1 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnith 
Aras an Chontae 
 
Leifear 
20 Bealtaine, 2025 
 
FÓGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
DO GACH BHALL DEN CHOMHAIRLE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú de Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Luain, 26 Bealtaine 2025 ag 
11.00 r.n in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Ta clár an chruinnithe leis seo. Seolfar nasc 
leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile.  
 
Beidh Clár Orduithe an Phríomh-Fheidhmeannaigh le feiceáil ag an chruinniú 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
____________________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
******************************************************************************************************** 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
County House  
Lifford 
 
20th May 2025 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 26th May 2025 at 11.00am in 
the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is attached. An online link to join 
the meeting will issue separately. 
 
The Register of Chief Executive Orders will be available for inspection at the meeting. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
______________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator  

2 
 
AGENDA 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes  
a) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 27th of March, 2025. 
b) Confirmation of the Minutes of the March Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 31st of March, 2025. 
c) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 28th of April, 2025. 
 
2. Disposal of Land – Section 211 of the Planning and Development 
Act, 2000(as amended)  
a) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to dispose of a plot of land at St Mary’s Terrace, 
Ramelton to Ramelton Community Garden Committee. 
b) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to dispose of a plot of land including two storey 
building under construction at Ailt an Chorráin Enterprise Centre, The 
Harbour, Ailt an Chorrain by way of lease to Donegal 2040 Strategic 
Development DAC.  
c) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to dispose by way of lease a plot of land and 
including  a 270m2  building as constructed thereon at Island House, 
Killybegs to Donegal 2040 Strategic Development DAC.  
d) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to dispose by way of lease a plot of land at 14 
Ballyduff Terrace, Lifford, Co Donegal together with the provision of a 
Right of Way in favour of Nuala Quinn. 
 
3. Taking of decision pursuant to the Planning and Development Act 
2000 (as amended), the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 
(as amended) (Pursuant to Section 179 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000and Part 8 of the Planning and Development 
Regulations 2001 
a) To approve the change of use of and the extension and modification of 
a Protected Structure, namely Letterkenny Courthouse (Ref. RPS 
40502279) and its attendant lands to provide flexible space with a 
multifunctional capacities for : (i) a tourist/visitor attraction and 
integrated Tourist Information Point, (ii) interpretation, exhibitions, 
conferences, education & learning, (iii) multi-purpose civic, cultural, 

3 
 
community use and social gatherings and events, (iv) café, (v) retail/gift 
shop and ancillary offices, storage and public conveniences.  
 
b) To approve the carrying out of works with regard to the Letterkenny 
  
Active Travel - R940 Ballyraine Road Project. 
c) To approve the carrying out of works with regard to the Letterkenny 
Active Travel – L1007 Circular Road Project. 
d) To approve the carrying out of works with regard to the R267 Donegal 
Town Safe Routes to School Active Travel Project. 
e) To approve the construction of 19 no. social housing units at Machaire 
Gathlán/Ard na gCeapairí, Doire Beag, Dún na nGall to include all 
associated site development works in two phases with Phase 1 
comprising 12 no. units being developed initially and Phase 2 to be 
completed at a later date. 
 
4. Corporate   
a) To approve the Donegal County Council nominee on the Board of 
Comhar na nOileán CTR.  
b) To fill casual vacancy on the Defective Concrete Blocks Committee 
arising from the resignation of Cllr Jimmy Kavanagh. 
c) To approve the appointment of Cllr Michael Boyle to the Board of 
Ballyshannon Leisure Centre. 
d) To approve the nomination of Cllr Jimmy Brogan and Cllr Michael Boyle 
to Coiste na Gaeilge. (final nomination from the Donegal MD). 
e) To fill three remaining vacancies on the Working Group on Local 
Government and Constitutional Change. 
f) To agree date for the 2025 Annual General Meeting – (Monday 30th 
June at 11.30am) 
 
5. Economic Development 
a) To approve the Donegal County Council Tourism Strategy 2025-2030. 
b) Tourism Presentation on TBEX – Europe (Travel Blog Exchange) 
 
6. Finance 
To approve the actual gross expenditure figure of €217,549,832 as set out 
on Table 3, Page 3 when compared to the Revised Budget of 
€212,186,413. (Adopted Budget as amended by net increases in funding 
received for 2024) for all Divisions in accordance with Subsection 7 of 
Section 104 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended by the Local 
Government Reform Act 2014. 
 
7. Endorsement of Minutes 
To note minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group held on the 
3rd March 2025. 
 
8. Attendance at Conference, Seminar or Event  
Authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under 
Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, 

4 
 
Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 
2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the 
Environment, Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local 
Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 -
2025(as amended). 
 
Training 
• AILG Elected Member Induction Day Training to be held on Thursday 
29th May 2025 in the Athlone Springs Hotel, Athlone (For newly co-
opted Councillors since the June 2024 Local Elections) 
 
Other 
• Attendance of Leas-Cathaoirleach at the National Enterprise Awards in 
the Mansion House on Thursday 22nd May, 2025. 
 
Conferences 
• Attendance at the Irish Planning Institute Conference 2025 in the 
Salthill Hotel, Galway from the 9th to the 11th April, 2025. 
• Buildings Action Coalition 2025 Summit from the 17th to the 19th June 
2025 in the Riverside Park Hotel, Enniscorthy, County Wexford.  
 
9. Conference Reports 
• Attendance of Cllr Martin Harley at the Lonely Planet Awards in London 
on the 6th November, 2023. 
• Attendance of Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan at the Association of Irish 
Regions (AIR) Conference in the Radisson Blu, Athlone on the 5th and 
6th February, 2025. 
• Attendance of Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan at the Irish Building Control 
Institute Conference in the Radisson Hotel, Cork on the 12th and 13th 
March, 2025. 
• Attendance of Cllr Kavanagh at St Patrick’s Day events in Philadelphia 
and New York from the 13th to the 18th March, 2025. 
• Attendance of Cllr Jack Murray at the CPMR Political Bureau Meeting 
in Bari , Italy from the 27th to the 28th March 2025. 
• Attendance of Cllr Jimmy Kavanagh at Diaspora Events in Glasgow on 
the 28th and 29th March 2025. 
 
 
MOTIONS  
 
 
 LIFFORD/STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks   
10. Cllr Frank Mc Brearty Jnr  
“Calling on the current Government to establish an Independent Judicial 
Statutory Public Inquiry into the Irish Defective Concrete Scandal, which 
has been labelled incorrectly as the Mica Freeze Thaw Scandal as being 
the cause of this disaster.” 

5 
 
 
  
Corporate  
11. Cllr Dakota Nic Mheanman  
That this Council calls on the Government to take action and provide 
capital investment for childcare facilities to create additional capacity as 
waiting lists grow in Donegal, as well as providing for childcare facilities 
with defective blocks. 
 
 
 
 
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT”. 
 
  Roads & Transportation  
12. Cllr Fionán Bradley 
“That this Council writes to the Department of Rural & Community 
Development seeking an immediate increase in the amount of Local 
Improvement Scheme funding that this County receives.” 
 
  Community & Planning  
13. Cllr Albert Doherty 
Donegal County Council notes the current Government's aim and 
ambition of driving balanced regional development and supporting rural 
communities in its “Programme for Government - Securing Ireland's  
Future". 
“Donegal County Council now calls on the Government to, 
 
• Remove the matching funding requirements for the Urban 
Regeneration Fund (URDF) and the Rural Regeneration Fund 
(RRDF) for Local Authorities located in the Northern and Western 
Region of Ireland, 
and 
• Ensure that more than half of the European Regional 
Development Fund (ERDF) is ringfenced for the Northern and 
Western Region of Ireland for the next EU funding period (2028-
2035)”. 
 
  Environment  
14. Cllr Joy Beard 
“In support of the efforts of the county’s ‘Tidy Town’ volunteers in helping 
keep our communities clean and litter free, this motion calls on Donegal 
County Council to adopt a three-part strategy comprising:  
 
1) A roll out of a targeted public awareness campaign on littering, 
utilising social media platforms to educate and engage the public 
on the importance of keeping our towns and villages clean, and 
promoting respect for public spaces. 
 
2) To put up clear and visible signage in town centres and other 
high-footfall areas encouraging people to keep these areas litter-
free and reminding them of their responsibility to dispose of waste 
properly. 
 

6 
 
3) A pilot of the installation of litter bins in selected locations 
specifically designed to accommodate pizza boxes, with the aim 
of addressing the recurring problem of pizza boxes jamming 
standard bins, thereby reducing overall street litter and improving 
the efficiency of waste collection.” 
 
Community  
15. Cllr Terry Crossan 
“That Donegal County Council formulate and adopt an Anti - Racism 
Charter similar to the recently developed North-West Anti - Racism 
Charter as a matter of urgency.” 
 
 
 
 
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
  Emergency Services   
16. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle 
“That this Council calls on the Management of Donegal Fire Service to 
enter into meaningful discussions with our Firefighters in Letterkenny 
and that no changes be made to the operational capacity of Letterkenny 
Fire Station Service including the removal of the Second Fire Engine, 
Incident Command Vehicle and Water Tanker until a comprehensive 
Business Case and Risk Assessments are carried out in relation to 
Letterkenny Fire Station and its capacity to deal with any eventuality that 
may arise in the Town of Letterkenny and surrounding district serviced 
by Letterkenny Fire Station and that the Firefighters and their 
representatives be included in all future decisions and discussions that 
impact on their working conditions and operational effectiveness.” 
 
  Corporate  
17. Cllr Tomás Sean Devine  
“Can this Council support me in my call that all DCC meetings being held 
in Lifford are streamed live to members of the public again, as in recent 
times we have been strongly criticised for not showing these meetings 
and most recently for the discussion around the recent protests, 
streaming was turned off. We believe it’s only fair and right that those 
who elected us can watch what we do in representing them.” 
 
18. Cllr Declan Meehan 
That this Council is gravely concerned that the Central Bank of Ireland is 
regulating the Israel Bonds Issuance Programme and, thereby, 
facilitating the sale throughout Europe of bonds which are funding 
genocide in Gaza.  
 
This Council notes that, 
(i) the bonds, known as Israel Bonds, have, since 1951, raised funds for 
the Israeli Treasury for use across the Israeli economy including the 
financing of the apartheid system, the Israeli military and illegal 
settlements 

7 
 
(ii) the bonds are now being advertised as war bonds and are funding 
the genocide in Gaza. 
 
Council further notes that, 
  
(i) in January 2024 the International Court of Justice (ICJ) confirmed the 
plausibility of the charge of genocide against Israel  
(ii) in June 2024 the UN’s International Commission of Inquiry on 
Palestine found that Israel’s actions in Gaza “constitute the war crimes of 
wilful killing and mistreatment, and the crime against humanity of 
extermination” 
(iii) in July 2024 an ICJ ruling declared that Israel is committing the crime 
of apartheid and its entire regime of military occupation of Palestinian 
territories is illegal and must end immediately 
(iv) all institutions are under obligation under international law to prevent 
genocide and abuse of human rights. 
 
Council believes that the Central Bank of Ireland must end all complicity 
in genocide. Council, therefore, calls on the Central Bank of Ireland to 
immediately end the regulation of the Israeli Bond Issuance 
Programme.” 
 
19. Cllr Jimmy Kavanagh 
That the Council write to Government requesting that they introduce a 
new annual Bank Holiday in the month of July in honour of St. Colmcille. 
 
   
 
 
   
 
DONEGAL MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
  
 
 Planning   
20.  Cllr Micheál Naughton  
“I am asking Donegal County Council to allocate €5 million in the 
revenue budget for 2026 to deal with derelict sites and buildings  to 
support the revitalisation and regeneration of our towns and villages.” 
 
Information Systems  
21.  Cllr Noel Jordan  
“I am asking that this Council call on the Department of 
Telecommunications to add a number of villages in the county that are 
not included in the national rollout of fibre broadband.” 
 
 
   
 
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
  
Planning 
22.  Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty 
“I am asking this Council to support my motion for the introduction of a 
higher planning fee in the region of €500 per objection and that we also 
write to the Government seeking such a rise in fees for objections etc. as 

8 
 
I feel that that currently the €20 charge is not fair on applicants as it is 
too low and really is open to abuse by objectors." 
 
I would also like this motion passed around the country to all other 
Councils for consideration.  
 
Corporate  
23. Cllr Brian Carr  
Noting recent studies and increased media coverage, including the 
impact of the Netflix documentary Adolescence, which highlight the 
growing concerns around early access to smartphones and social media 
among young people, 
 
“That Donegal County Council write to the Minister for Education, Norma 
Foley, and the Minister for Children, Helen McEntee, to express our 
concern regarding the rising use of smartphones and social media 
among early teenagers, and to request information on what plans or 
policies the Government intends to implement to address these issues 
and protect the wellbeing of children and young people.” 
 
24. Cllr Micheál C Mac Giolla Easbuig  
“Do Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall, mar mheabhrúchán gur ghlac 
Comhairle na hEorpa le Dearbhú Seville i mí an Mheithimh 2002, rud a 
dheimhnigh nach raibh aon bhagairt ar neodracht na hÉireann mar 
thoradh ar Chonradh Nice, tugtar le fios gur dheimhnigh an Taoiseach a 
bhí ann ag an am, an tUasal Ahern, do Theach Laighean : 
“Athdhearbhaíonn an Dearbhú Náisiúnta ceangal na hÉireann le beartas 
neodrachta agus dearbhaíonn sé: nach bhfuil Éire páirteach in aon 
ghealltanas comhchosanta: go ndéanfaimid ár gcinneadh ceannasach 
féin maidir le ar cheart d’fhórsa cosanta na 26 Contae páirt a ghlacadh i 
dtascanna daonnúla nó bainistíochta géarchéime arna gcur ar bun ag an 
AE bunaithe ar an Ghlas Triarach ceadaithe ag na Náisiún Aontaithe, 
cinneadh an Rialtais agus glactha leis ag Teach Laighean ”. 
 
Tá Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall sásta gur bhain an Dearbhú 
Náisiúnta Sollúnta le hIonstraimí daingniúcháin de chuid na hÉireann a 
bhain le Conradh Nice agus gur cláraíodh é ina dhiaidh sin ag na 
Náisiúin Aontaithe, agus gur athdhearbhaigh rialtas Cowan na 
gealltanais ina dhiaidh sin tar éis diúltú do Chonradh Liospóin ar dtús in 
2008. 
 
Mar sin féin, is mian le Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall a ndíomá a 
chur in iúl maidir le rún agus polasaí an Rialtais deireadh a chur leis an 
Ghlas Triarach, ina ndearna an Taoiseach, an tUasal Martin, cur síos air 
roimhe seo mar “croílár neodrachta na 26 contae”. 
 
I bhfianaise an rúin an riachtanas maidir le sainordú ó na Náisiúin 
Aontaithe a bhaint, aithníonn an Chomhairle seo freagracht na Náisiún 
Aontaithe maidir le síocháin agus slándáil idirnáisiúnta a choinneáil agus 
tosaíocht Chairt na Náisiún Aontaithe mar dhoiciméad bunúsach de 

9 
 
chuid an dlí idirnáisiúnta. Léiríonn an Glas Triarach gealltanas dlíthiúil 
agus polaitiúil ó stát na hÉireann i leith phrionsabail na Náisiún 
Aontaithe. Ag am ina bhfuil méadú ar éagobhsaíocht dhomhanda, 
iarrann an Chomhairle seo ar rialtas an tSaorstáit an Glas Triarach a 
chosaint mar chuid lárnach de neodracht na hÉireann agus brú a chur ar 
iarrachtaí chun síocháin agus taidhleoireacht a chur chun cinn. 
 
Mar sin de tá Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall go láidir i gcoinne 
polasaí den chineál seo agus geallann siad go ndéanfar teagmháil le 
gach Comhairle Contae láithreach ag iarraidh orthu seasamh linn agus 
leis na forais rialtais cuí chun iad a chur ar an eolas faoina bhfreasúra.” 
 
Má cheadaítear an rún go ndéanfar é a scaipeadh ar chomhairlí eile 
taobh istigh den stát – 
 
“Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall, recalling that in June 2002 the 
European Council adopted the Seville Declaration, which confirmed that 
the Nice Treaty posed no threat to Ireland’s neutrality, notes that the 
then Taoiseach Mr Ahern confirmed to Teach Laighean that: “ The 
National Declaration reaffirms Ireland’s attachment to a policy of 
neutrality and confirms that: Ireland is not party to any mutual defence 
commitment: that we will take our own sovereign decision on whether 26 
Counties defence force should participate in humanitarian or crisis 
management tasks mounted by the EU based on the Triple Lock of UN 
endorsement, Government decision and Teach Laighean approval”.   
 
Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall is satisfied that the Solemn National 
Declaration was associated with Ireland’s Instruments of ratification of 
the Nice Treaty and subsequently registered at the UN, while the 
undertakings were subsequently reiterated by the Cowan government 
following initial rejection of the Lisbon Treaty in 2008. 
 
However, Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall now wishes to express its 
dismay at the stated intention and policy of the Government to dismantle 
the Triple Lock, which the Taoiseach Mr Martin previously described as 
“the core of 26 counties neutrality”.   
 
In light of the intention to remove the requirement for a UN mandate, this 
Council recognises the responsibility of the United Nations in maintaining 
international peace and security and the primacy of the UN Charter as a 
foundational document of international law. The Triple Lock represents a 
legal and political commitment by the Irish state to the principles of the 
UN. At a time of heightened global instability, this Council calls on the 
Freestate government to safeguard the Triple Lock as a core component 
of Irish neutrality and to redouble efforts to promote peace and 
diplomacy. 
 
Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall therefore states its forceful opposition 
to such a policy and pledges to immediately contact all County Councils 

10 
 
requesting them to join us in this course of action and to inform the 
appropriate government organs of their opposition.” 
 
If motion is approved that it is circulated to other councils within the 
state. 
 
Environment  
25. Cllr John S O’ Fearraigh  
“With regards to the inspection of septic tanks that these inspections are 
open to all areas within the County of Donegal.” 
 
26.  Cathaoirleach’s Business. 
 
27. Chief Executive’s Management Report. 
 
 
QUESTIONS  
 
 
 
LIFFORD/STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT  
 
Environment  
28. Cllr Dakota Nic Mheanman   
What efforts have been made to engage with Uisce Éireann to install 
more public water refill stations in outdoor areas i.e. Greenways, Parks? 
 
 
  
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Environment 
29. Cllr Fionán Bradley 
How many life buoys does this Council have in the County? Do we know 
the condition and location of all them? 
 
30. Cllr Fionán Bradley 
How many lifeguards have been employed for the summer season? How 
many are employed in each MD? 
 
31. Cllr Terry Crossan 
Who is responsible for investigating problematic Septic Tank Run-Off that 
could present as a public health issue and what powers are there to 
enforce remedial action to resolve this? 
 
32. Cllr Terry Crossan 
Has there been monitoring of our waterways for the emergence of Blue 
Green Algae in light of the prolonged warm dry spell of weather? 
 
Community Development  
33. Cllr Albert Doherty 
County Donegal Motorhome Facilities, Upgrades and Maintenance. 

11 
 
How many Council based Motorhome facilities are in the county, where 
are they located and will the council ensure that facilities currently in situ 
are retained, serviced, maintained and upgraded with newer models 
where required? 
 
Housing  
34. Cllr Albert Doherty 
What funding has been granted and/or sought from the Department to 
enable further social homes in Donegal access works under the Energy 
Efficiency Retrofit Programme in 2025 and will the Council confirm areas 
and housing schemes that will have works carried out this year? 
 
35. Cllr Joy Beard 
Could you provide an update on any discussions with companies 
specialising in 3D construction printing (3DCP)? 
 
 
  
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Corporate   
36. Cllr Jimmy Kavanagh  
What plans are in place to improve the accuracy of the electoral registers 
in the County? 
 
37. Cllr Ciaran Brogan  
Can we have an update and timeframe of the current review being 
undertaken by management of our Directorates of Services and of the 
current council model to meet the current demands on our services 
moving forward? 
 
Housing   
38. Cllr Tomás Sean Devine  
Can I get a breakdown of the average cost to build a 2/3 bed housing unit 
for the Council's own stock and a breakdown what they can pay for a 
house from a housing body? 
 
Environment   
39. Cllr Declan Meehan  
Can we be provided with information relating to the number of Litter 
Wardens at work in the county per MD and can we be provided with the 
number of litter fines and dog fouling fines issued in the county per MD 
over the past five years? 
 
Housing   
40. Cllr Declan Meehan  
Can we be provided with a breakdown of all communication, including in-
person meetings, between this Council and the Department and Minister 
for Housing in relation to the Social Housing Remediation Scheme for 
those social houses affected by Defective Blocks? A timeline with efforts 

12 
 
or proposals made by this Council would be helpful to illustrate the work 
done by Council. 
 
Roads & Transportation 
41. Cllr Ciaran Brogan  
Can we a timeframe for the cross-party working group to explore and 
review the current costing model being used by our Machinery Yard while 
hiring plant to our Municipal Districts as agreed at our plenary workshop 
on 7th April? 
 
Emergency Services 
42. Cllr Ciaran Brogan  
Can we a timeframe for the business case to be carried out in our Fire 
Service and a commitment that no service will be downgraded while this 
study is being carried as agreed at our plenary meeting in Letterkenny on 
7th April? 
 
 
  
 
DONEGAL MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Housing  
43. Cllr Micheál Naughton  
How many houses has Donegal County Council built  in each Municipal 
District for the last 10 years? 
Can I receive the final department stage approval for the Council’s own 
direct scheme: 
e.g., The 30 units in Letterkenny? 
        The 43 units in Dungloe? 
        The 54 units in Buncrana? 
 
 
  
 
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 
Environment   
44. Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty  
When will the new Dog Warden be appointed in the County and have, we 
any retirements in the current Dog Warden Section pending and if so are 
replacements imminent?  
 
Environment  
45. Cllr John S O’ Fearraigh    
Under the national inspection on septic tanks how many personnel have 
the Council in place to carry out these inspections county wide? 
 
Economic Development  
46. Cllr Brian Carr    
What measures, such as byelaws, designated parking areas, 
enforcement policies, or signage are currently in place or planned to 
manage campervan parking across the county, and are there any plans 
or incentives to support the development of appropriate campervan 

13 
 
facilities either directly by the Council or through private or community-led 
initiatives; furthermore, is the Council developing an overall strategy to 
address related issues such as waste disposal and sewage management 
in a sustainable and coordinated manner? 
 
Roads & Transportation 
47. Cllr Micheál C Mac Giolla Easbuig    
Cé mhéad cé, cuan agus fána a bhfuil an Chomhairle freagrach astu 
laistigh den chontae? As na céanna, cuanta agus fánáin a bhfuil an 
Chomhairle freagrach astu, cé mhéad acu a bhfuil fodhlíthe acu? As na 
céanna agus na cuanta agus na fánáin nach bhfuil fodhlíthe acu ach a 
bhfuil freagracht orainn astu, cá huair a  chuirfear fodhlíthe i bhfeidhm 
iontu ar fad? 
 
How many piers, harbours and slipways does the Council have 
responsibility for within the county? Out of all the piers, harbours and slip 
ways that the Council have responsibility for, how many of them do have 
byelaws? Of the piers and harbours and slipways that do not have 
byelaws but that we have responsibility for, when will there be byelaws 
put in place in them all? 
 
Community Development 
48. Cllr Micheál C Mac Giolla Easbuig    
Maidir leis an mórshiúl frith-inimirce a bhí ar siúl i Leitir Ceanainn ar an 3 
Bealtaine 2025, iarradh go n-eagrófaí cruinniú éigeandála leis an Ard-
Cheannfort mar gheall ar imní mhór shlándála an phobail, na nGardaí 
agus ar ár gComhairleoirí. D'aontaigh na Comhairleoirí go léir leis seo, 
agus tá mé ag fiafraí cén fáth nár cuireadh an t-iarratas seo faoi bhráid 
an Ard-Cheannfoirt? 
 
In relation to the recent anti-immigration march in Leitir Ceanainn on the 
3rd of May 2025 , it was asked that an emergency meeting would be 
organised with the Chief Superintendent due to the massive security 
concerns of the public, Garda and .also us Councillors. This was agreed 
by all Councillors, and I am asking why this request was not submitted to 
the Chief Superintendent. 
 
49. Motions from other Councils/Bodies  
FINGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
That the Chief Executive introduce a ban on fox hunting on Council 
owned lands in Fingal.” 
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL  
“Leitrim County Council calls on the Department of Transport to secure 
funding for the removal of those huge Ash trees along local and regional 
roads, that are decaying from Ash Die Back. We are all aware of how 
dangerous those trees are to road users.” 
 
 
 

14 
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL 
“Noting that a home is a moral human right, this local authority calls on 
the Government to start a process to have the right to housing enshrined 
in the constitution. A copy of this motion to be sent to all local authorities 
within the state.” 
 

15 
 
MINUTES OF MAY MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 26th 
MAY, 2025 IN THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD 
C/163/25 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs N Kennedy, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, L Blaney, M Boyle, F Bradley 
C Brogan, J Brogan, P Canning, B Carr, T Crossan, TS Devine, A 
Doherty, A Farren, M Harley, N Jordan, D. M Kelly, M C Mac Giolla  
Easbuig, M McBride, M Mc Clafferty, M McDermott, P McGarvey, D 
McGee, P McGowan, G McMonagle, D Meehan, A Molloy, M Naugh-
ton, D Nic Mheanman, J.S Ó Fearraigh, M Scanlon. 
Online: Cllrs D Coyle, G Doherty, M Farren, J Kavanagh, and F Mc 
Brearty,  
 
C/164/25 
APOLOGIES  
Apologies were received from Cllrs T Crossan and J Murray who were 
unable to attend the meeting. 
 
C/165/25 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John G McLaughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of Hous-
ing, Corporate & Culture/Meetings Administrator, Liam Ward, Director 
of Community Development & Planning Services, Bryan Cannon, Di-
rector of Roads & Transportation, Richard Gibson, Director of Finance, 
Garry Martin, Director of Economic Development, Information Systems 
& Emergency Services, Michael McGarvey, Director of Water & Envi-
ronment, Tanya Kee, SEO, Management Accounts, Mary Daly, SSO 
Economic Development, Joy Browne, SSO Economic Development,  
Frances Friel, Communications Officer, William Colvin, ASO, Martina 
Tully, SO, Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Clíona Ní Ghal-
lachóir, Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí Aistriúcháin, Anne Marie Crawford, 
Staff Officer.   
 
C/166/25 
ADJOURNMENT OF THE MEETING AS A MARK OF RESPECT FOR 
THOSE WHO DIED IN THE INISHOWEN DROWNING TRAGEDY 
Cllr Fionán Bradley alluded to the recent tragedy in Buncrana where 
two young men had lost their lives in tragic circumstances in Lough 
Swilly. He said that Emmanuel Familola and Matt Sibanda were new 
community members and that their deaths had shook the town of 
Buncrana which has borne more than its fair share of tragedies. He 
commended the local community who had rallied around in the circum-
stances and had provided ongoing support for the grieving families. He 
thanked the emergency services, the coastguard, the RNLI volunteers 
and the many local boat owners who had helped in the search and re-
covery operation. He paid tribute to Fr Frances Bradley, P.P, Buncrana 
who was present that day and who had given great support and com-
fort to the families of Emmanuel and Matt, and also to the members of 
the refugee community in Buncrana. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr A Doherty, it was re-
solved to adjourn the meeting for a short period as a mark of respect 
for the two teenagers who had perished in the tragedy. 
 

16 
 
C/167/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 27TH MARCH, 2025 
 
On the proposal of Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig, seconded by Cllr Meehan, 
the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on 
the 27th March, 2025 were adopted.     
 
C/168/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE MARCH MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 31ST MARCH, 2025     
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Harley, the Minutes 
of the March Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 31st 
March, 2025 were adopted.  
 
C/169/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 28TH APRIL, 2025  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Harley, seconded by Cllr Boyle, the Minutes of 
the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 28th April, 
2025 was adopted. 
  
C/170/25 
DISPOSAL OF A PLOT OF LAND AT ST MARY’S TCE, RAMELTON 
TO RAMELTON COMMUNITY GARDEN COMMITTEE  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr McGarvey, seconded by Cllr Meehan, it was re-
solved to disposal of a plot of land at St. Mary’s Tce, Ramelton to 
Ramelton Community Garden Committee  in accordance with the pro-
visions of Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as 
amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, 
(as amended).      
 
C/171/25 
 DISPOSAL OF A PLOT OF LAND INCLUDING TWO STOREY 
BUILDING UNDER CONSTRUCTION AT AILT AN CHORRAIN 
 
ENTERPRISE CENTRE, THE HARBOUR, AILT AN CHORRAIN BY 
WAY OF LEASE TO DONEGAL 2040 STRATEGIC DEVELOPMENT 
DAC.     
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig, seconded by Cllr O Fear-
raigh, it was resolved to disposal of a plot of land including two storey 
building under construction at Ailt An Chorrain Enterprise Centre, The 
Harbour, Ailt An Chorrian by way of lease to Donegal 2040 Strategic 
Development DAC in accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of 
the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Sec-
tion 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, (as amended).         
 
C/172/25 
 DISPOSAL BY WAY OF LEASE A PLOT OF LAND AND INCLUD-
ING A 270SQ.M. BUILDING AS CONSTRUCTED THEREON AT IS-
LAND HOUSE, KILLYBEGS TO DONEGAL 2040 STRATEGIC  
DEVELOPMENT DAC. 

17 
 
 
Cllr Jordan asked that consideration be given to allowing the Killybegs 
Tourist Information take control of the building. He noted that the com-
mittee had made a presentation and that a business plan had been 
drawn up. He said that this made sense given the success of Slieve 
League and the need to cater for upwards of 160,000 visitors. 
 
 
Mr Garry Martin, Director Economic Development, Information Systems 
and Emergency Services noted that this had been discussed at a re-
cent workshop in the Donegal Municipal District. He said that to ap-
prove the disposal with the specific condition outlined would cause a 
difficulty for the Donegal 2040 Strategic Development DAC as it contra-
vened the terms and conditions under which DAC had been estab-
lished and would effectively curtail its ability to review submissions. He 
recommended that the members proceed with the original proposal as 
agreed by the Donegal MD. 
 
 
Cllr Jordan reiterated the fact that the Tourist Information company had 
a good business plan in place which would work for that building. 
 
 
Cllr J Brogan said he was of the belief that it should be kept in the 
hands of the public and not end up being utilised for private business 
opportunities.  
 
 
Mr Martin said that he was not aware of the business plan and that in-
formation presented to date made it difficult to make any judgement. It 
would be premature, he advised, to give the building to one entity or to 
a stand-a-lone business and would contravene the objectives of DAC. 
Donegal 2040 Strategic Development DAC was, he added, a fully 
owned Council company established to manage and deliver these 
types of buildings. He strongly advised members to go with the original 
proposal as it was a benefit to have DAC act in an advisory capacity 
and as a buffer entity. 
 
 
It was thus resolved to defer the matter to later in the meeting.  
 
C/173/25 
DISPOSAL BY WAY OF LEASE OF A PLOT OF LAND AT 14 BAL-
LYDUFF TERRACE, LIFFORD TOGETHER WITH THE PROVISION 
OF A RIGHT OF WAY IN FAVOUR OF NUALA QUINN  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Harley, seconded by Cllr Nic Mheanman, it was 
resolved to dispose by way of lease a plot of land at 14 Ballyduff Ter-
race, Lifford  together with the provision of a right of way in favour of 
Nuala Quinn in accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of the 
Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Section 
183 of the Local Government Act 2001, (as amended).       
 
 
 

18 
 
C/174/25 
TO APPROVE THE CHANGE OF USE OF AND THE EXTENSION 
AND MODIFICATION OF A PROTECTED STRUCTURE, NAMELY 
LETTERKENNY COURTHOUSE AND ITS ATTENDANT LANDS TO 
PROVIDE FLEXIBLE SPACE WITH A MULTIFUNCTIONAL CAPAC-
ITIES.     
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McBride, seconded by Cllr Brogan, the change 
of use of and the extension and modification of a Protected Structure, 
namely Letterkenny Courthouse (Ref. RPS 40502279) and its attendant 
lands to provide flexible space with a multifunctional capacities for: (i) a 
tourist/visitor attraction and integrated Tourist Information Point, (ii) in-
terpretation, exhibitions, conferences, education & learning, (iii) multi-
purpose civic, cultural, community use and social gatherings and 
events, (iv) café, (v) retail/gift shop and ancillary offices, storage and 
public conveniences was approved, in accordance with Part XI of the 
Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the 
Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as amended). 
 
Cllr A Doherty asked what correspondence had been received from the 
Courts Service in relation to this process and how positive this had 
been in relation to the Council’s involvement. 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning confirmed 
that the property had come into the Council’s ownership from the 
Courts Service in 2018. 
 
C/175/25 
TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS WITH REGARD 
TO THE LETTERKENNY ACTIVE TRAVEL – R940 BALLYRAINE 
ROAD PROJECT AND THE LETTERKENNY ACTIVE TRAVEL – 
L1007 CIRCULAR ROAD PROJECT 
 
Members considered the reports circulated with the agenda in relation 
to the above.  
 
Cllr McMonagle, proposed, seconded by Cllr Meehan, that the carrying 
out of works with regard to the Letterkenny Active Travel – R940  
Ballyraine Road Project be approved, in accordance with Part XI of the 
Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the 
Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as amended). 
 
Cllr C Brogan noted that there had been considerable discussion on the 
matter by the Letterkenny/Milford Municipal District and that it had been 
suggested that the project be deferred given that the single biggest is-
sue in Letterkenny was traffic congestion. As a result, he said, it was 
premature to go ahead with this project and proposed that approval of 
same be deferred pending further consideration. He alluded to the fact 
that a motion had been recently debated by the Letterkenny/Milford MD 
calling for a dedicated meeting at which the Chief Executive, the Direc-
tor of Service, Roads Management and the T.I.I could sit down, carry 

19 
 
out a root and branch review and look at ways of getting a viable solu-
tion for the traffic model in Letterkenny. To proceed with the project as 
outlined, was, he said, simply putting good money into bad. He cited 
the need for a Town Bus Service together with dedicated bus lanes.  
Cllr Kelly seconded the proposal to defer given that the project was 
premature and cited the need to start on the outskirts of the town and 
work inwards.  
 
Cllr Mc Monagle noted however that traffic congestion was due to the 
lack of significant investment and that was being done here was to try 
and put in place an Active Travel Programme which would encourage 
people to leave their cars behind and walk and cycle to work. He said 
that if the money was sent back then it would be allocated to other 
towns. By and large, he said, local business-people were in favour of 
the project. He alluded to the increased usage of eScooters especially 
in the context of Letterkenny’s status as an university town. It was 
acknowledged that there would be some delays on a temporary basis, 
but that the finished product would benefit the entire community. Let-
terkenny as a modern town, he said, needed this project and it would 
be a step backwards if this money had to be returned.  
 
Cllr Meehan concurred with Cllr Mc Monagle and cited the need to avail 
all funding opportunities. There was, he advised, an embarrassing lack 
of active travel opportunities for pedestrians and cyclists in and around 
Letterkenny. He acknowledged that these projects would not solve all 
the problems and that there was no one easy solution, with a suite of 
improvements needed to improve accessibility. Improved infrastructure 
was needed, he added, to control the traffic coming into the town en-
compassing a range of initiatives including a town bus service in con-
junction with the active travel projects. An end goal, he added, was the 
possible introduction of an e-bike scheme when the necessary re-
sources were in place. This would, he confirmed, tie in with Letterken-
ny’s status as a university town. He acknowledged that there would be 
an issue with temporary disruption which was on par with any capital 
investment programme. It was imperative, he said, that there was con-
tinual liaison with the Chamber of Commerce to mitigate any of the 
challenges that arose.  
 
Cllr Devine said that he was supportive of the project and highlighted 
the need for inter-linkage and the development of a Park & Ride” Sys-
tem to facilitate increased traffic management.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig noted that there were no active travel projects 
in the Glenties Municipal District and expressed concern that there was 
also no dedicated plans for footpath provision. Given the level of con-
gestion in Letterkenny, he said, that he was in agreement with Cllrs Mc 
Monagle and Meehan that active travel was the way forward in this in-
stance.  
 
Cllr Kelly said that he acknowledged that the footpath network was not 

20 
 
in place to accommodate e-scooters and said that the issue was in 
building confidence for the people that he represented. He said that 
concerns in relation to active travel had been raised at all the public 
consultation events. He referenced also the fact that his own party had 
opposed the Four-Lane project and that there had been issues with the 
impact of the works and the overall success of the project.  
 
Cllr Mc Bride noted that much work had been done on this project over 
the last number of years and that a couple of the sections had been 
completed. These, he said, had been a massive improvement from 
what was already there and had significantly improved the footpath 
network. Donegal County Council, was, he said in the process of build-
ing 150 houses in Ballymacool and there was an urgent need there for 
more footpaths.  
 
These  projects, he said, needed to progress to ensure that a viable 
transport network was put in place and that the funding allocations 
were retained. . He said that he was in agreement with the fact that 
some areas needed transportation hubs and that a dedicated town bus 
service was essential. He said that he had not received any negative 
feedback and alluded to the fact that the business community wanted 
the Circular Road project to go ahead and that the ATU had indicated 
that they were supportive. 
 
Cllr Kavanagh said it was strange that opposition was being voiced in 
relation to active travel on the basis that there was too much traffic. It 
would, he advised, not solve the problem but would be part of the over-
all solution. He said that he could not see the logic in scraping a 
scheme that would inevitably take cars off the road. He said that impact 
of Active Travel would only be seen when the entire programme was 
completed and amalgamated.  To abandon now would, he added, ren-
der works done to date useless. He seconded the proposal by Cllr Mc 
Monagle to proceed with the Letterkenny Active Travel – R940  
Ballyraine Road Project and the Letterkenny Active Travel – L1007  
Circular Road Project.  
 
Cllr Coyle cited the need to look at what was already there and alluded 
to the fact that the cycle lane on the Four Lane roadway was not being 
used. He said that there was no town bus service or park and ride facili-
ties and that there was no point in going ahead with active travel pro-
jects until these were in place. He called for a realistic approach and  
supported the proposal to defer the Letterkenny Active Travel projects.  
 
Cllr Canning said that he was not against active travel but that the tim-
ing was not right. His party had, he noted, not supported the Four Lane 
project at the time and that there had been a number of issues in rela-
tion to this project. There were, it was acknowledged two issues, name-
ly the absence of a proper traffic management plan and the fact that 
Uisce Éireann did not want anybody building over their infrastructure.  
 

21 
 
Traffic congestion was a major issue, he advised, and people were go-
ing to Derry rather than travel into Letterkenny. 
 
Cllr C Brogan said that there was a solution, and that this did not in-
volve scrapping the project and would ultimately be a good fix for the 
Glencar area. He noted that there were plans in place for the Windy 
Hall Road which included new cycle lanes and that the development of 
same would take the pressure off the Circular Road which has effec-
tively become a relief road. The Windy Hall Road, was, he stated, on 
the Active Travel Plan and if developed would take away a considera-
ble amount of traffic.  
 
He encouraged members to deliver the Windy Hall Road project. He 
said that two members of the business community on the Circular Road 
had indicated that the recovery period for the previous round of works 
on the sewerage network had been in the region of three years. 
 
He alluded to his motion as submitted to the Letterkenny/ Milford MD 
which had advocated a common sense approach and the need to look 
at easing the traffic congestion through the development of the Windy 
Hall Road.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee outlined the need for additional clarity and said that the 
new members required more time to assess same as there were 
implications for the whole of the county given the strategic element in-
volved. There were implications also, he advised for the business 
community.  
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that it was not a case of scrapping this and pro-
ceeding with the Windy Hall road as this would not solve all the prob-
lems on the Circular Road. This, he said, provided for a network of cy-
cle lanes and that more and more people were using the cycle lane on 
the Four Lane. It was about working together, he added and building 
the network. He said that the money was there, and the work was 
ready to start. It was acknowledged that there was a need to look at the 
bigger picture in order to ensure that Letterkenny had a workable traffic 
management system. 
 
The Chief Executive noted that traffic congestion in the town was a se-
rious issue. He alluded to the fact that the transport policy had changed 
under Minister Eamonn Ryan and that Donegal County Council had 
been one of the main beneficiaries of that policy decision similar to oth-
er Local Authorities. Letterkenny, he advised, had fared well and that 
there were changes in that where there were previously requests to 
widen roads, a shift in policy now required the sharing of space with all 
road users. The emphasis now, he stated, was to achieve the correct 
balance in line with national policy. He alluded to the fact that there had 
been considerable consultation and that it was now a matter for the 
members to decide. It was noted that there had been a change in the 
Part 8 process and that projects had to be approved within a dedicated 

22 
 
timeframe otherwise they became redundant. It was not possible, he 
said, to move the allocated monies to other projects and he urged 
members to approve the Letterkenny Active Travel Projects. Huge in-
vestment, he said, was needed to ensure that Letterkenny had all nec-
essary infrastructural links. It was imperative, he said, that all worked 
together to ensure that these vital links were provided.  
 
A recorded vote was then taken by the Meetings Administrator in rela-
tion to the approval of the Letterkenny Active Travel – R940 Ballyraine 
Road Project and the Letterkenny Active Travel – L1007 Circular Road 
Project.  
 
This resulted in 20 voting to proceed with Part 8 approval and 13 voting 
against.  
 
Those voting in favour included: 
 
Cllrs Beard, Boyle, J Brogan, Carr, Crossan, Devine, A Doherty, G 
Doherty, A Farren, Harley, Jordan, Kavanagh, Mac Giolla Easbuig, Mc 
Bride, Mc Garvey, Mc Monagle, Meehan, Nic Mheanman, O’ Fearraigh 
and Scanlon. (20) 
 
Those voting against were: 
 
Cllrs Blaney, Bradley, C Brogan, Canning, Coyle, M Farren, Kelly, Mc 
Clafferty, Mc Dermott, Mc Gee, Mc Gowan, Molloy, and Naughton. (13) 
 
Cllrs Kennedy and Mc Brearty abstained. 
 
It was thus resolved to approve the Letterkenny Active Travel – R940 
Ballyraine Road Project and the Letterkenny Active Travel – L1007 Cir-
cular Road Project in accordance with Part XI of the Planning & Devel-
opment Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning & Devel-
opment Regulations 2001(as amended) 
 
C/176/25 
 TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS WITH REGARD 
TO THE R267 DONEGAL TOWN SAFE ROUTES TO SCHOOL AC-
TIVE TRAVEL PROJECT    
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr J Brogan, seconded by Cllr Jordan, the carrying 
out of works with regard to the R267 Donegal Town Safe Routes to 
School Active Travel Project was approved, in accordance with Part XI 
of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of 
the Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as amended). This was 
approved subject to the carrying out of an assessment of the volume 
and capacity of traffic in the area at the far end of the scheme. 
 
Cllr Brogan noted that there were issues with the traffic lights at the 

23 
 
school. Cllr Naughton asked that consideration be given to the best 
way of managing the traffic flow at the junction at the old road.  
 
C/177/25 
TO APPROVE THE CONSTRUCTION OF 19 NO. SOCIAL HOUSING 
UNITS AT MACHAIRE GATHLAN/ARD NA GCEAPAIRI, DOIRE 
BEAG, DUN NA NGALL      
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr McGiolla Easbuig, seconded by Cllr O Fear-
raigh, the construction of 19no. social housing units at Machaire Gath-
lan/Ard na gCeapairi, Doire Beag, Dun nan Gall to include all associat-
ed site development works in two phases with Phase 1 comprising 
12no. units being developed initially and Phase 2 to be completed at a 
later stage was approved, in accordance with Part XI of the Planning & 
Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning & De-
velopment Regulations 2001(as amended). 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that he had concerns in relation to the 
sewerage aspect and asked what the provision was in respect of inde-
pendent living facilities at this location. He asked why the development 
could not proceed as one phase and asked if it was possible to apply 
for monies to put in the sewerage scheme and extend the scheme up 
to Carrickataskin.  
 
Cllr O’ Fearraigh welcomed the scheme and said that it was important 
that the Council did the necessary infrastructure works and did not wait 
for its inclusion on the Uisce Éireann work programme.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
confirmed that a site had been set aside for independent living accom-
modation and that discussions had taken place with an Approved 
Housing Body and the HSE to firm up on the detail. It was intended, he 
advised, in the initial stage to go with phase 1 and the progression of 
the treatment plant which would then allow the remaining phases to be 
completed.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig reiterated his call for the project to be complet-
ed in on phase and said that it should not have to wait on approval from 
Uisce Éireann. 
 
The Director of Services said that it was possible to move forward with 
certainty on the first twelve units and that the Council would work with 
the other relevant agencies to ensure that the project was completed in 
its entirety. 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty welcomed the development and outlined the need for 
Uisce Éireann to make a serious commitment to improving sewerage 
infrastructure in the Glenties Municipal District.  
 

24 
 
Cllr Mc Gee said he was supportive of completing the project in one 
phase and outlined the need for sewerage issues in Carrickataskin to 
be resolved. 
 
Cllr O’ Fearraigh said it was important that the project moved forward 
with no unnecessary delays. 
 
 
C/178/25 
TO APPROVE THE DCC NOMINEE ON THE BOARD OF COMHAR 
NA NOILEAN CTR.         
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
Cllr C Brogan proposed, seconded by Cllr Mc Dermott that Cllr Anthony 
Molloy be nominated as the Donegal County Council representative on-
to the Board of Comhar na nOileain CTR. 
 
 
Cllr J Brogan proposed, seconded by Cllr Meehan that Cllr Micheál 
Choilm Mac Giolla Easbuig be nominated as the Donegal County 
Council representative onto the Board of Comhar na nOileain CTR. 
 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that he had considerable support on the 
Islands and had worked with the Islanders on a range of projects. He 
was, he advised, very familiar with the issues on the ground and would 
be a dedicated and committed representative for all the Islands. 
 
 
Cllr Molloy said that as the outgoing representative he had been de-
lighted to be part of the process which saw significant monies approved 
for the Donegal Islands with €400,000 allocated under the 2023-2027 
programme. He had been, he said, a strong voice for the Islands and 
was happy for his name to be put forward as there was considerable 
work to be done going forward. 
 
 
A recorded vote was then taken by the Meetings Administrator resulting 
in 20 votes for Cllr Molloy and 10 votes for Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig. 
 
 
Those voting for Cllr Molloy were: 
 
Cllrs Blaney, Boyle, Bradley, C Brogan, Canning, Carr, Coyle, M Far-
ren, Harley, Jordan, Kavanagh, Kelly, Mc Clafferty, Mc Dermott, Mc 
Garvey, Mc Gowan, Mc Monagle, Molloy, Naughton and O’ Fearraigh. 
(20) 
 
Those voting for Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig were: 
 
Cllrs Beard, J Brogan, Devine, A Farren, Mac Giolla Easbuig, Mc 
Brearty, Mc Bride, Mc Gee, Meehan and Scanlon.(10) 
 
 
Thus, Cllr Anthony Molloy was selected as the Donegal County Council 
representative to the Board of Comhar na nOileain CTR 
 

25 
 
C/179/25 
TO FILL CASUAL VACANCY ON THE DEFECTIVE CONCRETE 
BLOCKS COMMITTEE ARISING FROM THE RESIGNATION OF 
CLLR JIMMY KAVANAGH  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Harley, seconded by Cllr Kavanagh, it was re-
solved that Cllr Boyle fill the casual vacancy on the Defective Concrete 
Blocks Committee arising from the resignation of Cllr Jimmy Kavanagh.  
 
C/180/25 
TO APPROVE THE APPOINTMENT OF CLLR MICHAEL BOYLE TO 
THE BOARD OF BALLYSHANNON LEISURE CENTRE  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Jordan, seconded by Cllr Naughton it was re-
solved to appoint Cllr Michael Boyle to the Board of Ballyshannon Lei-
sure Centre.  
 
C/181/25 
TO APPROVE THE NOMINATION OF CLLR JIMMY BROGAN AND 
CLLR MICHAEL BOYLE TO COISTE NA GAEILGE (FINAL NOMI-
NATION FROM THE DONEGAL MD)   
 
On the proposal of Cllr Jordan, seconded by Cllr Meehan it was re-
solved that Cllrs Jimmy Brogan and Michael Boyle fill the remaining va-
cancies on Coiste na Gaeilge.   
 
C/182/25 
TO FILL THREE REMAINING VACANCIES ON THE WORKING 
GROUP ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND CONSTITUTIONAL 
CHANGE  
 
Cllr A Doherty, Chair of the Working Group on Constitutional Change 
noted that there were three vacancies to be filled on the committee. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Beard, seconded by Cllr A Farren it was re-
solved that Cllr Tomás Sean Devine be appointed to the Working 
Group on Constitutional Change. 
 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Boyle, seconded by Cllr A Farren it was re-
solved that Cllr Martin Harley be appointed to the Working Group on 
Constitutional Change. 
 
 
 
It was agreed that further discussion would take place in relation to the 
remaining vacancy. 
 
 
C/183/25 
TO AGREE DATE FOR THE 2025 ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING – 
(MONDAY 30TH JUNE, 2025 AT 11.30a.m.).  
 
It was unanimously agreed to hold the 2025 Annual General Meeting 
on Monday 30th June, 2025 at 11.30a.m.  
 
C/183A/25 
ADJOURNMENT OF THE MEETING  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr Scanlon it was re-
solved to adjourn the meeting for lunch. 
 
C/183B/25 
DISPOSAL BY WAY OF LEASE A PLOT OF LAND AND INCLUDING 
A 270SQ.M. BUILDING AS CONSTRUCTED THEREON AT ISLAND 
HOUSE, KILLYBEGS TO DONEGAL 2040 STRATEGIC  
DEVELOPMENT DAC. 

26 
 
On resumption of the meeting, it was resolved on the proposal of Cllr 
Jordan, seconded by Cllr J Brogan to dispose by way of lease a plot of 
land, including a 270sq.m. building as constructed thereon at Island 
House, Killybegs to Donegal 2040 Strategic Development (DAC) sub-
ject to the submission by Killybegs Tourism being looked at again in re-
lation to obtaining space on the ground floor.  
 
C/184/25 
TO APPROVE THE DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL TOURISM 
STRATEGY 2025-2030.  
 
 Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach noted that the strategy had already been presented 
to members at MD level. Donegal Tourism, she advised did a fantastic 
job and there was great appreciation for the job that they did. She said 
that there had been an issue with some of the figures presented but 
that these had been revisited and the numbers clarified. 
 
 
Cllr A Doherty queried the visitor numbers outlined on page 7 and 
asked what counters were used as there were no figures for Banba’s 
Crown or for the Wild Alpaca Way. 
 
Mr Garry Martin, Director Economic Development, Information Systems 
and Emergency Services, in relation to the visitor figures for 2023 said 
that the total for Slieve League was much higher than outlined and that 
the total for the Visitor Centre alone was in the region of 142,000. He 
said that it would be possible to look again at how the gross numbers 
were captured and also in relation to the projects identified by Cllr 
Doherty. He acknowledged the excellent work carried out by the Tour-
ism team led by Anne Marie Conlon in conjunction with Joy Browne 
and Mary Daly.  
 
Cllr Mc Dermott said it was very disappointing to look at the statistics 
for the visitor number attractions especially as there was no reference 
to Malin Head the most northerly point in Ireland. 
 
 Cllr Blaney drew attention to the fact that Fanad Lighthouse was also 
absent from the list. 
 
The Director of Service said that these issues would be followed up 
with Failte Ireland.  
 
Cllr Mc Gowan expressed concern that East Donegal had again been 
ignored even though Ballybofey and Stranorlar were located one hours 
drive from the majority of the main tourist attractions in the county.  
 
 
Cllr A Farren said that considerable work had gone into trying to devel-
op and market Malin Head, yet it lagged in terms of the promotion of 
the overall tourism product. It was concerning, he said, that there had 
been very little focus on the development of an overall plan for this area 

27 
 
in the last five to six years. With 12% of jobs in Donegal tourism based, 
this project, he said, had the potential to enhance the tourism product in 
Inishowen and Donegal going forward. He alluded to the fact that there 
had been new counters put into the pathways at Malin Head and that 
these should have generated detail on the visitor numbers.  
 
 
Cllr Canning said that the figures for the Grianan of Aileach were low 
and this was reflective of the fact that there was an issue in relation to 
opening times.  
 
 
Members were informed that the numbers were sourced from Failte Ire-
land and based on their methodology. It was confirmed that the issues 
raised would be followed up with Failte Ireland.  
 
 
Mr Martin advised that there was specific reference to Fanad Light-
house, Fort Dunree and the Malin Head Visitor Centre under Sections 
1.1.1 and 1.10.5. He said that it would be possible to look at updating 
the table.  
 
 
Essentially, he said, this was a strategy document and not a marketing 
exercise. Hotel owners, he said had worked with the marketing team 
and thus was driven by the business itself. Donegal Tourism, he added, 
were committed to assisting them and driving this agenda forward. This 
association was, he noted, reflected in the overall visitor numbers. 
Donegal Tourism, he said, focused on marketing with the product de-
velopment driven by the private sector.  
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Dermott, seconded by Cllr A Farren it was 
resolved to defer the matter to the next plenary meeting so that the is-
sues raised could be reviewed.  
 
 
C/185/25 
TOURISM PRESENTATION ON TBEX – EUROPE (TRAVEL BLOG 
EXCHANGE). 
 
Members received a presentation from Ms Mary Daly, Senior Tourism 
Officer in relation to the TBEX – Europe (Travel Blog Exchange) which 
is scheduled to take place in Donegal in September 2025. This event, 
she confirmed would bring approximately 500 content creators to Don-
egal where they would take part in four days of intense meetings, con-
ferences, workshops and networking activities. This major gathering for 
travel bloggers, influencers and the content creator community would, 
she advised, be preceded by tours across the county and by post event 
tours across Ireland. Donegal Tourism, she said wanted to take full ad-
vantage of this exceptional opportunity to showcase Donegal’s distinc-
tive assets on an international stage.  
 
 
A overview and history of the event was provided and an analysis of 
why the event was being brought to Donegal. She highlighted the im-
pact this would have going forward and said that it was hoped to show-
case the county’s stunning scenery, friendly welcome, unique experi-
ences, a taste of Donegal food and crafts and offer an insight into our 

28 
 
language, and cultural and music traditions. This it was acknowledged 
was a massive event and would ensure that Donegal would be promot-
ed and receive worldwide coverage and exposure.  
 
 
Members welcomed the update and raised the following issues: 
 
• Suggested that the Irish Language be actively promoted as part of 
this initiative together with all aspects of life in the Gaeltacht. 
• Need to promote this so that all stakeholders can be prepared 
and to encourage all aspects of the industry to get involved. 
• Areas such as our maritime history and places like Inishstrahull 
should be promoted. 
• Need for the promotion of activities that fit in with our variable cli-
mate in Donegal.  
• Information sought in relation to the various tours that are to be 
promoted as part of the overall programme. 
• Highlighted the need to ensure that all viewing points and scenic 
spots are in pristine condition for the event. Noted that there were 
issues at Doe Castle. 
• Signage must also be attended to and in place prior to the event. 
Signage at Rathmullan Pier needs attention. 
• Dedicated strategy must be put in place prior to the event with 
collaboration at MD level by the Roads and Environment teams. 
• Identified the need to reach out to the Tidy Towns groups with a 
dedicated funding element so that the county looks it best for the 
event. 
• National Primary roads should be cleaned and litter free prior to 
the arrival of the delegates. 
• Suggested that Aer Lingus be contacted re providing additional 
flights into Carrickfin Airport.  
 
C/186/25 
TO APPROVE THE ACTUAL GROSS EXPENDITURE FIGURE OF 
€217,549,832 AS SET OUT ON TABLE 3, PAGE 3 WHEN COM-
PARED TO THE REVISED BUDGET OF €212,186,413.  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan , seconded by Cllr Scanlon it was re-
solved to approve the actual gross expenditure figure of €217,549,832 
as set out on Table 3, Page 3 when compared to the Revised Budget of 
€212,186,413. (Adopted Budget as amended by net increases in fund-
ing received for 2024) for all Divisions in accordance with Subsection 7 
of Section 104 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended by the 
Local Government Reform Act 2014.  
 
C/187/25 
TO NOTE MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE CORPORATE POL-
ICY GROUP HELD ON THE 3RD MARCH, 2025   
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 

29 
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr Meehan, the 
minutes of the Corporate Policy Group held on the 3rd March, 2025 
were noted.  
 
C/188/25 
ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCE, SEMINAR OR EVENT  
Having noted authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or 
event under Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 
668 of 2006, Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority 
Members) Regulations 2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by 
the Minister for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government in 
relation to the Local Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 
2010, and the Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority 
Members) Regulations, 2014 -2025(as amended).  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Blaney attendance at 
the following was approved.   
 
  Training 
• AILG Elected Member Induction Day Training to be held on 
Thursday 29th May 2025 in the Athlone Springs Hotel, Athlone 
(For newly co-opted Councillors since the June 2024 Local 
Elections) 
 
 
Other 
• Attendance of Leas-Cathaoirleach at the National Enterprise 
Awards in the Mansion House on Thursday 22nd May, 2025. 
 
 
Conferences 
• Attendance at the Irish Planning Institute Conference 2025 in the 
Salthill Hotel, Galway from the 9th to the 11th April, 2025. 
• Buildings Action Coalition 2025 Summit from the 17th to the 19th 
June 2025 in the Riverside Park Hotel, Enniscorthy, County 
Wexford.  
 
C/189/25  
CONFERENCE/EVENT REPORTS  
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Bradley the following 
conference reports were noted: 
 
• Attendance of Cllr Martin Harley at the Lonely Planet Awards in 
London on the 6th November, 2023. 
• Attendance of Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan at the Association of Irish 
Regions (AIR) Conference in the Radisson Blu, Athlone on the 5th 
and 6th February, 2025. 
• Attendance of Cllr Patrick Mc Gowan at the Irish Building Control 
Institute Conference in the Radisson Hotel, Cork on the 12th and 
13th March, 2025. 
• Attendance of Cllr Kavanagh at St Patrick’s Day events in 
Philadelphia and New York from the 13th to the 18th March, 2025. 
• Attendance of Cllr Jack Murray at the CPMR Political Bureau 
Meeting in Bari , Italy from the 27th to the 28th March 2025. 

30 
 
• Attendance of Cllr Jimmy Kavanagh at Diaspora Events in 
Glasgow on the 28th and 29th March 2025. 
 
C/190/25 
DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Brearty, seconded by Cllr Devine it was re-
solved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“Calling on the current Government to establish an Independent 
Judicial Statutory Public Inquiry into the Irish Defective Concrete 
Scandal, which has been labelled incorrectly as the Mica Freeze Thaw 
Scandal as being the cause of this disaster.”   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Brearty said that the truth needed to be told about the defective 
concrete scandal which had been labelled incorrectly by the State and 
the NSAI as being caused by mica freeze thaw. The victims of this 
scandal, he advised, were entitled to an independent statutory enquiry 
similar to the Postmaster enquiry in the UK and the Morris Tribunal 
established by the Irish Government in 2002. He said that as the only 
Donegal politician who had been involved in a public enquiry, he was in 
a unique position to understand the pros and cons and the need for 
such an enquiry. He said that this would deliver the answers and 
establish as to why this had been allowed to happen in the first place.  
 
 
He called on the Donegal TD’s and Senators to lobby for the delivery of 
this enquiry as the Governments failure had allowed this crisis to 
happen.  
 
This enquiry, he advised needed to have open terms of reference and 
the investigations needed to begin with the quarries, the construction 
and concrete industries at the point where they became self-regulating.  
 
 
 
Cllr Mc Brearty advised that his 2023 amended position paper was a 
good starting point and overview of what had happened and who was 
responsible. He questioned what forensic evidence was available to 
endorse the theory that freeze thaw was responsible.  
 
 
The Mica Action Group in their presentation to members in April 2014 
had, he noted,  presented a crumbling concrete block as evidence. He 
said he believed this had cemented the mindset that mica was the 
cause and queried what forensic evidence had been given to the group 
to support this claim.  
 
 
The formation of the Expert Panel in 2016 was, he contended, 
effectively the beginning of the cover up as they had pointed to mica 
freeze thaw as the root of the problem. This was further endorsed by 
the publication of IS465 by the NSAI in November 2018, he added. 
 

31 
 
 
Cllr Mc Brearty queried what forensic testing had been used in the 
development of this standard and whether cognisance had been taken 
of EU directives for concrete blocks and building control and market 
surveillance regulations. The EU directives at the time were the only 
standards, he said, that could or should have been used to test the 
samples from DCC Social Housing. He said that to date the NSAI and 
Donegal County Council have refused to hand over these test results. 
The Expert Panel and the NSAI he advised needed to be held to 
account for establishing a standard that did not identify the true cause 
of the DCB scandal.  
 
 
Donegal County Council and the Elected Members, he contended, had 
let down the people of Donegal by endorsing the 90/10 and the 
Enhanced Block Scheme. 
 
 
A Sinn Féin motion calling for an enquiry in 2018 had been passed, he 
stated, but there was no sign or commitment of same to date.  
 
 
He alluded also to the 5 defective concrete block properties purchased 
in Buncrana at full market value on the basis of IS465. 
 
 
Reference was also made to the fact that a sulphate attack analysis 
had come back from the Petrolab which had proved that mica freeze 
thaw was not the cause of the scandal even though mica was present 
at 16%.  
 
 
At this juncture, Cllr Mc Brearty contended that it was his professional 
opinion that the 90/10 Grant Scheme was suspended because of what 
was coming back from Petrolab and that IS465 and the Grant Scheme 
had been based on circumstantial evidence which replaced proper 
forensic evidence. It was, he said, a cover up and someone had to be 
held accountable. He called for IS465 to be withdrawn, and compliance 
predicated on the manufacturing standards and on compliance with EU 
directives.  
 
 
This Council, he said, had created policies based on IS465 as reflected 
in the Tenant Purchase Scheme and the purchase of concrete 
products.  
 
 
He expressed concern that evidence of defective concrete foundations 
had been presented to the Government, Donegal County Council and 
to the NSAI since March 2023 and consistently ignored. 
 
 
Thus, he said, it was clear that no 100% redress, clarity on 
foundations, building control, market surveillance or accountability had 
been delivered. 
 
 
Cllr Devine supporting the motion said that there had been no public 
accountability and said that answers were needed in relation to who  
exactly was responsible, why the crisis had been consistently ignored 

32 
 
and had been allowed to happen. People were living, he added, in 
dangerous conditions and deserved a fully independent public enquiry 
which was 14-15 years overdue.  
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Brearty requested that the motion be forwarded to the Minister 
for Housing, Local Government & Heritage and to all members of the 
Oireachtas. 
 
 
He called for recording of both his own and Cllr Devine’s contribution to 
be made available to the Oireachtas members.  
 
 
All concerned needed to accept the fact that many of the stakeholders 
involved had stuck their head in the sand and mislead homeowners 
from day 1, he added. People needed to know; he advised how the 
mica theory came about. He said that his own chartered engineer had 
highlighted the fact that when blocks were being tested in Northern 
Ireland high levels of mica in the region of 9 – 11% were detected  but 
because there were no other deleterious materials they were passed 
for sale under Irish and British standards. IS465, it was noted 
prevented the sale of concrete products with a mica content of over 5% 
on the Irish market. He again asked how the mica freeze thaw theory 
had come about given that mica was not a reactive mineral. He said 
that he wanted answers as to what involvement Donegal County 
Council aided by the technical group had in the circulation of this 
theory.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Brearty was informed that a copy of the motion would be 
forwarded to the Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage. 
 
for consideration.  
 
C/191/25 
CALLING ON THE GOVERNMENT TO TAKE ACTION AND 
PROVIDE CAPITAL INVESTMENT FOR CHILDCARE FACILITITES  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Nic Mheanman, seconded by Cllr McMonagle it 
was resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That this Council calls on the Government to take action and provide 
capital investment for childcare facilities to create additional capacity as 
waiting lists grow in Donegal, as well as providing for childcare facilities 
with defective blocks.”   
 
She received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Nic Mheanman said this motion was about access to childcare and 
also in relation to the fact that the Government had promised to reduce 
childcare costs to €200 per month. This, she added, had not material-
ised. Correspondence received from Minister Norma Foley, she said, 
had indicated that later this year there would be an evaluation of the 

33 
 
National Childcare Scheme. This, she advised, clearly showed that 
there was never any real intention of reducing the cost and had been a 
false promise. 
 
She said that she had received numerous requests from parents who 
were unable to get their children into childcare. This was a matter of 
grave concern, she added, as affordable childcare allowed parents to 
go to work, earn an income and send their children to college. People 
were struggling, she said, all over Donegal and the Government need-
ed to be made aware of the struggles that they faced in accessing 
these services. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said the situation was now at crisis point. He alluded 
also to the fact that it had been left to developers when building hous-
ing estates to develop such facilities. Few had been delivered, he not-
ed, and what was left tended to be 4 bed accommodation units which 
are totally inadequate for use as a childcare facilities.   
 
Many of the existing facilities, he contended, were defective concrete 
affected buildings and this was adding to the problem. The motion, he 
noted, was timely and capital investment was needed sooner rather 
than later to alleviate the situation.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
C/192/25 
INCREASE IN THE AMOUNT OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENT SCHEME 
FUNDING    
 
On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr Blaney it was re-
solved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That this Council writes to the Department of Rural & Community 
Development seeking an immediate increase in the amount of Local 
Improvement Scheme funding that this County receives.”   
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Bradley said that he believed there were in and around 1500 live 
applications in Donegal with €34m needed to complete all schemes. 
He noted that €2.8m had been allocated to Donegal in 2024. This, he 
said, had been very welcome and was one of the highest allocations 
that had ever come into the county. At this rate, he said, it would take 
12 years to complete all such applications. 
 
Donegal, it was noted, had no rail and retained the largest national 
primary road network covering 6270kms of road with 5000kms of these 
being local roads. 
 
He alluded to the fact that there had been a change to the application 
process last year which had allowed applicants to apply with only one 

34 
 
herd number. This easing of the rules, had not, he contended, resulted 
in any additional funding. Current funding, it was acknowledged, 
allowed for the completion only of 6 lanes per Municipal District and 
this was not enough. Additional capital resources, he advised, were 
needed. 
 
Cllr Blaney said it was very clear that LIS funding had not been 
adequate and that with 6 per MD completed each year amounting to 30 
countywide it would be 50 years before all could be completed. 
Cllr Scanlon asked if he could add an amendment to the motion in 
relation to plainings. 
 
Thus, on the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr Blaney it was 
resolved to adopt the amended motion as outlined below: 
 
“That this Council writes to the Department of Rural & Community 
Development seeking an immediate increase in the amount of Local 
Improvement Scheme funding that this County receives and that the 
stockpiles of plainings be considered for use on LIS schemes that do 
not need tar and chip.”   
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
C/193/25 
PROGRAMME FOR GOVERNMENT – SECURING IRELANDS 
FUTURE    
 
On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr McMonagle it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 Donegal County Council notes the current Government's aim and 
ambition of driving balanced regional development and supporting rural 
communities in its “Programme for Government - Securing Ireland's  
Future". 
 
 “Donegal County Council now calls on the Government to, 
 
• Remove the matching funding requirements for the Urban 
Regeneration Fund (URDF) and the Rural Regeneration Fund 
(RRDF) for Local Authorities located in the Northern and Western 
Region of Ireland, 
          and 
• Ensure that more than half of the European Regional 
Development Fund (ERDF) is ringfenced for the Northern and 
Western Region of Ireland for the next EU funding period (2028-
2035)”.    
He received a response from the Director of Community Development  
& Planning Services in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Doherty alluded to the NWRA Regional Priorities paper and the 
National Planning Framework which is due for circulation shortly. 

35 
 
He noted that almost one year on from the formation of the 2024-2029 
Council that there were many issues that still needed to be addressed 
and that these needed imminent and continued liaison with the relevant 
Government departments so as to address the many deficits that 
existed in the various programmes being implemented across the 
county. He made reference to the following and highlighted the fact that 
additional assistance was needed in terms of the following 
 
• Energy Efficiency Retrofit Programme.  
• Social Housing Remediation Programme. 
• CLAR Programme and the failure to include additional areas.  
 
The Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage, he noted had   
made reference to the improved National Planning Framework first 
revision which it was noted would trigger a review of the Regional 
Spatial & Economic Strategy (RSES).  
 
He noted that the NWRA had advocated for the Northwest City Region 
to be recognised and expressed concern that the Shared Island Fund 
had not really delivered for this area and that the projects in train had 
not progressed at a suitable pace. 
 
The NWRA, he said, would like to see and drive regional development 
prioritise the Northwest City Region, and see the delivery of 
infrastructure projects with sufficient funding needed to build the 
region’s main urban centres, develop targeted incentives. He stressed 
the necessity of removing the match funding requirements for the 
URDF and the RRDF and of ensuring that more than half of the 
European Regional Development Fund is ringfenced for the Northwest 
in the next EU funding period (2028-2035). 
 
He advocated the need to look at the National Planning Framework in 
terms of what was available to this region and to drive this forward 
positively so as to address the issues and bring infrastructure to the 
Northwest. It was important also, he added, that cognisance be taken 
of the priorities identified in the NWRA Regional Priorities paper and to 
progress these for the benefit of the county.. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that the issues had been well outlined and that it 
was very apparent that we needed all the help that we can get if the 
ERDF implementation is to be brought up to speed in this area and on 
par with the eastern seaboard. He expressed concern at the timelines 
involved in getting some of these projects off the ground.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services 
said that it would be possible to contact the relevant Government 
Departments. He said that he welcomed the thrust of the motion and 
noted that the issue of co-funding was one that was tabled with the 

36 
 
Oireachtas Members on a regular basis. The Council’s own investment, 
he said, could be extended much further in the absence of a co-funding 
requirement. He said he was supportive of the demand for the 
ringfencing of ERDF funding but that this was a matter for the 
Government or indeed Europe and was something that could be 
followed up separately. 
 
Cllr Doherty welcomed the response and asked that the motion be 
circulated to local Oireachtas members and MEPs.  
 
C/194/25 
 ADOPTION OF A THREE PART STRATEGY IN RELATION TO 
KEEPING COMMUNITIES TIDY  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Beard, seconded by Cllr Farren it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 “In support of the efforts of the county’s ‘Tidy Town’ volunteers in 
helping keep our communities clean and litter free, this motion calls on 
Donegal County Council to adopt a three-part strategy comprising:  
 
i. A roll out of a targeted public awareness campaign on littering, 
utilising social media platforms to educate and engage the 
public on the importance of keeping our towns and villages 
clean, and promoting respect for public spaces. 
 
ii. To put up clear and visible signage in town centres and other 
high-footfall areas encouraging people to keep these areas litter-
free and reminding them of their responsibility to dispose of 
waste properly. 
 
iii. A pilot of the installation of litter bins in selected locations 
specifically designed to accommodate pizza boxes, with the aim 
of addressing the recurring problem of pizza boxes jamming 
standard bins, thereby reducing overall street litter and 
improving the efficiency of waste collection.”   
 
 She received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Beard advised that these were low cost measures which could be 
put in place and would make a huge difference to the appearance and 
cleanliness of our public spaces.  
 
She said that there was no street cleaning in place in Buncrana and 
this was a matter of great concern now coming into high tourist season. 
Tourism, she added, put a spotlight on our public places and it was 
very important that the right impression was given. 
 
Cllr A Farren supporting the motion acknowledged the great work 
carried out by the various community groups and tidy towns 
associations and those who took part in local clean-ups. This, he 

37 
 
advised, needed to be backed up with the provision of additional litter 
bins. 
 
He cited the importance of having the bins in place applicable to the 
need and location in question and the need to create the right 
atmosphere to encourage the use of litter bins. It was essential also, he 
added, that consideration was given to tapping into the recycling refund 
scheme to encourage better litter management.  
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water  & Environment said it was 
important to promote the awareness and the need for cleanliness and 
took on board the points raised. He said that there were challenges in 
terms of maintaining the correct approach but that the Environment 
Section actively engaged and worked with the fast food sector on the 
issue. It would be possible also, he added, to work with other local 
authorities and bin providers to see what could be accommodated with 
regard to pizza boxes etc.  
 
Updates could, he advised, be provided through the Climate Action  & 
Environment SPC and at MD level.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
C/195/25 
 ADOPTION OF AN ANTI-RACISM CHARTER  
On the proposal of Cllr T Crossan, seconded by Cllr A Doherty it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 “That Donegal County Council formulate and adopt an Anti - Racism 
Charter similar to the recently developed North-West Anti - Racism 
Charter as a matter of urgency.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development  
& Planning Services in relation to the above. 
 
Cllr Crossan said that he had recently attended the launch of the 
Northwest Anti-Racism Charter which had advocated the following: 
 
➢ “Oppose all harm by words and actions on the basis of 
difference of race and colour. 
➢ Live together, love together, struggle together, thrive together. 
➢ Hold ourselves and others to account for racist words and 
actions. 
➢ Commit to policies and practices that oppose division by race 
and colour. 
➢ Promote these attitudes throughout our region in the northwest 
of Ireland. 
➢ We say no to racism.” 
 

38 
 
This, he advised, was to be made widely available for display in 
workspaces, social spaces and urged community groups, businesses 
etc to put the charter on display.  
 
He said that he firmly believed that this should go beyond the northwest 
and be part of an All-Ireland Charter against Racism. By adopting such 
a charter, the message would go out that hateful and diverse actions 
would not be tolerated in any social setting or workplace.  
 
Cllr A Doherty supporting the motion said that he noted in the response 
that dignity involved respect, acceptance, empathy and fairness as this 
was something that all elements of society needed to respond to. He 
also welcomed ongoing co-operation with Derry City and Strabane 
District Council. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services 
said that he agreed with the sentiment and thrust of the motion and that 
all concerned were supportive of the message relayed by Cllr Crossan. 
He said that his reply set out detail the fact that Donegal County 
Council had in conjunction with the relevant community based and 
voluntary agencies developed and adopted in 2021 the Black & 
Minority Ethnic (BME) Inclusion Strategy for Donegal in 2021-2026. 
Thus, he said, the bones of what Cllr Crossan was asking was in place 
and that he would feed back to the Implementation Team regarding the 
need to strengthen the strategy and to make same widely available.  
 The current strategy, he said, was very ,much in the same vein and that 
he would be happy to work with Cllr Crossan on progressing the issues 
that he had raised.  
 
Cllr Crossan welcomed the response.  
 
C/196/25 
 LETTERKENNY FIRE SERVICE   
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr Meehan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That this Council calls on the Management of Donegal Fire Service to 
enter into meaningful discussions with our Firefighters in Letterkenny 
and that no changes be made to the operational capacity of 
Letterkenny Fire Station Service including the removal of the Second 
Fire Engine, Incident Command Vehicle and Water Tanker until a 
comprehensive Business Case and Risk Assessments are carried out 
in relation to Letterkenny Fire Station and its capacity to deal with any 
eventuality that may arise in the Town of Letterkenny and surrounding 
district serviced by Letterkenny Fire Station and that the Firefighters 
and their representatives be included in all future decisions and 
discussions that impact on their working conditions and operational 
effectiveness.” 
 

39 
 
He received a response from the Director of Economic Development, 
IS & Emergency Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mc Monagle welcomed the fact that the business case would be 
expedited and completed by mid-July and that nothing would happen 
until this had been finalised. This, he said, was a positive move and a 
move in the right direction. The firefighters, he said, had proposed on 
the 7th May to revert to the pre WRC model and this he contended was  
about a healthy work-life balance. 
 
For the town of Letterkenny and its hinterland, there was now, he said, 
a feeling that the service was understaffed. The six on six off model, it 
was acknowledged needed to be looked at as there was a duty to 
ensure that staffing numbers were adequate to respond to all 
situations. 
 
With regards availability of personnel, he said, that few were available 
to respond during the day in the six on six off roster. This, he advised, 
impacted significantly on the number available when the 2nd pump was 
called out and expressed concern as to the capabilities of the daytime 
shift should a major fire break out in Letterkenny. He said that it was 
crucial that the firefighters were listened to. It was incumbent on 
management, he added, to ensure that a robust recruitment campaign 
was initiated. Even with this, he noted, that it would take 16 months to 
recruit the additional personnel and at least 16 months before they 
were trained and on the job. 
  
Letterkenny, he said, was growing substantially and the firefighters 
needed all the support they could get including ongoing engagement 
with all stakeholders. He called for increased communication and said 
that the knock on effect of calling in appliances from other areas when 
there was only one pump in Letterkenny needed to be addressed in a 
county-wide context. He cited the recent gorse fires and the need for 
multiple stations to be involved in the response. Letterkenny, he said, 
was too big and had a wide and varied range of industry, health care 
and educational establishments to be left without adequate cover.  
 
Cllr Meehan noted the response and said it was regrettable that this 
piece of work had not been done sooner. The overall decision, he said, 
needed to be well evidenced and researched. Any decisions as the 
result of changes in rostering would, he contended, need to take into 
consideration the safety of the people impacted. It was important, he 
added that the Council was in a position to facilitate the provision of 
any additional resources needed. To reduce fire service provision in a 
town which has doubled in size would, he stated, be illogical. He 
concurred with the need for ongoing communication at all levels.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 

40 
 
Mr Garry Martin, Director Economic Development, Information Systems 
& Emergency Services said that it was the responsibility of the Fire 
Service to keep the community safe. The Fire Service in Donegal, he 
said was fit for purpose and to meet the service demands placed on it.  
It was, he added, a well resourced and financed service with the 
budget increasing from €9m to €12m in the last two years and had 
never been subject to restriction. It was acknowledged that a 
recruitment process was ongoing for all stations. He said that members 
would be updated of the outcome when the business case was 
completed. He informed members that there was a Senior Fire Officer  
assigned to each station in the county and that he facilitated the 
ongoing conversation in relation to the resolution and moving forward 
of day to day operational issues. The issues arising currently were as a 
result of the WRC decision, he noted, and a national platform also 
existed for members to voice concerns. He said, as far as he was 
concerned the communication channels had not broken down and that 
on the 7th May the firefighters were offered the option of reverting to the 
pre-WRC crewing model.  
 
Mr Martin said that he would not stand over a service if he did not think 
it was fit for purpose. He said that the outcome of the business case 
was awaited and that it was hoped then to move forward on that basis.  
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that he accepted that there was a Senior Fire 
Office in each station but that it was important that communication 
translated into tangible actions. He said that he waited the publication 
of the business case and if the recommendation was for more staff in 
Letterkenny and throughout the county then that process should be 
commence immediately. Concluding, he said, it was not good enough 
that if a second tender is needed in Letterkenny that only one or two 
staff are available to respond.  
 
The Director of Services said that it had to be clarified that Senior Fire 
Officers do listen and respond and that it would not be possible to 
operate in any other way. Everybody, he stated, was looking for the 
same outcome and that needs were responded to in line with national 
policy, and that equipment and training was up to standard.  
 
In response to a query from Cllr Mc Monagle, he confirmed that it 
would be possible to have a workshop in July pending the completion 
of the business case.  
 
C/197/25 
STREAMING OF ALL DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL MEETINGS 
HELD IN LIFFORD  
On the proposal of Cllr Devine, seconded by Cllr McGee it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 “Can this Council support me in my call that all DCC meetings being 
held in Lifford are streamed live to members of the public again, as in 
recent times we have been strongly criticised for not showing these 

41 
 
meetings and most recently for the discussion around the recent 
protests, streaming was turned off. We believe it’s only fair and right 
that those who elected us can watch what we do in representing them.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Devine said that defective concrete block homeowners had serious 
genuine concerns and should be able to view DCB Committee 
meetings online to keep abreast of developments. 
 
Cllr Mc Gee said that the streaming of meetings would help the Council 
in the long run, inspire confidence and ensure transparency. It would be 
helpful, he added, that people could see what was happening and be 
informed as to what was happening with the DCB process. 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig asked that the motion be amended to include 
all Municipal District meetings.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
said that the motion had alluded to the recent plenary meeting during 
which a discussion on the anti-immigration protest in Letterkenny had 
taken place. It was important to note, he said, that the Council at that 
meeting had taken a decision to discuss the matter in committee and 
thus that segment had not been open to the public or media. He said 
that the CPG had discussed the matter a number of months ago and 
the determination had been that given the range of technical and 
resourcing implications involved and the fact that the public can attend 
such meetings that the streaming of plenary meetings only should 
remain. 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that this was an ongoing reply, and that 
streaming was necessary as people were not always in a position to 
attend meetings.  
 
The Director of Service responding to Cllr Bradley confirmed that 
Plenary meetings, Municipal District Committee meetings, SPC and 
other committee meetings were public meeting which could be 
attended by the media and the general public.  
 
Cllr Devine said he stood by his comments and that DCB meetings 
given the public interest in the subject should be streamed.  
Cllr Mc Clafferty noted that there were possibly GDPR issues here and 
said that careful consideration needed to be given to what was being 
asked.  
 
Cllr Mc Monagle noted that there was an opportunity for people to 
attend MD meetings etc and that whilst plenary meetings were live, 

42 
 
workshops were not. He said that when a meeting was live there was 
no control of what people say and that this had consequences in terms 
of overall liability. Further discussion was needed, he said, and that 
consideration had also to be given to staffing and resource issue and 
the cost to the Council.  
 
Cllr Canning said that he understood what Cllr Devine was saying but 
that streaming would result in additional workshops and that same 
would have implications going forward. 
 
Concluding Cllr Devine outlined the need for further discussion on the 
matter. 
 
It was agreed that the matter would be considered further by the 
Corporate Policy Group and an update provided to members.  
 
C/198/25 
CENTRAL BANK OF IRELAND AND THE REGULATION OF THE 
ISRAEL BONDS ISSUANCE PROGRAMME  
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr J Brogan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
That this Council is gravely concerned that the Central Bank of Ireland 
is regulating the Israel Bonds Issuance Programme and, thereby, 
facilitating the sale throughout Europe of bonds which are funding 
genocide in Gaza.   
 This Council notes that, 
 (i) the bonds, known as Israel Bonds, have, since 1951, raised funds 
for the Israeli Treasury for use across the Israeli economy including the 
financing of the apartheid system, the Israeli military and illegal 
settlements 
 (ii) the bonds are now being advertised as war bonds and are funding 
the genocide in Gaza. 
  
 Council further notes that, 
  
(i) in January 2024 the International Court of Justice (ICJ) confirmed 
the plausibility of the charge of genocide against Israel  
(ii) in June 2024 the UN’s International Commission of Inquiry on 
Palestine found that Israel’s actions in Gaza “constitute the war crimes 
of wilful killing and mistreatment, and the crime against humanity of 
extermination” 
 (iii) in July 2024 an ICJ ruling declared that Israel is committing the 
crime of apartheid and its entire regime of military occupation of 
Palestinian territories is illegal and must end immediately 
 (iv) all institutions are under obligation under international law to 
prevent genocide and abuse of human rights. 
 
 Council believes that the Central Bank of Ireland must end all 
complicity in genocide. Council, therefore, calls on the Central Bank of 

43 
 
Ireland to immediately end the regulation of the Israeli Bond Issuance 
Programme.” 
 
 He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
 Cllr Meehan asked that the motion be circulated to the Minister for 
Finance, the Central Bank and to all local authorities in Ireland for their 
consideration. He said that he bonds had originally been regulated by 
the Central Bank in the UK and that post Brexit the Israeli authorities 
had moved this to the Central Bank of Ireland in 2021. The overall net 
value of this regulation was in and around 3 billion dollars per year he 
said. This money he noted, was being used to finance war and 
genocide in Gaza and also to finance testing of military equipment.  
 
 It would, he said, be simple for the Central Bank of Ireland and the 
Government to address this issue and every step possible needed to 
be taken to cut ties with any complicity in genocide by the Israeli forces 
in Palestine. He welcomed the fact that a private members bill had 
been introduced recently in Dáil Eireann o the matter. He cited the 
need to keep the momentum going in relation to the situation.  
 
 It was important, he contended, that Irish financial institutions were not 
complicit in abetting genocide in Palestine. 
 
Cllr J Brogan said that what was happening in Gaza and the West Bank 
was deplorable. It was, he advised, open genocide and the murder of 
thousands of innocent men, women and children. The destruction of 
land and property was ongoing, he said, and Irish people did not want 
to be associated with these activities. It was important that all 
necessary steps were taken, he added, to halt the financing of the war 
in Gaza and cited the urgency in ensuring that the Occupied Territories 
Bill was passed through both houses of the Oireachtas.  
 
 
C/199/25 
  NEW ANNUAL BANK HOLIDAY IN JULY IN HONOUR OF ST. 
COLMCILLE     
On the proposal of Cllr Kavanagh, seconded by Cllr Mc Clafferty it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That the Council write to Government requesting that they introduce a 
new annual Bank Holiday in the month of July in honour of St. 
Colmcille.” 
 
 He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Kavanagh said that the motion in effect should read as a public 
holiday and that he had submitted same as Ireland currently had a 
below average number of public holidays compared to other EU 

44 
 
countries. This was 10 such days per annum currently, he noted, 
compared to 12.8 in other EU states. Countries such as Australia and 
New Zealand had he confirmed had  12 and 11 days respectively.  
Ireland, he said, had three patron saints with only two having a 
dedicated public holiday in their honour. He noted that St Colmcille 
feast day was in June but as there was already a public holiday in early 
June, then the first Monday in July would be an ideal date for a new 
public holiday to honour St Colmcille. This, would, he advised, also be 
an excellent tourism boost for the County and an opportunity to 
promote attractions such as Gartan and Slí Colmcille and other 
locations associated with St Colmcille. There was acknowledgement 
also that there was a cross border and an international dimension to 
any such recognition.  
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty seconded the motion and outlined his support for 
same.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
 It was thus agreed to circulate the motion to the Department of 
Enterprise, Trade and Employment for consideration 
 
C/200/25 
  THAT €5M BE ALLOCATED IN THE REVENUE BUDGET 2026 TO 
DEAL WITH DERELICT SITES AND BUILDINGS    
 
  
 On the proposal of Cllr Naughton, seconded by Cllr C Brogan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“I am asking Donegal County Council to allocate €5 million in the 
revenue budget for 2026 to deal with derelict sites and buildings  to 
support the revitalisation and regeneration of our towns and villages.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development 
& Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Naughton said this was an issue very familiar to all Councillors and 
alluded to the two funding streams that were available namely the 
RRDF and the URDF. Only one town in the county, namely 
Letterkenny, he added received funding amount to tackle 
dereliction with no such monies available under the RRDF. He noted 
that the Croí Cónaithe had been an excellent grant scheme and that 
changes were being considered in terms of looking at town centre and 
over the shop units.  
 
Welcoming the response, he thanked the Regeneration Team for their 
work and dedication and said that they had the capability to do so much 
more if the relevant funding was in place. He alluded to the many 
vacant and derelict properties in towns and villages across the county 
which would benefit if this was progressed. He cited the need for a 
revolving fund which could facilitate the buying and selling of such 
properties.  

45 
 
He referenced the Town Centre First Policy Article 7.2 and the URDF 
and the RRDF together with  National Planning Framework Ireland 
2040 under which, he noted, a commitment had been given to support 
the RRDF to deliver the necessary facilities and infrastructure to deliver 
and bring life back into rural towns and villages. The funding, he 
advised, was available and called on the Council to take the lead in 
securing funding noting that in the period 2020-2025 over €41m in 
funding had been received in Donegal for regeneration purposes. 
 
Cllr C Brogan said that it was an excellent motion and that it highlighted 
the opportunities that were available. He acknowledged the great 
amount of work done in this area and said that the regeneration team 
could build on this work if the funding envelope was enhanced. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services 
thanked Cllrs Naughton and Brogan for their comments and their 
acknowledgement of the work carried out by the Regeneration team. 
 
His response, he said, outlined the value of having a fund like this 
available and referenced the €4m available under the URDF in 
Letterkenny to deal with dereliction. The true value of this fund, he 
added, was to be seen in the success of the Croí Cónaithe. He noted 
that there had been engagement with landowners sitting on vacant or 
derelict properties and who now had the attraction of having funds 
available to them for refurbishment works. The value here, it was noted, 
was that where there was no engagement, the compulsory purchase 
option could be utilised and the property then ultimately made available 
with any income generated going into a revolving fund. He noted that a 
priority list of towns had been agreed outside of Letterkenny, 
comprising one in each MD and that this would be targeted in terms of 
accessing this fund. The only concern, he said, was the overall concept 
of having a €5m fund available to support work in these towns was 
subject to approval and would create huge pressure on the revenue 
budgetary process for 2026. This, he said, also put an onus on the 
Council to lobby the Government departments for such funding.  
 
C/201/25 
 ADDITION OF TOWNS AND VILLAGES THAT ARE NOT INCLUDED 
IN THE NATIONAL ROLLOUT OF FIBRE BROADBAND  
Cllr Jordan submitted the following motion and said that he wished to 
amend his motion as submitted by making specific reference to the 
commercial sector:- 
 
“I am asking that this Council call on the Department of 
Telecommunications to add a number of villages in the county that are 
not included in the national rollout of fibre broadband.”   
 
Thus, on the proposal of Cllr Jordan, seconded by Cllr Carr it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  

46 
 
 
“I am asking that this Council to ask the Department of 
Telecommunications to call on the commercial sector(Vodafone) to 
deliver on their commitment and to add a number of villages in the 
county that are not included in the national rollout of fibre broadband.”   
 
He received a response from the Director of Economic Development, 
Information Systems & Emergency Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Jordan referenced the fact that the rollout of the fibre broadband 
was slow and that whilst there was excellent coverage in certain areas 
many towns and villages were struggling to obtain any kind of service. 
There had been a promise, he noted, to upgrade all towns and villages 
on the national rollout but this had not materialised. He said that a 
promise had been made and not delivered on. This, it was noted was 
impacting on the business sector and the tourist industry. He asked the 
Council to put pressure on the various providers to deliver on that 
promise. 
 
Cllr Carr outlined his support for the motion and said that fibre 
broadband needed to be rolled out to all of rural Ireland.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Garry Martin, Director of Economic Development, Information 
Systems and Emergency Services said that the response tried to 
capture the fact that the towns were now lesser well served than many 
of the rural areas, It was disappointing, he said, that the commercial 
sector had not closed out on this aspect. He said that if members 
wished to identify specific areas requiring attention, then these could  
be highlighted directly to the Department. 
 
Cllr Jordan welcomed the response and noted that there was an onus 
on providers to upgrade all towns and villages.  
 
C/202/25 
INCREASE IN THE FEE FOR PLANNING OBJECTIONS   
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Clafferty, seconded by Cllr Molloy it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“I am asking this Council to support my motion for the introduction of a 
higher planning fee in the region of €500 per objection and that we also 
write to the Government seeking such a rise in fees for objections etc. 
as I feel that that currently the €20 charge is not fair on applicants as it 
is too low and really is open to abuse by objectors." 
 
 I would also like this motion passed around the country to all other 
Councils for consideration.   
 
 He received a response from the Director of Community Development 
& Planning Services in relation to the above.  

47 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty said that he had submitted the motion as there was 
currently considerable abuse of the legislation with people objecting for 
little or no reason. He said that the current charge of €20 for a planning 
objection was far too low and needed review. The reality was, he said, 
that such objectors were holding up the planning process and that the 
something needed to be done at national level. A higher planning fee of 
€500 would, he contended, cut out the abuse. 
 
Cllr Molloy supporting the motion said it was very easy to put in an 
objection given the low fee involved. With objections often coming from 
outside the area in question, he contended, that an increase in the cost 
might decrease the number of objections from outside the designated 
planning area.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that he could not support the motion as 
working people needed to be able to make an objection on a planning 
application in their own area at a reasonable cost. €500 was too much, 
he added, and outlined the need for people to be able to have 
ownership of environmental issues etc in their own communities.  
 
Cllr Meehan said that he could not support same as planning had to be 
accessible and the fee suggested onerous on ordinary people. 
 
Cllr Blaney said that he could see the reasoning for the motion but that 
€500 was excessive and €20 too low. This was something, he noted, 
which could be conveyed to the Department and that might also 
possibly be addressed in the context of the new planning framework. 
He cited the need for some form of agreement which would see 
objections categorised with a regional focus or county focus only. 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services  
Said that the motion would be conveyed to the Department of Housing, 
Local Government & Heritage in the context of the review of the 
regulations in conjunction with the new 2024 Planning Act. There would 
be an opportunity for Local Authorities to input into to the process using 
this mechanism. Work had been ongoing, he confirmed, by Planning 
Authorities in relation to the review of fees generally and this was due 
to feed into the overall review.  
 
Cllr Scanlon suggested a fee of €250 with €200 reimbursed if the 
objection was upheld. 
 
Cllr Canning proposed that the matter be referred to the Planning SPC 
for further consideration and subject to the publication of the new 
Planning Act. This was seconded by Cllr Mc Monagle.  
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty welcomed the commentary and criticism and said that 
he was agreeable to the matter being referred to the SPC. His proposal 
for a €500 fee, he said, was not set in stone and alluded to the fact that 

48 
 
there had been discussion by Kerry County Council regarding a €2000 
fee. 
 
Members not part of the Planning SPC were invited to make 
submissions on the matter for the next scheduled committee meeting.  
 
C/203/25 
RISING USE OF SMARTPHONES AND SOCIAL MEDIA AMONG 
EARLY TEENAGERS  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Carr, seconded by Cllr O’  Fearraigh it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
Noting recent studies and increased media coverage, including the 
impact of the Netflix documentary Adolescence, which highlight the 
growing concerns around early access to smartphones and social 
media among young people, 
 
“That Donegal County Council write to the Minister for Education, Helen 
Mc Entee, and the Minister for Children, Norma Foley, to express our 
concern regarding the rising use of smartphones and social media 
among early teenagers, and to request information on what plans or 
policies the Government intends to implement to address these issues 
and protect the wellbeing of children and young people.” 
 
 He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate and 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Carr said that this was an issue that received considerable media 
attention and referenced the fact that in 2023 a group of concerned 
parents, teachers and sports groups in the Glenties, Ardara and 
Lettermacaward areas had come together and responded to the rising 
impact of social media platforms on young people. This campaign, he 
said, had worked with 16 local primary schools and St Columba’s to 
promote the delaying of smart phone use until pupils had left primary 
school. This had a significant impact, he added, with over 90% of 
parents in favour of the initiative and many committed to signing a 
voluntary pledge to encourage their children to abstain from 
smartphone use. 
 
St Columba’s, he said, had introduced a ban on smartphones for junior 
cycle students and this had already seen an increased focus on 
classroom activity and renewed interaction at breaktimes. This initiative 
was also backed, he added, by local sports clubs and it was hoped that 
it would combat the rise in anxiousness, addiction, exploitation etc 
among young people.  
 
National action, he contended, was urgently needed and he cited the 
need for local communities to show leadership. 
 
Cllr O’ Fearraigh seconded the motion and said that the dangers of 
smartphone use for young people were wide reaching and had 

49 
 
contributed greatly to the bullying culture. It was heartening, he said, to 
see that so many parents had been supportive of the ban.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services  
said that the motion would be forwarded to the relevant Ministers as 
requested.  
 
Cllr Carr thanked members for their support and said that the 
government now needed to step their support and show the same 
commitment as the parents involved in the initiative.  
 
C/204/25 
 IRISH NEUTRALITY AND DEFENCE COMMITTMENTS 
      
 On the proposal of Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig, seconded by Cllr Meehan 
to was resolved to adopt the following motion:-    
 
 
 “Do Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall, mar mheabhrúchán gur ghlac 
Comhairle na hEorpa le Dearbhú Seville i mí an Mheithimh 2002, rud a 
dheimhnigh nach raibh aon bhagairt ar neodracht na hÉireann mar 
thoradh ar Chonradh Nice, tugtar le fios gur dheimhnigh an Taoiseach 
a bhí ann ag an am, an tUasal Ahern, do Theach Laighean : 
“Athdhearbhaíonn an Dearbhú Náisiúnta ceangal na hÉireann le 
beartas neodrachta agus dearbhaíonn sé: nach bhfuil Éire páirteach in 
aon ghealltanas comhchosanta: go ndéanfaimid ár gcinneadh 
ceannasach féin maidir le ar cheart d’fhórsa cosanta na 26 Contae páirt 
a ghlacadh i dtascanna daonnúla nó bainistíochta géarchéime arna 
gcur ar bun ag an AE bunaithe ar an Ghlas Triarach ceadaithe ag na 
Náisiún Aontaithe, cinneadh an Rialtais agus glactha leis ag Teach 
Laighean ”. 
Tá Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall sásta gur bhain an Dearbhú 
Náisiúnta Sollúnta le hIonstraimí daingniúcháin de chuid na hÉireann a 
bhain le Conradh Nice agus gur cláraíodh é ina dhiaidh sin ag na 
Náisiúin Aontaithe, agus gur athdhearbhaigh rialtas Cowan na 
gealltanais ina dhiaidh sin tar éis diúltú do Chonradh Liospóin ar dtús in 
2008. 
 
Mar sin féin, is mian le Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall a ndíomá a 
chur in iúl maidir le rún agus polasaí an Rialtais deireadh a chur leis an 
Ghlas Triarach, ina ndearna an Taoiseach, an tUasal Martin, cur síos 
air roimhe seo mar “croílár neodrachta na 26 contae”. 
 
I bhfianaise an rúin an riachtanas maidir le sainordú ó na Náisiúin 
Aontaithe a bhaint, aithníonn an Chomhairle seo freagracht na Náisiún 
Aontaithe maidir le síocháin agus slándáil idirnáisiúnta a choinneáil 
agus tosaíocht Chairt na Náisiún Aontaithe mar dhoiciméad bunúsach 
de chuid an dlí idirnáisiúnta. Léiríonn an Glas Triarach gealltanas 
dlíthiúil agus polaitiúil ó stát na hÉireann i leith phrionsabail na Náisiún 
Aontaithe. Ag am ina bhfuil méadú ar éagobhsaíocht dhomhanda, 
iarrann an Chomhairle seo ar rialtas an tSaorstáit an Glas Triarach a 

50 
 
chosaint mar chuid lárnach de neodracht na hÉireann agus brú a chur 
ar iarrachtaí chun síocháin agus taidhleoireacht a chur chun cinn. 
 
Mar sin de tá Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall go láidir i gcoinne 
polasaí den chineál seo agus geallann siad go ndéanfar teagmháil le 
gach Comhairle Contae láithreach ag iarraidh orthu seasamh linn agus 
leis na forais rialtais cuí chun iad a chur ar an eolas faoina bhfreasúra.” 
 
Má cheadaítear an rún go ndéanfar é a scaipeadh ar chomhairlí eile 
taobh istigh den stát – 
 
 “Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall, recalling that in June 2002 the 
European Council adopted the Seville Declaration, which confirmed 
that the Nice Treaty posed no threat to Ireland’s neutrality, notes that 
the then Taoiseach Mr Ahern confirmed to Teach Laighean that: “ The 
National Declaration reaffirms Ireland’s attachment to a policy of 
neutrality and confirms that: Ireland is not party to any mutual defence 
commitment: that we will take our own sovereign decision on whether 
26 Counties defence force should participate in humanitarian or crisis 
management tasks mounted by the EU based on the Triple Lock of UN 
endorsement, Government decision and Teach Laighean approval”.   
 
 Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall is satisfied that the Solemn National 
Declaration was associated with Ireland’s Instruments of ratification of 
the Nice Treaty and subsequently registered at the UN, while the 
undertakings were subsequently reiterated by the Cowan government 
following initial rejection of the Lisbon Treaty in 2008. 
 
 However, Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall now wishes to express its 
dismay at the stated intention and policy of the Government to 
dismantle the Triple Lock, which the Taoiseach Mr Martin previously 
described as “the core of 26 counties neutrality”.   
 
 In light of the intention to remove the requirement for a UN mandate, 
this Council recognises the responsibility of the United Nations in 
maintaining international peace and security and the primacy of the UN 
Charter as a foundational document of international law. The Triple 
Lock represents a legal and political commitment by the Irish state to 
the principles of the UN. At a time of heightened global instability, this 
Council calls on the Free State government to safeguard the Triple 
Lock as a core component of Irish neutrality and to redouble efforts to 
promote peace and diplomacy. 
  
Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall therefore states its forceful opposition 
to such a policy and pledges to immediately contact all County Councils 
requesting them to join us in this course of action and to inform the 
appropriate government organs of their opposition.” 
 
 If motion is approved that it is circulated to other councils within the 
state.   

51 
 
 He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that the three tiered approval mechanism 
authorising the deployment of Irish troops on overseas missions was 
vital for preservice Ireland’s neutrality and had to be protected at all 
costs. Millions, he said, had been spent on bombs when this money 
could have been invested in healthcare etc. Asking members for their 
support he cited the importance of ensuring that Irish troops were not 
randomly sent to other countries.  
 
Cllr Meehan said it was imperative that everybody was aware of what  
the Government were in the process of doing. It was imperative, he 
added, that nothing comprised our neutrality. Every poll carried out, he 
noted, in relation to Irish neutrality had garnered widespread public 
support. The attempt to remove the UN security mandate, he said, 
would effectively allow the Government to deploy Irish troops, putting 
the Irish National Defence Forces at risk. He said that he had spoken to 
Defence Force members on the ground, and they were not keen to 
progress the removal of the triple lock. Any such move, he advised, 
would be detrimental to our standing internationally and the safety of 
our defence forces. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
said that a copy of the motion would be forwarded to the Tánaiste for 
his consideration  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig thanked Cllr Meehan for his support outlining 
again the importance of retaining the Triple Lock.  
 
C/205/25 
 INSPECTION OF SEPTIC TANKS 
 
On the proposal of Cllr O’ Fearraigh, seconded by Cllr Crossan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“With regards to the inspection of septic tanks that these inspections 
are open to all areas within the County of Donegal.”    
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr O’ Fearraigh noted that back in 2013 59% of septic tanks had failed 
the inspection process yet 82% of these had now been corrected. 
Changes to the Septic Tank Grant Scheme in 2024 had been 
particularly beneficial, he added. There was still a problem, he 
contended, in that not all areas were included in the scheme. 
 
 
He asked that update be provided in relation to the requests for Septic 
Tank inspections and as to how many people are carrying out these 
inspections within Donegal County Council. 
 

52 
 
 
Cllr Crossan outlined his support for the motion and said that the 
extension of same would be beneficial county-wide.  
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment noted that a lot 
of work had been done in relation to this aspect. He welcomed the 
changes to the scheme that had come into force in January 2024, 
removing the requirement to have the septic tank registered before the 
1st February 2013 and increasing the maximum grant payable up to 
85% of the cost. The scheme, he advised, still required inspection by 
the Local Authority.  
 
 
Members were informed that further correspondence had been 
received from the Department earlier in the morning asking this Council 
to prioritise areas of high concern and to put a real focus on these. He 
said that the Annual Service Delivery Plan had given a commitment to 
increase resources and move forward with the inspection process. 
Every effort would be made, he said, to extend this, cater for the 
demand and meet national targets. Updates would be provided, he 
confirmed, through the MD process.  
 
 
Cllr O’ Fearraigh thanked all for their support and welcomed the fact 
that the scheme was being extended. 
 
C/206/25 
 CATHAOIRLEACH’S BUSINESS 
 
Votes of Sympathy 
 
A vote of sympathy was extended to the following: 
 
▪ Brian Boyle, former Head of Information Systems on the death 
of his mother, Frances Boyle. 
▪ Marie Deeney, formerly Income Collection, Inishowen MD on the 
death of her mother Bernie Deeney.  
 
 
 
Staff Retirements  
 
 Best wishes were extended to Teresa Conway, Staff Officer, Planning 
and Doreen Floyd, Administrative Officer on their impending 
retirements. It was noted that they had a combined total of 91 years of 
service. On behalf of Donegal County Council, the Cathaoirleach 
thanked both staff members for their incredible service and 
commitment over many years.  
 
 
Visit to Leitrim County Council 
 
Members were informed that arrangements were being made for 8 
member to go and meet with Leitrim County Council.  
 
  
 
 Events Attended 
▪ Meeting with and presentation to the Korean Ambassador, His 
Excellency Yong-Kil Kim in the County House on Friday 4th April 
2025. 

53 
 
▪ Participation in the Northwest Diversity and Cultural Conference 
held on the 4th April 2025 in Letterkenny. 
 
▪ Launch of the Big Donegal Clean Up at the Pier in Donegal 
Town on Thursday 10th April. 
▪ One Million Stars Project Workshop held in the Letterkenny PSC 
on the 15th April 2025. 
▪ Cathaoirleach’s Concert in aid of Donegal Domestic Violence 
Services held on the 18th April, 2025 in An Grianan Theatre. It 
was noted that this had been a massive success with €7,500 
raised to date. The Cathaoirleach acknowledged the assistance 
provided by Moya Brennan and Mairéad Ní Mhaonaigh and all 
involved in making this event a resounding success.  
▪ Visit to Worcester State University with the Mayor of Derry City 
& Strabane District Council, Lillian Barr Senoi to accept an 
honorary doctorate award from the 22nd to the 24th April 2025. 
▪ Contract Signing of the Design and Build Projects at Barrack Hill 
and Malin in the County House, Lifford on the 28th April, 2025. 
▪ Bealtaine Launch at Buncrana Library on the 29th April.  
▪ Cornerstone Launch in Letterkenny on the 30th April,  2025. 
▪ Launch of National Bike Week in Lifford National School on 
Thursday 1st May 2025. 
▪ Participation in the delegation to meet with Sligo County Council 
on the 6th May 2025. 
▪ Attendance at the Local Enterprise Business Summit on the 7th 
May, 2025. 
▪ Launch of the Go Visit Donegal Golf Brochure in Murvagh on the 
9th May 2025. 
▪ Delivery of the welcome address at the Forsa Local Government 
and Local Services Conference in the Mt Errigal Hotel on the 
14th May 2025. 
▪ ` Opening of the new Sensory Garden in Bundoran Community 
Library on the 14th May 2025. 
▪ `Attendance with the Director of Economic Development, 
Information Systems and Emergency Services and the Head of 
Economic Development at the Transatlantic Climate Alliance 
Conference in Plymouth, Massachusetts from the 21st to the 24th 
May 2025. It was noted that the Council had received a  number 
of awards from Ambassador Clare Cronin (Ret). 
 
 
 Congratulations 
 
Congratulations was extended to Lowry Construction on winning the 
“Residential Award” at the  Irish Construction Excellence Awards  for 
the Trusk Road Age Friendly Housing Development.  
 
 
 
Freedom of the County  
 
The Cathaoirleach said that she would like to give a special acknowl-
edgement to one of our own and her family. She informed members of 
the following: 
 

54 
 
“We are all very proud of her and despite her immense success, this 
woman remains a figure of mystery. She is someone who prefers her 
Dublin residence to the spotlight and who’s privacy has added to her 
mystique whilst making her music a refuge for listeners all around the 
world. She has achieved multi-million album sales and received critical 
acclaim all reflecting her unique ability to create music that transcends 
borders and speaks to the soul. Her album “Watermark” introduced her 
music to the world and highlighted that signature sound for which she 
has become famous. 
 
 
It was noted that the song  “A Day without Rain” became a global sen-
sation in the aftermath of the 9/11 tragedy providing solace for many. It 
was fitting also that all proceeds from this song were donated to the 
families of those in the Fire Service Department of New York who had 
perished in the tragedy.  
 
 
Her music she noted continued to be a source of peace and inspiration. 
 
The wonderful Eithne Pádraigín Ní Bhraonáin from Gweedore known 
worldwide as Enya is this remarkable woman.  
 
Orinoco Flow it was noted was a global hit together with “Only Time” 
and “Caribbean Blue” other notable hits. Another outstanding achieve-
ment was when her composition “May it Be” from the soundtrack of 
“Lord of the Rings” – The Fellowship of the Ring was nominated for an 
Academy Award for best original song in 2002.  
 
“Amaratine” her sixth studio album in 2005 continued this remarkable 
journey.” 
 
Cllr Kennedy said that she would like to offer her the Freedom of her 
home county, County Donegal to celebrate not just her music, but her 
craft, her world of tranquillity and the beauty which she has so magnifi-
cently conveyed through her art.  
 
She acknowledged that Enya was a very private person and that there 
would be no expectation to attend the ceremony in person. The award 
of same was, she advised, a token of how proud the people of Donegal 
were of her success and to highlight the fact that she deserved the 
highest honour that her home county could bestow. 
 
C/207/25 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MANAGEMENT REPORT  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
 
the above and noted the following issues. 
 
 
 
1. Delegation Meeting between Donegal County Council & Sligo 
County Council. 
 
2. Community Development & Planning Services 
 
Community Development 
 

55 
 
Outdoor Recreation Infrastructure Scheme 2024/2025 
 
Clar Programme 2025  
Planning Services 
 
Development Applications Unit 
 
E-Planning 
   
Enforcement 
   
Planning Policy    
Casual Trading – Review of Policy and Byelaws 
   
Review of the Development Contribution Scheme    
Conservation Services    
Capital Projects Delivery Unit and Taking in Charge of Housing 
Estates Division 
Major Projects  
Taking in Charge 
 
Refugee Response Unit 
 
Local Authority Integration Team (LAIT) 
Urban & Rural Regeneration and Development 
 
3. Water and Environment 
Waste & Litter Management 
Big Donegal Clean-Up Campaign 
Climate Action Plan Implementation 
Decarbonising Zones 
Funding of €15,000 for Donegal Community Climate Engagement 
Projects 
Success of Bespoke Organic Compost in treatment of Japanese 
Knotweed 
 
Central Laboratory 
 
Septic Tanks – National Inspection Plan 
 
Licence to Discharge Trade Effluent  
Bathing Waters 2025 Season  
National Agricultural Inspection Plan  
Defective Concrete Blocks - Update 
 
4. Housing Corporate & Cultural Services 
 
Social Housing  
Social Housing Delivery Programme 
Social Housing Second Hand Acquisitions Programme 2025 
Energy Efficiency Retrofitting Programme 
Current Housing Stock Level 
Estate Management of Existing Social Housing Units 
Culture Division 
Creative Ireland 
Library Service 
Right to Read Programme 
Arts Service 
Cathaoirleach’s Concert in support of Donegal Domestic Violence 
Services 
Regional Cultural Centre 
Festival 

56 
 
Exhibitions 
RCC Literary Journal -The Pig’s Back 
County Donegal Heritage Office 
Working over By – Smartphone Competition 
The Laurels – Glenties Historic Towns Initiative 
Community Archaeology Scheme 
Community Monuments Fund 
Biodiversity Office 
Donegal is Buzzin’ for Biodiversity 
Biodiversity Duty Feedback Report 2025 
 
5. Economic Development, I.S & Emergency Services  
Fire Service 
Operations 
Fire Prevention 
Major Emergency Management 
Economic Development 
Donegal Tech Advocates 
 
RegTech Supercluster – New Webinar Series 
Alpha Innovation 
Launch of new Golf in Donegal Brochure 
Local Enterprise Office 
Update 
Local Enterprise Week  
Made in Donegal 
Student Enterprise Programme 
SCÁLA 
 
6. Roads & Transportation  
Roads Areas Update 
Restoration Improvement and Restoration Maintenance 
Rural Speed Limit Implementation 
Local Improvement Schemes 
Decarbonisation 
Winter Maintenance 
National Roads Office Update 
TEN-T Priority Route Improvement Project Donegal 
A5 Western Transport Corridor 
National Roads and Greenways Allocation 
Central Technical Services Update 
Urban Speed Limits 
Piers and Harbours 
 
 
 
The Chief Executive alluded to the fact that the report had issued in a 
 
new flip book format and said that it was hoped over the coming 
 
months to streamline the content. He said that if there were any queries 
 
these could be forwarded directly to the Senior Management Team. 
 
Cllr Scanlon suggested that the Coillte presentation delivered recently 
 
to the Agriculture Committee on the damage caused by Storm Eoghan 
 
be presented to all members of the Council. 

57 
 
C/208/25 
INSTALLATION OF MORE PUBLIC WATER REFILL STATIONS IN 
OUTDOOR AREAS  
 
 Cllr Nic Mheanman submitted the following question:-  
 
 
What efforts have been made to engage with Uisce Éireann to install 
more public water refill stations in outdoor areas i.e. Greenways, 
Parks?  
 
 
She received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/209/25 
HOW MANY LIFE BUOYS DOES THIS COUNCIL HAVE IN THE 
COUNTY  
 
 Cllr Bradley submitted the following question:-  
 
 
How many life buoys does this Council have in the County? Do we 
know the condition and location of all them?   
 
 
 He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/210/25 
HOW MANY LIFEGUARDS HAVE BEEN EMPLOYED FOR THE 
SUMMER SEASON  
 
 Cllr Bradley submitted the following question:-  
 
 
How many lifeguards have been employed for the summer season? 
How many are employed in each MD?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/211/25 
WHO IS RESPONSIBLE FOR INVESTIGATING PROBLEMATIC 
SEPTIC TANK RUN OFF  
 
 Cllr Crossan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Who is responsible for investigating problematic Septic Tank Run-Off 
that could present as a public health issue and what powers are there 
to enforce remedial action to resolve this?    
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/212/25 
 BLUE GREEN ALGAE MONITORING 
 
 Cllr Crossan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Has there been monitoring of our waterways for the emergence of Blue 
Green Algae in light of the prolonged warm dry spell of weather?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  

58 
 
C/213/25 
COUNTY DONEGAL MOTORHOME FACILITIES, UPGRADES AND 
MAINTENANCE  
 
 Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
 
 County Donegal Motorhome Facilities, Upgrades and Maintenance. 
How many Council based Motorhome facilities are in the county, where 
are they located and will the council ensure that facilities currently in 
situ are retained, serviced, maintained and upgraded with newer 
models where required?  
  
He received a response from the Director of Community Development 
& Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/214/25 
 ENERGY EFFICIENTY RETROFIT PROGRAMME  
 
 Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
What funding has been granted and/or sought from the Department to 
enable further social homes in Donegal access works under the Energy 
Efficiency Retrofit Programme in 2025 and will the Council confirm 
areas and housing schemes that will have works carried out this year?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development 
& Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/215/25 
 3D CONSTRUCTION PRINTING (3DCP)  
 
 Cllr Beard submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Could you provide an update on any discussions with companies 
specialising in 3D construction printing (3DCP)?   
 
She received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/216/25 
 ELECTORAL REGISTER IN THE COUNTY  
 
 Cllr Kavanagh submitted the following question:-  
 
What plans are in place to improve the accuracy of the electoral 
registers in the County?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.   
 
 
C/217/25 
UPDATE ON THE CURRENT REVIEW BEING UNDERTAKEN BY 
MANAGEMENT OF OUR DIRECTORATES OF SERVICES  
 
Cllr Brogan submitted the following question:-  
 
Can we have an update and timeframe of the current review being 
undertaken by management of our Directorates of Services and of the 

59 
 
current council model to meet the current demands on our services 
moving forward?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.   
 
C/218/25 
BREAKDOWN OF THE AVERAGE COST TO BUILD A 2/3 BED 
HOUSING UNIT  
 
 Cllr Devine submitted the following question:-  
 
Can I get a breakdown of the average cost to build a 2/3 bed housing 
unit for the Council's own stock and a breakdown what they can pay for 
a house from a housing body?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.   
 
C/219/25 
NUMBER OF LITTER WARDENS AND NUMBER OF LITTER FINES 
AND DOG FOULING FINES ISSUED IN THE COUNTY  
 
 Cllr Meehan submitted the following question:- 
 
Can we be provided with information relating to the number of Litter 
Wardens at work in the county per MD and can we be provided with 
the number of litter fines and dog fouling fines issued in the county per 
MD over the past five years?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities Managements in relation to the 
above.  
 
C/220/25 
SOCIAL HOUSING REMEDIATION SCHEME FOR SOCIAL HOUSES 
AFFECTED BY DEFECTIVE BLOCKS  
 
 Cllr Meehan submitted the following question:-  
 
Can we be provided with a breakdown of all communication, including 
in-person meetings, between this Council and the Department and 
Minister for Housing in relation to the Social Housing Remediation 
Scheme for those social houses affected by Defective Blocks? A 
timeline with efforts or proposals made by this Council would be helpful 
to illustrate the work done by Council.   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/221/25 
TIMEFRAME FOR THE CROSS PARTY WORKING GROUP TO 
EXPLORE AND REVIEW THE CURRENT COSTING MODEL BEING 
USED BY OUR MACHINERY YARD  
 
 Cllr Brogan submitted the following question:-  
 

60 
 
Can we a timeframe for the cross-party working group to explore and 
review the current costing model being used by our Machinery Yard 
while hiring plant to our Municipal Districts as agreed at our plenary 
workshop on 7th April?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/222/25 
TIMEFRAME FOR THE BUSINESS CASE TO BE CARRIED OUT IN 
OUR FIRE SERVICE  
 
 Cllr Brogan submitted the following question:-  
 
Can we a timeframe for the business case to be carried out in our Fire 
Service and a commitment that no service will be downgraded while 
this study is being carried as agreed at our plenary meeting in 
Letterkenny on 7th April?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Economic Development, 
Information Systems & Emergency Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/223/25 
HOW MANY HOUSES HAS DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL BUILT 
IN EACH MUNICIPAL DISTRICT  
 
 Cllr Naughton submitted the following question:-  
 
How many houses has Donegal County Council built  in each Municipal 
District for the last 10 years? 
Can I receive the final department stage approval for the Council’s own 
direct scheme: 
 
▪ The 30 units in Letterkenny? 
▪ The 43 units in Dungloe? 
▪ The 54 units in Buncrana? 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/224/25 
WHEN WILL THE NEW DOG WARDEN BE APPOINTED IN THE 
COUNTY  
 
 Cllr Mc Clafferty submitted the following question:-  
 
 
When will the new Dog Warden be appointed in the County and have, 
we any retirements in the current Dog Warden Section pending and if 
so are replacements imminent?    
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the 
above.  
 
 

61 
 
C/225/25 
HOW MANY PERSONNEL HAVE THE COUNCIL IN PLACE TO 
CARRY OUT SEPTIC TANK INSPECTIONS  
 
 Cllr O’ Fearraigh submitted the following question:-  
 
Under the national inspection on septic tanks how many personnel 
have the Council in place to carry out these inspections’ county wide?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the 
above.  
 
C/226/25 
WHAT MEASURES ARE IN PLACE TO MANGE CAMPERVAN 
PARKING ACROSS THE COUNTY  
 
 Cllr Carr submitted the following question:-  
 
What measures, such as byelaws, designated parking areas, 
enforcement policies, or signage are currently in place or planned to 
manage campervan parking across the county, and are there any plans 
or incentives to support the development of appropriate campervan 
facilities either directly by the Council or through private or community-
led initiatives; furthermore, is the Council developing an overall strategy 
to address related issues such as waste disposal and sewage 
management in a sustainable and coordinated manner?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the 
above.  
 
C/227/25 
HOW MANY PIERS, HARBOURS AND SLIPWAYS DOES THE 
COUNTY HAVE RESPONSIBILITY FOR WITHIN THE COUNTY  
 
 Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig submitted the following question:-  
 
Cé mhéad cé, cuan agus fána a bhfuil an Chomhairle freagrach astu 
laistigh den chontae? As na céanna, cuanta agus fánáin a bhfuil an 
Chomhairle freagrach astu, cé mhéad acu a bhfuil fodhlíthe acu? As na 
céanna agus na cuanta agus na fánáin nach bhfuil fodhlíthe acu ach a 
bhfuil freagracht orainn astu, cá huair a  chuirfear fodhlíthe i bhfeidhm 
iontu ar fad? 
 
How many piers, harbours and slipways does the Council have 
responsibility for within the county? Out of all the piers, harbours and 
slip ways that the Council have responsibility for, how many of them do 
have byelaws? Of the piers and harbours and slipways that do not 
have byelaws but that we have responsibility for, when will there be 
byelaws put in place in them all?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 

62 
 
C/228/25 
WHY HAS THE REQUEST FOR AN EMERGENCY MEETING WITH 
THE CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT IN RELATION TO THE RECENT 
ANTI-IMMIGRATION MARCH IN LETTERKENNY NOT BEEN 
SUBMITTED  
Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Maidir leis an mórshiúl frith-inimirce a bhí ar siúl i Leitir Ceanainn ar an 
3 Bealtaine 2025, iarradh go n-eagrófaí cruinniú éigeandála leis an Ard-
Cheannfort mar gheall ar imní mhór shlándála an phobail, na nGardaí 
agus ar ár gComhairleoirí. D'aontaigh na Comhairleoirí go léir leis seo, 
agus tá mé ag fiafraí cén fáth nár cuireadh an t-iarratas seo faoi bhráid 
an Ard-Cheannfoirt? 
 
In relation to the recent anti-immigration march in Leitir Ceanainn on 
the 3rd of May 2025 , it was asked that an emergency meeting would be 
organised with the Chief Superintendent due to the massive security 
concerns of the public, Garda and .also us Councillors. This was 
agreed by all Councillors, and I am asking why this request was not 
submitted to the Chief Superintendent.   
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development 
& Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/229/25 
MOTIONS FROM OTHER COUNCILS/BODIES  
Members noted the motions from other Councils.  
 
FINGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
That the Chief Executive introduce a ban on fox hunting on Council 
owned lands in Fingal.” 
 
LEITRIM COUNTY COUNCIL  
“Leitrim County Council calls on the Department of Transport to secure 
funding for the removal of those huge Ash trees along local and regional 
roads, that are decaying from Ash Die Back. We are all aware of how 
dangerous those trees are to road users.” 
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL 
“Noting that a home is a moral human right, this local authority calls on 
the Government to start a process to have the right to housing enshrined 
in the constitution. A copy of this motion to be sent to all local authorities 
within the state.” 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting.  
 
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
