1 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
Aras an Chontae 
Leifear 
16 Eanáir, 2025 
FOGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú Speisialta den Comhairle Chontae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Céadaoin 
22 Eanáir, 2025 ag 11.00rn. in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Tá Clár an chruinnithe leis 
seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile. 
 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
********************************************************************************** 
 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
                                  
Office of Meetings Administrator 
 
County House 
 
Lifford. 
 
16th January, 2025 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Special Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Wednesday 22nd 
January 2025 at 11.00am in the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is 
attached. An online link to join the meeting will issue separately. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
___________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator 
 

2 
 
AGENDA  
 
1. Housing Capital Update. 
 
2. Design  & Build Projects Update. 
 
 
3. Letterkenny Flagship Projects Update. 
 
4. Date of next Special Plenary Meeting – 25th February 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
MINUTES OF SPECIAL MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN 
THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD ON THE 22nd JANUARY 2025 
C/1/25 
 MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs N Kennedy, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, F Bradley, J Brogan, B Carr, 
D Coyle, T Crossan, A Doherty, A Farren, M Farren, M Harley, N 
Jordan, D McGee, P Mc Gowan, M Mc Mahon, G Mc Monagle, D 
Meehan, A Molloy, J Murray, D Nic Mheanman, and J S. O’ Fearraigh. 
Online: Cllrs, L Blaney, M Boyle, T S Devine, G Doherty, J Kavanagh, 
D M Kelly, M C Mac Giolla Easbuig, M Mc Clafferty, M Mc Dermott, M 
Naughton and M Scanlon. 
 
C/2/25 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
Liam Ward, Deputy Chief Executive/ Director Community Development  
& Planning Services, Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, Corporate 
and Cultural Services, Meetings Administrator, John Gallagher, Senior 
Engineer, Housing Capital, Donal Walker, Senior Engineer, Housing 
Capital Claire Burke, Senior Executive Architect, Gillian Dempsey, 
Housing Design, Donna Mc Groarty, Area Manager, Housing 
Design/Construction, Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Dónall 
Mac Giolla Choill,Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí Aistriúcháin, Frances Friel, 
Communications Officer, William Colvin, Assistant Communications 
Officer, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff Officer, Corporate Services.  
 
C/3/25  
HOUSING CAPITAL UPDATE – DESIGN AND BUILD PROJECTS 
AND AN OVERVIEW OF THE LETTERKENNY FLAGSHIP 
PROJECTS  
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
informed members that an update on Housing Capital activity would be 
presented together with an overview of the Letterkenny Projects.  
 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, outlined in detail the progress to 
date in relation to Turnkey Acquisitions, the overall 2023 Turnkey 
Process and ongoing developments with regard to In House Design 
and Construction Projects. This included an overview of projects on site 
together with those at the Part 8 stage of application, updated 
information on the appointment of consultants and detail in relation to 
ongoing site investigations. It was noted that there had been a meeting 
with Uisce Éireann on the 17th January to review projects and that 
currently several tendered projects were at  draft review stage. An 
update in relation to S.I Housing was also provided. 
 
Mr Donal Walker, Senior Engineer outlined the progress to date on a 
number of Design and Build Projects. He advised of the advantages in  
using this method of delivery and noted that the Housing Agency had 
developed a guidance document as a contractual mechanism for 
encouraging the use of modern methods of construction. Specific 

4 
 
examples were provided outlining the progress on a number of such 
projects county-wide.  
 
Ms Gillian Dempsey, Senior Executive Engineer, highlighted the 
progress to date with regard to the Letterkenny Flagship Projects 
incorporating the Ballymacool Project with 165 units and the High Road 
Project providing 150 units. A detailed assessment of the current status 
of both projects was provided.  
 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, thanked the Cathaoirleach and 
members for their attention and engagement. He said that these 
meetings afforded an opportunity to update members in relation to the 
challenges and obstacles encountered in terms of housing delivery.  
 
In terms of that progress, he said, that under “Housing for All 
Programme 2022-2026” 267 houses had been completed and that 313 
units were currently under construction across the various delivery 
mechanisms with 40 additional houses to be provided under the Design 
& Build Framework giving a total of 353 under construction at present.  
 
The next phase, he said, was the 111 units due to go out to tender in 
the first quarter of 2025. It was noted that there were also 48 houses in 
the planning process at present encompassing projects at Oldtown, 
Milford and Kilmacrennan. It was confirmed that a further 96 units were 
also at planning stage under the Turnkey process.  
 
He alluded to the Letterkenny Flagship Projects and the planning and 
due diligence that was required with projects of this scale.  
Land acquisition was being pursued, he added, to meet with the 
growing demand for accommodation. There were, he stated, 
challenges in certain towns and villages and whilst there had been 
considerable success to date the crucial element was to find land that 
was suitable for development. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services  
noted that the delivery of housing was now on a different sphere and 
the focus on the lease of social housing had now diminished with a 
greater emphasis on building suitable accommodation. The economic 
downturn, he said, had seen Housing Capital Teams decimated. The 
introduction of the “Housing For All” initiative, had, he advised, created 
a renewed focus on the building of houses and the updates provided 
earlier clearly indicated where the focus is now. This level of activity, he 
added, needed to continue and it was clear that there were a number of 
obstacles to be overcome. He cited difficulties in terms of wastewater 

5 
 
treatment, water availability, the defective concrete block crisis and 
staffing and resource issues as items that had to be dealt with going 
forward. 
 
He said that under the current programme funds were available to 
acquire lands and that this was critical for housing delivery now and 
into the future. The benefits were now being seen, he added, and 
housing provision was in a much better place today. 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig at this juncture apologised to the Cathaoirleach 
in relation to comments he had made at the previous meeting.  
 
 
 
 A lengthy debate ensued with members raising the following issues. 
 
• That the Special Meetings relating to housing issues should be 
• held at MD level. 
• Uisce Éireann must be contacted in relation to sewerage 
infrastructure in Derrybeg so that the housing delivery can 
progress. Continued engagement needed In terms of the provision 
of sewerage infrastructure county-wide.  
• More houses need to be built if the “Housing For All” targets are to 
be met with a dedicated focus on the design and build aspect.  
• Should be an audit of the various housing delivery mechanisms so 
as to ascertain what can be done to speed up the building process 
given that families are being forced to leave Donegal due to the 
lack of social housing.  
• Lack of housing is leading to the decimation of rural areas. 
• Imperative that planning issues in respect of the 29 houses in 
Falcarragh are sorted. Sewerage infrastructure must be prioritised.  
• S.I Housing policy must be streamlined to enhance provision. 
• Buying of empty and vacant houses in towns and villages and 
those in housing estates could help alleviate the problem. 
Dedicated scheme needed 
• Insulation should be priority when houses are being built. 
• More innovation needed in terms of incorporating play areas, 
community housing facilities etc at design stage.  
• Islands being left behind in terms of housing provision. 
• Tendering process may discriminate against local contractors and 
• consideration needs to be given to utilising local developers. 
• Progress is still too slow, and it is taking too long to get 
developments finished given the numbers presenting as homeless 
at present. 

6 
 
• Needs to be some form of intervention to assist with rising rental 
costs. 
• Welcomed the fact that there is engagement with Uisce Éireann 
and that there is wastewater capacity in Letterkenny at present as 
the system is operating at 42% to 44% capacity. 
• Highlighted the need to invest in water/wastewater infrastructure 
as a matter of urgency. 
• Water capacity issues for existing residents in Letterkenny must be 
addressed prior to the construction of the aforementioned flagship 
projects.  
• Need to work in tandem with Uisce Éireann and the Department of 
Transport etc to ensure that planned developments in Letterkenny 
do not give way to traffic congestion.  
• Concern re the amount of outside expertise used in the delivery of 
housing in the county and advocated the use of in-house 
capabilities.  
• Donegal County Council needs a strategy for dealing with people 
who present as homeless. Emergency Accommodation needed 
urgently. 
• Consideration needs to be given to sourcing building materials, 
concrete products etc outside of Donegal to ensure that they are 
free of defective materials.  
• Must be an agreed national standard for concrete products and 
materials as the presence of a particular standard for Donegal is 
creating numerous problems. 
• Testing for deleterious materials must start in the quarries so that 
the aggregates do not go into the building materials. Robust 
national standard is needed.  
• Five Bedroomed houses must be included in the overall 
programme.  
• Lessons have to be learned from the past an cognisance taken of 
the problems created by unfinished estates.  
• Problems with the Council’s own housing stock need to be 
addressed and a social housing remediation scheme for defective 
concrete block houses put in place as soon as possible. Concern 
raised in respect of  
• Ard na Guaile Duibhe Estate in Moville where houses are in a 
dangerous condition.  
• Social Housing Remediation Scheme must be a priority for the 
• incoming Government. Increased lobbying needed and local 
Oireachtas members to be contacted regarding same.  
• Serviced Site initiative offers a reasonably priced housing option. 
• Concern raised that the rehousing of tenants impacted by the 

7 
 
defective concrete blocks crisis is utilising available 
accommodation and as a result having no impact on the current 
waiting list. 
• Houses must be tested for deleterious materials at the building 
stage. 
• Land acquisition for housing development in Gweedore and 
Gortahork must be actively pursued.  
• Need to look at the possibility of introducing specific liabilities and 
• penalties in instances where developments are not finished on 
time.  
 
Queries 
▪ How is it intended to meet the Irish language requirements given 
that it has been identified in the new County Development Plan 
that a proportion of units in each new Housing Estate is to be 
allocated to people fluent in the Irish language. 
▪ Will the turnover clause in the tendering process rule out local 
contractors from tendering to build projects? 
▪ With regards the quality and pricing aspect is there a minimum 
price that would be accepted? 
▪ What plans have Uisce Éireann for the reservoir in Rahan? 
▪ Update requested in relation to the Cluid Houses at Glencar and 
Kiltoy, and the tenant -in-situ houses at Ballymacool.  
▪ With regard to the “Housing for All”  and the Donegal County 
Council projected delivery targets what is the total number of 
projects on site at the end of January, given that it was envisaged 
that 614 units would have been delivered?  
▪ What is projected number of projects for the first quarter in 2025? 
▪ Has there been any significant impact on interest for social  
housing and private housing delivery by the basic unit costs that 
are issued annually and how did they change in 2024? 
▪ What impact and change would it benefit and attract further 
developers and impact housing provision in the county? 
▪ In terms of site investigations does the basic unit cost in its 
imposition restrict or prevent or reduce the interest from 
developers? 
▪ Is there any update in relation to water and wastewater capacity 
issues in Carndonagh? 
▪ In terms of issue raised at previous meetings in relation to the 
Approved Housing Bodies, has a response been forthcoming? 
▪ Request that an emergency option be put in place for DCB 
homeowners in light of the impending Storm Éowyn and the 
danger to life warnings issued in advance of same. 

8 
 
▪ Has there been any progress in acquiring lands behind the old Fire 
Station in Falcarragh? 
▪ What can be done to reduce the high cost of building materials?  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr A Farren it was 
resolved that the local Oireachtas members be invited to attend a future 
Special Housing Meeting in order to receive the relevant updates and 
hear at first hand the issues being encountered on the ground. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that updates on a range of issues were provided 
to the Oireachtas Members at scheduled meetings with the Corporate 
Policy Group. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
noted that both the executive and the members were on the same 
wavelength with regard to social housing remediation and the fact that 
it needed to be up and running. Contact had been made with the 
Department, he said, to follow-up on issues raised at the last meeting 
on the 5th December, 2025 and to arrange a further meeting.  
 
With regard to Ballymacool, he confirmed that a meeting had been held 
with the vendors and the engineers and that the vendor had confirmed 
that he was happy to enter into discussions again. He said it was hoped 
to have a number of weekly meetings going forward and ultimately to 
conclude the process. In the interest of the affected tenants, he said 
that it was hoped to continue the meetings and to keep the 
Letterkenny/Milford members updated on the progress. 
 
Concluding, he noted that the focus of “Housing for All” was on new 
builds and that there had been progress in terms of acquisitions with 
the 2024 target  of ten units exceeded. He advised that there were 
plans for more in the pipeline but that the 2025 target figures had not 
been received to date.  
 
Acknowledging comments from Cllr Murray in relation to Crana 
Crescent, he said, that generally the approach was to engage locally 
with communities in relation to any issues that might arise.  
 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer informed members that in certain 
instances where the main sewer is not available a site suitability is 
carried out and where possible to incorporate a standard treatment 
plant on site to allow developments proceed. Cognisance was also 
taken of developments connected to the main sewerage system that 
might facilitate additional units going forward. He said that the provision 

9 
 
of a standard treatment plant on site did however limit the number of 
houses that could be built. Every effort, he said, was made to connect 
to the main sewer so that maximum development could take place. It 
was acknowledged that this presented certain challenges in a number 
of towns and villages. 
 
In relation to the tendering process, he confirmed that a robust review 
system was in place. He said that he could appreciate the comments 
made by members in relation to the use of local contractors and 
developers. It was noted that there were a number of substantial 
projects ongoing at present and that these were by and large being 
undertaken by local companies. 
 
The implication of traffic associated with a development and the impact 
that a social housing development will have on an area was very 
relevant and was dealt with under the road safety aspect with roads 
audits and traffic impact assessments carried out routinely. 
 
It was noted that a review of standards was taking place nationally in 
relation to blocks and aggregates and that the introduction of a new 
standard would be welcomed. In the meantime, he said, that the 
Council wanted to build houses to a specification which is robust and 
thus testing is carried out before concrete and aggregates are delivered 
to the sites. 
 
Land acquisition was, he confirmed, being progressed in towns and 
villages and also in relation to smaller pieces of land county-wide. 
Housing need it was acknowledged was reviewed regularly and a focus 
placed on those areas that had an identifiable housing need. 
 
He informed members that a meeting had taken place with the 
Approved Housing Body in Letterkenny regarding the Kiltoy site and 
that Cluid were carrying out due diligence on the issues raised and 
would revert to the Council in due course. He said that he would 
consult directly with Cllr O’ Fearraigh in relation to the Respond Project 
in Falcarragh. The sewerage scheme in Falcarragh, he acknowledged 
was important piece of infrastructure in terms of housing delivery and 
was included for discussion at successive meetings with Uisce Éireann. 
Its completion would, he advised, allow the completion of additional 
social housing units. 
 
Concluding, he said that there were requirements set out in every job 
regarding the completion periods for contractors on site and that 
contract documents and site meetings clearly outlined the necessary 

10 
 
end dates. There were, he said, from time to time challenges to be 
overcome but that every effort was made to minimise delays. 
 
Overall , he noted that good progress was being made in the delivery of 
S.I Housing. 
 
Mr Donal Walker, Senior Engineer, said that under the Turnkey process 
when a developer nominates a supplier for concrete products the 
Council takes samples from the quarry and if satisfactory informs the 
developer. Authorisation to proceed with a Turnkey is not given until 
this is carried out and the test results are satisfactory. Testing was also 
carried out, he added during the construction process. 
 
He noted that building unit costs were set by the Department and were 
all in costs for the delivery of social housing. They did not include, he 
said abnormals and thus in relation to Turnkey Housing what is applied 
is a reasonable percentage of uplift in relation to abnormals. There 
was, he confirmed, an ongoing positive response from developers in 
terms of turnkey provision. 
 
With regard to the costs presented by the Approved Housing Bodies 
the basic unit costs and a similar uplift as applicable to turnkey 
development was applied thus ensuring a consistent approach to both 
mechanisms of delivery. A similar approach it was confirmed was 
applied to Part V developments. 
 
The Council, he said, was aware that the provision of social housing 
developments also impacted on private housing provision with private 
housing 15 to 20% more expensive than social housing.  
 
Meetings had taken place it was confirmed with the Approved Housing 
Bodies in relation to the basic unit costs and the price which the 
Council was prepared to pay for housing units. He said there was 
ongoing contact with the Department and that if revised basic unit costs 
were issued, they would certainly be applied. 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
