1 
 
MINUTES OF ANNUAL BUDGET MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
HELD ON 4TH DECEMBER, 2024 IN THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD 
C/426/24 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs N Kennedy, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, M Boyle, F Bradley, C Bro-
gan, J Brogan, P Canning, B Carr, D Coyle, T Crossan, T.S Devine, A 
Doherty, A Farren, M Farren, M Harley, N Jordan, J Kavanagh, D. M 
Kelly, M MacGiolla Easbuig, M McBride, M. McClafferty, M McDermott, 
P McGarvey, D McGee, P McGowan, M Mc Mahon, G McMonagle, D 
Meehan, A. Molloy, J Murray, M Naughton, D Nic Mheanman, J.S Ó 
Fearraigh, and M Scanlon.  
Online: Cllrs L Blaney and F McBrearty. 
 
C/427/24 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John G McLaughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of Hous-
ing, Corporate & Culture/Meetings Administrator, Bryan Cannon, Direc-
tor of Roads & Transportation, Richard Gibson, Director of Finance, 
Garry Martin, Director Economic Development, Information Systems & 
Emergency Services, Michael McGarvey, Director of Water & Environ-
ment, Liam Ward, Director of Community Development & Planning Ser-
vices, Eunan Quinn, Senior Planner, Tanya Kee, Management         
Accountant, Anne Marie Quinn, Administrative Officer, Finance, Lauren 
Badham, Frances Friel, Communications Officer, Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, 
Rannóg na Gaeilge, Dónall MacGiolla Choill, Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí 
Aistriúcháin, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff Officer. 
 
C/428/24 
2025 BUDGET PRESENTATIONS  
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed members to the meeting and outlined the 
format for the budget presentations.  
 
 
 
The Chief Executive addressing members outlined the main budget 
considerations for 2025 and an overview of the expected challenges for 
the forthcoming financial year. He said that this was the largest ever 
Revenue Budget and represented an increase of €15m on Budget 
2024. It contained, he advised significant spending and a dedicated 
investment plan for the county. Highlights of the projected spend were 
provided. There was, he said, no increase in service charges but it was 
recommended that commercial rates be increased by 4.74% for the first 
time in a six year period with a Draft Revenue Budget of €200,793,949 
proposed for 2025. 
 
 
 
It was acknowledged that there had been a number of difficulties in 
creating a balanced budget namely: 
 
1. Pressure of Demands for Increased Services 
2. Impacts of Inflation and General ‘Cost of Living’ Increases 
3. The Erosion of Value on Council Income from Inflation 
4. Assistance sought from Central Government 
5. Weakness in overall Council Funding Model 
 
Looking ahead, he said, it was intended to target key investment and 

2 
 
development opportunities whilst supporting wider education, health 
and population growth for the development and prosperity of the 
Northwest region. This would be achieved, he added, through working 
with central government and reviewing workforce/planning, delivery and 
working arrangements. Continued emphasis would be placed, it was 
confirmed, on delivering, operating, and maintaining Innovation Centre, 
Digital Hubs and Centres of Enterprise. This was all in the interest of 
planning and investing in the future so that the Northwest Region could 
be a nett contributor to the national economy.  
 
Concluding, he drew attention to the fact that the Three Year Capital 
Budget 2025-2027 included planned expenditure of €418m in 2025 with  
an overall total of €1.8b over the next three years.  
 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director of Finance, advised members in relation to 
the legislation governing the preparation of the Draft Revenue Budget 
2025 and the Three - Year Capital Budget 2025-2028, together with an 
overview of the statutory timeframes involved for the adoption of same. 
It was noted that the final day for the adoption of the 2025 Budget was 
the 17th December, 2024. 
 
He drew attention to the fact that members were also required to con-
sider the Chief Executive’s Report on the Abatement of Rates in Re-
spect of Vacant Properties 
 
 
He updated members as to how the 2025 figures compared with 2024 
and highlighted the increases applicable under the various expenditure 
headings. This was followed by an analysis of the projected income for 
2025 outlined in the Specific State Grants Table and under the other 
Receipts Table. 
 
 
Members were informed that there was still a requirement, as part of a 
multi-annual approach to continue with a number of exceptional 
measures to match income with required expenditure for 2025, in an 
effort to provide a balanced budget for the members’ consideration. It 
was noted that the Council’s reliance on exceptional measures had 
decreased marginally from 2024 to 2025 and that liability to NPPR 
Charges and Penalties would cease in March 2025. 
 
 
He drew attention to the fact that that it was an important financial 
objective to balance the annual revenue budget and that this had to be 
addressed as part of a multi-annual approach in the years ahead 
 
 
Thus, it was acknowledged that the total projected expenditure for 2025 
was €200,793,947 with €131,173, 234 to be financed by state grants, 
income from Uisce Éireann and a number of other income sources. 
This, it was noted, left a net requirement of €69,620,715 to be funded in 
the sum of €28,019,932 from LPT income and the balance of 
€41,600,783 sourced from commercial rates.  
 
 

3 
 
 
The Director of Finance proceeded to outline the effect of inflation on 
own-resource funding which accounted for almost one third of the 
Council’s total income in 2024. He highlighted the fact that the 
Council’s own resource income line had fallen behind by over €4.1m in 
the period 2019 to 2024 and that this was reflective of the impact of 
inflation on the Council’s spending power in that period. 
 
An overview of the Commercial Rates categories and bands was 
provided, and members were advised that the 4.74% proposed 
increase in rates would have the following impact: 
 
 
▪ For more than a quarter (27.4%) of properties, the proposed in-
crease of 4.74% equates to a maximum annual increase of €47 or a 
weekly increase of €0.91. 
▪ For over 80% of properties, the proposed increase equates to a 
maximum annual increase of €237 or a weekly increase of €4.56. 
▪ For over 90% of properties, the proposed increase equates to a maxi 
mum annual increase of €474 or a weekly increase of €9.12. 
 
 
Reference was made to the range of business supports available to 
rate payers in the various eligible categories and assistance in place for 
small and medium enterprises. 
 
 
Concluding, the Director of Finance said that members were now 
required to consider the following: 
 
 
▪ The Chief Executive’s Report on the Abatement of Rates in Respec-
tive of Vacant Properties. 
▪ Consideration of the Draft Statutory Revenue Budget for 2025 and 
the Annual Rate of Valuation for Commercial Rates for 2025. 
▪ Consideration of the Three-Year Capital Programme 2025 to 2027. 
 
The budget as presented, he advised represented a daily spend of 
€550,120 for the Council and amounted to a spend of €1,202 per 
citizen of the county in 2025.  
 
The Directors of Service proceeded to outline in detail the 2025 
budgetary provisions applicable to their respective Directorates. 
 
C/429/24 
 CONSIDERATION OF THE 2025 ANNUAL BUDGET  
 
Members from the various political groupings acknowledged that the 
presentations had been comprehensive and informative. Cllr C Brogan 
said that the budget was ambitious and reflective of the fact that there 
had been record levels of capital funding over the past number of 
years. Clarity was needed, he said, in relation to a number of items and 
advised that it had been made clear in the local workshops as to how 
the Council should proceed over the next five years. He alluded to the 
following issues which, he contended, required attention going forward 
and the fact that there was room in the budget book for change and 

4 
 
increased efficiencies. 
 
➢ Need for a dedicated focus on basic items such as housing 
maintenance and related staffing levels.  
➢ Roads and road maintenance. 
➢ Query as to the proposed review of the various Council 
Directorates. 
➢ Why there was no reference in the book to legal costs and what 
has happened in respect of previous requests to employ an in-
house solicitor and legal team capable of dealing with issues 
such as conveyancing. 
➢ Machinery Yard costs need to be looked at as it appears to be 
cheaper to procure services in the Municipal Districts.  
➢ Analysis needed in respect of the costs directly related to grant 
expenditure especially in instances where monies are top sliced 
for other items. 
➢ Clarity needed in relation to irrecoverable rates. 
➢ Detail required on the new valuations for Donegal which were 
done in 2023 as there is now a requirement to look at smaller 
businesses in a different way. Noted small retail and hospitality 
businesses are struggling at present. 
➢ Greater engagement needed with those businesses that are not 
able to access the Business Grants Schemes. 
 
Cllr Brogan said that members had taken a leap of faith earlier in the 
year when adopting the Local Property Tax and that many of the issues 
highlighted as being significant at that point in time were now being 
presented again. He said that there should be a renewed focus on 
current pressure points and an emphasis on carrying out service 
delivery in a more efficient way. This, he contended, was a new 
Council term and the focus should be on ambitious long terms goals 
with dedicated investment in the County House itself. His grouping, he 
said, could not support a 4.74% increase in commercial rates. He 
called for further clarity and proposed that the meeting be adjourned to 
facilitate further consideration and assess the areas where efficiencies 
could be made. This was seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan.  
 
Cllr Mc Bride concurred with this and said the overwhelming feeling at 
MD level had been that commercial rates should not be increased. 
Small businesses, he added, were encountering the same cost 
increases as the Council and could not withstand a rates increase. The 
wrong message, he advised, was being sent out as it appeared that the 
Council were not interested in those businesses that were struggling. 
He queried the role of the Value for Money Committee and asked that 
a review of the top twenty items procured by Donegal County be 
reviewed with a view to identifying savings. 
 
Cllr M Farren said that as someone who had always supported the 
annual budget it would be very difficult to support the rates increase 
proposed at this point in time. Many of the towns in the Inishowen 

5 
 
Peninsula, he advised, were dependent on tourism and an additional 
rates bill on top of increased insurance, heating and lighting costs 
would cripple many small businesses. He said that further dialogue 
was needed and that he could not support such an increase. 
 
Cllr Meehan said it was disappointing that members comments in the 
MD workshops had not been listened to and that he could not support 
a rates increase whilst small businesses in the Milford Electoral Area 
were struggling to survive. He said that there were clearly problems 
with the process and an alternative budget proposal was required. The 
revaluation process in 2023, he said, had put additional pressure on 
businesses with many ineligible for the business support grants. He 
said that he was aware that not all the issues were the Council’s fault 
but that there had to be recognition of the obstacles being faced by 
these businesses such as general service costs, an increase in the 
minimum wage, mandatory pension increases etc and the recent 
increase in the LPT. He called for alternative budget proposals to be 
put in place.  
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that all of the members had genuine concerns in 
relation to the proposed increase. He highlighted several issues 
including: 
 
➢ The fact that successive budgets had seen an increase in 
housing maintenance budgets but that there had been little 
evidence of the works to date. 
➢ Little or no maintenance of green areas  
➢ No apparent increase in roads maintenance, pedestrian safety , 
and traffic calming projects. 
➢ Query as to where the savings were to be made.  
➢ No increased allocation for pathways in social housing 
developments, Greenways, the taking in charge of estates etc.  
➢ €0.4 million allocation for homelessness is insufficient. 
➢ Further discussion needed with regard to the Machinery Yard 
and the use of our own staff as opposed to outside contractors.  
➢ €17million generated from housing rents each year yet rents 
continue to be increased. 
➢ Are the monies on tourism promotion warranted? 
 
Cllr Mc Garvey said that he could not support the proposal as a 4.74% 
increase was too much given the challenges facing small and medium 
enterprises.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that he did not have a problem with the 
rates increase especially when it was broken down into the various 
categories. He said that he was greatly concerned however about the 
Local Property Tax which was an unbearable burden for many families. 
As a point of principle, he said he could not support this budget in 
solidarity with those who were unable to secure accommodation, or 
were being impacted by the lack of basic services such as footpaths, 

6 
 
poor road conditions etc. He highlighted the lack of funding for Rannóg 
na Gaeltachta and the fact that insufficient funding was available for 
piers and harbours, recycling services, water services, and the offshore 
Islands. The Glenties Municipal District, he noted, had again been left 
behind in terms of overall service provision. 
 
Cllr J Brogan said this was not the right time to increase commercial 
rates and alluded to the fact that he had not supported the LPT 
increase. He noted that reference had been made to the various 
business support grants available, but contended however that there 
were several anomalies in the grant application process. He said that 
there were also value for money issues involved and that he could not 
support the budget as presented. 
 
Cllr Harley acknowledged that that much work had gone into the 
presentation of the 2025 budget and that there were a number of items 
that warranted further discussion. He said that there were issues with 
the business support grants and if a business was ineligible for the 
ICOB grant they could not apply for the Power Up Grant. The 13.5% 
vat rate also needed to be looked at again nationally. He welcomed the 
changes to the Older People’s Grant and the fact that the DCC 
contribution was now reduced to 15%. Going forward he asked that the 
Council look at the possibility of acquiring a patching lorry given that 
funding was available from the Department of Transport. He cited the 
need for improved savings in terms of energy efficiency and for 
additional movement on the various Flood Relief Schemes.  
Cllr Harley also highlighted the need for Ballybofey and Stranorlar to be 
ready to avail of any future RRDF funding. He asked that every effort 
be made to have the new casual trading scheme in place. An area of 
concern, he advised, was the monies spent annually on coroner’s fees. 
These, he noted were paid by the state in Dublin, but all other local 
authorities had to bear the cost of same. This was something that 
needed to be looked at going forward, he added. Thus, he confirmed, 
his grouping could not support the 4.74% increase in commercial rates.  
 
Cllr Mc Brearty said that all members had a mandate to be the political 
voice for all the people of Donegal. He thanked staff for their co-
operation, but said he was not in a position to thank Donegal County 
Council for spending tax-payers money. He noted that the LPT had 
technically been increased and indicated that it should have been 
reduced as the Government had promised to exclude DCB 
homeowners. He queried what had happened to this promise and who 
was responsible for the fact that it had not materialised. He said that 
the budget book should have contained reference to the number of 
social houses impacted by defective concrete in Donegal and the fact 
that full demolition was ultimately what was needed on the basis of the 
recent scientific evidence. 
 
He expressed concern that he had been excluded from taking part in 
the forthcoming meeting with the Department on various defective 

7 
 
concrete issues.  
 
It was acknowledged that there was €17m income generated from 
housing rents yet only €6m of an associated spend had been identified. 
He asked that detail be provided in relation to the balance of this 
income and as to how it was utilised.  
 
Cllr Mc Brearty alluded to the 8 houses in St Johnston which had not 
been provided with the test results from the Council and queried why 
the tenants in question still had to pay rent for their DCB affected 
homes.He asked what the additional costs were in respect of 
Meadowhill in Raphoe, given that it was now three years since the 
contractor concerned had gone out of business.  
 
He noted that the budget book had also not referenced the legal fees in 
respect of his own case, and the fact that the total legal fees in 2024 to 
date were in the region of €2.5m. It was, he contended, hard to justify a 
rates increase when these and the Coroners fees amounted to over 
€3m. He asked that a breakdown of the legal costs be provided 
together with an analysis of same going back to 2019.  
 
Noting the statutory obligation to pass the budget, he said that the 
approval of the figures as presented would cripple small to medium 
enterprises and allow large entities get off the hook. He advocated that 
the reserve funding should be utilised. 
 
Concern was expressed that there was no mention of flooding in 
Raphoe or the Finn Valley area and that the request to meet with an 
engineer from the OPW had not materialised. He was disappointed 
also, he advised, that there was no mention of Building Control or 
Market Surveillance. 
 
On the basis of the various issues identified above, he said, that he 
could not support the budget in its present format.  
 
The Cathaoirleach noted that there was a proposal from Cllr C Brogan, 
seconded  by Cllr Mc Gowan to adjourn the meeting to facilitate further 
discussion. 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig supported Cllr M Farren’s call for meeting to 
continue. 
 
After some discussion it was unanimously agreed to adjourn the 
meeting to 2pm on Monday 9th December 2024. 
 
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 

8 
 
 
 
 
