 
1 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
Aras an Chontae 
 
Leifear 
19 Bealtaine 2026 
 
FÓGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
DO GACH BHALL DEN CHOMHAIRLE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú de Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Luain, 25 Bealtaine 2026 ag 11.00 
r.n in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Ta clár an chruinnithe leis seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach chuig an 
chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile.  
 
Beidh Clár Orduithe an Phríomh-Fheidhmeannaigh le feiceáil ag an chruinniú 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pól Mac Giolla  
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
********************************************************************************************************
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
County House 
Lifford 
 
19th May 2026 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 25th May 2026 at 11.00am in the 
County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is attached. An online link to join the meeting will 
issue separately. 
 
The Register of Chief Executive Orders will be available for inspection at the meeting. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
____________________ 
Paul Mc Gill 
Meetings Administrator  

 
2 
 
AGENDA 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes  
a) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 11th March 2026. 
b) Confirmation of the Minutes of the March Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 30th March 2026. 
c) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 15th April 2026. 
d) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 27th April 2026. 
 
2. Disposal of Land – Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 
2000(as amended)  
a) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to approve the disposal of a plot of land at Muff, 
Co Donegal to Glenturas Oakwood Park Ltd. 
b) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to approve the disposal of a plot of land at 
Croaghlin, Killybegs to Mr Hugh O’ Donnell. 
c) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to grant a Right of Way over and existing 
laneway at Cockhill, Buncrana to Mr. Aaron O’Donnell, Straboe, 
Buncrana, Co. Donegal. 
 
3. Corporate Services 
a) To fill casual vacancy on the Community, Social & Cultural Strategic 
Policy Committee arising from the resignation of Cllr Jack Murray. 
b) To consider and approve the adoption of the Donegal County Council 
Annual Report 2025 in accordance with Section 221 of the Local 
Government Act, 2001. 
c) To consider and approve the adoption of the Donegal County Council 
Revised Annual Service Delivery Plan 2026, in accordance with 
Section 134 (a) of the Local Government Act, 2001. 
d) To agree date for the 2026 Annual General Meeting of Donegal County 
Council. 
e) To note correspondence from Mo Chuisle in relation to its new global 
kindness initiative.  
 
4. Economic Development  
To approve the North-West City Region Memorandum of Understanding 
between the Council and other partners as part of the UNESCO Learning 
City Initiative. 

 
3 
 
5. Communities & Culture  
To approve the Draft Donegal County Council Biodiversity Action Plan 
2026-2030. 
 
6. Finance 
To approve the actual gross expenditure figure of €223,843,695 as set out 
on Table 3, Page 3 when compared to the Revised Budget of 
€222,819,744 (Adopted Budget as amended by net increases in funding 
received for 2025) for all Divisions in accordance with Subsection 7 of 
Section 104 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended by the Local 
Government Reform Act 2014. 
 
7. Endorsement of Minutes 
a) To note minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group held on 
the 2nd March 2026. 
b) To note minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group held on 
the 15th April 2026. 
 
8. Attendance at Conference, Seminar or Event  
Authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under 
Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, 
Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 
2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the 
Environment, Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local 
Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 -
2025 (as amended). 
 
 
Conferences 
➢ Attendance at the Donegal Travellers Project Anniversary Conference 
– “Pride not Prejudice - 30 Years On” to be held on the 4th June 2026 
in the Silver Tassie Hotel, Letterkenny.  
 
Other  
➢ Attendance of the Cathaoirleach or his representative at the National 
Enterprise Awards in the Mansion House, Dublin on the 18th June, 
2026. 
 
9. Conference Reports 
• 
Attendance of Cllr John S O’ Fearraigh at the meeting of the CPMR 
Political Bureau from the 19th to the 20th February 2026 in Nicosia, 
Cyprus. 
• 
Attendance of Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle at the IBCI Conference in 
Galway on the 4th and 5th March 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
4 
 
 
MOTIONS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks    
10. Cllr Declan Meehan   
“That Donegal County Council, in partnership with relevant and 
appropriate stakeholders, undertake a comprehensive qualitative and 
quantitative research study into the experiences of individuals engaging 
with the DCB scheme, including: 
- those who have fully completed remediation, 
- those who have commenced their remediation option within the 
scheme, 
- and those registered for the scheme but not yet active within it. 
 
Furthermore, that the research include a survey of tenants and 
households living in council housing impacted by the DCB scheme, with 
the aim of assessing experiences, outcomes, challenges, levels of 
satisfaction, and the wider social and housing impacts of the scheme. 
 
The findings of this research should be compiled into a report and 
presented to the members of Donegal County Council, and crucially the 
Department of Housing, to help inform future policy development, service 
delivery, and supports relating to the DCB scheme.” 
 
11. Cllr Tomás Seán Devine   
"That Donegal County Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to ensure that homeowner representatives are 
formally included on the Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme 
Implementation Steering Group recognising the vital insight and lived 
experience that affected homeowners bring to the ongoing operation and 
review of the scheme." 
 
 
  
 
DONEGAL MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
  
 
Economic Development  
12. Cllr Niamh Kennedy  
“That this Council would contact the Department of Trade and 
Employment and the Department of Rural Affairs and suggest that 
County Donegal could pilot a project to help combat the closures of 
indigenous retailers in our towns and villages. We would welcome any 
ideas and would be willing to participate in any schemes that could work.  
The costs in keeping small business open is now overwhelming for many 
shops and small rural pubs, we need some practical incentivisation 
scheme to keep the lights on and to trade locally. The wage increases, 
electricity costs have driven these people to the pin of their collar.  
Without these small retailers remaining open in our areas, we will have 
no offering for the community or the tourism trade in the near future.  

 
5 
 
Something must be done to save our rural communities from closure and 
dereliction.” 
 
 
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks 
13. Cllr Joy Beard  
"That Donegal County Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to urgently introduce an upfront funding 
mechanism within the Defective Concrete Blocks Grant Scheme." 
 
Environment  
14. Cllr Fionán Bradley 
"That this Council, following the recent report from Swim Ireland, prioritise 
the provision of Leisure Centres throughout the County and that we 
formally adopt that as our number one priority for recreational facilities 
and that we write to Swim Ireland asking for them to support us in that 
regard." 
 
Corporate 
15. Cllr Albert Doherty 
“That Donegal County Council call on the Minister for Transport and the 
Government to address the concerns of cross border workers, 
commuters about the impact of the imposition of new rules (July 1st) 
pursuant to the EU mobility package which will classify intra-island trips 
as international journeys requiring a new tachograph version 2 (G2V2) to 
be fitted and an international haulage licence acquired for HGV's et al 
undertaking this journey. Donegal County Council calls on the Minister to 
address the issue with the EU Directorate-General for Mobility and 
Transport in Brussels in conjunction with the Minister for Infrastructure in 
the Northern Executive.” 
 
16. Cllr Martin Mc Dermott 
“To ask this Council to write to the Minister for Children, Norma Foley, on 
behalf of the 5th Year students at Carndonagh Community School 
regarding their concerns about mobile phone use and whether the age 
limit for access to social media should be increased to 15 years of age.” 
 
17. Cathaoirleach’s Business. 
 
18. Chief Executive’s Management Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
6 
 
QUESTIONS 
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Corporate  
19. Cllr Joy Beard  
Could I get an update on all my previous motions since elected in June 
2024? 
 
Flood Relief   
20. Cllr Joy Beard  
Can I get a clear and updated timeline for the submission of all Flood 
Relief Scheme Planning applications? 
 
Housing  
21. Cllr Fionán Bradley  
To ask the Director of Housing how many group homes or social housing 
units are currently under construction for those who have SEN and 
additional needs? How many are planned for during the lifetime of this 
Council? 
 
22. Cllr Albert Doherty  
What is the value/fee of recent increases in housing rent charges to 
council tenants, how is the increase calculated and is there a House 
Rental Waiver Scheme currently in place for all council tenants living in 
Defective Concrete Blocks affected houses? 
 
Planning  
23. Cllr Albert Doherty  
SPI 01/2026 
A new Short Term Letting deadline has been confirmed for DEC 1st 
2026, 
What correspondence has been received from Government and/or 
forwarded by Council that clarifies or establishes the planning 
requirements necessary for applicants who want to remain, commence or 
explore SLT? 
 
24. Motions from other Councils/Bodies   
CARLOW COUNTY COUNCIL 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council request from the 
Department of Climate, Energy and the Environment, that annual local 
representative clinics and a local representative dedicated reporting 
service be provided from ESB Networks. This would be a similar service 
provided to local representatives from Uisce Éireann.” 
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL 
“That Clare County Council noted the Government’s announcement of its 
cost-of-living measures and expresses concern that the package 
unveiled does not meet the needs or wishes of the Irish people. This 
Council calls on the Government to bring forward a fair and 

 
7 
 
comprehensive cost-of-living package that delivers meaningful relief for 
households, workers, farmers, and businesses. Please circulate this 
motion to the Taoiseach, Tánaiste, Minister for Finance, all Oireachtas 
members for Clare and Councils in the State.” 
 
DERRY CITY AND STRABANE DISTRICT COUNCIL 
“That Council will write to Translink, Bus Éireann, The National Transport 
Association, The Department for Infrastructure and the Inishowen 
Municipal District of the Donegal County Council to explore bus links that 
could improve connectivity to and from Killea/Nixons Corner and Derry.” 
 
LONGFORD COUNTY COUNCIL 
“We call on Longford County Council to write to the relevant Ministers, 
Fáilte Ireland, and the City and County Management Association to 
implement an extension scheme to retain the Just Transition Tourism 
Activators, who continue to support over 80 projects and their County 
Tourism Officers, for a further period of 3-5 years to ensure the 
sustainable development of tourism and the delivery of long-term 
economic benefits to transitioning communities.  
We further call on Longford County Council to write to all local authorities 
within the Just Transition Territory, and nationally, to support this motion 
in recognition of the critical importance of continuity in delivering a 
successful Just Transition.” 
 
MONAGHAN COUNTY COUNCIL 
“In light of the disruption to rate paying business in County Monaghan 
due to the recent road blockades which have had severe and negative 
impact on local businesses in terms of deliveries, collections and 
employee disruption, this Council calls on the Government to introduce a 
Business Grant to the value of two weeks to compensate for the loss of 
business.” 
 
SOUTH DUBLIN COUNTY COUNCIL 
“That this council request the minister investigate the 900+ missing 
children and girls in the Bessborough mother and baby institution and 
request a hold off on any development of the site until an investigation is 
completed and we commit to write to the Minister for Children, Disability 
and Equality, An Taoiseach and all other Local Authorities.” 
 
WATERFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
"In recognition of the rights of people with disabilities and of 
the importance of complying with legal obligations, including 
the Disability Act 2005, this Council: 
 
• formally supports the Irish Wheelchair Association's Access 
It's No Joke Campaign, which highlights the critical need for 
a dedicated professional in every local authority to improve 
disability access to public services and amenities in our 
communities; 
• requests the Chief Executive to examine and report on the 

 
8 
 
feasibility, including resource implications the appointment 
of a dedicated, full-time and fully resourced Access and 
Inclusion Officer in order to ensure that the Council fully 
meets its statutory obligations under Section 26 of the 
Disability Act 2005 and to align with the European Union 
(Accessibility of Websites and Mobile Applications of Public 
Sector Bodies) Regulations 2020, and in order to ensure 
best practice internally within this organisation and 
externally in supporting people with disabilities; 
• requests the Chief Executive to examine and report that 
procedures are in place throughout the organisation to 
make provision for all Council strategies, plans and projects 
to be formally reviewed in order to ensure that the rights and 
needs of people with disabilities are adequately addressed; 
• requests the Chief Executive to examine and report on the 
feasibility, including resource implications, of establishing 
and maintaining a disability consultative forum under the 
aegis of the Council to ensure that disability groups and 
people ·with disabilities can be brought together to consult 
with the Council in a structured and sustained manner; 
• 
requests the Chief Executive to examine and report on the 
feasibility, including _ resource implications, on the 
provision of training on disability rights to Council staff; 
and, 
• requests the Chief Executive to examine and provide a report; 
o that outlines the Council's legal obligations under the 
Disability Act (2005), taking independent expert legal 
advice if necessary; 
o that provides details on what measures have been 
taken to achieve compliance with these legal 
obligations in the last 5 years; 
o that identifies: 
 
■ which legal obligations are not currently being complied with, 
■ what measures are necessary to achieve compliance with 
them, 
 
o that is to be shared with Councillors within 3 months of the 
passing of this' motion and also published on the Council's 
website in order to be available to disability groups and other 
interested parties. 
• And, if passed, this motion to be circulated to all other local 
·authorities in Ireland. " 
 
 
 
 
 

 
9 
 
MINUTES OF MAY MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 25TH 
MAY, 2026 IN THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD 
C/143/26 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs P Canning, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, M Boyle, C Brogan, B Carr, D 
Coyle, A Doherty, A Farren, M Harley, N Jordan, D. M. Kelly, N 
Kennedy, M McBride, M McDermott, D McGee, P McGowan, M 
McMahon, G McMonagle, D Meehan, A Molloy, J Murray, M Naughton, 
and D Nic Mheanman. 
Online: Cllrs L Blaney, F Bradley, J Brogan, T Crossan, T. S. Devine, G 
Doherty, M Farren, J Kavanagh, M Mac Giolla Easbuig, F McBrearty 
Jnr, M Mc Clafferty, P McGarvey, J. S O’ Fearraigh, M Scanlon 
 
C/144/26 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John G McLaughlin, Chief Executive, Eamon Brown, A/Director 
Planning, Communities & Culture, Bryan Cannon, Director of Roads & 
Transportation, Anne Marie Conlon, A/Director Housing, MD Services 
& Capital Projects, Richard Gibson, Director of Finance, Corporate 
Services & Information Systems, Michael McGarvey, Director of 
Environment & Climate, Property Management & Defective Concrete 
Block Grant Scheme, Garry Martin, Director of Human Resources, 
Economic Development and Emergency Services, Paul McGill, 
Meetings Administrator, William Colvin, Assistant Communications 
Officer, Clíona Ní Ghallachóir,  Rannóg na Gaeilge, Donall Mac Giolla 
Choill,Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí Aistriúcháin, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff 
Officer.     
 
C/145/26 
35TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE DEATH OF FORMER CLLR EDDIE 
FULLERTON 
 
Cllr Jack Murray addressing the meeting paid tribute to the late Cllr 
Eddie Fullerton who he noted had been assassinated in his own home 
in Buncrana 35 years ago. Eddie, he said, was a public representative, 
a community man, a family man and a tireless voice for the people of 
Buncrana, Inishowen and Donegal. During his life, he said, that he had 
stood up for working class communities, Irish unity, justice , equality 
and civil rights at a time when doing so carried real personal risk. His 
family, he said, were decades later still looking for answers and justice 
and had continued to do so with the utmost dignity and determination. 
They had, he contended, been failed by both the Irish and British 
Governments and that the investigation into Eddie’s murder was flawed 
and inadequate.  
 
 
This assassination of a member of Donegal County Council had been, 
he added, an attack on democracy. He was, he said, extremely proud 
of the fact that he had been elected to the seat once held by Eddie 
Fullerton, a seat that carried, history, sacrifice and responsibility. The 
greatest tribute, he added, was to continue the work, that Eddie 
believed in and to stand with his family in the quest for justice and to 
work for the achievement of a peaceful and democratic united Ireland. 
 

 
10 
 
 
A minute’s silence was then held in memory of the late Cllr Eddie 
Fullerton and to mark the 35th anniversary of his assassination. 
 
C/146/26 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 11TH MARCH, 2026.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Dermott, seconded by Cllr McBride the 
Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 
11th March 2026 were adopted.  
 
C/147/26 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE MARCH MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 30TH MARCH 2026.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr McBride the 
Minutes of the March Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 
30th March, 2026 were adopted.  
 
C/148/26 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 15TH APRIL 2026.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr McDermott the 
Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 
15th April, 2026 were adopted.  
 
C/149/26 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 27TH APRIL 2026.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Bride, seconded by Cllr Nic Mheanman the 
Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council (Cost of 
Living Crisis) held on the 27th April, 2026 were adopted.  
 
C/150/26 
DISPOSAL OF LAND AT MUFF, COUNTY DONEGAL TO 
GLENTURAS OAKWOOD PARK LTD 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.    
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr A. Doherty, seconded by Cllr M Mc Dermott 
Doherty it was resolved to approve the disposal of land at Muff, to 
Glenturas Oakwood Park Ltd in accordance with the provisions of 
Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) 
and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, (as 
amended). 
 
C/151/26 
DISPOSAL OF LAND AT CROAGHLIN, KILLYBEGS TO MR HUGH 
O’ DONNELL. 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.    
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Jordan it was 
resolved to approve the disposal of land at Croaghlin, Killybegs to Mr 
Hugh O’ Donnell in accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of 
the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, (as amended) 
. 

 
11 
 
C/152/26 
GRANTING OF RIGHT OF WAY OVER AN EXISTING LANEWAY AT 
COCKHILL, BUNCRANA TO MR AARON O’ DONNELL  
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.    
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr Beard it was resolved 
to grant a Right of Way over an existing laneway at Cockhill, Buncrana 
to Mr Aaron O’ Donnell in accordance with the provisions of Section 
211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, (as amended). 
 
C/153/26 
 FILLING OF VACANCY ON THE COMMUNITY, SOCIAL AND 
CULTURAL STRATEGIC POLICY COMMITTEE  
It was unanimously agreed to defer this matter to the Plenary Meeting 
on the 20th July 2026. 
 
C/154/26 
 ADOPTION OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL ANNUAL REPORT 
2025  
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr McGowan it was 
resolved to adopt the Donegal County Council Annual Report 2025 in 
accordance with Section 221 of the Local Government Act, 2001. 
 
C/155/26 
 ADOPTION OF THE DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL REVISED 
ANNUAL SERVICE DELIVERY PLAN 2026  
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
Responding to Cllr Mc Dermott in relation to his query on the 
availability of roads staff to do some of the smaller roads jobs, Mr 
Bryan Cannon, Director of Roads & Transportation said that this issue 
had been discussed in the MD workshops in terms of the allocation of 
monies and that the Roads Area Managers had been asked to keep a 
record of the various types of jobs that were not getting done. He said 
that he was well aware of the concerns raised by members and noted 
that discretionary monies were available in each of the MDs. The 
matter, he confirmed, would be kept under review. 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach said that there would be an opportunity to discuss 
the matter further through the Special Meeting process. The Director of 
Services confirmed that there would be an opportunity at the July 
meeting to discuss some of the items raised.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty called for a dedicated workshop or meeting to discuss 
marine related issues and matters arising in relation to our piers and 
harbours. 
 

 
12 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Meehan it was 
resolved to adopt the Donegal County Council Revised Annual Service 
Delivery Plan 2026, in accordance with Section 134 (a) of the Local 
Government Act, 2001 
 
C/156/26 
 AGREE A DATE FOR THE 2026 ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan and seconded by Cllr Brogan it was 
resolved to hold the 2026 Annual General Meeting on Monday 29th 
June, 2026 at 11am in the Council Chamber, County House, Lifford.  
 
C/157/26 
 CORRESPONDENCE FROM MO CHUISLE IN RELATION TO ITS 
NEW GLOBAL KINDNESS INITIATIVE  
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above and noted the contents of the same. 
 
C/158/26 
 NORTH- WEST CITY REGION MEMORANDUM OF 
UNDERSTANDING 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle and seconded by Cllr Kennedy it 
was resolved to approve the North- West City Region Memorandum of 
Understanding between the Council and other partners as part of the 
UNESCO Learning City Initiative. 
 
C/159/26 
 DRAFT DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL BIODIVERSITY ACTION 
PLAN 2026-2030 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Coyle, seconded by Cllr McDermott it was 
resolved to approve the Draft Donegal County Council Biodiversity 
Action Plan 2026-2030. 
 
 
Cllr Coyle further proposed, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan that the 
extension of the Biodiversity Officer’s contract which is due to expire in 
November 2026 be further discussed by the Corporate Policy Group. 
 
C/160/26 
 APPROVAL OF ACTUAL GROSS EXPENDITURE FIGURE 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director Finance, Corporate Services and 
Information Systems said that the detailed report outlined the fact that it 
was another positive year’s outturn yielding a surplus of €1.1m.  
 
Ms Tanya Kee, Management Accountant proceeded to give a 
presentation on the finer details of the 2025 financial year and an 
overview of the outturn for the eight service divisions and noted that in 

 
13 
 
2025 income had exceeded expenditure by €1.1m. It was confirmed 
that the ongoing deficit had been reduced from €2.5m down to €1.4m. 
 
 
 
There was confirmation also that the Council’s long-term financial 
strategy was working and that the overall aim going forward was to 
maximise the delivery of services whilst meeting the overall financial 
objectives. This was important, she contended, in terms of the overall 
national strategy in order to meet the requirements of the Audit service 
and the National Oversite Office so that the Council could continue on 
this trajectory with a view to eliminating the deficit over the next few 
years.  
 
 
Cllr Meehan said that the gap in the Minor Tourism Infrastructure 
Scheme was clearly evident in 2026 and queried what plans there were 
to have this reinstated in 2027 or reserves put in place to fund the 
scheme. 
 
 
The Director of Service said that plans could be considered for same 
as part of the 2027 budgetary considerations. He thanked Tanya Kee 
and the Finance staff for the good financial management shown, and 
the members for their assistance in reducing the deficit. He was 
hopeful, he added, that the deficit could be eliminated by the end of this 
Council term.  
 
 
Members complimented the Director of Service and his team on this 
achievement and paid tribute to all staff and elected members past and 
present who had contributed to this outcome.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Harley, seconded by Cllr Meehan it was 
resolved to approve the actual gross expenditure figure of 
€223,843,695 as set out on Table 3, Page 3 when compared to the 
Revised Budget of €222,819,744 (Adopted Budget as amended by net 
increases in funding received for 2025) for all Divisions in accordance 
with Subsection 7 of Section 104 of the Local Government Act 2001 as 
amended by the Local Government Reform Act 2014. 
 
 
C/161/26 
 ENDORSEMENT OF MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP HELD ON 2ND MARCH 2026 
 On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr McGowan it was 
resolved to endorse the minutes of the meeting the Corporate Policy 
Group held on 2nd March 2026. 
 
C/162/26 
 ENDORSEMENT OF MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE 
CORPORATE POLICY GROUP HELD ON 15TH APRIL 2026 
 On the proposal of Cllr Harley, seconded by Cllr McMonagle it was 
resolved to endorse the minutes of the meeting the Corporate Policy 
Group held on 15th April 2026. 
 
 
 

 
14 
 
C/163/26 
ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCE, SEMINAR OR EVENT  
Authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under 
Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, 
Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 
2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the 
Environment, Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local 
Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 
-2025 (as amended). 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr McDermott 
attendance at the following was approved.   
 
Conferences 
➢ Attendance at the Donegal Travellers Project Anniversary 
Conference – “Pride not Prejudice - 30 Years On” to be held on the 
4th June 2026 in the Silver Tassie Hotel, Letterkenny.  
 
Other  
➢ Attendance of the Cathaoirleach or his representative at the 
National Enterprise Awards in the Mansion House, Dublin on the 
18th June, 2026. 
 
C/164/26 
CONFERENCE REPORTS   
 On the proposal of Cllr McBride, seconded by Cllr Nic Mheanman the 
following conference reports were noted 
 
• Attendance of Cllr John S O’ Fearraigh at the meeting of the CPMR 
Political Bureau from the 19th to the 20th February 2026 in Nicosia, 
Cyprus. 
• Attendance of Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle at the IBCI Conference in Galway 
on the 4th and 5th March 2026 
 
C/165/26 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE RESEARCH STUDY INTO THE 
EXPERIENCES OF INDIVIDUALS ENGAGING WITH THE DCB 
SCHEME 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Beard it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:- 
 
“That Donegal County Council, in partnership with relevant and 
appropriate stakeholders, undertake a comprehensive qualitative and 
quantitative research study into the experiences of individuals engaging 
with the DCB scheme, including: 
- those who have fully completed remediation, 
- those who have commenced their remediation option within the 
scheme, 
 - and those registered for the scheme but not yet active within it. 
 

 
15 
 
 Furthermore, that the research include a survey of tenants and 
households living in council housing impacted by the DCB scheme, 
with the aim of assessing experiences, outcomes, challenges, levels of 
satisfaction, and the wider social and housing impacts of the scheme. 
 The findings of this research should be compiled into a report and 
presented to the members of Donegal County Council, and crucially the 
Department of Housing, to help inform future policy development, 
service delivery, and supports relating to the DCB scheme.” 
 
Cllr Meehan said it was imperative that homeowners were included in 
any discussions and their experiences reflected in the study of 
individuals engaging with the DCB Scheme. It was important, he 
acknowledged, that evidence was given by people living through this 
nightmare so that the issues impacting on them could be documented 
and reviewed. He cited the need to gather information on how people 
navigated the scheme and said that this should include the broad 
spectrum of applicants and those engaging at all stages of the scheme. 
 
 
The information gathered, he said, needed to be fact based and 
Donegal County Council was best placed to do this as it was at the 
epicentre of the DCB crisis. He outlined also the need to look at the 
broad human impact and to include also the views of social housing 
tenants.  
 
 
This research, he stated, would equip Donegal County Council and the 
DCB Committee with robust evidence and strengthen engagement with 
all the relevant stakeholders with the aim of bringing about meaningful 
improvement to all aspects of the process. 
 
 
Cllr Beard, seconding the motion that it was important that the 
experiences of those living through this nightmare were documented 
and that evidence based research was provided. She concurred with 
the need to ensure that social housing tenants were included in the 
process.  
 
 
Evidence gathered, she said, would allow the Council and the 
Department to see where policy was failing and where additional 
supports were need. It could also, she contended, influence any future 
review of the scheme. 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that a dedicated timeframe was required in 
terms of the completion of this study.  
 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director of Environment & Climate, Property 
Management  & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme noted that the 
undertaking of such a study would require extensive resources and was 
outside the remit of Donegal County Council as administrators of the 

 
16 
 
scheme. He said that it would be possible to write to the Department of 
Housing, Local Government & Heritage requesting the commissioning 
of such a study across all designated Local Authorities.  
 
Cllr Mc Dermott suggested that the LCDC could get involved in work of 
this nature with the assistance of Donegal Local Development 
Company and Inishowen Development Partnership. 
 
Concluding Cllr Meehan said that he believed Donegal County 
Council was best placed to carry out this work. He cited the 
need to think outside the box given that this was a critically important 
piece of research and would strengthen the Council’s own hand in its 
engagement with the Department and the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government & Heritage.  
 
C/166/26 
INCLUSION OF HOMEOWNER REPRESENTATIVES ON THE DCB 
SCHEME IMPLMENTATION STEERING GROUP  
On the proposal of Cllr Devine, seconded by Cllr McGee it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:- 
 
"That Donegal County Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to ensure that homeowner representatives 
are formally included on the Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme 
Implementation Steering Group recognising the vital insight and lived 
experience that affected homeowners bring to the ongoing operation 
and review of the scheme." 
 
 
Cllr Devine said that a dedicated push was needed to ensure that 
homeowners were included on the DCB Implementation Steering group 
as these were the people with a dedicated insight into the crisis and 
whose lives were impacted every day from a social and economic 
perspective. 
 
 
 
Cllr Mc Gee seconding the motion concurred with this assessment . 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion  
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director of Environment & Climate, Property 
 
Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme said that the 
Council would write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government & 
Heritage accordingly. 
 
 Cllr Devine asked that this be done as a matter of urgency 
 
C/167/26 
PILOT A PROJECT TO COMBAT THE CLOSURES OF INDIGENOUS 
RETAILERS/SMALL BUSINESSES IN TOWNS AND VILLAGES 
On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Mc Dermott it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:- 
 

 
17 
 
“That this Council would contact the Department of Trade and 
Employment and the Department of Rural Affairs and suggest that 
County Donegal could pilot a project to help combat the closures of 
indigenous retailers in our towns and villages. We would welcome any 
ideas and would be willing to participate in any schemes that could 
work.  The costs in keeping small business open is now overwhelming 
for many shops and small rural pubs, we need some practical 
incentivisation scheme to keep the lights on and to trade locally. The 
wage increases, electricity costs have driven these people to the pin of 
their collar.  Without these small retailers remaining open in our areas, 
we will have no offering for the community or the tourism trade in the 
near future.  Something must be done to save our rural communities 
from closure and dereliction.” 
 
 
Cllr Kennedy called on the Council to contact the Department of Trade 
& Environment, and the Department of Rural Affairs regarding the 
provision of an incentivisation scheme to allow people trade locally and 
remain in their own areas. Increased costs “it was noted” had driven 
retailers to the pin of their collar. 
 
These closures, she said, had a strong economic impact but also 
impacted on the identity of our communities and were preventing 
inward investment and stifling the tourism industry.  
 
It was imperative, she added, that the causes were documented and 
solutions found so that the areas in question could be identified going 
forward as areas worth investing in and returning to. In many towns 
and villages, she noted that retail was being replaced by services and 
that this resulted in a loss of street energy thus diminishing the 
authentic local experience and weakening the overall economic impact.  
 
The Regeneration and Town Teams, she said, needed to be at the fore 
on this issue. One accountable manager, was needed, she contended, 
in each MD to co-ordinate a dedicated response and promote a 
strategy to tackle the issue and communicate same to local 
communities. She noted the need for the following:- 
 
• Establishment of a micro grants system. 
• Access grants for shop fits outs and signage. 
• Launch of a vacancy activation programme.  
• Temporary rent subsidies. 
• Tax breaks to landlords.  
• Development of a cluster strategy to mentor complementary 
businesses. 
• Creation of a hybrid model that would allow small businesses to 
pool resources, avail of collective marketing strategies etc in 
order to reduce overheads.  
• Focus on the tourism/ regional market to facilitate the 
development of small niche markets in specific areas.  
• Shop Local Campaign’s to be utilised.  

 
18 
 
• Progress made to be sufficiently monitored in the interest of 
transparency.  
 
She said that there was considerable experience within the local 
authority which could be utilised with assistance from the relevant 
Government Departments to tackle the current decline. 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott concurred and said that something needed to be done 
urgently to assist small businesses whose livelihoods were being 
crippled by increasing costs. He alluded also to the infrastructural 
deficits which also impacted on the situation. 
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Garry Martin, Director Human Resources, Economic Development 
& Emergency Services said the emphasis going forward needed to be 
on maximising the opportunities for existing businesses and increasing 
footfall to boost economic activity. He noted that there were huge 
challenges out there at present for small businesses and that whilst a 
range of incentives were in place there was a need for additional 
supports. He referenced also the work of the Local Enterprise Office 
and the Tourism Office in helping to promote increased economic 
activity. He said that it would be possible to engage with the relevant 
departments in relation to the challenges outlined and to look at what 
other additional opportunities might exist. The success of the “ Buy 
Donegal Campaign” was cited as an example of what could be done to 
assist small businesses.  
 
 
 
Cllr Kennedy welcomed the contribution from the Director of Service 
and advised of the need for collaboration at MD level in terms of finding 
a solution to the matter. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty said that the lack of planning approval along the N56 
was also contributing to the matter and impacting local towns along the 
route.  
 
C/168/26 
UPFRONT FUNDING MECHANISM WITHIN THE DCB GRANT 
SCHEME 
On the proposal of Cllr Beard, seconded by Cllr A Farren it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:- 
 
That Donegal County Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to urgently introduce an upfront funding 
mechanism within the Defective Concrete Blocks Grant Scheme." 
 
Cllr Beard noted that this had been raised with the Minister on his visit  
to Donegal the previous week but it was important that the facts were 
reiterated. The reality was, she said, that many small builders could not 
wait for the first grant payment to be allocated and were being forced to 
ask homeowners for payment. Homeowners, she said, were anxious to 

 
19 
 
proceed but were unable to manage the level of  financial burden 
concerned or carry upfront costs themselves. It was, she added, a 
huge barrier to remediation and rebuild options for many families as the 
first payment arrived only when the property was demolished and 
rebuilt to sub floor level.  
She noted that under the interim remediation scheme for fire safety 
defects upfront supports were provided to allow works proceed. The 
purpose of this interim scheme, she noted, was to ensure that urgent 
fire safety defects were dealt with and works allowed to proceed as 
quickly as possible.  
 
 
 
On this basis, she contended, that an upfront funding mechanism 
would allow families commence works sooner, reduce delays and help 
small local contractors. She called on the Government to recognise the 
present reality and put measures in place to provide upfront funding.  
 
Cllr A Farren supporting the motion said the motion was timely and this 
option a good one as people were getting the grant anyway. He alluded 
also to the benefits that would accrue for small builders if this funding 
measure was applied. 
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director of Environment & Climate, Property 
Management, & Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme said that 
correspondence would issue to the Minister as requested. He 
acknowledged that difficulties were being experienced by families in 
relation to the progressing of rebuild works. He noted that a 
considerable effort had been made in the past to secure 
accommodation costs for defective concrete block affected 
homeowners. He said that the Council was committed to doing all it 
could to reduce payment times for DCB applicants. 
 
Cllr Beard thanked members for their support and said that she looked 
forward to a favourable response from the Minister. 
 
The Director of Service responding to a query from Cllr Mc Dermott, 
said that the issue of upfront cost had been raised previously with 
department officials and the response provided had indicated that there 
were no plans at present to amend the current payment methods.  
 
C/169/26 
PROVISION OF LEISURE CENTRES THROUGHOUT THE COUNTY 
On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr McGowan it is 
resolved to adopt the following motion:- 
 
"That this Council, following the recent report from Swim Ireland, 
prioritise the provision of Leisure Centres throughout the County and 
that we formally adopt that as our number one priority for recreational 
facilities and that we write to Swim Ireland asking for them to support 
us in that regard." 

 
20 
 
 
Cllr Bradley noted that there were 20 swimming pools in Donegal and 
that of these 4 were public facilities. Swim Ireland, he said, had a very 
significant role in the provision of leisure facilities, yet it was clear from 
reports in the local media that they as an organisation had failed to 
prioritise Buncrana Leisure on the basis that it had now been placed 
last in terms of funding options. This swimming pool, he noted, had 
been closed for eleven years. He queried why the Council had not 
stepped in and taken over the facility and as to why there had been no 
follow-up with the Buncrana Leisure Centre Committee. The transfer of 
land, he added, should have happened much sooner. Swim Ireland 
and Donegal County Council, he said, had not prioritised Buncrana. 
The issue now, he contended, was that there was no way of raising 
match funding given that €1.4m had been removed at the last budget 
meeting for the co-funding of national projects.  
 
 
It was noted that should funding become available from the 
Department of Sport, the reality was that the Council was not in a 
position to draw it down given its co-funding capabilities. 
 
 
He called on Swim Ireland and Donegal County Council to prioritise 
Buncrana Leisure Centre so that the swimming pool can be reopened.  
The Council had, he said, in the past got the Aura Leisure Centre and 
the Finn Valley Leisure Centre over the line and the same input was 
now required for Buncrana.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan supporting the motion said that Buncrana needed to be 
prioritised going forward. 
 
 
At this juncture Cllr Murray said that he would like to add an 
amendment to the motion and suggested the following change to Cllr 
Bradley’s motion:- 
 
“That this Council, following the recent report from Swim Ireland, 
prioritise the provision of Leisure Centres throughout the County and 
that we formally adopt that as our number one priority for recreational 
facilities and that we write to Swim Ireland asking for them to support 
us in that regard, noting that Donegal County Council has already 
repeatedly prioritised leisure centre provision throughout the 
county, and further calls on the Minister for Sport and the 
Government to provide the necessary capital funding to deliver 
this vital recreational infrastructure as a matter of urgency.” 
 
He said that this issue had been ongoing for a considerable period of 
time and that the real issue was the provision of funding at national 
level. 
 
The Cathaoirleach said that he did not want to start a precedent and 
that an agreement was in place where any proposed amendments 
were discussed initially with the proposer of the motion.  
 

 
21 
 
Cllr Bradley said that he believed that the amendment was factually 
inaccurate and stated that he did not want to amend his motion as he 
was of the belief that Donegal County Council had not prioritised 
leisure centre provision in Buncrana.  
Cllr Murray at this juncture withdrew his amendment. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that it was important that the Council provide 
clarity in relation to the situation. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director of Environment & Climate, Property 
Management & Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme said that the 
Council continued to support the provision of leisure services on a 
sustainable and financially responsible basis. He said that 
correspondence would issue as requested to Swim Ireland.  
 
C/170/26 
IMPLICATIONS FOR CROSS BORDER WORKERS AND 
COMMUTERS ARISING FROM THE IMPOSITION OF THE EU 
MOBILITY PACKAGE 
On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr McMonagle it is 
resolved to adopt the following motion:- 
 
“That Donegal County Council call on the Minister for Transport and the 
Government to address the concerns of cross border workers, 
commuters about the impact of the imposition of new rules (July 1st) 
pursuant to the EU mobility package which will classify intra-island trips 
as international journeys requiring a new tachograph version 2 (G2V2) 
to be fitted and an international haulage licence acquired for HGV's et 
al undertaking this journey. Donegal County Council calls on the 
Minister to address the issue with the EU Directorate-General for 
Mobility and Transport in Brussels in conjunction with the Minister for 
Infrastructure in the Northern Executive.” 
 
Cllr A Doherty said that he had received representation from the 
haulage industry in relation to the implications of the new EU Mobility 
package effective from the 1st July 2026. It was apparent, he said, that 
there was not significant awareness of the impact that this would have 
and the extra cost, paperwork etc involved for haulage contractors and 
the transport industry. It would also create, he added, particular 
barriers for businesses making intra-island trips which would now be 
classified as international journeys. 
 
He noted also the costs involved in installing new smart tachographs 
and the fact that two drivers would be required in many instances.  
 
Cllr Doherty asked that the motion be forwarded to Minister for 
Transport, Mr Darragh O' Brien T.D. and to Ms Liz Kimmins, MLA, 
Minister for Infrastructure. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle seconding the motion, noted that this was another 
outworking of Brexit and was very much in contrast to the free 

 
22 
 
movement of goods and people that had been promised. The result, he 
advised was that now there would be significant costs for businesses 
delivering goods across the Island of Ireland He called for the Road 
Safety Authority and the Minister for Transport to look into the matter 
and through the auspices of the Ministerial Council. 
 
Donegal, he said, needed access to other markets and this legislation 
would have a detrimental impact for drivers and hauliers in this county.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion  
 
Mr Richard Gibson, Director Finance, Corporate Services & Information 
Systems said that the matter would be communicated to the RSA and 
the Ministers referenced by Cllr Doherty.  
 
Concluding Cllr Doherty outlined the need to create an awareness of 
the legislation and asked that the relevant clarifications be provided for 
all impacted by these new rules.  
 
C/171/26 
MOBILE PHONE USE AND THE AGE LIMIT FOR ACCESS TO 
SOCIAL MEDIA 
On the proposal of Cllr McDermott, seconded by Cllr A Doherty it is 
resolved to adopt the following motion:- 
 
“To ask this Council to write to the Minister for Children, Norma Foley, 
on behalf of the 5th Year students at Carndonagh Community School 
regarding their concerns about mobile phone use and whether the age 
limit for access to social media should be increased to 15 years of age.” 
 
Members welcomed students from the 5th year politics class in 
Carndonagh Community School.  
 
Cllr Mc Dermott said that he had submitted the motion based on a 
request from the 5th year students as they had put significant work into 
their project on mobile phone use and access to social media for those 
under 15 years of age.  
 
The class, he said, would welcome a conversation with the Minister on 
the topic, to relay the results of their findings and to have a 
conversation as to what was best for children in this day and age.  
 
The major concern, he said, was the content on social media and the 
effects of online abuse. This had to be balanced, he added, with the 
fact that access to social media was a vital aspect of life today. 
 
Cllr A Doherty, said that the Inishowen members had met with the 
students and that they had produced an excellent piece of work on the 
subject. It was important, he added, that their views were listened to 
and he encouraged them to continue with this work.  
 

 
23 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
The Chief Executive said that feedback from the students was required 
in terms of their overall findings on the matter and that a copy of same 
should accompany the request to the Minister.  
 
Concluding Cllr Mc Dermott thanked members for their support and 
alluded to the fact that 96% of children between the ages of 10 and 15 
actively used social media with 7 in 10 of those exposed to harmless 
content. 
 
C/172/26 
 CATHAOIRLEACH’S BUSINESS 
 
 
Votes of Sympathy 
 
 
• James Leonard, National Roads Design Office on the death of his 
father, Robert. 
• Linda Mc Cann, Housing & MD Services on the death of her 
brother, Kieran McKay. 
• Marie Dabell, Housing & MD Services, Letterkenny/Milford MD on 
the death of her brother, Kieran McKay. 
• Loretta Mauerhofer, Donegal/Bundoran Community Libraries on the 
death of her mother, Molly Mc Carry.  
• Anthony Walsh, DCB Unit on the death of his mother, Teresa.  
 
Save the Date – Climate Action Flagship Launch Event 
Monday 12th October 2026 – Aura Leisure Centre  
Members were informed that a flagship launch event for Climate Action 
Week 2026 would take place in the Aura Leisure Centre on Monday 
12th October. 
 
This event, he advised would showcase a wide range of organisations 
and the positive efforts they were making to achieve positive climate 
action  
 
Visit of Minister James Browne to Donegal  
The Cathaoirleach thanked all who had supported and met with Mr 
James Browne, Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage  on 
his recent visit to Donegal and noted that cross-party support had been 
very much in evidence.  
 
C/173/ 26 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MANAGEMENT REPORT 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
1.Planning, Communities & Culture 
 
1.1 
Planning Services  
1.2 
Community Development  
1.3 
Refugee Response Unit 
 
1.4 
Cultural Services 
 

 
24 
 
 
2.Environment & Climate, Property Mgt. & DCBS 
 
2.1 
Environment  
2.2 
Defective Concrete Blocks  
 
3. Housing, MD Services & Capital Projects 
 
3.1 
Housing, MD Services  
3.2 
Capital Projects Delivery Unit (CPDU) 
3.2 
Housing Capital 
 
 
4. Human Resources, Economic Development & Emergency Services 
4.1 
Economic Development Division  
4.2 
Local Enterprise Office 
 
4.3 
Emergency Services 
 
 
5. Roads & Transportation  
5.1 
National Roads Office 
 
5.2 
Central Technical Services  
5.3 
Roads Areas – May 2026  
 
 
 
The Chief Executive advised members that any queries in relation to 
same could be directed to his office.  
 
 
 
 
 The following questions were submitted. 
 
C/174/26 
UPDATE ON PREVIOUS MOTIONS 
 
 Cllr Joy Beard submitted the following question:- 
 
 Could I get an update on all my previous motions since elected in June  
2024? 
 
She received a response from the Director of Finance, Corporate 
Service and Information Systems in relation to the above. 
 
C/175/26 
 FLOOD RELIEF TIMELINE 
 
 Cllr Joy Beard submitted the following question:- 
 
Can I get a clear and updated timeline for the submission of all Flood 
Relief Scheme Planning applications? 
 
She received a response from the Director of Environment & Climate, 
Property Management and Defective Concrete Block Grant Scheme in 
relation to the above. 
 
C/176/26 
 SOCIAL HOUSING FOR THOSE WITH ADDITIONAL NEEDS 
 
 Cllr Fionán Bradley submitted the following question:- 
 
To ask the Director of Housing how many group homes or social 
housing units are currently under construction for those who have SEN 

 
25 
 
and additional needs? How many are planned for during the lifetime of 
this Council? 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services and 
Capital Projects in relation to the above. 
 
C/177/26 
RENT INCREASES FOR COUNCIL TENANTS 
 
Cllr Albert Doherty submitted the following question:- 
 
What is the value/fee of recent increases in housing rent charges to 
council tenants, how is the increase calculated and is there a House 
Rental Waiver Scheme currently in place for all council tenants living in 
Defective Concrete Blocks affected houses? 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, MD Services and 
Capital Projects in relation to the above. 
 
C/178/26 
SHORT TERM LETTING CORRESPONDENCE  
 
Cllr Albert Doherty submitted the following question:- 
 
 SPI 01/2026 
A new Short Term Letting deadline has been confirmed for DEC 1st 
2026, 
 What correspondence has been received from Government and/or 
forwarded by Council that clarifies or establishes the planning 
requirements necessary for applicants who want to remain, commence 
or explore SLT? 
 
He received a response from the A/Director of Planning, Communities 
and Culture in relation to the above. 
 
C/179/26 
MOTIONS FROM OTHER COUNCILS/BODIES  
Members noted the following motions from other Councils 
 
CARLOW COUNTY COUNCIL 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council request from the 
Department of Climate, Energy and the Environment, that annual local 
representative clinics and a local representative dedicated reporting 
service be provided from ESB Networks. This would be a similar service 
provided to local representatives from Uisce Éireann.” 
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL 
“That Clare County Council noted the Government’s announcement of 
its cost-of-living measures and expresses concern that the package 
unveiled does not meet the needs or wishes of the Irish people. This 
Council calls on the Government to bring forward a fair and 
comprehensive cost-of-living package that delivers meaningful relief for 
households, workers, farmers, and businesses. Please circulate this 
motion to the Taoiseach, Tánaiste, Minister for Finance, all Oireachtas 
members for Clare and Councils in the State.” 

 
26 
 
DERRY CITY AND STRABANE DISTRICT COUNCIL 
“That Council will write to Translink, Bus Éireann, The National Transport 
Association, The Department for Infrastructure and the Inishowen 
Municipal District of the Donegal County Council to explore bus links that 
could improve connectivity to and from Killea/Nixons Corner and Derry.” 
 
LONGFORD COUNTY COUNCIL 
“We call on Longford County Council to write to the relevant Ministers, 
Fáilte Ireland, and the City and County Management Association to 
implement an extension scheme to retain the Just Transition Tourism 
Activators, who continue to support over 80 projects and their County 
Tourism Officers, for a further period of 3-5 years to ensure the 
sustainable development of tourism and the delivery of long-term 
economic benefits to transitioning communities.  
We further call on Longford County Council to write to all local authorities 
within the Just Transition Territory, and nationally, to support this motion 
in recognition of the critical importance of continuity in delivering a 
successful Just Transition.” 
 
MONAGHAN COUNTY COUNCIL 
“In light of the disruption to rate paying business in County Monaghan 
due to the recent road blockades which have had severe and negative 
impact on local businesses in terms of deliveries, collections and 
employee disruption, this Council calls on the Government to introduce a 
Business Grant to the value of two weeks to compensate for the loss of 
business.” 
 
SOUTH DUBLIN COUNTY COUNCIL 
“That this council request the minister investigate the 900+ missing 
children and girls in the Bessborough mother and baby institution and 
request a hold off on any development of the site until an investigation is 
completed and we commit to write to the Minister for Children, Disability 
and Equality, An Taoiseach and all other Local Authorities.” 
 
WATERFORD COUNTY COUNCIL  
"In recognition of the rights of people with disabilities and of 
the importance of complying with legal obligations, including 
the Disability Act 2005, this Council: 
 
• formally supports the Irish Wheelchair Association's Access 
It's No Joke Campaign, which highlights the critical need for 
a dedicated professional in every local authority to improve 
disability access to public services and amenities in our 
communities; 
• requests the Chief Executive to examine and report on the 
feasibility, including resource implications the appointment 
of a dedicated, full-time and fully resourced Access and 
Inclusion Officer in order to ensure that the Council fully 
meets its statutory obligations under Section 26 of the 

 
27 
 
Disability Act 2005 and to align with the European Union 
(Accessibility of Websites and Mobile Applications of Public 
Sector Bodies) Regulations 2020, and in order to ensure 
best practice internally within this organisation and 
externally in supporting people with disabilities; 
• requests the Chief Executive to examine and report that 
procedures are in place throughout the organisation to 
make provision for all Council strategies, plans and projects 
to be formally reviewed in order to ensure that the rights and 
needs of people with disabilities are adequately addressed; 
• requests the Chief Executive to examine and report on the 
feasibility, including resource implications, of establishing 
and maintaining a disability consultative forum under the 
aegis of the Council to ensure that disability groups and 
people ·with disabilities can be brought together to consult 
with the Council in a structured and sustained manner; 
• 
requests the Chief Executive to examine and report 
on the feasibility, including _ resource implications, on the 
provision of training on disability rights to Council staff; and, 
• requests the Chief Executive to examine and provide a report; 
o that outlines the Council's legal obligations under the 
Disability Act (2005), taking independent expert legal 
advice if necessary; 
o that provides details on what measures have been 
taken to achieve compliance with these legal 
obligations in the last 5 years; 
o that identifies: 
 
■ which legal obligations are not currently being complied with, 
■ what measures are necessary to achieve compliance with 
them, 
 
that is to be shared with Councillors within 3 months of the 
passing of this' motion and also published on the Council's 
website in order to be available to disability groups and other 
interested parties. 
• And, if passed, this motion to be circulated to all other local 
·authorities in Ireland. " 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting.  
  
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
