1 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnith 
Aras an Chontae 
 
Leifear 
25 Márta, 2025 
 
FÓGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
DO GACH BHALL DEN CHOMHAIRLE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú de Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Luain, 31 Márta 2025 ag 
11.00 r.n in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Ta clár an chruinnithe leis seo. Seolfar nasc 
leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile.  
 
Beidh Clár Orduithe an Phríomh-Fheidhmeannaigh le feiceáil ag an chruinniú 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
******************************************************************************************************** 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
County House  
Lifford 
 
25th March 2025 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 31st March 2025 at 11.00am 
in the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is attached. An online link to join 
the meeting will issue separately. 
 
The Register of Chief Executive Orders will be available for inspection at the meeting. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
______________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator  
 

2 
 
AGENDA 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes  
a) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 22nd of January, 2025. 
b) Confirmation of the Minutes of the January Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 27th of January, 2025. 
c) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 24th of February, 2025. 
 
2. Filling of Casual Vacancy in the Membership of Donegal County 
Council. 
a) Filling of casual vacancy on Donegal County Council occasioned by the 
appointment of Cllr Manus Boyle as a member of Seanad Éireann. 
b) Filling of consequential vacancies arising from a) above: 
➢ 
Donegal Municipal District Committee 
➢ 
Fisheries Committee 
➢ 
Peaceplus Partnership 
➢ 
Housing & Corporate Strategic Policy Committee 
➢ 
Planning Strategic Policy Committee 
➢ 
ICBAN  
 
3. Disposal of Land – Section 211 of the Planning and Development 
Act, 2000(as amended)  
a) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to dispose of a plot of land comprising 0.0050 
hectares situated at Upper Mount Marian, Milford, Co. Donegal to Mr. 
Garret Orr. 
b) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to dispose of a plot of land comprising 0.0056 
hectares situated at Upper Mount Marian, Milford, Co. Donegal to Mr. 
Liam Holian. 
c) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to dispose of lands at the Port Road/Ramelton 
Road, by way of a fifty year lease to Dr. John McGeehan, Cyril 
Kennedy, Dr. Brian Gallagher, Jim O’Sullivan, Conor McCloskey and 
Marshall McCloughan as the Trustees of Letterkenny Tennis Club. 
d) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to dispose of a portion of land at Mountcharles to 
James Mogan. 
e) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  

3 
 
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) to register a Deed of Grant of Easements at 
Railway Road, Milltown, Donegal Town to Deramore Investment 
Holdings Ltd. 
f) Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to dispose of land at Maas, Glenties to Diane 
Boyle. 
 
4. Taking of decision pursuant to the Planning and Development Act 
2000 (as amended), the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 
(as amended) (Pursuant to Section 179 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000and Part 8 of the Planning and Development 
Regulations 2001 
a) To approve the carrying out of works with regard to the construction of 
 
 
 
12 No. Social Housing Units at Rosgarrow, Milford. 
b) To approve the carrying out of works with regard to the construction of 
 
 
 
16 No. Social Housing Units at Oldtown, Letterkenny. 
 
5. Housing 
To approve the raising of an additional loan of €2,000,000 to assist first 
time buyers who wish to purchase a new or second-hand property, or to 
build their own home but are unable to obtain a loan from private lending 
agencies.  
 
6. Corporate   
a) To fill vacancy on the Northern & Western Regional Assembly arising 
from the nomination of Cllr Jack Murray to the EU Committee of the 
Regions.  
b) To approve Schedule of Special Plenary Meetings for 2025. 
 
7. Finance   
To note report on irrecoverable rates for 2024. 
 
8. Environment 
To consider and approve the adoption of the Donegal County Council 
Annual Service Delivery Plan 2025, in accordance with Section 134 (a) of 
the Local Government Act, 2001. 
 
9. Community Development   
a) To approve the nomination of Ms Máire Uí Chomhaill, as a 
representative of Social Inclusion Interest on PPN, on the Donegal 
Local Community Development Committee in accordance with of Part 
6 of the Local Government Reform Act 2014 and Section 128C (3)(b) 
of the Local Government Act 2001. 
b) To note Donegal LCDC Annual Report 2024. 
 
 

4 
 
10. Roads & Transportation  
a. To adopt the 2024 - 2028 Plant Purchase and Refurbishment 
Programme. 
b. To approve the 2025 Non-National Roads Bridge Strengthening 
Programme. 
 
11. Endorsement of Minutes 
To note minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group held on 
the 20th January 2025. 
 
12. Attendance at Conference, Seminar or Event  
Authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under 
Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, 
Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 
2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the 
Environment, Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local 
Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 -
2025(as amended). 
 
Training 
• AILG Annual Training Conference to be held on Wednesday, April 2nd, 
and Thursday, April 3rd at the Limerick Strand Hotel, Limerick. 
 
Other 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the Donegal Person of the Year 
Award Ceremony in the Bonnington Hotel, Dublin on the 29th March, 
2024. 
  
Travel Abroad 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at a ceremony in Worcester State 
University on the 24th April, 2025 to accept an honorary degree (Doctor 
of Humane Letters, honoris causa. 
• Attendance of the EU Cerv representative at Meeting V in Budapest 
and Paszto, Hungary from the 23rd to the 26th April 2025. (Flight and 
accommodation costs to be covered by EU Cerv) 
  
13. Conference Reports 
• Attendance of Cllr Martin Harley at the US Trade Mission and Golden 
Bridges Conference (Philadelphia & Boston) from the 12th to the 17th 
November 2023. 
• Attendance of Cllr Jack Murray at the CPMR Atlantic Arc Commission 
Meeting in Brussels on the 30th and 31st January 2025. Martin Harley at 
the 25th Anniversary of the Island of Ireland Peace Park in Mesen, 
Belgium on the 11th November 2023. 
• Attendance of Cllr Martin Harley at the EU Cerv Programme event in 
Figueira Da Foz, Portugal from the 2nd to the 5th February 2025. 

5 
 
• Attendance of Cllr Declan Meehan at the Association of Irish Regions 
Conference in Athlone on the 5th and 6th February 2025. 
 
 
 
MOTIONS  
 
  
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 
 
Roads & Transportation   
14. Cllr John S O’ Fearraigh  
“Calling on this Council to abolish landing fees for our Island fishermen 
with the current increase on petrol and diesel, the upgrading of their 
vessels and restrictions on fishing, the industry is very much in decline 
over recent decades.” 
 
15. Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty  
“I am asking this Council to take a stand  on road safety in relation to the 
non-wearing of high vis vests, arm bands etc or indeed proper lighting on 
bicycles given that these are causing issues for road users, late night 
walkers, cyclists etc. Furthermore, E Scooters have become a major 
problem for motorists. Given the number of motorists and pedestrians 
having accidents and the increasing number of fatalities we need to work 
with An Garda Siochána, the Minister for Transport, Schools, Youth 
Clubs etc to highlight these issues.”  
 
I would ask also that this Motion is sent around the Country to all other 
Councils in Ireland for their support.  
 
16. Cllr Denis Mc Gee  
“That the Council seeks clarification from central government on the 
procurement process for Vehicle Restraint Systems used on our county's 
roads. The Council should then provide these details including the cost 
assessments, tendering processes, and quality control measures, to 
ensure that taxpayers receive value for money. 
The council should also question why T.I.I does not have a specific 
programme to fund VRS's for non-national roads, given the high 
incidence of traffic collisions on all our roads.” 
 
Corporate  
17. Cllr Micheál C Mac Giolla Easbuig 
Iarraim ar Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall tacú le héilimh TINTEÁN 
agus chomh maith leis sin, scríobh chuig Rialtas an tSaorstáit ag iarraidh 
go gcuirfear na héilimh sin ar fad i bhfeidhm lom láithreach. 
 
• Cumhacht reachtúil tithíochta agus na hacmhainní cuí d'Údarás na 
Gaeltachta 
• Scéim na nDeontas Tithíochta Gaeltachta a athbhunú 
• Treoirlínte Pleanála Gaeltachta a fhoilsiú agus a achtú 
• Straitéis Tithíochta agus Pobail do gach Limistéar Pleanála Teanga. 

6 
 
I call on Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall to support the demands of 
TINTEÁN and to also write to the Freestate Government asking that 
these demands are fully implemented immediately. 
• Statutory housing power and the appropriate resources for Údarás na 
Gaeltachta. 
• Re-establishing the Gaeltacht Housing Grants Scheme 
• Gaeltacht Planning Guidelines published and enacted 
• Population and Housing Strategy for each Gaeltacht Language 
Planning Area 
 
 
 
 
LIFFORD/STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT”. 
 
  Corporate 
18. Cllr Dakota Nic Mheanman 
“That this Council acknowledges every child's right to a school place and 
calls on the Minister for Education and the Minister for Children and 
Disability to take action in regard to capacity issues in the Little Angels 
School, and that this Council recognises that there is only one school 
that caters for moderate to severe, profound intellectual disabilities, 
highlighting the need for another school. I would also ask that this 
Council writes to the Minister for Health about the need for a dedicated 
children's respite service in Donegal, given that our children with 
intellectual disabilities have been continually let down.” 
 
 
 
 
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
  Environment  
19. Cllr Terry Crossan   
“I propose that more litter bins are positioned along our Greenways as a 
matter of urgency and that these are emptied on a regular basis.” 
 
20. Cllr Albert Doherty   
"That Donegal County Council demand a special and urgent meeting 
with Uisce Éireann following the recent but consistent number of water 
outages that has affected and disrupted education provision (School 
Closures),Tourism and Hospitality, Businesses, Community events and 
families in Donegal, and that DCC demand the provision of an 
immediate contingency and infrastructure programme works response 
plan from Irish Water to reduce and end water supply interruptions." 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks 
21. Cllr Joy Beard  
“On 12 March 2025, Ulster University published details of its 
groundbreaking survey into the mental health of those affected by the 
defective concrete crisis. 
Alarmingly, the study found that over 30% of participants (nearly three 
times higher than the rate for the Irish population as a whole) were 
suffering from severe depression. However, of most concern, more than 

7 
 
one third of those surveyed reported having suicidal thoughts after 
learning that their properties were affected by defective concrete. 
In light of these shocking statistics, this motion calls on the Executive of 
Donegal County Council to write to the Minister of Health, seeking an 
urgent meeting at which targeted mental health interventions will be 
discussed and agreed, to help address the mental health crisis being 
experienced by some of the most vulnerable in our county.” 
 
  Roads & Transportation  
22. Cllr Ali Farren 
"That DCC look into developing or encouraging a better EV charging 
network for the county, as the annual sales of EV cars has increased 
over the last few years but Donegal lags behind with public EV charging 
stations and will the Council do more in every way to increase the 
number of public charging stations." 
 
  Corporate   
23. Cllr Fionán Bradley 
“That this Council call on the HSE to stop downgrading services in the 
new Primary Care Centres which have been built throughout the County 
over the last number of years and that we write to the CEO of the HSE 
and the Minister for Health calling on them both to do everything within 
their power to ensure that all services currently available in the Primary 
Care Centres continue to be available within them going forward.” 
 
  Planning    
24. Cllr Paul Canning 
I would seek the support of my fellow councillors Under Section 13 of the 
Act to request the Planning Authority of Donegal Co. Council to make a 
variation to the County Development Plan 2024-2030 insofar as  to 
aligned the policy in relation to Unfinished estates in Rural Areas with 
the existing policy in the Urban Areas UB-P-13. This proposed policy will 
read "It is a policy of the Council to consider proposals for RURAL 
residential development that seek to resolve existing unfinished 
residential development, including through appropriate reconfiguration of 
developments, and such proposals shall be considered outside the 
population targets set by the Core Strategy" 
Also, I would request the Planning Authority of this Council to vary the 
County Development Plan to make reference to and include within its 
housing policies and objectives the Guidelines Document for Planning 
Authorities sent recently from the Government namely "Sustainable 
Residential Development and Compact Settlements". I would be of the 
opinion that our housing density standards within the County 
Development Plan are not aligned with those in the Government 
Guidelines document Chapter 3. 
 
 
   
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 Corporate   

8 
 
25.  Cllr Donal Coyle  
That this Council recognise that on 24th June 2025 the Blaney Family 
from Rossnakill will have had 100 years of continuous political 
representation on Donegal County Council. 
 
26. Cllr Tomás Seán Devine  
That this Council support my call that the current protocol where we as 
elected representatives cannot contact or request a meeting etc with the 
management at Letterkenny University Hospital be scrapped straight 
away as our hospital is in crisis. The notion that we can only raise 
matters through the Regional Health Forum is madness as we have a 
duty of care to those that we represent and surely, we as Councillors 
should be allowed to challenge the conditions in this hospital in terms of 
waiting times, staff issues, lack of services, shortages of staff etc and the 
list goes on. 
  
Roads & Transportation  
27.  Cllr Donal Mandy Kelly  
“That this Council review the current policy on the removal of 
overhanging trees on our roads to make it more workable for landowners 
please.” 
 
28. Cllr Ciaran Brogan  
I propose that this Council seek a meeting with the new Minister for 
Transport to discuss our on-going infrastructure projects in Donegal. 
 
29.  Cathaoirleach’s Business. 
 
30. Chief Executive’s Management Report. 
 
 
QUESTIONS  
 
 
 
 
GLENTIES MUNICIPAL DISTRICT  
 
Evironment  
31. Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty  
What steps have the Council took in relation to dog fouling on our 
footpaths in our towns or indeed beaches etc? 
 
Roads & Transportation   
32. Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty 
What steps do the Council propose going forward to deal with 
overhanging trees, branches etc on our main roads or secondary roads 
ahead of any future storms?  
 
Planning  
33. Cllr Micheál C. Mac Giolla Easbuig 
An bhfuil an tOrdú Aireachta maidir le Plean Forbartha na Condae 2024-
30 glactha agus aontaithe ag an Chomhairle? 

9 
 
An dtig leis an Oifig Pleanála glacadh anois le hiarratais do thithe in aice 
leis an N56? 
 
Has the Ministerial Direction on the County Development Plan 2024-
2030 been agreed and adopted by Donegal Co Co? 
And therefore, can the planning office make a ruling on applications 
along the N56?  
 
Community   
34. Cllr Micheál C. Mac Giolla Easbuig 
I ndiaidh dom freastal a dhéanamh ar Chomhdháil Shoillse ar ‘The 
Gaelic Crisis’ i Steòrnabhagh, Oileán Leòdhais, Albain a bhí ar siúl ón 
29-31 Lúnasa 2022, d’ullmhaigh mise, mar Chathaoirleach ar Choiste na 
Gaeilge, tuarascáil ina raibh roinnt moltaí maidir le húsáid na Gaeilge i 
gContae Dhún na nGall. Dírím aird ar leith ar mholadh Uimh. 5: 
 
‘Go mbogann an Chomhairle láithreach chun an leagan Gaeilge amháin 
dár mbailte móra sa Chontae a úsáid ar gach comhfhreagras agus le 
linn cur i láthair srl, e.g. Leitir Ceanainn, Leifear, Bealach Féich, Carn 
Domhnach, Baile Dhún na nGall srl.  
Bealach simplí dearfach a bheadh anseo don fhoireann dul i ngleic leis 
an teanga agus í a chur chun cinn ina gcuid oibre go laethúil. 
 
Cuireadh an tuairisc seo os comhair chruinniú Choiste na Gaeilge agus 
roimh Chruinniú iomlán de chuid na Comhairle, agus tugadh tacaíocht 
iomlán don tuairisc.   
Mar sin, cén fáth nár gníomhaíodh air seo? 
 
Following the attendance at the Soillse Conference on ‘The Gaelic 
Crisis’ in Stornoway, Isle of Lewis, Scotland which took place from 29-31 
August 2022, I as Cathaoirleach of Coiste na Gaeilge, prepared a report 
which included a number of recommendations regarding the use of the 
Irish Language in Donegal County Council.  I draw particular attention to 
recommendation No 5: 
 
‘That the Council moves immediately to use the Irish version only of all 
our bigger towns in the County on all correspondence and during 
presentations etc, e.g. Leitir Ceanainn, Leifear, Bealach Féich, Carn 
Domhnach, Baile Dhún na nGall etc. This would be a simple and positive 
way for staff to engage with and promote the language in their work on a 
daily basis.” The report was presented to Coiste na Gaeilge and to Full 
Council, where it received full support and endorsement.  
 
Why has this not been acted upon? 
 
 
  
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Environment 
35. Cllr Terry Crossan 

10 
 
What is the Council policy on the frequency of emptying Council bins in 
urban areas? 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks  
36. Cllr Joy Beard 
Has the Executive of Donegal County Council been advised when the 
Government’s "guarantee” in the form of a second grant option if required 
for a period of 40 years" (as outlined in the Ministerial Guidelines) will be 
issued to those who have remediated their properties under the 
provisions of the Enhanced Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme? 
 
37. Cllr Joy Beard 
Has the Executive of Donegal County Council been advised when 
legislation will be brought forward to enable the recently revised grant 
rates under the Enhanced Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme to be 
applied retrospectively? 
 
Housing 
38. Cllr Fionán Bradley 
To ask the Director for Housing to halt the rent review currently being 
undertaken so as to find a mechanism which precludes any rent 
increase for those who live in any of the Council's housing stock affected 
by DCB. 
 
39. Cllr Albert Doherty 
Will Donegal County Council respond urgently and positively to a request 
for a meeting with senior officials forwarded and requested by CIF? 
Will DCC in particular assess and brief members on the correspondence 
reply from former housing Minister Darragh O Brien received by CIF and  
DCC's interpretation of the Dept of Housing's procurement procedures 
and guidance and the delivery methods for housing delivery in Donegal? 
(Dept Circular 16/2024 & correspondence Dec 2024) 
 
Emergency Services  
40. Cllr Albert Doherty 
Fire Hydrant inspections, faults, repairs. 
How many FH connection faults, inspection reports, repairs required 
have been received by DCC from fire station personnel in Donegal in 
2024 and 2025 to date? And  
 
• What problem areas for early attention are consistently 
highlighted? 
• Are repair works required the responsibility of DCC and/or Uisce 
Éireann? 
 
Environment 
41. Cllr Paul Canning 
How many applicants/residents have applied for the septic tank upgrade 
within this county? 
 

11 
 
42. Cllr Paul Canning 
How many grants have been paid out for these upgraded septic tanks 
since the grant increase arrived? 
 
 
  
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Housing  
43. Cllr Gerry Mac Monagle  
How many tenants have been moved out of their Council House due to 
them being affected by Defective Concrete Blocks, where are the houses 
located and have the tenants been housed in alternative Social Housing 
Units? 
 
Corporate   
44. Cllr Tomás Sean Devine  
Can I get an update on the motion Cllr Frank Mc Brearty had passed 
regarding calling for a public enquiry into the Creeslough tragedy? I am 
looking for the Government response and the dates the motion was sent 
to Government and responses from them. 
 
Finance  
45. Cllr Tomás Sean Devine  
Can this Council provide a breakdown to all members of the costs to date 
of legal fees paid to solicitors and law firms challenging the Coleman 
legal case regarding defective concrete materials? 
 
Economic Development  
46. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle   
How many applications has Donegal County Council made to the Shared 
Ireland Fund, what did the applications apply for and how many have 
been successful? 
 
Roads & Transportation  
47. Cllr Ciaran Brogan   
What is the cost apportionment method applied by the Machinery Yard in 
relation to roads work carried out by council staff? 
 
Environment  
48. Cllr Ciaran Brogan   
Can we get an updated report on the progress regarding the provision of 
new graveyards in Donegal? 
 
49. Motions from other Councils/Bodies  
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL  
“I call on the Minister for Children and Disability, Norma Foley to provide 
funding for all of the valid applications made by Early Years Educators 
across the country through the Building Blocks Capital Investment 
Programme 2025. A pillar service with major waiting lists and need 
across the country requires sufficient focus and funding now to ensure 

12 
 
those who have taken the time and invested money in developing 
projects that prove a need in their area should be funded as a matter of 
urgency to see delivery of much needed additional space in the 
next12/18 months. 
If agreed, I ask that this motion is shared with other local authorities.”  
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That this Local Authority would call on the Government to put in place a 
financial support scheme within the grant aid for older people form to 
include people in medical need that they would be able to apply for 
financial aid to help them purchase a generator to allow them to power 
electric medical devices where loss of power occurs.”   
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That,Limerick City and County Council expresses its fullest appreciation 
for all of the work done by the Council staff and staff of other agencies 
and volunteers who worked 24/7 to alleviate the hardships caused by the 
recent severe weather event. The Council now calls on the Minister for 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage to (a) immediately release 
funds to replenish Local Authority financial resources used to manage 
the emergency and (b) provide additional adequate funds (or otherwise 
provide financial arrangements) for Local Authorities impacted to 
arrange a local scheme to compensate homeowners and businesses for 
property damage, lost stock or foods or other reasonable uninsured 
damages caused by snowfall or electricity cuts, and that this Notice of 
Motion be circulated to all Local Authorities.”   
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That,given the recent weather events, Limerick City and County Council 
(a) calls on Uisce Eireann to install generators at every pumping station 
in the country (b) calls on the ESB to cut back/cut down all trees and/or 
branches that are in danger of damaging the infrastructure and (c) calls 
on the Government to set up a special emergency phone number which 
is activated prior to and manned during all orange and red weather 
alerts.” 
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL   
“To write to the next Minister for Education requesting the introduction of 
extra time for students with Dyslexia, Dyscalculia and other learning 
difficulties sitting second level examinations. The lack of extra time is a 
severe disadvantage to such students at this crucial time in their lives. It 
was also agreed to circulate this to all Local Authorities.” 
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL   
“In light of over 40 trees falling during Storm Darragh, damaging power 
lines and leaving homes and businesses without power for days, I 
propose this Council writes to Nicholas Tarrant, MD of ESB Networks, 
and Keith Leonard, Head of the National Emergency Coordination 
Group. They should ensure compliance with wayleaves and exclusion 
zones near overhead powerlines, requiring forestry owners to meet 

13 
 
clearance standards. ESB Networks should take pre-emptive measures 
ahead of storms to prevent similar outages. Additionally, compliance with 
the DAFM Standards for Felling & Restoration near public roads must be 
enforced to prevent road safety hazards during extreme weather.  
Subsequent to the submission of this motion the events of Storm Eowyn 
have further highlighted to need for action on this matter.”  
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL   
“To write to the Minister for Communications that all emergency frontline 
services have access to the GOV.NE system to use any network 
available in the major emergency events to ensure communication 
channels remain open. It was agreed to circulate this to all Local 
Authorities.”   
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL   
“To write to the Department of Agriculture, Department of Transport and 
Department of Environment, for an incentive to be put in place for 
landowners to move trees off the roadside. It was agreed to circulate this 
to all Local Authorities.”  
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL   
“This local authority call on the Government to initiate a fixed penalty fine 
of €10,000 on any retailer or person who sells or provides children under 
the age of 18 with e-liquids, vape kits or nicotine-containing products. To 
also ask that the HSE create an awareness campaign to highlight the 
dangers of vaping. A copy of this motion to be sent to all Councils within 
the state.”  
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL   
“It is evident now that this Government is incapable of delivering its own 
yearly housing targets, and the number of families living in emergency 
accommodation is increasing by at least 16% per year with an estimated 
4,000 children homeless in Ireland. I am once again calling on the 
Government to implement an eviction ban, only in case where the 
Tenant are abiding with the letting contract, this would protect both 
Tenant and the landlord. A copy of this motion to be sent to all Councils 
within the state.” 
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That this local authority call on the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to reinstate the Tenant in Situ scheme and 
increase the financial threshold limit in line with the current housing 
market prices in County Sligo. A copy of this motion to be sent to all 
Councils within the state.”   
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That this local authority call on the government to abolish any plans of 
introducing further Carbon Taxes for the foreseeable future. A copy of 
this motion to be forwarded to all local authorities within the state.” 
 

14 
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That this local authority call on the government to desist from increasing 
the VAT of 9% to 13.5% on electricity costs that is planned to come into 
effect from May, 2025. A copy of this motion to be forwarded to all local 
authorities within the state.”   
 
SOUTH DUBLIN COUNTY COUNCIL  
“South Dublin County Council formally backs the call for a Fossil Fuel 
Non-Proliferation Treaty and urges the Irish Government to support the 
initiative for a Fossil-Fuel Non Proliferation Treaty. If passed, a letter 
should be sent to all local Councils and the Minister for the 
Environment.”  
 

15 
 
MINUTES OF MARCH MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 
31st MARCH 2025 IN THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD 
C/87/25 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs N Kennedy, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, L Blaney, M Boyle, F Bradley 
C Brogan, J Brogan, P Canning, B Carr, D Coyle, TS Devine, A 
Doherty, A Farren, M Harley, N Jordan, J Kavanagh, D. M Kelly, M 
McBride, M Mc Clafferty, M McDermott, P McGarvey, D McGee, P 
McGowan, M Mc Mahon, G McMonagle, A Molloy, M Naughton, D Nic 
Mheanman, J.S Ó Fearraigh, M Scanlon. 
Online: Cllrs J Brogan, G Doherty, M Farren, M C Mac Giolla Easbuig, 
D Meehan, and J Murray.  
 
C/88/25 
APOLOGIES  
Apologies were received from Cllr Terry Crossan who was unable to at-
tend the meeting. 
 
C/89/25 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John G McLaughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of Hous-
ing, Corporate & Culture/Meetings Administrator, Liam Ward, Director 
of Community Development & Planning Services, Bryan Cannon, Di-
rector of Roads & Transportation, Richard Gibson, Director of Finance, 
Garry Martin, Director of Economic Development, Information Systems 
& Emergency Services, Michael McGarvey, Director of Water & Envi-
ronment, Frances Friel, Communications Officer, William Colvin, ASO, 
Martina Tully, SO, Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Clíona Ní 
Ghallachóir, Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí Aistriúcháin, Anne Marie Craw-
ford, Staff Officer.   
 
C/90/25 
 CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 22ND JANUARY, 2025  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr McGowan the 
minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 
22nd January, 2025 were adopted.  
 
C/91/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE JANUARY MEETING 
OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 27TH JANUARY, 
2025   
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr Scanlon the 
minutes of the January Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 
27th January, 2025 were adopted.   
 
C/92/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON THE 24TH FEBRUARY, 
2025  
 
On the proposal of Cllr McBride, seconded by Cllr McGowan the 
minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on the 
24th February, 2025 were adopted.  
 
C/93/25 
FILLING OF CASUAL VACANCY IN THE MEMBERSHIP OF  
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 

16 
 
Cllr Harley welcomed Senator Manus Boyle to the meeting together 
with his father former Cllr John Boyle. He proposed that the casual va-
cancy on Donegal County Council be filled by Mr Michael Boyle. This 
was duly seconded by Cllr Kavanagh and thus Cllr Michael Boyle was 
co-opted onto Donegal County Council to fill the casual vacancy arising 
from the nomination of former Cllr Michael Boyle to Seanad Éireann.  
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed Cllr Boyle to the meeting and assured 
him of the co-operation and support of the members going forward. 
 
Members welcomed him to the chamber and congratulated him on his 
nomination. They said that they were looking forward to working with 
him on a range of issues and acknowledged that it was a proud day for 
the Boyle family. Congratulations was also extended to Senator Manus 
Boyle on his appointment to Seanad Éireann. 
 
The Chief Executive extended congratulations on behalf of the execu-
tive and staff of Donegal County Council. 
 
Cllr Boyle thanked members for welcoming him to the chamber and 
said that he was proud to be the third member of the Boyle family to sit 
on Donegal County Council and the fourth person from his own town-
land. He said that he would work hard for the betterment of all and par-
ticularly for the people of the Donegal Municipal District. He outlined the 
need for ongoing co-operation and a commitment to work together for 
the county as a whole.  
 
C/94/25 
FILLING OF CONSEQUENTIAL VACANCIES ARISING FROM THE 
NOMINATION OF FORMER CLLR MANUS BOYLE TO SEANAD 
ÉIREANN 
On the proposal of Cllr Harley, seconded by Cllr Kavanagh it was re-
solved that Cllr Michael Boyle fill the consequential vacancies arising 
from the nomination of former Cllr Michael Boyle to Seanad Éireann.  
 
It was thus resolved that he be elected to the following commit-
tees/bodies: 
 
➢ 
Donegal Municipal District Committee 
➢ 
Fisheries Committee 
➢ 
Peaceplus Partnership 
➢ 
Housing & Corporate Strategic Policy Committee 
➢ 
Planning Strategic Policy Committee 
➢ 
ICBAN  
 
C/95/25 
 DISPOSAL OF LAND SITUATED AT UPPER MOUNT MARIAN, 
 MILFORD TO MR GARRET ORR 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 

17 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Blaney, it was re-
solved to disposal of a plot of land comprising 0.0050 hectares situated 
at Upper Mount Marian, Milford to Mr Garret Orr in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as 
amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, 
(as amended).     
 
C/96/25 
 DISPOSAL OF LAND SITUATED AT UPPER MOUNT MARIAN, 
 MILFORD TO MR LIAM HOLIAN 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Blaney, it was re-
solved to disposal of a plot of land comprising 0.0056 hectares situated 
at Upper Mount Marian, Milford to Mr Liam Holian in accordance with 
the provisions of Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001, (as amended).      
 
C/97/25 
 DISPOSAL OF LANDS AT THE PORT ROAD/RAMELTON ROAD, 
BY WAY OF A FIFTY YEAR LEASE TO THE TRUSTEES OF  
LETTERKENNY TENNIS CLUB 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Kelly, it was re-
solved to dispose of lands at the Port Road/Ramelton Road, by way of 
a fifty year lease to Dr John McGeehan, Cyril Kennedy, Dr Brian Gal-
lagher, Jim O’Sullivan, Conor McCloskey and Marshall McCloughan as 
the Trustees of Letterkenny Tennis Club  in accordance with the provi-
sions of Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as 
amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, 
(as amended).       
 
C/98/25 
 DISPOSAL OF A PORTION OF LAND AT MOUNTCHARLES TO 
JAMES MOGAN    
 Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Jordan, seconded by Cllr Kavanagh, it was re-
solved to dispose of a portion of land at Mountcharles to James Mogan 
in accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of the Planning & De-
velopment Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001, (as amended). 
 
C/99/25 
 REGISTER A DEED OF GRANT OF EASEMENTS AT RAILWAY 
ROAD, MILLTOWN, DONEGAL TOWN TO DERAMORE INVEST-
MENT HOLDINGS LTD  
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  

18 
 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Naughton, seconded by Cllr J Brogan, it was 
resolved to register a deed of grant of easements at Railway Road, 
Milltown, Donegal Town to Deramore Investment Holdings Ltd  in ac-
cordance with the provisions of Section 211 of the Planning & Devel-
opment Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001, (as amended).        
 
C/100/25 
DISPOSAL OF LAND AT MAAS, GLENTIES TO DIANE BOYLE  
 Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Carr, seconded by Cllr Kelly, it was resolved to 
dispose of land at Maas, Glenties to Diane Boyle  in accordance with 
the provisions of Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001, (as amended).      
 
C/101/25 
 TO APPROVE THE CARRY OUT OF WORKS WITH REGARD TO 
THE CONSTRUCTION OF 12 NO. SOCIAL HOUSING UNITS AT 
ROSGARROW, MILFORD. 
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Blaney, seconded by Cllr McGarvey, the carry-
ing out of works with regard to the construction of 12 no. social housing 
units at Rosgarrow, Milford was approved, in accordance with Part XI of 
the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the 
Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as amended).        
 
C/102/25 
 TO APPROVE THE CARRYING OUT OF WORKS WITH REGARD 
TO THE CONSTRUCTION OF 16 NO. SOCIAL HOUSING UNITS AT 
OLDTOWN, LETTERKENNY    
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr Devine, the car-
rying out of works with regard to the construction of 16 no. social hous-
ing units at Oldtown, Letterkenny was approved, in accordance with 
Part XI of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and 
Part 8 of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as amended).    
 
C/103/25 
APPROVAL OF AN ADDITIONAL LOAN OF €2 MILLION TO ASSIST 
FIRST TIME BUYERS    
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
 
Cllr C Brogan welcomed the initiative and said that more needed to be 
done to assist and encourage young families get on the property  
ladder. 

19 
 
 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty whilst supportive of the initiative said that it was fine for 
those who wanted to buy an existing property, but not satisfactory for 
those who wanted to build on their own land or for those who wanted to 
build in rural Donegal along the N56. It was an excellent proposal, he 
said, but refinements were needed.  
 
 
Cllr Harley concurred but said that additional funding was needed for 
the scheme at national level and that the Government should also 
commit to putting in another €2m.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that it was only workable for those who could not 
secure loans from other agencies.  
 
Cllr M Farren agreed that match funding was needed and that the 
scheme offered people an opportunity to get on the property ladder.  
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan it was 
resolved in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government 
Act 2001, Section 106 (as amended), to authorise the borrowing of a 
loan in the sum of €2,000,000 from the Housing Finance Agency for the 
purpose of the payment of Local Authority Home Loans (LAHL) 
 
 
C/104/25 
TO FILL VACANCY ON THE NORTHERN & WESTERN REGIONAL 
ASSEMBLY ARISING FROM THE NOMINATION OF CLLR JACK 
MURRAY TO THE EU COMMITTEE OF THE REGIONS 
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr A Doherty, it was 
resolved that Cllr Brian Carr fill the vacancy on the Northern & Western 
Regional Assembly arising from the nomination of Cllr Murray to the EU 
Committee of the Regions.  
 
C/105/25 
TO APPROVE SCHEDULE OF SPECIAL PLENARY MEETINGS FOR 
2025  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. It was unanimously agreed to approve the schedule subject 
to the December 2025 meeting being rescheduled to the second week 
in January, 2026.   
 
C/106/25 
TO NOTE REPORT ON IRRECOVERABLE RATES FOR 2024   
 
Members considered and noted the report circulated with the agenda in 
relation to the above. Mr Richard Gibson, Director of Finance, alluding 
to his report informed members that the cash collected figure of 
€34,656,183 for 2024 was the highest value of commercial rates ever 
collected in the county and represented 16% of Donegal County Coun-
cil’s income. It was noted that the collection rate had increased from 
70% in 2021 to 80% in 2024 and that the closing arrears figure for 2024 
had reduced by €657,785 from 2023 which was a significant decrease. 
It was too early, he said, to speculate whether this would be an ongoing 
trend. An overview of the collection performance indicators achieved in 
2020 to 2024 was provided together with an analysis of the external 

20 
 
factors affecting collection performance. It was confirmed that the total 
amount of rates written off in 2024 was €4,532,128. An explanation in 
relation to the categorisation of write-offs was given and it was con-
firmed that the value of the 2024 Commercial Rate demand was 
€38,554,490. 
 
 
 
Mr Gibson advised that since 2015 the Council had granted the Early 
Payment Incentive Credit (previously Small Business Grants Scheme) 
to customers who had discharged their liability in full and with no out-
standing arrears as at the 31st October 2024.  
 
 
Members proceeded to raise the following issues and commended the 
Finance team on the excellent collection rates and the ongoing interac-
tion that had taken place with local ratepayers.; 
 
▪ Outlined the need to write to the Minister for Finance with regard 
to the retention of the 9% vat rate for the hospitality, tourism and 
small business sectors given the additional costs on these sec-
tors arising from the minimum wage directive and the impact of 
pension scheme contributions for small business units.  
▪ Hospitality sector, it was noted, had been adversely impacted 
over the years and has been paying way beyond what it should 
have.  
▪ Query as to whether any of the hotels currently housing Ukraini-
an refugees would be in a position accommodate tourists again? 
▪ Number of businesses lost out on the ICOB grant because they 
were in arrears. Businesses not able to avail of the various in-
centives should be assisted in accessing the various incentive 
schemes. 
▪ Query in relation to the inequality in the treatment of county 
sports facilities and why some bodies were paying rates and 
others were not. 
▪ Consideration must be given as to how proposed incoming US 
tariffs will impact on the small business sector in Donegal. 
▪ Airbnb’s need to be taken into the loop for rates purposes. Noted 
however that these provide a vital service in areas where there 
are no hotels and that a measured approach was needed.  
Impact of Airbnb’s on housing and housing rents in rural areas 
was also a consideration.  
▪ What plans are in place to deal with any potential economic 
downturn? 
▪ Query as to how Donegal fared nationally in terms of irrecovera-
ble rates.  
 
 
Mr Gibson referenced the fact that the mean collection rate in 2024 was 
88%. which was favourable with other counties. Donegal County Coun-
cil was one of the few local authorities, he said, which did not let rates 
bill go and only relinquished collection when there was a genuine rea-
son to do so. Figures, he said, showed that performance was improv-
ing, and that occupancy rates were up in Donegal.  

21 
 
C/107/25 
TO APPROVE THE ADOPTION OF THE DONEGAL COUNTY 
COUNCIL ANNUAL SERVICE DELIVERY PLAN 2025  
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
A lengthy debate took place with members raising the following issues  
 
 
▪ Insufficient number of septic tanks inspections being carried out. 
Resources and manpower needs to be increased. Six to nine 
months inspection times are not practical and must be improved.  
▪ Cllr Naughton proposed seconded by Cllr Mc Gowan that con-
sideration be given to carrying out septic tank grant inspections 
at the same time as the initial inspections on vacant properties. 
▪ Suggestion that two to three staff be employed to work on septic 
tank inspections in each Municipal District. 
▪ Maintenance of Public Conveniences a priority issue including 
the overall funding aspect. Issues with the facilities in Donegal 
Town, Moville, Magheroarty and Bunbeg. 
▪ Staffing a major issue across all programme areas. 
▪ Continued push needed in terms of the TEN-T and A5 projects. 
▪ Regeneration Projects need to progress at a much quicker pace. 
▪ Twin Towns Regeneration Project must be moved forward and 
progressed in advance of the TEN-T proceeding.  
▪ Query as to the need for an updated Fire Services Report which 
would include the Fire Services on the Islands.  
▪ What is the status of the Masterplan for Magheroarty?  
▪ Query as to why there are no Recycling Centres in areas such 
as Gweedore, Dunfanaghy and Falcarragh.  
▪ Update needed from Uisce Éireann in relation to the Sewerage 
Systems in Gweedore and Bunbeg. 
▪ Proper survey required and sufficient monies must be ear-
marked for public lighting in order to enhance the safety aspect. 
▪ Query as to why cameras are not installed at Bottle Banks in or-
der to counteract illegal dumping.  
▪ Is there any way that the Council can assist Tidy Towns and 
Community Volunteers with insurance costs? 
▪ Proper mechanisms need to be put in place to cover staff leave 
so as to retain continuity and an acceptable level of service.  
▪ Cognisance to be taken of the fact that sewerage treatment re-
mediation works are not included in the Defective Concrete 
Blocks Scheme, yet a significant number have been built with 
defective blocks. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment responding said 
that consideration could be given to looking at the alignment of the Croí 
Conaithe and the Septic Tanks grant process. Several of the items 
raised, he said, could be looked at in the context of the SPC process.  
 
Staffing issues, he noted, were being looked at presently as part of the 
ongoing organisational review.  

22 
 
He said that the Fire Service and the Roads & Transportation Direc-
torate would respond directly in relation to fire services on the Islands 
and public lighting issues which had been raised. It was also noted that 
there had been engagement with the Department with regard to ad-
vancing the Treatment Plant at Magheroarty. 
 
Mr Mc Garvey said that in relation to Recycling Centres it was im-
portant that those currently in operation were performing to the best of 
their ability before consideration could be given to establishing new fa-
cilities. He advised members that there were legal issues in terms of 
the use of CCTV at bottling banks. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Gowan, seconded by Cllr Mc Bride it was 
resolved to adopt the Donegal County Council Annual Service Delivery 
Plan 2025 in accordance with Section 134(A) of the Local Government 
Act, 2001 and Section 50 of the Local Government Reform Act, 2014.  
 
 
 
C/108/25 
TO APPROVE THE NOMINATION OF MS MAÍRE UÍ CHOMHAILL 
AS REPRESENTATIVE OF THE SOCIAL INCLUSION INTEREST ON 
THE PPN ON THE DONEGAL LOCAL COMMUNITY DEVELOP-
MENT COMMITTEE  
 
On the proposal of Cllr O’ Fearraigh, seconded by Cllr McDermott, it 
was resolved to approve the nomination of Ms Máire Uí Chomhaill as 
presentative of the Social Inclusion Interest on PPN on the Donegal 
Local Community Development Committee in accordance with Part 6 of 
the Local Government Reform Act 2014 and Section 128C (3)(b) of the 
Local Government Act 2001.  
 
C/109/25 
TO NOTE DONEGAL LCDC ANNUAL REPORT 2024   
 
Members considered and noted the Donegal LCDC Annual Report for 
2024.  
 
C/110/25 
TO ADOPT THE 2024-2028 PLANT PURCHASE AND REFURBISH-
MENT PROGRAMME  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Brogan, seconded by Cllr Kelly, it was resolved 
to defer consideration of this item until after the Plenary Roads Work-
shop on the 7th April, 2025.  
 
C/111/25 
TO APPROVE THE 2025 NON-NATIONAL ROADS BRIDGE 
STRENGTHENING PROGRAMME  
 Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above and raised the following issues: 
 
• New Roads Bridge in Ballybofey a priority given the volume of 
traffic passing through the town.  
• Logue’s Bridge in Ballybofey needs urgent attention given that it 
is being used as a shortcut around the town and is currently in a 
poor state of repair. Advised that it was no longer viable to wait 
for works aligned with the Bypass option. Call for a temporary 
bridge to be put in place. 

23 
 
• Update sought on the bridge at Bonagee and query as to why it 
is not included on the list. Noted the need for emergency funding 
at this location. Acknowledged that a short and a long-term solu-
tion should be looked at as the closure of the bridge combined 
with the impact of the four-lane system is impacting on busi-
nesses in the area.  
• Two bridges in Cloughaneely identified as needing attention giv-
en the traffic volumes and the fact that two vehicles cannot pass 
safely. Works also required on the bridges at Dan Mhici, Glais a 
Chú and Bunbeg. 
• Smaller Bridges on the Wild Atlantic Way must also be looked at 
given the implications for tourism. Seven bridges identified as 
needing remediation in the Glenties Municipal District. 
• Additional funding required if Treankill Bridge is to be brought to 
an acceptable standard. 
• Stronger application must be made in respect of all bridges 
along the R250 from Glenswilly to Fintown. 
• Footbridge needed alongside the Mill Bridge in Buncrana. 
• Coillte need to be contacted regarding the transport of heavy 
loads in and around forestry’s  and the impact of same on the 
bridge infrastructure.  
• General agreement that the overall funding element was inade-
quate and that additional monies needed to be provide at na-
tional level.  
• Bridge in Malin Town needs strengthened and the bridge at Car-
rygawley requires strengthening. 
• Craignahorna Bridge between Carndonagh and Buncrana needs 
attention. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Gee proposed seconded by Cllr Ali Farren that consideration be 
given to widening the two bridges in the Glenties Municipal District. 
 
 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director of Roads & Transportation thanked mem-
bers for their contribution. He said that €250,000 had been allocated 
from discretionary maintenance funding for bridge repairs thus amount-
ing to €50,000 per Municipal District and facilitating works on two 
bridges per district. 
 
 
He confirmed that every effort would be made to push for funding for 
Logue’s Bridge in Ballybofey. With regard to Bonagee Bridge, he said 
that staff were working on interim measures but that the long-term out-
look would necessitate its inclusion on the Programme for Bridges. 
 
 In relation to the bridges referenced in the Glenties and Inishowen MD 
he said that if there were specific needs in each MD then that was what 
the discretionary monies were there for. It was imperative, he added, 
that there was an overall prioritisation of the work needed to be done.  
 
 
 Other avenues of funding would have to be pursued, he advised, if a 
footbridge was to be provided at the Mill Bridge in Buncrana. 

24 
 
 
 
He noted that funding from the Specific Improvement Grant had been 
received in terms of taking the project through the various stages of 
consent and that construction funding would then be applied for. 
 
 
The work on bridges, he said was seasonal taking place from May to 
September and that works had to be planned to be completed within  
that timeframe. On this basis, he asked, members to approve the 2025 
programme and said that the area teams would be receptive to discuss 
the various issues highlighted by members in today’s discussion. This 
was also something, he said that could be raised at MD level when the 
Schedule of Municipal District Works was being approved. 
 
 
 
Cllr Brogan asked if there was a timeline for works at Bonagee.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Gowan proposing the 2025 Non-National Roads Bridge 
Strengthening Programme advised again of the need for interim works 
at Logue’s Bridge and or the need for a Bailey Bridge given its im-
portance as an alternative route through Ballybofey. 
 
 
He was informed that all concerned were on the same wavelength and 
in agreement that a backup plan was needed. The Director of Service 
assured Cllr Brogan that the team were working on an interim solution 
for Bonagee. 
 
 
 
Thus, on the proposal of Cllr Mc Gowan, seconded by Cllr Scanlon the  
 
2025 Non-National Roads Bridge Strengthening Programme was 
adopted. 
 
 
C/112/25 
TO NOTE MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE CORPORATE 
POLICY GROUP HELD ON 20TH JANUARY, 2025.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Mc Monagle the 
minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group held on 20th Jan-
uary, 2025 was noted.  
 
C/113/25 
ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCE, SEMINAR OR EVENT  
Having noted authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or 
event under Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 
668 of 2006, Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority 
Members) Regulations 2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by 
the Minister for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government in 
relation to the Local Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 
2010, and the Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority 
Members) Regulations, 2014 -2025(as amended).  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Gowan, seconded by Cllr Mc Monagle 
attendance at the following was approved.  
 
 
 

25 
 
Training 
AILG Annual Training Conference to be held on Wednesday, April 2nd, 
and Thursday April 3rd at the Limerick Strand Hotel, Limerick.  
 
Other 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the Donegal Person of the Year 
Award Ceremony in the Bonnington Hotel, Dublin on the 29th March, 
2025 
 
Travel Abroad 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at a ceremony in Worcester State 
University on the 24th April, 2025 to accept an honorary degree (Doctor 
of Humane Letters, honoris causa. 
• Attendance of the EU Cerv representative at Meeting V in Budapest 
and Paszto, Hungary from the 23rd to the 26th April 2025. (Flight and 
accommodation costs to be covered by EU Cerv).  
 
C/114/25 
CONFERENCE/EVENT REPORTS 
On the proposal of Cllr McGowan, seconded by Cllr McMonagle the 
following conference/event reports was noted:-  
 
• Attendance of Cllr Martin Harley at the US Trade Mission and Golden 
Bridges Conference (Philadelphia & Boston) from the 12th to the 17th 
November 2023. 
• Attendance of Cllr Jack Murray at the CPMR Atlantic Arc Commission 
Meeting in Brussels on the 30th and 31st January 2025. Martin Harley 
at the 25th Anniversary of the Island of Ireland Peace Park in Mesen, 
Belgium on the 11th November 2023. 
• Attendance of Cllr Martin Harley at the EU Cerv Programme event in 
Figueira Da Foz, Portugal from the 2nd to the 5th February 2025. 
• Attendance of Cllr Declan Meehan at the Association of Irish Regions 
Conference in Athlone on the 5th and 6th February 2025.   
 
C/115/25 
ABOLITION OF LANDING FEES FOR ISLANDS FISHERMEN___  
 
It was unanimously agreed at this juncture to deal with the Roads  & 
Transportation submissions as the Director of Service had to leave the 
meeting early as a result of another commitment. 
 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr O’ Fearraigh, seconded by Cllr Jordan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“Calling on this Council to abolish landing fees for our Island fishermen 
with the current increase on petrol and diesel, the upgrading of their 
vessels and restrictions on fishing, the industry is very much in decline 
over recent decades.”   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  

26 
 
 
 
Cllr O’ Fearraigh said that the fishermen concerned faced a number of 
challenges and with rising fuel costs were finding it difficult to make a 
living. Additional challenges in terms of revised quotas and the decline 
in the industry had, he advised, serious implications going forward. He 
welcomed the fact that a review of the Harbour Byelaws could be 
included in the Roads & Transportation Draft Programme of Work. 
 
 
Cllr Jordan supporting the motion said that the past number of years 
had been difficult for the fishing industry arising from the hefty pier 
charges and the fact that the fleet were often tied up for significant 
periods of time but were still obliged to pay. 
 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director of Roads & Transportation alluded to the 
fact that a review of the Harbour Byelaws could be included for 
consideration by the Roads SPC. He noted however that these were a 
source of income for the Council and to abolish same would result in 
the Council losing out on this income source. 
 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said he could see the rationale for reviewing 
the byelaws but that the income was important for the Council. He 
asked why the specific reference to Islands fishermen and noted that 
the fees were not excessive in terms of the catches landed by the 
larger fishing boats. He proposed, seconded by Cllr J Brogan that there 
should be no abolition of fees. 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach queried the necessity of a counter motion as the 
Byelaws were to be reviewed anyway. Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig 
disagreed and asked why a difference was being made between 
fishermen on the Islands and those on the mainland. 
 
 
A recorded vote was then taken by the Meetings Administrator on the 
motion as submitted by Cllr O’ Fearraigh. 
 
 
This resulted in 25 voting for with 2 against. 
 
 
Those voting in favour included: 
 
 
 
Cllrs Beard, Blaney, Boyle, Bradley, Canning, Carr, Coyle, Devine, A 
Doherty, A Farren, Harley, Jordan, Kelly, Kennedy, Mc Clafferty, Mc 
Dermott, Mc Garvey, Mc Gee, Mc Gowan, Mc Mahon, Mc Monagle, 
Molloy, Nic Mheanman, O’ Fearraigh and Scanlon. (25) 
 
 
 
 Cllrs J Brogan and Mac Giolla Easbuig voted against. 
 
 
Thus, the motion submitted by Cllr O’ Fearraigh and seconded by Cllr 
Jordan as outlined above was adopted.  
 

27 
 
C/116/25 
ROAD SAFETY – THE NON-WEARING OF HIGH VIS VESTS, ARM 
BANDS, AND PROPER LIGHTING ON BICYCLES – ISSUES WITH  
E SCOOTERS.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Clafferty, seconded by Cllr Blaney, it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“I am asking this Council to take a stand  on road safety in relation to 
the non-wearing of high vis vests, arm bands etc or indeed proper 
lighting on bicycles given that these are causing issues for road users, 
late night walkers, cyclists etc. Furthermore, E Scooters have become 
a major problem for motorists. Given the number of motorists and 
pedestrians having accidents and the increasing number of fatalities we 
need to work with An Garda Siochána, the Minister for Transport, 
Schools, Youth Clubs etc to highlight these issues.”  
 
I would ask also that this Motion is sent around the Country to all other 
Councils in Ireland for their support.  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty said that people walking on our roads in dark clothing 
had become a major issue and that a stand needed to be taken to 
prevent injuries and fatalities. He alluded to the fact that cyclists were 
not using proper lighting on their bicycles and highlighted the fact that E 
Scooters had become a major problem over the past year or so. 
 
 
Cllr Blaney concurred and said that there was no reason as to why 
people could not abide with the safety requirements which were in the 
best interests of all concerned. 
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation outlined the 
importance of highlighting the issue given the number of fatalities on 
our roads. Donegal County Council and the Road Safety Authority, he 
advised, provided high visibility vests free of charge to the public and 
community groups each year whilst actively promoting the “Be Seen, 
Be Safe” campaign in the Autumn months. It was noted that the 
delivery of active travel, segregated cycling, and walking infrastructure 
further enhanced the safety of vulnerable road users and also provided 
safe and dedicated road crossing facilities to assist  in navigating towns 
and villages. He confirmed that the motion would be forwarded to other 
local authorities for consideration. 
 
 
Cllr Mc Clafferty welcomed the reply.  
 
 
 

28 
 
C/117/25 
 THAT DCC LOOK INTO DEVELOPING OR ENCOURAGING A 
BETTER EV CHARGING NETWORK FOR THE COUNTY  
On the proposal of Cllr A Farren, seconded by Cllr Beard, it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
"That DCC look into developing or encouraging a better EV charging 
network for the county, as the annual sales of EV cars has increased 
over the last few years but Donegal lags behind with public EV 
charging stations and will the Council do more in every way to increase 
the number of public charging stations."  
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Farren said that Donegal County Council needed to look at 
encouraging or developing a better EV charging network to facilitate 
tourism development. Figures had indicated, he said, that international 
tourism numbers were dropping and that there would be an increased 
dependency on stay at home visitors thus highlighting the need for 
additional charging stations.  
 
Cllr Beard alluded to the 25% drop in international visitors and said that 
Donegal as a rural county needed reliable infrastructure. Without this, 
she said it would not be possible to develop the green tourism initiative.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation alluded to his reply 
and the support provided by Zero Emission Vehicles Ireland (ZEVI) to 
support consumers, the public sector and businesses to make the 
switch to zero emission vehicles. It was noted that the National EV 
Charging Plan had been developed to further this aim and focusing on 
two areas with the National Road/Motorway Network EV Charging Plan 
being led by the TII and the Regional and Local EV Charging Plan 
Network Plan being led by Local Authorities. As a result, he said, that 
Local Authorities received funding to develop strategies to develop 
charging facilities. Donegal County Council, he noted, was the lead 
authority for the west and north of the Wild Atlantic Way and in 
conjunction with Clare, Galway, Mayo and Sligo County Councils would 
be appointing a consultant in the coming weeks to develop EV charging 
strategies in the region. There would be an opportunity, he added, for 
members and the public to get involved in the consultation process. He 
advised also of the guiding principles applicable for this strategy. 
 
Cllr Farren welcomed the reply and said that Malin Head as a key 
destination on the Wild Atlantic Way needed to be at the forefront of 
any EV charging initiative. The Local Authority, he contended, needed 
to be actively involved in the installation of such facilities.  
 

29 
 
C/118/25 
THAT THE COUNCIL SEEK CLARIFICATION FROM CENTRAL 
GOVERNMENT ON THE PROCUREMENT PROCESS FOR VEHICLE 
RESTRAINT SYSTEMS USED ON OUR COUNTY ROADS 
On the proposal of Cllr McGee, seconded by Cllr A Farren, it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That the Council seeks clarification from central government on the 
procurement process for Vehicle Restraint Systems used on our 
county's roads. The Council should then provide these details including 
the cost assessments, tendering processes, and quality control 
measures, to ensure that taxpayers receive value for money. 
 The council should also question why T.I.I does not have a specific 
programme to fund VRS's for non-national roads, given the high 
incidence of traffic collisions on all our roads.”  
 
 He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee queried the excessive costs involved in providing such 
systems and asked for additional clarity on the operation of same. He 
cited the need to look at the value for money aspect and asked if it was 
possible to source same more competitively. 
 
Cllr A Farren supporting the motion said that it was imperative that 
value for money was sought and consideration to sourcing the service 
locally.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation noted that the 
specification and guidance for VRS (Crash Barriers) had evolved 
considerably over the past number of years and that it was imperative 
that all current requirements, standards and guidelines were adhered 
to. Any change would, he advised, necessitate looking at the 
alternatives that were out there. The Council, he said, had installed 
VRSs at a number of locations on Non-National road network funded 
through the Department of Transport Safety Works but that monies 
were not available for the maintenance of VRSs on the Non-National 
road network. He would, he advised, write to the Department of 
Transport as requested. This was also something, he added, which 
could be looked at by the Roads  & Transportation SPC.  
 
C/119/25 
THAT THE COUNCIL REVIEW THE CURRENT POLICY ON THE 
REMOVAL OF OVERHANGING TREES ON OUR ROADS  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kelly, seconded by Cllr Blaney, it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That this Council review the current policy on the removal of 
overhanging trees on our roads to make it more workable for 
landowners please.”  

30 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
Cllr Kelly said this was a serious issue and that the current policy was 
not working as it should. Landowners, he said, were having to put traffic 
management measures in place and that the cost of employing private 
companies to carry out same was excessive. He asked that the Roads 
and Transportation SPC review the policy and cited the need for the 
Council to become more directly involved in the process especially in 
relation to the traffic management issue. Clarity was requested on who 
was actually responsible for the area between the edge of the road and 
boundary fencing and he cited the need for ongoing engagement on 
the matter. It was noted that the majority of landowners were amenable 
to working with the Council on the matter.  
 
Cllr Kelly said that the Agriculture Committee had agreed to write to the 
Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Martin Heydon, T.D 
requesting that consideration be given to the implementation of a 
scheme to encourage landowners to look after hedges and 
overhanging trees. 
 
Cllr Blaney, seconding the motion alluded to the impact of overhanging 
trees on powerlines. He alluded to specific problems in the Milford 
Electoral EA where overhanging trees were damaging car mirrors and 
traffic was unable to pass safely. This was, he contended, an ongoing 
issue in this particular area. The Council., he said, needed to work with 
the landowners and provide assistance with roads management.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads and Transportation said that the 
issues raised were of a practical nature and could be included in the 
draft SPC work programme. He agreed to circulate a copy of the 
“Guide for Landowners to Managing Roadside Trees” as compiled by 
the Department of Agriculture, Food and the Marine, along with the 
Tree Council of Ireland for member’s information. 
 
Cllr Kelly welcomed the response and advised of the need for a 
balanced approach to the issue.  
 
C/120/25 
THIS COUNCIL SEEK A MEETING WITH THE NEW MINISTER FOR 
TRANSPORT TO DISCUSS OUR ON-GOING INFRASTRUCTURE 
PROJECTS  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr C Brogan, seconded by Cllr Kelly, it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
I propose that this Council seek a meeting with the new Minister for 
Transport to discuss our on-going infrastructure projects in Donegal. 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  

31 
 
Cllr Brogan said that Donegal as a county with no rail network 
depended on its roads network and that it was imperative that this 
adequately maintained and enhanced. He cited the need for a cross-
party delegation to meet with the Minister for Transport, Mr Darragh O’ 
Brien, T.D to discuss the infrastructural deficits in the county given that 
TEN-T initiative was progressing and would be a game changer for the 
county.  
There was a need also, he advised, to look at quick fixes for projects 
such as the Southern Relief Road in Letterkenny. He alluded also to 
the massive population movement in Letterkenny on a daily basis and 
the need to look again at some of the proposals for Active Travel. He 
said that a proposal needed to be put to the Minister and if this required 
additional outside assistance then that should be sought.  
 
Cllr Kelly concurred and referenced the earlier discussion in relation to 
the bridge programme, overhanging trees etc outlining the need for 
additional funding resources. A lot of issues, he advised, needed to be 
teased out including the concerns raised in relation to Active Travel in 
Letterkenny.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads and Transportation said that it would 
be possible to issue an invitation to the Minister to ensure delivery on 
the potential for the county.  
 
C/121/25 
 CALLING ON DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL TO SUPPORT THE 
DEMANDS OF TINTEÁN AND TO ALSO WRITE TO THE 
FREESTATE GOVERNMENT ASKING THAT THESE DEMANDS 
ARE FULLY IMPLEMENTED IMMEDIATELY.   
On the proposal of Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig, seconded by Cllr J Brogan, 
it was resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
Iarraim ar Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall tacú le héilimh TINTEÁN 
agus chomh maith leis sin, scríobh chuig Rialtas an tSaorstáit ag 
iarraidh go gcuirfear na héilimh sin ar fad i bhfeidhm lom láithreach. 
 
• Cumhacht reachtúil tithíochta agus na hacmhainní cuí d'Údarás na 
Gaeltachta 
• Scéim na nDeontas Tithíochta Gaeltachta a athbhunú 
• Treoirlínte Pleanála Gaeltachta a fhoilsiú agus a achtú 
• Straitéis Tithíochta agus Pobail do gach Limistéar Pleanála Teanga. 
I call on Comhairle Contae Dhún na nGall to support the demands of 
TINTEÁN and to also write to the Freestate Government asking that 
these demands are fully implemented immediately. 
• Statutory housing power and the appropriate resources for Údarás na 
Gaeltachta. 
• Re-establishing the Gaeltacht Housing Grants Scheme 
• Gaeltacht Planning Guidelines published and enacted 

32 
 
• Population and Housing Strategy for each Gaeltacht Language 
Planning Area.  
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.   
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig said that people in the Gaeltacht were Irish 
speakers and that the issues highlighted in the motion were items that 
warranted discussion at SPC and committee level. He noted that there 
had been discussion on the matter by Coiste na Gaeilge.  
 
Cllr J Brogan supporting the motion outlined the importance of keeping 
the language alive and of ensuring that all the necessary supports were 
in place to sustain and revitalise Gaeltacht Communities whilst 
maintaining their distinct identity. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig acknowledged the response and said that 
Government policy must endeavour to ensure that Irish speaking’ 
families had access to all the necessary housing supports to allow them 
to live in the Gaeltacht areas. 
 
C/122/25 
CAPACITY ISSUES IN THE LITTLE ANGELS SCHOOL  
On the proposal of Cllr Nic Mheanman, seconded by Cllr McMonagle, it 
was resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That this Council acknowledges every child's right to a school place 
and calls on the Minister for Education and the Minister for Children 
and Disability to take action in regard to capacity issues in the Little 
Angels School, and that this Council recognises that there is only one 
school that caters for moderate to severe, profound intellectual 
disabilities, highlighting the need for another school. I would also ask 
that this Council writes to the Minister for Health about the need for a 
dedicated children's respite service in Donegal, given that our children 
with intellectual disabilities have been continually let down.”   
 
She received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Nic Mheanman said the motion was self-explanatory and that the 
expansion of the Little Angels School was something that warranted 
immediate attention. She alluded also to the need for a dedicated 
respite service for children. It was noted that the facility in Drumboe 
had long since closed thus creating undue stress and hardship for 
many families who depended on this service.   
 
Cllr Mc Monagle outlined the fact that it had been brought to the 
attention of the Minister that there were capacity issues and that the 
demand for places exceeded what the new school could deliver.  
This demand, he contended, would only increase and cited the need to  

33 
 
look at adding three additional classrooms or consider an alternative 
site for another school. 
He referenced also the fact that two out of the four respite centres in 
Donegal were no longer available and the other two only available on 
alternative weekends. It was essential, he said, that a purpose built 
respite centre for children was provided . The need for same, he said, 
was well documented so that children could have the full benefit of 
these services at an important stage in their development.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
It was thus resolved to forward the motion to the relevant Government 
Ministers. 
 
 
C/123/25 
 LITTER BINS - GREENWAYS  
The following motion submitted by Cllr T Crossan was proposed by Cllr 
A Doherty and seconded by Cllr Nic Mheanman, it was resolved to 
adopt the following motion:-  
 
 “I propose that more litter bins are positioned along our Greenways as 
a matter of urgency and that these are emptied on a regular basis.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment 
Services, Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities Management in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/124/25 
THAT DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL DEMAND A SPECIAL AND 
URGENT MEETING WITH UISCE EIREANN   
On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr O’ Fearraigh, it 
was resolved to adopt the following motion:-   
 
 "That Donegal County Council demand a special and urgent meeting 
with Uisce Éireann following the recent but consistent number of water 
outages that has affected and disrupted education provision (School 
Closures),Tourism and Hospitality, Businesses, Community events and 
families in Donegal, and that DCC demand the provision of an 
immediate contingency and infrastructure programme works response 
plan from Irish Water to reduce and end water supply interruptions." 
 
He received a response from the Director of Director of Water & 
Environment in relation to the above.  
 
 Cllr Doherty made reference to outages in the North Inishowen area 
and the fact that these had occurred with some frequency particularly at 
weekends. He noted that various responses issued had referenced the 
fact that planned infrastructural works on the network were at 
preliminary design stage and likely to be costed for inclusion in the 
2026 programme. Members, he said, needed to be kept informed and 
in the loop on outages county-wide including detail on the planned 
responses. He expressed concern that an Uisce Éireann representative 

34 
 
had not been available to attend a public meeting in Clonmany which 
had  sought to highlight ongoing water outage issues in that area. 
 
 Donegal County Council personnel, he said, had a critical role to play 
in ensuring that Uisce Eireann personnel committed to a dedicated 
meeting with the elected members. 
 
 Cllr O’ Fearraigh noted that there had been similar problems in the 
Glenties Municipal District and that there had been difficulties in getting 
same resolved. It had resulted, he said, in schools closing and the 
tourism industry being severely impacted. He alluded also to issues in 
the summer months when a significant number of young people 
attended Irish language courses in the Gaeltacht areas. It was 
imperative, he said, that members were briefed on Uisce Eireann’s 
investment programme and when and where new pipelines were to be 
laid. 
 
 There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment said that he had 
already spoken to Uisce Éireann and with Deputy Padráig Mac 
Lochlainn. He said he would email Uisce Éireann again and ask them 
to reconsider making personnel available for the meeting on the 2nd 
April. 
 
Cllr Doherty concluding again outlined the need for an urgent meeting 
with Uisce Éireann at which members would be briefed on the relevant 
timelines and programmes on the various infrastructural needs and 
deficits in the county. 
 
C/125/25 
CORRESPONDENCE TO ISSUE TO THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH, 
SEEKING AN URGENT MEETING IN RELATION TO THE 
GROUNDBREAKING SURVEY INTO THE MENTAL HEALTH OF 
THOSE AFFECTED BY THE DEFECTIVE CONCRETE CRISIS  
On the proposal of Cllr Beard, seconded by Cllr Devine, it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
 Defective Concrete Blocks 
“On 12 March 2025, Ulster University published details of its 
groundbreaking survey into the mental health of those affected by the 
defective concrete crisis. 
Alarmingly, the study found that over 30% of participants (nearly three 
times higher than the rate for the Irish population as a whole) were 
suffering from severe depression. However, of most concern, more 
than one third of those surveyed reported having suicidal thoughts after 
learning that their properties were affected by defective concrete. 
In light of these shocking statistics, this motion calls on the Executive of 
Donegal County Council to write to the Minister of Health, seeking an 
urgent meeting at which targeted mental health interventions will be 

35 
 
discussed and agreed, to help address the mental health crisis being 
experienced by some of the most vulnerable in our county.”  
 
She received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the 
above.  
 
Cllr Beard said that there were many people out there who could not 
get finance to access the scheme and thus felt abandoned. It was 
imperative, she added, that something was done the alleviate the 
despair and hopelessness that existed and to help people rebuild their 
lives. She noted that an Ulster University study in the region had found 
that 30% of participants were suffering from severe depression with 
one third harbouring suicidal thoughts. Thus she called for an urgent 
meeting with the Minister for Health with the aim of securing mental 
health initiatives especially for the most vulnerable in society. 
 
Cllr Devine supporting the motion advised that there was a lack of 
transparency and respect. The 100% Redress party, had, he advised, 
contacted the Minister but had not received a response to date. He 
said that it was important that all 37 members were united in a call for 
action. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment, acknowledged 
that the motion was a very important one and said that he would be 
happy to write to the Minister as requested. 
 
C/126/25 
THAT THIS COUNCIL CALL ON THE HSE TO STOP 
DOWNGRADING SERVICES IN THE NEW PRIMARY CARE 
CENTRES THROUGHOUT THE COUNTY  
On the proposal of Cllr Bradley, seconded by Cllr McDermott, it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That this Council call on the HSE to stop downgrading services in the 
new Primary Care Centres which have been built throughout the 
County over the last number of years and that we write to the CEO of 
the HSE and the Minister for Health calling on them both to do 
everything within their power to ensure that all services currently 
available in the Primary Care Centres continue to be available within 
them going forward.”  
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Bradley using Inishowen as an example said that over three years 
ago Buncrana had been in receipt of a range of HSE services. Ten 
days ago, he said, the Civil Registration Office in the town closed on a 
temporary basis. He outlined a range of statistical information which 

36 
 
highlighted service delivery options in Louth and Leitrim. Comparing 
this to the Inishowen Peninsula, he said that elderly and sick people 
would now have to travel to Letterkenny to access births, deaths and 
marriage services. He noted that the round journey time from Malin 
Head to Letterkenny was two hours and thirty-four minutes covering a 
distance of 162 kms. Despite the contention that this service could  be 
accessed online, he noted, that many of those availing of the service 
were elderly with no access to transport or broadband facilities. It was, 
he added, that this service was retained in Inishowen. 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott concurred with this assessment and outlined the need 
to reinstate the Civil Registration Office facility in Buncrana as a matter 
of urgency. 
 
 
C/127/25 
REQUEST THE PLANNING AUTHORITY TO MAKE A VARIATION 
TO THE COUNTY DEVELOPMENT PLAN 2024-2030  
On the proposal of Cllr Canning, seconded by Cllr Coyle, it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
I would seek the support of my fellow councillors Under Section 13 of 
the Act to request the Planning Authority of Donegal Co. Council to 
make a variation to the County Development Plan 2024-2030 insofar 
as  to aligned the policy in relation to Unfinished estates in Rural Areas 
with the existing policy in the Urban Areas UB-P-13. This proposed 
policy will read "It is a policy of the Council to consider proposals for 
RURAL residential development that seek to resolve existing 
unfinished residential development, including through appropriate 
reconfiguration of developments, and such proposals shall be 
considered outside the population targets set by the Core Strategy" 
 Also, I would request the Planning Authority of this Council to vary the 
County Development Plan to make reference to and include within its 
housing policies and objectives the Guidelines Document for Planning 
Authorities sent recently from the Government namely "Sustainable 
Residential Development and Compact Settlements". I would be of the 
opinion that our housing density standards within the County 
Development Plan are not aligned with those in the Government 
Guidelines document Chapter 3.  
 
 He received a response from the Director of Community Development 
& Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
 Cllr Canning said it was essential that the policy in relation to 
Unfinished estates in Rural Areas was aligned with the existing policy in 
the Urban Areas UB-P-13. Alluding to Letterkenny in particular, he said, 
that its status as a growth centre warranted a proper density 
designation and one aligned with national policy. 
 
 Cllr Mc Gowan seconded the motion. 
 
 There was no opposition to the motion. 

37 
 
 Mr Liam Ward, Director Planning & Community Development advised 
that on this basis the executive was now obliged to present to members 
a report to initiate the variation within four weeks of the adoption of the 
motion. The view in planning, he said was that the request to include 
within its housing policies and objectives the Guidelines Document for 
Planning Authorities ("Sustainable Residential Development and 
Compact Settlements) as recently issued by the Government was 
something that could be added as a non-material amendment to the 
plan. He said that the revisions to the “ National Planning Framework” 
were awaited and expected in the coming weeks. He said that it was 
anticipated that on receipt of same Local Authorities would have to 
carry out a variation of their County Development Plans to take into 
account increased targets in terms of housing development. 
 
 Cllr Canning accepted the reply.  
 
C/128/25 
THAT THIS COUNCIL RECOGNISE THE BLANEY FAMILY WILL 
HAVE 100 YEARS OF CONTINUOUS POLITICAL 
REPRESENTATION ON DCC ON 24TH JUNE, 2025.  
 
 Cllr Coyle proposed the following motion:-  
 
That this Council recognise that on 24th June 2025 the Blaney Family 
from Rossnakill will have had 100 years of continuous political 
representation on Donegal County Council.  
 
 He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Coyle outlined the in detail the political history of the Blaney family 
which had begun with the election of Neal Blaney as a Sinn Féin 
candidate in the 1925 Local Elections and who remained a Councillor 
until 1948. It was noted that in that period he had also been a member 
of Dáil Eireann and Seanad Eireann and had subsequently served as a 
member of the Fianna Fáil party. He was Chair of the Council from 
1945-1948. After his death in 1948 his son Neil T Blaney was elected to 
Donegal County Council and served until 1957 having assumed the 
role of Chairperson from 1955-1957. Neil T Blaney was also a member 
of Dáil Eireann from 1948 until his death in 1995.  
 
 In 1957, Harry Blaney a brother of Neal T Blaney took his seat on 
Donegal County Council and served until 1999. During that time, he 
had been Chair of the Council on two occasions, 1967-1968 and 1986-
1987. Harry was elected to Dáil Eireann in 1997. His son Niall Blaney 
became a member of the Local Authority in 1999 and served until 2003 
when he was elected to Dáil Eireann. He is currently a member of 
Seanad Eireann.  
 
Cllr Liam Blaney succeeded his brother Niall in 2003 and is currently a 
member of Donegal County Council and served as Cathaoirleach from 
2022-2023. 

38 
 
Cllr Coyle asked members to support the motion and requested that a 
Civic Reception be afforded to the Blaney Family considering their 
lengthy and dedicated service to the people of Donegal since 1925. 
This, he advised, would serve to acknowledge the century long 
contribution that the Blaney family had made to public life and their 
continuous representation on Donegal County Council since 1925, 
service in Dáil Eireann, Seanad Eireann and the European Parliament. 
This level of service, he said, was unparalleled and displayed a true 
sense of public duty and dedication to the community. 
 
Cllr Scanlon seconded the motion and acknowledged the huge 
contribution made by the Blaney family to political life in Donegal. It was 
fitting, he said, that a civic reception take place to honour this 
achievement.  
 
 There was no opposition to the motion. 
  
Cllr Coyle concluding asked that the necessary arrangements be put in 
place for the reception.  
 
C/129/25 
CURRENT PROTOCOL FOR CONTACTING OR REQUESTING A 
MEETING ETC WITH THE MANAGEMENT AT LETTERKENNY 
UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL  
On the proposal of Cllr Devine, seconded by Cllr Beard it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 
“That this Council support my call that the current protocol where we as 
elected representatives cannot contact or request a meeting etc with 
the management at Letterkenny University Hospital be scrapped 
straight away as our hospital is in crisis. The notion that we can only 
raise matters through the Regional Health Forum is madness as we 
have a duty of care to those that we represent and surely, we as 
Councillors should be allowed to challenge the conditions in this 
hospital in terms of waiting times, staff issues, lack of services, 
shortages of staff etc and the list goes on.  
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services. 
 Cllr Devine alluded to the fact that whilst the population in Donegal was 
rising staff numbers at Letterkenny University Hospital were reducing. 
He expressed concern that Cllrs were unable to secure a meeting with 
hospital staff and noted that a previous meeting with hospital 
management had been subsequently cancelled.  
 
 It was, he advised unacceptable that Cllrs could only raise matters 
through the Regional Health Forum as members locally needed to be 
able to raise queries on the conditions at the hospital, waiting times, the 
lack of specific services and the impact of staff shortages. He 
referenced also the fact that successive Minister’s for Health had 
shown little or no interest in concerns raised by members.  

39 
 
 Cllr Beard said that it was totally unacceptable that members were 
barred from contacting hospital management when there were serious 
issues and concerns to be raised. Members, she noted, were not 
looking to interfere but needed to be able to engage with the 
management in relation to the concerns raised by the general public.  
 
Cllr C Brogan as a representative on the Regional Health Forum said 
that a range of issues were discuss at this forum and expressed 
surprise that the personnel in Letterkenny University Hospital would not 
facilitate a meeting. He said that a lot of people worked very hard in the 
hospital and that this needed to be acknowledged. He would, he said, 
raise the issues concerned with the Regional Health Forum. 
 
 There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Cllr Devine, said that he did not dispute the fact that a lot of excellent 
work was done, but expressed dismay at the fact that members were 
not able to request a meeting with hospital management on ongoing 
issues which directly affected constituents. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that he would seek clarification at the next 
Regional Forum Meeting. 
 
C/130/25 
 CATHAOIRLEACH’S BUSINESS  
 
 Votes of Sympathy 
 
 A vote of sympathy was extended to the following: 
• Charlie Cannon, formerly Roads, Letterkenny/Milford MD on the 
death of his father John (Retired Clerk of Works). 
• Rosemary Coyle, Motor Tax and Stephanie Kearns, Flood Relief Unit 
on the death of their father Charlie Kearns. 
• Paul O’ Donnell, Roads  & Transportation , Letterkenny on the death 
of his son, Odhran. 
• Donna Cavanagh, Library Service on the death of her mother 
Maureen Quinn.  
• Pauline McLoughlin, Veterinary Office on the death of her mother, 
Greta Devine  
• Máire Boyle, Letterkenny Roads on the death of her father, Phil Bán 
Boyle. 
• Cllr Noel Jordan on the death of his brother Alan. 
• Cllr Michael Mc Clafferty on the death of his mother, Bridie. 
• Francie Duffy on the death of his wife Breid Duffy. 
• Francie Duffy on the death of his brother Phil Duffy, former Water-
works Inspector. 
• The family of the late Anthony Gallagher, Donegal County Council 
School Warden, Letterkenny. 
• James Mc Laughlin, Housing, Inishowen MD on the death of his 
brother Charlie Mc Laughlin. 

40 
 
• Noel Mongan (Water Services), Eunan Mongan (Water Services) and 
Joe Mongan, Roads Section (Donegal MD) on the death of their 
brother, Frank Mongan. 
• Brian O’ Donnell formerly Reprographics Services on the death of his 
brother, Patsy O’ Donnell. 
 
Events Attended 
The Cathaoirleach informed members that she had attended the follow-
ing events: 
 
Intelligent Cities Closing Conference& Mayors Business Forum on the 
5th and 6th March in Brussels.  
This she advised had provided an opportunity to discuss and align 
thoughts on future commitments for smarter, greener and more inclu-
sive cities. It also afforded an opportunity to forge collaborations with 
other cities and key urban stakeholders. The conference, she noted, 
had provided inspiring keynotes from global leaders in urban transfor-
mation and involved interactive workshops and an opportunity to ex-
change views and avail of networking opportunities with the relevant 
industry experts.  
 
Local Enterprise Week Opening Event in the Radisson Hotel, Let-
terkenny on the 3rd March 2025. 
 
Reception in honour of  Sean M. O’Brien, General President of the In-
ternational Brotherhood of Teamsters in Lifford on the 11th March 2025. 
 
St Patrick’s Day Events in the USA 14th – 18th March, 2025. 
The Cathaoirleach advised that she had travelled to Boston for the St 
Patrick’s Day events on the 16th March 2025 with the Leas-
Cathaoirleach, Cllr Kavanagh attending events in Boston on the same 
date.  
 
Cllr Kennedy confirmed that she had attended the St Patrick’s Day 
Breakfast organised by Senator Nick Collins and afterwards participat-
ed in the South Boston St Patrick’s Day Parade on Sunday 16th March. 
There had been an opportunity afterwards to meet with members of the 
Diaspora in Boston City Centre. The delegation, then travelled on even-
ing of the 16th March to New York. 
Both the Cathaoirleach and the Leas-Cathaoirleach attended mass on 
the morning of the 17th March and took part along with the members of 
the Donegal Association of New York in the St Patrick’s Day parade. 
This was followed by a meeting with the Donegal Association and the 
extended Diaspora. 
The delegation met with Enterprise Ireland on the morning of the 18th 
March to discuss matters of mutual interest.  
 
EU Belong Event in Strasbourg from the 24th to the 27th March 2025 
This was attended by the Cathaoirleach and two members of staff from 
the Community Development Section. This took place during the 48th 

41 
 
Session of the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities in Stras-
bourg, France. The Cathaoirleach thanked Mr Paddy Doherty, AO, 
Community Development and Ms Christina O’ Donnell, Staff Officer, 
Social Inclusion for their contribution and assistance with the event.  
 
Civic Reception for Naomh Pádraig Uisce Chaoin in the County House, 
Lifford on the 28th March 2025. 
 
Launch of Social Inclusion Week 2025 in An Grianan Theatre on the 
evening of the 28th March.  
 
 
 Attendance at the Donegal Person of the Year Award Ceremony on the 
29th March 2025 in the Bonnington Hotel, Dublin. 
 
 
 Killybegs Regeneration Project 
 
It was noted that the official opening of the project would take place in 
May 2025 and would be officially opened by the Minister for Rural, 
Community Development & the Gaeltacht. 
 
 
 
 Cathaoirleach’s Concert – Friday 18th April 2025 
 
Cllr Kennedy reminded members that this event in support of Donegal 
Domestic Violence Services was taking pace on Friday 18th April at 
8pm in An Grianan Theatre, Letterkenny. She said that she had 
organised the event to create awareness of domestic violence and 
abuse in Donegal and to highlight the fact that more needed to be done 
to assist vulnerable people. She said that she was delighted to be 
hosting the concert with Moya Brennan of Clannad and Mairéad Ní 
Mhaonaigh of Altan as an awareness event to help break the stigma of 
and empower people whilst raising funds for Donegal Domestic 
Violence Services. 
 
 
C/131/25 
 CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MANAGEMENT REPORT  
 Members considered the report circulated with the agenda and 
received an update on the following: 
 
1. Local Authority Members Association (LAMA) Council of the Year 
Award. 
2. Community Development & Planning Services 
Community Development 
• Community Recognition Fund 2025  
• Dormant Accounts fund   
• 2025 Town & Village Renewal Scheme  
Planning Services   
• Transboundary Public Consultation-Dalradian Gold Mine Project  
Capital Projects Delivery Unit and Taking in Charge of Housing 
Estates Division  
• Major Projects  
• Refugee Response Unit  
3. Water and Environment  
Climate Action  

42 
 
• Decarbonising Zones  
• Falcarragh Tidy Towns-5 Year Strategic Plan Launch  
• Eco Buncrana – Eco Strategy and Action Plan  
• Conversations Towards Actions: Climate Justice   
Environment  
• National Agricultural Inspection Plan   
• Water Framework Monitoring  
• Septic Tanks  
• Septic Tank Grant Scheme  
Flood Relief Scheme (FRS) Unit Updates   
Defective Concrete Blocks – Update  
4. Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
Social Housing Delivery 
• Social Housing Delivery Programme 
• Land Acquisition 
• Social Housing through Turnkey Acquisition 
• Extensions to Existing Social Housing 
Secondhand Acquisitions Program 
Library Service 
• Creative February  
• Seachtain na Gaeilge 
• Ireland Reads 2025 
Arts Service 
• Cathaoirleach’s Concert in support of Donegal Domestic 
Violence Services 
• Fly-A-Kite for Diversity 
• Biodiversity Office35 
• National Tree Week 202535 
5. Economic Development, I.S. & Emergency Services  
Fire Service  
• Operations  
• Fire Prevention  
• Major Emergency Management  
Information Systems  
• Online Submission Tool  
• Defective Concrete Blocks  
• Network, Infrastructure & Security 
• EU Projects  
• National Broadband Plan 
Economic Development 
• First Green Hydrogen Stakeholder Meeting  
• Blue Economy Working Group Workshop 
• Love Donegal Day wins Best Communication at LAMA Council 
Awards 
• Believe in Branding: Building a Strong Identity for Business 
Strategy  
• Sean M. O’Brien Visit  
• Alpha Innovation Annual Community Check In  

43 
 
• Innovation Exchange Preview Event hosted in Inishowen 
Innovation  
• Inaugural Tourism Connect event in Letterkenny  
 
6. Roads & Transportation  
Roads Areas Update 
• DOT Non-National Road Grant Allocations 2025 
• Restoration Improvement and Restoration Maintenance 
• TII Maintenance Allocations 
• Údarás Bus Shelters 
• Local Improvement Schemes 
• Velocity Patcher Trial 
• Official Languages Act Signage Programme 
National Roads Office Update 
• TEN-T Priority Route Improvement Project Donegal  
• A5 Western Transport Corridor and Access to the Northwest  
• A5/N2 Cross Border Committee  
• TII Greenways Projects 
• TII Active Travel Projects 
• All Ireland Strategic Rail Review 
 
A number of issues were raised by members. 
 
• Query as to the filling of the Waste Awareness Officer position and 
the reason for the delay in same. 
• Clarity requested in relation to the Ballybofey Flood Relief Scheme. It 
was noted that every effort would be made to raise the profile of this 
project.  
• Members advised of the need to acknowledge the work of 
community volunteers, Tidy Towns volunteers and to look at ways of 
recognising their contributions on a county-wide basis. Query raised 
as to recent developments on the provision of insurance for 
community volunteers. 
• It was agreed that detail on the Second Hand Acquisitions 
Programme would be circulated when issued by the Department.  
 
C/132/25 
DOG FOULING ON OUR FOOTPATHS AND BEACHES  
 
 Cllr Mc Clafferty submitted the following question:-  
 
What steps have the Council took in relation to dog fouling on our foot-
paths in our towns or indeed beaches etc?  
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/133/25 
WHAT STEPS DO THE COUNCIL PROPOSE GOING FORWARD TO 
DEAL WITH OVERHANGING TREES  
 
 Cllr Mc Clafferty submitted the following question:-  

44 
 
What steps do the Council propose going forward to deal with over-
hanging trees, branches etc on our main roads or secondary roads 
ahead of any future storms?    
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/134/25 
HAS THE MINISTERIAL DIRECTION ON THE COUNTY DEVELOP-
MENT PLAN 2024-2030 BEEN AGREED AND ADOPTED BY DCC  
 
 Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig submitted the following question:-  
 
An bhfuil an tOrdú Aireachta maidir le Plean Forbartha na Condae 
2024-30 glactha agus aontaithe ag an Chomhairle? 
An dtig leis an Oifig Pleanála glacadh anois le hiarratais do thithe in 
aice leis an N56? 
 
Has the Ministerial Direction on the County Development Plan 2024-
2030 been agreed and adopted by Donegal County Council? 
And therefore, can the planning office make a ruling on applications 
along the N56?    
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development 
& Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/135/25 
 USE OF THE IRISH LANGUAGE IN DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL  
 
 Cllr MacGiolla Easbuig submitted the following question:-  
 
I ndiaidh dom freastal a dhéanamh ar Chomhdháil Shoillse ar ‘The 
Gaelic Crisis’ i Steòrnabhagh, Oileán Leòdhais, Albain a bhí ar siúl ón 
29-31 Lúnasa 2022, d’ullmhaigh mise, mar Chathaoirleach ar Choiste 
na Gaeilge, tuarascáil ina raibh roinnt moltaí maidir le húsáid na 
Gaeilge i gContae Dhún na nGall. Dírím aird ar leith ar mholadh Uimh. 
5: 
 
‘ Go mbogann an Chomhairle láithreach chun an leagan Gaeilge amháin 
dár mbailte móra sa Chontae a úsáid ar gach comhfhreagras agus le 
linn cur i láthair srl, e.g. Leitir Ceanainn, Leifear, Bealach Féich, Carn 
Domhnach, Baile Dhún na nGall srl.  
Bealach simplí dearfach a bheadh anseo don fhoireann dul i ngleic leis 
an teanga agus í a chur chun cinn ina gcuid oibre go laethúil. 
 
Cuireadh an tuairisc seo os comhair chruinniú Choiste na Gaeilge agus 
roimh Chruinniú iomlán de chuid na Comhairle, agus tugadh tacaíocht 
iomlán don tuairisc.   
 Mar sin, cén fáth nár gníomhaíodh air seo? 
 
Following the attendance at the Soillse Conference on ‘The Gaelic 
Crisis’ in Stornoway, Isle of Lewis, Scotland which took place from 29-
31 August 2022, I as Cathaoirleach of Coiste na Gaeilge, prepared a 
report which included a number of recommendations regarding the use 

45 
 
of the Irish Language in Donegal County Council.  I draw particular 
attention to recommendation No 5: 
 
‘That the Council moves immediately to use the Irish version only of all 
our bigger towns in the County on all correspondence and during 
presentations etc, e.g. Leitir Ceanainn, Leifear, Bealach Féich, Carn 
Domhnach, Baile Dhún na nGall etc. This would be a simple and 
positive way for staff to engage with and promote the language in their 
work on a daily basis.” The report was presented to Coiste na Gaeilge 
and to Full Council, where it received full support and endorsement.  
 
 Why has this not been acted upon?  
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development 
& Planning Services.  
 
C/136/25 
WHAT IS THE COUNCIL POLICY ON THE FREQUENCY OF 
EMPTYING COUNCIL BINS IN URBAN AREAS  
 
 Cllr T Crossan submitted the following question:-  
 
What is the Council policy on the frequency of emptying Council bins in 
urban areas?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/137/25 
HAS DCC BEEN ADVISED WHEN THE GOVERNMENT’S 
“GUARANTEE” IN THE FORM OF A SECOND GRANT OPTION IF 
REQUIRED FOR A PERIOD OF 40 YEARS WILL BE ISSUED  
 
 Cllr Beard submitted the following question:-  
 
 
 Defective Concrete Blocks  
 Has the Executive of Donegal County Council been advised when the 
Government’s "guarantee” in the form of a second grant option if 
required for a period of 40 years" (as outlined in the Ministerial 
Guidelines) will be issued to those who have remediated their 
properties under the provisions of the Enhanced Defective Concrete 
Blocks Scheme?  
She received a response from the Director of Water & Environment in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/138/25 
 LEGISLATION FOR THE REVISED GRANT RATES UNDER THE 
ENHANCED DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS SCHEME  
 
 Cllr Beard submitted the following question:-  
 
Has the Executive of Donegal County Council been advised when 
legislation will be brought forward to enable the recently revised grant 
rates under the Enhanced Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme to be 
applied retrospectively?  
 
 

46 
 
She received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the 
above.   
 
C/139/25 
HALTING OF THE RENT REVIEW CURRENTLY BEING 
UNDERTAKEN  
 
 Cllr F Bradley submitted the following question:-  
 
To ask the Director for Housing to halt the rent review currently being 
undertaken so as to find a mechanism which precludes any rent 
increase for those who live in any of the Council's housing stock 
affected by DCB.  
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/140/25 
WILL DCC RESPOND URGENTLY AND POSITIVELY TO A 
REQUEST FOR A MEETING WITH SENIOR OFFICIALS 
FORWARDED AND REQUESTED BY CIF  
 
 Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
Will Donegal County Council respond urgently and positively to a 
request for a meeting with senior officials forwarded and requested by 
CIF? 
 Will DCC in particular assess and brief members on the 
correspondence reply from former housing Minister Darragh O Brien 
received by CIF and  DCC's interpretation of the Dept of Housing's 
procurement procedures and guidance and the delivery methods for 
housing delivery in Donegal? 
 (Dept Circular 16/2024 & correspondence Dec 2024)  
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/141/25 
 FIRE HYDRANT INSPECTIONS,FAULTS,REPAIRS  
 
 Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
 
 Fire Hydrant inspections, faults, repairs. 
How many FH connection faults, inspection reports, repairs required 
have been received by DCC from fire station personnel in Donegal in 
2024 and 2025 to date? And  
 
• What problem areas for early attention are consistently highlighted? 
• Are repair works required the responsibility of DCC and/or Uisce 
Éireann?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Economic Development, 
Information Systems & Emergency Services in relation to the above.  
 
 

47 
 
C/142/25 
 SEPTIC TANK UPGRADE WITHIN THE COUNTY  
 
 Cllr Canning submitted the following question:-  
 
How many applicants/residents have applied for the septic tank 
upgrade within this county?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the 
above.  
 
C/143/25 
HOW MANY GRANTS HAVE BEEN PAID OUT FOR THE 
UPGRADED SEPTIC TANKS 
 
 Cllr Canning submitted the following question:- 
 
How many grants have been paid out for these upgraded septic tanks 
since the grant increase arrived?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the 
above.  
 
C/144/25 
HOW MANY TENANTS HAVE BEEN MOVED OUT OF THEIR 
COUNCIL HOUSE DUE TO THEM BEING AFFECTED BY 
DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS  
 
 Cllr McMonagle submitted the following question:-  
 
How many tenants have been moved out of their Council House due to 
them being affected by Defective Concrete Blocks, where are the 
houses located and have the tenants been housed in alternative Social 
Housing Units? 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/145/25 
UPDATE ON THE MOTION CLLR MCBREARTY HAD PASSED 
CALLING FOR A PUBLC ENQUIRY INTO THE CREESLOUGH 
TRAGEDY  
 
 Cllr Devine submitted the following question:-  
 
Can I get an update on the motion Cllr Frank Mc Brearty had passed 
regarding calling for a public enquiry into the Creeslough tragedy? I am 
looking for the Government response and the dates the motion was 
sent to Government and responses from them.   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/146/25 
PROVIDE A BREAKDOWN OF THE LEGAL FEES PAID TO 
SOLICITORS AND LAW FIRMS CHALLENGING THE COLEMAN 
LEGAL CASE REGARDING DEFECTIVE CONCRETE MATERIALS 

48 
 
 
 Cllr Devine submitted the following question:-  
 
Can this Council provide a breakdown to all members of the costs to 
date of legal fees paid to solicitors and law firms challenging the 
Coleman legal case regarding defective concrete materials?  
 
He received a response from the Director of Finance in relation to the 
above.  
 
C/147/25 
HOW MANY APPLICATIONS HAS DCC MADE TO THE SHARED 
IRELAND FUND  
 
 Cllr McMonagle submitted the following question:-  
 
How many applications has Donegal County Council made to the 
Shared Ireland Fund, what did the applications apply for and how many 
have been successful?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Economic Development, 
Information Systems & Emergency Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/148/25 
WHAT IS THE COST APPORTIONMENT METHOD APPLIED BY 
THE MACHINERY YARD IN RELATION TO ROAD WORKS 
CARRIED OUT BY COUNCIL STAFF  
 
 Cllr C Brogan submitted the following question:-  
 
What is the cost apportionment method applied by the Machinery Yard 
in relation to roads work carried out by council staff?  
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/149/25 
UPDATE ON THE PROGRESS REGARDING NEW GRAVEYARDS 
IN DONEGAL  
 
 Cllr C Brogan submitted the following question:-  
 
Can we get an updated report on the progress regarding the provision 
of new graveyards in Donegal?  
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme and Facilities Management in relation to 
the above.  
 
C/150/25 
 MOTIONS FROM OTHER COUNCILS/BODIES  
Members noted the motions from other Councils.  
 
CLARE COUNTY COUNCIL  
“I call on the Minister for Children and Disability, Norma Foley toprovide 
funding for all of the valid applications made by Early Years Educators 
across the country through the Building Blocks Capital Investment 
Programme 2025. A pillar service with major waiting lists and need 

49 
 
across the country requires sufficient focus and funding now to ensure 
those who have taken the time and invested money in developing 
projects that prove a need in their area should be funded as a matter of 
urgency to see delivery of much needed additional space in the 
next12/18 months. 
If agreed, I ask that this motion is shared with other local authorities.”  
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That this Local Authority would call on the Government to put in place 
a financial support scheme within the grant aid for older people form to 
include people in medical need that they would be able to apply for 
financial aid to help them purchase a generator to allow them to power 
electric medical devices where loss of power occurs.”   
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That, Limerick City and County Council expresses its fullest 
appreciation for all of the work done by the Council staff and staff of 
other agencies and volunteers who worked 24/7 to alleviate the 
hardships caused by the recent severe weather event. The Council 
now calls on the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
to (a) immediately release funds to replenish Local Authority financial 
resources used to manage the emergency and (b) provide additional 
adequate funds (or otherwise provide financial arrangements) for Local 
Authorities impacted to arrange a local scheme to compensate 
homeowners and businesses for property damage, lost stock or foods 
or other reasonable uninsured damages caused by snowfall or 
electricity cuts, and that this Notice of Motion be circulated to all Local 
Authorities.”   
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
“That,given the recent weather events, Limerick City and County 
Council (a) calls on Uisce Eireann to install generators at every 
pumping station in the country (b) calls on the ESB to cut back/cut 
down all trees and/or branches that are in danger of damaging the 
infrastructure and (c) calls on the Government to set up a special 
emergency phone number which is activated prior to and manned 
during all orange and red weather alerts.” 
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL   
“To write to the next Minister for Education requesting the introduction 
of extra time for students with Dyslexia, Dyscalculia and other learning 
difficulties sitting second level examinations. The lack of extra time is a 
severe disadvantage to such students at this crucial time in their lives. 
It was also agreed to circulate this to all Local Authorities.” 
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL   
“In light of over 40 trees falling during Storm Darragh, damaging power 
lines and leaving homes and businesses without power for days, I 
propose this Council writes to Nicholas Tarrant, MD of ESB Networks, 
and Keith Leonard, Head of the National Emergency Coordination 

50 
 
Group. They should ensure compliance with wayleaves and exclusion 
zones near overhead powerlines, requiring forestry owners to meet 
clearance standards. ESB Networks should take pre-emptive 
measures ahead of storms to prevent similar outages. Additionally, 
compliance with the DAFM Standards for Felling & Restoration near 
public roads must be enforced to prevent road safety hazards during 
extreme weather.  
Subsequent to the submission of this motion the events of Storm 
Eowyn have further highlighted to need for action on this matter.”  
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL   
“To write to the Minister for Communications that all emergency 
frontline services have access to the GOV.NE system to use any 
network available in the major emergency events to ensure 
communication channels remain open. It was agreed to circulate this to 
all Local Authorities.”   
 
ROSCOMMON COUNTY COUNCIL   
“To write to the Department of Agriculture, Department of Transport 
and Department of Environment, for an incentive to be put in place for 
landowners to move trees off the roadside. It was agreed to circulate 
this to all Local Authorities.”  
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL   
“This local authority call on the Government to initiate a fixed penalty 
fine of €10,000 on any retailer or person who sells or provides children 
underthe age of 18 with e-liquids, vape kits or nicotine-containing 
products. To also ask that the HSE create an awareness campaign to 
highlight the dangers of vaping. A copy of this motion to be sent to all 
Councils within the state.”  
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL   
“It is evident now that this Government is incapable of delivering its own 
yearly housing targets, and the number of families living in emergency 
accommodation is increasing by at least 16% per year with an 
estimated 4,000 children homeless in Ireland. I am once again calling 
on the Government to implement an eviction ban, only in case where 
the Tenant are abiding with the letting contract, this would protect both 
Tenant and the landlord. A copy of this motion to be sent to all Councils 
within the state.” 
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That this local authority call on the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to reinstate the Tenant in Situ scheme and 
increase the financial threshold limit in line with the current housing 
market prices in County Sligo. A copy of this motion to be sent to all 
Councils within the state.”   
 
 
 

51 
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That this local authority call on the government to abolish any plans of 
introducing further Carbon Taxes for the foreseeable future. A copy of 
this motion to be forwarded to all local authorities within the state.” 
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL   
“That this local authority call on the government to desist from 
increasing the VAT of 9% to 13.5% on electricity costs that is planned 
to come into effect from May, 2025. A copy of this motion to be 
forwarded to all local authorities within the state.”   
 
SOUTH DUBLIN COUNTY COUNCIL  
“South Dublin County Council formally backs the call for a Fossil Fuel 
Non-Proliferation Treaty and urges the Irish Government to support the 
initiative for a Fossil-Fuel Non Proliferation Treaty. If passed, a letter 
should be sent to all local Councils and the Minister for the 
Environment.”  
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting.  
 
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
 
 
