1 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
Aras an Chontae 
 
Leifear 
23 Meán Fómhair 2025 
 
FÓGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
DO GACH BHALL DEN CHOMHAIRLE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú de Chomhairle Contae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Luain, 29 Meán Fómhair 
2025 ag 11.00 r.n in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Ta clár an chruinnithe leis seo. Seolfar nasc 
leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile.  
 
Beidh Clár Orduithe an Phríomh-Fheidhmeannaigh le feiceáil ag an chruinniú 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
********************************************************************************************************
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Office of Meetings Administrator 
County House 
Lifford 
 
23rd September 2025 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 29th September 2025 at 
11.00am in the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is attached. An online 
link to join the meeting will issue separately. 
 
The Register of Chief Executive Orders will be available for inspection at the meeting. 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
____________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator  

2 
 
AGENDA 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes  
a) Confirmation of the Minutes of the July Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 21st of July 2025 
b) Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Donegal County 
Council held on the 25th of July 2025. 
 
2. Disposal of Land – Section 211 of the Planning and Development 
Act, 2000(as amended)  
Notice under Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000  
(as amended) and under Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 (as amended) – to dispose of a plot of land at Shore Road, 
Ramelton to the adjoining property owners, Monsignor Anthony Mc Daid 
and Mrs Rosemaria Kennedy. 
 
3. Taking of decision pursuant to the Planning and Development Act 
2000 (as amended), the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 
(as amended) (Pursuant to Section 179 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 and Part 8 of the Planning and Development 
Regulations 2001 
a) To approve the carrying out of works in relation to the provision of a 
Social Housing Development at Fintragh Rd Killybegs consisting of the 
demolition of 1no. existing shed and construction of 2 no. 1-bed 
apartments and 16 no. 2-bed apartments (Total 18 no.units), complete 
with new vehicular entrance onto Fintragh Road, with connection to 
existing services & all associated site development works at New Row, 
Killybegs, Co. Donegal. 
b) To approve the carrying out of works in relation to the construction of 
172 no. Social Housing units including all associated site development 
works at Ballymacool, Letterkenny, Co Donegal. 
c) To approve the carrying out of works in respect of a new shared use 
pedestrian facility adjacent to the existing R245 between Mulroy Woods 
Hotel and the LIDL retail unit and adjacent retail complex between the 
towns of Milford and Ramelton. 
 
4. Community Development  
To approve the nomination of Marie Little, ICTU to fill the vacancy on the 
Donegal Local Development Committee in accordance with Part 6 of the  
Local Government Reform Act 2014 and Section 128C (3)(B) of the  Local 
Government Act 2001.  
 
5. Planning 
a) To approve the publication of the Draft Development Contribution 
Scheme 2025-2030 for a 6-week period of public consultation. 

3 
 
b) To note update regarding the Guidelines under Section 28 of the 
Planning & Development Act 2000-2025 relating to the National 
Planning Framework and Housing Growth Requirements. 
c) To approve the holding of a workshop to discuss the County  
Development Plan 2025-2030. (Date to be agreed). 
 
6. Finance 
a) To agree date for the 2026 Revenue Budget Meeting. 
b) To agree Overdraft Accommodation of Ten Million Euro (€10,000,000) 
for full year ending 31st December 2026. 
c) To consider the draft Donegal County Council Anti-Fraud and 
Corruption policy drafted in accordance with the CCMA approved 
template for the Local Authority Sector. 
d) To consider a report on the Internal Audit Report on Council’s use of 
Purchasing Cards.  
 
7. Endorsement of Minutes 
To note minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy Group held on the  
14th July, 2025. 
 
8. Attendance at Conference, Seminar or Event  
Authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or event under 
Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 668 of 2006, 
Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations 
2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by the Minister for the 
Environment, Heritage and Local Government in relation to the Local 
Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 2010, and the Local 
Government (Expenses of Local Authority Members) Regulations, 2014 -
2025 (as amended). 
 
Training  
• AILG/DHLG Training for SPC Chairs held on the 2nd September, 2025 
in the Midlands Park Hotel, Portlaoise, Co Laois.  
• LAMA Autumn Training Seminar to be held on the 16th & 17th October, 
2025 in the Amber Springs Hotel, Gorey, Co Wexford.  
• AILG-MU Micro Credential Course for Members – The Planning 
System in Ireland. (12 week course commencing 15th November 2025) 
 
Other 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach/Leas - Cathaoirleach at the National 
Age Friendly Awards in the Galmont Hotel, Galway on the 23rd October 
2025. 
• Attendance of Cllrs Mac Giolla Easbuig and Scanlon at Oireachtas na 
Samhna in Belfast from the 30th October to the 2nd November 
2025. 
 
 
Abroad 
• Attendance of the Leas - Cathaoirleach at the London Irish Vintage Day 
Event in London on the 7th September, 2025. 

4 
 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the “Working Over By” Launch in 
Glasgow on the 23rd September, 2025. 
• Attendance of Cllr Niamh Kennedy as a panel speaker at the 
International Meeting of Local Elected Women in Palma, Majorca on 
the 6th and 7th November 2025. (Travel and accommodation costs to be 
covered by Fons Mallorquí) 
• Participation of the Cathaoirleach or Leas - Cathaoirleach on the North-
West City Region Golden Bridges and US Trade and Investment 
Mission 2025 in the USA from the 10th to the 14th November, 2025. 
 
9. Conference Reports 
• Attendance of Cllr Donal Coyle at the IBCI Conference on the 12th and 
13th March 2025 in Little island, Cork.  
• Attendance of Cllr Donal Kelly at the IBCI Conference on the 12th and 
13th March 2025 in Little island, Cork. 
 
 
 
 
MOTIONS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
 
 
Housing  
10. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle   
“That this Council Calls on the Minister for Housing James Browne TD to 
move Donegal from Band Three of the Social Housing Income Limits to 
Band One. Donegal since the income limits were set has experienced a 
massive rise in private sector rents, an increase in house prices all of 
which is leading to more and more people needing to apply for Social 
Housing as they cannot afford the high rents and are unable to meet the 
criteria set by banks and lending institutions to qualify for mortgages. 
Unfortunately, more and more of these social housing applicants are 
being turned down for social Housing due the threshold on income 
limits set by Government. I would now ask that we call on the Minister to  
develop a new social housing income eligibility model in line with the 
“Housing For All” Action Plan that will give the people of Donegal parity.“ 
 
 
  Defective Concrete Blocks  
11. Cllr Donal Coyle  
" That this Council provide an update on what is now being done to 
expedite the process regarding payments to applicants, who submit 
invoices  while their homes are being rebuilt under the Defective Concrete 
Blocks Grants Scheme.” 
 
 
  Roads & Transportation 
12. Cllr Ciaran Brogan  
“I propose that we have a Special Meeting to discuss the TEN - T Project 
and the timeframe with the process moving forward so that we as a 
Council are fully up to speed on the statutory process.” 
 

5 
 
 
  Community Development  
13. Cllr Tomás Seán Devine   
Again, I would like to submit my previous motion regarding the council 
takeover of the site in Creeslough after several meetings with the families 
they want this to happen regarding the last meeting where it was agreed 
to hold a workshop. This hasn't happened to date while the families are in 
full support of all the regeneration work being carried out in the village. 
None of it relates to this site which the motion is in relation to as we are 
approaching the 3rd anniversary, please help in giving these families 
some relief in taking control of this site. 
 
“That this Council support my motion in this Council by purchasing the 
land site of the Creeslough Tragedy by a way of negotiation with the 
owner or CPO, if need be, and sit down with the families and design a 
memorial garden in memory of all those affected.” 
 
 
 
  Cultural Services  
14. Cllr Declan Meehan   
“That Donegal County Council calls on the Government to ensure the 
continuation and expansion of the Basic Income for the Arts Scheme as 
part of Budget 2026, recognising the vital contribution of artists and arts 
workers to our cultural, social, and economic life here in Donegal, as well 
as nationally. 
 
Further, that this Council writes to the Minister for Culture, 
Communications and Sport, Patrick O'Donovan TD, and the Minister for 
Public Expenditure, Jack Chambers TD, urging them to provide for 
sustained funding for a Basic Income for Artists scheme in Budget 2026, 
and to ensure its accessibility and fairness for artists across all disciplines 
and regions, including those living and working in rural counties like 
Donegal.” 
 
 
 
 
 
DONEGAL MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Emergency Services  
15. Cllr Niamh Kennedy  
“That this Council imminently seeks funding from the Department to 
purchase necessary equipment in relation to an "Emergency Household 
Response Package" for vulnerable households during the winter months, 
where storms and flooding may occur, leaving people without power, 
heating and no ability to access hot food.  
 
That this council should have sufficient provisions in stock and in good 
time to help citizens.  
 
That this motion be presented to all local authorities.” 
 
 

6 
 
Environment  
16. Cllr Noel Jordan  
“I am asking that this council intervene and engage with the ISPCA and 
the Department due to the closure of its centre in Letterkenny and I am 
asking that we provide assistance to the smaller pet rescue centres 
throughout the county due to the pressures they now face.” 
 
Roads & Transportation  
17. Cllr Michael Mc Mahon  
“That this council call a meeting with the Office of Public Works as soon 
as possible in relation to flooding that is happening all over the 
constituencies. This needs to be arranged as soon as possible because 
the flooding is causing a lot of damage and this needs to be looked at.” 
 
 
  
 
   
LIFFORD/STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
  
 
 Housing   
18. Cllr Frank Mc Brearty  
“That DCC discloses to the elected members the test results on all their 
social housing stock that have been tested by Petrolab in the UK, to 
date, (especially the 8 properties at Railway Park, St Johnston), and that 
this disclosure includes the costs of coring, engineers reports and 
Petrolab testing to date, and that it includes the number of DCC 
properties that have been cored and tested to date, and the number of 
properties that have been identified visually as being possibly affected 
by defective concrete (all properties on their books) and how many have 
been remediated and repaired to date, including any that have been 
condemned as unsafe to date, and how many tenants have been 
rehoused in new or temporary accommodation”. 
 
Corporate   
19. Cllr Gary Doherty 
“That this Council: 
- Abhors and condemns the ongoing genocide in Gaza and Israeli military 
operations in the West Bank; 
- Calls on the Irish Government to lobby for international sanctions on 
Israel; 
- Calls on the Government once again to pass the Occupied Territories 
Bill in full; 
- Writes to our friends in Bani Zeid outlining the strong support and 
solidarity of the people of Donegal for the people of Palestine.” 
 
 
   
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
  
Environment  
20. Cllr Fionán Bradley  
“That this Council prioritise investment in infrastructure at our beaches, 
piers and harbours which is used by swimmers in advance of the 2026 

7 
 
Summer Season. This would be done in an effort to ensure that we fully 
utilise our natural environment to advertise Co Donegal as a place both 
accessible and welcoming to those who enjoy sea swimming.” 
 
Community Development  
21. Cllr Albert Doherty  
“Donegal County Council welcomes recent funding announced for 
projects under the CLÁR Programme (Measure 2). 
Mindful of the current Programme for Government "Securing Ireland's 
Future" and its commitment to conduct a comprehensive review within 6 
months with a view to expand the CLÁR Programme to rural areas which 
are currently ineligible for funding, 
Donegal County Council now urges Minister Calleary and the 
government to deliver on commitments made, designate, include and 
extend the number of electoral areas enabling additional communities’ 
eligibility to apply and secure funding from the CLÁR Programme.” 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks  
22. Cllr Martin Mc Dermott  
“That this Council write to Minister James Browne requesting that he 
explore a mechanism to provide homeowners on the Defective Concrete 
Block Scheme with access to upfront costs, as the lack of such supports 
is a major stumbling block for many homeowners.” 
 
Planning 
23. Cllr Joy Beard  
“That this Council requests the National Building Control and Market 
Surveillance Office, with the support of the Geological Survey of Ireland, 
to revisit Donegal as soon as possible to conduct a further market 
surveillance audit of all quarries in the county. 
 
This Council notes that recent peer-reviewed and government-funded 
research, commissioned by the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage, has confirmed the presence of pyrrhotite and 
framboidal pyrite as the primary causes of concrete failure in Ireland, 
through the mechanism of internal sulphate attack. 
 
This Council further recognises the critical need to ensure full 
compliance with I.S. EN 12620:2002 + A1:2008 Aggregates for Concrete 
and the associated S.R. 16:2016, to safeguard construction quality and 
protect the structural integrity of newly-built or remediated properties. 
 
Accordingly, this Council calls on the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to authorise a full and comprehensive audit of 
every quarry in Donegal to ensure that all materials supplied to the 
market are fully compliant with all relevant legislation and free from risk 
of internal sulphate attack.” 
 
 
 

8 
 
Water & Environment 
24. Cllr Jack Murray  
“That Donegal County Council expresses it's deep, ongoing frustration 
with Irish Water, shares the concerns of those in our communities 
impacted by regular water outages, calls for greater recruitment of staff 
in water services, with better working conditions for water staff and a 
significant increase in investment in our current water infrastructure.” 
 
Roads & Transportation  
25. Cllr Terry Crossan  
“That Donegal County Council take immediate action to ensure that 
necessary dredging is facilitated to keep D.C.C controlled harbours free 
of silt accumulation to enable berthing at all stages of the tides.” 
 
26.  Cathaoirleach’s Business. 
 
27. Chief Executive’s Management Report. 
 
 
QUESTIONS  
 
 
 
LETTERKENNY/MILFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT  
 
Corporate   
28. Cllr Ciaran Brogan   
Can we have an updated report on the ongoing review of all the council 
services and when the outcome of that will be presented to the elected 
members of the Council? 
 
29. Cllr Ciaran Brogan  
What steps have taken place regarding our legal services with a view to 
employing our own council solicitor in-house in order to streamline much 
of the workload by all our different directorates? 
 
30. Cllr Tomás Seán Devine    
Can I get confirmation if any councillors in the chamber receive the 
answers to motions many days in advance of the meetings (Chairs of 
Committees or MDs ) and if is so why aren't all members treated the 
same with responses to the motions? 
 
Housing   
31. Cllr Gerry Mc Monagle   
Can I have an update on any recent information we have received from 
the Minister of Housing in relation to the Defective Concrete Block 
Scheme for Social Housing and when it might be passed and started? 
 
32. Cllr Tomas Sean Devine   
Can I get an update on how many people are on the housing list waiting 
for a wheelchair accessible home and how many are being built in our 
new social housing stock? 

9 
 
33. Cllr Declan Meehan   
Can the Housing Directorate put in place a plan to carry out remedial 
repair works internally and externally, including painting, addressing 
mould, and crack-filling ahead of the autumn and winter seasons, for 
Council-owned DCB houses across the county, in lieu of the much-
anticipated, long-delayed Social Housing Remediation Programme for 
Defective Blocks? 
 
Roads & Transportation 
34. Cllr Declan Meehan   
What is the current status of the proposed TEN-T road projects in 
Donegal, including projected timelines and commitments to funding from 
the government? 
 
 
  
LIFFORD/STRANORLAR MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Corporate  
35. Cllr Gary Doherty   
Can I have a breakdown of the numbers of staff working within each 
directorate of DCC and per Municipal District? 
 
Finance  
36. Cllr Gary Doherty   
Can I have a breakdown of total grant funding received by DCC in each 
of the last five years together with the amounts spent on matched funding 
for each project? 
 
 
  
 
INISHOWEN MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Housing  
37. Cllr Fionán Bradley   
To ask the Director for Housing how the new rent pressure zones will 
affect the rents we charge people on our own housing stock? 
Furthermore, what impact will they have in relation to the properties we 
lease but don’t own? Will those properties be subject to the new 
legislation also? If so from what date? If a property owner was in the 
process of negotiating a new lease with the Council before the 
announcement of the RPZ will that lease be subject to the RPZ 
legislation? 
 
38. Cllr Albert Doherty   
What were the homeless numbers recorded in each municipality in DCC 
from Sept 1st 2024 until  Sept 1st 2025 and what are the current results 
following works  by DCC Homeless Presentation Officer(s) to  
secure/identify available properties for refuge provision in the county? 
 
 
 

10 
 
39. Cllr Albert Doherty  
What AHBs  are currently working/and or have expressed an interest to 
work (Sept 2025) with Donegal County Council in each municipality to 
deliver much needed social and affordable homes and what are the 
current timelines agreed for the delivery of these projects? 
 
40. Cllr Joy Beard   
Why did Donegal County Council deem it necessary to devise its own 
bespoke standard for concrete used in the construction of social homes, 
rather than relying on the existing national and European standards? 
 
Roads & Transportation  
41. Cllr Fionán Bradley   
To ask the Director for Roads and Director for Environment what Bye 
Laws, if any, within the county, pertain to horses and ponies accessing 
public roads, beaches, walkways, greenways, trails, forests or any other 
public space. Are there areas where horses and ponies are banned (for 
example Blue Flag beaches), if there are does this ban relate to all 
animals or exclusively horses? 
 
42. Cllr Joy Beard   
Can the Council provide an itemised breakdown of how the revenue 
generated from current car parking charges in each of the designated 
towns is being spent?   
 
43. Cllr Terry Crossan 
What arrangements are being made to appoint additional engineering 
staff in respect of our main harbours so that all necessary surveys, 
reports and applications are completed to facilitate the development of 
the harbours? 
 
Water & Environment   
44. Cllr Jack Murray   
Is this Council currently engaged in discussions with Causeway Coast 
and Glens Council regarding a Shared Ireland application for funding in 
Leisure Centres in both council areas, and, if so, what is the current 
status of such discussions? 
 
45. Motions from other Councils/Bodies  
CARLOW COUNTY COUNCIL 
Carlow County Council agrees to write to the Minister for Further  and 
Higher Education, Research, Innovation and Science, and to the 
Taoiseach, expressing this Council’s opposition to any increase in 
college fees and the Government to ensure to maintain the Grant in the 
upcoming budget. 
 
GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL   
Galway County Council reaffirms its strong support for Portiuncula 
University Hospital, as recognised under Special Policy Objective H4 of 
the Galway County Development Plan 2022-2028 and acknowledges 

11 
 
PUHs long term strategic importance in the county and beyond as a 
provider of essential healthcare services and also as a major employer 
and economic driver in Co. Galway.  
Galway County Council calls on the Minister for Health and CEO HSE to 
support PUHs critical role in maternity care provision in the county and to 
recognise Portiuncula UHs strategic location as the most accessibly 
located maternity unit in the country just 800 meters off the M6 in 
providing crucial timely accessible maternity care for mothers infants and 
families across a wide and rural catchment in County Galway and to 
communities in Roscommon, Westmeath, Longford, Leitrim, Offaly, North 
Tipperary and beyond. Restriction of maternity services poses serious 
risks to women and infants, especially those in rural and 
socioeconomically disadvantaged areas with poor transport where they 
are now facing much increased travel times and reduced local access to 
crucial maternity services.  
Galway County Council calls on the Minister for Health and CEO HSE to 
seek development of an immediate plan for reinstatement of high quality 
safe maternity services at PUH, with allocation of the necessary funding 
and resources for full implementation.  
Galway County Council asks the Minister for Health if she will 
commission a fully independent external review of maternity services 
across the county and comprehensively examine risk assessments and 
consequence of any maternity care downgrade in the wider area served 
including the ability of receiving maternity units to safely absorb 
additional patient load, given capacity, staffing, and infrastructure 
challenges.  
A copy of this motion is sent to the Oireachtas Joint Health Committee, 
all Oireachtas Elected Representatives for the area, and all local 
authorities.  
I would be obliged if you could consider and revert to me with your views 
on the above motion so that I can advise the Elected Members.  
 
 
 GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL  
 “It was proposed that a letter of support issue in relation to the motion 
 passed by Donegal County Council calling to safeguard the Triple Lock 
 component of Irish neutrality. It was further agreed to circulate same to all 
 authorities for their consideration.”  
 
 
 LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
 
 “I will move at the next meeting of the Metropolitan District of Limerick 
 that this Council write to the Minister for Further and Higher Education, 
 Research, Innovation and Science, James Lawless, stating that this 
 District condemn any future attempt by the Government to reinstate the 
 €3,000 college contribution fee for students given the increased financial 
 burden that this will place on students and their families.” 
 
 
 LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
 
 “That, Limerick City and County Council agrees to and calls on the 
  
 Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to relax the current 
 ribbon development rules to allow for the construction of 6 dwellings in a 

12 
 
 linear arrangement and, where appropriate, that restrictions be set aside 
 entirely for sites within 1km of an existing settlement boundary once the 
 development is located on a non-regional road with available appropriate 
 sightlines.”     
 
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL      
 
“That Limerick City and County Council provide a liaison/link to 
Community Welfare where support is necessary to enable newly allocated 
tenants move in speedily.”  
 
 
OFFALY COUNTY COUNCIL    
 
“That this Council asks the Minister for Housing to include Part 5 houses 
in the “Tenant Purchase Scheme.”   
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL  
Given the huge success of the Love Sligo Gift Card since its launch in 
2024 and it having achieved over €1m in sales in Ireland, driving an 
estimated 150,000 in-store customers across the country: 
 
That Sligo County Council writes to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade & 
Employment and the Minister for Rural Affairs to ask them to consider 
supporting the Town and Gift Card rollout across every county. 
 
 
WATERFORD CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
 
“Carers Allowance and Benefit Reform 
 
That the members of Waterford City and County Council call on the 
Minister for Social Protection Mr Dara Calleary, to abolish means testing 
for Carers Allowance in Budget 2026.  We further call on the Minister to 
introduce a fair and adequate payment for recipients of Carers Allowance 
and Carers Benefit one which truly reflects the time, dedication and 
compassionate care that carers provided everyday across Ireland.”  
 
 

13 
 
MINUTES OF SEPTEMBER MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD 
ON 29TH SEPTEMBER, 2025 IN THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD 
C/317/25 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs P Canning, Cathaoirleach, J Beard, J Brogan, D Coyle, T 
Crossan, T.S Devine, A Doherty, G Doherty, A Farren, M Harley, N 
Jordan, D. M Kelly, N Kennedy, M McDermott, P McGarvey, D McGee, 
M McMahon, G McMonagle, D Meehan, A Molloy, J Murray, M 
Naughton, M Scanlon. 
Online: Cllrs L Blaney, M Boyle, B Carr, M Farren, J Kavanagh, M 
MacGiolla Easbuig, F McBrearty, M McBride, M McClafferty, P 
McGowan, D NicMheanman, JS O Fearraigh.  
 
C/318/25 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
John G McLaughlin, Chief Executive, Patsy Lafferty, Director of 
Housing, Corporate & Culture/Meetings Administrator, Liam Ward, 
Director of Community Development & Planning Services, Bryan 
Cannon, Director of Roads & Transportation, Michael McGarvey, 
Director of Water & Environment,Garry Martin, Director of Economic 
Development, IS & Emergency Services, Tanya Kee, SEO, Finance, 
John Gallagher, Sen. Eng. Housing, Claire Burke, Sen. Ex. Architect, 
Housing Capital, Killian Smith, Ex. Planner,  Eunan Quinn, Senior 
Planner, Frances Friel, Communications Officer, William Colvin, ASO, 
Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Clíona Ní Ghallachóir, 
Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí Aistriúcháin, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff 
Officer.   
 
C/319/25 
VOTE OF SYMPATHY 
Cllr Kennedy proposed, seconded by Cllr Mc Garvey a vote of 
sympathy for the late Kevin Mc Cluskey a well-known and respected 
fisherman from Killybegs. A minute’s silence was then observed by all 
present.  
 
C/320/25 
FORMAT OF THE MEETING 
The Cathaoirleach advised that he intended to deal with items on the 
agenda initially requiring a proposer and seconder, followed by 
consideration of the motions. Statutory items warranting debate would 
then be considered, he added. This was unanimously agreed.   
 
C/321/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE JULY MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 21ST JULY, 2025  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr McGarvey, the 
Minutes of the July Meeting of Donegal County Council held on 21st 
July, 2025 were adopted.    
 
C/322/25 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD ON 25th JULY, 2025  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Coyle, seconded by Cllr Canning, the Minutes 
of the Special Meeting of Donegal County Council held on 25th July, 
2025 were adopted.     
 

14 
 
C/323/25 
DISPOSAL OF PLOT OF LAND AT SHORE ROAD, RAMELTON TO 
MONSIGNOR ANTHONY MCDAID AND MRS ROSEMARIA 
KENNEDY  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr McGarvey, it was 
resolved to disposal of a plot of land at Shore Road, Ramelton to 
Monsignor Anthony McDaid and Mrs Rosemaria Kennedy  in 
accordance with the provisions of Section 211 of the Planning & 
Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and under Section 183 of the 
Local Government Act 2001, (as amended). 
 
C/324/25      TO APPROVE THE NOMINATION OF MARIE LITTLE, ICTU TO FILL 
THE VACANCY ON THE DONEGAL LOCAL DEVELOPMENT 
COMMITTEE    
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMahon, seconded by Cllr Meehan it was 
resolved that Marie Little, ICTU fill the vacancy on the Donegal Local 
Development Committee in accordance with Part 6 of the Local 
Government Reform Act 2014 and Section 128C (3)(b) of the Local 
Government Act, 2001.  
 
C/325/25      TO NOTE MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE CORPORATE 
POLICY GROUP HELD ON THE 14TH JULY, 2025.  
 
Members noted the Minutes of the meeting of the Corporate Policy 
Group held on the 14th July, 2025.  
 
C/326/25 
ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCE, SEMINAR OR EVENT  
Having noted authorisation of representation at a seminar, meeting or 
event under Section 142 (5) of Local Government Act, 2001, S.I. No. 
668 of 2006, Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority 
Members) Regulations 2006, S.I. No. 37 of 2010, Guidelines given by 
the Minister for the Environment, Heritage and Local Government in 
relation to the Local Government Act, 2001 (Section 142) Regulations 
2010, and the Local Government (Expenses of Local Authority 
Members) Regulations, 2014 -2025(as amended).  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Scanlon attendance 
at the following was approved.    
 
Training  
• AILG/DHLG Training for SPC Chairs held on the 2nd September, 
2025 in the Midlands Park Hotel, Portlaoise, Co Laois.  
• LAMA Autumn Training Seminar to be held on the 16th & 17th 
October, 2025 in the Amber Springs Hotel, Gorey, Co Wexford.  
• AILG-MU Micro Credential Course for Members – The Planning 
System in Ireland. (12 week course commencing 15th November 
2025) 
 
 

15 
 
Other 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach/Leas - Cathaoirleach at the National 
Age Friendly Awards in the Galmont Hotel, Galway on the 23rd 
October 2025. 
• Attendance of Cllrs Mac Giolla Easbuig and Scanlon at Oireachtas na 
Samhna in Belfast from the 30th October to the 2nd November 
2025. 
 
 
Abroad 
• Attendance of the Leas - Cathaoirleach at the London Irish Vintage 
Day Event in London on the 7th September, 2025. 
• Attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the “Working Over By” Launch in 
Glasgow on the 23rd September, 2025. 
• Attendance of Cllr Niamh Kennedy as a panel speaker at the 
International Meeting of Local Elected Women in Palma, Majorca on 
the 6th and 7th November 2025. (Travel and accommodation costs to 
be covered by Fons Mallorquí) 
• Participation of the Cathaoirleach or Leas - Cathaoirleach on the 
North-West City Region Golden Bridges and US Trade and 
Investment Mission 2025 in the USA from the 10th to the 14th 
November, 2025. 
 
C/327/25 
CONFERENCE REPORTS     
 
On the proposal of Cllr McGarvey, seconded by Cllr Scanlon the 
following conference reports were noted.  
 
 
• Attendance of Cllr Donal Coyle at the IBCI Conference on the 12th and 
  13th March 2025 in Little island, Cork.  
• Attendance of Cllr Donal Kelly at the IBCI Conference on the 12th and 
  13th March 2025 in Little island, Cork.    
 
C/328/25 
THAT THE COUNCIL CALL ON THE MINISTER FOR HOUSING 
JAMES BROWNE TD TO MOVE DONEGAL FROM BAND THREE 
OF THE SOCIAL HOUSING INCOME LIMITS TO BAND ONE    
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMonagle, seconded by Cllr A Doherty it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That this Council Calls on the Minister for Housing James Browne TD 
to move Donegal from Band Three of the Social Housing Income Limits 
to Band One. Donegal since the income limits were set has 
experienced a massive rise in private sector rents, an increase in 
house prices all of which is leading to more and more people needing 
to apply for Social Housing as they cannot afford the high rents and are 
unable to meet the criteria set by banks and lending institutions to 
qualify for mortgages. Unfortunately, more and more of these social 
housing applicants are being turned down for social Housing due the 
threshold on income limits set by Government. I would now ask that we 
call on the Minister to  develop a new social housing income eligibility 
model in line with the “Housing For All” Action Plan that will give the 
people of Donegal parity.“   

16 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that the massive rise in rents and the increase in 
house prices in Donegal had created a situation whereby people were 
being pushed to apply for social housing. Generally, he said that both 
parents in a household were working to make ends meet and the result 
was that they were pushed over the social housing limits. These 
families, he noted could not afford the high rents and were unable to 
meet the criteria for a mortgage laid down by the various lending 
agencies. 
 
He said he was aware that the Housing Agency were carrying out a 
review but that it was imperative that Donegal was moved to Band 1 of 
the scale from Band 3 as soon as possible given the ongoing housing 
crisis in the county. 
 
Cllr A Doherty said that it was essential that the issues preventing 
access to social housing were dealt with and noted that Minister 
Browne in his recent visit to Donegal had seen at first hand the issues 
and stumbling blocks facing applicants. He said that the widening of the 
thresholds would be of major benefit. On point of concern, he noted, 
was the fact that the defective concrete block crisis had not been 
mentioned.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services  
advised that the income eligibility thresholds for Social Housing 
supports were last increased with an effective date of the 1st January 
2023 with the baseline limits raised by €5000 across all bands and 
certain counties moved between bands. Donegal, he stated, had at that 
juncture remained within Band 3 of the national income limits. He 
confirmed that a copy of the motion as adopted would be forwarded to 
the Minister for Housing, Mr James Browne T.D, requesting the 
reclassification from Band 3 to Band 1 for Donegal considering the 
prevailing market conditions.  
 
C/329/25 
UPDATE ON EXPEDITING THE PAYMENT PROCESS - DEFECTIVE 
CONCRETE BLOCKS – ACCESS TO UPFRONT COSTS FOR 
HOMEOWNERS 
 
 The Cathaoirleach informed members that motions 11 and 22 would be 
taken together given that they were similar in nature. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Coyle, seconded by Cllr McDermott it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
" That this Council provide an update on what is now being done to 
expedite the process regarding payments to applicants, who submit 

17 
 
invoices  while their homes are being rebuilt under the Defective 
Concrete Blocks Grants Scheme.”   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment and Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme in relation to the 
above.  
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Dermott, seconded by Cllr Coyle it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 “That this Council write to Minister James Browne requesting that he 
explore a mechanism to provide homeowners on the Defective 
Concrete Block Scheme with access to upfront costs, as the lack of 
such supports is a major stumbling block for many homeowners.” 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment and Defective Concrete Blocks Scheme in relation to the 
above.  
 
Cllr Coyle highlighted the need to expedite the payment process and 
alluded to the fact that once the first invoice had been processed then it 
should be possible to deal with any ensuing documentation in a timely 
manner.  
 
Cllr Mc Dermott said that cashflow was a major stumbling block for 
most homeowners and impacted not only the applicant but the 
builder/contractor and all associated suppliers. He said that a system 
similar to that in place for the rent element of the scheme was 
warranted. This was something he added, which had been discussed 
previously with Department officials, and he thus called for 
correspondence to be issued as soon as possible to the Minister’s 
office outlining the immediate need for a mechanism to provide access 
to upfront costs.  
 
There was no opposition to either of the motions.  
 
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment said that he 
appreciated that there were cashflow issues and noted that the Council 
had paid out over €120 million to date with payments totalling €15m 
paid out in August 2025. These, he said reflected the significant 
number of applicants that had requested payment. He noted that there 
had been issues with payments but that the process was being 
streamlined, and resources utilised to progress same. There was 
acknowledgement also that the submission of incomplete and incorrect 
data also impacted the payment process. He cited the need to comply 
with GDPR requirements and to ensure that the necessary checks and 
balances were in place. Every effort, he advised, was being made to 
improve the processing times and to reduce waiting times. He 
committed to writing to Minister Browne as requested. 
 

18 
 
 
Cllr Coyle welcomed the response and the commitment to simplify the 
payment claims process and reduce turnaround times  for the payment 
of claims.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott concluding said that both motions worked hand in hand 
and the payment process needed to be reviewed as the current 
process was preventing people from engaging with the scheme.  
 
C/330/25 
TEN-T PROJECT   
 
Cllr Coyle proposed, seconded by Cllr McDermott that the following 
motion submitted by Cllr C Brogan, be adopted. This was unanimously 
agreed. 
 
“I propose that we have a Special Meeting to discuss the TEN - T 
Project and the timeframe with the process moving forward so that we 
as a Council are fully up to speed on the statutory process.”  
 
 Cllr Brogan received a response from the Director of Roads & 
Transportation in relation to the above.  
 
 
 
Cllr Coyle said that this was one of the largest projects ever undertaken 
in Donegal and all were aware of the need for same to progress. Huge 
investment was needed, he said, to bring to fruition projects such  as 
the Ballybofey, Stranorlar Bypass, Lurgybrack Project, the construction 
of the bridge over the River Swilly and the upgrading of the Letterkenny 
to Lifford road. The overall cost at this juncture, he contended, would 
be over €1 billion with much preliminary work completed to date. He 
cited the need for a special meeting given that the process was moving 
forward, and that detail and a timeframe was needed where there were 
homes to be demolished and also in respect of farms/farmland etc 
landlocked over the past seven to eight years because of the route 
design implications.  
 
 
Cllr Kelly supporting the motion said it was imperative that people were 
informed and kept up to date in relation to the project. 
 
 
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation said that the 
Donegal TEN-T Priority Route Improvements Project included three 
distinct sections of National Road on which significant improvements 
were planned, namely the N15/N13 Ballybofey to Stranorlar Urban 
Section, the N56 Letterkenny to Manorcunningham Section which 
includes a bridge over the Swilly at Bonagee, and the N14 
Manorcunningham to Lifford Section encompassing a link to the A5. 
Works also, he added, included the provision of Active Travel facilities 
at key locations. Final preparations, it was noted were ongoing for the 
publication of the Environment Impact Assessment Report and the 
Compulsory Purchase Order process. Publication of same, he noted, 

19 
 
was expected by year end. He said that the Executive would welcome 
an opportunity to update the Elected Members in relation to the project. 
 
 
Cllr Coyle welcomed the response and asked that the update be 
provide as soon as practical.  
 
C/331/25 
SITE OF THE CREESLOUGH TRAGEDY   
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed a number of the Creeslough families to 
the meeting.  
 
Cllr Devine proposed, seconded by Cllr Mc Gee that the following 
motion be adopted:- 
 
Again, I would like to submit my previous motion regarding the council 
takeover of the site in Creeslough after several meetings with the 
families they want this to happen regarding the last meeting where it 
was agreed to hold a workshop. This hasn't happened to date while the 
families are in full support of all the regeneration work being carried out 
in the village. None of it relates to this site which the motion is in 
relation to as we are approaching the 3rd anniversary, please help in 
giving these families some relief in taking control of this site. 
 
“That this Council support my motion in this Council by purchasing the 
land site of the Creeslough Tragedy by a way of negotiation with the 
owner or CPO, if need be, and sit down with the families and design a 
memorial garden in memory of all those affected.” 
 
Cllr Devine received a copy of the response as circulated at the July 
Plenary Meeting. 
 
Cllr Devine noted that a number of families concerned were present at 
the meeting. He said that nothing had changed in the interim only an 
indication that there was a workshop to discuss same on the 20th 
October. He said that he had discussed the issue with several of the 
families and what was now required was for the Council to take over 
the site by negotiation or CPO if necessary. There had been, he stated, 
mention of a memorial being located at other areas in the town. This, 
he contended, was not acceptable to the families in the chamber today. 
He called on the Council to start proceedings for the acquisition of the 
site and to talk to the families concerned in relation to the way forward. 
He asked also that contact be made with the Department in relation to 
the funding aspect.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee supporting the motion noted that this was the second time 
that the matter had been raised and noted that the workshop as 
proposed at the July meeting was to be held in October. He called on 
members to come together to support the families concerned and allow 
the families concerned move on.  
 

20 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services 
addressing the family members in attendance said that the Council was 
fully aware of their ongoing pain and suffering. He said that a very 
detailed reply had been given at the July meeting and that the position 
remained the same. That response, he noted, had outlined in detail 
why the Council was not acquiring the site and how it was not best 
placed to make such a decision. The position, he advised, had not 
changed and a workshop had been arranged for the 20th October to 
consider same. 
 
He said that he had to date met with some family members and had 
also been in contact by email with others and had consistently offered 
all concerned an opportunity to meet and discuss the need for an 
appropriate memorial on the site of the new regeneration project in 
Creeslough being led by the Council. It was, he stated, an emotive and 
sensitive issue for all concerned but the Council position remained 
unchanged.  
 
The Chief Executive said that the path forward was not obvious and 
that no one could have anticipated the journey ahead. He cited the 
need for all involved to work together and noted that this also included 
the landowner. It was acknowledged that the three year anniversary 
was coming up and that the Director of Service and other Council staff 
had worked tirelessly to assist in every way possible to provide 
assistance. He said that the workshop would offer an opportunity to 
discuss the matter further and was the appropriate forum to work 
through the issues concerned.  
 
The Cathaoirleach informed Cllr Mc Brearty that procedures were the 
same for all motions and that he was not opening the motion to the 
floor. He said that the motion as submitted by Cllr Devine had been 
proposed and seconded and a response received from the executive.  
It was now a matter for members, he said, to confirm whether they 
were in favour of the motion or not.  
 
Cllr Mc Brearty contended, that the Council did not want to discuss the 
matter thus denying the families present proper justice. He said that the 
motion if passed put an onus on the Council to purchase the property. 
The Council, he said, had serious questions to answer, in that planning 
permission had been given to a property that was not fit for purpose. 
He reiterated the need for a public enquiry.  
 
The Cathaoirleach said the motion as submitted was now carried.  
Cllr Mc Monagle at this juncture, seconded by Cllr Meehan proposed 
that a Liaison Officer be appointed to work with the families and to keep 
them informed of developments. This, he advocated, would allow the 
grieving families to see that their loved ones had not been forgotten. 
 

21 
 
Cllr Devine said that now that the motion had been passed it was 
essential that a guarantee was given that the Council would purchase 
the site.  
 
He said he was happy for this to be discussed at the workshop on the 
20th October and cited the need for the families concerned to be 
present on the day as they should be at the centre of any proposal 
going forward.  
 
Concluding, the Cathaoirleach noted the request to create an 
environment whereby a Liaison Officer could be appointed to work with 
the families, and as outlined in the motion the purchase of the site at 
Creeslough was being requested. He queried whether the option to 
purchase same could in fact be progressed.  
 
The Chief Executive said that acceptance of the motion gave the 
Council a difficulty in that it involved a CPO being placed on a site 
which was not required for Council business. It had been outlined 
clearly in July, he said, the reasons as to why this could not be 
progressed and that remained the position. The way forward, he 
advised was to work together and find the common ground.  
 
Cllr Devine was informed that a CPO required departmental approval 
and possibly a hearing with full justification and reports to back up 
same. An Bord Pleanála, he said, would for any application require 
considerable detail and the full rationale prior to considering same.  
 
The Cathaoirleach said that there were sensitivities with the matter and 
for that reason would not be opening the meeting to the floor. He 
proceeded to adjourn the meeting for a short recess.  
 
C/332/25 
 CONTINUATION AND EXPANSION OF THE BASIC INCOME FOR 
THE ARTS SCHEME  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr Brogan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-   
 
“That Donegal County Council calls on the Government to ensure the 
continuation and expansion of the Basic Income for the Arts Scheme as 
part of Budget 2026, recognising the vital contribution of artists and arts 
workers to our cultural, social, and economic life here in Donegal, as 
well as nationally. 
 
Further, that this Council writes to the Minister for Culture, 
Communications and Sport, Patrick O'Donovan TD, and the Minister for 
Public Expenditure, Jack Chambers TD, urging them to provide for 
sustained funding for a Basic Income for Artists scheme in Budget 
2026, and to ensure its accessibility and fairness for artists across all 
disciplines and regions, including those living and working in rural 
counties like Donegal.”  
 

22 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Meehan said that a scheme had been in place for a number of 
years and the overall effect had been a positive one in terms of 
creativity and economic output. He said that the cost benefit analysis 
had been clear for all to see with €1.39 going back into the economy for 
every €1 invested by the government. Overall, he advised, participation 
in the scheme had reduced financial burdens on the applicants and 
allowed artists to focus on creativity which was a benefit to themselves 
and society in general. He called on the government to invest further in 
the scheme given its successful implementation to date. It had been he 
noted particularly successful in Donegal and had given rise to a 
creative boost. He cited the need for some improvements to the 
scheme including greater access for people with disabilities. It was 
essential, he said, that the scheme was expanded across the country. 
 
 
Cllr Beard supporting the motion said it was really about providing a 
basic income for artists and building on the success of the scheme 
over the last three years. It was, she  confirmed, about sustaining 
artists, strengthening communities and boosting local economies. 
Acknowledging that there was a vibrant artist community in Donegal, 
she said that the thrust of the motion was that Donegal valued its 
artists community and valued their social and economic importance. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services  
said that the Council would write to the relevant ministers as 
requested.  
 
C/333/25 
 EMERGENCY HOUSEHOLD RESPONSE PACKAGE  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr McGarvey it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That this Council imminently seeks funding from the Department to 
 
 purchase necessary equipment in relation to an "Emergency 
Household Response Package" for vulnerable households during the 
winter months, where storms and flooding may occur, leaving people 
without power, heating and no ability to access hot food.  
 
That this council should have sufficient provisions in stock and in good 
  time to help citizens.  
 
  That this motion be presented to all local authorities.”   
 
 She received a response from the Director of Economic Development,      
Information Systems & Emergency Services in relation to the above. 
 
 

23 
 
Alluding to previous storms she noted that generators and 
dehumidifiers had to be sourced from various suppliers .The 
majority of the council’s housing stock, she added, was now using the 
air to water system and thus electricity dependent. 
 
Cllr Kennedy said the council should have sufficient provisions in stock 
to deal with weather emergencies as they arose. This, she said, might 
include a stock of items such as gas cookers, heaters, battery torch etc. 
 
The impact was greater she stated for vulnerable people living in rural 
locations. Going forward she cited the need for the council to have such 
items in stock. 
 
Recognising that supports had been put in place after Storm Eoghan, 
it was noted however that there had been some difficulty in accessing 
same.   
 
 Cllr Mc Garvey said that the case for an emergency package had been 
 well outlined and that government support was needed to put the 
 initiative in place. 
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
 Mr Garry Martin, Director Economic Development, Information Systems 
 and Emergency Services said that the Department of Housing, Local 
 Government, & Heritage would be contacted in relation to the matter. 
 
Concluding Cllr Kennedy asked that the motion be circulated to all local 
 authorities for consideration. 
 
C/334/25 
CLOSURE OF THE ISPCA CENTRE IN LETTERKENNY  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Jordan, seconded by Cllr McMonagle it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
I am asking that this council intervene and engage with the ISPCA and 
the Department due to the closure of its centre in Letterkenny and I am 
asking that we provide assistance to the smaller pet rescue centres 
throughout the county due to the pressures they now face.”   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the 
above.  
 
Cllr Jordan said that there were a number of aspects to his motion and 
also the fact that the closure of the centre was putting a huge strain on 
other smaller centres throughout the county. The closure was, he 
contended, a major setback for animal welfare in the county with local 
animal welfare centres already operating at full capacity. 
 

24 
 
The centre in Letterkenny had, he added, been established through 
local funding raising efforts and the receipt of voluntary and legacy 
donations , with the facility then signed over to the ISPCA. The closure 
of same, he advised, had occurred with very little consultation and with 
no regard for the intention of the original donors. Donegal SPCA had 
outlined a moral case for action and for the return of the facility to the 
local owners. 
 
The need for an adequate safety net was outlined as the situation was 
at crisis point for vulnerable animals.  
 
He called on Donegal County Council to show leadership  and engage 
with the Minister to secure a viable future for the centre or ensure that it 
is returned to the Donegal SPCA. It was important, he added, that there 
was transparency regarding the financial basis for the closure. 
 
Reference was made to a recent cruelty case where animals ended up 
being transported to Longford.  
 
 A call was made also for increased funding for the many smaller 
shelters. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle outlined his support for the motion and said that  there 
was in the post-covid years an increasing demand for these services.  
He said that the ISPCA should be invited in to give a briefing and 
outline their plans for the future. There were issues also, he said, with 
the withdrawal of the dog warden service in Donegal.  
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment said that the 
council had been engaging with the ISPCA since the notice of their 
intention to withdraw the dog warden service in 2026. The closure of 
the Letterkenny Centre had been discussed and would be brought up 
again in future meetings. He confirmed that it would be possible to write 
to the ISPCA and ask for clarity on the plans for Letterkenny and to the 
Department regarding the implications of the closure for other pet 
rescue centres. It was hoped, he said, to provide an update at the 
November meeting.  
 
Cllr Jordan said it was imperative that assurance was given that the 
centre would transfer back to the Donegal SPCA and that supports 
would be put in place for the smaller centres in the county. 
 
 
C/335/25 
FLOODING EVENTS THROUGHOUT THE COUNTY 
 
On the proposal of Cllr McMahon, seconded by Cllr Jordan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That this council call a meeting with the Office of Public Works as soon 
as possible in relation to flooding that is happening all over the 
constituencies. This needs to be arranged as soon as possible because 
the flooding is causing a lot of damage and this needs to be looked at.”  

25 
 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
 
 Cllr Mc Mahon said that there were serious flooding issues and 
outlined in particular problems in Pettigo and Ballyshannon. He 
welcomed the assistance provided by the Council and their cross-
border colleagues in Pettigo during recent flooding events which had 
saved a number of properties. There were cross-border issues here, he 
noted, and advised of the need to be proactive going forward. 
Additional works were also needed, he said, in respect of the drain at 
the industrial estate at Portnason where there were problems with flash 
flooding.  
 
He referenced also the need to attend to an issue that had arisen 
where water was flowing from the public road onto a property in 
Clyhore owned by an elderly occupant. He said that the Office of Public 
Works should be invited to meet with members to discuss ongoing 
works.  
 
Cllr Jordan said that an update had been requested at MD level in 
relation to the various flood relief schemes and that this was hopefully 
to proceed shortly. He supported the call for the OPW to come in and 
address members. It was essential, he said, that they were asked to 
include flood relief measure for Pettigo in their capital spend.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Bryan Cannon, Director Roads & Transportation advised that the 
OPW were responsible for co-ordinating Irelands national flood risk 
management policy. The Council, he said, through its Flood Relief 
Schemes Unit is working with the OPW to deliver schemes at Burnfoot, 
Castlefin, Na Dunaibh, Glenties, Kerrykeel, Ballybofey/Stranorlar, 
Buncrana, Ludden, Ramelton and Lifford with further pilot schemes 
being progressed in Donegal Town and Letterkenny. The OPW was, he 
added, leading the delivery of the scheme in Raphoe. Detail was also 
provided on the direct funding received from the Department of 
Transport in respect of drainage improvements on Regional and Local 
roads. .This, he advised, amounted to €1,188,000 in 2025. He was, he 
confirmed, familiar with the issue at Clyhore and that the Council had 
worked with Fermanagh and Omagh District Council and the Rivers 
Agency in Northern Ireland to address the problem in Pettigo.  
Options had been considered to address the problem at Clyhore and 
efforts were being made to source the required funding. 
 
He said that a meeting could be sought with the OPW and a mutual 
agenda agreed.  
 
Cllr Mc Mahon welcomed the response and asked that the issue at 
Clyhore be addressed in a timely fashion.  

26 
 
C/336/25 
TEST RESULTS ON ALL THE COUNCIL SOCIAL HOUSING STOCK  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Brearty, seconded by Cllr Devine it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That DCC discloses to the elected members the test results on all their 
social housing stock that have been tested by Petrolab in the UK, to 
date, (especially the 8 properties at Railway Park, St Johnston), and 
that this disclosure includes the costs of coring, engineers reports and 
Petrolab testing to date, and that it includes the number of DCC 
properties that have been cored and tested to date, and the number of 
properties that have been identified visually as being possibly affected 
by defective concrete (all properties on their books) and how many 
have been remediated and repaired to date, including any that have 
been condemned as unsafe to date, and how many tenants have been 
rehoused in new or temporary accommodation”.    
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Mc Brearty said that the Council had failed to give the information  
which he has an elected member had been mandated to seek.  
 
He said that he had an issue with the fact that the response referred to 
“if the motion is passed” which showed an element of contempt for the 
request. 
 
Petrolab, he advised, had carried out the testing on the housing stock 
yet mica was not the cause of the structural defects. There were he 
added, three categories of reactive minerals which were the cause of 
these defects and reclassified as total sulphates, in a sulphate attack 
analysis because of the presence of pyrrhotite. The answer provided, 
he contended, did not deal with the motion as submitted. Alluding to the 
eight houses in St Johnston tested by Petrolab, he said that they 
showed a visual estimate of true cause of the problem. If the Council 
was serious about addressing the situation, they would, he stated, ask 
Petrolab to conduct a sulphate attack analysis on the core samples 
concerned. The response provided, he added, clearly indicated that 
Donegal County Council was not serious about dealing with its social 
housing stock . A public enquiry had still not been established he noted, 
and the state had failed to police the industry responsible for this crisis.  
 
Cllr Devine supporting the motion said that he could see no detail as to 
how many people had been moved out of their homes to other 
properties and asked when this would be made available. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
responding said that the Council had set up a Social Housing 
Remediation team a number of years ago with a view to addressing the 
issue of social homes affected by deleterious materials. As the Social 
Housing Remediation Scheme had not yet commenced, remediation 

27 
 
works had not yet commenced. Repair works where necessary had 
been carried out and visual surveys carried out on all social homes. He 
said that it was estimated that 1000 homes approximately were 
affected (including 80 vacant homes)   and that the potential existed at 
present for another 1000 properties. Testing had been carried out to 
date; he confirmed on 200 homes in preparation for a remediation 
scheme. This had been carried out by a number of companies, he 
stated, and the test results, costs and data could be collated and 
arrangements made to circulate the details to the Elected Members. 
 
Cllr Mc Brearty said that he was not happy with the response and that 
the Department needed to be made aware of the exact cause of the 
structural defects in social housing properties so that a proper scheme 
could be put in place. He said that a sulphate attack analysis should 
have been carried out on the 200 houses referenced. It was a disgrace, 
he said, that after 14 years the Council were still unwilling to call the 
matter a defective concrete block crisis clearly backed up by current 
forensic evidence. Concluding, he said, he was extremely concerned 
that the Council was not treating this as an emergency.  
 
C/337/25 
CONDEMNATION OF THE ONGOING GENOCIDE IN GAZA AND 
SOLIDARITY FOR THE PEOPLE OF PALESTINE  
 
On the proposal of Cllr G Doherty, seconded by Cllr McMonagle it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That this Council: 
- Abhors and condemns the ongoing genocide in Gaza and Israeli 
military operations in the West Bank; 
- Calls on the Irish Government to lobby for international sanctions on 
Israel; 
- Calls on the Government once again to pass the Occupied Territories 
Bill in full; 
- Writes to our friends in Bani Zeid outlining the strong support and 
solidarity of the people of Donegal for the people of Palestine.”   
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Doherty alluded to the unspeakable horror that was taking place in 
Gaza and said there was an onus on all to voice and highlight the 
atrocities that were taking place. An independent United Nations 
Commission had, he said, delivered a grave and historic conclusion in 
the last week that Israel has committed and continues to commit 
genocide against the Palestinian people in Gaza. The international 
commission of Enquiry established by the UN Human Rights Council, 
he said, had found that Israeli authorities and security forces had 
committed four of the five acts that are defined as genocide under the 
1948 Genocide Convention. The acts committed, he stated, were not 
random and carried out with clear genocidal intent to destroy 
Palestinians in Gaza as a group. It was clear, he added, that 
continuous acts of genocide were being carried out and that these meet 

28 
 
the criteria established by the Genocide Convention . He said that such 
acts were being carried out by the highest levels of Israeli authority. 
 
It was acknowledged that there had been unprecedented killings, 
starvation of civilians, the blocking of humanitarian aid, the destruction  
of healthcare and education services, sexual and gender based 
violence and the targeting of children. This he added was combined 
with an assault on religious and cultural foundations and the barbaric 
use of starvation as a method of warfare all indicating that genocide 
was being carried out. 
 
Continuing Cllr Doherty said that the Israeli President, the Prime 
Minister and the then Minister for Defence had incited genocide with no 
accountability pursued. Israel, he said, had flagrantly ignored various 
warnings and appeals by the International Court of Justice and other 
member states together with appeals from civil society and persisted 
with its campaign of destruction.  
 
This humanitarian emergency, he contended, was beyond apocalyptic  
with starvation, malnutrition, denial of water and medicine being used to 
annihilate a defenceless population. It was, he said, a holocaust 
inflicted in full view of the world and with western governments, the UK 
the USA, Germany and the EU all complicit. 
 
The Hague Group Summit in Bogota, had outlined, he confirmed the  
concrete multi-lateral measures that states could and must adopt 
including full arms embargos, the levying of political and economic 
sanctions and the freedom to provide full humanitarian aid. The siege, 
he said, had to end together with the harsh and unethical treatment 
afforded to the various aid flotillas on which there were a number of 
Irish representatives. Israel, he said, was an outlaw state acting with 
impunity. 
 
He thus called on the Irish Government to lobby aggressively for 
sanctions and for sporting organisations such as UEFA, FIFA and the 
International Olympic Committee to expel Israeli athletes. We in 
Ireland, he stated, need to do all in our power to highlight the fact that a 
genocide and a man made famine was taking place before the 
Palestinian people in Gaza and the West Bank were extinguished. 
Those with the greatest power, he added, had the greatest 
responsibility given that silence in the face of genocide amounts to 
complicity.  
 
Cllr Mc Monagle seconding the motion said that Cllr Doherty had 
outlined well the gravity of the situation. Benjamin Netanyahu had, he 
said, been found guilty of committing genocide in Gaza and an arrest 
warrant issued, yet with the complicity of the USA he was allowed to 
attend the UN and boast about what he was doing to the Palestinian 
people. Pillars of society in Palestine, were being targeted daily 

29 
 
together with mothers, fathers, children, doctors, medics, ambulance 
drivers, and reporters, while the world watches on. 
 
Ireland, he said, needed to call out other EU leaders to react to the 
situation and to ensure that Israel was punished for its actions. He 
called on Donegal County Council to look at where it was buying its 
products from and where they were supplied from. Purchasing should 
desist, he said, where there were Israeli links. 
 
It was time, he said, to stand up to the bullying from Israel and all 
complicit in the obliteration of Gaza. He reiterated the need to write to 
Babi Zeid as a symbol of solidarity.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Culture said that 
correspondence would issue to the Tánaiste’s office and to Bani Zeid.  
 
Cllr Doherty thanked members to for their support and said it was 
incredibly important that members used their voices to highlight what 
was going on. 
 
C/338/25 
 ADJOURNMENT FOR LUNCH 
 On the proposal of Cllr Kelly, seconded by Cllr Coyle it was resolved to 
adjourn the meeting until 1.45pm 
 
C/339/25 
 INVESTMENT IN INFRASTRUCTURE AT OUR BEACHES, PIERS & 
HARBOURS  
 
It was unanimously agreed to defer the following motion submitted by 
Cllr Fionán Bradley.  
 
“That this Council prioritise investment in infrastructure at our beaches, 
piers and harbours which is used by swimmers in advance of the 2026 
Summer Season. This would be done in an effort to ensure that we fully 
utilise our natural environment to advertise Co Donegal as a place both 
accessible and welcoming to those who enjoy sea swimming.” 
 
C/340/25 
CLAR PROGRAMME  
 
On the proposal of Cllr A Doherty, seconded by Cllr Crossan it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“Donegal County Council welcomes recent funding announced for 
projects under the CLÁR Programme (Measure 2). 
Mindful of the current Programme for Government "Securing Ireland's 
Future" and its commitment to conduct a comprehensive review within 
6 months with a view to expand the CLÁR Programme to rural areas 
which are currently ineligible for funding, 
Donegal County Council now urges Minister Calleary and the 
government to deliver on commitments made, designate, include and 

30 
 
extend the number of electoral areas enabling additional communities’ 
eligibility to apply and secure funding from the CLÁR Programme.”   
 
He received a response from the Director of Community Development 
& Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Doherty welcomed the reply but contended that a stronger case 
needed to be made. He highlighted a number of projects on which 
members had been lobbied for support particularly in relation to 
supports for adults with disabilities. Accessible transport was identified 
as being of enormous importance and barriers to same was preventing 
such people from engaging in meaningful activities and accessing 
community services. He alluded to the fact that a named application 
had been denied as it was not in a Clár designated area.  
 
Numerous examples, he said, could be highlighted in the Inishowen 
area. Answers from previous motions at Plenary and MD level, had, he 
advised, indicated that a review was progressing. Promises had been 
made nationally in relation to Disability Service provision but nothing 
significant had materialised. He called on the executive to be more 
forceful in their demands for a review of Clár funding and the extension 
of designated areas. He cited the need for greater emphasis on people 
with disabilities and outlined the necessity of having a level playing field 
to access funds.  
 
Cllr Crossan supporting the motion said that there were a number of 
projects in his own area that he wanted to see include and highlighted 
the need to expand the programme in Inishowen and throughout the 
county.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion.  
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services 
acknowledged that Cllr Doherty had been a long-time advocate of 
extending the programme.  He noted that 16 applications had been 
submitted under Measure 1 by the Council. He said he appreciated the 
call for more forceful action and confirmed that the Council did meet 
with Department officials on an ongoing basis. The issues raised, he 
said, would be followed up and the motion forwarded as requested to 
Minister Calleary.  
 
Cllr Doherty acknowledged the response and called on members to 
actively pursue the matter with the relevant government 
representatives.  
 
C/341/25 
MARKET SURVEILLANCE AUDIT OF ALL QUARRIES IN THE 
COUNTY  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Beard, seconded by Cllr Devine it was resolved 
to adopt the following motion:-  
 

31 
 
 
“That this Council requests the National Building Control and Market 
Surveillance Office, with the support of the Geological Survey of 
Ireland, to revisit Donegal as soon as possible to conduct a further 
market surveillance audit of all quarries in the county. 
 
This Council notes that recent peer-reviewed and government-funded 
research, commissioned by the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage, has confirmed the presence of pyrrhotite 
and framboidal pyrite as the primary causes of concrete failure in 
Ireland, through the mechanism of internal sulphate attack. 
 
This Council further recognises the critical need to ensure full 
compliance with I.S. EN 12620:2002 + A1:2008 Aggregates for 
Concrete and the associated S.R. 16:2016, to safeguard construction 
quality and protect the structural integrity of newly-built or remediated 
properties. 
 
Accordingly, this Council calls on the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to authorise a full and comprehensive audit 
of every quarry in Donegal to ensure that all materials supplied to the 
market are fully compliant with all relevant legislation and free from risk 
of internal sulphate attack.”   
 
She received a response from the Director of Community Development 
& Planning Services in relation to the above.  
 
Cllr Beard called for the National Building Control Market Surveillance 
Office with the Geological Survey of Ireland to carry out a full audit of 
all quarries with deep and random testing across the quarry face. This , 
she said, needed to include testing for pyrrhotite and pyrite, issuing the 
results and holding all operators accountable. This , she added, would 
restore confidence and ensure that each home, remediation, and 
community facility presently being built was free from the risk of failure.  
 
Cllr Devine, in support of the motion said that the testing practice was 
lax and need to be more comprehensive and regular. He cited the need 
for the Market Surveillance Office to come in and address members in 
relation to the situation. 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services 
said that the thrust of the motion was clear and well set out. His reply, 
he said, had set out the background to what was happening and 
detailed the work of the National Building Control  & Market 
Surveillance Office and their role in Donegal. He was, he advised, 
happy to the forward the request for a further market surveillance audit 
and to write to the Department of Housing, Local Government & 
Heritage as requested. 
 
Concluding Cllr Beard said that motion requested a new and 
comprehensive audit of all quarries, and the results released and 

32 
 
identified. She said it needed to be kept in mind that the GSI had 
confirmed that acid digestion method for total sulphur is not fit for 
purpose.  Current inspections, she added, did not guarantee long-term 
quality. She called for ongoing vigilance and for repeated audits to be 
carried out to safeguard public confidence.  
 
C/342/25 
 IRISH WATER – SERVICE ISSUES  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Murray, seconded by Cllr McMonagle it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That Donegal County Council expresses it's deep, ongoing frustration 
with Irish Water, shares the concerns of those in our communities 
impacted by regular water outages, calls for greater recruitment of staff 
in water services, with better working conditions for water staff and a 
significant increase in investment in our current water infrastructure.”   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the 
above.  
 
Cllr Murray said that there was increasing frustration with Uisce 
Éireann in relation to outages and bursts in the Inishowen area in 
particular. He said that there was a valid case for the service to be 
handed back to the local authorities as lack of funding was preventing 
Uisce Éireann from addressing infrastructural deficits. There was also, 
he noted, an associated impact on staff morale. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle supporting the motion advised of the need for capital 
investment in water infrastructure as this impacted also on the overall 
housing strategy. The motion, he said ,was timely and asked that it be 
referred to the Minister for Finance , Mr Pascal Donohoe, T.D 
considering the impending 2026 budget.  
 
Mr Michael Mc Garvey, Director Water & Environment said that he 
would write to Uisce Éireann as requested and forward a copy of the 
motion to the minister as directed.  
 
C/343/25 
KEEPING DCC CONTROLLED HARBOURS FREE OF SILT 
ACCUMULATION  
 
On the proposal of Cllr Crossan, seconded by Cllr A Doherty it was 
resolved to adopt the following motion:-  
 
 
“That Donegal County Council take immediate action to ensure that 
necessary dredging is facilitated to keep D.C.C controlled harbours free 
of silt accumulation to enable berthing at all stages of the tides.”   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 

33 
 
Cllr Crossan advised that there were number of harbours where 
dredging had become problematic and referred to Greencastle Harbour 
in particular. He acknowledged the fact that there had been huge 
investment in Greencastle to date and that this would be wasted if 
nothing was done in relation to the accumulation of silt.  
 
Greencastle, he noted, had been reduced to a landing harbour only 
and berthing options had become limited as larger craft were no longer 
able to access the port except for a short period on either side of high 
water. He alluded to the fact that it extra costs were being incurred 
when high tides occurred overnight. 
 
Cllr Doherty said that Greencastle users have expressed concern at 
the delays with dredging. Referring to the response, he said, that it was 
alarming the number of steps and permissions that had to be taken to 
allow dredging take place and all before final approval from the 
Department. He noted that a new designated maritime plan might delay 
the works further. It was essential, he added, that additional funding 
was allocated for dredging works and for some of the smaller projects 
that required attention including:  
 
• Coastguard Station affected by defective blocks needs to be 
replaced. 
• Lease of another small area of land to the school entrance. 
• Need for better parking and access facilities. 
• New slipway layout to accommodate the new Coastguard 
building. 
 
There was need also, he said, for further engagement with the Foyle 
Port Authorities in relation to matters of mutual interest.  
 
There was no opposition to the motion. 
 
Mr Bryan Canon, Director Roads & Transportation said the report set 
out on a general basis what is needed for the Council to carry out 
dredging works and the range of consents needed. He alluded to the 
fact that consents were not everlasting and had to be reviewed on a 
regular basis with significant levels of work involved. The consultants 
were now in place, he said, to prepare the applications for Greencastle, 
Buncrana and Portmore Pier at Malin Head. 
 
The Council, he noted, funded an ongoing programme of dredging with 
€250,000 provided on an annual basis in respect of a number of 
locations around the county. In relation to Greencastle, he said, that 
the executive did meet with the Greencastle users’ group on a periodic 
basis and held monthly meetings with the Piers and Harbour team on 
site and were aware of the ambitions and aspirations of the group. 
€16m had been spent, he said, on extending the breakwater and this 
needed to be capitalised on. 
 

34 
 
Concluding Cllr Crossan welcomed the response and acknowledged 
that considerable investment that had been made in terms of the 
breakwater at Greencastle. If the issues with silt continued, this 
investment would have been in vain. He asked that the matter be given 
urgent attention so as to mitigate ongoing issues at the harbour. 
 
 
C/344/25       CARRYING OUT OF WORKS IN RELATION TO 
                     THE PROVISION OF A SOCIAL HOUSING DEVELOPMENT AT 
FINTRAGH ROAD, KILLYBEGS TOTAL 18NO. UNITS   
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Kennedy, seconded by Cllr Naughton, the 
carrying out of works in relation to the provision of a Social Housing 
Development at Fintragh Road, Killybegs consisting of the demolition of 
1no. existing shed and construction of 2no. 1-bed apartments and 
16no. 2-bed apartments (total 18no. units)  was approved, in 
accordance with Part XI of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as 
amended) and Part 8 of the Planning & Development Regulations 
2001(as amended). 
 
Cllr Kennedy welcomed the development which she said was much 
needed.  
 
C/345/25 
 CARRYING OUT OF WORKS IN RELATION TO THE 
CONSTRUCTION OF 172 NO. SOCIAL HOUSING UNITS AT 
BALLYMACOOL, LETTERKENNY      
 
 Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Kelly, seconded by Cllr Coyle, the carrying out 
of works with regard to the construction of 172 no. social housing units 
at Ballymacool, Letterkenny was approved, in accordance with Part XI 
of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of 
the Planning & Development Regulations 2001(as amended).  
 
Cllr Kelly noted that there had been considerable discussion on the 
matter and that several workshops had also taken place. He said that 
he personally had raised a number of concerns in relation to the 
development  
 
He thanked John Gallagher, Senior Engineer and his team for 
addressing a number of the issues that had been raised together with 
David Mc Elwaine, A/Senior Executive Engineer and Michael Canning 
Road Safety Engineer for their input on road safety issues. There had 
been recognition also, he stated of the need for a bus service and in 
addressing issues raised by the National Parks and Wildlife Service. 
 
He welcomed the assurance that Uisce Éireann was committed to  
providing the necessary water and sewerage infrastructure and that 

35 
 
traffic would not be emerging out onto the R250 and would instead 
come out onto the existing entrance at the roundabout. There was 
acknowledgement also of the commitment to upgrade the roads and 
cycle paths into the town and the assurance that there would be 
engagement with Inland Fisheries in relation to the River Swilly.  
The inclusion of a five bed group home was also to be welcomed, he 
said. 
 
It was important, he added, that engagement with the residents 
continued and that an adequate bus service was be put in place.  
With 1300 on the waiting list in Letterkenny, this was a most welcome 
development in a prime location, he added. 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said the development was much needed and 
complimented all involved in getting it off the ground. He noted that the 
Active Travel project would work in conjunction with this development 
and that new cycleways and footpaths would be put in place as soon as 
the development was coming to completion. He said it was a positive 
development that Uisce Éireann had committed to the site given the 
infrastructural deficits that had existed previously. 
 
Cllr Coyle welcomed the preparatory work that had been undertaken 
and noted that this was one of the biggest building projects that the 
Council would deliver. He said that 8 such schemes were needed to 
deal with the housing waiting list in Letterkenny.  
 
Cllr Mc Gee said that he was not against the houses being developed 
but that it was a case once again of putting the cart before the horse.  
 
Cllr Devine said that he welcomed the development and the inclusion of 
the five bed group home. His concern, he said, that houses were not 
being built for people with disabilities and queried if any were included 
in the scheme. 
 
Cllr Mc Bride welcomed the works and said that housing needed to be 
developed at scale and in tandem with the private market. High rents 
and homelessness were, he said, a contributing factor to the demand 
for social housing. It was imperative, he said, that the proposed 
development at the old Fire Station in Letterkenny was progressed and 
that consideration was given to looking at other sites in the town for the 
development of housing on a similar scale. 
 
C/346/25 
CARRYING OUT OF WORKS IN RESPECT OF A NEW SHARED 
USE PEDESTRIAN FACILITY ADJACENT TO THE EXISTING R245 
BETWEEN MULROY WOODS HOTEL AND THE LIDL RETAIL UNIT 
BETWEEN THE TOWNS OF MILFORD AND RAMELTON.  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above.  
 
 On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr McGarvey, the 

36 
 
carrying out of works in respect of a new shared use pedestrian facility 
adjacent to the existing R245 between Mulroy Woods Hotel and the Lidl 
Retail unit between the towns of Milford and Ramelton was approved, 
in accordance with Part XI of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 
(as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning & Development Regulations 
2001(as amended). 
 
Cllr Meehan thanked the roads team for the work carried out to date. 
He said that there were road safety issues along this busy stretch of 
road with pedestrians having to walk on the grass verge in an unsafe 
manner. He welcomed the fact that €125k had been secured for the 
commencement of construction and outlined the need to secure 
remaining monies in 2026. Cllr Mc Garvey welcomed the works an 
thanked the roads staff for taking on board members concerns.   
 
C/347/25 
TO APPROVE THE PUBLICATION OF THE DRAFT DEVELOPMENT 
CONTRIBUTION SCHEME 2025-2030 FOR A 6 WEEK PERIOD OF 
PUBLIC CONSULTATION. 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Monagle, seconded by Cllr Meehan it was 
resolved to approve the publication of the Draft Development 
Contribution Scheme 2025-2030 for a six-week period of public 
consultation in accordance with Section 48 of the Planning & 
Development Act, 2000 (as amended). 
 
Cllr Kennedy alluded to the fact that the €20k charge for holiday home 
accommodation seemed excessive. 
 
Cllr Naughton referenced the need for camper van sites and said that 
special incentives were required to facilitate this type of development.  
 
Cllr A Farren said he believed the €2000 charge for caravans/mobiles 
was too high together with the €3000 fee for carparking. Donegal, he 
stated, was a holiday destination and these charges would restrict 
development. There was, he added, the need for a more proactive  
approach in terms of the tourism product. 
 
Cllr Mc Dermott concurred and said that the mindset needed to change 
In relation to rural tourism and that the ten berth restriction for 
carparking/campervan facility was unviable.  
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services 
said that what had been sought today was permission to allow the 
Development Contribution Scheme to go out to public consultation. 
 
Alluding to the number of concerns raised, he said, that the adoption of 
the scheme would come before members again following the period of 
public consultation and the preparation of a Chief Executive’s report on 

37 
 
the submissions received. The issue of the ten berth restriction was, he 
advised, a separate policy matter and not part of the Development 
Contribution Scheme proposals. He thanked Mr Killian Smyth, 
Executive Planner for his work on the scheme to date and said that 
amendments could be made when the scheme came back to members 
for approval.  
 
C/348/25 
TO NOTE UPDATE REGARDING THE GUIDELINES UNDER 
SECTION 28 OF THE PLANNING & DEVELOPMENT ACT 2000-2025 
RELATION TO THE NATIONAL PLANNING FRAMEWORK AND 
HOUSING GROWTH REQUIREMENTS  
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & Planning Services 
alluded to the documentation circulated and said that the preparation of 
a report on the guidelines was underway and would be completed as 
soon as a tool kit was received from the department. 
 
 
He said that work on Variation No 1 to the County Development Plan 
2024-2030 was progressing and would be presented to members in 
November. 
 
 
Cllr A Doherty highlighted the fact that the baseline housing growth 
requirement figures for Donegal made reference to the period 2023 and 
from 2023-2040. He asked for clarity in relation to the intervening 
years.  
 
 
The Cathaoirleach said it would be possible to have a workshop to look 
at issues arising in relation to the County Development Plan and 
advised of the need to include the following issues: 
 
 
• Unfinished Estates  
• Issue arising in the Inishowen MD as a follow on from the 
previous Development Plan. 
• The Tourism Policy. 
• Marina at Fahan.  
 
C/349/25 
TO APPROVE THE HOLDING OF A WORKSHOP TO DISCUSS THE 
COUNTY DEVELOPMENT PLAN 2025-2030  
 
It was unanimously agreed to hold a Plenary Planning Workshop on 
Wednesday 5th November at 10am in the County House, Lifford.  
 
C/350/25 
TO AGREE DATE FOR THE 2026 REVENUE BUDGET MEETING     
 
On the proposal of Cllr Meehan, seconded by Cllr McGarvey it was 
resolved to hold the 2026 Revenue Budget Meeting on Friday 21st 
November, 2025 at 10a.m. in the County House, Lifford.  
 
 
 

38 
 
C/351/25 
TO AGREE OVERDRAFT ACCOMMODATION OF TEN MILLION 
EURO (€10,000,000) FOR FULL YEAR ENDING 31ST DECEMBER, 
2026.   
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
 
 It was noted that the Bank had made, and was continuing to make, 
available to the Council and overdraft facility (the facility) for the 
purposes of the working capital needs of the Council as may be 
required from time to time.  
 
 
After due consideration, it was resolved on the proposal of Cllr M 
Farren, seconded by Cllr Scanlon, and in accordance with Section 106 
of the Local Government Act, 2001, as amended, and subject to the 
sanction of the Minister for Housing, Local Government & Heritage that:  
 
 
“It is in the best interests of the Council and in line with its statutory 
rights and obligations to avail of the Facility and provide the Guarantee 
up to an amount of ten million euro (€10,000,000).  
 
 
Accordingly, the Council agrees to avail of the Facility and provide the 
Guarantee.  
 
 
Each of the persons undertaking the roles of Donegal Chief Executive 
and the Director of Finance from time to time be authorised, together 
and separately, to negotiate the terms of each of the facility letters put, 
and to be put, in place to document the Facility (each, a “Facility Letter” 
and together, the “Facility Letters”), together with any amendments or 
variations to the Guarantee or replacement Guarantee, and to sign 
each such Facility Letter and Guarantee by way of acceptance of the 
terms of such document (including, without limitation, all terms and 
conditions referred to in each such Facility Letter) and that each such 
signed Facility Letter and Guarantee shall be fully binding on, and 
enforceable against, the Council; and  
 
 
The Council ratifies the availing of the Facility by the Council, within the 
limits specified, and confirms the execution of all Facility Letters 
together with the Guarantee”.   
 
C/352/25 
TO CONSIDER THE DRAFT DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL ANTI-
FRAUD AND CORRUPTION POLICY DRAFTED IN ACCORDANCE 
WITH THE CCMA 
 
 Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
On the proposal of Cllr G Doherty, seconded by Cllr Scanlon the Draft 
Donegal County Council Anti-Fraud and Corruption Policy drafted in 
accordance with the CCMA was approved.    
 

39 
 
C/353/25 
TO CONSIDER A REPORT ON THE INTERNAL AUDIT REPORT ON 
COUNCIL’S USE OF PURCHASING CARDS 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
 
The Chief Executive noted that the internal audit report in question was 
available on the Council’s website for the public to view. A number of 
reports were available at this location, he said, in the interest of overall 
transparency. This report, it was noted, had been selected for specific 
media attention.  
 
 
It had been published, he stated, with no right of reply and thus an 
unbalanced interpretation had appeared. The article in question, he 
stated, had been selective and had not told the full story. This, he said, 
had mislead people in relation to all the facts and had given a poor 
impression of the Council.  
 
 
There had been a backlash, he said, in that businesses were now 
hesitant to accept the purchase cards as the impression had been 
given that these were being used in an irresponsible manner.  
 
This type of payment method was, he advised, of great benefit to the 
Council and to the community in general given that it allowed quick 
access to products/services and was a speedy and efficient way of 
doing business. It was noted that Purchasing Cards provided users with 
a more flexible and immediate method of carrying out low value and 
frequent purchases.  
 
 
They were not, he advised, credit cards but rather low value purchase 
cards used for day to day expenditure and the system itself provided 
excellent tracking information. It was clear from the audit report, he 
added, that there had been no wrongdoing and that there was no 
evidence of purchases being made that were not required. The overall 
total expenditure using these cards was, he said low in terms of overall 
expenditure amounting to less than 1%. 
 
 
The report, he said, had flagged the need for greater discipline in terms 
of documenting purchases and strengthening internal controls. Average 
expenditure, it was acknowledged, was €138 and the vast majority of 
transactions benefitted local shops and businesses. 
 
 
This report had been considered, he said, by the Senior Management 
Team and the Council’s Audit & Risk Committee prior to inclusion on 
the website. 
 
 
There was a need, he contended, to review the policy itself given that it 
had been in place now for a number of years and there were areas that 
needed modernising and specific rules changed to suit present day 
requirements. 
 

40 
 
 
Mr Garry Martin, Director Economic Development, Information Services 
and Emergency Services said that there had been an intimation that 
the cards were being used to buy fuel and this was incorrect. Specific 
fuel cards existed, he said, for all vehicles in the Council fleet and that 
these were well monitored and strong checks and balances in place 
overseen by line management.  
 
 
Cllr G Doherty acknowledged  the work of the Internal Audit 
Department and said it was important that members were familiar with 
same. It was essential, he added, that the conclusions and 
recommendations were acted upon. It was clear, he said, that certain 
practices had to change. He cited the need for the purchasing and 
procedures policies to be updated and for members to be provided with 
a briefing when this was carried out. In relation to toll charges, he 
highlighted the fact that most organisations required expenditure on 
these to be reclaimed through their travel systems.  
 
Members raised a number of queries namely: 
 
▪ What is the excess limit on the purchasing cards? 
▪ Are all 250 needed and how many of these displayed usage? 
▪ What is the annual cost and fees associated with the cards? 
▪ Is it possible to reduce the number of cards in circulation? 
 
Cllr Beard advised of the following: 
 
▪ That the media should be contacted with a comprehensive reply. 
▪ The policy and procedure documentation should be updated as 
soon as possible.  
▪ Progress report should be provided within three months of the 
implementation of the audit recommendations.  
▪ Independent audit needed to verify that the recommendations 
and improvements had been implemented all in the interest of 
public accountability and transparency. 
 
Cllr A Farren said, he was of the opinion that the cards offered 
efficiency in terms of day to day activity and that the availability had to 
be there. He cited the importance of replying to the media at the 
earliest opportunity as responses often issues too late and the damage 
had been done. Cllr Mc Dermott concurred and noted the importance of 
acting quickly and responding in a timely manner when contentious 
issues arose. It had happened far too many times in the past, he said 
and particularly in relation to defective concrete block issues. 
 
Cllr Kelly said that no staff member should be targeted with abuse in 
relation to this matter as unfortunately the message had been delivered 
too late in the day. The Corporate Policy Group, he noted, had received 
a detailed response on the matter. It was unfortunate, he added, that 
the Council did not get the time to respond and clarify same. CPG had 
also, he stated, forwarded the report to the Value for Money 

41 
 
Committee. Purchasing cards, he added, enabled each transaction to 
be clearly accounted and offered overall savings in the long-term. He 
said that he hoped that the correct message would now go out and be 
delivered by the various media outlets.  
 
Concluding the Chief Executive said that he was happy for a workshop 
to take place. The Council he noted was a large organisation with 
1000s of transactions occurring and that all were checked and pursued 
by Finance. Alluding the backlog of transactions referenced in the 
media report, he said, that each and every one had been checked, 
verified and accounted for.  
 
The report itself, he said, had gone to the Audit & Risk Committee on 
the 14th April as part of the normal governance procedures.  
 
These relatively low value cards, were, he said, good for local 
businesses. He accepted that the response had been late in issuing 
given the holiday period but that there was an expectation that the 
organisation would be contacted before an article appeared in the 
paper. 
 
C/354/25 
CATHAOIRLEACH’S BUSINESS  
 
Votes of Sympathy 
 
 A vote of sympathy was extended to the following: 
 
 
•  Glenn Doherty, Planning, on the death of his mother, Margaret. 
•  Tony Browne, HR, on the death of his mother Susan. 
•  Eva Browne, Library Service, on the death of her 
 mother, Susan. 
• Martina Mc Brearty, formerly Housing, Letterkenny PSC, on the death 
  of her mother, Siobhan. 
• The family of the late former A/County Secretary, Sean O’ 
  Donnell. 
• Cllr Jimmy Kavanagh on the death of his brother, Danny.  
• Anne Mc Elchar, Chief Executive’s Office on the death of her mother, 
Margaret.  
• Cllr Ciaran Brogan on the death of his father, Philip. 
 
Local Democracy Taskforce 
The Cathaoirleach read into the record correspondence from Cllr 
Kieran Hanlon, AILG President in relation to the Taskforce on Local 
Government.  
 
Civic Reception  
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Clafferty seconded by Cllr Molloy it was 
resolved to afford a civic reception to the Cloughaneely Senior and 
Junior Bands in recognition of their outstanding success to date .Cllr 
Mc Clafferty said this would allow for formal recognition of the hard 
work and dedication of all the band members and also recognise their 
achievements to date.  

42 
 
C/355/25 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S MANAGEMENT REPORT  
 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above and noted the following items: 
 
 
1.Community Development & Planning Services  
Community Development 
• Town & Village Renewal Scheme 2025 
Capital Projects Delivery Unit & Taking in Charge of Housing Estates 
Division 
• Major Projects Update 
 
Refugee Response Unit Update 
• Number of Refugees 
• Commercial Accommodation 
• Offer a Home 
• Local Authority Integration Team (LAIT)  
Planning Services 
• Development Applications Unit 
• ePlanning 
• Enforcement 
• Planning Policy 
• Casual Trading-Review of Policy and Byelaws 
• Review of Development Contribution Scheme 
• Conservation Services 
Regeneration and Development Team 
• Rural Regeneration and Development Fund (RRDF)  
• Urban Regeneration and Development Fund (URDF)  
• Croi Conaithe Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant Scheme 
• Addressing Vacancy and Dereliction 
2.Water and Environment 
Climate Action 
• Climate Action Week 2025 13th-19th October 
• Inishowen Is Ours – PEACEPLUS Programme 
• Community Climate Action Fund – Phase 2 
• Launch of the People’s Transition for Carndonagh Action Plan 
Flood Relief Schemes 
 
 

43 
 
Defective Concrete Blocks - Update 
• Background 
3. Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
Social Housing 
Social Housing Delivery Pipeline 2022-2030 
Social Housing Second-Hand Acquisitions Programme 2025 
Library Service 
• National Public Library Open Day-September 27th 
• Fáilte Isteach Language Classes 
• Europe Direct Letterkenny 
• ChangeMakers 
• Wainfest 2025 
Arts Office 
• Culture Night 
• Donegal Bay and Blue Stacks Festival 
 
County Donegal Heritage Office 
• Working Over By Exhibition 
• Glasgow Corporation Transport & The Donegal Connection 
• Heritage Week in County Donegal 
• The Laurels, Glenties Historic Towns Initiative 
• Ballyshannon Historic Towns Atlas 
Biodiversity Office 
Biodiversity Office events for National Heritage Week 
 
4. Economic Development, I.S. & Emergency Services 
Fire Service 
• Operations 
• Fire Prevention 
• Major Emergency Management 
Information Systems 
• eGovernment Award Finalist 
• Digital Maturity Assessment 
• Economic Development Division  
• National AI Challenge 
• TBEX Doneal 2025 
• Nighttime Economy Action Plan Launch 

44 
 
• #LoveDonegal Day 
• London Vintage Day 
Local Enterprise Office 
• Progress Against Targets  
• Developing Female Entrepreneurship 
• Digital for Business 
• Blas na hÉireann Irish Food Awards 
• SuperValu Food Academy 
• Business Support Clinics 
• Enterprise Europe Network (EEN)  
5. Roads & Transportation 
National Roads Office Update 
• N56 Glenties to Kilraine Project Phase 2 
• N56 Letterkenny Traffic Management and Active Travel Project – 
Polestar to Creamery Roundabout 
• Pavement Asset Repair and Renewal (PARR) 2025 
• Barnesmore Gap Greenway Outline Program 
• TEN-T Priority Route Improvement Donegal 
• A5 Western Transport Corridor and Access to the Northwest 
Roads Areas Update 
• Restoration Improvement and Restoration Maintenance 
 
• Local Improvement Scheme – Additional Funding Received 
• TII Emergency Pavement Scheme 
• Interim Agreement on Road Openings by Uisce Éireann to 30th 
June 2026 
• Winter Maintenance 
• ROBUST – Electric shaRed mOBility hUbS Trail 
 
Retirement of Mr Liam Ward, Director Community Development & 
Planning Services . 
 
The Cathaoirleach offered his best wishes and thanks for his 
outstanding service to Donegal County Council. This was followed by a 
round of applause from all in the chamber.  
 
 
 
Tribute was paid to Mr Liam Ward who was due to retire from Donegal 
County Council on the 10th October 2025 after 42 years of service with 
Donegal County Council. It was noted that he had worked across 
various Council Departments including Roads, Finance, Corporate, 
Information Technology, Human Resources, Housing, Community & 
Enterprise, and Planning Services over this period. His appointment as 

45 
 
Director of Service in 2010 was testament to his work ethic and the 
wide range of experience gained within these various departments.  
 
This role also saw him take on the role of Director of Services with 
responsibility for the Letterkenny/Milford Municipal District. 
 
 
Liam represented the Council on many national boards and 
committees, serving with distinction and made a considered and valued 
contribution to each and every one. 
 
 
It was acknowledged that he had been a truly valued member of staff 
who had gained the respect of all who came in contact with him. 
Members were informed that he had at all times displayed the highest 
order of public service and had represented the Council in an 
exemplary fashion. 
 
 
 
The Chief Executive thanked him for his service and for the manner in 
which he had carried out the role of Deputy Chief Executive for the past 
5 years. 
 
 
Best wishes were extended to Liam and his family for a healthy and 
enjoyable retirement. It was noted that an event to recognise these 
achievements would be held on Friday 3rd October where members 
would have an opportunity to speak and pay tribute to Liam on his 
retirement.  
 
 
 Water Tanker Redeployment 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle raise concerns in relation to the redeployment of a 
water tanker from Letterkenny to Buncrana. He said that he believed 
that the Fire Service management had superseded their powers and 
had operated outside of Section 26 of the Fire Services Act. He 
contended that a commitment had been given at the recent Emergency 
Response Committee meeting to discuss the matter at the meeting 
today.  
 
 
 
Mr Garry Martin, Director Economic Development, Information Systems 
and Emergency Services said that he had not been at the meeting in 
question but would follow up on same and organise an early workshop 
in relation to the matter. He said he was satisfied that the Fire Service 
were not operating outside of Section 26 and that the matter had a lot 
of detail which was more suited for discussion in a workshop format. 
 
 Cllr Mc Monagle contended that under Section 26 it was the 
responsibility and the preserve of the elected members to make a 
decision on an operational matter. It was, he said, a reserved function 
of the members and the decision had been made without consultation, 
and thus proper procedure had not been followed.  
 
 
He was, he said, disappointed that no one from the Fire Service was 
present and noted that this had been recorded in the minutes of the 
ERC meeting. 
 

46 
 
 
The Director of Service reiterated the fact that the matter given the 
detail involved was more suited to the workshop format and committed 
to organising same in a timely manner and that a report was already 
being prepared on the matter.  
 
 
Cllr Mc Monagle again contended that the issue was a matter for the 
elected members and that a decision had been made without 
consultation and in opposition to the wishes of the Letterkenny 
members.  
 
Mr Martin said it had to be remembered that it was a county-wide fire 
service and that the Senior Officers need to determine where the best 
location was for a piece of equipment and as to how resources needed 
to be aligned. New appliances were received from time to time and it 
was noted that there had never been a custom or practice of bringing 
notification of same to the Chamber. It was intended, he added, to look 
at in the workshop where the legal requirement lay versus the day to 
day operational requirements.  
 
Cllr Mc Monagle said that if the right decision was to relocate the tanker 
to Buncrana then that was something the members were well capable  
of doing. He said that a conversation was now required as to what the 
reserved functions of the members under Section 26 actually entailed 
and clarity as to what the actual responsibilities were.  
 
Concluding the Director of Service noted that a Section 26 Plan had 
been brought to Council in 2018 and had been rejected by the 
members arising from the fact that there was a clash between the 
national policy in relation to the Islands and the practice in Donegal.  
 
The following questions were noted. 
 
 
C/356/25 
UPDATE REPORT ON THE ONGOING REVIEW OF ALL THE 
COUNCIL SERVICES  
 
Cllr Brogan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
 Can we have an updated report on the ongoing review of all the council 
services and when the outcome of that will be presented to the elected 
members of the Council?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/357/25 
EMPLOYING OUR OWN IN-HOUSE SOLICITOR 
 
Cllr Brogan submitted the following question:-  
 
 
What steps have taken place regarding our legal services with a view to 
employing our own council solicitor in-house in order to streamline 
much of the workload by all our different directorates?   
 

47 
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/358/25 
ANSWERS TO MOTIONS IN ADVANCE OF MEETINGS  
 
Cllr Devine submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can I get confirmation if any councillors in the chamber receive the 
answers to motions many days in advance of the meetings (Chairs of 
Committees or MDs ) and if is so why aren't all members treated the 
same with responses to the motions?    
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/359/25 
DEFECTIVE CONCRETE BLOCKS SCHEME FOR SOCIAL 
HOUSING  
 
Cllr McMonagle submitted the following question:-  
 
 
Can I have an update on any recent information we have received from 
the Minister of Housing in relation to the Defective Concrete Block 
Scheme for Social Housing and when it might be passed and started?   
 
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/360/25 
UPDATE ON HOW MANY PEOPLE ARE ON THE HOUSING LIST 
WAITING FOR A WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBLE HOME  
 
Cllr Devine submitted the following question:-  
 
 
 
 Can I get an update on how many people are on the housing list 
waiting for a wheelchair accessible home and how many are being built 
in our new social housing stock?   
  
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.     
 
C/361/25 
 REMEDIAL WORKS INTERNALLY & EXTERNALLY FOR COUNCIL 
OWNED DCB HOUSES  
 
 Cllr Meehan submitted the following question:-  
 
Can the Housing Directorate put in place a plan to carry out remedial 
repair works internally and externally, including painting, addressing 
mould, and crack-filling ahead of the autumn and winter seasons, for 
Council-owned DCB houses across the county, in lieu of the much-
anticipated, long-delayed Social Housing Remediation Programme for 
Defective Blocks?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.    

48 
 
C/362/25 
 CURRENT STATUS OF THE PROPOSED TEN-T PROJECTS  
 
 Cllr Meehan submitted the following question:-  
 
What is the current status of the proposed TEN-T road projects in 
Donegal, including projected timelines and commitments to funding 
from the government?   
 
 
 He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
 
C/363/25 
 BREAKDOWN OF THE NUMBER OF STAFF IN EACH 
DIRECTORATE AND PER MUNICIPAL DISTRICT  
 
 Cllr G Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
Can I have a breakdown of the numbers of staff working within each 
directorate of DCC and per Municipal District?    
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.   
 
C/364/25 
BREAKDOWN OF THE TOTAL GRANT FUNDING RECEIVED BY 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL  
 
 Cllr G Doherty submitted the following question:-  
 
Can I have a breakdown of total grant funding received by DCC in each 
of the last five years together with the amounts spent on matched 
funding for each project?  
 
He received a response from the Director of Finance in relation to the 
above.  
 
C/365/25 
 RENT PRESSURE ZONES  
 
 Cllr Bradley submitted the following question:-  
 
To ask the Director for Housing how the new rent pressure zones will 
affect the rents we charge people on our own housing stock? 
Furthermore, what impact will they have in relation to the properties we 
lease but don’t own? Will those properties be subject to the new 
legislation also? If so from what date? If a property owner was in the 
process of negotiating a new lease with the Council before the 
announcement of the RPZ will that lease be subject to the RPZ 
legislation?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/366/25 
 HOMELESS NUMBERS RECORDED FROM SEPT 1ST 2024 UNTIL 
SEPT 1ST 2025  
 
 Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  

49 
 
 
What were the homeless numbers recorded in each municipality in 
DCC from Sept 1st 2024 until  Sept 1st 2025 and what are the current 
results following works  by DCC Homeless Presentation Officer(s) to  
secure/identify available properties for refuge provision in the county?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/367/25 
 APPROVED HOUSING BODIES   
 
 Cllr A Doherty submitted the following question:-  
What AHBs  are currently working/and or have expressed an interest to 
work (Sept 2025) with Donegal County Council in each municipality to 
deliver much needed social and affordable homes and what are the 
current timelines agreed for the delivery of these projects?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.  
 
C/368/25 
BESPOKE STANDARD FOR CONCRETE USED IN THE 
CONSTRUCTION OF DCC SOCIAL HOMES  
 
 Cllr Beard submitted the following question:-  
 
Why did Donegal County Council deem it necessary to devise its own 
bespoke standard for concrete used in the construction of social 
homes, rather than relying on the existing national and European 
standards?   
 
She received a response from the Director of Housing, Corporate & 
Cultural Services in relation to the above.    
 
C/369/25 
BYE LAWS PERTAINING TO HORSES AND PONIES ACCESSING 
PUBLIC ROADS, BEACHES, WALKWAYS, GREENWAYS ETC  
 
 Cllr Bradley submitted the following question:-  
 
To ask the Director for Roads and Director for Environment what Bye 
Laws, if any, within the county, pertain to horses and ponies accessing 
public roads, beaches, walkways, greenways, trails, forests or any 
other public space. Are there areas where horses and ponies are 
banned (for example Blue Flag beaches), if there are does this ban 
relate to all animals or exclusively horses?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/370/25 
HOW IS THE REVENUE FROM CURRENT CAR PARKING 
CHARGES BEING SPENT  
 
 Cllr Beard submitted the following question:-  
 
Can the Council provide an itemised breakdown of how the revenue 

50 
 
generated from current car parking charges in each of the designated 
towns is being spent?     
 
She received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation 
in relation to the above.  
 
C/371/25 
ADDITIONAL ENGINEERING STAFF IN RESPECT OF OUR MAIN 
HARBOURS  
 
 Cllr Crossan submitted the following question:-  
 
What arrangements are being made to appoint additional engineering 
staff in respect of our main harbours so that all necessary surveys, 
reports and applications are completed to facilitate the development of 
the harbours?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Roads & Transportation in 
relation to the above.  
 
C/372/25 
SHARED IRELAND APPLICATION FOR FUNDING IN LEISURE 
CENTRES  
 
 Cllr Murray submitted the following question:-  
 
Is this Council currently engaged in discussions with Causeway Coast 
and Glens Council regarding a Shared Ireland application for funding in 
Leisure Centres in both council areas, and, if so, what is the current 
status of such discussions?   
 
He received a response from the Director of Water Services, 
Environment, DCB Scheme & Facilities Management in relation to the 
above.  
 
C/373/25 
 MOTIONS FROM OTHER COUNCILS/BODIES  
 
 Members noted the motions from other Councils.  
 
CARLOW COUNTY COUNCIL 
Carlow County Council agrees to write to the Minister for Further  and 
Higher Education, Research, Innovation and Science, and to the 
Taoiseach, expressing this Council’s opposition to any increase in 
college fees and the Government to ensure to maintain the Grant in the 
upcoming budget. 
 
GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL   
“Galway County Council reaffirms its strong support for Portiuncula 
University Hospital, as recognised under Special Policy Objective H4 of 
the Galway County Development Plan 2022-2028 and acknowledges 
PUHs long term strategic importance in the county and beyond as a 
provider of essential healthcare services and also as a major employer 
and economic driver in Co. Galway.  
Galway County Council calls on the Minister for Health and CEO HSE 
to support PUHs critical role in maternity care provision in the county 

51 
 
and to recognise Portiuncula UHs strategic location as the most 
accessibly located maternity unit in the country just 800 meters off the 
M6 in providing crucial timely accessible maternity care for mothers 
infants and families across a wide and rural catchment in County 
Galway and to communities in Roscommon, Westmeath, Longford, 
Leitrim, Offaly, North Tipperary and beyond. Restriction of maternity 
services poses serious risks to women and infants, especially those in 
rural and socioeconomically disadvantaged areas with poor transport 
where they are now facing much increased travel times and reduced 
local access to crucial maternity services.  
 
Galway County Council calls on the Minister for Health and CEO HSE 
to seek development of an immediate plan for reinstatement of high 
quality safe maternity services at PUH, with allocation of the necessary 
funding and resources for full implementation.  
Galway County Council asks the Minister for Health if she will 
commission a fully independent external review of maternity services 
across the county and comprehensively examine risk assessments and 
consequence of any maternity care downgrade in the wider area 
served including the ability of receiving maternity units to safely absorb 
additional patient load, given capacity, staffing, and infrastructure 
challenges.  
A copy of this motion is sent to the Oireachtas Joint Health Committee, 
all Oireachtas Elected Representatives for the area, and all local 
authorities.” 
 
I would be obliged if you could consider and revert to me with your 
views on the above motion so that I can advise the Elected Members.  
 
 
  GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL  
 “It was proposed that a letter of support issue in relation to the motion 
   passed by Donegal County Council calling to safeguard the Triple Lock 
  component of Irish neutrality. It was further agreed to circulate same to 
all  authorities for their consideration.”  
 
 
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
 
 
“I will move at the next meeting of the Metropolitan District of Limerick 
that this Council write to the Minister for Further and Higher Education, 
Research, Innovation and Science, James Lawless, stating that this 
District condemn any future attempt by the Government to reinstate the 
€3,000 college contribution fee for students given the increased 
financial burden that this will place on students and their families.” 
 
 
 LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
 
 “That, Limerick City and County Council agrees to and calls on the 
  
 Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to relax the 
current ribbon development rules to allow for the construction of 6 
dwellings in a  linear arrangement and, where appropriate, that 
restrictions be set aside  entirely for sites within 1km of an existing 

52 
 
settlement boundary once the development is located on a non-
regional road with available appropriate sightlines.”     
 
 
 
LIMERICK CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL      
 
“That Limerick City and County Council provide a liaison/link to 
Community Welfare where support is necessary to enable newly 
allocated tenants move in speedily.”  
 
 
 
OFFALY COUNTY COUNCIL    
 
“That this Council asks the Minister for Housing to include Part 5 
houses in the “Tenant Purchase Scheme.”   
 
SLIGO COUNTY COUNCIL  
Given the huge success of the Love Sligo Gift Card since its launch in 
2024 and it having achieved over €1m in sales in Ireland, driving an 
estimated 150,000 in-store customers across the country: 
 
“That Sligo County Council writes to the Minister for Enterprise, Trade 
& Employment and the Minister for Rural Affairs to ask them to 
consider supporting the Town and Gift Card rollout across every 
county.” 
 
 
 
WATERFORD CITY & COUNTY COUNCIL  
 
 
Carers Allowance and Benefit Reform 
 
“That the members of Waterford City and County Council call on the 
Minister for Social Protection Mr Dara Calleary, to abolish means 
testing for Carers Allowance in Budget 2026.  We further call on the 
Minister to introduce a fair and adequate payment for recipients of 
Carers Allowance and Carers Benefit one which truly reflects the time, 
dedication and compassionate care that carers provided everyday 
across Ireland.”  
 
This concluded the business of the meeting.  
 
 
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
