1 
 
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE DHUN NA nGALL 
 
Oifig Riarthóir na gCruinnithe 
Aras an Chontae 
Leifear 
5 Samhain, 2024 
FOGRA CRUINNITHE 
 
A Chara, 
 
Beidh Cruinniú Speisialta den Comhairle Chontae Dhún na nGall ar siúl Dé Luain 11 
Samhain, 2024 ag 11.00rn. in Áras an Chontae, Leifear. Tá Clár an chruinnithe leis 
seo. Seolfar nasc leictreonach chuig an chruinniú i gcomhfhreagras eile. 
 
 
Mise, le meas 
 
_____________________ 
Pádraig Ó Laifeartaigh 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
 
********************************************************************************** 
 
DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
                                  
Office of Meetings Administrator 
 
County House 
 
Lifford. 
 
5th November, 2024 
 
TO EACH MEMBER OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
 
NOTICE OF MEETING 
 
Dear Councillor, 
 
A Special Meeting of Donegal County Council will be held on Monday 11th November 
2024 at 11.00am in the County House, Lifford. The agenda for the meeting is 
attached. An online link to join the meeting will issue separately. 
 
 
Yours sincerely 
 
___________________ 
Patsy Lafferty 
Meetings Administrator 
 

2 
 
AGENDA  
 
1. Housing Capital Update.  
 
2. S.I. Housing Update.  
 
3. Disability/Independent Living.  
 
4. To approve attendance at the Annual Transport Infrastructure Ireland 
delegation meeting in Dublin on Friday 22nd November, 2024. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
MINUTES OF SPECIAL MEETING OF DONEGAL COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN 
THE COUNTY HOUSE, LIFFORD ON THE 11TH NOVEMBER 2024 
C/367/24 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
Cllrs J Kavanagh, Leas-Cathaoirleach, L Blaney, F Bradley, B Carr, D 
Coyle, D M Kelly, M Mc Bride, M Mc Clafferty, D Mc Gee, G Mc 
Monagle, A Molloy, M Naughton, D Nic Mheanman, J S O’ Fearraigh, 
and M Scanlon.  
Online: Cllrs, J Beard, M Boyle, C Brogan, J Brogan, P Canning, T 
Devine, A Doherty, A Farren, M Harley, M C Mac Giolla Easbuig, M Mc 
Dermott, P Mc Garvey, P Mc Gowan, and D Meehan.  
 
C/368/24 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE  
Liam Ward, Deputy Chief Executive/ Director Community Development  
& Planning Services, Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, Corporate 
and Cultural Services, Meetings Administrator, Bryan Cannon, Director 
Roads & Transportation, John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, Housing 
Capital, Eamonn Brown, Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate, 
Claire Burke, Senior Executive Architect, Housing Design, Donal 
Walker, A/Senior Engineer, Housing Capital, Jim Boner, Senior 
Executive Engineer, Housing Design, Gillian Dempsey, Senior 
Executive Engineer, Donna Mc Groarty, Area Manager, Housing 
Design, Thomas Melly, Senior Staff Officer, Housing & Corporate, 
Róise Ní Laifeartaigh, Rannóg na Gaeilge, Dónall Mac Giolla 
Choill,Tacaíocht do Sheirbhísí Aistriúcháin, Frances Friel, 
Communications Officer, William Colvin, Assistant Communications 
Officer, Anne Marie Crawford, Staff Officer, Corporate Services.  
 
C369//24 
UPDATES IN RESPECT OF HOUSING CAPITAL, S.I. HOUSING, 
DISABILITY AND INDEPENDENT LIVING OPTIONS 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director of Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
informed members that the presentation would outline housing targets 
and delivery statistics as applicable in November 2024. He said that 
progress updates would be provided in relation to the following and an 
overview of the key upcoming deliverables outlined: 
 
• Inhouse Design projects 
• Inhouse Construction Projects 
• Turnkey Acquisitions 
• Design & Build 
• Letterkenny Flagship Projects. 
 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, Housing Capital updated 
members on the delivery process and the status of a number of 
projects as of November 2024 together with an analysis of the key 
upcoming deliverables. 
 
Ms Claire Burke, Senior Executive Architect, Housing Design provided 
an overview of the various inhouse design projects being undertaken 
together with an update on their current status. 
 

4 
 
Mr Jim Boner, Senior Executive Engineer, Housing Design gave an 
overview of the inhouse construction projects including those on-site 
and those currently out for tender.  
 
Ms Donna Mc Groarty, Area Manager, Housing Design, advised that 
the projected delivery for turnkey acquisitions over the period 2022-
2026 was 307 representing a projected investment of €84m. She noted 
that by the end of 2024 173 turnkey units will be completed or on site 
and that approval is being sought for 5 further turnkeys encompassing 
164 units. It was acknowledged that there were ongoing meetings with 
developers and that this had assisted the process. 
 
Mr Donal Walker, Senior Engineer, Housing Capital, outlined the range 
of Design and Build projects being undertaken including referencing 
works at Barrackhill, Carndonagh, Gleneely, Malin and Oldtown, 
Letterkenny. 
 
Ms Gillian Dempsey outlined the status of the Letterkenny Flagship 
Projects at Ballymacool and at the High Road.  
 
Mr Eamon Brown, Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate gave an 
update on SI Housing, outlining the application process involved, the 
various stage processes, and the consideration given to alternative 
accommodation options. An analysis of the range of SI applications 
was also provided. He proceeded to give an outline of the Housing 
Grants Scheme, the overall strategy in relation to housing for people 
with a disability including accommodation options under “Housing for 
All”. Details were also provided on the provision of Group Homes under 
the Capital Assistance Scheme. 
 
 
 
The meeting was opened to the floor and the following issues raised. 
 
 
Issues Raised 
• Lack of housing development in the Milford Electoral Area with 
towns such as Milford, Ramelton Rathmullan, Kerrykeel, Carrigart 
and Downings suffering. Smaller rural communities suffering, and 
the Council needs to support the retention of services in these 
localities. Reference made to Termon, Glenswilly and Churchill and 
the viability of services in these areas. Dedicated focus needed in 
this electoral area. Planned 10 units represent only 4% of the 
current housing need which currently stands at 254 units.  Projects 
and sites need to be identified across the area.  
• Number of stumbling blocks identified in terms of S.I Housing all of 
which are delaying the effective development of same including 
access to the N56 and other national roads. Noted that the 
provision of S.I. Housing had been very successful in the past.  
• Houses where available and on the market should be bought if they  
can accommodate the specific housing need in an area.  

5 
 
• Growing number of people on the housing waiting list together with 
increased rents are contributing to the homelessness situation. Not 
enough social houses being built.  
• People are being refused HAP on the basis that tenancies are 
becoming untenable due to increased rental costs.  
• Concern regarding delays with ESB connections. Update 
requested.  
• Building of extensions not an option down the road in many new 
housing schemes and thus not facilitating the needs of the elderly in 
the long-term. 
• The Local Authority should get involved in the provision of care 
homes. Noted that the Habinteg model in Lifford was an excellent 
facility that should be replicated county-wide.  
• Disability inclusive accommodation should be a priority. Specific 
need in the Milford Electoral Area.  
• Local Authority should provide proper Homeless Shelters and not 
leave this to the private sector.  
• Length of time involved in the procurement of housing is far too 
long. Benchmark prices provided by the Department are outdated 
for Donegal. 
• Noted that there were serious problems in relation to the 
advancement of housing grants directly related to the fact that the 
HSE was having difficulty recruiting occupational therapists. 
• Serviced site initiative worked very well in the past especially in and 
around Letterkenny.  
• Group Homes should be provided for in all planned housing 
developments. 
• Further detail required in relation to the feasibility of the water 
supply in Ballymacool given that the infrastructure in place is not 
adequate at present.  
• Update requested in respect of the meeting held recently involving 
the various lending institutions and the Vacant Home team. 
• Pre-Planning an issue in Inishowen in terms of housing 
development and as a result rural communities are suffering.  
• Little or no emphasis in relation to  housing provision on the Islands.  
• Potential for traffic issues highlighted on the road from Ballymacool 
into Lower Main Street, Letterkenny as a result of development at 
that location. Concern that traffic volumes will have an impact for all 
road users going forward. 
• Builders are struggling with current rates of payment, and this is 
impacting on adaptation and disability grants.  
• Request that current HAP rates be reviewed, and the relevant body 
contacted in relation to amending same to make them more 
compatible with current rental prices.  
• Letterkenny needs to be prioritised given that there are currently 
1262 application for housing in the Letterkenny area.  
• No reference to Ardara or Glenties.  
• Uisce Éireann should be coming to Donegal County Council with 
their short and long term infrastructural plans plans.  

6 
 
• No mention of Laghey, Ballintra, Pettigo or Mountcharles where 
there is adequate service infrastructure.  
• Drumrooske not mentioned in the update.  
• No reference to Fintown and over 22 years since social housing 
was provided in Brockagh. Population declining and larger towns 
are bursting at the seams.  
• Current policy pushing people to seek accommodation outside their 
own localities.  
 
Queries  
• What will happen to existing applications when the new criteria for 
housing adaptation grants is issued and how will existing 
applications be dealt with? 
• Request that the Disability Access Officer be invited to address 
members on the work currently being undertaken under her remit 
and in relation to adaptation measures that could be incorporated 
into new and existing buildings.  
• Query as to who is responsible for water upgrades, the overall cost 
of same together with the associated timelines involved.  
• How many houses have been purposefully built for people with 
disabilities and what are the plans for same in the future? 
• Are there any plans to build group houses in Kilmacrennan?  
• What is the delay in letting the houses in Killylastin? 
• How many houses will be built in Falcarragh and what are the 
dedicated timelines? 
• What stage are the 29 houses in Falcarragh and has provision been 
made for independent living issues? 
• Update needed regarding the houses in Annagry.  
• What has happened in relation to “Serviced Sites” given that the 
Department sanctioned the acquisition of certain sites over a year 
ago. 
• What is holding up the development of the houses behind the Fire 
station in Letterkenny and is this directly related to the presence of 
invasive species? 
• Is the target of 11 S.I Houses identified in “Housing for All” an 
annual target.  
• What is the process for applying for an S.I. House? 
• Update sought on housing provision in Gweedore. 
• Has any progress been made in terms of collaboration with Udarás 
na Gaeltachta. 
• Query regarding Voluntary Housing in Raphoe. 
• What is the situation regarding the provision of four bedroom 
accommodation? 
• Will disability access be a standard feature in all new social housing 
stock? 
• Does planning permission have to be sought again for the 
development in Newtowncunningham? 

7 
 
• Given that Policy RHP4 has been adopted in the new County 
Development Plan, has any effort been made to meet with 
developers in relation to housing provision on small rural sites? 
• What has been done in terms of carrying out a survey of vacant 
houses in Housing Estates? 
• What plans have the Council presented to Uisce Éireann in terms of 
capital investment in water and sewerage services over the next 
five years? 
• Breakdown of turnkey developments by MD requested.  
• Staged payment must be prioritised.  
 
Mr Patsy Lafferty, Director Housing, Corporate & Cultural Services 
informed members that the presentation was available on eCouncil. He 
acknowledged the comments in relation to the progress to date and 
thanked the Housing team for their contribution. It was noted that a range 
of issues had been raised and highlighted and that updates would be 
provided where applicable. 
 
Mr John Gallagher, Senior Engineer, advised that there had been a 
number of meetings with Uisce Éireann in relation to the developments at 
Old Town, Ballymacool and the High Road in Letterkenny encompassing 
356 housing units. A confirmation of feasibility had been received, he 
confirmed, in relation to the Ballymacool site which was positive but also 
referenced the need for upgrade works. He said that an update would be 
provided going forward on how this would affect the existing houses in the 
area. 
 
Clarification was provided in relation to the following: 
 
➢ It was confirmed that there were 181 additional units to be catered for 
in Southern Letterkenny in addition to maintaining and ensuring a 
robust water supply for existing consumers. It was positive, he added, 
that a confirmation of feasibility had issued.  
➢ The Council, he advised, was progressing projects in Letterkenny for 
social housing with Uisce Éireann being asked to define the works 
required to facilitate such development. The cost, it was noted, would 
be abnormal to the social housing projects concerned and would be 
sought from the Department. It was hoped, he said, that the projects in 
Letterkenny would act as a catalyst for Uisce Éireann to enhance 
project delivery in the area. Members would, it was confirmed, be 
updated in relation to the upgrades as soon as the connection offers 
became available. 
➢ There was acknowledgement that there had been issues with service 
provision at the Killylastin site but that this was now in the process of 
being resolved. Mr Gallagher outlined the importance of early 
intervention in terms of interaction with the utility providers. 
➢ It was confirmed that there had been an issue with Japanese 
Knotweed and Himalayan Balsam on the High Road site and that these 
would be dealt with at the design stages.  

8 
 
➢ With regard to the problems arising at preliminary stage it was 
confirmed that consultation was taking place in different towns around 
the county and that a number of turnkey projects were at pre-planning 
stage in towns such as Carndonagh, Muff, Buncrana and Moville. Land 
acquisition, it was noted, was being pursued in Moville.  
➢ It was noted that ongoing efforts were being made to identify suitable 
sites for social housing in the correct locations in the Milford Electoral 
Area. 
 
Mr Gallagher proceeded to inform members of the following: 
 
➢ That the layout of the Gweedore and Derrybeg sites would be made 
available to the members.  
➢ That the Sewerage Scheme in Dungloe was the responsibility of the 
Uisce Éireann and that the Council would have to make an application 
to connect. Issues raised by Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig it was confirmed 
would be followed up outside of the meeting process.  
➢ There were traffic implications arising from the proposed 300 units in 
Ballymacool but that the design works included a road safety audit and 
consideration as to where the additional traffic would go.  
➢ That where applicable initial studies undertaken in respect of  
Newtowncunningham would be utilised. 
➢ Killea is on the agenda and consideration is also being given to smaller 
towns and villages such as Derrybeg, Fintown etc where developments 
of 1-5 houses could be accommodated.  
➢ Uisce Éireann to be briefed on Donegal County Council plans going 
forward at the next scheduled meeting in December. Update will be 
sought on their county-wide programme and the implications for 
housing development in Donegal.  
➢ Update will be provided on the DCC lands at Ard Connell.  
➢ Consideration being given to developments in Laghey and 
Mountcharles with discussions at an early stage.  
➢ All areas of housing need being looked at in Brockagh, Cloghan and 
Fintown including the possibility for land acquisition for specific 
schemes.  
➢ Department not in favour of staged payment and have indicated that 
payment is to be made only after completion of projects. 
 
Mr Eamonn Browne, Divisional Manager, Housing & Corporate alluded to 
the fact changes to the Housing grants Scheme would see an increase in 
grant levels but would not cover the entire cost of any proposed works. 
Further guidance, he said, was awaited from the Department. In terms of 
existing applications, he noted that from past experience these had been 
treated in a sympathetic manner.  
Responding to members in relation to a number of comments on the lack 
of occupational therapists to assess grant applications, he confirmed, that 
contact would be made with the HSE regarding same. It was the intention 
going forward, he added, to tender for OT services and draw up a 
dedicated listing that could be called upon. This under the service level 
agreement with the HSE would allow Donegal County Council to go to the 

9 
 
approved tender list should the HSE not be in a position to provide the 
service within a five-day working period. The cost of same, he added, 
would be deducted from the overall grant. There was a third option, he 
advised, in that the applicant could engage a private OT costing in the 
region of €300. It was envisaged, he confirmed, that the tender list would 
offer better value with the cost then deducted from the standard grant 
monies.  
 
With regard to disabled applicants, members were informed that when a 
person qualifies for social housing support, they have to be capable of 
independent living and that where this is not possible a support plan is 
needed from the HSE. This support plan it was noted would be sought at 
the point of allocation.  
 
Group Homes he advised were for individuals with high support needs and 
the AHBs and the HSE had the skill set to manage these. In terms of this 
type of accommodation it was noted that there were currently 15 units in 
Dungloe and 10 in Donegal Town with a further 10 planned for Castlefin, 5 
in Drumkeen and 8 in Dungloe. With the support of the AHBs and the HSE 
it was planned to provide further units in Falcarragh and Gweedore. 
 
Mr Browne noted that at least 20 units were needed in Letterkenny with 
consideration being given to the Ballymacool site.  
 
In 2023 it was confirmed that 15% of social housing allocations had been 
made to those in the disabled category.  
 
Responding to the query on the need for four bed accommodation, he said 
that schemes were drawn up based on need and that there was ongoing 
consultation involving the Housing Assessment Officer and the Area 
Manager in the relevant Municipal District. 
 
He confirmed that an update would be provided in relation to the 29 units 
in Falcarragh being developed by Respond.  
 
Comments in relation to the timelines for the provision of SIs were, he 
advised, noted and that continuing efforts were being made to improve 
and monitor same.  
 
Cllr Mac Giolla Easbuig was informed that an update on his query in 
relation to accommodation in Raphoe would be provided outside of the 
meeting.  
 
Mr Donal Walker, A/Senior Engineer advised of the following: 
 
The project in Carrigart was expected to proceed to commencement but 
that issues in relation to wastewater treatment had yet to be teased out 
with the developer. 
 

10 
 
With regard to the Turnkey Scheme in Gweedore, it was confirmed that 
Uisce Éireann were looking to develop individual pods for the units at that 
location. It was noted that a letter of offer had issued and that this had 
confirmed that there would be no impact on the overall network or on any 
other connections.  
 
Approval was in the process of being sought for the development of 25 
units in Falcarragh.  
 
The department had approved the development in Annagry and it was now 
proceeding to final tender stage.  
 
Ongoing dialogue was taking place with the developer in Killea. 
 
Contracts had been exchanged in respect of the Drumrooske project and 
work was due to commence shortly. 
 
The Department had confirmed that it would not be possible to facilitate 
staged payments.  
 
The current Turnkey Scheme was valid until 2026 and that it was possible 
to look at small scale developments in smaller towns and hamlets. He 
encouraged members to actively promote this initiative as the Housing  
Capital team would be happy to meet with developers in relation to the 
small-scale development. 
 
Mr Liam Ward Deputy Chief Executive said that following on from the last 
Special Meeting and the item on vacancy and dereliction, a meeting had 
taken place with the various lending institutions and that an update on 
same would issue in due course. 
 
Responding to comments on the carrying out of a survey in relation to 
vacant properties in Housing Estates, he said that plans to fully implement 
same had been delayed given the success of the Croí Conaithe Scheme, 
but that it was intended to proceed with same as soon as resources 
became available. He said that he would check whether or not 
Newtowncunningham was on this list. 
 
Concluding, he said that the meeting had been useful and informative and 
that the value of holding these Special Meetings was clear. He 
acknowledged the work and ongoing effort of the Housing team. 
It was intended, he said that the Special Meeting scheduled for the 9th 
December would commence at 10am. 
 
C/370/24 T.I.I DELEGATION 22ND NOVEMBER 2024 
Members considered the report circulated with the agenda in relation to 
the above. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Mc Bride, seconded by Cllr Mc Monagle it was  

11 
 
to approve the attendance of members at the Annual Transport 
Infrastructure Ireland delegation meeting in Dublin on Friday 22nd 
November, 2024. 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
Cathaoirleach:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________________________ 
 
 
 
