Minutes of the Monthly Meeting of the Municipal District of Loughrea held on 12th January 2026
CEANTAR BARDASACH BHAILE LOCHA RIACH
MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF LOUGREA
Minutes of Monthly Meeting of the Municipal District of Loughrea
held in the Council Chamber, Civic Offices Loughrea, on 12th January 2026
I LATHAIR:
Cathaoirleach:
Baill:
Qjgglgb,;
Cllr. P. Killilea
Cllrs. l. Canning, G. Donohue, L. Harney, G. Finnerty
(online), D. Kelly, M. Kinane, M. Maher (online),
J. McClearn, M. Regan.
Ms. E. Ruane Director of Services, Mr. D Troy A/Senior
Engineer, Mr. G. Haugh Senior Executive Engineer,
Mr. N. Kennedy Executive Engineer, Mr. D. O'Loughlin
Executive Engineer, Ms. M. McGann
Meetings Administrator, Ms. O. Cloonan Staff
Officer.
1.
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF MONTHLY MEETING OF THE MUNICIPAL
DISTRICT OF LOUGHREA HELD ON 8th DECEMBER 2025
LMD2464
The Minutes of the monthly Meeting of the Municipal District of Loughrea held on 8th
December 2025 were approved by the Municipal District Members and signed by the
Cathaoirleach on the PROPOSAL of Cllr. L. Harney and SECONDED by Cllr. J. McClearn.
Matters arising from the Minutes:
Cllr. McClearn referenced speed ramps he recently observed on the N55 in the village of
Ballynagh, Co. Cavan and queried how such measures were permitted in Cavan while similar
installations are not approved in Galway. In response, Mr. Haugh advised that, although
there is no specific policy prohibiting traffic calming measures, any such interventions must
be considered on a case-by-case basis. He noted that traffic calming ramps are not
necessarily the starting point, and that it is generally preferable to implement horizontal
realignment or other traffic calming measures at the entrance to a village or town, through
landscaping or other visual measures so that drivers clearly recognise the change in
environment. He further noted that the installation of speed ramps carries a significant
financial cost, and any such interventions must be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Cllr. McClearn expressed his dissatisfaction with the tack of engagement from TII, noting that
the issue on the N65 at Heathlawn has remained unresolved since September 2024. He
stated that TII had been requested to attend the Loughrea MD meeting on two occasions but
were unavailable on both, and if TII are unable to attend a meeting of the Municipal District,
the Members may have to seek a meeting with them directly. He further stated that he
does not intend to issue another request for Til to attend and suggested that a public
1
Minutes of the Monthly Meeting of the Municipal District of Loughrea held on 12th January 2026
meeting be convened, and several Members indicated their support for this suggestion and
In relation to the query regarding the
the possibility of a delegation travelling to Dublin.
N65 at Heathlawn, Mr. Haugh advised that the most recent update received from Til
indicated that the project has progressed to the stage where the formal appointment of a
consultant is imminent.
Cllr. Regan enquired about proposed services at Longpoint and the expected timeline for
advertisement and in response, Ms. Ruane advised that clarification has been received
confirming that a concession, rather than a Casual Trading Licence, is required and that this
process is currently underway and will be examined in conjunction maintenance and
opening of the public toilets. Cllr. Kelly requested that, when the Concession for Longpoint
is being prepared, the Council's social media platforms be used to publicise it and to
highlight that the initiative was a decision of the Loughrea Municipal District Members.
Cllr. Harney requested an update on the request for attendance of the Superintendent of An
Garda Siochana at the Loughrea MD Meeting, and in response, Ms. McGann advised that the
request has been acknowledged and we are awaiting a formal response.
In response to enquiries from Cllr. Regan, Mr. Haugh agreed to distribute the results of the
speed surveys previously undertaken at Craughwell and Kilreekil. Mr. Haugh noted that an
application under the Low Cost Safety Scheme for works at Carrabane had been unsuccessful
but had been resubmitted for both Kilreekil and Carrabane.
Cllr. Donohue conveyed concern regarding the proposed amendment to the Customer
Services Action Plan which would require that children under the age of 16 to be
accompanied by an adult at libraries. Ms. Ruane noted that a revision to the policy is
currently under consideration and will be made available in due course.
2.
PRESENTATION ON CIVIL DEFENCE -BRENDAN QUALTER, CIVIL DEFENCE OFFICER
LMD246S
Mr. Qualter gave a presentation on the core services of the Civil Defence Service in Galway
City and County, confirming there were 5 operational units based across the City and County
with core services as follows:
Search & Rescue: assisting emergency services in searches of urban areas, open country,
and water-based searches.
Medical Response: training volunteers as first responders and emergency medical
technicians and supporting the HSE ambulance services.
Community Assistance: attending local community, cultural and sporting events to
provide an voluntary first response service.
Emergency Response: providing second line support to the Fire Service during
emergency events and provide welfare services during emergency events.
Mr. Qualter outlined the training and equipment used in the provision of core services, and
the range of communications systems to maintain operations.
2
Minutes of the Monthly Meeting of the Municipal District of Loughrea held on 12th January 2026
Cllr. Killilea and the Members thanked Mr. Qualter for the informative presentation and the
work carried out by Civil Defence services during COVID-19 and recent events such as Storm
Eowyn and stressed the value of their work to communities across the County.
3. MUNICIPAL DISTRICT OF LOUGHREA CATHAOIRLEACH'S BUSINESS
No matters arose.
4. ANY OTHER BUSINESS
LMD2466
LMD2467
Cllr. Canning queried who is responsible for removing the reeds at Portumna Bathing Area,
and Ms. Ruane confirmed that the Environment Department, Galway County Council, are
taking the lead on this project as there is a risk to Blue Flag status.
Cllr. Canning highlighted the ongoing issue with the illegal encampment in Portumna and
while he understands there is a court injunction being prepared, it needs to be highlighted
that the regular campers are now avoiding the area.
Cllr. McClearn noted that faults reported to Electric Skyline three months ago remain
unresolved and suggested that Galway County Council consider revoking the contract, citing
the IO-working-day guarantee. Cllr. Kelly seconded the proposal, referencing Abbey Street.
Mr. Troy advised that he will review the existing contract and contact Electric Skyline
regarding the highlighted complaints, and report back at the next MD Meeting. He noted
that delays may be possibly due to infrastructural improvement needed rather than direct
replacement of bulbs, which was outside the control of Electric Skyline.
Cllr. Kinane thanked the Gort Area Office for the repair work carried out on the Boardwalk in
the Cowpark Clarinbridge and enquired whether bollards will be installed indicating
willingness to cover any associated costs through notice of motion monies.
Cllr. Kinane proposed that a motion be tabled at Municipal District or Plenary regarding the
additional costs required to deliver the planned Wastewater Treatment Plant for
Clarinbridge and Craughwell. Cllr. Killilea advised that the motion should be brought to the
Plenary Meeting and Cllr. Kinane stated that support from Councillors at the Plenary Meeting
would be appreciated.
Cllrs. Killilea and Harney raised concerns about traffic calming measures in Labane, noting
the absence of lighting and damaged reflectors. Mr. Haugh advised that a survey has been
arranged by Mr. O'Loughlin, with proposals to follow. If funding is required, Councillors will
be contacted regarding Notice of Motion funding.
Cllr. Canning raised concerns about lack of reflection on M18 motorway signage when
traveling from Shannon late at night recently. Mr. Troy noted he uses that route daily and
will check the signage and seek a response from the Motorway Operators.
3
Minutes of the Monthly Meeting ofthe Municipal District of Loughrea held on 12th January 2026
Cllr. Donohue highlighted the poor condition of footpaths on Georges Street, Gort, noting
trip hazards, and suggesting the project for LPT funding. Cllr. Donohue also raised concerns
about inadequate lighting on the same street under the bridge. Mr. Haugh advised that no
funding is currently available, but LPT or Notice of Motion funding would be welcome.
Cllr. McClearn enquired about an update on the appointment of a Manager for Portumna
Courthouse and Loughrea Town Hall and Ms. Ruane confirmed that an individual
commenced employment last Tuesday.
Cllr. Regan noted a reduced spread of light since the recent change of bulbs in street lighting
and queried whether the wattage was strong enough in comparison with previous lighting.
Mr. Troy advised he will seek clarification, but his understanding was that the bulbs were
replaced like-for-like.
Ms. McGann reminded Members that the Community Support Schemes remain open until
23 January 2026 and confirmed that a new Community Support Scheme for Environmental
Development encompassing funding for burial ground improvement works and anti-litter
anti-graffiti measures was part of the Schemes this year.
CHRIOCHNAIGH AN CRUINNIU ANSIN.
Cathaoirleach:
Date:
4