 
1 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect putting 
them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is available on 
request. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ AN CRUINNIÚ DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH 
I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRÁ LÍ, AGUS AR-LÍNE/FÍORÚIL 
AR AN LUAN, 19 EANAIR, 2026 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN THE 
COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE AND ONLINE ON MONDAY, 19 
JANUARY 2026 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
Angie Baily                            Tom Barry  
Robert Brosnan 
      
Tommy Cahill                        Brendan Cronin 
Paul Daly                            
Charlie Farrelly                      Deirdre Ferris 
Breandán Fitzgerald  
Fionnán Fitzgerald                 Michael Foley (Cathaoirleach) Podge Foley       
       Martin Grady 
       
   Tommy Griffin                     Jackie Healy-Rae  
      Johnny Healy-Rae                  Maura Healy-Rae               Niall Kelleher                                          
Aoife Kennelly                       Michael Leane                     Sam Locke 
Dan McCarthy                       Jimmy Moloney 
 
     Norma Moriarty                     
Liam Speedy Nolan               Terry O’Brien                       Niall O’Callaghan                  
Bobby O’Connell                   John O’Donoghue                Anne O’ Sullivan                   
Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey        
 
ABSENT/ AS LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
Marie Moloney, Mikey Sheehy 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Mr.  F. Reidy Chief Executive              Mr. M. O’ Donoghue, Dir H.R. & Corporate Affairs                 
Ms. N. O’ Sullivan Dir Housing            Mr. P. Neary Dir Com, Climate Act& Oper Serv     
Ms. K. Moriarty SEO Finance              Mr. P. Curry SE. Cap Deliver, Climate Resil & Culture           
Ms. B Fitzgerald Meetings Admin        Mr. J. Nolan Dir Act Land Mgt & Econ Dev                            
Mr. B. Looney Head of Dig, Smart Prog & BB   Ms. C. Fitzgerald S.S.O. Corporate    
Ms. O. O’Shea, C.O Corporate                                             
 
 
 
The meeting commenced at 10.30a.m.   
 
Cllr. Michael Foley took the Chair and welcomed everyone.  
 
 
 
 

 
2 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
Congratulations 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley referred to the fantastic success the Kingdom of Kerry 
had achieved in January 2026 to date. The Cathaoirleach congratulated 
 
 
 Daingean UÍ Chuis Football Team on winning the All-Ireland Senior Football 
Title. 
 
 An Gaeltacht Football Team on winning the All-Ireland Junior Club Football 
Title.   
 
 Ballymacelligott Football Team on winning the All-Ireland Junior Club Football 
Title.  
 
 He congratulated Jessie Buckley on winning the Golden Globe for Best Actress. 
 
 Finally, he congratulated Aoibheann Daly on winning the Stripe Young 
Scientists of the Year award.  
 
January has been a very special month for Kerry and hopefully this success will 
continue throughout 2026. 
 
The Cathaoirleach congratulated Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae on his recent engagement.  
 
All members wished to be associated with the warm wishes expressed by the 
Cathaoirleach.  
 
Cllr. Terry O’ Brien also congratulated the five students from CBS School Tralee who 
achieved success at the Stripe young Scientist awards.  
 
 
Request for Civic Reception  
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue Director of Service advised that following the recent success in 
the county, a number of requests for Civic Reception had been received. The requests 
have been dealt with at CPG having regard to the formal Protocol agreed and adopted 
by Council in 2019, and as outlined in the Cathaoirleach report all requests for Civic 
Reception for the respective football teams will be dealt with at Municipal District Level. 
This formality will coincide with previous winners such as Dr. Crokes GAA and 
Templenoe GAA who received Civic Reception at MD Level. The Director indicated 
that under the agreed protocols it was proposed that a full Council Civic Reception will 
be held for Aoibheann Daly winner of the Stripe Young Scientist in accordance with 
established practice and a Full Council Civic Reception will be held for Jessie Buckley 
Golden Globe Winner given her success at international level.  
 
A number of Elected Members requested that the possibility of holding a joint Civic 
Reception at Full Council level for the three football teams would be examined. 
 
Following discussion, it was agreed that this matter would be dealt with at CPG and 
the February meeting.    
 

 
3 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
19.01.2026.01 
Protocols/Induction 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald, Meeting Administrator, referred Elected Members to the Protocols 
for Meetings of Kerry County Council and took a roll call.  
 
19.01.2026.02 
Cathaoirleach’s Report on CPG Meeting 
The Cathaoirleach’s report on the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 13 January 
2026, was noted by the Members. 
 
19.01.2026.03 
Confirmation of Minutes 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Angie Baily SECONDED by Cllr. Charlie Farrelly, it was 
resolved that the minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Kerry County Council held on 12th 
December 2025 be confirmed. 
 
19.01.2026.04 
(i)Confirmation of the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Kerry 
County Council held on 15 September 2025. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly SECONDED by Cllr. Robert Brosnan, it 
was resolved that the minutes of the Special Meeting of Kerry County Council held on 
15 September 2025 be confirmed. 
 
Ms. Bridget Fitzgerald, Meetings Administrator, went through protocol on ethics.   
Ms. B. Fitzgerald reminded members of their requirements under Part 15 (Ethics 
Framework) of the Local Government Act 2001 and the Code of Conduct for 
Councillors.  Councillors should be aware that the onus for complying with the 
requirement of the Act and the Code of Conduct lies with each individual 
Councillor.  Under the beneficial interest provision and should that provision apply, a 
Councillor must (1)    Disclose the nature of his/her interest or the fact of a connected 
person’s interest at the meeting and before discussion or consideration of the matter 
commences and (2)    Withdraw from the meeting for so long as the matter is being 
discussed or considered, and accordingly, he/she shall take no part in the discussion 
or consideration of the matter and shall refrain from voting in relation to it. There can 
be no discussions with people in the public gallery while the meeting is in progress. 
 
(ii) To consider in accordance with Section 13 of the Planning and Development Act 
2000 (as amended). 
 
a. Chief Executive’s Report on submissions/observations received in respect of the 
Material Alterations on proposed Variation No 2. (Killarney Municipal District 
Settlements’ Plan) of the County Development Plan 2022-2028. 
b. The recommendations of the Committee established under Section 51 (1)(a) of the 
Local Government Act 2001 for this purpose. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher declared a conflict of interest with regard to lands that are subject to 
a material alteration. 
 
S. Flahive stated we will go through the Chief Executive’s Report and the Section 51 
Report. 

 
4 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
S. Flahive read out the Statutory consideration:- 
Section 13, subsection 6 (C) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as 
amended).  
Any modifications are restricted at this stage of the process. 
A further modification to the variation— 
• 
may be made where it is minor in nature and therefore not likely to 
have significant effects on the environment or adversely affect the 
integrity of a European site, 
• 
shall not be made where it refers to— 
(i) an increase in the area of land zoned for any purpose, or 
(ii) an addition to or deletion from the record of protected structures. 
 
S. Flahive stated 17 Submissions were received from prescribed bodies and various 
landowners during the public consultation period on the Proposed Material Alterations 
to Proposed Variation No. 2 of the Kerry County Development Plan 2022-2028.  
 
 
Submissions 
Statutory Submissions 
Submission No. KE-C71-VAR2-13:   OFFICE OF THE PLANNING REGULATOR 
(OPR) 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
In relation to Material Alteration 20 the committee disagreed with the recommendation 
made in the CER for the following reasons: 
 Lands are in agricultural use. 
 Sufficient lands zoned for development in the Municipal District. 
 Other lands are undeveloped between the lands and the town centre. 
 Residential zoning remains, they will be Strategic Residential Reserve – R4. 
Proposed Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
 
In relation to Material Alteration 23 the committee disagreed with the recommendation 
made in the CER for the following reasons: 
 Lands are in agricultural use. 
 Sufficient lands zoned for development in the Municipal District. 
 Other lands are undeveloped between the lands and the town centre. 
 Residential zoning remains, they will be Strategic Residential Reserve – R4. 
Proposed Cllr. N. O’Callaghan  
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
 
Cllr. Kelleher stated services not anywhere adjacent to this site and Material Alteration 
20. 
 
In relation to Material Alteration 32 the committee disagreed with the recommendation 
made in the CER for the following reasons: 
 Lands are in agricultural use. 
 There are issues accessing the site. 
 The lands are not serviced. Uisce Éireann didn’t extend the sewer as far as 
these lands. 

 
5 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
 The lands are located away from the village. 
 Residential zoning remains; they will be Strategic Residential Reserve – R4. 
Proposed Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
Cllr. N. O’Callaghan stated changing land from R1 to R4 is not removing residential 
land, just keeping land in reserve for future development. 
Cllr. Kelleher stated services not anywhere adjacent to site. 
 
 
In relation to Material Alteration 33 the committee disagreed with the recommendation 
made in the CER for the following reasons: 
 Lands are adjacent to and surrounded by development, next to the Páirc 
Chuimín estate. 
 The lands are sequential to Kilcummin. 
 Lands are serviced, with investment by Uisce Éireann in the sewer. 
 Within walking distance of the settlement and its associated services. 
Development would help maintain enrolment in the National School. 
 Close to the proposed Cork-Kerry Economic Corridor. 
 The lands were previously zoned residential and had planning permission. 
Proposed Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
 
 
In relation to Material Alteration 34 the committee disagreed with the recommendation 
made in the CER for the following reasons: 
 The lands are not serviced, as such zoning would be premature. 
Proposed Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
 
 
In relation to Material Alteration 43 the committee agreed with the recommendation 
made in the Proposed Material Alterations CER in response to this material alteration. 
Proposed Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
 
In relation to Material Alteration 11 the committee disagreed with the recommendation 
made in the CER for the following reasons: 
 There is a need for industrial lands in Killarney, with an opportunity to diversify 
the town’s economy being positive. 
 Balanced provision for employment/enterprise is necessary as a critical part of 
any development plan. 
 Other lands zoned for industry in the town have not been developed to date. 
 Businesses are seeking land outside of Killarney as insufficient employment 
land is available. 
 The site is considered to be accessible. 
 There will be a demand for industry/employment with future residential 
development. 

 
6 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
 These lands may have access to the proposed Cork-Kerry Economic Corridor 
and are not located in the preferred route corridor that has been identified by 
TII. 
Proposed Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
 
 
In relation to Material Alteration 30 the committee disagreed with the recommendation 
made in the CER for the following reasons: 
 No history of flooding in Barraduff. 
 These lands could accommodate a variety of uses with employment needed 
given the population of Barraduff. 
 There is a need for this type of zoning, with businesses being there to use it. 
Proposed Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
 
 
In relation to Material Alteration 48 the committee agreed with the recommendation 
made in the Proposed Material Alterations CER in response to this material alteration. 
Proposed Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
 
 
In relation to Material Alteration 3 the committee agreed with the recommendation 
made in the Proposed Material Alterations CER in response to this material alteration. 
Proposed Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
 
 
In relation to Material Alteration 19 the committee disagreed with the recommendation 
made in the CER for the following reasons: 
 The lands are not within the curtilage of the protected structure or within 
definition of attendant grounds. The protected structure is in a different folio to 
these lands, see Appendix A. 
 Reports were submitted by the Committee from Reid Associates and Robin 
Mandal Architect in support of this material alteration, see Appendix B, C & D 
to this report, with the planning consultant stating: 
o The proposed Amendment of the Killarney zoning map to extend the 
settlement boundary and to zone lands R1 – New/Proposed Residential 
and R2 – Existing Residential at Cahernane as identified on the map, 
Material Alteration No 19, should remain as the lands comprise Phase 1 
lands as defined in the National Planning Framework and warrant 
prioritisation within the sequential phasing of development land to 
provide a coherent sustainable location for the provision and delivery of 
housing and securing the objective of the Housing Strategy. 
o The Conservation Assessment has concluded that suitably designed 
residential use on the site could have a neutral, slight and long-term 
effect on the surrounding lands, including those of Cahernane House 
and that there is no reason, based on the heritage aspects of the 

 
7 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
proposed material alteration, for it to be excluded from Variation 2 of the 
Kerry County Development Plan 2022-2028. 
o There are no sustainable grounds for recinding the residential zoning. 
The subject amendment is in accordance with the proper planning and 
sustainable development of the area. 
 In addition, Uisce Éireann notes the availability of a sewer and watermain. 
 There are footpaths, public lighting and cycle paths serving the site. 
 The site is within walking distance of the town centre and would accord with the 
10-minute town concept. 
 There is existing residential development on the northern side of the river, the 
site is therefore contiguous to Killarney. 
Proposed Cllr. N. Kelleher 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae wanted it to put on the record that the language used by the OPR, 
Department and Planning Authority, ‘’associated” in the report with Cahernane House 
had been put to bed.  There is a separation between the site and the house and this 
has been made clear by Councillors, landowners and experts; the distinguishment has 
been made. 
J. Nolan stated that the documents supplied by the Councillors will be submitted in 
response to OPR. 
 
 
In relation to Material Alteration 21 the committee disagreed with the recommendation 
made in the CER for the following reasons: 
 The members have agreed to a road upgrade, including traffic lights, at this 
location with a dwelling at this location not considered to impact on the 
proposed upgrades. 
 Trees on the site can be maintained as part of any development on this site. 
 The N22 will be downgraded upon completion of the Cork-Kerry Economic 
Corridor. 
Proposed Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
In relation to Material Alteration 25 the committee agreed with the recommendation 
made in the Proposed Material Alterations CER in response to this material alteration. 
Proposed Cllr. B. Cronin 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
 
 
Submission No. KE-C71-VAR2-8: 
SOUTHERN REGIONAL ASSEMBLY 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. B. Cronin 
Seconded Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
Submission No. KE-C71-VAR2-1:     TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE IRELAND 
(TII) 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 

 
8 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
Seconded Cllr. B. Cronin 
 
 
Submission No. KE-C71-VAR2-2: 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION & YOUTH 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. B. Cronin 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
 
 
Submission No. KE-C71-VAR2-3: 
HSE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
Seconded Cllr. B. Cronin 
 
 
Submission No. KE-C71-VAR2-4:   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY 
(EPA) 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
 
 
Submission No. KE-C71-VAR2-6: 
UISCE ÉIREANN 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. B. Cronin 
Seconded Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
 
 
Submission No. KE-C71-VAR2-7: 
OFFICE OF PUBLIC WORKS  (FLOOD 
RISK MANAGEMENT) 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. B. Cronin 
Seconded Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
 
 
Submission No. KE-C71-VAR2-9: 
INLAND FISHERIES IRELAND 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 

 
9 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
Seconded Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
 
 
Submission No. KE-C71-VAR2-10:DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING, LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT & HERITAGE 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. B. Cronin 
Seconded Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
 
 
Submission No. KE-C71-VAR2-15: 
NATIONAL 
TRANSPORT 
AUTHORITY 
(NTA) 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
Seconded Cllr. B. Cronin 
 
 
Material Alteration Submissions 
Submission KE-C71-VAR2-14: ECKHARD LADNER 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. B. Cronin 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
 
 
Submission KE-C71-VAR2-12: ELSIE HEGARTY 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. B. Cronin 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
 
 
Submission KE-C71-VAR2-16: RENA, MUIRIS & ANDREA HEALY 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
Seconded Cllr. B. Cronin 
 
Submission KE-C71-VAR2-17: MARGARET HEFFERNAN 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 

 
10 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
Seconded Cllr. B. Cronin 
 
 
Submission KE-C71-VAR2-5: 
DEREK & MARGARET LING 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. B. Cronin 
Seconded Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
 
 
Submission KE-C71-VAR2-16: RENA, MUIRIS & ANDREA HEALY 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. M. Healy-Rae 
Seconded Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
 
 
Submission that does not relate to Proposed Material Alterations 
Submission KE-C71-VAR2-11: MARK O’LEARY 
Section 51 Committee Recommendation: 
The Committee agreed with the recommendations made in the Proposed Material 
Alterations CER in response to this submission. 
Proposed Cllr. B. Cronin 
Seconded Cllr. N. O’Callaghan 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher logged off as conflict of interest in lands. 
 
 
Mr. J. Nolan concluded by thanking the Councillors and Section 51 Committee.   
J. Nolan stated we have had two long meetings and noted if plan is adopted, Killarney 
MD would be in a strong position with respect to employment and residential land. 
 
(iii) To consider in accordance with Section 13 of the Planning and Development 
Act 2000 (as amended), the adoption of Variation No 2. (Killarney Municipal 
District Settlements’ Plan) of the County Development Plan 2022-2028. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr Brendan Cronin and Seconded by Cllr Niall O’Callaghan it was 
agreed to consider in accordance with Section 13 of the Planning and Development 
Act 2000 (as amended), the adoption of Variation No 2. (Killarney Municipal District 
Settlements’ Plan) of the County Development Plan 2022-2028.  
 
One vote was taken on the proposal as follows  
 
For: Cllrs. (25) Angie Baily, Tom Barry, Tommy Cahill, Brendan Cronin, Paul Daly,  
Charlie Farrelly,  Deirdre Ferris,  Fionnan Fitzgerald, Podge Foley, Martin Grady, 
Tommy Griffin, Jackie Healy-Rae, Johnny Healy-Rae, Maura Healy-Rae, Niall 
Kelleher, Aoife Kennelly, Sam Locke, Dan McCarthy, Liam Speedy Nolan, Terry 

 
11 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
O’Brien, Niall ‘Botty’ O’ Callaghan, Bobby O’ Connell, John O’Donoghue, Anne O’ 
Sullivan, Michael Foley (Cath)                                               
 
Against: (0) 
 
 
Absent: Cllr. (8) Robert Brosnan, Breandán Fitzgerald, Michael Leane, Jimmy 
Moloney, Marie Moloney, Norma Moriarty, Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey, Mikey Sheehy 
  
Ms B. Fitzgerald, S.E.O. Corporate Affairs said the vote was carried.                
 
Mr. Fearghal Reidy, Chief Executive acknowledged the work done by Killarney MD 
and acknowledged the work done by the Planning team led by Seán Flahive.  This 
adds to residential development and capacity to increase and enhance housing policy. 
Kerry is well ahead on variations and wish to acknowledge the team. 
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service stated we will respond to OPR in the next 5 days, 
indicating that the plan has been adopted with material alterations. 
 
19.01.2026.05 
Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
The Chief Executive’s Report to Council for the month of January 2026 which had 
been circulated was noted by the Members.  
 
The Chief Executive advised that the Council had today received notification from the 
National Transport Authority for 2026 Capital Grant allocation of €3,250,000 which will 
fund a number of projects across the county for the Active Travel Investment Grant 
and Bus Stop Enhancement Programme.  
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae moved Notice of Motion no 26.  
 
26. Affordable Housing Progress Update 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae proposed  
To ask Kerry County Council to update the members on what progress has been 
made in progressing affordable housing in Kerry. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Council published an open call for developers for Affordable Housing in Tralee 
and Killarney in December 2025. Calls for expressions of interest from developers will 
remain open until 13th February 2026. Thereafter, the submissions will be assessed 
in accordance with the eligibility criteria and successful proposals will be referred to 
the Department of Housing for approval to access the Affordable Housing Fund.  
 
Successful schemes will then be advertised to individual applicants and work is 
underway to develop a scheme of priorities for the allocation of affordable homes in 
the county and the members will be briefed on this process in the coming months. 
 
In parallel, Kerry County Council is planning delivery of affordable houses on council 
owned lands in the short to medium terms. 
 

 
12 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae said that the council needs affordable housing urgently, it 
appears that the council is playing catch up all the time. She said the infill sites need 
to be developed in particular with affordable housing. She asked if an update in relation 
to the H.S.E. site in Killarney has been received. The H.S.E. is the biggest landowner 
in Killarney, who currently doesn’t have to pay Residential Zoned Land Tax (RZLT) 
and questioned if the H.S.E. were liable for this Tax, would they provide the land.   
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae seconded this motion.  
 
Ms. N. O’ Sullivan Director of Service said that a full update will be provided at the 
Housing Briefing which is due to take place in the coming weeks. The Expression of 
Interest has been advertised and remains opened until 13th February 2026. The 
Department has approved Affordable Housing for Tralee and Killarney however 
Kerry County Council can make an appeal to the Department for affordable Housing 
in other towns throughout the county. She referred to the Department of Housing 
website which she advised is very informative and provides information on the 
housing process. The Council will continue to engage with potential buyers and 
developers.  
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service advised that the Council will continue to engage with 
the Land Development Agency in relation to the master plan site in Tralee. The 
Council is hopeful to have an update on the lands at St. Finans Killarney by the end 
of Q1 2026. 
 
Mr. M O’ Donoghue advised that the masterplan will have to be in line with financial 
viability. 
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae welcomed the Estate Enhancement Fund and questioned if 
the same issues will arise as with the Community Support Fund. 
She expressed concerns at the planting of trees at the Gap Cross and questioned if 
they are planted too close to the junction.  
She asked for an update on the proposed works at Shinnagh Junction.  
 
All Elected Members welcomed the update on the Affordable Housing and Turnkey 
Acquisitions and hoped that the Affordable Housing Scheme will be extended 
beyond Tralee and Killarney. 
 
Many of the Elected Members supported the comments in regard to the Estate 
Enhancement Fund and also requested that guidance would be given on what type 
of trees can be planted.  
 
Many of the Elected Members welcomed the announcement to the funding for the 
Bus Shelter and said that the planned projects should be expediated.  
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly welcomed the Estate Enhancement Fund which he said will be 
a great assistance to communities across the county.  He asked that the scheme 
would include funding of power washing and painting of boundary walls.   
 
Letter to the Department of Transport 

 
13 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly referred to the Chief Executive report and in particular the reply 
dated 15th January 2026 received from the Department of Transport in relation to a 
request to make the use of high vis clothing mandatory. He said he was very 
disappointed with the response and didn’t agree with comments expressed in 
relation to the RSA that the “The Road Safety Authority (RSA) has successfully been 
running the Be Safe, Be Seen, Campaign”. He asked that a reply would issue to Mr. 
Sean Canney TD expressing his disappointment and asking that the mandatory 
wearing of high vis would be reconsidered.     
 
Cllr. Robert Brosanan seconded this proposal and said that the lack of high vis 
clothing is a problem everywhere, even with hill walkers and mountain climbers and 
said there should be mandatory.  
 
Cllr. Tom Barry referred to the update on the Affordable Housing and said that there 
are anti-social behaviour issues under the CLUID Housing that needs to be 
addressed.  He asked that all voluntary housing bodies should be issued with anti-
social behaviour policies in line with Kerry County Council’s anti-social behaviour 
policies.  He welcomed the Estate Enhancement Fund but advised that some estates 
don’t have residents’ association and it may be challenging to apply for funding. He 
referred to the Town and Village Renewal Scheme and expressed disappointment 
that Lixnaw didn’t receive funding for a bus shelter under the bus shelter funding 
programme.  
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan welcomed the Chief Executive report and asked of the 344 that 
the Council expect to deliver for 2026, how many will be allocated in Chorca Duibhne 
area.  
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae asked if the criteria for the Affordable Housing Scheme can 
be forwarded to the Elected Members. He welcomed the funding for Currow of 
€50,000 under the TVRS Project Development Measure. He referred to the 
allocation of funding for the NRA under the Road Safety Campaign and said he 
believed that the money would be spent better if allocated directly to a road safety 
scheme.  
 
Cllr. Niall Kelleher thanked the Planning Staff for their efforts in Variation No 2 
(Killarney MD) and acknowledged the difficulty in completing the process. He 
welcomed the funding for the Active Travel but believed that a lot more funding 
should be allocated. He welcomed the Estate Enhancement Fund and asked for an 
update on Part V projects which will be delivered across the county. He said these 
properties will play a big part in housing people in the future. He said if the 
Community Enhancement Fund is going to be oversubscribed, he asked that 
additional funding be made available at National Level.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill asked for an update on Age Friendly Parking.  In addition, he 
asked if an application for funding for flood prevention measures had been submitted 
to the Department and if not that it would be submitted as a matter of urgency. He 
said the South Kerry Greenway has been very busy since its opening and thanked 
everyone associated in their efforts to open the facility.  
 

 
14 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
Cllr. Angie Baily concurred with previous comments expressed in regard to the 
funding allocated for the Bus Shelters and asked that the works would be 
expeditated.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin welcomed the funding for Milltown under the Town and Village 
Renewal Scheme.  
 
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly referred to the funding for Bus Shelter and asked that a Bus 
Shelter would be provided in Duagh Village.  
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty welcomed the success of the South Kerry Greenway since its 
opening; it has been an economic driver for the area. She welcomed the increase in 
funding for the Arts grant and asked when will the application for Sport Development 
Grants open. 
 
Cllr. Niall O’Callaghan referred to the funding for the Sports Capital Grant and 
questioned if there is easier way to access the funding as currently many clubs have 
to borrow the money to carry out the works before they receive the grant. He asked 
for an update on what Kerry County Council plans are to promote the Ryder Cup in 
Kerry. He said Kerry cannot be relying on Fáilte Ireland and Limerick County Council 
to assist them.  
 
Cllr Podge Foley asked for an update on the footpath Enhancement works to the 
RDI  Hub in Killorglin.  
 
The Chief Executive replied to the following queries as follows: 
 
 The Chief Executive welcomed the additional funding for the Bus Shelter 
Enhancement Scheme. He advised that the Council is engaging with the 
National Transport Authority directly and all updates will be provided at 
Municipal District Level.  
 
 A full update will be provided on all Housing developments at the Housing 
briefing.  
 
Ms. N O’ Sullivan Director of Service thanked the Elected Members for the positive 
comments in relation to the Estate Enhancement Scheme. She advised that the 
Tenancy Management Officer will engage with residents’ association to address any 
issues that may arise.  
 
A detailed breakdown of all housing projects for 2026 can be provided to the Elected 
Members. She confirmed that 34 housing units are planned for the Chorca Duibhne 
Area.  
 
She advised that the Council will engage with Approved Housing Bodies in relation 
to anti-social behaviour.  
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service replied to the following queries raised:  
 

 
15 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
 An update on all Part V Developments will be provided at Municipal District 
level.  
 In relation to the Ryder Cup, he advised that the Council be proposing that a 
working group is formed via the S.P.C to consider the 
communications/marketing/legacy etc of the event and its benefit to the 
Kerry tourism industry. 
 
 Mr. P. Neary Director of Service replied to the following queries raised:  
 
 The Tree Planting at the Gap Cross will allow visibility at the junction but 
undertook to request the safety audit to review same.  
 
 He undertook to provide an update on the works at Shinnagh Cross.  
 
 In relation to Age Friendly parking, he said the Council is currently reviewing 
its policy and will be looking at this in more detail over the coming months. 
 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris moved Notice of Motion no 15 
 
15. Proposal to Amend KCDP 5-9  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Deirdre Ferris proposed  
In light of the ever decreasing availability of affordable properties on the private market 
for purchase or rent, and the growing social housing list, I propose that this council 
supports an amendment to KCDP 5-9 to increase supply in the county: 
 
Facilitate the development of small-scale residential cluster developments in villages 
and small village settlements in all small towns and villages in the county served by 
individual onsite wastewater treatment systems where there are no plans to provide a 
capital wastewater scheme, where wastewater schemes are at capacity with long time 
frames for planned upgrades and where the design, layout and scale of the residential 
cluster is commensurate with the scale and layout of the existing settlement. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Objective KCDP 5-9 of the Kerry County Development Plan 2022-2028 seeks to 
facilitate the development of small-scale residential cluster developments in villages 
and small village settlements listed in Table 5.1 served by individual onsite wastewater 
treatment systems where there are no plans to provide a capital wastewater scheme 
and where the design, layout and scale of the residential cluster is commensurate with 
the scale and layout of the existing settlement. 
  
 
It should be noted that Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage James 
Browne recently announced that builders will be able to develop new wastewater 
treatment facilities in collaboration with Uisce Éireann for smaller housing 
developments of up to 40 homes. The new arrangements will provide greater planning 
certainty for developers, local authorities, and communities by ensuring a consistent 
and transparent approach to how wastewater solutions for smaller housing schemes 
are assessed and approved. Under this model: 

 
16 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
 
• Uisce Éireann will work with developers to establish the wastewater infrastructure 
and UE will secure the necessary discharge authorisations from the EPA 
• developers will retain responsibility for planning permission and will fund and 
construct the infrastructure to Uisce Éireann’s specifications under a design–build–
transfer 
agreement. 
• following commissioning, ownership and operation will transfer to Uisce Éireann 
• the department will issue a circular to planning authorities to ensure consistent 
application of assessment criteria for wastewater options in small-scale, multi-unit 
housing developments providing greater clarity for both planners and developers 
 
Once the regulations for General Binding Rules (GBRs) are adopted, Kerry County 
Council would welcome working with developers to advance any such proposals.  
 
Cllr. Deridre Ferris acknowledged the response but said the proposed development 
will not solve the existing problem and will only lead to an increase in house prices. If 
the Council is serious about addressing the housing crisis, she said cluster 
developments must be expanded.  
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan seconded the motion.  
 
Mr. J. Nolan acknowledged the comments of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and said firstly all  
Variation Plans must be completed. He advised that the National Planning Statement 
may deal with is issue nationally and if not, the council will review the matter.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris Moved Notice of Motion no 31. 
 
31. CAMHS Publication Request 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Deirdre Ferris proposed  
That this council supports a demand for the publication of the long awaited and long 
delayed North Kerry CAHMS look back review. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris expressed frustration that to date the report has still not been 
published.  She questioned what the H.S.E. feel they need to hide in the report. This 
event has been one of the greatest scandals in recent times and demanded that the 
report be published immediately.  
 
Cllr. Tom Barry seconded this motion.  
 
19.01.2026.06 
To note the NOAC Local Authority Performance Indicator 
Report 2024      
 
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue, Director of Services, referred to the report dated 09th January 
2026 which had been circulated to Elected Members.  He outlined the following:  
 

 
17 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
The National Oversight and Audit Commission (NOAC) recently published its Local 
Authority Performance Indicator Report. This outlines the activity in 2024 in respect of 
a set of 46 performance indicators across the range of local authority services.  
 
Established in July 2014 under the 2014 Local Government Reform Act, the role of 
NOAC is to scrutinise the performance of local government bodies against relevant 
indicators, including customer service indicators, that NOAC considers appropriate. 
The statutory functions of the Commission provide independent oversight of the local 
government sector and is also of importance to the various Government Departments 
that operate through the authorities and to the wider public. Since its initial report in 
2014, the number of measurement indicators has increased, from 31 in 2015 to 46 in 
2024. These indicators provide a measurement of the performance of local authorities 
in certain areas, and also provide a comparator against similar local authorities.  
 
Kerry County Council continuously reviews operations efficiency to ensure services 
are delivered in the most effective manner. In many areas, improvements in 
performance outcomes were achieved in key areas in the delivery of services to the 
people of Kerry and visitors to this county in 2024. As a Council, we continue to work 
closely with our directorates, elected members, community and voluntary groups and 
other stakeholders to continue this improvement in terms of service delivery and 
promotion of the county’s economy. 
 
This report is an overview of the performance of the Council across the 46 NOAC 
performance indicators for 2024 and the unique aspects of County Kerry including its 
peripheral, scenic and rural nature, the influx of almost 2 million visitors to the county 
each year with over 1 in 5 jobs in the county dependant on tourism and ongoing 
investment in urban and rural regeneration programmes across the county. A 
comparison with 2023 indicator performance is included in the report and our actions 
to address indicators outcomes, as appropriate.  
 
The performance indicators form only a part of the overall governance framework in 
Kerry County Council. This framework also includes publications and reports to our 
elected members such as the Annual Report, Annual Service Delivery Plan, Chief 
Executive’s Reports to Council, Directorate Updates to Council and Municipal District 
meetings, Annual Budgetary Process and responses to notices of motions. These all 
form part of our commitment to good governance and accountability in the delivery of 
over local government 1,100 services to the citizens of County Kerry.  
 
In June 2025, Kerry County Council attended the National Oversight and Audit 
Commission as part of its scrutiny process into the performance of local authorities in 
accordance with its statutory functions. A recording of the meeting, as well as a copy 
of the transcript, can be freely viewed by the public on the NOAC website at 
www.noac.ie with a copy of this report. 
 

 
18 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
Cllr. Angie Baily expressed concerns that more social houses were sold than bought 
by Kerry County Council in 2024. She said the timeframe to renovating properties is 
concerning and called on the Council to consider expanding the existing workforce.  
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty asked from the number of properties sold; how many were 
Single Rural Dwellings. She highlighted concerns regarding the Tenant Purchase in 
estates as it may reduce the security element of social housing for the future. 
 
Cllr. Jimmy Moloney said that additional funding must be provided to repair the 
tertiary roads. If the Council doesn’t improve their standards, the roads will continue 
to deteriorate costing more in the long-term future.  
 
Ms. N. O’ Sullivan Director of Housing advised that the Housing Department is doing 
everything possible to reduce the timeline for void management. She advised that 
the figures outlined include properties where they are long-term legal issues.  
 
Mr. P. Neary Director of Service acknowledged the comments expressed by Cllr. 
Jimmy Moloney, however, he advised that Kerry County Council PSCI ratings across 
the local road network consistently exceeded the 95% target. 
 
19.01.2026.07 
To note the issue of Annual Declaration Forms in 
accordance with Part 15 (Ethics) of the Local Government Act 2001 as 
amended. 
 
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue, Director of Services, referred to report dated 12th January 2026 
which had been circulated to Elected Members outlining that in accordance with his 
duties under Section 174(1)(b) of the Local Government Act, 2001, a notice is being 
issued to each Member of the Council informing them of the requirement under 
Section 171 of the Act to prepare and furnish an annual declaration of interests to the 
Ethics Registrar.   
 
He asked Members to note that this declaration must be returned before 28 February 
2026. 
 
(b) Disclosure of Donation Forms for 2025 
The Disclosure of Donations Statement Forms for 2025 along with the Guidelines for 
Members of Local Authorities Concerning Donations have issued to each Member of 
the Council. 
 
The statutory deadline for return of the completed forms, together with statutory 
declarations is 31 January 2026. 
 
19.01.2026.08 
To 
consider 
the 
Draft 
Training 
and 
Development 
Programme for Councillors 2026. 
 
Ms. B Fitzgerald Meetings Administrator, referred to the report dated 15 January 2026 
which had been circulated to Elected Members, and she outlined the key objectives of 
the draft Training Programme. 
 

 
19 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
She noted that significant amount of training is available on an annual basis from the 
AILG and a number of approved training bodies. Members will be notified of upcoming 
training events on an ongoing basis when received.  
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Dan McCarthy, SECONDED by Cllr. Podge Foley, it was 
agreed to adopt the Training & Development Programme for Councillors 2026.  
 
19.01.2026.09 
To consider and adopt the 2026 Kerry County Council Arts Act 
Grant Allocations. 
 
All Elected Members wished to compliment the works undertaken in the Arts Office 
and paid tribute to Ms. Kate Kennelly and her team for their achievements.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Angie Baily and seconded by Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan It was 
agreed to consider and adopt the 2026 Kerry County Council Arts Grant Allocations. 
 
19.01.2026.10 
To note reports from SPC Chairs: 
(a)  Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey, SPC Chair, on the meeting of the Culture, 
Heritage & Gaeltacht SPC held on 10 December 2025 was noted. 
(b) Cllr. Tommy Cahill, SPC Chair, on the meeting of the Housing SPC held on 11 
December 2025 was noted.                 
 
19.01.2026.11 
To note the opening of tenders for: 
 
(a) On the proposal of Cllr Dan McCarthy and seconded by   Cllr. Norma Moriarty it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tender for the N70 Sneem to Blackwater 
Bridge (Tahilla to Doon) Road Project – Archaeological Consultancy Services 
Contract (Stage (i) – (iv) Services). Closing Date: Friday 30 January 2026. 
 
(b) On the proposal of Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan and seconded by   Cllr. Angie Baily it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tender for Engineering Consultant Led 
Integrated Design Team Services for The Ashe Memorial Hall - Heritage and 
Sustainability Revival Project. (RFT 7211741). Closing Date: Friday 06 February 
2026. 
 
19.01.2026.12  Notices of Motion 
 
1. Make a full review of the tenants’ handbook 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae proposed. 
With the increase in social housing rents and the increased budget for housing 
maintenance that Kerry County Council will commit to a full review of the tenants 
handbook. 
 
The following reply issued:  
The Housing Department has commenced a review of the Tenant’s Handbook and the 
Members of the Housing SPC were briefed on same at the Housing SPC Meeting held 
on 11th December 2025. The housing department will also brief full council on the 
tenancy handbook review, as part of the process. 

 
20 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae said that the Council must be cognisant that there will be a 
cohort of people on a lower income threshold that are paying higher rents. He said 
that the Council should now be willing to replace windows and doors in additional to 
other maintenance works.  
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae seconded this motion. 
  
2. Establishment of Task Force to address rural depopulation 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Cahill proposed.  
That Kerry County Council would establish, in conjunction with the Department of 
Rural and Community Development, a dedicated Task Force to address rural 
depopulation in Iveragh and South Kerry. A Task Force should also be set up in North 
Kerry and all other areas facing rural depopulation. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council will liaise with the Department of Rural and Community 
Development on the potential for establishment of dedicated Task Force in relation to 
the further development and implementation of Our Rural Future, which will consider 
rural depopulation as a key matter. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill said that this County is facing a significant challenge in rural 
depopulation especially in South Kerry, many GAA clubs have had no choice but to 
amalgamate to form a team. He said that that planning conditions and wastewater 
infrastructure are forcing people to move out of towns. He expressed concerns that 
while the basic services are not there, South Kerry will continue to decline. He 
commended the efforts of the existing committee that has already been established in 
South Kerry to address rural depopulation.  
 
Cllr. Dan McCarthy seconded this motion.  
 
The Chief Executive said that the Council will meet with the GAA and a pilot 
programme could potentially be undertaken in Kerry. He stressed that it is critical that 
the Government take a leading role at national level.  
 
Suspending of Standing Orders 
As it was 1.30p.m. on the proposal of Cllr. Tommy Cahill and seconded by Cllr. 
Robert Brosnan it was agreed to suspend standing orders.  
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin moved Notice of Motion no 29 
 
29. Deer confinement Plan   
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Brendan Cronin proposed  
In light of the increasing number of road accidents and damage being done by 
wandering deer in our county, that Kerry County Council request senior 
representatives of the NPWS to attend a meeting of this Council to clarify what fencing 
and confinement works are being undertaken to keep the deer herd within the NPWS 
grounds to protect road users. Have relevant body's including Kerry County Council 
engaged with fencing professionals to draw up a strategy of requirements and works, 

 
21 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
similar to what Irish Rail have done. responsibility, restrictions and works must be 
undertaken to protect road users. 
 
The following reply issued: 
This is a matter for consideration by the members and in addition to engaging with the 
NPWS Kerry County Council are in the process of carrying out a pilot scheme in 
cooperation with Iarnród Eireann, UCC and Bird Control Ireland. The scheme involves 
installing Virtual Fence Technology on two 1km stretches of roadway to investigate 
the reduction in Deer Collisions after the installation of the system. The pilot schemes 
will be rolled out in the coming months, and the areas will be monitored through a UCC 
research programme. 
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin said that it is almost seven years where a fatal accident occurred 
following an encounter with a deer and the only progression is a single deer sign on 
the road at Fossa. He said the deer population has increased significantly and there 
appears to be no responsibility taken by anyone and no culling of deer. He paid 
compliment to Irish Rail who have done an excellent job in installing fencing to protect 
the tracks from the deer. He said there appears to be no works undertaken on the 
roads. He said he believed that the National park has no idea of the number of deer 
presently in the county.   
 
Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan seconded this motion and concurred with previous comments 
expressed and noted that there have been several incidents with deer on roads over 
the years. This is a national issue and questioned if the deer are being culled.  
 
Cllr. Michael Leane said that the deer have been seen as far as Abbeydorney and 
asked will the state compensate drivers when the insurance company will not cover 
the damage done to their cars from deer.  
 
Mr. P. Neary said that is a widespread issue and it is not possible to fence in over 
4,000 deer. He said the proposed Virtual Fence Technology is used across Europe, 
and the data can be analysed. As part of the study all stakeholders will be asked to 
have an input.  
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae acknowledged that it is not possible to fence in all the deer and 
requested that the tress would be cut back at Ballydowney and Rossacroo.  
 
In response to a query from Cllr. Brendan Cronin, Mr. Paul Curry Senior Engineer 
acknowledged that seven year is a long time to wait for a safety scheme to be 
implemented but assured Cllr. Brendan Cronin that an update will be provided at 
Municipal District Level on both the progress of the Virtual Fence Technology and the 
overall solution.  
 
4. Management of waste materials 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Angie Baily Proposed. 
Under the National End of Waste Criteria for recycled Aggregates, ‘recycled 
aggregate’ may cease to be classified as waste to be reused or sold. How does 
Kerry County Council currently manage waste materials arising from road, footpath 
and public-realm improvement works. Is the End of Waste criteria a priority for Kerry 
County Council. 

 
22 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council requires that all large-scale works, including road, footpath, and 
public realm improvement projects, demonstrate good waste management practice in 
accordance with Articles 27 (By Product Notifications) and 28 (End of Waste Criteria) 
of 
the 
European 
Communities 
(Waste 
Directive) 
Regulations 
2011. 
For Council-led or Council-contracted works, contractors must manage waste in a 
lawful and responsible manner, including the segregation and storage of materials and 
the arrangement of transport to appropriately licensed waste facilities or approved 
reuse sites. Materials suitable for reuse on-site, such as clean inert fill for backfilling, 
are prioritised for reuse wherever practicable. 
 
Any surplus materials that cannot be reused on-site are collected by authorised waste 
contractors and transported to permitted recycling or disposal facilities. Kerry County 
Council continues to work collaboratively with industry partners to maximise carbon 
reduction in the construction and maintenance of infrastructure. 
 
Cllr. Angie Baily said she tabled  this motion to ask how Kerry County Council manages 
waste materials arising from our own works, in particular roads, footpaths, and public-
realm improvements and whether the National End of Waste criteria for recycled 
aggregates is being treated as a priority. 
She said under the End of Waste framework, recycled aggregate can cease to be 
classified as waste once it meets specific quality and environmental standards. This 
is a key enabler of the circular economy, it keeps materials in use for longer, reducing 
extraction of virgin resources, cutting emissions from transport and quarrying, and 
delivering real value for the public purse. 
People are constantly under pressure to recycle, the latest approach being the bottle 
return scheme where the benefits of our efforts are visible from a statistical and 
community perspective. From a council perspective, she asked is the council 
systematically recovering and reusing materials from own works where it is safe and 
appropriate to do so? 
This matters because local authorities are market leaders. If Kerry County Council 
embeds End of Waste principles into procurement, design standards, and contractor 
requirements, we can help normalise recycled materials, support local recycling 
enterprises, small businesses who pride themselves on turning recycled goods to 
saleable produces, all while reducing our reliance on imported aggregates. 
 
Cllr. Podge Foley seconded this motion.  
 
5. Reward Package for Working Persons  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Podge Foley proposed  
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Finance to put together a package 
to reward the working person. The budget has given nothing of substance to reward 
workers who are footing the bill for everything in society. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Podge Foley said these concerns are raised following the National Budget and 
said that more provisions should be put in place to reward the working person.  
 

 
23 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
Cllr. Angie Baily seconded this motion.  
 
6. Expansion and Delivery of Fibre Broadband 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Aoife Kennelly proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Culture, Communications and 
Sport and the National Broadband Plan Unit seeking urgent intervention to ensure 
the delivery of reliable high-speed fibre broadband infrastructure to the wider North 
Kerry area and Listowel. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly said that it is completely unacceptable in this day and age that 
broadband speed is an issue. It is as important as electricity and water and is 
affecting businesses in North Kerry.  
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley seconded this motion.  
 
7. Community Dental Clinics 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Teddy O'Sullivan Casey proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Health and the HSE to look at 
providing Community Dental Clinics in all towns in Kerry that currently do not have a 
clinic as it is not acceptable for parents of school children and individuals having to 
travel to other towns such as Killarney and Tralee to access treatment. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Teddy O’Sullivan-Casey said it is unacceptable that many towns in Kerry don’t 
have a dental clinic.  
 
Cllr. Dan McCarthy seconded this motion. 
 
 
8. Appeals to Irish fishing quota cuts and Blocking of the Hague preferences 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Robert Brosnan proposed 
Go scríobhfadh CCC  chuig an Aire Stáit Iascaigh agus chuig an Aire Talmhaíochta, 
Bia agus Mara, ag iarraidh orthu scríobh chuig an gCoimisinéir Eorpach um Iascaigh 
Costas Kadis agus chuig an gCúirt Bhreithiúnais Eorpach chun achomharc a 
dhéanamh i gcoinne na laghduithe le déanaí ar chuótaí iascaireachta na hÉireann 
agus chun achomharc a dhéanamh i gcoinne bac a chur ar na Hague Preferences. 
 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister of State for Fisheries and the Minister 
for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, requesting that they write to the European 
Commissioner for Fisheries Costas Kadis and to the European Court of Justice to 
appeal the recent cuts to Irish fishing quotas and to appeal the blocking of the Hague 
preferences. 
 
 
Is ábhar é seo atá le breithniú ag na Comhaltaí. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 

 
24 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan said that the recent cuts come as no surprise to him as currently 
there are no representative from Ireland on the committee. These measures along 
with previous restrictions on fishing quotas has had a significant impact on Dingle town 
which once was full of fishing boats.  
 
Cllr. Angie Baily seconded this motion and said that there have been significant issues 
with securing fishing rights and as a country we need to protect our fish reserves. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin moved Notice of Motion no 14  
 
14. Financial Supports for Fishermen   
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Griffin proposed 
That Kerry County Council will call on the Minister for Fisheries and Maritime Affairs 
to immediately introduce financial supports for fishermen following the loss of one third 
of Ireland's fish quota in 2026. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin said these measures have had a significant impact on the fishing 
industry that is facing extinction. He stated that the ruling must be appealed to the 
Court of Justice with additional funding should be provided to the fishing industry.  
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Robert Brosnan.  
 
9. Coordination between Kerry Airport’s buses and plane schedules  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. John O'Donoghue proposed 
That Kerry County Council would write to the National Transport Authority and ask 
that the bus service at Kerry Airport would be coordinated with the scheduled plane 
departures and arrivals. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue said this motion was brought to his attention recently by 
someone who is a frequent flyer from Kerry airport that the bus service calling to the 
airport could be far better aligned with flight departures and arrivals. He said while he 
realises, we cannot have a bus pulling up outside every time a plane lands, he 
requested that the services be examined to make it as integrated as possible. We are 
encouraged to leave the car at home as much as possible and use public transport, 
so it is vital it is as made as convenient as possible. He respectfully asks that the NTA 
examine their services before the season opens up fully again in a month or two. 
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae. 
 
10. Request for Pier Safety Checks 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Michael Leane proposed 
To thank Kerry County Council for the descaling and cleaning of piers in Kerry for the 
Christmas period. I would like to ask Kerry County Council to survey all the piers of 
Kerry to check out the safety in the structures for 2026. 
 

 
25 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council will undertake to examine the current condition of piers 
throughout the county, in terms of their physical infrastructure and the safety of 
structures. 
 
Cllr. Michael Leane thanked Kerry County Council for the response and said the safety 
of the pier infrastructure is paramount.  
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley seconded this motion.  
 
11. Review of the Community CCTV Grant Aid Scheme 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald proposed  
That Kerry County Council writes to the Minister for Justice calling for a root and 
branch review of the Community CCTV Grant Aid Scheme. As it currently stands it is 
not suited for small local voluntary groups such as a Community Alert Group. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald said that he has been approached by Ballymac Community 
Alert Group who advised that they are not in a position to apply for the Community 
CCTV Grant Aid Scheme. He said is not suitable for small community groups and 
called on the Minister to review the terms and condition of the scheme or alternatively 
introduce a different scheme suitable for small community groups. 
 
Cllr. Angie Baily seconded this motion.  
 
12. Request Priority list for bridge repair & rehabilitation works 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae proposed 
To ask Kerry County Council to provide members with the details of the priority list 
for bridge repairs and rehabilitation works. Also, can Kerry County Council specify 
what locations have applications been made for and the nature of the application. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council is responsible for approximately 1,700 bridges and culverts on 
the Regional and Local (R&L) Road Network, of which approximately 550 are currently 
recorded on the Council’s asset register. 
The Annual Bridge Rehabilitation Priority List for Regional and Local and Roads in 
County Kerry is established using the following criteria: 
 
Bridge Condition Rating (a standardised assessment of the physical condition 
and structural integrity of a bridge) 
 
Annual Average Daily Traffic (AADT) 
 
Critical Infrastructure Routes 
 
Availability of a diversion route 
 
Length of the diversion route 
 
This annual list is prepared for a submission to the Department of Transport under the 
Regional and Local Road Bridge Rehabilitation Grant Programme. For 2026 each local 
authority was requested to submit applications for bridge rehabilitation and repair 
works, with the total value of submissions not to exceed 130% of the 2025 bridge 

 
26 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
allocation. For Kerry County Council, this equates to a maximum submission value of 
€1,209,000, based on the 2025 allocation of €930,000. Individual bridge rehabilitation 
projects under this grant programme are capped at €200,000. 
 
Due to the limited funding available under the Bridge Rehabilitation Grant Programme, 
Kerry County Council continues to seek funding for bridge maintenance and repair 
works on regional and local roads under other grant programmes, including the 
Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience (CCAR) Grant and the Specific 
Improvement Grant (SIG). However, applications under these programmes must be 
balanced with other regional and local road projects that deliver safety, sustainability, 
and housing and economic development benefits across the county.  
The 2026 Priority list submitted to the Department of Transport under Bridge 
Rehabilitation is as follows: 
 
 

 
27 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
 
No.
Road 
Number 
Bridge Name & 
Location 
M.D. 
Works Description 
1 
Countywide 
All
Bridge Inventory and Maintenance 
Inspections
2 
Countywide
All
Parapet Repairs  
3 
L4047 
Gearha South, 
Blackwater, 
Templenoe 
Kenmare 
Full deck replacement required. 
Design, Environmental Reports, 
Section 177ae application to be 
submitted. 
4 
R568 
Gearha Boston 
Bridge, Templenoe 
Kenmare 
Masonry 
Rehabilitation 
works 
required. Subject to NIS approval 
planning to commence works in 
2026
5 
L2010 
Ballard,Tralee 
Tralee 
Consultant procured in 2025, full 
bridge 
replacement 
potentially 
required. Design work currently 
being carried out.
6 
L11161 
Beheenagh Bridge, 
Barraduff
Killarney 
Masonry 
Rehabilitation 
works 
required.
7 
L2033 
Leamnguilla Bridge, 
Farranfore 
Castleisland 
- 
Corca 
Dhuibhne/ 
Killarney
Masonry 
Rehabilitation 
works 
required. 
8 
L1000 
Kilconly Bridge, 
Kilconly, Ballybunion
Listowel 
Masonry 
Rehabilitation 
works 
required.
9 
L2028 
Glauntaunyalkeen 
Bridge, 
Lyrecrompane 
Castleisland 
- 
Corca 
Dhuibhne 
Masonry 
and 
riverbed 
Rehabilitation works required. 
10 L6550 
Gortatlea 
Bridge, 
Tralee 
Castleisland 
- 
Corca 
Dhuibhne 
Rehabilitation works to concrete 
abutments required 
11 L2031 
Ballahantouragh 
Bridge, 
Ballahantouragh, 
Cordal
Castleisland 
- 
Corca 
Dhuibhne 
Steel 
rehabilitation 
in 
deck 
required, possibly a full deck 
replacement. 
12 L11643 
Letter 
west, 
Glenbeigh
Kenmare 
Masonry 
Rehabilitation 
works 
required.
13 L10102 
Keel Bridge Lixnaw 
Listowel 
Steel 
rehabilitation 
in 
deck 
required
14 L6081
Rathscannel Bridge, 
Abbeydorney 
Listowel 
Masonry 
Rehabilitation 
works 
required. 
15 L4039 
Gearha Beaufort 
Kenmare 
Steel 
rehabilitation 
in 
deck 
required, possibly a full deck 
replacement.
16 L7015 
Coolick 
Bridge, 
Kilcummin, Killarney 
S50
Killarney 
Culvert replacement and masonry 
rehabilitation works required. 

 
28 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
No.
Road 
Number 
Bridge Name & 
Location 
M.D. 
Works Description 
17 L4038 
Lawlors 
Bridge, 
Killorglan
Kenmare 
Masonry 
Rehabilitation 
works 
required.
18 L7042 
Ballinamanagh, 
Kilcummin 
Killarney 
Located 
in 
SAC. 
Repair/replacement bridge steel 
beams and deck slab. Rebuild 
East parapet. 
 
In addition, funding priorities may change where emergency works are required as a 
result of severe weather events. Foildarrig Bridge has been submitted for preliminary 
design funding under the Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience Grant and is 
intended to transfer to the Specific Improvement Grant programme for construction 
funding. Works at the Gap of Dunloe and Listry Bridge are included under the Specific 
Improvement Grant funding stream. 
 
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae welcomed the detailed response but stated that there were a 
number of bridges that required works that didn’t appear on the asset list. She 
questioned why Shronedrough Bridge and Loo Bridge near Poulgorm was not on the 
list. She said Loo Bridge had deteriorated rapidly and can no longer take the traffic. 
She also referred to Foiladown where she explained where two cars cannot pass on 
the bridge.  
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae seconded the motion, and the Loo Bridge has not been on a 
priority list for years. It has been hit several times by lorries; the bridge needs to be 
widened and should be on a priority scheme.  
 
Mr. P. Neary Director of Service advised that the list outlined in the response is for 
works that are capped at €200,000, which would only be suitable for maintenance and 
restoration works. He acknowledged the concerns expressed in relation to Loo Bridge 
and sad the Council is aware of the problems that exist with the structure, however 
substantial works such as bridge widening will require specific grant such as the 
Specific Improvement Grant which is currently being examined.   
 
13. Call for Social Media Company Legislation   
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald proposed 
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister for Justice, Jim O’Callaghan TD and 
the Minister for Further and Higher Education, Research, Innovation, and Science, 
James Lawless TD to bring forward legislation that social media companies be 
treated the same as traditional publishers legally. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr Breandán Fitzgerald stated that unfortunately in Ireland and in most of the world, 
Social Media companies are not treated the same as traditional publishers and is one 
of the biggest mistakes that has been allowed to happen.  
With free speech comes responsibility and the current crop of Social Media 
companies think that they have no responsibility whatsoever. That it is completely up 

 
29 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
to the person, or bot, in lots of instances who is saying anything that they want and 
doing anything that AI tools on the social media platforms will allow them to do. This 
cannot continue unchecked. 
Social media companies are supposed to follow a regulatory framework which covers 
platform obligations, not publisher liability. Irish and EU Law impose duties on the 
platforms to manage illegal and harmful content, but they are not legally responsible 
for what the users post.  
Even if the social media platforms are the ones that are facilitating, enabling, 
encouraging and equipping them with AI tools so that their users can do whatever they 
want for good or bad. This cannot continue. They must be held accountable and they 
must be held liable for what they are allowing their users to publish and do on their 
social media platforms. 
It is time that social media companies be treated the same as traditional publishers 
legally and ask all Elected Members to support me in this call.  
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Angie Baily. 
 
27. Request for Increase of Tax Incentives for Long Term Lets 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald proposed  
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister for Finance, Simon Harris TD to 
increase tax incentives for homeowners who are willing to rent long term to families 
or individuals and return homes to long term rental. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr Breandán Fitzgerald stated that any property owner who is willing to rent their 
property long term should be encouraged to do so by an increased tax incentive.  
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Tommy Cahill 
 
16. Update Wanted on CAMHS Report  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Paul Daly proposed  
That this Council write to the Minister for Health and ask when the report on CAMHS 
by Dr. Colette Halpin will be published. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Paul Daly said that three years is a very long time to await the publication of a 
report. He asked that the report should be made available to the people affected.  
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley seconded this motion.  
 
17. NDLS Wait Times Increased  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae proposed  
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister regarding extreme delays in getting a 
driving test, which has gone back up 3 months or more. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 

 
30 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae stated that the time frame is unacceptable and has greater 
implications for this county rather than in cities where public transport is more 
accessible.  
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae seconded this motion and concurred with all previous 
comments.  
 
18. Programmes for Apprentices 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Angie Baily proposed  
Does Kerry County Council currently take on apprentices in areas such as construction 
trades, cybersecurity, media, or other technical roles. If so, what programmes are 
available and how many apprentices have been recruited in recent years. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry 
County 
Council 
facilitates 
structured 
education 
and 
training-based 
apprenticeships under the Governments Public Service Apprenticeship Plan and there 
are currently 4 no. Apprentices employed (Cyber Security and Accounting Technician) 
who commenced their apprenticeships in 2025.  These are 2-year programmes 
combining learning in in the workplace with learning via education or training facility, 
on successful completion of which the participants will obtain a qualification 
recognised 
under 
the 
National 
Framework 
of 
Qualifications 
(NFQ). 
 
The Council intends to increase the number of Apprenticeships being facilitated this 
year in line with sectoral targets and are currently examining suitable roles both in the 
traditional craft areas (Standards-Based Apprenticeships) and newly identified 
apprenticeship areas as provided for under the Public Service Apprenticeship Plan. 
 
Cllr. Angie Baily said that this is not just about apprenticeships but more a motion 
about pushing one of the county’s largest employers to become not just a service 
provider but a skills developer. Across Kerry, there is a striking imbalance of employers 
struggling to recruit skilled workers, alongside young people and career-changers who 
are actively seeking practical, paid, and meaningful pathways into employment. 
Apprenticeships bridge that gap. 
Aside from the obvious benefits of apprenticeships delivering secure, paid training for 
local people allowing locals to stay local, they also strengthen council links between 
education, industry, and the public sector. She said she firmly believe if Kerry County 
Council leads by example, others will follow, and that’s how we build on our skilled, 
inclusive, and future-focused county. 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan seconded this motion.  
 
19. Career Insurance Fraudsters  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Podge Foley proposed  
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Finance to investigate career 
insurance fraudsters with more than two claims and insurance companies. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 

 
31 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
Cllr. Podge Foley called on the Minister for Finance to investigate these claims and 
said anyone found making false claims should be prosecuted. He said it is the taxpayer 
who ultimately ends paying through increased premiums. 
 
Cllr. Dan McCarthy seconded this motion.  
  
20. No Confidence in RSA  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae proposed  
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister expressing no confidence in the 
Road Safety Authority (RSA) in its current format. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae said that the RSA was formed in 2006 with their mission 
statement to make the roads safter. However, he said there is still over 300 road 
fatalities per year. He acknowledged that that road networks have improved but could 
not see any benefit the RSA has contributed. He questioned the public safety 
campaign run by RSA stating that they cost excessive amounts of money. He said the 
vehicles on the roads have never been as good while roads fatalities continue to 
increase and the RSA’s response is to implement stricter penalties. He questioned the 
“Vision Zero” introduced by The RSA and said that isn’t achievable, unfortunately there 
will always be road fatalities. He said the elephant in the room is road infrastructure. 
He said more funding should be spent on making the roads safe.  
 
Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan seconded this motion and said he concurred with all the 
previous comments.  
 
Cllr. Angie Baily suggested that the use of mobile phones by car passengers should 
be investigated as they can be a distraction for the driver.    
 
21. Wastewater waiver for Community Groups/Centres 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Teddy O'Sullivan Casey proposed  
That Kerry County Council write to Uisce Eireann and the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to ask for a waiver to be introduced for wastewater 
charges for Community Groups and Community Centres that are operating on 
limited resources. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan said most community groups only require water for watering 
flowers. The groups are classified as commercial entities for wastewater charges.  
 
Cllr. Dan McCarthy seconded this motion.  
 
22. Opposition for Mercosur 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Robert Brosnan proposed  
Go scríobhfadh KCC chuig an Aire Talmhaíochta, Bia agus Mara, ag iarraidh air 
scríobh chuig an gCoimisinéir Eorpach um Thalmhaíocht agus Bia, Christophe 
Hansen, ag leagan amach ár bhfreasúra i leith Mercosur mar gheall ar na 
héifeachtaí díobhálacha a bheidh aige ar shlí bheatha ár bhfeirmeoirí dúchasacha.  

 
32 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine, 
requesting that he writes to the European Agriculture and Food Commissioner, 
Christophe Hansen, outlining our opposition to Mercosur because of the detrimental 
effects that it will have on the livelihoods of our indigenous farmers. 
 
Is ábhar é seo atá le breithniú ag na Comhaltaí. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosanan said that this was previously raised in 2019 and the T.D.s 
didn’t support the agreement. He called on his colleagues to lobby all Government 
Ministers to support this notice of motion.  
 
Cllr. Angie Baily seconded this motion.  
 
23. Update on Public Lights 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. John O'Donoghue proposed  
That the elected members would receive an update on the number of both the newly 
erected and existing public lights within the County awaiting works by the ESB for 
longer than 3 months, and that any reason for delays mentioned in correspondence 
with the ESB would be provided to us. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council currently maintains 14,034 public lights (PLs) across the county, 
providing lighting to streets, laneways, and roads. The Council remains committed to 
delivering and maintaining a safe and high-quality public lighting environment for all 
road users and the wider community. 
 
At present, there are 33 outstanding service requests with ESB Networks (ESBN) 
relating to faults in existing public lighting infrastructure that have been open for a 
period exceeding three months. It should be noted that a number of these requests 
relate to faults affecting strings of lights rather than individual lighting columns. While 
delays have been experienced, improved turnaround times have been noted 
recently. Kerry County Council will continue to liaise with ESB to expedite the 
resolution of network side faults. 
Network side faults can be for a number of reasons including necessary cabling 
upgrades, unbundling the Public Lighting circuit from the ESB Network, resolving 
legacy network issues etc. 
 
Currently, the timeframe from application submission to connection ranges from 
approximately 14 to 22 weeks. 
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue acknowledged the response and said his reason for bringing 
this motion is he is aware of a few lights in the Killarney MD which are out for longer 
than 3 months, indeed one is waiting for the ESB with 20 months and was curious to 
know if it was a county wide problem. He said anywhere there is public lighting, it was 
installed because it was needed and hopes that the ESB can get these fixed as soon 
as possible. 
 

 
33 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley seconded this motion.  
 
24.  Roads Improvement Update  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Michael Leane proposed  
Regarding the local improvement schemes (LIS), there was 618 roads on the list in 
2025. How many roads were done and how many are planned for 2026. 
 
The following reply issued: 
In 2025, 38 LIS projects were completed. The number of schemes that can progress 
in 2026 will depend on the grant allocation to Kerry County Council. It is anticipated 
that the grant funding for LIS in 2026 will be announced in February of this year. 
  
Cllr. Michael Leane said it will take 15.25 years to complete the current list based on 
the current work programme. He asked where there is more than one house on a road, 
can a new application be submitted.   
 
Mr. P. Neary Director of Service said the list is prepared in accordance with the terms 
of the scheme which is determined nationally. It is not feasible to re-open the 
applications.  
 
Following a query from Cllr. Michael Leane to provide compensation to the applicant 
who are waiting for works to be completed, Mr. P. Neary Director of Service replied 
that the LIS is a scheme to strengthen private roads, and the Council must work within 
the memorandum of understanding.  
 
25. Request for Review of Section 160 of the Planning & Development Act 2000 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald proposed  
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister of State for Local Government and 
Planning calling for a review of Section 160 of the Planning & Development Act 
2000. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Section 160 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 enables the High or Circuit 
Court to issue injunctions to stop unauthorized development or force compliance with 
planning permissions.  
 
This is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald said the implications in accordance with Section 160 of the 
Planning and Development Act 2000 are not strong enough. He said it appears that 
when the planning is refused, the applicant still proceeds with the works and then 
applies for retention.  
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan seconded this motion. 
 
Mr. James Nolan Director of Service said the Planning Department cannot stop 
development but must apply for an injunction from the courts to do so. He undertook 
to provide an update of unauthorised developments at the next SPC meeting.  
 
 

 
34 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
28. Request for report on tyre damage 2024/2025  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Griffin proposed  
That Kerry County Council will provide details of the number of claims received for 
damage to tyres in 2024 & 2025. If the total for each year and the value of the claims 
can be provided. If confirmation can be provided if the damage occurred on the local, 
regional or the national road network. 
 
The following reply issued: 
IPB investigate vehicle tyre damage claims and assess whether the defence of non-
feasance applies to claims resulting from natural road surface deterioration. 
Additionally, they investigate tyre damage claims to determine if third-party issues, 
such as contractor or statutory body works, have impacted the roadway. 
  
In 2024, the Council received 77 tyre damage claims, with 15 resulting in payments 
from IPB, totaling €3,215.90. In 2025, there were 95 claims, with 10 payments to date 
amounting to €3,227.57. Over these two years, 33% of claims related to national 
roads, 22% to regional roads, and the remaining 45% to local roads. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin said that he recently spoke to a tour operator who had to replace 
two tyres following an incident with a pothole and received no compensation. He said 
the road network is in an appalling condition and referred in particular to the Tralee to 
Castlemaine Road. He said it is not acceptable and can be very costly for a small 
business. He asked that the assessment would be reviewed. 
 
Cllr. Angie Baily seconded this motion.  
 
30. Requesting Meeting with TII Re: Road and Greenway Projects 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Cahill proposed  
That Kerry County Council request a meeting with TII to discuss major road projects 
and greenways in the county. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill referred in particular to the N86 Dingle Roads and N70 Ring of 
Kerry Road. He called on the TII to process the Killorglin Bypass.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin seconded the motion and said the existing road network needs to 
be prioritised and upgraded.  
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae asked if a response has been received from T.I.I. in regard to 
a previous request to meet with them. He said the road networks in Caherciveen town 
is continuing to deteriorate, which is already in an unacceptable condition.  
 
32. Inquiry to Develop Public Play Areas 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Paul Daly proposed  
That this Council develop multi-purpose public play areas in towns and communities 
to encourage outdoor activity. 
 
The following reply issued: 

 
35 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
Kerry County Council manages, maintains, and insures 45 playgrounds, 10 Multi-Use 
Games Areas, 19 Outdoor Exercise Areas, and 2 skateparks throughout the County. 
Additionally, there are plans to develop or refurbish 11 more such amenity areas in 
2026, including the provision of 5 new playgrounds. 
  
The Council's ‘Kerry Play & Recreation Policy’, adopted in 2025, commits the Local 
Authority to providing access to high-quality play and recreation activities for infants, 
children, and young people across the County. 
 
This Policy mandates the Council to support local community groups in providing or 
upgrading existing amenities.  
 
The Council has a dedicated Playground Unit to advise and support Community 
Groups in their efforts, subject to necessary statutory planning approvals and the 
availability of grant funding. 
 
Cllr. Paul Daly said he was very impressed with the facilities in Ballylongford and said 
is a great example to what could be expanded throughout the county.  
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley seconded this motion and thanked Cllr. Paul Daly for the 
positive comments and thanked Mr. Vincent Foley and Mr. Donal O’ Neill for their help 
and assistance on bringing this development to fruition.    
 
33. Request for Water Supply for Kenmare 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae proposed  
That Kerry County Council write to Uisce Éireann regarding a water supply for 
Kenmare. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae said he tabled this motion to express the frustration on the 
timeframe to provide an effective water supply for Kenmare, which he is raising since 
2018. He said that the motion has previously been brought before the Kenmare 
Municipal District and is now fearful that current planning applications for Kenmare 
will be refused due to the lack of water infrastructure. He said the Bonane and 
Templemore scheme have been taken out of circulation and as a result we have less 
water in Kenmare than previously. There have been no private houses built for years 
in Kenmare. It is impacting on the population and schools 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald Meetings administrator said workshops are being organised with 
Uisce Éireann. 
 
19.01.2026.13 Correspondence – Conference and Seminars 
(a) On the proposal of Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan and seconded by Angie Baily it was 
agreed Conference – Retrospective approval for the attendance of Cllr. Mikey Sheehy, 
Jackie Healy-Rae and Podge Foley and Tommy Cahill to “The Finance Act 2025” 
Conference which was held in Co. Louth from Friday 16 January and Sunday 18 
January 2026.  
 

 
36 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
(b) On the proposal of Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae and seconded by Angie Baily it was 
agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. Martin Grady, Cllr. Maura Healy- Rae, Aoife 
Kennelly and Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae to the Celtic conference event on 
“Misinformation, Disinformation and Fake News” to be held in Clonakilty from Friday 
06 February to Sunday 08 February 2026. 
 
(c) On the proposal of Cllr. Dan McCarthy and seconded by Maura Healy-Rae it was 
agreed to approve the attendance of Cathaoirleach Cllr. Michael Foley and Cllr. Angie 
Baily to attend the Chinese New Year Celebrations in the National Concert Hall, Dublin 
on Monday 16 February 2026. 
 
 
19.01.2026.14 Correspondence General 
 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were circulated: 
 
List of correspondence circulated at the January 2026 
Meeting of Kerry County Council 
 
Date 
From 
Description 
1. 
12/12/2025 
ESB Networks 
Reply in relation to a request from the 
Elected Members to request the ESB to 
survey their power lines and cut down 
branches. 
2. 
18/12/2025 
Uisce Éireann 
Reply in relation to a request from the 
Elected Members to carry out a survey of 
wastewater network across Kerry. 
3. 
22/12/2025 
LGMA 
Reply in relation to a request from the 
Elected Members that services available 
on LGMA website be available in the Irish 
language.
5. 
16/12/2025 
Department of 
Climate Energy 
and Environment 
Reply in relation to a request from the 
Elected Members to prioritise the delivery 
of Designated Area Plan (DMAP) for the 
Southwest Coast of Kerry. 
6. 
19/12/2025 
Dept of Rural and 
Community 
Development
Reply in relation to a request from the 
Elected Members funding for Foras na 
Gaeilge.
7. 
23/12/2025 
Minister of State of 
LG and Planning 
Reply in relation to a request from the 
Elected Members to request funding for 
tree trimming across the county. 
8. 
07/01/20226
Minister for 
Housing 
Reply in relation to a request from the 
Elected Members for funding for voids in 
older properties. 
9. 
12/01/2026 
TII 
Reply in relation to a request from the 
Elected Members for funding for N86 

 
37 
Jan Ordinary Meeting – 19 January 2026 
10. 
14/01/2026 
HSE 
Reply in relation to a request from the 
Elected Members to provide funding for 
clinical treatment for mental health and 
addiction services. 
11. 
15/01/2026 
Dept of Housing 
LG & Heritage 
Reply in relation to a request from the 
Elected Members to carry out a review of 
the EM reserved functions.
12. 
15/01/2026 
Dept of Transport 
Reply in relation to a request from the 
Elected Members to make the wearing of 
Hi Vis clothing mandatory.
 
19.01.2026.15 Minutes arising from the minutes as confirmed 
 
19.01.2026.16 Any Other Business 
 
The meeting concluded at 2.45 p.m. 
 
Bridget Fitzgerald 
 
_________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator 
Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
