Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
COMHAIRLE CHONTAE NA GAILLIMHE
MINUTES OF MONTHLY MEETING OF GALWAY COUNTY COUNCIL
Held at CLAREGALWAY HOTEL CLAREGALWAY CO. GALWAY
CATHAOIRLEACH:
I LATHAIR FREISIN:
Baill:
Baill ar line:
Oifigh:
Monday. 25th May 2026
Cllr. D. Collins
Cathaoirleach of the County of Galway
Comh. [Cllr. S. Broderick, l. Canning, J. Charity, D.
Connolly, M. Connolly, S. Cunniffe, T. Ö Curraoin,
G. Donohue, P. Feeney, G. Finnerty, D. Geraghty,
T. Grealish, A. Harney, L. Harney, M. Hoade,
c.
Keane, D. Kelly, D. Kiltilea, M. Kinane, M. Lee, P
Mac An Iomaire, M. Maher, E. Mannion,
McClearn, K. McHugh Farag, S. McHugh Ryan, M
McNamara, E. F. Parsons, A. Reddington,
M.
Regan, O. Turner, S. Walsh and T. Welby.
Mr. L. Conneally, Chief Executive, Mr. L.
Hanrahan, Director of Services, Mr. Michael
Owens, Director of Services, Ms. E. Ruane,
Director of Services, Mr. D. Mitchell, Director of
Services, Ms. K. O'Connor, Director of Services,
Mr. T. Prendergast, Senior Engineer, Ms. J. Brann
Meetings Administrator, Ms. L. Keady, A/Senior
Executive Officer, Ms. U. Ni Eidhin, Administrative
Officer, Ms. H. Riordan, Staff Officer, Ms. L.
O'Donnell, Assistant Staff Officer, Ms. T. Costello,
Assistant Staff Officer.
Page 1 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
Thosnaigh an cruinniü leis an paidir.
Expressions of sympathy were expressed to Cllr. Geraghty on the loss of his mother
in law Mary Smyth and to Comh. Mac an Iomaire on the loss of his sister-in-law
Barbara Joyce and to Cllr. King on the loss of his brother-in-law George Yelvington.
The Cathaoirleach, the Elected Members and the Chief Executive congratulated
Councillors Thomas, Keane and Welby on contesting the recent bye-election and
extended their congratulations to newly elected TD Sean Kyne.
ITEM NO.' CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES OF THE FOLLOWING MEETINGS
4734
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Lee SECONDED by Cllr. Finnerty the minutes of the
Monthly Plenary Meeting held on 27th April 2026 were AGREED.
ITEM NO.2 CONSIDERATION OF REPORTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
4735
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Killilea SECONDED by Cllr. Grealish the minutes of
the Corporate Policy Group held on 20th April 2026 were NOTED.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Connolly SECONDED by Cllr. Geraghty It was
AGREED, as per recommendation from the Corporate Policy Group (CPG) that
Galway County Council would hold a Civic Reception to honour Glenamaddy
Players, All Ireland Confined Drama Winners.
ITEM NO.3 TO CONSIDER REPORT UNDER SECTION 183 OF THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT ACT 2001 TO DISPOSE OF 0.05067 HECTARES OF LAND AT
PARKMORE TUAM CO. GALWAY.
4736
Statutory Notice issued in accordance with Section 183(1)(b) and report dated 2nd
April 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
Page 2 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
Mr. Prendergast, Senior Engineer, informed the Members that the section 183 refers
to a small piece of land at Parkmore that was owned by Galway County Council and
was transferred to Uisce Éireann. A further transfer of land is now required to facilitate
essential upgrade works that are required to enhance the reliability, efficiency and
operational capacity of the wastewater pump station. This is to ensure that it meets
existing demand and projected future population growth. It was recommended that the
Elected Members approve the proposed disposal of land under Section 183.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Killilea SECONDED by Cllr. McHugh Farag it was
AGREED to dispose of 0.05067 hectares of land at Parkmore, Tuam, Co. Galway in
accordance with the Statutory Notice dated 2nd April 2026.
ITEM NO.4 TO CONSIDER REPORT UNDER SECTION 183 OF THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT ACT 2001 TO DISPOSE OF 1.149 (m2) OF LAND AT RAHEEN
DEMESNE GORT CO. GALWAY.
4737
Statutory Notice issued in accordance with Section 183(1)(b) and report dated 22nd
April 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
Mr. Prendergast, Senior Engineer, informed the Members that the Section 183
concerns boundary rectification. There is no objection in principle to the proposed
disposal from an engineering perspective, subject to the following; reservation of
appropriate Rights of Way in favour of the Council, the protection of all existing Rights
of Way and easements, the creation of any new folios not prejudicing adjoining or
neighbouring lands and all legal, mapping and boundary matters being agreed in
consultation with the Council's Law Agent. It was recommended that the Elected
Members approve the proposed disposal of land under Section 183.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. L. Harney SECONDED by Cllr. Finnerty it was AGREED
to dispose of 1 , 149 rn2 of land at Raheen Demesne, Gort, Co. Galway.
Page 3 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
ITEM NO. 5. TO CONSIDER REPORT UNDER 183 OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ACT 2001 TO DISPOSE OF 798 (m2) OF LAND AT THOOR. BALLYLEE. CO.
GALWAY.
4738
Statutory Notice issued in accordance with Section 183(1)(b) and report dated 10th
March 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
Mr. Prendergast, Senior Engineer, explained that the purpose of this Section 183 is
to rectify a long-standing discrepancy between registered titles and the physical
layout of the lands. There are no operational issues preventing the correction and it
was therefore recommended that the Elected Members approve under Section 183
the proposed Rectification by Agreement to regularise the titles of the folios and to
formally correct the Council's registered interest in the Thoor Ballylee car park.
Cllr. Finnerty raised the following points and queries:
• Clarification was sought regarding the ownership of, and responsibility for
maintaining, the Ballylee car park, which is currently in very poor condition.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Prendergast:
• The office of Public Works (OPW) own the carpark.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Hanrahan:
• The Council's Regeneration Team are working with the OPW and National
Parks and Wildlife Service (NPWS) on Thoor Ballylee and Coole Park and he
committed to discussing this matter with them.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Finnerty SECONDED by Cllr. L. Harney it was AGREED
to dispose of 798 m2 of land at Thoor, Ballylee, Co. Galway.
Page 4 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
ITEM NO. 6 FILLING OF A CASUAL VACANCY ON THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE
LOCAL COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE (LCDC).
4739
Report dated 13th May 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Connolly SECONDED by Comh. Mac An Iomaire it
was AGREED to appoint Ms. Margaret Fitzpatrick to the Local Community
Development Committee (LCDC).
Cllr. Michael Connolly thanked outgoing member Mr. Donal Walsh for his work on
the LCDC.
ITEM NO. 7 TO CONSIDER AND IF DEEMED APPROPROATE APPROVE
HOUSING BORROWING REQUIREMENTS.
4740
Report dated 25th May 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting
Director of Services, Mr Mitchell, provided Members with background to the request
for their consideration. He noted that approval was granted by the Elected Members
by way of formal resolution in November 2024, to proceed with borrowing of up to
€25 million to support and accelerate the delivery of affordable purchase housing in
Galway. Approval is now being sought for an increase of €10 million to the
previously sanctioned borrowing, bringing the total authorised borrowing ceiling to
€35 million. This additional funding will support the expanded programme, address
inflationary cost pressures and ensure the continued delivery of local authority own-
build affordable housing schemes. He drew attention to the fact that there are no
projects identified for the Ballinasloe area in the report, as only projects located on
lands under the control of Galway County Council are currently included. However,
he reassured Members that locations within Ballinasloe will be considered in future
reports
The programme of affordable housing that is being proposed consists of the
following:
1. Claregalway (Droim na Gaoithe)
66
Page 5 of 26
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Loughrea, Cosmona — Phase 1
Loughrea, Cosmona — Phase 2
Athenry, Raheen
Tuam, Sun Street
Bearna, Tobar Na Luarcha
Oughterard, Station Road
Loughrea, Cosmona — Phase 3
Athenry, Pairc na hAbhain
10. Portumna, St. Joseph's Road
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
44
18
28
62
20
70
50
16
12
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Maher SECONDED by Cllr. McClearn it was AGREED to
approve an increase of €10 million to the previously sanctioned borrowing, bringing
the total authorised borrowing ceiling to €35million, to enable the delivery of
Affordable Housing Purchase, in accordance with Section 106 of the Local
Government Act 2001 (as amended).
Cllrs. I Comh. Maher, McClearn, Regan, D. Connolly, Hoade, Cunniffe, Welby,
Canning, Geraghty, A. Harney, McHugh Farag, Reddington, L. Harney, O
Curraofn, Kinane, Lee, M. Connolly & McNamara raised the following points
and queries:
This funding will allow for the delivery of affordable housing schemes in each
Municipal District (MD).
The housing borrowing requirements have been discussed extensively at
Housing Strategic Policy Committee (SPC).
The demand for affordable housing is exceptionally high.
The affordable housing plans were warmly welcomed and the housing staff were
complimented for their work.
There must be a balance between social, affordable and cost rental housing.
Houses which cost between €425,000 and €475,000 are not affordable houses.
The government are moving in the right direction with the upcoming Critical
Infrastructure Bill.
Page 6 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
There is also a clear need for affordable housing in outlying areas of the county.
Provision of social housing places a significant financial strain on local
authorities.
The government subsidy provided for affordable housing is inadequate.
The government subsidy has not made allowances for increases in inflation. The
2021 Statutory Instrument governing this is outdated.
Has there been any indication from Government that the Affordable Housing
Scheme will be reviewed.
Is the same scheme in operation in every local authority.
Appreciation was expressed to the Executive for incorporating a diverse mix of
housing types in Portumna.
Building specifications are overly prescriptive, this increases construction costs
and, in turn, makes homes less affordable.
A request was made for the delivery of a scheme in Ballinasloe at the earliest
opportunity. Affordable housing is also needed in rural towns and villages where
schools and services have capacity, in contrast to urban areas where such
services are under pressure. It was emphasised that supporting people to live
within their own communities is essential.
It was noted that the Affordable Housing policy requires review, as current
asking prices are not considered affordable. Concerns were also raised that
deferred payment arrangements may result in higher overall costs.
Is there provision for the Council to construct homes for applicants on their own
sites?
It was asked if water services will be provided in Craughwell, Clarinbridge and
Ardrahan. Serviced sites are required to build houses.
To allow the proposed wastewater plant to proceed in Clarenbridge and
Craughwell, the Council are required to provide €2.6 funding.
A water treatment plant is required in South Connemara.
The Council are underfunded.
The cost of materials has increased.
Galway Roscommon Education Training Board (GRETB) need to support
apprenticeships.
Page 7 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
Clarity was sought on the definitions of 'bridging loan' and 'overdraft' used in the
meeting documentation.
The Council should be looking for increased funding from government to fund
these schemes and not applying for loans to provide affordable housing.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Mitchell:
The Council work within the parameters of the subsidies provided in the
Affordable Housing Scheme.
The Council may construct housing on land owned by social housing
applicants in certain circumstances. Approval is contingent on the suitability of
existing social housing in the area and the intended long-term use of the
dwelling. Applicants also have the option to apply for a Local Authority Home
Loan.
Uisce Éireann are introducing a policy document on Developer Led
Infrastructure.
There are currently no plans for treatment plants in An Spidéal or
Lettermullen. The existing private schemes will be evaluated to assess their
capacity for potential use to advance schemes.
The Department have shown some flexibility in the Affordable Housing
Scheme and assess each proposal on a case-by-case basis.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
Committed to providing affordable housing in each of the 5 MDs.
• The council are currently seeking to acquire sites and are working with
developers in each MD.
ITEM NO. 8 UPDATE TO PLENARY ON IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CORPORATE
PLAN 2025-2029.
Report was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
4741
Page 8 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
Director of Services Mr. Owens introduced the quarter one progress report on the
implementation of the Corporate Plan 2025-2029, as progressed through the Annual
Service Delivery Plan (ASDP). The report sets out the strategic goals, supporting
actions, timelines, National Oversight and Audit Commission (NOAC) performance
indicators, goals, KPI targets and quarter 1 status updates. The report was considered
at Corporate Policy Group (CPG).
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Killilea SECONDED by Cllr. Finnerty the update on the
Implementation of the Corporate Plan 2025-2029 was NOTED.
Cllrs. I Comh. D. Killilea, D. Connolly, Maher, Geraghty, Parsons, Finnerty & A.
Harney raised the following points and queries:
It was asked that the contract for the Council Out of Hours call answering
service be reviewed.
Are the Council out of hours staff fully trained.
Homeless accommodation is required in County towns. The Council should
not be reliant on services provided by COPE.
It is not suitable for homeless families to be referred to Galway City, when
their family supports and schools are located in the county.
The units to shelter the homeless on Vicar Street, Tuam are being
progressed.
St. Brigid's Hospital in Ballinasloe should be acquired to provide homeless
There needs to be a broad discussion around homelessness as it is a
complex issue with many contributing factors.
A wide range of accommodation options are required.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Mitchell:
e There has been an increase in homelessness. COPE which operates the
homeless services for Galway County Council is at capacity.
Page 9 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
Homeless people tend to migrate to larger urban areas where they can avail
of back up services.
Back up facilities will be required for the facility in Vicar Street, Tuam.
The Council are looking to provide services in Oranmore and Ballinasloe. He
welcomed suggestions of locations from the Elected Members.
He would welcome a representative from COPE to make a presentation to the
Housing SPC Members.
The out of hours service will be assessed.
Cllrs. I Comh. D. Killilea, Parsons, Donohue, Cunniffe & McHugh Farag raised
the following points and queries:
It was asked what Elected Members and the Council can do to assist COPE
in their work.
That supporting actions for homeless services be included in the Annual
Service Delivery Plan.
It was asked if COPE could make a presentation to the full Council at plenary.
COPE provided Domestic Abuse training recently to Members, it was
encouraged that all Members should undertake the training.
It was asked if non-SPC members can attend SPC meetings as a guest.
Elected Members may attend an SPC they are not a member of, where they
are bringing a motion to that SPC; however, they cannot vote at meetings.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
Homeless services are a complex issue as additional wrap around services
are required in addition to food and shelter.
The current Out of Hours service will be reviewed.
The purpose of SPCs is to gather information and data, which is used to
inform policy.
If the Members wish to undertake COPE training this will be facilitated.
Workshops can also be arranged if the Members wish.
Page 10 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Owens:
The Annual Service Delivery Plan can be supplemented by way of supporting
actions, if agreed at SPC.
Confirmed that Elected Members where they are bringing a motion to a SPC
that they were not a member of, they could attend for that purpose however,
they cannot vote at these meetings.
The Cathaoirleach confirmed that it was agreed that COPE will be invited to attend the
Housing SPC and that the provision of a workshop can be discussed at the Housing
SPC.
ITEM NO. 9 TO FIX A DATE AND TIME FOR THE ANNUAL MEETING OF
PLENARY COUNCIL.
4742
It was agreed to hold the Annual Meeting of the Plenary Council on Friday 19th June
in Aras an Chontae at 2.30pm.
ITEM NO. 10 TO CONSIDER AND IF DEEMED APPROPRIATE AUTHORISE THE
ATTENDANCE AT TRAINING IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 142(5A) OF
THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 2001 (AS AMENDED).
Report dated 14th May was published to the Extranet prior to the meeting.
4743
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. McClearn SECONDED by Cllr. Maher it was AGREED to
authorise Cllr. M. Hoade to attend AILG Women's Regional Caucus Network at
Tipperary County Council Office, Nenagh on Wednesday 29th April 2026.
Retrospective approval.
On the PROPOSAL of CEEr. Maher SECONDED by Cllr. McHugh Ryan it was
AGREED to authorise Cllr J. Mc Clearn, Cllr. S. McHugh Ryan, Cllr. G. King, Cllr. M.
Hoade & Cllr. M. Kinane to attend All-G Elected Member Training Programme May
2026 — Module 3 - "Supporting Councillors: Responding to Mental Health, Suicide
Page 11 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
and Addiction Issues" in Hotel Kilmore, Cavan on 21st May 2026. Retrospective
approval.
ITEM 11. TO NOTE THE SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS OF CONFERENCES
ATTENDED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 142(5F) OF THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT ACT 2001 (AS AMENDED).
4744
Report dated 14th May 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Maher SECONDED by Cllr. Lee the Summary of
Proceedings at conferences attended were NOTED.
ITEM 12. TO CONSIDER THE MANAGEMENT REPORT - MAY 2026 IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 136(2) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT
2001 (AS AMENDED).
4745
Report dated May 2026 was published on the Extranet prior to the meeting.
The Management Report — May 2026, in accordance with Section 136(2) of the
Local Government Act 2001 (as amended) was NOTED.
Cllrs. McHugh Ryan, Kinane, McHugh Farag, Mannion, D. Connolly,
Reddington, Lee & Grealish raised the following points and queries:
The Tuam Women's Shed was praised for the positive impact that they have
had in their community and were congratulated on their 'Inclusive
Communities' award at the Cathaoirleach Awards.
The recent community event at the Palace Grounds, Tuam opening the
Michael McGrath Sensory Garden, new basketball courts and the raising of
the Green and Green Hertitage Site Flag by Tuam MD Cathaoirleach Cllr.
McHugh Farag was congratulated.
Play equipment in Palace Grounds, Tuam requires upgrading.
The commencement of works on a section of new footpaths connecting Tuam
Rugby Club was warmly welcomed.
Page 12 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
The provision of playground Inspector Training was welcomed.
Capital funding under the Capital Grant Scheme for Play and Recreation to
support works at Renville playground was welcomed.
Feedback was sought following a recent meeting with members of the
Oireachtas on the CraughwelI-Clarinbridge wastewater scheme. The Council
must provide the €2.6m match funding for the scheme to proceed.
The approval of the Clifden Part 10 planning application was welcomed.
A session of the Local Community Safety Partnership public consultation
should also be held in Clifden.
Are the provisions for the Summer Ready programme in place in advance of
the bank holiday weekend. Has engagement taken place with the Gardai
regards parking at beaches.
There should be a dedicated budget for works to footpath.
It was asked if the Council's anti-dumping initiatives are adequately
resourced.
The Cathaoirleach was complimented on the recent Cathaoirleach Awards
and praised for the presentation of the Cathaoirleach's Special Recognition
Award which was awarded posthumously to Mr. Damien Delaney.
Delays in payments of Croi Cönaithe were highlighted. It was asked if bridging
loans could be provided for applicants.
The solar panels provided in Leitir Meallain and Pobal Tir Fhia Community
Centres were welcomed.
Works on the pedestrian crossing at An Spidéal National School was
welcomed.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
A report on the Wastewater Treatment for Craughwell and Clarinbridge will be
presented to the Members.
Illegal dumping remains a significant challenge, and we are applying all
available mechanisms and resources to address it.
Acknowledged that payments under the Croi Cönaithe should be processed
promptly.
Page 13 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Prendergast:
There is currently no dedicated budget code for footpath works. These works
are delivered through the roads programme, encompassing maintenance,
upgrades, safety improvement schemes, and active travel initiatives.
If the Members have specific areas of concern, he invited them to contact the
specific MD.
The Summer Ready programme witl be operational.
Cllrs. Regan, D. Connolly, Keane, Cunniffe & Lee raised the following points
and queries:
€200,000 should be allocated every year per MD for footpath works.
A budget code for footpath works should be included in the 2027 budget.
The completion of the Section 38 consultation for Oranmore Train Station
Active Travel Scheme was welcomed. An update on the timeline for
completion of the project was requested.
It was asked that the Athenry/Oranmore MD Members be updated on the
Loughrea MD flood reviews that relate to Oranmore.
The Craughwell—Clarinbridge wastewater treatment plant should have been
developed when costs were lower. It was queried that, should the Council be
required to provide match funding for the project, which service areas would
be impacted. The current situation, whereby wastewater from Clarinbridge is
being discharged to the sea, is not acceptable.
The Council does not receive an equitable share of the Equalisation Fund.
The announcement of funding for piers in Connemara and the work of Council
staff in securing it was acknowledged.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Prendergast:
• The Section 38s in Oranmore for bus shelters are going to tender shortly, the
MDs will be updated.
Page 14 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
RPS are preparing an interim report on the flooding review. The final report
will be completed in the next few months and the MDs will be updated.
ITEM 13. CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S BUSINESS & CORRESPONDENCE.
4746
The following items of correspondence which were published on the extranet prior to
the meeting were NOTED:
Letter dated 26.11.2025 from Galway County Council to Department of
Transport — Resolution letter — Traffic Calming Speed Ramps.
Email dated 07.05.2026 from Amanda Corley Private Secretary to Minister O
Brien TD - Reply to Resolution letter dated 26.11.2025.
Letter dated 02.03.2026 from Galway County Council to Minister James
Browne, Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage — Resolution
letter — Modular Housing Guidelines.
Letter dated 01.05.2026 from Eoin Colleary, Private Secretary to Minister of
State John Cummins — Reply to Resolution letter dated 02.03.2026.
Letter dated 04.03.2026 from Galway County Council to Department of An
Taoiseach — Resolution letter — Increase provision of Irish Medium Education
— circulated to Minister for Education.
Letter dated 21.04.2026 from Hildegarde Naughton, Minister for Education
and Youth — Reply to Resolution letter dated 04.03.2026.
Letter issued post Council Meeting of 09.04.2026 in Waterford City & County
Council — Resolution — Disability Act 2025.
Letter dated 16.04.2026 from Waterford City & County Council — Resolution —
Expressway Services.
Letter dated 20.04.2026 from Carlow County Council — Resolution Letter —
Dedicated Local Representative Service from ESB.
Letter dated 21.04.2026 from Monaghan County Council — Resolution Letter —
Business Grant for Rate Payers in Monaghan.
Letter dated 24.04.2026 from South Dublin County Council — Resolution
Letter — Bessborough Mother and Baby home.
Page 15 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
Letter dated 30.04.2026 from Michael McCarthy Chair, National Oversight and
Audit Commission — NOAC Annual Report.
Letter dated 05.05.2026 from Roscommon County Council — Resolution letter
— Independent Commission for Validation of Planning objections.
Letter dated 1 1.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Department of
Housing, Local Government & Heritage — Resolution Letter — Grants for
domestic Waste Water Treatment.
Email dated 13.05.2026 from Megan Woods Private Secretary to Minister
Browne — Acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated 1 1.05.2026.
Letter dated 1 1.05.2026 from Galway County Council to National Transport
Authority — Resolution Letter — Additional Services on 424 Route.
Letter dated 1 1.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Minister for Public
Expenditure, Infrastructure, Public Service Reform & Digitalisation —
Resolution Letter- Critical Infrastructure Development.
Email dated 1 1.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Local Authorities in
the wider West/North West Region — Circulation of Resolution letter dated
1 1.05.2026.
Email dated 13.05.2026 from Corporate Services Section Sligo County
Council — Acknowledgement of Resolution letter dated 1 1.05.2026.
Letter dated 1 1.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Corofin Set Dancers
— Congratulations on winning All Ireland Senior Scor in Set Dancing.
Letter dated 1 1.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Seån O Tuairisg —
Congratulations on work contributed to Joyce Country Western Lakes
Geopark Status.
Letter dated 1 1.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Maire Mannion,
Heritage Officer - Congratulations on work contributed to Joyce Country
Western Lakes Geopark Status.
Letter dated 1 1.05.2026 from Galway County Council to Joyce Country &
Western Lakes Geopark Project - Congratulations on work contributed to
Joyce Country Western Lakes Geopark Status.
Letter dated 12.05.2026 form Clare County Council — Resolution — Cost of
living measures.
Page 16 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
Email dated 14.05.2026 from Cavan County Council — Resolution —
Awareness campaign on Sepsis.
Letter dated 18.05.2026 from Longford County Council — Resolution letter —
Just Transition Tourism Activators
The Chief Executive informed Members that a Training session will be delivered on
the morning of the 3rd September 2026 in respect of Public Sector Duty & Members
Conference/Training Expenses.
ITEM 14. QUESTION Cllr. Geraldine Donohue
Cllr. Donohue submitted the following question to the meeting:
4747
'That Galway County Council Chief Executive and Director of Services provide
confirmation how much has Galway County Council written off on Derelict Sites
Levies in the last 10 years"
The following reply issued:
I can confirm that Galway County Council has not written off any Derelict Sites levies
in the last 10 years.
ITEM 15 QUESTION Cllr. Andrew Reddinqton
4748
Cllr. Andrew Reddington submitted the following question to the meeting:
"How many streetlamps there are in Galway County Council's administrative area?
How many streetlamps have been replaced with modern LED lamps to date?
What plan Galway County Council has to replace the remaining lamps?"
The following reply issued:
I refer and reply to your Motion relating to Public Lighting infrastructure in the Galway
County Council administrative area.
Page 17 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
It is confirmed that there are a total of 13,116 public lighting lanterns in the Galway
County Council administrative area.
Of these it is confirmed that 12,553 are LED lanterns. This represents 95.71% of the
public lighting system.
The remaining 563 non-LED lights will be replaced through the existing Public Lighting
Maintenance contract. It is projected that the majority of these lights will be replaced
within the next three years.
The Chief Executive spoke on the motion and emphasised that meeting carbon
thresholds is an important element in Our Climate Action Plan. Work is ongoing in
this area to reach 100% completion.
ITEM 16. NOTICE OF MOTION
4749
Cllr. Thomas Welby submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the
meeting:
"This Council agrees that the Comprehensive Economic Trade Agreement (CETA)
providing additional rights to multinational corporations to sue the state outside of
ordinary legal systems we currently have will undermine EU social, health and
environmental standards. This Council acknowledges that many of the trade
elements are already in place and does not need the addition of corporations being
able to sue the Irish government through the Investor Court System (ICS) when any
new laws affect their profits. This council stands against the Investor Court System
(ICS) and calls this constituency a CETA-Free Zone.
This Council resolves to write to the Minister for Trade, the Minister for Local
government and the Taoiseach to outline this position. It further resolves to publicise
the council's concerns about CETA and to circulate this motion with other Councils
as correspondence for consideration".
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr.WeEby SECONDED by Cllr. Grealish the above motion
was AGREED.
Page 18 of 26
ITEM 17. NOTICE OF MOTION
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
4750
Cllr. Michael Regan submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the
meeting:
'That we write to electric Skyline, to clarify the lights they have replaced on all poles
within the County, are of what wattage.
It appears all these new light LED fittings are not throwing out the same light as the
old light fitting.
In between poles there is a huge black spot, dark area which means they need to put
in a stronger light fitting, if not we would have to look at putting in a new pole and
light between existing poles, as its extremely dangerous for all pedestrians
The following reply issued:
I refer and reply to your Motion relating to the Public Lighting LED Retrofit
Programme.
With regard to the concern that the new LED fittings do not appear to provide the
same level of lighting as the previous lanterns, it is important to note that the earlier
LED retrofit designs were developed to provide compliant lighting levels while also
improving energy efficiency, reducing maintenance requirements, reducing upward
light spill and sky glow, and supporting climate action and biodiversity objectives.
The designs across the Galway County Council area have been carried out in
accordance with the relevant public lighting standards, including IS EN 13201-2:2015
and BS 5489-1:2020.
In some very limited locations, achieving ideal lighting uniformity can be challenging
within the constraints of the existing public lighting infrastructure. As a result, some
areas may appear darker between columns following the LED upgrade works.
Where specific locations requiring additional attention were identified, these were
reviewed and addressed on a case-by-case basis where feasible.
If there are specific locations which members consider to have inadequate lighting
levels or to present a potential safety concern for pedestrians or road users, details
can be forwarded to the Roads Section for inspection and further assessment.
Page 19 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
In relation to the query regarding wattage, replacement LED fittings are selected on
a design basis having regard to the applicable lighting standards and the
requirements of each individual location, including road classification, column
spacing and mounting height. In general, the LED wattages installed across the
public lighting network range from approximately 8 watts to 137 watts.
Cllr. Regan asked for further information on the locations of the different watt bulbs.
Mr. Prendergast, Senior Engineer clarified that the response should have stated 18
watt and not 8 watt. He added that the wattage of bulb used is determined by the
area that the light has to cover. By design, LEDs have less spillage of light than
conventional bulbs, as they are more focused, they are also more efficient. Dark
spots occur where the lighting is situated on network poles. The Council is
addressing this as part of the retrofit process, which is subject to available budget.
He asked that he be informed if the Members have any areas of particular concern.
Cllrs. McClearn, McHugh Ryan, Hoade, Regan, M. Connolly & Keane raised the
following points and queries:
The concentration of light from the LED bulbs is creating blackspots, the fitting
and design needs to be examined. Local roads are not suitable for these
types of lights.
Sensor lights only come on once you have passed the area. Lighting is vital
for women to feel safe.
Repairs to lights are not being carried out.
There is an issue of lights being erected but not connected for a year or more,
which is not acceptable.
An enquiry was made regarding the timeframe for repairing lights.
Page 20 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Mr. Prendergast:
18 watt bulbs are used in housing estates. Where a larger area requires
lighting, a taller column and higher wattage bulb is used. Further detail can be
provided if required by the Member.
In the opinion of the Council the contractor is fulfilling their responsibilities.
Older cabling is in place. It is not the responsibility of Skyline, engagement
with ESB is required.
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Regan SECONDED by Cllr. Keane the above motion
was AGREED.
ITEM 18. NOTICE OF MOTION
4751
Cllr. Geraldine Donohue submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to the
meeting:
'Based on the attached February 2026 Plenary reply to my question, can Galway
County Council Chief Executive and Director of Services provide an update on the
funding requests to Central Government required for the re-opening of Dunguaire
Castle and status of same. If no response has been forthcoming can Galway County
Council write to relevant depts in Central Government seeking an update on the
urgent funding required to have this important domestic and international tourist
attraction re-opened'.
The following reply issued:
The Council continues to actively engage with relevant State bodies in relation to the
transfer of ownership of Dunguaire Castle, recognising its importance as both a
significant heritage asset and a key domestic and international tourism attraction.
Arising from the matters referenced in the February 2026 plenary response, a
meeting has been scheduled with the Director General of the National Parks and
Wildlife Service and the newly appointed CEO of Shannon Airport Group. In addition,
Page 21 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
dates are currently being explored for a meeting with the Assistant Secretary
General of the Office of Public Works (OPW).
The Council has pursued alt appropriate and recommended avenues in seeking to
advance this matter, including formal engagement with central government
departments and agencies. However, it is important to note that formal requests to
secure capital funding have not been successful to date, with both the OPW and
NPWS currently indicating that they are not in a position to provide funding of this
nature.
Notwithstanding this, the Council remains committed to working collaboratively with
all relevant stakeholders to identify viable pathways. Engagement is ongoing, and
opportunities for further advancement will continue to be explored.
The Chief Executive informed the meeting that there has been advancement on this
issue since the reply to the motion was issued to Cllr. Donohue.
ITEM 19. NOTICE OF MOTION
4752
Cllr. Karey Mc Hugh Farag submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to
the meeting:
That Galway County Council writes to the Minister for Children, Disability and
Equality, the Minister for Enterprise, Tourism and Employment, and any other
relevant Government Ministers, requesting an urgent review and amendment of
current maternity, paternity and parental leave legislation to provide additional
supports for families following childbirth recovery.
In particular, this Council calls on the Government to introduce provisions whereby:
1. A parent availing of the current two-week Paternity Leave entitlement would
automatically qualify for the immediate usage of four weeks of Parent's Leave
where their partner has undergone a Caesarean section birth, recognising the
medical recommendation of a minimum six-week recovery period following
major abdominal surgery. Should they wish to do so.
Page 22 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
2. A parent availing of Paternity Leave in cases of natural birth would qualify for
an additional two weeks of Parent's Leave immediately following the initial
two-week leave period, in recognition that recovety from labour and childbirth
complications frequently extends beyond two weeks. Should they wish to do
so.
The purpose of these measures is to ensure that mothers recovering from childbirth,
particularly following Caesarean delivery, have adequate support during the critical
postnatal recovery period, including assistance with attending medical appointments,
caring for newborns and other children, and managing day-to-day activities where
medical restrictions may apply.
This motion is also being brought forward in recognition of the fact that many
partners currently only avail of the initial two weeks of Paternity Leave, while some
employers do not facilitate or accept the immediate use of additional Parent's Leave
directly following paternity leave period. As a result, many fathers and partners defer
or do not avail of their Parent's Leave entitlement during the first two years of a
child's life, despite the clear need for support in the immediate postnatal period. This
issue has also been highlighted in recent Government awareness campaigns
encouraging greater uptake of Parent's Leave by partners and fathers.
Galway County Council further recognises the significant positive impact that
extended parental support can have on maternal recovery, family wellbeing, and
early childhood care, and requests that the Government give this matter urgent
consideration. '
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr.McHugh SECONDED by Cllr. Donohue the above
motion was AGREED.
ITEM 20. NOTICE OF MOTION
4753
Cllr. Karey Mc Hugh Farag submitted the following Notice of Motion prior to
the meeting:
'That Galway County Council writes to the Minister for Health, the Minister for Social
Protection, the Minister for Enterprise, Tourism and Employment, and any other
Page 23 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
relevant Government Ministers, requesting that consideration be given to the
introduction of a statutory annual medical appointment leave entitlement for
individuals registered under the Long-Term Illness (LTI) Scheme.
In particular, this Council calls on the Govemment to introduce a provision whereby
individuals in full-time or part-time employment who are approved under the Long-
Term Illness Scheme would be entitled to an allowance of 2—3 paid days per annum
for the purpose of attending necessary scheduled medical appointments, treatments,
consultations, or preventative care related to their condition.
This motion is being brought forward in recognition of the fact that many individuals
living with long-term illnesses are currently unable to attend all recommended
medical appointments due to financial pressures, workplace constraints, or an
inability to take unpaid leave from employment. As a result, some patients delay or
miss essential preventative and ongoing care appointments, which can negatively
impact health outcomes and quality of life.
Galway County Council further recognises that missed medical appointments place a
significant financial burden on the HSE each year and can contribute to increased
long-term healthcare costs arising from delayed diagnosis, avoidable complications,
and the progression of treatable conditions.
This Council believes that providing a limited and protected medical appointment
leave entitlement for those living with long-term illnesses would support preventative
healthcare, improve patient outcomes, reduce avoidable pressures on the healthcare
system, and promote a more compassionate and inclusive working environment for
individuals managing chronic health conditions.
Galway County Council therefore requests that the Government urgently review this
matter and consider the implementation of such a support measure. '
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. McHugh Farag SECONDED by Cllr. Donohue the above
motion was AGREED.
Page 24 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
ITEM NO. 21 CATHAOIRLEACH'S BUSINESS
4754
Cllrs. Maher, Welby, Cunniffe, Keane, Kinane, Kelly, M. Connolly, D. Connolly &
Grealish, raised the following points and queries:
•
An enquiry was made regarding the provision of facilities at Long Point,
Loughrea.
All staff involved in the recent National Famine Commemoration held in
Portumna were commended, notably Marie Mannion, Heritage Officer.
A discussion took place regarding meetings of the Irish Republican
Brotherhood that were held Oughterard.
Reference was made to the Occupied Territories Bill that is to be discussed in
the Dåil. It was asked if a reply was received to recent correspondence that
was issued to An Taoiseach.
Government were called on to enact legislation to govern illegal campsites.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
The National Famine Commemoration was a fitting commemoration and a
proud day for County Galway.
Galway County Council is the only democratically elected local authority for
County Galway and the Chief Executive reports to this Council only-
Issues relating to illegal camping are addressed through the court system, in
collaboration with An Garda Siochäna and the courts.
The Executive did not receive a response to the correspondence issued to the
Office of An Taoiseach on the Occupied Territories Bill.
Cllrs. McHugh Farag, Donoghue, Regan & Finnerty, raised the following points
and queries:
Israel is the second largest export market for Ireland. Peace should be given
higher priority than profit.
An update was requested on the targeted leaflet drop relating to Ash Die Back
that was previously requested.
Page 25 of 26
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held 25th May 2026
Information was requested regarding the timeline for advertising commercial
opportunities at Long Point, Loughrea.
Clarification was sought on which local authority owns a particular parcel of
land near the M18 Gort to Ennis motorway.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by Ms. Ruane:
• A response was received from An Coimisiün Pleanåla on Friday regarding the
Long Point, Loughrea, she will liaise with Director of Services, Mr. Finn.
Members Queries were responded to as follows by the Chief Executive:
• Mr. Finn, Director of Services will contact Cllr. Finnerty regarding the query on
the M18 lands.
ITEM NO. 22 VOTES OF SYMPTAHY 1 CONGRATULATIONS.
Alex and Cllr. Declan Geraghty, Williamstown, Co. Galway
The Downey Family, Athenry Road, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Carmel Burke, Crossford, Gott, Co. Galway
Tony O Rourke, Curra, Kylebrack, Loughrea, Co. Galway
Pat Deely, Ballyboy, Gort, Co. Galway
P.J. Joyce, Criminagh, Leitir Mör, Co. na Gaillimhe.
Cllr. Gerry King, Errislannan, Clifden, Co. Galway
Chriochnaigh an Cruinniü Ansin.
Submitted, Signed and Approved
Cathaoirleach:
Date:
4755
Page 26 of 26