1 
 
 
 
 
Minutes of the Meeting of Limerick City and County Council’s Travel and Transportation 
Strategic Policy Committee held on 22nd April at 2:15 p.m. in the Council Chamber, Dooradoyle 
and ONLINE by MS Teams Video Conference. 
 
 
 
Members’ Present: Cllr Brigid Teefy, Cllr Gregory Conway, Cllr Peter Doyle, Cllr Ursula Gavan, Cllr 
Sean Hartigan, Cllr John O’ Donoghue, Cllr Elisa O’ Donovan, Cllr Eddie Ryan, Cllr Martin Ryan, Cllr 
Tom Ruddle, Cllr Jerome Scanlon, Cllr Elena Secas,  
 
Apologies:   Cllr Fergus Kilcoyne, Cllr Martin Ryan, Cllr Tom Ruddle, Cllr Adam Teskey, Cllr Ger 
Ward, John Foster, Farron Flaherty  
 
Other Invitees: Philip Byrne 
 
Officials Present: Ms. P Liddy, (PL) Mr. H. McGrath (HMcG), M Fitzgerald, Ms Ú Walsh (ÚW), Ms. 
M. Corrigan (M.C.), Ms. M. Fitzgerald (MF), Mr. T. Goodwin (TG), Mr. S. McGlynn (SMcG), Ms C. 
Mulcahy (CM), Mary Hennessy, (MH), Tom Hayes (TH), Caroline Mulcahy (CM), Caroline 
Chambers (CC), Patrick O’ Rourke (PO’R) , John O’ Keeffe (JO’K), Assumpta Leahy (AL), Mr T Hayes 
(TH), Mr J O’ Leary (JO’L), John Gannon (JG), Sasa Novak (SK) 
 
Item 1:  Minutes:  
The Minutes of the Meeting of the Travel and Transportation Strategic Policy Committee held on 
the 17th of February 2025 were proposed by Cllr Jerome Scanlon seconded by Cllr. John O’ 
Donoghue and adopted. 
 
The Chair thanked Hugh McGrath for working with the Committee, who has taken up a new role 
with Clare County Council, and welcomed Patrick O’ Rourke, Senior Executive Technician. 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
Item 2: Presentation - Update on the Implementation of Built-up and Urban Area Speed Limits 
John O’ Keeffe, Senior Executive Engineer, gave an update on the delivery of phase 2 of the 2023 
speed limit review which includes for the implementation of urban core speed limits along with 
reduced speed limit zones outside of urban schools. Future phases will be delivered, with Phase 
3 of the review including for a speed limit reduction on national Secondary Roads to 80kph and 
Phase 4 delivering reduced speed limit zones outside rural schools.  
 
Following discussions, Mr O’Keeffe responded to queries from the members on the scope of 
Phase 2. Members raised the matter of speed limits at a number of locations on regional roads, 
which it was clarified falls outside the scope of the Phase 2 review, and it was requested that 
such requests for speed limit reviews are referred to the Central Services Roads team as speed 
limit review requests to assess and respond.  
  
Questions were raised relating to a review of the impact of the existing 30kph core in Limerick 
City which was implemented in recent years, and if before and after speed have been 
compared.  Mr O’ Keeffe confirmed that he was not aware if before and after surveys have 
been undertaken but he will look into this and revert. 
 
Cllr Elisa O’ Donovan stated it was a useful review; she has a particular interest in O’ Connell 
Avenue. She asked if the signs were working and whether traffic had slowed down.  She said a 
snapshot of how this is running in the city would be helpful and asked what was being done in 
relation to enforcement. John O’ Keeffe said there is no instruction to review at this stage; he is 
to check this out and revert. 
Cllr Elisa O’ Donovan stated that a review would be very helpful.  
She questioned where regional roads fell in the phases. John O’ Keeffe stated that these do not 
fall under the criteria of required roads under this phase., no plans to alter speed limit on these.  
ER  - 60m of footpath in Knocklong, sign is to be moved out 30m.  
 
John O’ Keeffe – Number of byelaws would need to be put in place of Byelaws and an 
application is required. 
ER – 29 accidents in Ballylanders in the last couple of months including two fatalities. 80km 
road – (R513) this cannot be changed according to John O’ Keeffe. Ballylanders speed limit to 
increase from 50km to 60km. This is not getting any hearing.  
 
JOK is to check this out. Guidelines are quite clear, Ballylander is a very rural location, and does 
not believe this area is suitable for reduction. 

3 
 
DT – Many fatalities in 2025 and 2024, 30km limit applies to all urban areas. 6 schools in 
Limerick City West. He queried whether the urban core is quite conservation. The speed limit in 
Mungret is 30km other may not need so much 
LIHAF Road  
JOK – All non-main road schools will be included.  
Every week representatives are contacted over excessive speeds  
50 – 30 when you’re in it 
JOK – If representatives want specific locations to be reviewed, they are to let Limerick City and 
County Council know.  
The Chair asked for the presentation to be circulated in due course. 
 
Item 3:  Strategic Policy Committee Meeting Workshop with the purpose of developing a  
work programme for the remainder of the current council with Facilitator Dr Philip  
Byrne of Byrne Training and Consultation Ltd. 
 
Dr Philip Byrne of Irish Public Administration  
He has over forty years experience working in local government and the public sector 
The purpose of the workshop is to agree on a draft work programme for the remainder of the 
current council 2024 – 2029. 
Cllr Elena Secas queried how this might be done.  The roles for of the Elected Members, Chief 
Executive, Mayor require funding for projects, that the Council are at mercy of national funding  
Philip Byrne - Identify funding as a challenge at national and regional level.  
 
Cllr Elisa O’ Donovan – worthwhile exercise, unique situation in Limerick with DEM, after this 
with under legislation that the Mayor chairs a Transport subgroup with Minister for Transport  
 
Taxi and Hackney services – no concession for taxi drivers – trying to promote the Twilight 
Thursday. NTA destroyed hackney business. Age restriction, garda compliant, tax compliant and 
taxi and hackney insurance.  
Cllr Jerome Scanlon – lack of connectivity locally. There is a bus from Newcastlewest to Dublin 
but not to the city centre. There are no taxis in Newcastlewest after 7pm.  

4 
 
Cllr Peter Doyle stated that Urban Rail should be established across all of Limerick. Limerick City 
and County Council should aspire to have passenger line to Adare, Birdhill to Castleconnell, 
passenger line to Foynes, passenger line to Shannon Airport. There are only temporary lines at 
present; there should be an attempt to establish a permanent commuter rail.  
 
Members of the Travel and Transportation Strategic Policy Committee Meeting split into two 
groups with the task of: 
 
• Identifying 5 strategic policies that they felt they could realistically achieve between now 
and 2029. 
• Identifying the timeframe for each of the policies 
• Identifying challenges facing implementation of policies  
• Identifying solutions to overcome the challenges  
 
 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
