COMHAIRLE CONTAE AN CHABHÁIN 
 
Teach na Cúirte 
An Cabháin 
 
3 Meitheamh 2025 
 
Don CHATHAOIRLEACH AGUS GACH BALL DEN CHOMHAIRLE 
 
A chara, 
 
Beidh cruinniú míosúil Chomhairle Contae An Chabháin ar siúl Dé Luain, 9 
Meitheamh 2025 ag 2.00 i.n. i dTeach na Cúirte, an Cabhán. Ta Clár an 
chruinnithe leis seo.  
Mise le meas 
 
 
L. McGavigan 
Riarthóir Cruinnithe 
 
 CAVAN COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
Courthouse 
Cavan 
 
3 June 2025 
 
To CATHAOIRLEACH AND EACH MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL 
 
Dear Councillor, 
The monthly meeting of Cavan County Council will be held in the Courthouse, 
Cavan on Monday 9 June 2025 at 2pm. 
  
Agenda is given hereunder. 
   
Yours sincerely, 
 
L. McGavigan 
Meetings Administrator 
 
CLÁR - A G E N D A 
 
Confirmation of Minutes  
1. To confirm Minutes of Monthly Meeting held on 12th May 2025. 
 
2. Disclosure of Interests (Section 177 Local Government Act 2001). 
 

Note Minutes of Committee Meetings 
 
3. To note Minutes of Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 10 April 2025. 
 
Note Members’ Reports from Conferences/Training events 
4. To note members’ reports from conferences and training events (Section 142  
and Section 143 of the Local Government Act 2001; Local Government (Expenses 
of Local Authority Members) Regulations 2014 Part V Section 5 (1)). 
 
5.   Member’s Question / Ceist – Councillor Niall Smith 
To ask Cavan County Council for an update on the position regarding Bus Stop 
Planning submitted in relation to Local Link Bus Service, which will service Cootehill, 
Shercock, Bailieborough and Virginia.  I understand Bus Stops have been finalised, 
and the service has gone to Tender and the agreed Bus Stops have gone to 
Planning. Could an update be provided as to when a decision may be expected in 
relation to this Planning Application as this Bus Service will provide an important link 
to the Cavan / Dundalk Service, and Virginia to Dublin Service going forward to the 
people living in these local Towns. 
 
Business prescribed by Statute, Standing Orders or Resolutions of the 
Council 
 
6.  To note Chief Executive’s monthly report (Section 51 Local Government Reform  
     Act 2014). 
 
7. In accordance with Section 221, Local Government Act 2001 as amended, 
     adoption of the 2024 Annual Report. 
 
MEMBERS’ ITEMS DEFERRED FROM MAY MEETING 
8.1 
Councillor John Paul Feeley 
That Cavan County Council call on renewable energy companies to make curtailed 
or wasted renewable energy available to support households experiencing energy 
poverty or for community use and that in amending the County Development Plan 
that we make compliance with this objective a condition of any grant of planning. 
8.2 
Councillor John Paul Feeley 
In light of the decision of the Orange County, California and other regions to 
implement a moratorium on BESS facilities and other new restrictions, that Cavan 
County Council call on the Minister for Local Government to implement a regulatory  

MEMBER’S ITEMS – JUNE 
8.3 
Councillor Clifford Kelly 
That Cavan County Council provide an update on the North South Interconnector. 
8.4 
Councillor Shane P. O’Reilly 
That Cavan County Council encourage strongly Minister for Justice Jim O'Callaghan 
T.D. to introduce 'Lukes Law' during the lifetime of this government. 
 
8.5 
Councillor Shane P. O’Reilly 
In welcoming a full state apology to the O'Farrell family on the handling of the case of 
the tragic death of Shane O'Farrell, that Cavan County Council continue to support 
the O'Farrell family in requesting a full public Enquiry into the case. 
 
8.6 
Councillor Shane P. O’Reilly 
That this Council call for an urgent review of the LTI Scheme (Long Term Illnesses) 
as a priority to include many conditions not listed. 
 
8.7 
Councillor Noel Connell 
Concerns about abolition of the triple lock. 
 
8.8 
Councillor Brendan Fay 
That Cavan County Council write to the Ministers for Finance, the Minister for Trade, 
Enterprise and Employment the Minister for Tourism and the Taoiseach to urgently 
call for increased and targeted supports for the hospitality sector, particularly pubs, 
small restaurants and SMEs which are under unprecedented financial pressure. 
 
8.9 
Councillor Brendan Fay 
That Cavan County Council conduct a review of existing online street parking 
arrangements in towns and villages across the county and bring forward measures 
to ensure that all parking is clearly marked and enforced in line with the flow of 
traffic, corresponding with some towns traffic management programmes. 
 
8.10 Councillor Brendan Fay 
That Cavan County Council write to the Minister for Health and the HSE to express 
concern about ongoing lack of dental care services for children in our National 
Schools. 
 

 
 
8.11 Councillor Áine Smith 
Need for varied sizes in housing developments nationwide. 
 
8.12 Councillor T.P. O’Reilly 
To seek a review of the HAP allocation for County Cavan. 
 
8.13 Councillor Stiofán Conaty 
Ag iarraidh ar Rialtas na hÉireann deireadh a chur le Cinedhíothú na Pailistíne a 
mhaoiniú tríd Bhannaí Cogaidh Iosrael a dhíol agus a éascú / To call on the Irish 
Government to stop financing the Palestinian Genocide through the sale and 
facilitation of Israeli War Bonds. 
 
 
 
