
noon




Any communication on thiß subject ghould be
addressed to :—
THE SECRETARY,
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURFI
AND TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION
FOR IRELAND,
(VETERINARY BRANCH),
13, UPPER MERRION ST., DUBLIN,
And the Number and Date of this letter
should be quoted.
No. 2096-13.
Sir,
Department of Ägriculture
anb Cecbnical 3n$truction for 3reIanb,
(Veterinarp Srancb),
13, upper merrion Street;
Dublin.
16th hay, 1913.
4-
_Møvp„-—
mie Deou•tgnt ef cultur and Technical for
Ireland desire to forwexd herew.'th, for the information and
idanoe of ymzr LqcaJ Åvthcri by, oopues of em Oxdcr enti tied
"Tubercuaceie (Ireland Ord.e:• of 1913" vhich hag been mede iy
the Department under the D geaaeg of BD.uma1B Acts, Cid which
will into operati cn proximo.
The Local auü.rity u. e, no d f.vbt 87are üat, having
regQ'd not enil tv the wayg wheröby tubercv10BiB iB liable to
te cc.rnmicatea from bovine euma)B men, but algo tt (he
direct importance of pc04,ectong live gt,ock from the gtread
üe dieeage, there hag, Jn recent yeare, been a ornei3ere.ble
movement cf opinion jn the d) rection of having Tuberculosis
echedvied under the wiüh a view, if peggible.
to euopregsion of the rnä,) uonget outt.le.
Definite actim towards thig Qd has recently been taken
regards Britain by the issue of the TvbercuIoeiB a-der
of the Bism•d Qt end Figherieg, Which cue into
force on 1st ingtant• Qld it follc:wg, cfvneceeøity, that
Bimiler action Bhoulå nov be taken in this country, ag it iB
vital to the interests ot Ireland!g large Tede in
cattle that the adct)t.ed againe•t diseago here ghould be
no legs complete then üoee In Great Brit•ain.
have, üereforø, felt it incumyent them
to {Beue the encltged Order end they are glad to be in
oosition to gtate thet lcrdß OcmniBYicnerg of His Majesty' e
ede for
bxchequer towards the OOBtB of cemvensation for cattle
elaughtered uder the es it had oreviNBly been
decided to to the Local Authorities in Great Britain.
The Local Autheritieg will cbeervø that the u•der
Fovideø
for due notification of uy oagee of udder digeaee in cows,
er emacåadcn in cattle generally, that may poesibJy be due
to Tuberculosis;
tor careful exszninatim by a Veterinary Inspector coting on
behalf of tae Lccel Autherity of all bcvine on
premiseg where the disease iß guppoged to be pregmt in eny
ot the forÜ reauired to be notified, or where there ie a
oor euppoeed to giving tuberculous milk; Qld fer
recourse, in certain to epeciai rneåodB of
invegt,igaticn in euch cegeg;
Clerk
each Local Authority.
ya
for ølzu&ter by the Local authority - gubieet to erta.in
reservatimø - ot any bovine anima.) Which the Locd
Authority ere BQtiBfxed from their report
guttering fren tuberou10BiB of the udder or taber logie
with emaciation, or my cov giving uberculoug miR;
procedure in regard to of propoøed
to be elaughtered;
the øetiefqctory poet-mortem examination of
Biu&lterod snimnig•,
for payment ot compensation by üe Local Authority in
reevect of the glaughtered mtmalB, on a gode depending
regultB of the pogt-mortem exuinztion;
geog.ltimg to be qdopted regsxd to the milk of
diseased or eugpected cows;
tor detentim {golqtion of gugpected mimalø;
for dealing with the epc±ql cage of dieeovery of
euepected mimale in Larkete, Fairs cr Salog;
for prohibiting the oending of digoaeed tor
for tho oo•rying out, There rgquieit.o,
dioinfeoticn;
for whA with üo
authority; and
for other eubeldi.u•y parpoegø.
It hoped to forwqrd ehrtly fa• the further
of Local dt.fthority end their Officere a supply of copiee
of Memorandvm which the qxe htving dealing
more full deteiie of procedure under the (Eder. The
Departmen% Algo coneider that with a view of promoting uniform
efficiont mothodB o? ctu•rying out thu Order, particularly
ag my investigations roouiBito under axticie
4 thered tie Chief
could have eerly opportamity of' intårviev in {ith
tho Veterinary Inepuctore of tme varicue Looni buüeritiug ard
for theuæ%ge
B14gegtea in each case.
Tho queetim of Accotmte in relatim to Gder vill be
dealt in a gepqrate cormmicatim md it remaing t
g tata here that the which üe will {e Rn
positim to afford from the Exche uer Fumag towards tie cost
of working the Order in the dietric% of your Local Authority
will bo one half of the net amour# paid cornpaaeation fcr
Blau&tered animals, after deductacn of any proceede of gale
of healthy carcageg. ThiB arrmeenmt ie to hqve force for
five years fran tie of Crder, the Deriod
durinc which it ig to mticipate, the largest number
of cattle require to be Bluchtered.
Sir,
Your obedimt Servm t,
Secretary.
he folloviiE outfit required for tegting milk
micr:.sctpe fitted with oil imergicn lens.
Åbbe condenser. (Mechanical B tage, althægh
net abgolutely neceggary, {B a great advantage
A centrifuge and gupply of centrifugo glagges.
A platinum w.{re loop in holder.
eupply of glass Blideg, 3" X l".
fev flat b'tt0&d vat.ch glaneg.
A gma.il Bupply Of ceda• oil.
A microscope leap.
g•eaee pencil for on glug.
A gupply of carbol fuchsin stain, ngthyleneilue
stain, end Bolution of carbolic acid
in small drop bottles.
vqgh bottle.
tev pipettes (IO C.c. )
bungen burner, or epirit lemp.
(230.)
ORDER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE AND TECHNICAL IN-
STRUCTION FOR IRELAND.
(DATED 8TH MAY,A913.)
TUBERCULOSIS (IRELAND) ORDER OF
1913.
THE Department of Agriculture and Tech-
nical instruction for Ireland, by virtue and in
exercise of the powers vested in them under the
Diseases of Animals Acts, 1894 to 1911, the
A griculture and Technical Instruction (Ire-
land) Act, 1899, and of every other power
enabling them in this behalf, do order, and it
is hereby ordered, as follows :
Interpretation.
1. In this Order—
' The Department " means the Department
of Agriculture and Technical Instruction
for Ireland :
Local Authority " means the Council of an
administrative county acting as the Local
Authority for the purposes of the Diseases
of Animals Act, 1894 :
The Act of 1894 " means the Diseases of
Animals Act, 1894 :
Inspector " includes Veterinary Inspector :
Bovine animal " means a bull, cow, ox,
heifer or calf :
Cow " includes a heifer that has calved :
Milk includes cream and separated or
skimmed milk.
Other terms have, where the context so per-
mits,• the same meaning and scope as in the Act
of 1894.
Notice of Disease.
Every person having in his posses-
Sion or under his charge
(i) any cow which is, or appears to be, suffer-
ing from tuberculosis of the udder, in-
durated udder, or other chronic disease of
the udder; or
(ii) any bovine animal which is, or appears
to be, suffering from tuberculosis with
emaciation
shall withbut avoidable delay give information
of the fact to a constable of the police force
for the area wherein the animal is, and the con-
stable shall transmit the information
(a) to the Local Authority, who, if not
themselves the Sanita Authorit
shall
inform that Aut orr y; an
(b) to the DepüÄ¯ent.
(2.) The person in possession or having
charge of the animal shall forthwith take such
steps as are necessary to secure compliance with
Article 9 (Precautions to be adopted ovith re-
spect to Milk, and Article 10 (Detention
and Isolation of Suspected Animals).
Notification of Disease by Veterinary
Surgeons.
3.—(1.) A veterinary surgeon or veterinary
practitioner who in his private practice is em-
ployed to examine any animal, and is of opinion
that the animal, if a cow, is suffering from
tuberculosis of the udder, indurated udder, or
other chronic disease of the udder, or, if a
bovine animal, is suffering from tuberculosis
with emaciation, shall with all practicable
speed give notice of the existence or suspected
existence of such disease
(a) to the Local Authority, who, if not
themselves the Sanitary Authority, shall
inform that Authority; and
(b) to the Department.
(2.) A veterinary surgeon or veterinary
practitioner who under and in accordance with
this Article gives notice of the existence or
suspected existence •off disease to the Local
Authority shall be entitled to receive from the
Local Authority a fee of two shillings and six-
pence for each notification.
(3.) Where two or more animals are ex-
amined by a veterinary surgeon or veterinary
practitioner on the same premises and at the
same time and are found to be diseased, one
fee only shall be payable to him under this
Article Vin respect of the notification of the
existence or suspected existence of disease in
such animals.
Inspection and Examination of Animals.
4.—(1. ) Where a Local Authority, from
information received under the preceding
Articles or otherwise, have reasonable ground
for supposing that on any premises in their
District there is a cow which is suffering from
chronic disease of the udder or giving tuber-
culous milk, or a bovine animal which is suffer-
ing from tuberculosis with emaciation, the
Local Authority shall with all practicable speed
cause such veterinary examination of the bovine
animals on such premises to be made by a
Veterinary Inspector as in the opinion of the
Local Authority is necessary to ascertain
whether any cow thereon is suffering from
tuberculosis of the udder or giving tuberculous
milk, or whether any bovine animal thereon is
suffering from tuberculosis with emaciation,
and for that purpose the Inspector may, with
the previous consent in writing of the owner of
the animal or of his agent, but not otherwise,
apply the tu berculin test to any cow which the
Inspector suspects of suffering from tuberculosis
of the udder, or of giving tuberculous milk, or
to any bovine animal which he suspects of
suffering from tuberculosis with emaciation.
(2.) For the purpose of such examination, a
Veterinary Inspector may at all reasonable
hours enter on any part of the premises and
examine any bovine animal thereon, -and re-
quire any cow to be milked in his presence, and
may take samples of the milk, and the milk
from any particular teat shall if he so require
be kept separate, and separate samples thereof
shall be furnished.
(3.) The Inspector may also take samples of
the fæces or urine of any bovine animal on the
premises, or of any abnormal discharge from
any bovine animal thereon.
(4.) The occupier of the premises and the
persons in his employment shall render such
reasonable assistance to the Inspector as may
be required for all or any of the purposes of
this Article, and any person refusing such
assistance shall be deemed guilty of an offence
against the Act of 1894.
(5.) The Inspector shall as soon as possible
send to the Local Authority a report showing
the result of his inspection and examination
and Of the examination of any sample taken
by him. He shall further send a copy of
the report to the Department. The Local
Authority, if not themselves the Sanitary
Authority, shall send a copy of the report to
that Authority.
Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction
TtJBERCVLOSIS ( 1æAID) ORDER OF 1913 .
for Ireland.
Temorandum as to certain points of procedure in connection with
the above Order.
1.
The Local Authority are charged with the duty of investigating,
with the assistance of a Veterinary Inspeotor, reporte received under
the Order, with a view to oauging ths slaughter of any •ow in their
district shown to be suffering from tuberculosis of the udder or to
be giving tuberculous milk, or any bovine animal Bhown to be
guffering from tuberou10BiB with ema•lation.
The Local Authority
may be get in motion (a) by rooeiving notice of suspe.ted . disease
from the owner of an animal, or by ether information relating to an
animal kept on private premises;
(b) by the discovery of a diseased
animal in a market ;
(c) br the disoovery of tubercle bacilli in a
consignment of milk from a partieular dairy; (d) or by receipt of
a notice from a Veterinary Surgeon in conformity with the
requirements of Article 3.
In any such oase the Local Authority
should forthwith instruct their Veterinary Inspector for the part
of their digtri.t where the case hag arisen, or, if the Inspector
for that area be not a Veterinary Inspector, the Veterinary
Inspector of a neighbouring area, to carry out the necessary
examination .
2. Where the report hag been received in respect of a particular
animal, the examination conducted by the Veterinary Inspector
should not be confined to the animal whioh wag the subject of the
report, but ghould be extended to other bovine animal B on the
premises and particularly to all milch cows, and the Veterinary
Inspeotor should make an exhaustive clinical examination of any
animal there is reason to suspect of suffering from tuberculogig of
the udder, from tuberculosiB with emaciation, or of giving
tuberculous milk.
Since the Local Authority will be liable to pay
full compensation for any animal slaughtered by them as regarde
which the poet-mortem examination does not Bhow that it was
affected with tuberculosiß they should be careful to Bee that in all
cagee every available test has been made use of before their final
decision reached ag regards a particular animal. To thig end
they Bhould iggue instructions to their Veterinary Inspectors that;
(a) in the oase of cowg guspeoted of having tuberculosis of the udder
or giving tuberculoue milk, samples of their milk Bhould be
centrifugalised and examined for tubercle baöilli with the
microscope ;
(b) in the ease of animals suspected on account of an
abnormal discharge, the latter should be examined rnicr0Boopica11y for
tubercle bacilli; and ( c) in the case of animal B suspected to be
Buffering from tuberculosis with emaciation, but which are not
suspected to be suffering from tuberou10BiB of the udder or to be
giving tuberculous milk, all possible use Bhquldj with the congent
of the owner of the animal, be mado of tuberculin under Article 4 (1)
of the Order.
In the event of a digeaged animal being found in a
market, fair ground or saleyard, the veterinary enquiry sehould be
extended to the animal g on tho premises whence the diseased animal
was taken to the market,
In order that this may be done, the
Local
/ (6.) If the report of the Inspector as to any
/ animal does not show that it is suffering from
tuberculosis of the udder, or giving tuber-
culous milk or suffering from tuberculosis with
emaciation, the Local Authority shall forth-
with give notice in writing to the owner or
person in charge thereof that the provisions of
this Order relating to precautions to be adopted
with respect to milk and detention and isolation
of suspected animals have ceased to apply to
the animal. The Local Authority shall fur-
ther send a copy of such notice to the Depart-
ment.
Slaughter of Diseased Animals.
5.—(1.) Where a Local Authority are
satisfied by the report of the Inspector that in
their District. there is a cow which is suffering
•from tuberculosis of the udder, or giving
tuberculous milk, or a bovine animal which is
suffering from tuberculosis with emaciation, the
Local Authority shall Vith all practicable speed
give notice in writing (in the Form set forth in
the First Schedule hereto or to the like effect)
to the owner or person in charge of the animal
and also to the Department, and cause the
animal to be slaughtered ; provided that if,
before the slaughter is carried out, the owner of
the animal, or any person on his behalf, gives
notice in writing to the Local Authority, or
to their Inspector or other Officer directed to
carry out such slaughter, that the owner
objects to the animal being slaughtered under
the provisions of this Order, it shall not be
lawful for the Local Authority to cause the
animal to be slaughtered without the special
authority of the Department first obtained ;
prpvided also that this special authority shall
not be given in the case of any animal valued
under this Order at more than thirty pounds,
if and so long as the animal is detained and
isolated, and the milk (if any) is dealt with in
accordance with the provisions of this Order.
(2.) If the value of an animal proposed to be
slaughtered, as agreed or certified under this
Order, exceeds thirty pounds, the Local Autho-
rity shall not proceed with its slaughter unless
so directed by the Department.
(3.) Nothing in this Article shall be deemed
to interfere with the powers possessed by a
Sanitary Authority, under Section 18 of the
Tuberculosis Prevention (Ireland) Act, 1908, of
causing the slaughter of any milch cow which
is certified by a veterinary surgeon to be affected
with tubercular disease of the udder.
Valuation for Compensation.
6—(1.) Before the slaughter of an animal
the Local Authority shall either agree in
writing with the owner of the animal as
to the value of the animal in its condi--
tion at the time of valuation ,
or if
they shall fail so to agree shall cause such
value to be ascertained by a valuer appointed
by them or appointed on the application of the
Lccal Authority by the Department, but paid
by the Local Authority, and such valuer shall
give to the Local Authority and to the owner
a certificate in writing of the said value.
(2.) In ascertaining the value of an animal,
regard shall be had to any Act, Order, or
Regulation dealing with the sale or use of milk,
milk products, or carcases for human food.
(3.) The value shall• be ascertained both on
the basis of the certificate of examination here-
inafter required showing that •the animal was
suffering from tuberculosis, and also on the
basis of its not showing that the animal was
suffering from tuberculosis, and the amount to
be paid for compensation shall depend on such
certificate accordingly.
Post-mortem Examination of Slaughtered
A nimals.
7.—(1.) In the case of every animal slaugh-
tered under this Order, the Local Authority
shall cause the carcase, at the time of slaughter
or as soon as practicable thereafter,' to be
examined by a Veterinary Inspector of the
Local Authority, or (if so required by the
owner or person in charge of the animal before
it is slaughtered) by some other veterinary
surgeon, who, failing agreement between the
Local Authority aud such owner or person,
shall be nominated by the Department but paid
by the Local Authority.
(2.) The Veterinary Inspector or other
vetermary surgeon shall at the conclusion of
his examination give to the Local Authority
and to the owner of the animal a certificate of
the result of the examination in the Form set
forth in the First Schedule hereto or to the like
effect, and shall send a copy thereof to the De-
partment.
Compensation.
If the Local Authority fail to carry
out the examination required by the preceding
Article, or if the certificate of such examination
does not show that the animal was suffering
from tuberculosis, the Local Authority shall, by
way of compensation, pay to the owner thereof.
a sum equal to the value of the animal as agreed
or certified in manner aforesaid and a fur-
ther sum of twenty shillings.
(2.) If the certificate of the examination
shows that the animal was suffering from
tuberculosis (not being advanced tuberculosis),
the Local Authority shall, by way of compensa-
tion, pay to the owner a sum equal to three-
fourths of the value of the animal as agreed
or certified in manner aforesaid, after deducting
from such sum one-half of their reasonable
costs of any valuation of the animal by a valuer
appointed by the Department, and of any ex-
amination of its carcase by a veterinary surgeon
other than the Veterinary Inspector.
(3.) If the certificate of the examination
shows that the animal was suffering from ad-
vanced tuberculosis, the Local Authority shall,
by way of compensation, pay to the owner a
sum equal to one-fourth of the value of the
animal, as agreed or certified in manner afore-
said or the sum of thirty shillings, whichever
sum is the greater; after deducting from such
sum one-half of their costs of valuation and
examination as in the preceding case.
(4.) For the purposes of this Order an animal
slaughtered under this Order shall be deemed
to have been suffering from advanced tuber-
culosis
(a) When there is miliary tuberculosis of
both lungs ;
(b) when tuberculous lesions are present on
the pleura and peritoneum ;
(c) when tuberculous lesions are present in
the muscular system, or in the lymphatic
glands embedded in or between the
muscles; or
(d) when the carcase is emaciated and tuber-
culous lesions are present.
Precautions to be adopted with respect to Milky
tec.
9 The milk producéd by any cow
which is, or appears to be, suffering from
chronic disease of the udder or tuberculosis with
emaciation, shall not be mixed with other
milk until the cow has been examined by a
Veterinary Inspector in accordance with the
provisions of this Order, and until the owner or
person in charge thereof has been notified that
this Article has ceased to apply to the cow ; and
all milk affected by this Article shall forthwith
be boiled or otherwise sterilised, and any utensil
in which such milk is placed before being so
treated shall be thoroughly cleansed with boil-
ing water before any other milk is placed
therein.
(2.) A Local Authority, or a Veterinary In-
spector on their behalf, may by written notice
apply the restrictions imposed by this Article
to the milk produced by any cow specified in
the notice which is suspected of giving tuber-
culous milk and is being examined under this
Order, and such restrictions shall apply accord-
ingly. The Local Authority or the Inspector
giving such notice shall send a copy f,hereof to
the Department.
Detention and Isolation of Suspected Animals.
10.—(1.) Every person having in his posses-
Sion or under his charge any cow which is, or
appears to be, suffering from chronic disease of
the udder, or any bovine animal which is, or
appears to be, suffering from tuberculosis with
emaciation, shall keep the animal isolated as
far as practicable from other bovine animals,
and also keep the animal in his possession or
under his charge, until the animal has been
examined by a Veterinary Inspector in accord-
ance with the provisions of this Order and the
owner or person in charge thereof has been
notified that this Article has ceased to apply to
the animal; provided that the animal may at
any time be slaughtered by the owner or person
in charge.
(2.) A Local Authority, or a Veterinary In-
spector on their behalf, may by written notice
this Article to any bovine animal speci-
fied in the notice which is being examined
lunder this Order, and such Article shall apply
accordingly. The Local Authority or the
Inspector giving such notice shall send a copy
thereof to the Department.
Suspected Animals in Markets, Fairs, and
Sales.
A Veterinary Inspector or a Local
Authority may by notice served cm the owner
or person in charge of a bovine animal exposed
in a market, fairground, or saleyard which
appears to him to be
(i) suffering from tuberculosis of the udder,
indurated udder, or other chronic disease
of the udder; or
(ii) suffering from tuberculosis with emacia-
tion,
equire the animal to be removed from the
market, fairground, or saleyard to the premises
from which it was brought thereto, or if the
owner or person in charge so desires, to any
other suitable premises, to be specified in the
notice, and thereupon the animal shall forth-
with be moved by the owner or person in charge
to those premises for the purpose of examina-
ion under the foregoing provisions of this
rder.
(2.) Where the premises to which the animal
is required under this Article to be moved are
not in the same District as the market, fair-
ground, or saleyard, the Inspector serving the
notice shall forthwith send a copy of the notice
to the Local Authority of the District in which
the first-mentioned premises are situate.
Diseased Animals not to be brought for
Shipment.
12.—(1.) It shall not be lawful for any
person to bring, or carry, or send, or cause to
be brought, or carried, or sent to any port or
place of inspection at' a port, for shipment, any
cow suffering, or appearing to be suffering,
from tuberculosis of the udder, indurated
udder, or other chronic disease of the udder ;
or any bovine animal suffering, or appearing
to be suffering, from tuberculosis with emacia-
tion.
(2.) In the case of any breach of this Article
the provisions of the last preceding Article shall
apply (without prejudice to other proceedings
in respect of the offence) as if the animal ap-
pearing affected had been exposed in a market,
fairground, or saleyard.
Cleansing and Disinfection.
13. The occupier of any premises on which
there has been a cow suffering from tuberculosis
of the udder or giving tuberculous milk, or a
bovine animal suffering from tuberculosis with
emaciation, shall if so required in writing by
an Inspector of the Local Authority cleanse
and disinfect at his own expense, and to the
satisfaction of the Inspector, that par! of any
shed or other erection in which the animal has
recently been placed or kept.
Powers of Inspectors of Department.
14. Any powers exercisable under this Order
by a Veterinary Inspector acting for a Local
Authority shall be exercisable •also by a
Veterinary Inspector of the Department.
Reports to the Department.
15. Every Local Authority and their In-
spectors and omcers shall send and give to the
Department such reports, returns, and infor-
mation as to their proceedings under this Order
as the Department require.
Extension of certain Sections of Diseases of
Animals Act, 1894.
16. Tuberculosis shall be a disease for the
purposes of the following sections of the Act
of 1894 (namely) :
Sections nineteen and twenty (Slaughter in
Disease and Compensation Generally) ;
Section forty-three (Police) ;
Section forty-four (Generat Administrative
Provisions) ;
and also for the purposes of all other sections
of the said Act containing provisions relative
to or consequent on the provisions of those
sections and this Order, including such sections
as relate to offences and legal proceedings.
Information to be given as to certain Animals
or Animals in contact therewith.
17. Article 35 of the Animals (Transit and
General) (Ireland) Order of 1913 (Information
to be given as to Diseased or Suspected Animat&
or Animals in contact therewith) shall apply to
(i) any • cow which is, or is suspected of,
suffering from tuberculosis of the udder or
giving tuberculous milk; and
(ii) any bovine animal which is, or is sus-
pected of, suffering from tuberculosis with
emaciation.
Ofences.
18. Every person who—
(i) fails to give the notice required by
Article 2 or Article 3 of this Order; or
(6.) If the report of
' animal does not show t
tuberculosis of the ud
culous milk or suffering
emaciation, the Local
with give notice in wr
person in charge thereoi
this Order relating to pt
with respect to milk ano
of suspected animals
the animal. The
ther send a copy of su
ment.
Slaughter of
Where a
satisfied by the report
their District, there is
•from tuberculosis of
tuberculous milk, or a
suffering from tu bercul
Local Authority shall
give notice in writing (
the First Schedule her
to the owner or person
and also to the Depai
animal to be slaughte
before the slaughter is
the animal, or any pers
notice in writing to th
to their Inspector or oi
carry out such slaugl
objects to the animal b
the provisions of this
lawful for the Local
animal to be slaughtep
authority of the Depa
prpvided also that this
not be given in the
under this Order at m
if and so long as the
isolated, and the milk
accordance with the pro
(2.) If the value of
slaughtered, as agreed
Order, exceeds thirty pg
rity shall not proceed
so directed by the Dep
(3.) Nothing in this
to interfere with the
Sanitary Authority, u
Tuberculosis Preventio
causing the slaughter
is certified by a veterin
with tubercular disease
Valuation for
6—(1.) Before the
the Local Authority
writing with the ow
to the value of the
Lion at the time
they shall fail so to
value to be ascertained
by them or appointed o
Lccal Authority by th
by the Local Authority
give to the Local Auth
a certificate in writing
(2.) In ascertaining t
regard shall be had to
Regulation dealing with
milk products, or carcas€
(3.) The value
the basis of the certificat
inafter required showing
suffering from tubercul
basis of its not showing
(ii) fails to comply with any provision of this
Order relating to precautions to be adopted
with respect to milk or relating to deten-
tion and isolation of animals; or
(iii) fails to comply with any notice directing
removal of an animal from a market, fair-
ground, saleyard, port or place Of inspec-
tion at a port; or
(iv) fails to cleanse or disinfect any erection
which under this Order he is required to
cleanse or disinfect
shall, according to and in respect of his own
acts and defaults, be deemed guilty of an
offence against the Act of 1894.
Extent.
19. This Order extends to the whole of Tre-
land.
Local A uthority to enforce Order.
20. The provisions of this Order, except
where it is otherwise provided, shall be executed
and enforced by the Local Authority.
Commencement.
21. This Order shall come into operation on
the second day of June, nineteen hundred and
thirteen.
Revocation.
22. The Order described in the Second
Schedule to this Order is hereby revoked from
and after the commencement of this Order.
Short Title.
23. This Order may be cited as the TUBER-
CULOSIS (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1913.
In witness whereof the Department of
Agriculture and Technical Instruction
for Ireland have hereunto set their
Offcial Seal this eighth day of May,
nineteen hundred and thirteen.
(Signed),
n. Cantrell,
on behalf of the Secretary.
FIRST SCHEDULE.
FORMS.
TUBERCULosrs (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1913.
Form of Notice of Intended Slaughter.
(Article 5.)
To
of
The Local Authority for the county
[borough] of
hereby give
notice that they are satisfied that [insert de-
scription of animal] which is pow kept at
[insert description of premises where it is
kept] is
*(a) suffering from tuberculosis of the udder ;
*(b) giving tuberculous milk;
*(c) is suffering from tuberculosis with
emaciation,
and that they propose with all convenient speed
to slaughter the animal.
*Strike out the part which is inapplicable.
(Signed)
By direction of the Local Authority.
Dated
, 191
N0TE.—If the owner of the animal, or any
person on his behalf, before the slaughter is
carried out, gives notice in writing to the Local
Authority, or to their Inspector or other officer
directed to carry out the slaughter, that the
owner objects to the animal being slaughtered,
it may not be slaughtered without the special
authority of the Department first obtained.
The compensation payable by the Local
Authority is regulated by the Order.
TUBERCULOSIS (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1913.
Form of Certificate of Result of Post-mortem
Etamination.
(Article 7.)
I, A.B., a Veterinary Inspector of the Loc
Authority for the county [borough] of
[or a veterinary surgeon acting under the
Tuberculosis (Ireland) Order of 1913] do hereby
certify that my examination of the carcase of
[here describe the animal slaughtered] which
was caused to be slaughtered by the Loc
Authority for the county [borough] of
on the
day of
191
and which animal belonged to
of
does not sho
that the animal was affected with tuberculosi
[or shows that the animal was affected with
tuberculosis (not being advanced tuberculos•
within the meaning of the Tuberculosis (Ire
land) Order of 1913)] [or shows that the anim
was suffering from advanced tuberculosis with •
the meaning of the Tuberculosis (Ireland
Order of 1913].
Dated
(Signed) A. B.
191
No.
102
Date.
1910.
27th January,
SECOND SCHEDULE.
(Article 22.)
Order Revoked.
Sho,t Title.
The Bovine Tuberculosis Notification (Ireland) Order o
1910.
DUBLIN : Printed for Hiz Ma•esty's Stationerv Offce,
By A. THOM & Co. (Limited , 87, 88 & 89, Abbey•st.
(34103). (9» 6.6 4. 10,000. 1913.
iB situated
Local Authority in whose district the market. ,
should, Where necessary, oormunieate with any other Local Authority
concerned.
3. Should sugpioåon first be aroused by the discovery of
tubercle bacilli In milk from a dairy, the enquiry of the Veterinary
Inspector should be directed to the discovery of the particular cow
in the herd giving tuberouloug milk.
It 1B of importance that the deoiBion of the Looal Authority
Bhould be come to without avoidable delay in view of the regtrlctlong
which Articles 9 and IO of the Order Impose on animals, particularly
dairy cowS, during the time that they remain under suspicion.
is suggested, therefore, that the Losal Authority should make special
arrangementø for dealing with the reports reaeived from their
Veterinary Inspectore, and the iBBUe of the neoeggary notification
to the owner of the animal .
5. The Local Authority are required by Article 5 of the Order to
give a Notice in writing, in the form get forth in the Schedule to
the Order, to the owner of any animal of the faot that guoh animal
has been found by them to be digeased within the meaning of the Order,
It ig Intended
and to send a copy of such Noticø to the Department.
that a separate Notice Bhall be served as regards each animal. So
soon as this N0tioe has been issued, arrangements must be made for
the Blaughter of each animal found by the Local Autherity to be
diseased. Che animal is to be valued in its oondition at the time
of valuation. As it is possible, however, that the olinlcai
diagnosis made by the Veterinary Inspector prior to slaughter may
not be confirmed on post-mortem examination it is provided in
paragraph (3) of Artiole 6 of the Order that there shall be separate
valuations on the basis both of the animal proving to be affected
with tuberculosis and of its proving not to be so affeotea, and the
amount of compensation will depend on the result of the examination.
It may be presl.med that, ordinarily, the Local Authority will be able
to agree in writing with the owner of the animal in respect of a
valuation made by the Veterinary Inspeotor. Where no such agreement
is reached, however, and a valuer has to be employed to agcertain
the value the speolal attention of the latter should be called
beforehand to the provisions of the aforesaid Arti ale 6 of the Order.
Slaughter may not be prooeeded with in the raoe of written
objection by the owner of the animal without the speoiai authority
of the Department, and guoh authority will not be given In respect
of any animal valued under the 'Orde* at more than thirty pounds
provided that the owner of the animal eontinues to observe the epecial
In no edge iB an animal
requirements imposed in sush aircumgtanoeg.
valued at more than thirty pounds to be slaughtered exoept under the
directions of the Department .
The compensation allowable for an animal slaughtered under the
Order is governed by Article 8 of the Order, in conjunction with
Article 7. Ag will be seen the amount of oompensation 1B determin-
able by what iB shown In the certifie#e given by the Veterinary
Inspector (or, where Buch is arranged for under the Order, by another
Veterinary Surgeon) regarding the results of examination of the
It iB evident, therefore, that due care
carcage for tuberculosis.
in making suoh examination will be important in every instance. AB
in default of guoh examination the owner becomes entitled to the full
valuation of the animal and a further eum of twenty Bhiillnggj it Is
most important Ohat post-mortem examination should be arranged fer
In all pages.
a.
The caroase of any animal glaughtered under the Order becomes
the property of the Local Authority, and, when the requirements of
Article 7 of the Order ag to post-mortem exæination have been duly
carried out, the oaroaso may be dealt with ag provided in section 2C
(2) of the Dieeages of Animals Aot, 1894.
If sale be effeoted Of
any caroaee found healthy the enount realised éhould be carried to
If a oareage be buried the ueual
pre cautions ag to Binking the grave to a proper depth, slashing the
hide and covering the oaroage with quieklime should be adequately
Articles 9, IO, and 13 of the Order deal ins respeøtirely with
the precautions to be adopted regarding the milk of digeaeed or
sugpeoted oowg, the detention and isolation of euspeoted animal B, and
the carrying out of cleansing and disinfection on places where
diseased animals have been, are all neoegeary auxiliary provisione
which the Looal Authority should Inetruot their Veterinary Inspectors
10.
Provision made in Article 11 of the Order for dealing with
gugpicious animals exposed in EarketB, Fairs, or Sale e . A strict
enforcement of the provisione of this Arti ole seems to be very
desirable, and the Department trust that Local Authorities will give
instructions aooordingly to any of their Veterinary Inspeotore
attending at it:arketB, Fairs, and Sales held within their district,
so that the praotioe of exposing emaoiated animals for gale may be
A useful stimulus will thereby be given to reporting,
gime the exposure of suoh animal g in a Zarket when in an advanced
state of diseaee would be attended with risk to their owner, who would
be liable to legal proeeedings for failure to report the oage in
accordance with the provisions of the Order.
It will further be observed that under Arti ole 12 if an
animal Buffering or appearing to be suffering from any of the
specified forms of tuberculosis ig illegally brought to a port, or
place of inspection et a port, for Bhiprnent, the provisiong of
Arti ale 11 will apply algo in such a oase as if the animal had been
exposed in a market. fair, fair ground or gale yard, and the
Department' g Inspeotore at porte will be instructed, when any cage
of the kind comes under their notice, to apprise the Local Authority
with a view to the neceggary further action.
12.
The Local Authority should duly arrange for •ommunioation with
the sanitary Authority, as ocoasion may require, in oonne•tion with
the provisions to thie effeot in Art 101 eg 2 (1), 3 (I), and 4 (6) of
It ig further important that copies of all reports,
gertifioateg of notioes made
Iven, or served under the Order - and
artiouiarly under Artioleg ?5), 5 (1), 7 (2), 9 (2) ,and IO (2)
f - should be promptly eent to the Department, go that the
Department may be kept duly In touch vith the operationc in each
Speoineng of Formc (Numbered to T. 13) whioh it is
guggested Ghoul d be utilized for thege variouo purposes
found encloeed. Further eopieg will, if deoired, be obtainable on
application to the Department .
2
e.
13. AB It i g of importanoe that aocurate rcoordg Should be
kept by eaoh Local Authority regarding the operations agalnet
the disease In ite district, the Department guggegt the
adoption in this eønneotion of a Re•ord Book with headings
similar to those in the large Form (Form A) algo gent herewith
ue attention shoul be ai to the r
00k and the Department wili
e necessar en r es n
e glad if the Loc Authority w 11, n addition, kindly
arrange that the 300k Bhall be open, when desired, to any
Inspeotor of the Department .
P. GILL.
Secretary.
Department of Agricul ture
and Technical Instruction for Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch), Dublin.
nay, 1913.
dazmF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
T. F. FILGATE,
SECRETARY.
SECRETARY'S OFFICE,
COURT HOUSE, DUNDAL
'(bfflooococ
900en.tø am'
9fU.Äh.0/D_
Æa;u
J Gtecv (tew u.
Du)-d
u6zJcuzøu
ZOO
13. AB it ig of Importanoe that accurate rcoordg should be
kept by eaoh Local Authority regarding the operations againet
the disease In its distriot, the Department euggegt the
adoption In thiB eønneotion of a Re•ord 300k with headings
Bimilar to those in the large Form (Form A) algo sent herewith
ue attention should be aid to the r
00 and the Department will
e necessar en es n
e glad if the Loc Authority will, n addition, kindly
arrange that the Book Bhall be open, when desired,' to any
Inspeotor of the Department .
T, P. GILL.
Secretary.
Department of Agricul ture
and Technical Instruction for Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch), Dublin.
Nay, 1913.
a one,
COUNTY
Zama/
COUNCIL.
SECRETARY'S OFFICE,
COURT HOUSE, DUNDALK
aue
eLGtecv /'t-2,az zU.
Durd
dwzmz->

LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
SECRETARY'S OFFICE,
COURT HOUSE, DUNDALK,
Committee.
SIR,
You are hereby requested to attend a Meeting of the above Committee,
URT HOUSE, at. One o'clock p.m.,
AMBER, COUNTY
in t e
to be
UNCIL
day of
the
1913'
J3usiness .
Correspondence and any other business that may be brought forward.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. F. FILGATE,
Secretary County Council.
To each Member ot the Committee.

Any communication on this subject should
be addressed to
"THE SECRETARY,
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
AND TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION
FOR IRELAND,
(VETERINARY BRANCH,)
18 UPPER MERRION STREET,
DUBLIN.
And tho Number and Date of this letter
should be quoted.
No. 2490/13.
Sir,
?epartment of Agriculture
anb Cecbnical 3nstruction for 3reIanb,
(Veterinarv Srancb),
13 Upper merrion Street,
publin.
4th june 1913.
With reference to your letter of 2nd instant I have
hereby to convey this Departn-entts approval of the re-appoint-
ment by your Local Authority, on the same terns ag previously,
for the dipping Periods in 1913, of the undermentioned
Superintendents of Sheep Dipping had been employed in
the County last year, viz:-
Thomas McArdle ,
Owen enan,
William Leonard,
Michael McQuillan.
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Secre tary.
The Secret ary,
Louth County Council,
DUNDALK.
LOUTH
F. FILGATE,
SECRETARY.
COUNTY
COUNCIL.
SECRETARY'S OFFICE,
COURT HOUSE, DUNDALK,

/pze4.ZzdZ4 /a

t' ¯ // rc/fo'

Ä49C4-z
427
G e-l.e..et-d
-66/4<0
Mø(zfttüL9 6ZuuwZce/f/3
U/Zoe4
7MWÄZ/ü /f/cow/-
746/3
a-øtömeæ
70
70
-—vezdæ
czZZdz4-6C-CC7ZdZZØP-pzecZ(-/
zåueøozåzc/zZ
—CuZ
•Ode
4
(0
-RvmÉ
5
Zcmmzt6L
75 dé4C2C
aM44UØ4M/ 7//Zauef-o
JUZÄø-dwezuedMZzz7v
zzzzoeapy-
gZZca/Zåø/8umfC—eJa4ezz-Z/
uuueÉZchALé
4tzÆeeæ4«zøøe47/tue
—ecczcea6zEh-Zæ Vacz'zauvtdzw
_—caZZedzuÄczv,
—vczæ
tæcecz6ueÄcwwuZD
—JKL
—us-e-4&
cÅ-øt7/f//+
He &fdezah-yæ-eze-w"
0--oe-W4-
ft-EAHeeÄ/
MCf-&——
71.-f€Æ-tte„z12
/f/8J7ad—M
7%a.f-oM
kak-nn/+-aeæarp(c ,
•pd. Ca,fzzKZ+-
e,Æ242//
f Agriculture and
n for Ireltuyl,
eterinary Branch),
51 Upper Mount Street,
Dublin,
March, 1914.
No. 242/14. V. 13.
Sir,
I have to forward, herewith, to be laid before
your Alithofity, copies of an Order entitled "The
Sheep Scab .(Local Regulations) (Ireland) Order oi
1914," and, at the same time, to invite the earnest
attention of the Local Authorities to the new situation,
which demands that immediate and energetic measures
should be taken by them to advance the object aimed at
by this Order, viz., the eradication of Sheep Seab fronv
their respective districts
The Order confers on JOC&I Authorities
for dealing with this mat,-
additional powers
ter, supplementary to the powers already
conferred by previous Orders of the Depart-
ment. It enables them to make regul&tious to arrest
the spread of Sheep Seab in their districts by regulating
the- movement of sheep into them from other districts.
With these powers and those already possessed by
73
them ; with, the uid of the Inspectors •or officers whom
they employ, or have the power to employ; with the
general? support oi the Royal Irish Constabulary b hind
their' local officers $ and with the further asslåanee
which the Department 'are prepared to give them by
means of advice and in the supervision of their staffs, •
the Local Authorities are now in a state of complete
effectiveness for operating against th is disease. -All
that is needed to secure success is vigour on their part,
and earnest co-operation from the public of the district,
and especially co-operaton from those whose interests
are most direct)s injured by the spread of the disease
and most directly benefited by its suppression.
The Department wish set before all concerned
in each County—both the general public and those en-
trusted with any duty or placed in position con-
nect"l with the administration of . the law in this
matter—the importance, in the interests of the
country,. of efficient enforcement of these Orders in
all their detailS, including adequate punishment of any
agåinst them.
As mentioned above, a new situation has beeu;
created imminent danger that, unless effective
metvsures are now taken, the export trade in Irish
may be subjeeted to damaging interruption,
Great Britain there is growing a belief that the impor-
tat,imi of Irish sheepl amongst whi:eh cases = of the
disease continue to be found, is now the principal, if
not the sole, obstacle to the complete elimination of the
disease in that couniry. ' Prejudice has been created
against sheep from aud the questiön of
, regulating or prohibiting their importation ilitO Great
Abritain fo•r the better protection of British flocks
b+•roued.
'Mie Department desire .plain.ly to inform the Local
Authorities that, in their opinion, unle.•immediate
steps are taken to clear the country of the disease,
measures of this nature are likely to be declared at au
ear;y date. To save the country generally from thö
heavy loss which would thus be involved, and to
the valuable improvement to our Irish flocks which
would be the result of clearing out this disease and
restoring to Irish sheep clean bill of health, all that
is needed is that the Local Authorities throv them-
selves with vigour into a common campaign against
this pest, and that the farmers and shæp owners co-
operate with them. , - The disease is one which can be
completely extirpated simply by the practice of regular
aud thorough dipping.
The man who does not dip his sheep, but allows
them to lhpse into this unhealthy condition, and to
carry infection with them wherever they go, is not only
guilty of folly in his own personal interests, but is,
without thinking it, 41 public enemy propagating infec-
lion and inflicting injury and loss upou his fellow-
farmers and sheep raisers an.d ail who depend upon the
sheep raising industry in the country.
The purpose of the Orders is to see that the sheep
of a county are dipped at least twice a year, to pro-
vide, where necessary, facilities for dipping—a measure
of the greatest personal advantage to owners of sheep ;
to see that where the disease appears it is promptly
notified, so that the proper steps may be taken for its
75
suppression ; and to proteet the markets and fairs from
the entry into them of sheep affected with the disease.
The Department desire to draw your Local Authority's
attention to the following ways, in particular, in which
they can further the object in view, viz :—
(1) By making adequate provision for having the
Dipping Order fully complied with. In the Depart-
ment's view it will be necessary, ill most instances, to
buve the Local -Authority's Veterinary Officers. specially
assigned to-this duty during the dipping period, and to
appoint, where necessary during that period, persons
to assist them.
(2) By requiring their Inspectors to take the most
prompt action in the treatment of reported cases and
to exercise the greatest care ill removing restrictions.
(3) By using the persons employed to assist thew
Officers in supervi sing the dipping, who should be
'persons experienced in the care of sheep, to range their
district with a view to the detection of unreported cases.
(4) By arranging for the systematic inspection by
their Veterinary Inspectors of sheep exposed for sale
at markets and fairs.
(5) Ily the adoption of regulations, under t,he
enclosed ()rder, where it secyns desirable to regulate the
movement of sheep from an affected into a free district.
(G) By making it apparent that they regard the
concealment of Sheep Scab, the movement of diseased
sheep, and the failure to dip sheep, as serious offences
committed by private individuals against the general
interest, and that they consider that such offences cali
(d.)
78
For prohibiting or regulating the movement or securing
the isolation of sheep moved into their District from
outside such District unles and until such have
been dipped as prescribed.
for prosecution and justify the infliction of heav
penalties, and should be condemned by public opinion. •
To assist the Local: Authorities ill the furtherance
of these duties the Department, whose inspectorial staff
has been strengthened for the purpose, have now ar-
ranged to co-operate in supervising the work of the
officers of the Local Authorities employed in the
administration of the Diseases of Ammals Acts. Il'his
provision should materially help the Local Authorities'
in bracing up the general efficiency of their officers
employed under these Acts.
l)epartment will further, should cyrcumstances
permit, be glad to arrange for one of their Superintend-
ing Veterinary Inspectors to confer with your Local
Authority on this subject generally.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secreta•ry.
The Clerk of
each Local: Authority.
ORDER OF THE DEPARTMFXü" OF AGRICTLTURE ANP
TECHNICAL INSTRUC"IYCS FOR IRELAND.
(Dated 23rd January, 1914).
EP-SCAB (LOCAL REGULATIONS) (IRELAND)
OF 1914 (No.
The partment of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
1
virtue and in exercise of the 1K)wers in them vested
ggnder *grieulture and Technical Instruction (Ireland) Act,
1893, the Diseases of Animals Acts, 1894 to 1911, and of
other powers enabling them in this behalf, do order, and it is
hereby as follows
VOWERS OF A LOCAL AUTHORITY AS TO MAKING
REGULATIONS.
I. A Local Authority may, wit;h a view of preventing the
spreading of sheep-scab, make such Regulations as they think
fit for the following purposes, or any of them
(a.) For regulating the movement by land or water of sheep
into their District from the District of any other Tuoca!
Authority in Ireland.
(b.) For requiring the occupier of any premises within their
District to which sheep are moved from outside such Dis-
trict to notify forthwith the arrival of the sheep to a
Constable or other rnember of the Police at the
nearest Police Borrack or Station who shall < forthwith
transmit the information to the Clerk of the Local Au-
thority under the Diseases of Animals Acts for such Dis-
trict.
(c.) For prescribing, regulating and securing the dipping
within a specified period in an approved sheep-dip and in
the presence and to the satisfaction of an Inspector of
the Local Authority of sheep moved into their District
from the District of any other Local Authority in Ire-
land or of sheep imported direct into their District.
PROVISIONS AS TO REGULATIONS OF LOCAL
AUTHORITY.
2. (I.) A Local Authority shall forthwith send to the See-
retar.v, Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction
for Ireland, Dublin, a eopy of every Regulation made by them
under this Order.
(2.) If the Department are on inquiry, with respect
to any Regulation or part of a Regulation made by a Local Au:
thority under this Order, that tbe same is for any reason objec-
tionable, and direct the revocation thereof, the same shall
thereupon cease to operate.
(9.) A Local Authority shall send a copy of every Regula-
tion mado by them in relation to the movement of swep under
this Order to every railway company having a railway station
within the District of the Local Authority, or within the part
of their District to which the Regulation applies, and shall also
forthwith send a copy of the Regulation to the Secretary, Rail-
way cearing House, 5, Kildare Street, Dublin, and to the
Clerk of each Local Authority in Ireland.
2' (4.) For the putrpose of any Regulation made by a Local Au-
thority under this Order, an Inspector of such Local Authority
may enter any premises within the District of the 1,0-•
cal Authority and examine any sheep thereon, and such powers
of entry and examination shall be in addition to any other like
powers vested in the Inspector by the Act of 1894 or other-
wise.
(5.) Any powers exeax:isable under Regulation made by a
Local Allithority under this Order by a Veterinary
acting for a Local Authority shmll be exercisable also by a
ÄAxVeterinary Inspector of
79
POWER To MAKE REGULATIONS NOT TO BE
DEPUTED.
3. The power to make Regulations under this Order shall be
exercised only' by a Local Authority or their Executive Com-
mittee, and shall not 'be-deputed to any •other nor
to a Sub-Committee.
LIMITATION AS TO REGULATIONS OF LOCAL
AUTHORITY.
4. For the purpose of this Order, or •of xny Regulation made
by a Local Authority thereunder, sheep shall not be deemed to
be moved from, into, or within District of LocalAuthority
or within the part of the District to which the Regulation ap-
plies, where they are moved through the District, or such part,
thereof by railway froin a place outside the District, or such
part thereof—
(a.) to another place outside the District, or such part there:
gf, without unnecessary delay and without sheep
being untracked within the District, or suoh part there-
of; or
(b.) &reet to a port within the District OT to a lair at such
port for shipment froin such port within two days.
OFFENCES.
5. If a sheep is moved in contravention of any mgula-
tion made by the Local Authority under this Order, the owner
of tho sheep, ancl the person in charge i,hereof, and the person
eausing, directing, or permitting the movement, amd the person
moving or conveying the sheep, and talle consignee or other per-
son reoeiving or keeping it knowing it to have been moved in
Oontra.vention RS aforesaid, and the occupier Of the place from
which the sheep is moved, shall, each according to and in res-
pect of his own acts and defaults, be deemed guilty an of-
fence against the Act of .1894.
J.
80
4,
(2.) If the arrival of sheep is not notified a' requifed by
any R*ation made by a Local Aut,horii+' under this Order,
the avner 'of the sheep, xnd the person charge thereof, and ' T
the place or premises at G'hiöilfihe sheep has' ar-
rived, shall, each according to and in his own acts
and defaults, be deemed guilty of mn offence against the Act
of 1894.
(3.) If anybhing is otherwise done or omitted to be done in
contravention of any Regulation made by Local Authority
under this Order, the owner and the Lessee and the occupier and
the person in charge of any place, sheep, carcase or thing in or
in respect of which the same is done or omitted to be done,
shall, each according to and in respect of his own acts and de-
faults be deemed guilty of an offence against the Aet of 1894.
6. In bhis Order, unless the context otherwise requires—
' 'Approved sheep-dip" means dip approved by the Depart-
ment for sheep scab and sheep dipping in rreland or pur-
porting to be so approved.
"The Department" means the Department of Agriculture
and •Technical Instruction for Ireland.
"The Act of 1894" means •the Diseases of Animals Act, 1894,
Other terms have the same meaning as in the Diseases of
Animals Act, 1894, and the Acts amending same.
COMMENCEMENT.
7. This Order shall come into operation on the twenty-six tb
day of January, one thousand nine hundred and fourteen,
REVOCATION OF ORDER.
8. Order descrfl»ed in the Schedule to ibis Order is
hereby revoked.
81
SHORT TITLE.
9. This Order may be cited as the Sheep-Seab (Local Regula-
tions) (Ireland) Order of 1914 (No. 2).
In witness whereof the Department of Agriculture and
Technical Instruction for Ireland have hereunto set
their Offcial Seal this twenty-third day of January,
one thousand nine hundred and fourteen.
(Signed),
T. P. GWL,
•t ecretary.
SCHEDULE.
(hder Revoked.
82
other power enabling them in this behalf, do order, and it
hereby ordered, as follows : —
PROHIBITION OF MOVEMENT OF ANIMALS.
1. Unles and 'tvntål the -Department otherwise -order no;cah+
tle, sheep, goats, or swine, shall be moved either by land or
water out of t..he area described in the Sehediule to this Order.
OPERATION OF OTHER ORDERS.
2. Nothing in this Order shall be deemed to interfere with
the operation of the provisions of Orders of the Department re-
lating to Foot and M.oubh Disease in Ireland.
OFFENCES.
3. If an animal is moved in contra+ent,ion of this Order, the
owner Of the animal, and the person for the time being in
charge thOreof, and the person causing, directing, or permit-
ting bhe movement, and the person moving or conveying the
animal, and the consignee or other Æ)erson receiving or keeping
. knowing it to have been moved in, contraventio» •as afare-
said, alid tho occupier of the place, from which the animal is
moved, shall each according to and in respect of his own acts
and defaults, be deemed guilty of an offence against the Dis-
of Animals Act, 1894.
COMMENCEMENT.
4. This Order shall come into operation on the twenty-S&
venth day of Marcsh, nineteen hundred and fourteen.
SHORT TITLE.
5. This Order may be cited as The Movement of Animals
(Southern Ireland) Temporary Prohibition Order.
In witness whereof the Depart,rpent of Agricultüre and
Technical Instruction for Ireland have hereunto set
their Official Seal this twenty-fifth day of March
nineteen hundred and fourteen.
(Signed),
83
SCHEDULE:
T. P. GILL,
.93 _
No.
250
Date.
14th Jan., 1914.
Short Title.
The Sheep Scab (Local Regula-
tions) (Ireland) Order of 1914.'
MOVEMENT OF ANIMALS ORDER.
The following Order was also submitted to tho Committee
and initialled by the Chairman
ORDER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND
TECHNICAL TNS'I'RUCPION FOR IRELAND.
(Dated 25th March, 1914).
THE MOVEMENT OF' ANIMALS (SOUTHERN TRELAND)
TEMPORARY PROHIBITION ORDER.
The Department of Agriculture and Teohnical Instruction for
Ireland, by •virtue and in exercise of the powers vested in them
under tho Agriculture and Technical lustruction (Ireland) Act,
1899, the Diseases of Animals Acts, 1894 to 1911. and of every
. So much of Ireland as lies to the south of the following
bouuslary (roads and railway lines mentioned as forming the
'boundary being regarded as outside the Scheduled Area) :—
Commencing at the Maiden Tower; near the sea coast east of
Drogheda, thence along the river bank past Mornington to the.
Northern RailWay line at Drogheda, thence by that
way line via Navan to the termiillts of'åhe line at Oldcastle,
thence by the road leading from Oldcastle Railway Station to
Fore, as fm- as the junction of that.oad with the direct road
to Granard, thence by the Granard read by Finea Bridge and
S north of Bracklagh Lough as far as the Midland Great Western
Railway, north of Ballywillnn 'Station, thence southwards along
the railway line- toMuIlingar, thence westwards by that rail-
way line via Athlone and Ballinasloe to where the railway line
-erosses t,hO road leading from Monivea through Athenry,
thence alonÉ .t.hO road leading to Oranmoi•e to the point where
it is crossed the railway lino, the,nee along the, railway line
to Oranmore Station, thence in a southerly direction by the
road leading to Oranmore as far as Orcnmore, and thence in' a
direct line •to the sea at Oranmore Pier.
LOUTH
COUNTY COUNCIL.
SECRETARY'S OFFICE,
COURT HOUSE, DUNDALK,
luth. 1014
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
SIR,
You are hereby requested to attend a Meeting of the above Committee,
to be held in the Council Chamber, County Court House, at One o'clock
p.m., on Monday, the
day of
BUSINESS :
1914
Consideration ef- arrangementg for Surner
Sheep Dipping.
Consideration
Reports from
of Veterinary ingpoctors
Salariee,
veterinary Inspectors
711t-zdE,F/ftß Z
eecaC
écaC-4-wwue.
C
Correspondence,
and any other business' that may be
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
CHARLES
brought forward.
McALESTER,
LP.e&--
-M-ØY4-zæ%e.4øa.-m
Secretary County Council.
To each Member ot the
Committee.
—zee.
7k
I-eadu.uZ
/4/tÉMPJ4W;øpvzÉf7t.z
—MHZ-ez%-ay
ILwgv
—uMStrfU
—MtacauZ-adUucøzpv6zz-uQ1tMf¯ZM4L
45
MOVEMENT OF ANIMALS.
Tho following Order of the Department of Agriculture was
read, RS also a from the West Sussex County Council
(No. 355.)
ORDER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND
TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION FOR IRELAND.
(Datcd 21st AIMi1, 1914.)
THE MOVEMENT OF ANIMAIS (SOUTHERN IRELAND)
TEMPORARY PROHIBITION ORDER (No. 3).
The Department of Agriculture and, Technical Instruction
for Ireland, by virtue and in exercise of the powers vested in
them under the Agriculture and Technical Instruction (Ireland)
Act, 1899, the Diseases of Animals Acts, 1894 to 1911, and of
every other power enabling them in this behalf, do order, and
it is hereby ordered, as follows :—
Alteration of Scheduled Area.
I. On and after the twenty-second day of April, nineteen
hundred and fourteen, 'I*ne Movement of Animals (Southern
Ireland) Temporary Prohibition Order shall be read as if the
Area described in the Schedule to that Order were the Area
described in the First Schedule to this Order.
Order Revoked.
2. The Order described in the Second Schedule to tbis
Order is hereby revoked from the twenty-second day of April,
nineteen hundred and fourteen, inclusive.
Short Title.
8. mis Order may be cited as The Movement of Anima.L
(Southern Ireland) Temporary Prohibition Order (No. 3).
In witnes whereof the Department of Agriculture
and •Technical Instruction for Ireland have here-
unto set their Offcial Seal this twenty-first day of
April, nineteen hundred and fourteen.
P. GILL,
(Signed)
Secretary.
FIRST SCHEDULE.
Scheduled Area.
So much of Ireland as lies to the south of the following
boundary (rdads and railway lines mentioned as forming the
boundary, except the Great Southern ond Western Railway
Line from Clara to Banagher, being regarded as outside the
Scheduled Area) : —
Commencing at the Maiden Tower, on tho sea coast at
Mornington, thence by the course of the River Boyne to the
Railway Bridge at Drogheda, thence by tfne Great Northern
Railway Line to its junction at Navan with the Midland Great
Western Line, thence southwards by the Midland Great
Western Line to Kihnessan Station, thence westwcrck by the
Athboy Branch of that Line as far as the point, where it
crosses the road from Navan to Trim at Peterstown, thence
southwards by the road via Newtown to the junction with the
road from Scurlockstow:n Bridge to Trim, thence by that road
through Trim to Roristown as far as the iunction with t,ho
bye-road over Derringdaly Bridge, thence by that road to tho
junction with the road from Ballivor to Trim, thence by that
road to Ballivor, thence by the direct road via Raharney to
Kitlncam, thence by the direct road from Killucan via Kit—
Itiéåti kåilway Station to the junction with the main road
leading from Kinnegnd to Mullingar, thence by the main road
Via Rochfortbridge, TyrreLlsLnss and Kilbeggan to the Mid-
iand Greac Asstern Bailway Line at Clare
Oat
Line to •its junction with the Great Southern and
Line south of Clara, thence by that Line to Banagher Station,
thence by the direct road to the River Shannon, and thence
by the course of that river to the sea,
SECOND SCHEDULE.
l.
2.
3.
4.
The movement from the District of any other Looal
Authority in England or Wales or Scotland into .the
District of the Local Autihority of the County of West
Sussex of animals landed in Great Britain from ireland
since the 21st day of April, 1914, or animals which
have been in contact with any such animals Landed fit
Great Britain as aforesaid, is prohibited.
Movement throu€h the Couniy of West Sussex by raii
without untrucking is excepted.
The expresion "animals" mearis cattle. sheep and goats,
and all •other ruminating animals and swine,
Tlhße Regulations shall come into force on tho 8th day
of May, )914.
S. THORNELY,
Clerk of the West Sussex Coünty Council,
Xo. of
Order
Date of Order.
ith April, 1914
Order Revoked.
(Article 2.)
Short fritle.
The Movement of Animals (Southern Ire-
land) Temporary Prohibition Order
WFST SUSSFX
blSEASFS OF ÅNiMALS acers.
FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE ORDER OF 189m
Notice hereby given Chat the Execüt;ve Committee of time
Local Authority of the County of West Sussex, in exeroise
of the powers vested in them under Article 12 of the Foot and
Mouth Disease Order of 1895, and of every other power
enabling thom in th\s behalf, have made thc following
Regula thons : —
County Council Offices, Horsham,
8th May, 1914,
CAUTION—Every person acting fn eontfaventfon of the fore-'
going Regulations will be liable to a fine not exceeding
C'20, or if the offence is committed with respect to more
than four animals, to a fine not exceeding for each
animal.
DEATH -OF MR. M. EIJCOCK, DROGÄF,DA.
Mr O'Connell broodfit under the notice of tÄie Committee the
lamented death of Mr M Elcock, Drogheda, brother Of
49
Luke J Elcock, a respected member of • the County Council,
and the following resolution Was passed in silence
Proposed by Mr Patrick O'Connell,
Seconded by Mr John F Murphy, J P, and
Resolved—That we learn with regret of tho death of Mr
Michael, Elcock, bnother of our esteemed coll«lguo, Mr Luke
J Elcock, and we direct our Secretary to convey to Mr Elcook
our sincere sympathy in his brmvemeut.
—4
uvadaZZe-w
C-Vcøf-L,
i-czzu——
vzzwV4É
CÆtZ
—amv
_v4øæzuZ.e
CzcZueaUwÉzcå70
eunL3//4
—ÆÅ-/-th
guadUz/ZoMH--Ø41.FA%Æ/Z
Zu«lz——
7tazpntdM_
_zamt-eUa.z6
deaz ßZe2/v
Åaf4eczcunzC—
ue-a7
LL_ÄÄ
.4%" 77.
e/fZZc//'Z/
Fh-zAzC—
_uezddurz
—c-cczzædM7%/FXc
-suet
dzZ4eV
eF/Æ-t-fmgd
ezcazf
_ua.#-uZZ
4mwa6Y4(zdc
/LKuw9zak
_uc'éft
g&f-zeZ -€üdMzedaZc—
doc-ccct,e€
_Äeeuær4
acm
'-vu.aem,c •
(ad J-ee-«v Zau
ao zicad
zoeae ae,ad/
ubv
Sirs—
During the month an outbreak of Sheep Scab occurred'
in a number of sheep at Dundalk Port. The aninials were con«
signed from Sligo to England and scab was detected in them at
Dundalk Pore. All the sheep (33) were slaughtered and disin--
fection carried out. On the Dtll instant I received a wire from,
the poliee at Castlebellingham stating- that three cattle were•
found dead on that day on a farm at Seabank, and an outbreak
Of anthrax was feared. Though the place is not in my district
I went immediately to the farm and made an inspection of the,
, carcases, when I found that death in each case was due to black
quarter and not to anthrax.
Your obedient Servant,
J. T. CLINTON, R C V S.
'Gen
Dufing tlie month of July 1 had to deal with three out..
'Ibreaks Of .Eheep scab, and also one suspected case. The latter,
Ävhich was reported at the Local Port, proved not to be a case
j ••of the disease.
All sheep in the three eases of sheep scab have been treated,
.:und I have been able to withdraw the restrictions. Under the
Tuberculosis Order 1 have had two cases not notified and dealt
-with them according to the Order. I furnished your Secretary
-with copies Of all the Official Forms served on the different
Of reported animals.
I remain,
Yours respectfully,
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
Sir,
I beg +0 report that visited and examined the usual
zfairs, markets, etc., held in the Ardee No. 1 District, for tho
-month of Jaily.
1 visited on the 3rd and 9th the farm on which sheep are de-
•tained at Rathnestin for sheep scab. These sheep were efficiently
•dipped for the seeond time.
I am unable as yet to issue a withdrawal notice, as disinfec,
-tion has not been carried out.
On the 15th July it vas reported by the police that • swine
•fever was supposed to have broken out on the premiess of Wm
"l'aaffe, Ardee, in. my opinion, which was also the opinion of an
Inspector of the Department of Agriculture, tho disease was not
swine fever.
' During the last week of this month I examined a bullock _ the
propéi•ty of Captain Taåffé, Smarmor€ suspectecE¯
Of tuberculosis with emaciation. On making the usual exauw
ination and tests, the animal, in my opinion, was not suffering-..
from this disease, and also exhibited no sign of emaciation.
I am, Sir,
Faithfully yours,
W. E. MAXWELL, R C V S, Ardee.
Chid-vv
caaeø
uØde-Z 4f«af
d >1-æC
cazCo
C d. 53 at-
,aæ-v
, KQo -no-C Z'-en-v
a-rao
Department of Agriculture a-nw Technical Instruction for
Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch),
50 and 51, Upper Mount Street, Dublin,
28th July, 1914.
No. 294814.
Sir,
With further refcrenee to the special efforts for eradicating7
Sheep Scab in Ireland; I have to transmit, for the information,
of your Local Authority, the accompanying supply of copies of-
an Order made by the Department on 27th instant and entitled
the ' 'Autumn Shéep Dipping (Irland) Temporary Order of 1914."
This Order, as will be observed, is designed to secure that during
the autumn period of the present year, i.e., between the 1st
proximo and 15th November next, sheep throughout Ireland
shall be dipped twice (instead of once as in other years), with wn
interval Of not less than seven days and not more than fourteen
days between the dippings.
It is very advisable that steps should at once be taken on behalf
of your Local Authority to draw the attention of their Inspectors
to this new Order, . and to have a notice as to the scope of the -
Order inserted in newspaper circulating in their district.
Some copies of a form of notice suitable for this purp(xse will be
found enclosed.
The police are also, being apprised regarding the Order, and
supplies ot Forms for use thereunder •will be sent to the POIice-
Stations for the convenience of sheep owners.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary..
The Clerk
Of each Local Authority.
x.D-eu
JzC dat JK2f/•u
caw-a-ed
unea; c-N
eat
arae Ze
/U.z».c-cmat t'
Jo A-Kat zf--køutct
af_.do
Ue_Aß'ZcotcnJ
-dLcd2Z ag /--0
Orde.p-u (
29
-a-c-z.c->+aGd
10
Ø--a-t -arun
.4_LQ.-4-e—
e--yv 3-0.
dea 'zra-ot-
(_T•-QOZ .zo-eoC
Cc-aot
-at u'9-M-ee
.-a.„-nZ JCåC6r¯
Ze-epee
OUaazZ
-0-0 Ze COea-Q-eÄ
zoeu -at
Knock bridge,
3rd August, 1914.
Secretary,
Louth County Council.
Dea+ Sir,
I bog to apply for increase in my wages owing to the extra
Sheeping Dipping in Autumn Period.
T am Superintendent at the Knockbridge Sheep Dipping Tank
for the past eight years; and, hoping to give every satisfaction
in the future, as I did in the past, now leave it to the kind
consideration of your Council to' place me on equal terms with
the ncighbouring counties, as T am informed
Superintendents have one pound per week.
I am,
Your obedient Servant,
THOMAS M'ARDLE,
Sheep Dipping Superintendent
. Mullenstown,
Ardee,
3rd August, 1914.
-Dear Sir,
I beg to apply for an increase in wages owing to the increase m
•number of sheep dipped in the summer period, as my books will
show you. also note that there are two compulsory dippings
in the coming autumn.
Leaving all to your kind consideration and trusting to give you
•every satisfaction, as I have given you heretofore.
remain,
four obedient Servant,
Wm. LEONARD.
PS—I understand that, the County, Monaghan men are paid
.81' per week.
caouaæ
— J(zade
eZ6v 7. J.
yeaZ
6 dat
at
oden Jk-ee/u
c-zvc-o-uzo
_ßmcuzaddl'
ÄzCacÄed
at ze-e-a_z
Cete-5
zrM-fn/
e-z6-&
.-Cæv
-and
Gecufv-C
-Caeca zeen-c
at /-vuae.+t
9 aÆC(
azzeaoeo
—n-CC 6
re_p-t dmt
cyv
>tTåze pao
em-o-C z6-e-eæv
due'/ -Cazed
26 aft _ 6
4,c-KzcZ Zoe-AL
cXaüd
% Uauv-eZZo'
JCaucveMf--
QI-Z
-Kane
-ate
COC
(00
CKzo
Z9eamJL uFQØuøv
(ZL (2?denz
mead
Æ,Ze
__h-2C6eed
Ze do ao do do
6-ecceu-ze
do-ne JO
_MØ&KL mm
d-<HL-ed
a; Qn«d
ICC Of
Tl-c-&ß-/
{czve -ea.oZ
>-tzoep-v
-e.zC
Mad C'(af
-a-ae reTevwd
U(zadz
ca,-vued (Kat Ze
mead
•at-I-LL
6eat ft_
YafCv
ureCckeo
Q-nUo J(-.ee-r-e
d c;KQt
aaeo
4cuCnn%
I-eceöed a-tmo-e
Cao-e.o
-am-d QC
C/Ydeæ / 9/3
affcøh(io 6ec„v
Ze
Ørcødc,YJ
at c-æ-r_.z
u,-o.4
-cz.--e»e
INSPECTORS' REPORTS FOR NOVEIGZR,
Clinton' s Report.
Dear Sir
1914.
On November 19th an outbreak of suspeot,ed sri-ne fever vag
reported on the premises of Mr Walter Gernon, Nevrath, Louth.
visited the farm and inspected the pigs. The oase was reported to
the Department, of Agriculture Who have the matter in hands.
Disin-
fection has been carried out, on Irwin's farm at Lisnavilly, and the
Detention Order served on him has been vithdravn. No other outbreak
o? contagious disease occurred In my district during the month.
Your obedient Servant,
CLINTON, M.R.C.V.S.
Mr Donnelly' s Report,
Gentlemen,
During the month of November I had tvro reported cases under the
ft-Iberoulosis Order and dealt with game.
I made inspections at a few premises where contagious disease vas
supposed to exist, , but found the animals were not suffering from any
of the notifiable diseases.
At present there is no ease of contagious disease in aninzls in
this district,.
Yours respectfully,
ANDRET A. DONNELLY.
Mr Manvel It s Report .
Sir,
I beg to report that I visited the usual fairs and markets in the
Ardee No. 1 District for the month of November.
I have had no reported cases of disease • to examine.
I am,
faithfully yours,
-ur-ao zav-e
c;6yZc
xu-a..A
'SDIP+ING 1914 -
ARDEE TANK. 14.
219 .
AUTUMN PERIODS.
S
Wage s
Hire of Tank &
water
Sheep Dip and
Sundrie s
s
d
20 :
s
Rent,
Æ\TOCKBRIDGE TANK.
6 616 Di in s
Wage s
Hire of Tank and
Sundries
Sheep Dip
RAVENSDALE AID
ÆNALOUGHAN TANK.
1 767 Di in s.
Wages
Hire of Tank,Rent ,
and Sundries.
Sheep Dip.
CARLINGFORD , OLEAN ,
& GLENMORE.
5 267 Di inos.
I'.rage s
Hire of Tank, Rent, ,
& Moving.
Sundrie s
Sheep Dip.
wage s
Hire of Tank, Rent, ,
& Sundries
Sheep Dip.
DROGHEDA.
2 405 Di in s.
Wages
Hire of Tank,nent,
& Dip.
-DITIJFE
Bill Posting.
Advertising
Printing.
4:
15
14
6:
20 :
8
5
13 :
5
3
9
2
6
2:
5:0
9:
9
34: 1
5
66 : o
40
14 :
29 :
47
8:
: 17 :
: 10
5
9
33 :
6:
6:
12 :
56 : 5
16 : 2
.ZZE-Q-Ü _Ee--•tæ
Ce-e.O*'--Ze a-d
e-cu
• 44
: 11 : 9
o
o
o
o
19 :
7
4
a-C-•-o--o-e
9
2.
7
23 :
31 :
12
13
d
: 11
uecw-eta.7
C--ae_e__
zac-ea 6.ego-v
a-ze
c-ohAZ
6-e_Lrv
Total 32 , 047 Dippings
100
So .
: 11
Z/ßt;C cUc
27.0.e-md
m-e4ZcZ-c.cÅ-e
Z-ZL Q.C
a-nd
da6Z '6
6 ne-a-«
VZ6.uzC_J
Oz.e-w&e--/
C/%tea.ra
aa zeed
Zocccua-e
REPORTS
Secretary.
FROM
VETERINARY INSPECTORS.
January 31st
The
Sir,
1915.
no oase of
The
Sir,
Chairrnan ,
Louth County
mndalk.
Mr
Ardee ,
Council ,
1st February, 1915.
Louth County Council.
Clinton' s Report, for January.
I beg to report that during the past month
Mamellt s Report for January. 1915.
scheduled contagious disease has occurred in this district. 'Two
cases of suspected bovine tuberculosis were reported to me, one
at Dromiskin and one at Bellurgan, but, on examination of the
animals I found that they did not suffer from tuberculosis.
Your obedient Servant,
J. T. CLINTON,
23rd January, 1915.
The
Sir,
Chairman ,
Louth County Council ,
Dundalk.
Maxwell's Report for December. 1914,
I beg to report that I examined the usual fairs md markets
P. Crosby, iålllamelia, reported
of the Ardee No. 1 District.
to me that he had a siok pig which he thought vas swine fever.
The an-inal was suffering from Indigestion.
faåthfully yours,
B. MAXWELL.
I beg to report that, I visited the usaa.l fairs, markets,
for the month of January, held In the Ardee No. I District. On
the 13th an outbreak of sheep seab occurred on the farm of Edvard
Ot Cormor, Charleville, Dunleer.
I visited these premises on the
12th & 13th and issued the necessary regulations In regard to
same, and on the 19th & 29th I personally supervised dipping
of these sheep. On the 14th another outbreak took place on the
fern at Corballis, ovmed by L. A. Lee—Noman in this ease. I also
åssued the necessary notices of detention and personally super-
vised their dipping on the 23rd of the month.
I to draw your attention to the fact that these
vere not reported under the Sheep Seab Order of May, 1914, made by
your Council.
•I also beg to draw your attention to the fact,
that in its present form the Order does not fulfil the intention
of the Council, viz: the prevention of the entry Into this County
of diseased animals.
To do so, my opinion, the Order should
include the words —nor sheep exposed for sale In any fair, mart
or saleyardU— and should also In nv opinion be made Include the
Agent,t s, i.e. stationmaasters or managers of Steam Packet Companies
in the County Louth report, the alTiva1 of arv sheep at their
station or depots.
Unless something like
Order is of little value.
I
this be done, I am afraid the present
Sir
falthfully yours
W. E. MAXVELL.
Drogheda, Jan., 6th
Donnellyt s Report for December.
Géntlemen,
1915,
1914
During the month of Decer±er, 1914, I had eight reported
cases to deal with under the Tuberculosis Order.
I furnished your Secretary with full reports relating to the
cases.
I am pleased to state that at present there Is no outbreak
existing in the district of any of the. notifiable diseases.
Sheep Scab is not now at all prevalent in this part ovrlng to
the farmers oornplying vrith the oonditions laid dovm in the recent
Sheep Dipping Orders.
I am,
Yours respectfully,
A. DONNELLY.
-zad QZ
•To
Louth County
(Executive
Council ,
Committee) .
Drogheda, Feb.
Mr Donnelly' s Report of
C+•-v nc-n2-
42
ca.dEd
-8-e.-e„v
neceee-ed
1st 1915.
January 1915.
Gentlemen,
During the month January I had six oases reported under
the Tuberculosis Order & dealt with same and furnished your
Secretary with the necessary reports on the prescribed forms.
I had one outbreak of sheep scab in district, but, fortunately
only one animal In the flock was found affeotéd Tith the disease.
I had all the sheep at once dipped and the diseased anixnal has
been dipped three times since the outbreak vas first notified,
and I hope in the course
of ten days or so to be able to Withdraw
the restrictions in this
case.
I am
Yours respectfully
A. DONNELLY.
——e-eo.&a-tzædeÄaea-U
(5)
/jaß--nxcaVfr/C//4@aza-z--aZ t/u
zcæ-ße—
eaÆZ--
d.e-C-af
-me-a-dz-
o-CZ&L
County Council of Louth.
Tuberculosis (Ireland) Order of 1914.
The attention of persons ot,ming or having charge of Cattle in
the County Louth is directed to the above naaned Order of the
Department of Agriculture and Teohnioal Instruction for Ireland
vrhioh cornes into o eratlon on 1st, February 1915. An effect of
within the scope of {he existing provisions
—u. the Order is to b
: vritJh regard to bovine tuberculosis all bovine animals suffer
from a chronic cou h and showin de
oa s o u er—
ou osxs.
es are empower e o slau er any ull,
ooa u or
cow, ox, heifer or calf vmioh they are satisfied IS suffering from
this form of the disease and to pay compensation for animals so
slaughtered on the game consitions as apply to cows slaughtered as
suffering from tuberculosis of the udder, or as giving tuberculous
milk and bovine animals slaughtered as suffering from tuberculous
emaelat,ion.
Under the Order the valuation of an an:ixnal for the
purposes of compensation vrill be made on one basis only, viz:
the market value before slaughter.
Under the Order every person having In his possession or under
his charge
(1)
(2)
(3)
any cov which is or appears to be suffering from
tuberculosis of the udder, indurated udder, or other
chronic disease of the udder; or
any bovine animal vhioh is or appears to be suffering
from amaciat,ion due to tuberculosis; or
any bovine animal which is suffering from a chronic
cough and shoving definite clinical signs of tuber—
culosis
—i
is required to notify the Police of the fact vrithou+o delay and to
keep the animal isolated from other animals as far as practicable
(Article 10) until the animal is slaughtered or the permission of
the Local Authority for its removal is obtaüied. He is also re—
quired, if the ani-nzl be a oow to take oertain precautions with re—
gard to milk and milk vessels (Article 9) .
The Order forbids the movement to a Port for shipment of aav
animal suffering or appearing to be suffering from any of the
fomrs of disease specified in the preceding paragraph, and pre—
scribes steps vhioh may be taken in the event of any such animal
being brought to a Port for shipment, or exposed for sale in a
market, fairground or saleyard.
Persons desirlng fuller Information as to the provisions of
the Order can obtain copies of the Order by applying to
The Secretary
Department of Agriculture and
Technical Instruct, ion for Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch) ,
DUBLIN.
By Order
(Signed) CHARES
Clerb of the Local under the
of Animals Act for the County of Louth.
Dundalk ,
25th January, 1915.
Diseases
- 640m a
-ronde,
z , apa
Caze
rqz5.
arz&e
Z o,.eFC
2".arÆß Pts. f.
eeZaQCd •necca.zcz
-co•-a.o .-,.-e
ca.a-e
'Ze cee
k.9e/aeZ
ccoza
No. 1399-14.
Sir
Department of Agriculture and
Teohhioal Instruction Cor Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch ) ,
50 & 51 Upper Meunt, Street,
DåBLIN.
19th April, 1915.
I have to transmit herewith for the Information and guidance
of the Local Authority, copies o an Order entitled the Sheep
Dipping (Ireland) Order of 1915, made recently by this Depart,ment
under the Diseases of Animals Acts.
The Orders previously exist,ln , entitled respectively the
Sheep Dipping (Ireland) Order of 1 12, and the Auturm Sheep Dipping
(Ireland) Temporary Order of 1914 are, in effect, by
this further Order which comes into foroe on 1st proxåmo; that Is
to say, the new Order will continue the provision'initiated last,
year substituting a double for a single dipping In thc autum perlodi
in aåditlon to the usual sumner dipping.
From the representations made by the Department on
occasions the Local Authority are avare that It is essential in the
Interests of the sheepbreedlng industry that effective action
should be taken with the object of eradloatinz Sheep Scab. The ex—
tent, to which this disease still prevails In Ireland (vide the attached'
return as to Its distribution in 1914) constitutes a g•ave menace to
Already that trade has severely felt the
the sheep export trade.
pressure of the regulations called for by the frequency of outbreaks
and should the landing of Irish Sheep In Great Britain be further
restricted the results might ba very Inimical to the prosperity of
sheep farming in this country. . It will accordingly be seen how
neoegsary It Is that all oonoerned in dealing with the disease
should co-operate effectively for Its suppression. The Department
trusts therefore, that, the active oo—operation of your Local Authority—
may be relied upon in so inportant a matter.
As regards the present Order, the Local Authority should take
adequate steps to enforoe it properly in their district. In thig
connection, I have to suggest that the Looal Authority, If they hotre
not yet exercised their powers of appointing Inspe otors to see that
dipping Is effectively carried out, should nov do so under Artiole
20 of the Order. Many Looal Authorities have alreaåy taken this
-4 oourse, and it would be distinctly for the general advantage if
similar useful action were taken In all districts.
With a view to the effective publication of the Order the De—
partment will forrard at, an early date, a sup Iy o? plaoard Notices
for posting throughout your Local Authority' s åistriot.
The
customary arrangements are also bedra made for the supply to sheep
owners (through the Police or ot,hexase) of Fonns for use under •the
mecca;ev€
Mccpez
Order.
Mzo
Beca..."'
The
Clerk,
of each
Lo oa1
I am, Sir,
Your obedient
Sa oretary.
Authority.
1
30
c/--o-f>
C.z-æe-ec-,-l
TUBERCULOSIS (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1913.
SOME OF FFES
1.
2.
30
4.
5.
6.
For olinloal exaanination of the first,
ani-TAI a fee of
Each additional aninzl on the same premises
nae maxi-mm amount under this head not to
exceed ZI.
the premises are xmre than 15 miles
distant a fee for the first animal of —
For applying the Tuberculin Test, up to
four animals
Baeh animal over four
Post Mortem Examinations —
Loroseopio Examination
:l:o
20:10 6
-kad
Q'JQÄ
Mileage at the rate of Is per rd-le one way, or railway
fare.
No further charges to be roade for reports or valuations.
Cta-.e.QaR ao
6-
ade--c•cz Ze/
mc-a/-Za.,-
tx-ecuCb-c
Ce--eetac.Z
60-ct4-t JK-O—cza-e
z;cZeU F.
CA-:ze_
47
decard
-at Z 6-cac
UZeæu
4 .ZC'ürv(f-e 07
6-CQ-Z
6 -zz zv-æße«
a,
Mzc(aøt aM
Xe af (Rd.-e
,.CC-ze
am-dez
eoe-,A-e rend
Wv z4-z z, i
09
$ /4 Zé..e.-.„-e
- iö'±L
z-a.6-U Cae_ze
C.A-a.-C•-o
u—Uc-æCe-e-c--teue-Z-
dcML-d----
_Yke—
a-v-e-
2/4 C/ __haq-e----l
ea.Zø-ea
U--øee.do)
f/acB-anaÆ
400
Yue/
yz-o-€cz-a—ze---t-o-e-d--
4.4
azie—vcoec—
—Z-e-a-*t..-
—--k.e-e-d--
ce--n.UZdC4ZCd--fl--
.w-zzeu-a-ZC
( 6rdev)
Q--•cæ——
——z/(æzzZaøeeZZ, Z30
—ee—4-v-e-d—
6h--Zev
zf/{-e
VR/5
C-nüeaO
—era-e—dei.c-cc-d--
t/tL
vae-<R-Z
Z)
,ugz$.
Rau,
Ze-anZUi/,
ue-«-aZ
A-ze--tz-z
Zae.ze-dmzm
_C2dc4(
a-ezz-- c-a-ueo,
ZØ--C&-ÆCZ
zee-u-z-aÉ
I
VETERINARY INSECTORSt
Clintont g Report for
On 10th Sept. 41 the property of joseph hrphy ot Derry—
beg, were at ereenore Port for gæb. me ne cessary steps
were taken, the affected sheep being gla*tered and the realnder
dipped at Greenore ard returned to the ovmers farm by order of the
Departnznt of On the date sheep the property
of P. Rooney, Mountanillg, vere also detained at Greenore for
The affected 81B ep vere Tho rædnder were dipped at
Greenore and returned to Mr gooney' g &rm.
Your obedient Servant,
J. OLINTON.
CIIntmts Report f0? Oetober.1915.
On October 7th, twenty four sheep were detained at Dandalk Port
owing to the pregenoe of scab amongst them. They were the property
of Malone Drumshæbo and were oonslmed to England. All of
them were on the premigeg by order of owner.
October 30th four lanis suffering from scab were found In a oong1C1—
ment sent by J. Shevlin to mnda& Port from Cerlohacross. tme
necessary steps are being taken in the oase.
Your obedient ,
CLINTON.
Donnelly' Report for Septe±er. 1915.
During the month of Septe±er I had to deal with one outbreak
of sheep soab (the animals Co.Dmrn).
There vas a oase
of paras1t10 In a horse, the anirnai being destroyed, æad I had
one or tvo cases of suspected swine fever
I Inspected a
couple of hundred sheep Into the County Dublin and
Ballinasloe.
Your Secretary has been with full particulars and all
the necessary reports relating to each cage.
Yours respectfully,
A. DONNELLY.
Mr Donnell.yt g Report for October. 1915.
There has been no outbreak of my of the notifiable diseases
annngst, In digtrlot during the month of October, 1915.
There are no at present under restrictions.
I made
inspections In one or two suspected cages reported to me but found
the ar±B1g free from arv of the goheduied contagious diseases.
-Ze-I
9.
The Secretary,
County
Yours respectfully,
A. DON}ELLY.
-Uee•eiö-ry
t/v-y
07
. tic
Zaecee/wz
b4---u-z-ae+-w(l uvr-rz,u-u--
I-V-F
Qas-ruy2zO
-EC@t---
MAINTENANCE OF LIVE STOCK
(IRELAND) ORDER OF 1915 (No. 2).
THE Department of Agriculture and Tech-
nical Instruction for Ireland by virtue and in
exercise of the powers vested in them under the
Maintenance of Live Stock Act, 1915, and for
the purpose of maintaining a sumcient stock of
animals, do hereby order as follows :—
Sucking Calves not to be slaughtered or
exported.
I. From and after the date of commence-
ment of this Order, no sucking calf shall
(a) be slaughtered, or be caused or per-
mitted by its owner to be slaughtered; or
(b) be moved out of Ireland, or be caused
or permitted by its owner to be moved out of
Ireland.
Exceptions from Restrictions.
2. The restrictions imposed by the foregoing
Article shall not, apply to_
(a) slaughter of an animal under the
powers conferred by the Diseas«s of Animals
Acts, 1894 to 1914, or any Order made
thereunder ; or
(b) slaughter of a male calf of any of the
following dairy breeds, that is to say,
Channel Island, Ayrshire or Kerry breeds ;
or
(c) slaughter of an animal necessary or
desirable on account, of accidental injury to
the animal or its illness; or
CEY )
(d) slaughter or movement, out of Treland
of an animal if in the opinion of the Depart-
ment of Agriculture and Technical Instruc-
tion for Ireland the slaughter or movement
out of. Ireland is desirable for any excep-
tional reason or purpose and the slaughter
or movement, is authorised by a licence
granted by the Department or by an officer
of the Department.
Application of Order.
3. This Order applies to Ireland.
Commencement.
4. This Order shall come into operation on
the twenty-second day of November, nineteen
hundred and fifteen.
Short Title.
5. This Order may be cited as the MAINTEN-
ANCE OF LIVE STOCK (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1915
(No. 2).
In witness whereof the Department of
Agriculture and Technical Instruction
for Ireland have hereunto set their
Official Seal this seventeenth day of
November, nineteen hundred and
fifteen.
T. P. Gill,
Secretary.
a-ccc+-d-æ-ncc--
Cuz
bZaE—
Jc-az,/v/v
ø-ZcJÖ-mzzuÖ
to-_tÅz—
—Aayza-Zz---
Ct./azve/(e-pzåeaø.
Po-zercy—//z-/fcuzeeu— aznUøzukaV/eam
n.øza--az
ur Clinton t s Report
On the 13th Deoembæ, 1915, an outbreak of scab ooourred in a
oonsigment of larnbs fomrarded to Dundalk Port for to England
by ur James Marmion. The Iambs were purchased from a P.HanIon of
Piedmont ard had been grazing on Malonet s land at Ea;mestown. The
Iaanbs were slaughtered at, mndalk Port by order of the wrner. In oom—
pany with a Departmental Inspector I visited the farm at, Eavrxest,ovm
and examined the renzåning sheep there (76 In all) No other oase of
I bad all the sheep dipped under personal Super—
scab was found.
visione In the oase of J. Shevlints sheep already reported, the
affected animals were slaughtered and the remainder (40) dipped.
t sR ort
Mr Donnel
During the month of November there were two outbreaks o? sheep
scab. In one ca se the animals cue from Co. Neath and the other
from, Dublin market e me animals (92) that oame from Dublin market
were all slaughtered with the owner's authority. In the other oase
the diseased vas slaughtered and the dipped twice
inside IO days and afterwæds allovred to go forward for shipment at
Droghed@ Port.
During the. month of Decenber 1915, I had two outbreaks of sheep
scab. The diseased animals were slaughtered and the tvrioe
dipped end I have been able to withdraw the restrictions. mere are
no other animals In the di rict under restrictions at, present, date.
I beg to that I visited and inspected the usual fairs and
rerkets held in the Ardee No. 1 District for the month of November. I
had the detained sheep the property of Matthevi Skelly, Ham-nondstovm,
Dunleer dipped on the 2ndii& 16th of the month. On the 15th I released
the sheep detained on the fam of John Crævley, Art,nallvery, Ardeee In
consequence of Matthew Skelly selling a to Henry Sloan, Aclare
C.astle, Dunleer, the sheep on Mr Sloants farm had to be examined, but
Both Crawley t s and Skel lyt s tams have
were ±und free from disease.
been properly disinfected.
I examined a pig the property of James
Hughes which the ovmer thought •might have swine fever, but the disease
was Indigestion. All the necessary forms, et,o. have been Torvarded In
connection vrith these oases.
During the month of I>oember I- visited the fairs and mæketg held
In Ardee, No. 1 Distrlot. The detention placed on •ilatthev Skelly' s
farm, Haamondetown, Ihnleer, has been withdræm by me as from the 8th
of this month, the usual forms in connection with t,ms ease have been
forwarded to the Council. A suspeot,ed oase of scab at H. Craig's farm
Bohemore, Ardee, was found not to exist.
zcf/z/azn/r
pÄ/tøaz//Ø;,
MUJzcezøaefÄ,
Local Authorities to appoint Inspectors of
Sheep Dipping.
2. Every local authority shall temporarily
appoint, for service during the prescribed
dipping periods, as many additional inspectors:
as may be necessa.ry to enable proper supervision
to be maintained on behalf of the local autho-
rity with a view to securing the effective dipping
of sheep in their district under the principa
Order.
Department' $ approval required for appoint-
ments.
3. Appointments under this Order and the
remuneration of persor!'FIPP0inted shall in all
instances be subject to approval by the Depart-
ment.
Proi'ision against delay, d:c., in appointing.
4. If it, appears to the Department that a
local authority has failed
(a) to make, within a reasonable time, the
appointments required by this Order, or
(b) to make a sufficient number of such ap-
pointments,
the Department may issue to such local autho-
rity a certificate, under the seal of the
Department, specifying what number of
appointments, or •of further appointments,
as the case may be, are requisite for the pur-
poses of the Order in the district of the local
authority, and specifying also, if the Depart-
menf see fit, the rates of remuneration of the
inspectors to be aVpointed and the areas for
which they should respectively act, and the local
authority, on receipt of such certificate, shall
proceed, without avoidable delay, to make the
requisite appoint,ments in accordance with the
terms of the certificate.
Sooretar:rf s Offico,
Court House, Dundalk,
10th February ,
1916.
3 X ECUQIVE
Sir
You are hereby requested
of the above Oormlttee to bo
Court Nouso, Dundalk, at One
14th day of February, 1916.
to attend a Special Uooting
hold the Council ,
ot 0100k p.m. on tho
BüS1iTESS
Consideration o? Appointment, of Inspectors t
(Ireland) Ordor.
Reoonsideration of Veterinary Inspectors t
Salarie g.
Reports from Veterinary Inspootorg.
Correspondence, and other businesg that
be brought, forward.
I Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
CHARLES
Secretary.
To eaah of the Corrnittee
øz-z
-.zL<-zvgeCM
aM az-aavzfa.dZ<.Z4-zæzzZ—
ao./<Äz--eUazd-a.d/0
a--ee++Z-ænc-e--
a-z-<ØeAaaÉmeZ—
aøU/L4
,æaz
REPORTS FROM INSPECTORS.
Clintonts Report.
-1
Sir ,
During the month of January an outbreak of goab ooourred in
sheep the property of J. McNally, Carrlolmaoross, at Dundalk Port, .
The animals were slaughtered by order of the avnür, ard the hides
disinfected. Restrlotlons were ranoved from sheep detained at Heynes—
tot,m on grazing land the property of P. Hanlon, Pieånont,.
With reference to your circular regarding sheep dipping order, t
am of the opinion that the only efficient method of dipping Ig by the
swim bath.
So far as I know there are only 4 of those in district
viz. the one owraed by Mr O. Keenan at Aghameen, md those ovmed by
ya.tr Council at Stonetrough, Annaverna and Carlingford. me last two
are of course movable baths. A few years ago the Department ordered
all the sheep the area between Dandalk Omeath to be dipped under
Veterinary supervidon In swim baths. This order was oarrled out
thoraaghly, with the result that for a couple of years afterwards not
a single oase of scab reported In the Under the present
system there Is practical JJ no supervision over the dipping and in most
oases it is only a matter of form. Dipping by means of the svd.m bath
is, I believe, less dangerous to the sheep than that done by the hand
bath. In the latter oase the sheep have to be turned on their backs
ard held forcibly dovm. Only a. few htmdred can be done In this way
by three men in a day, whereas, with the swim bath t,vro men can easily
do over a thousand a day.
J. Clinton.
Maxwell t s Report.
I beg to report tha# I visited the usual fairs and markets held in
the Ardee No. 1 District for the month of January. I visited the de—
talned sheep at Artnalivery, the property of John Crawley on the 8th,
13th, 22nd and 24th, ard had them thoroughly dipped.
I have not yet
removed notice. me necessary forms, etc. have been du3Jr forwarded by
me to your Secretary.
Wm. Maxwell.
C/z-z—
DAO---ß--daz Vez-oai-cZ-—
7
zucazu _vZ-zz—maØUcZJ
/ aa-eCezm b/w-
/767/0
mt41_
Ze.z.eåzpa-
z-e-a-J2
-a4cÉ±+t'-e--e4
voæccZ4ht<
2rC-ocße•ev -U
M—pz.Ä---Äa./iÄ
J/JU2U,Pf
Zen-ua
YCYL2uåw/ dz-
caeca
caze-<
t/teø,44ee-/eeteæ-Æatv •4 -Q-o
Ae-æZUz-æceeæoZa&QZ6Le
b the-
czZCae
mu ucteW
UaMU-e-c-Q-eyzouué/vu-a-Z dz.ezaeee@'ü
oxct/—
ZåzcnczZzA%4z1Ø t;/42/Z
ZceæZ
é/9)/uvZ1/uz-/4z«
_9/Lnvvtvecen.o
M/zæ
d+-zz-z—
e-ÖU
<C-CiC4i Mezo_
, Ä%/CZ
eza,UJ
Lrøzz-øcVezM "t/u7
Nadcev.
QLt/e-
LYXL-
uraeaLeuuæazYe-ZUZaZ
Uz•e--æe_
Ve-eMÄZAZåaccz/bU
uexeaZ/azaM
Caz-u Accua.zcz
ec/vpæ-ae
i'
a e-/LZ10--teg-rzeL.Uæn—
e/z-aed"-m-cz——
blat
cc«zZ'
Applications vere read from the following •
Denis Tiernan, Newhmse, TermonfeoHn.
John J. Eerr, hillipstow•n, Ballyrnakezny, and
Patriok F. Moreon, Priorstown, ClemonfeoHn.
The latter two both attended In person and vere Inter—
viewed by the Coamdtt,ee.
After a short discussion the following resolution was passed
unanåÄ)ug1y
Ä•oposed by T. Ltrphy, Es
Seconded by Pat,riok Cailæi, sq., J eP., and
Resolved
as Dipping Superintehdent for the Tank and Looal In-
speotor for the Drogheda District at the salary of ZI per veer for
the Sumer Autum Dipping periods.
It was unanimously arranged that tlz Inspector make inspections
on WednesdAY, Thursday, and In week, md that he
attend at the tank on each and Tuesday.
It, vas that, he be paid his vages fortnight and
that he be Instructed to lodge all nnnies received by' hlm for dipping
fees each fortnight, e
UecaJ
M.NR oont11"1EE.
As directed by the County Omm0119 a Meeting of the Looal Oom—
mittee of the Tank was held In Ihogheda Court House on
the 6th June, 1916, at the hazr of two ot 0100k p.m.
In the Chair: P. Donegan, Esq., J. P.
Present : —
Other P. Callan, J.P. and N. T. Esquires.
accordance the advertisement issued the pro—
oeeded to appoint, a Dipping Supexdntendent, and LooaI Inspector for the
district.
uJzu/uædzuUu/Ldezæ
Å..a-%0
——a.Æeae4Ä
No.1B10/16
Sir,
z/ze-iÆa.ÄZ/
Z Caz
unounancøzaW
_uå<d€L
Depart,nznt, of Agrioult,ure
Vet erinary Branoh Bublin,
20th June, 191å.
a-Ze-cue(s
I
I have to aohlowledgø the receipt of your letter of 19th Instant
Ln reference to the question of securing In the process of sheep dipping
In reply I have to state that while dipping In swim baths Ig without
doubt, the amre expeditious and eoonanloal method of dipping, it, Is not
LQraot10ab1e, the are advised, by proper to effect
a thorough åmnersion in a less oapaoious bath. The process In this oase
Is of course a tedious one and the practice of using vessels such as
you would naturally Increase the difficulties of supervision; but
it, does not appear to the Department that It would be 00Qot,ent for the
Looal Authority for or other reason to require dipping In their dis—
trict to be oamied out in grim baths.
If, however, swim—baths were provided by the Inoal Authority It
would apparently be open to them, under the Regulations at present, In
force in County Louth, to require who had not, suitable mems of
The
dipping of hig -to carry out, dipping in one of these baths.
procedure In such oases would be to insert the requisite condition as to
the of dipping in the Notice specifying the t,åme and Iaoe oat
which the dipping is required to be done.
üo.1475/16
Department, of Agriculture,
Veterinary Branoh
Dublin, 30th May, 1916.
I have to advert, to your letter of 25th Instmt, and to the reso—
lution vhioh, ag Indicate, was unanimously passed by your County
Council at, their adjourned Quarterly MeetAng on that day, the
' following terms
iResoIved, that as all sheep in this Courlty ZUSt be dipped
the pregenoe of a looal inspector eppoint,ed by the County
'Council, ye hereby request the Departnm-xt to foreeo that part
•of their regulations sheep owners to Ep their
•sheep t,wioe within a certain time during the Autunn period,
nas sheep find this regulation very Injurious to heavy
nbreeding
In reply I have to state that the ciroumgtanoes of the Ilfe history
of the Insect which produæs Sheop Boab render it nost desirable that
'the prescribed double dl In at an interval of not legs than seven or
I :more thu fourteen dayg tke Altunn Perlod shmld be persevered In,
the end at, viz. , the eradication of the disease from the
I Country, Is, In dae course, to be attained. The Department could not,
therefore, but, regard a suspension of the double—dip
requirement as
a retrograde step In existing oiroumstances, and it
regretted that they are unable to entertain the proposal In your Councils
resolution.
At the same they to say that there Is no reason to oon—
sider that the second dipping Qlould neoessarily be Injurious to Eheavy
breeding ewesU, especially as It Is 001Qetent, to start the arrangerznts
for the two dippings In such oases as early as may be wished after 31st
July.
I Sir,
Your obedient Servant ,
P. 0111,
Se oret,ary.
County Council.
YG&oretary vas ±ü+iished full
I had no other outbreak of
the prescribed forms of the Department.
contagious disease In anlnøls, but. made inspections In a few suspected
t/zæoUceczeZe&
Mr Clintonts Reporb — June. 1916.
During the month I visited the fairs and markets in district as
usual. On June 24th an outbreak of Boab occurred In one Imb amongst
a lot of 13 the property of Mr M. Dawe of Church Street. Dundalk. me
affected animal was slaughtered and the remainder dipped under
supervision. Other necessary steps will be tüen regarding disln—
feotlon, et,o.
Your obedient servant, ,
J. T. Clinton.
Report.
During the rrnnth of June I had one oase of sheep In a lot of
Tho diseased animals were
79 sheep brought In from the County Meath.
slaughtered with the owner' s pemisslon and the in—contacts dipped
cases reported to me.
Yours respectfully.
Andrew A. Donnelly.
Mr Maxwell t s Report.
I beg to report that I visited the fairs and mrketg held in thé
Ardee No. 1 District for the month of June.
Though I have no official oase of disease to report, I learn from
outside sources that Qxeep scab Is still prevalent in this distriot„but
as I can get, no nues, I camot, personally Investigate.
E. Maxwell.
No.18é3/16.
Sir,
Depåi±ffent ,
Veterinary Branah
29th Jute, 1516.
pergOhSSSTSfWsüp@r1ntendents, and also as Looal Inspectors under the
Appointmæt of Inspectors (Ireland) Order with remmeratlon (In the
Sumner and Autumi Dipping Periods) as Indoated opposite their respeo—
tave names, viz:—
John J. Kerr,
Ballymakenny
2/—
lil
In reply to your further letter of 27th Instmt respecting oertdn
difficulties arising In oonneotlon with the supervision of sheep dickng
requiring sheep owners to oarry out dipping at, guoh time and place and
such conditions as the Looal Authority direct is to place the
Local Authority In a pog1t10n to overcome the difficulties æat,ioned.
Such Regalatlon being In force in County Louth the Local Authority
may,by the due service of notices thereunder, arrange the dipping of
.•evezv sheep go as to admit, of dipping being supervised In
Instance by one of the DIpp1æ Inspectors. bloreover In oases
*here there is reason to believe that the facilities for dlpping on the
premises of my omer are not guoh as to allow of adequate personal
supervision of the dipping the Looal Authority may require the dipping
to be oarrled out under oondltions which aån1t of such supervision,
e.g., In the public dlppltz t,mk In charge of the Dipping Inspeotor.
I have to add that It, should be practicable through the Police to
ascertain beforehand the kind of dipping facilities vhloh each owner
possesses.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant ,
T. P. Gill,
Secretary.
County Council.
Eat
William Leonard, Ardee.
Thomas McArdle , Enookbridge
Thomas MoDermottJ ,Ravensda1e
per week, md
as Inspector.
per week and
as Inspector .
per week md
as Inspector.
per week and
as Inspector.
Oyen Keenan,
Hugh
Owen Traynor,
Aghameen
Carlingford
(heath
I am, Sir
Fees of Id per sheep
and per and 2/—
per week as Inspector.
same.
Your ot edient,
T. P, Gill
Servant ,
ge eretary.
County Council.
No.1892/16.
Sir,
zzzLm aa-/' •
Department, of Agriculture ,
Veterinary Branoh
29th June, 1316.
With reference to your letter of the 27th Instant, respecting the
armnæements recently ngde by your Looal Authority under the Diseases
of Any-malg Aots In vrlt,h the supervision of sheep dipp in
County Louth, I have hereby to express the Department,' s approval o the
Qpolnt.,nmat, by the Lonal Authority of the undermentioned
'fiendzUe--e-hnzz@—
aqahLaA/DMe
'u;-ætzæ
.—/eeez--
Mr Ponnell.vis Report.
During the month of July I had tvo outbreaks of sheep scab at
the Drogheda Port, the animzls In each oase corning from Co.yeath.
The ' diseased animals were slaughtered and the in—contacts dealt Vith
and your Secretary vag furnished with full reports •and particulars in
There vas no other case of contagious disease in
the matter.
animals occurring in this district, during the month.
Andrew A. Donnelly.
Manrellig Report.
I beg„to infom you that I attended the usual fairs and market s
I have no
held In the Ardee No. 1 District for the month of July.
cage of contagious or infeot,ious disease to report for this month.
Mr Report.
On July 8th an outbreak of scab occurred In a flock of 15 sheep
the property of Thomas Thornton, Newtowndarver. The sheep have been
dipped three times and the necessary measures taken to gt,anp out the
disease. An outbreak of g cab was algo detected In a flock of twenty
three sheep at Dundalk Port which vere consigned to England by
Curran, Sligo. The affected animals were slaughtered ard
in—contactoneg dipped. A cage of swine fever hag occurred on the
preraises of Eohael Hanlon, Ramparts, Dundalk. The matter is bei-1Z
at present dealt with by the Department of Agriculture.
J. Clinton.
No .2077/16
Sir,
c-+nvJ
Department, of Agriculture ,
Veterinary Branch,
Dublin, 24th July, 1916.
h e Di in
With reference to your letter of 12th instant containing a further
expression of the views of the Discageg of Animals Acts Executive Com-
mittee of the Louth County Council on the procedure needful to rnake
sheep dipping effe otive in the County, I have to state that would
be a mistake to suppose that the Department, renard the dipping hand
baths ag other than a rnalceshift arrangement Thioh It, would be un—
desirable to have recourse to when better means can be provided. The
Department are at one the In stmongly favourine dipp
in central baths under supervision as against the scattered dppl-ng o
small floors in tubs, which rendérs adequate inspection .
But the Departænt consider that the readiest way to atain the
desired end of having dipping carried out, at, central points Is by the
full exercise of the Local Authority i s powers under
"(Local of ag16 In Pursuance cof vrhloh the
Inspectors can serve notices requiring dipping to be carried out at
the place, &c., specified in the notice.
It is hoped that this view
of the matter vrill connend Itself to the Conn±ttee and that they will
be •so good as to take action accordingly.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant ,
T. P. Gill,
Secretary.
Secretary, Loutn County Council.
em-c/o
azzz7{aZJ, C
Cllntont s' Report — August 1916.
During the month of August an outbreak of scab occurred in a flook
of 113 sheep oonglgled to &xgland by Mr J. Woods of Oarrlckmacrosse The
affected animals vrere slaughtered and the remainder dipped on two
occasions.
A further outbreak occurred at, Dundalk Port on August 14th
In 35 sheep consigned to England by J. Woods, Carriclmacross.The animals
affected (9) were slaughtered and the renzlning 26 dipped on tmo occasions.
The Department have ordered a prosecution In this case. The necessary
regulations having been complied Tith I have withdrawn the Detention
Order served on Thornton, Newtowndarver.
Donnelly' s Report .
the month of August no outbreak of contagious disease in
animals occurred In I nzde inspections In a few suspected
cases but found the anlnzls were not suffering from of the notifiable
diseases.
Andrew A. Donnelly.
tfaxwålltg
I beg to report that I the usual fairs, markets, &o held
-Lw±he Ardee No .1 District for the month of Aug.1St. During t-,het month
no oases of contagious or Infectious disease reported to
Az-Zane-a--ü4/Uezm--'
—Vuc<Uzc4zfa77/
—Jae/veåLOM-fdu-
Thomas Ravensdale Tank.
Fe eg
Vages for Inspection
Rent & Cartage
Sheep Dip
Hurdle g
02:14 0
1:16 0
2:14 0
3:18 0
11
ZIO
4
g
7:
4
8
Dipped in Council mank 292
sheep
Inspected 46 Tanks.
Hugh McRev1tt, Carlingford Tank
Fees
Wages for Inspection
and
Loss
Iambs.
Loss
1
PÆZIOD
1916
Profit
6146.
Loss
2763 •
Loss
Rent
Sheep Dip
Hurdles
Sundries
16:0
1:
2:14 0
Leonard, Ardee Tank.
Wages
Sheep dip
Rent
Water
Sundries
Dipped at Coun011 Tank sheep and
Inspected 14 Private Tanks.
Thonzs McArdle, haockbrldge Tank.
I'!ageg
Sheep Dip
Pent
Dipped In Council Tank Sheep ald
Inspected 34 Private Tanks.
J. J. Kerr,
larbs
27:
26:
13:
15:
1:
12 :
9:
8:0
al:19:
15 no
19 : 6
7
4
9
11
11
2:0
Dipped In Ooune11 Tank 1980
Inspected 15 Private Tanks.
Oven Travnor, Omeat& Tank
Fees
vages Inspection
Sheep Dip
gun&ieg & rent 4 g:
Timber — Hurdles 9: 8:11
2
22:15 : 5
214:
5
215
o:
18:
o:
Dipped In Council 1308
Inspected 13 Private Tanks.
gmnÆARY.
Wage g
She ep Dip
Rent
Dipped In
Inspected 82
Owen Keenan,
Fees
Wages for
Sheep Dip
Rent
Sundrie s
Logs on &lookbridge Tank
Bal
Ravensdale
Oar lingford
Less rofit on Ardee
10:
14:
56:
1:
e Tank 761
Private nariks.
Aghameen Tank.
Inspection
1:
Printing & Postlæ
11:
Total
67:
19
2
5
Logs
Grogs Logs
5
9
16:0
Less Extra expenditure—Ravensdale Nevr Tahke 12:12:5
Carlingford Tank
Omeath
Net Loss — Surrner Period
10:
35 :
Dipped In Council Tank 688
Inspected 71 Private TankS
Ccc-cc/ruzzÄ4/
49
u mezca2C
ZZ-Ze—
C4zzazzcZ-cvzzM/it/z-z
-Miep-ft
- NECEIPTS and
_zczzdeya
_——uzduzuzö-
a-azcc—
Ardde Tank
okbridge
Aghame en
Ravensdale
Carlingford
Corraklt
22:11 6
10:12 0
9:10
2: 5 10
12:10 6
9:10: 2
243:15:
18:18:
15:17:
8:
15 : O
Profit,
Loss
Less
eo
10 :
16 :
232
6
6
28:16:
20:
2:
18:
8:
6
o
6
Printing Account
8
2:2
7
Less s contrlbn.
Net Loss
REmRTS - OCT10Bm &
1916.
I be to report that during the nnnt,hs of October ard Noverber I
dealt a large mnber of outbreaks of Boab Thich occurred at
the shipping Ports of Dundalk and Greenore. In all there were over
380 sheep detained and with the exception of one lot of ten sheep (one
of Thioh was affected) all of the ani.nzls came from outside the Caanty.
The did not orl#nate In County Louth but, was detected in the
sheep when they vere brou@t Into the Ports for shipment,. When the
disease (sheep goab) Is found to exist It Is duty to detain the sheep
and to serve notloe of detention on the owner.
I have then to gee to
sheep (both affected ones) dipped on two oooaslons Within
ten days and to perlodlo Inspections of them In the meantime; This
especially In the oase of sheep at Greenore means an enormug
amount of work and is brought about by diseased sheep being taken
Co. Louth and over Thioh I om have %ßously no control, and for whose
is unfair that I should be
oompelled to deal with anlmls Thich have oontraoted disease in
Counties and which are allowed to be out of the districts vhæe the
disease originates.
I would respectfully ask your Council .to autb±lse
me (If It Is within their power to do so) to have diseased sheep gent
back from the Ports t, o the district from Thioh they came. I am one of
tht very few Veterinary Inspectors In Ireland who have two big shipping
Mr REPORT.
I beq to report that I exulned the usual fairs and markets held In
Ardee No. i District for the month of Novanber. Pranois Re111y,Bohemaamre
ill : nv opinion from swine fever. I examined the and In
W. MAXVELL
t/zæ
zar_
e--pz-Z<WZM
O'D'C-Z---
c-n-Zde<70z-7üe-eo
accu
ccZ»V
ze,ee-nÉ
z/U/vzzq
z-;eceazeæ4
-- _*vyæ
aac-/o uzze—
—MCevæAf
aczUJze;ee4zfz—
w-aM
No .1763/17.
Sir ,
Dopartmmt, of Agriculture and
reeled-oal Instraot,ion for Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch) ,
DUBLIN.
31st July, 1917.
I have to the roc o? your letter of 27th instant,
relativo to tho oase of llaxroll, Veterinary Inspector for tho area
oonvrised vrithdn tho Rural District of Ardoo 110.1, who has ceased to
oonpl;r with the condition o+iginally attaching to appointment Which
required 111m to reside vrithin that
is observed that tho County Council, as tho Local Authority
under tho Diseases of Ar&nals Acts, haeo oonsoquently declared the
position vacant, and I havo to say tlz+o tho Dopartment vrill not, in the
oircurnst*anoes, wit,hhold thoir approval o? ayv notice given in accordance
with Officers of Local Authorities (Ireland) Order of 1899 deterrd-ning
the appointnnpnt
I havo also to say that, should the action above indicated result
a: decision on Mamrellf s part, to roslde again in tho District and on
tho part of the Local Authority to reappoint him, the Department would be
prepared to approve of gaoh on the former conditiong .
hovrover, a new appointment has to bo Æde tho Department, having rogard
to the present need of the Amv for Veterinary Surgeons, would be able
to approve only of a oandidate who could slow that he vras not, eligible
for the Army Veterinary Corps.
dzezZ _UavzeeCÉ/uz1Zezzzæzz/G<.
Dundalk
2nch August, 1917.
Dear Sir
William E. Maxwell, Veterinary Surgeon, one of tho Inspectors
appointed undor tho Diseases of Alinals Aot has instructed rno that his
services have been dispensed Vith by the County Council of Louth vrlthout
any justification and in face of tho fact, that no dereliction o? duty on
his part had boon alloged or attempted to bo proved, and that tho Notice
of tho meeting at vrhioh this illegal action vras taken not given to
such reasonable tino as to cnable him to attond.
Would you please gend no •a copy of the agroonont under vrh±oh the
conditions of s appointment vroro doff-nod, and also of any
Di-nutos rocorring to his discharqo, vrith the nanos of tho proposer- and
seconder on each occasion, in order to enable 2110 to advise client,.
Cho g o ,
Louth County
I aan, SIT,
Your obedient Servant ,
T. P. GILL,
go
C oun cil ,
Yours ,
T. P. COFFEY.
The geercta-cr,
Louth County Council ,
Ze-z«veJ-zCJ-t/uU_
Dundalk ,
August 1st 1917.
1917
Dear Sir
I enclose returns on forms 3 and 4
as they sinvr I have
dealt Vith six outbreaks of scab during tho month and a total of 541——
sheep. Fifty one sheep have boon slaughtered. Tho rmaad.ndcr havo been
dipped and the necessary steps taken rogarding det ention, eto.
Your obedient, Servant ,
_CæueM
Ø/zvznzåzc
t/uz
un -- umaui////7
ZLtaz;Z 4UzV±mmÆzc-—
/17.
Department of Agriculture and
Teemioal Instmotion for Ireland
22nd August, 1917.
th- reference to. your letter of 17th instant the Louth
Council at æeting on t,lE previous day had passed a resolution
Mr Oron D. Neary, Vetorlnaey Inspector for tho rural
t of Ardee Noel I have to direct attention $0 the Department t s letter
31st ultimo, anh to state the Department are prepared to approve
appointment of Mr Neary if it can be shown he Is not eligible for
as a comdssioned officer In the Arrv Veterinary Corps.
Slould It
however, that, Mr Neary is eligible for mployment in that capacity
artment vrill be unable to approve of his appointment as Veterinary
or to your Looal Autlnrit,y pending the teminat,ion o? war.
ter oase the Department, consider that, proper course for the Council
is to nake a tenporary arrangement for the discharge of the
ry Inspection duties in the Ardee district by the Inspectors of the
r districts of the County Louth, Mr Donnelly and Clinton these
rs dividing the dutiég between and to reserve the questlon of
t s a ointment, until after the var. The Department Till be prepared
o ion
s arrangement.
oretary ,
uth County Counon.
I am, Sir,
Your obed1Zit Servant ,
T. P. GILL,
Se cretary.
Keel/
01923/17.
Department of Agricnlture and
Teohioal Instruction for Ireland
Diblin, August, 1917.
With refermoe to. your letter of 17th Instant Intirrzting tint, the Louth
nt4Y Council at t,lelr on t,lE previous d4Y had passed a resolution
oint,ing Owon D. Neary, Veterinazy Inspector for tho rural
strict of Ardee Noel I have to direo?. attention bo the Department t s letter
the 31st ultimo, anh to state tlBt the Department are prepared to approve
t, lb appointrent of Neary if it. can be shown is not eligible for
ervlce as a connissioned officer In t,hø Arrv Veterinary Corps.
ppen, however, that Mr Neary Is eligible for æployment in that, capacity
he Department v.åll be unable to approve of his appointment as Veterinary
speotor to your Looal Autnnritjy pending the temination of war.
he latter oase the Department, consider that, tho proper course for the Council
o adopt Is to nake a tenporary orrangement for the discharge of tho
terinary Llspect,ion duties in the district, by the Inspectors of tho
o ot,yer districts of the County Louth, Mr Donnelly and Clinton these
ibers dividing the dutiég between t,h€m; and to reserve the questlon of
Neary' s a oint,nznt until after the var. The Department vrill be prepared
sanction
s arrangement.
e
Secretary ,
Louth County CounOü.
I arn, Sir,
Your obed1QtJ Servant ,
m. P. GILL,
ge cretary.
u; mznz2nCu///
Donnellyt g Report .
Gentlemen,
Daring the month of August, I had one oase of sheep scab In my (E strict,
and I have had all t,he sheep on the premises dipped four md hope to
be able to rennve restrictions on the farm shortly.
I rnde Inspections in one or tvo instances o? ani-EBIs reported to me
personally, but nono of the oases were the animals suffering from my of
the notifiable diseases.
Yours respe ctfully,
Secretary,
Louth County Council.
Clint,ont s Report.
Dandalk, 31st August, 1917.
Dear Sir,
During the month of August I dealt with seven fresh outbreaks of
b Involving 231 sheep. The rzjorlty of these consisted of sheep sent
to Dundalk for shipment, from other districts outside County Louth. &enty-
I bad cases vero slaughtered and all the remainlæ sheep dipped twice
I have vÆthdravm restrictions In the case of
under supervision.
Parkst sheep, and those of P. Hoey, Merohes.
Yours truly,
ez¯za
LZ¯/ae
Wzzz-Uænc%eazc/J/i
V-ffvze/+-nvz/
f/ze/
-me-VN
Mzu/vcåmJ/å//øÄÉJ
INSECTORS.
Clintont s Report.
I bæ to report that I have visited the fairs and nzrket,s in
district durirz t 1B month of December. No case of Infeotloug
disease ooourred during the month. Suspected sheep scab occurred
on the farm of P. EIIs, Jenldngtovm, but on visit,11Z the place and
examining the flook of sheep, I found that sheep scab did not exist,
there.
Mr Dönnell.yts Report,.
During the month of Decanber 1917, I had two outbreaks of sheep
scab in t he district. One oase occurring at Drogheda Port and
the animals coring in from Coe Meath, ard the other oase occurring
I have furnished
on a farm at Listoke, near Dr#eda.
Secretary with full particulars of each the usual
official forms.
A. DOmEILY.
To Louth County Council,
Executive CommLtt,eo.
c.o-t.o,o
a/voe-Jz%deÆ
—JÄJ¯Ä_
///f aZr/ZØc2c+4Z74 my
a—nd/'
C t/tn
kra'zzo-V<4-ez-Z4/-
zn-v<_
avec
—U/cwdwqMuLd4n%/7/f,
d-e.CdeZ4-rzzduz—
tlz
an-Z—_
neczzeeU/-eÆ
_VH&/D
f&aaaz--;
CeuZ-,C
tk.ec<æzae/fivQ-
cDmnccz7
decuÆeJ<ttZz.å
4-2tvC--c.ceZ--.»
azaz.
aet-ZeæZL<_
æ-zzZ_---
a-ccz-z-dv;vfM
_a.//v/b4'Cfzr-aL
ZU-e-U4 aM
_ztz.gUa-t
u-ecZ aa
wabvf
%-cJU0/4zä
72--0
aeaeLf'za+-
z--r-v
Aec4e; 74
VIZ
_cznCH Oi
LV/¯ CCMM(-——
d--nL
4>-4.0 a--
0--n_-z—
/CtJ //
t/ua%
B-'•z-z-•'

__zv_v.v;_
amena
/Wåo
a-ncC
@-zto
zmzccz--az&
PALO —
o-oCo /
_UÄJ
set
ISeA-ø 44.0 -uuceqcto
0-6 toc_eew-æe-e
CAc•Ä
Co-wo
10
I •30 0' Cloc—
(P. n' gec jp
9 _ P- LN. loop-odom
51 d
ro IT-...e
Oeo.voo-n•,
_væ_cPu
316 ft-YT Covazo. Co. cC%ev-.
slö•.J.-cd
fcsT
1+1' 316
Cw.cl cac
cctxcvwctz
ccnd O-maovtv
low} YecvCo 0+ße-•tCCd to cm,'wp«_
cuned
acoc.y&Co . cu
t/.æt
_H--&IJ
I QI Ch SRevfr 30 cu..cl Sktcß
Rc&-rto
HcøatL0
160'& 1 C/20 • cu
J+ 30 0
9)cdA.ek 'Pe/:e, Jv-t& L•o,
H c [+0--oc(o
vvaa.io [BJ
(L IC,æI•
Cma-e scoJ3
tk.c
JbD 'u
d
IAtco doucAd Co Co
A-eeevÅt cyl J
cu- o•-vCc
.1
6.0 eca Li
cX 110 IO-I'
30-å+
wot -1920 0-6
Jo-uu-
QAd-cc ccw.ct /hCÆsdQ2
5b eoccq•eo
cu Cvo-o
'l- [Gou
ICA.e
ecu
f $ Y 2 OVI
351.
SR/oeuÄÜeo.deaU,
J+ It..-uo
p/Qecd Itu
æo to nrcxcje„o
ate,' Qadu
CCu
to foo ccø
- cuc,.d 3
CO (CAJ
40--0
Co-tu«pJ
384
Co 0'clock.
p loptt--•d,'
LO.vccTpkgm___
ao_ftead
, Ce•-cc.ncc-t$
to e-m of
and-a:- f2ftæC--gce 9'Ø'41A'Cfee
Pro an
IS-aef NS $ev-cclh
B. r-10.
P--te•ø--occ.o Co
OVAC&JWo:-
MA 01
Co
(lu g.øc,a.J
Avø-e.eecl
I-A-cC&-cuaca
Ce-wcf J{ö-wuc, 1320
4'V4Ccu04.4L•a 9C/Qu.cuw,
cuRa.s_
2ka
rc..-k.-.ø„ cvo•ct S
€ke-v-Ced
-ke SIA-e-#- Sccv6. pæ.•.-kco.-JQxø
6-6 'e Slated t-,aÜ
been hÖ0
'RCPs cac
kcR.L4 Lü•o.J
PJ&f.v f
ceweø
co
LASQAe
- caQ_ccl
e-vtCAt
Aftcw•dc.d s tAa-/ 0-6
to
ctcQCZU a-cc-e-rcl
—l
CCu
0-6 ae
ad
O-LR-Qo.-t«,
(IRo.u6 /Uftu-RQd
cu-x CAQ
All
1
Ocu-.clALR
Pela
P tBJ+odo, P
n,AC Cd
et cl.g
k.a.å-.zs,
e.f&'vhahd Co.,
ttv Co.-€uæcct
_'eæoeæ.o
h-.aÄc aacQe
A-e--q,..zvt. Lö It-ck
L•eac
ft.-eat 0-6
ahh
o-V+Üect OJ •
'P Vd. OC-q.ee
See-ft-VI -
d Ilu.aot.o 0--0
{mdA.J
••r¯Ü'T.
291-9K
Ocea
. P. Léo-odo ß.
c Small S
fc.o,t
O. OÄÆe_
J+caRcCoeo
— 'x kæ—b
0-6
OJI CLJ
Pcaovcs
_læavo to
L•ovo to
CO ACQ-
L•ø.ff.ø ø,--v.-r, LOA-.O
t.•.eæø
3e.ÆA-aÄß
91+ 91 d
Rocca
Io-6-odo
Sec«cq-
_—uoe/
fte tee
ycawdußtuo
"egr

zJ/cu/o
au
Meea r , '
94
heaulc @2Y/-/u»
00
'.Ce•e
oy.-ncC
.•-øarue..t
IA..nonL•Je..1äoUd..6 Q e e
e-z c.wCv•o-e —6
ovo—8-o..u
run
NhÄ..2
260
/927
4-1
/929—
and 'z
'kp—C-o
au
.=eev/æø
aJ8




