



z/aa.
"4 M 4/44/ //
E-----Æ44--h
Sze/
4--EÆ f/
ZZ-zee" z-e-ø-„zz t/
97
/Ö4<ß-n
44
/fa-Ü '
744/054 :
h-h-ø-"5-3/
C-e...a—ee—.-- V
a--c---v•-v-e-•
czaæz
/Z-5?æg/i-2'
zsz-zæ
zz zÆ--L4/Zz-,z
Z%m-Z4 4"
Z--&44-»;
Ze-Æ
ÆZzZÄ
--44M
f--sf/4/R.
r--&ZZ//,' e Z,t-Z2pf
//74.-ß,gZ_.
7/ æß-ø--z
//45'-*-Z
423--2
4øt/ can; /'Æ
"-F--"-7ß
æ„4-F


Z/ 2m.4Z7
2/4„d7 // < Z"
ZWzz-p
444M
44--0
44-—4.4/
øzZ-Ü
/-eezzÆeZ
Ä4F---F-æ-v'Z
*3--34 ÆUÄ2eZ„z--ÄFE
4/43
ßMv" 8-3
Szp--ez
r--$ÆA
—'Zee""
4m-øø-7Z/
64—-1 '
; 4 ZZ-he'
/-ZFM

¯/mz MA f--Z-m-æm;-
JØÄpæt-/
74-2/-7
COUNTY OF LOUTH.
SHEEP SCAB.
COMPULSORY DIPPING OF SHEEP.
The County Louth County Council being the Local Authority of the County
of Louth, by virtue and in exercise of the powers conferred on them by the Diseases
of Animals Acts, 1894 to 1903, and the Sheep Scab (Local Regulations) (Ireland)
Order of 1905, and of every other power enabling them in this behalf, do hereby
make the following Regulations
COMMENCEMENT AND EXTENT OF REGULATIONS.
1.—These Regulations shall come into operation on the ISt August, 1906, and
shall apply to the County of Louth, hereinafter called The County."
COMPULSORY DIPPING OF ALL SHEEP IN THE COUNTY.
In each year during which these Regulations are in operation the owner
of any sheep which may be in the County between the following dates, viz., ISt August
and 31st October, and between ISt April and 30th June, hereinafter referred uto as
the " prescribed dipping periods," shall cause such sheep to be treated for sheep-scab
between such dates by effective dipping in an efficient sheep-dip : provided that
sheep shall not be required to be dipped in pursuance of these Regulations when ,
they are moved by railway through the District of the Local Authority, or any
part thereof, from a place outside the District to another place outside the District,
without unnecessary delay and without the sheep being untrucked within the District.
(2) If the owner of any sheep in the County fails to treat such sheep in accordance
with this Article, the Local Authority may at any time, without prejudice to the
recovery of any penalty for such default, cause such sheep to be treated for sheep-scab
by effective dipping in any efficient sheep-dip, and may recover summarily the ex-
penses of such treatment from such owner.
N0T1cE TO LOCAL AUTHORITY OF TIME AND PLACE OF INTENDED DIPPING.
3.—(1) For the purpose of enabling the Local Authority to be represented at
the dipping whenever they think such a course desirables the owner or person in
charge of any sheep required to be dipped under the preceding Article, shall give
2
such written notice of his intention to dip his sheep as is hereinafter provided :—
The notice shall be delivered or sent by post to Veterinary Inspector
of the District or other authorized officer.
The notice shall be sent or delivered at such time as to be received by
the Inspector or other authorized officer three clear days, at least, before
the intended time of dipping.
The notice shall state the time and place of the intended dipping, and the
approximate number of sheep intended to be dipped.
(2) If from any cause the dipping of the sheep on the date specified in a notice
becomes further notice shall be required if the sheep are dipped
as soon after such date as is practicable.
ROYAL IRISH CONSTABULARY.
In conformity with the instructions given by the Inspector General Royal Irish
Constabulary the Police of this County will render assistance to the Local Authority
as follows :—
(1) Receiving notices given by owners of sheep as to the time' and place of
intended dipping, and transmitting them to whatever address the Local Authority
nay desire ; the expense for postage to be defrayed by the Local Authority.
(2) Satisfying themselves while on patrol that the dipping is being carried out ;
and by reporting to the Local Authority any cases of neglect or failure to carry out
the Regulations which may come under their notice. The Police will not be
required to superintend the actual process of dipping with the view of seeing that
it is properly performed. •
(3) Reporting any cases which may come under their notice of movements of
sheep from a sheep-dipping area in contravention of the Regulations.
(4) Receiving declarations which owners of sheep may be required by the
Regulations to furnish at the conclusion of dipping, and transmitting them to what-
ever address the Local Authority may desire.
(5) Furnishing to the Local Anthority, prior to the commencement -of the sheep-
dipping period which may be fixed in the Regulations, a list, by townlands, of the
names and addresses Of persons having sheep in each Constabulary sub-district.
SHEARING BEFORE DIPPING.
4.—A sheep shall not be deemed to have been dipped in accordance with the
requirements of Article 2 unless it has been previously shorn prior to the dipping
in the year of dipping, but this Regulation shall not apply to lambs less than twelve
months old.
DECLARATION AFTER DIPPING.
5.=-Every owner of sheep to which these Regulations apply or his authorized
Agent shall, within one week after the conclusion of each of the prescribed dipping
/,ø47
3
periods, send by post or deliver to the Clerk of the Local Authority a Declaration
in the Form A set forth in the Schedule I. hereto, or to the like effect, of his having
dipped all sheep owned by him within the County in accordance with these
Regulations.
ISOLATION OF SHEEP.
sheep after having beendipped as aforesaid during either of " the prescribed
dipping periods " shall for the remainder of that period be kept isolated as far as
practicable from any other sheep which have not been so dipped.
MOVEMENT TO MARKET DURING DIPPING PERIODS.
7.—During the prescribed dipping periods in any year no sheep shall enter or be
exposed for sale in •any market, fair, or saleyard within the County, nor be moved
along or across a highway for that purpose unless such sheep has been previously
dipped in that year in accordance with these Regulations.
CLEANSING or DIPPING PLACES.
8.—The place on any farm or premises which has been used for the dipping shall
without unnecessary delay be thoroughly cleansed by the occupier, and all tufts
of wool shall be gathered and disinfected or destroyed by him.
SAMPLES OF DIP MAV BE TAKEN.
9.—Every owner or person in charge of sheep being dipped under these Regulations
shall permit and give every facility to an Inspector of the Local Authority to take
samples of the dip used.
CERTIFICATES OF DIPPING.
10.—Where •under these Regulations, sheep are dipped in the presence, and to
the satisfaction, of an Inspector of the Local Authority or other authorized offcer,
he shall give the owner or person in charge of the sheep a certificate to that effect,
on a Form to be provided by the Local Authority.
INTERPRETATION.
ll.—ln these Regulations, unless the context otherwise requires, " Efficient Sheep-
dip " has the same meaning as in the Sheep-Scab (Ireland) Order of 1905.
' Owner " includes joint owner.
" Sheep " includes lambs.
" Authorised Officer " means an officer authorised by the Local Authority for
the purposes of Articles 4 and 5 of the Sheep-Seab (Ireland) Order of 1905, or of these
Regulations.
T. F. FILGATE,
Clerk to the Local Authority.
Dated at County Louth County Council Offices,
this 16th day of July, 1906.
1
--4-27 zß—
//ø/--c7
22M' 4
such written notice
The notice
of the Distri
The notice
the Inspecto
the intended
The notice
approximate
(2) If from any ca
becomes impracticab
as soon after such d
In conformity wi
Constabulary the Poli
as follows :—
(1) Receiving noti
intended dipping, and
tnay desire ; the expe
(2) Satisfying them
and by reporting to
the Regulations whic
required to superinten
it is properly perform
(3) Reporting any
sheep from a •sheep-d
(4) Receiving decl
Regulations to furnis
ever address the
(5) Furnishing to t
dipping period which
names and addresses
4.—A sheep shall
requirements of Artic
in the year of dipping,
months old.
5.=-Every owner of
Agent shall, within on
4
NOTES.
USE OF DIPPING PLACES AND APPARATUS PROVIDED BY LOCAL AUT
Every owner may have the use of the dipping places and portable
as well as the necessary appliances and materials in connection therew
payment of the charges prescribed by the Local Authority) which haw
may hereafter be provided by the Local Authority, and a list of which al
in Schedule 11. hereto, and upon such terms and conditions as may be I
by •the Local Authority fro:n time to tine.
STREAMS NOT TO BE INJURIOUSLY AFFECTED.
No dipping place shall be used as aforesaid if such use will injuriously
water in any stream, reservoir, aqueduct, well, pond or place constructe
for the supply of water for drinking or other domestic purposes.
DISPOSAL OF USED DIP MATERIAL.
The liquid or material which has been used for dipping sheep must be
of into a pit or dealt with in some other available way so that all nece
cautions are taken to prevent any animals coming into contact with any s
liquid or material.
OFFENCES.
Any person not complying with any of the above Regulations is gu
offence against the Diseases of Animals Act, 1894, s. 52, and is liable to
(i.) A fine not exceeding L20.
(ii.) If relating to more than 4 animals, 15 for each animal, and to imp
in default of payment.
SHEEP DIP.
It is important that all owners of Sheep should see that the dip to be
sufficient strength.
e/-Zm-æ-"
zM4z
Y-z-eez-$--d
,zzzM
44
Zw /L-z ZZ-4-Ä/a--zC
2/4447
/6--Æe-vZøf
e zoe
Ya—24,
424-9
'-W Z/ h-z-n-z¯
ZZ-HE.
674 zr4uz/
77
23-4B
Me-Nd-a."
ZZ-pz4c-Zz--"
zFzß4'
For Ardee
JAMES MEADE, Ardee.
For Drogheda District—
JAMES OBRIEN, Castlelumney, Dunleor
For Dundalk (Southern Division)—
'THOMAS M'ARDLE, Rathiddv,
Knockbridge.
And for tho Northern Division—
OWEN KEENAN, Aghamoon, Jenkinstown
Dundalk.
Owners of •Sheep must give three clear
days notice, in writing, stating time dnd
place of their intention to have Sheep dipped
to any of the above-mentioned persons or to
the nearest Police Station.
The following scale of charges has been
decided upon to persons who intend having
their Sheep dipped in the County Council
Tanks, viz : —
All Sheep, Excepting Scotch, Horned and
Mountain lid. each, and their Lambs one
W-penny each.
Scotch, Horned, or Mountain Sheep, ope
penny each, and their Lambs one half-penny
MZC4Z
o-z-Z%
28
LOUTH
County Council.
COMPULSORY
Dipping of •Sheep.
NOTICE is hereby given that the Exocu.
tive Committee of this Council at their
Meeting held on Wednesday, the 15th ingt.,
have appointed the under-mentioned persons
to take charge of the Sheep Dipping Tanks in
the respective Rural Districts as follows
For Ardee District-—
JAMES MEADE, Ardee.
For Drogheda District—
JAMES O'BRIEN, Castlelumney, Dunleer
For Dundalk (Southern Division*
THOMAS WARDLE, Rathiddv,
Knockbridge.
And for the Northern Division—
OWEN KEENAN, Aghameen, Jenkinstown
Dundalk.
Owners of 'Sheep must give three clear
days notice, in writing, stating time and
placed their intention to have Sheep dipped
to any of thO above-mentioned persons or to
the nearest Police Station.
The following scale of charges hog been
decided upon to persons who intend having
their Sheep dipped in the County Council
Tanks, viz :—
All Sheep, Excepting Scotch, Horned and
Mountain lid. each, and their Lambs one
A-penny each.
Scotch, Horned, or Mountain Sheep, one
penny each, and their Lambs one half-penny
each.
By order.
T. F. FILGATE,
Sec. Co. Council.
Dated this 18th August, 1906.

4-2M/ 2MF
5--47
g--Z,I

J324-cø z4mO
Z.ce„-nV
Zøt4
/6-F4-,.mp-zZ
Ze/ Me-ZZ

/fa7
CIRCULAR TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES IN IRELAND UNDER
DISEASES OF ANIMALS ACTS.
Telegrams: "VETRAM, DUBLIN."
Any communication on thi3 subjeet should be
addressed to
THE SECRETARY,
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
AND TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION
FOR IRELAND,
(VETERINARY BRANCH),
13, UPPER MERRION-ST., DUBLIN.
And tho Number and Date Of this letter should
bc quoted.
No. 1118/07, V. B,
SIR,—
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND
TECKNICAI, INSTRUCTION FOR IRELAND
(VETERINARY BRANCH),
13, UPPER MERRION STREET,
DUBLIN,
March, 1907.
.4
The Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for Ireland
desire to revert to the important question of Sheep Dipping, and to make the
following further statement, for the information pf your Local Authority.
During the year 1906 action on a comprehensive scale was for the first time
taken with a view to enforce sheep dipping generally in Ireland, and, as a re-
sult, considerable and, on the whole, gratifying progress was made in the
matter owing to the energetic way in which the majority of the Local
Authorities carried out measures regulating dipping in their respective dis-
tricts.
A defect which revealed itself, however, in connection with the system of
local regulations was that a somewhat wide diversity existed in regard to the
dipping periods prescribed in the counties in which these regulations wa•e in
force ; and at the last meeting of the Council of Agriculture It was urged that
a reform in this respect would in future years be desirable.
With that view the Department are fully in accord, and, having given
much consideration to the question of how best to achieve the desired uni-
formity in the matter, the conclusion to which they have been led is that one
general Sheep Dipping Order for Ireland, prescribing the same dipping period
for the entire country and fixing the requirements to be observed in connec-
tion with the dipping during that period, affords the simplest and most effec-
tive solution of the diffculty.
The Department, moreover, have been informed by the Board of Agriculture
and Fisheries for Great Britain, whose compulsory Sheep Dipping Orders
have been extended to the whole of England, Wales, and Scotland, tha
adoption of a single Sheep Dipping Order for Ireland on lines relat.
on which the British Orders have been framed will, as will be explaine'
subsequent, paragraph of this circular, enable that Board materially to facilitate
the admission of Irish sheep to the leading Cross-Channel Markets, a con-
cession which will be a very important advantage to the Irish Sheep in-\
dustry.
Moved by these considerations the Department have, accordingly, made the
Order of which copies are now enclosed, entitled the Sheep Dippiig (Ireland)
Order of 1907, the principal provisions of which may be summarised as
follows :—
The Order extends to the whole of Ireland. (Article I).
The dipping period prescribed under the Order is from 15th June to 31st August
inclusive. (Article 2).
Dipping is to be carried out by thorough immersion in an approved sheep dip.
(Article. 3).
Exemption from dipping will obtain
(i.) in instances where the Local Authority, for some satisfactory special cause, see
fit to grant, conditionally or otherwise, a written exemption, and
(ii.) in the case of sheep slaughtered durin the dipping period which have been kepb
pei (Article 4).
separate from sheep already dip
The obligation as to dipping is cast on the owner or person in charge of sheep who, in
order that the Local Authority mays if they so wish, be represented at the dipping, is
required to give fiv.e clear days' notice to the Police of his intention to dip. (Article 5).
The Clerk
of each Local Authority.
2
During the prescribed dipping period sheep carinat enter or bé exposed foi• sale in any
Market, Fair, or Sole-yard in Ireland unless accompanied by a Declaration (made by the
owner of the sheep or his agent, on a prescribed Form) that they have been dipped during
thot period. In the case, however, of sheep exposed for sale during the first twenty-
eight days of the prescribed dipping period, this requirement will be satisfied if the
I)eclaration indicates that they have been dipped within twenty-eight days of their
movement to the Fair, Marketi or Sale-yard. (Article 6).
Clipping before dipping is required in the case of all éheep and of lambs Over
•nine months old. (Article 7).
Isolation of dipped from undipped sheep is required to be carried out as far as practica-
ble during the dipping period. (Article 8).
The occupier of a farm or holding on which sheep are kept is required, within fourteen
days after the close of the dipping period, to furnish a Declaration as to the dipping of the
sheep to the Police on a prescribed Form. (Article 9).
Special powers are given for dealing with cases of neglect to dip. (Article 11).
Subject to certain provisos the Local Authority may provide, fit up, and maintain
dipping places. (Article 14).
The Local Authority are empowered also, where they think fit, to regulate, by notice,
the time and place of dipping in particular cases. (Article 15).
The execution and enforcement of the Order in each district and the provision of all
necessary Forms for the purpose will rest with the Local Authorities. (Article -18).
Other subsidiary provisions relate to—
Extension of time for dipping of sheep landed in Ireland towards the close of
the dipping period. (Article 5 (2)).
Allowing sheep which it is found impracticable to dip on the date firstproposed
in the owner's notice of intention to dip to be dipped as soon as practicable
afterwards without further notice. (Article 5 (5)).
Certificates of dipping. (Article 10).
Cleansing of dipping places. (Article 12).
Power to take samples of dip. (Article 13).
Obligation of persons moving sheep, where a Declaration or Licence is necessary,
to produce such Declarations or Licences and furnish names and addresses.
(Article 16).
Powers of entry of Inspectors. (Article 17).
'OffenCes against the Order. (Article 19).
Interpretation of the Order and short title. (Articles 20 and 21).
Forms for use under the Order are set forth in the Schedule thereto.
In the main, the provisions of the Order do not differ substantially from
the regulations which many Local Authorities had framed last year. Conse-
quently, it may be anticipated that little difficulty will be experienced in
•giving efia?t to the Order in the coming season.
The Constabulary, though they cannot act as Inspectors, will assist in the
working of the Order in the following ways, viz. :—
(a) By sending on to the Clerk of the Local Authority, or to such other officer of the
Local Authority as the Local Authority may direct, any notices of intention to
dip received by the Police from sheep-owners under Article 3 of the Order,
and any Declarations as to dipping received under Article 9 of the Order ;
(b) By satisfying themselves while on patrol that the dipping is being carried out, and
by reporting to the Local Authority any cases of neglect or failure to comply
with the Order which may come under their notice. The Police will not be
required to superintend the actual process of dipping, with the view of seeing
that it is properly performed j
(c) By reporting any cases which may come under their notice of movements of sheep
in contravention Of the Order ;
(d) By furnishing to the Local Authority, prior to the commencement of the sheep-
dipping period, a list, by townlands, of the names and addresses of persons
having sheep in 'each Constabulary sub-district; and
(e) By keeping at the Police Barracks stocks of Forms (which the Local Authority
should provide) for purposes of Declaration under Articles 6 and 9 of the Order
respectively, and issuing such Forms to persons calling to obtain them.
The enforcement by the Local Authorities of this general Order. will render
it unnecessary for them to put in operation Regulations on their own behalf
in regard to a Summer dipping, but it is hoped that many Local Authorities
will consider it advantaceous to supplement the requirements of the Order by
prescribing for their own districts an additional , or later dipping. In this'
connection it may be recalled that, as a result, of their consideration of the
•matter in May, 1906, the Council of Agriculture recommended two dippings
annually. The Department have not, however, felt that it would be suitable
at present to lay down rigid • requirements in regard to a second dipping
by means of a general Order.
3
In consideration of the adoption of the enclosed general Sheep Dipping
Order for this country the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries have agreed
to modify the Market Regulations applying to the Scotland and North of
England area (to which by far the largest proportion of the sheep exported
from Ireland are sent), and to allow Irish sheep to be exposed in these
markets during the Market Regulation period, lasting from after 1st September
until 12th November, on the strength merely ofa Declaration that the animals
have been landed from Ireland after the 31st August. This requirement, it
will be perceived, will impose no trouble whatever on the farmer selling his
sheep in an Irish Fair or Market for exportation to Scotland or the North
of England. In the case of sheep sent to the Welsh Dipping area, which at
present comprises the whole of Wales (excepting Carnarvon) and Monmoutil,
and where the Market Regulation period commences on 2nd August,
the same concession as in the Scotland and North of England area will apply
to sheep landed in the Welsh dipping area after the 319t August. For the
month of August, however, sheep sent to markets in the Welsh area
Nill require to be accompanied by a Declaration that they have been dipped
.on or smce the 3rd July, and particulars of the dipping must be stated in the
Declarations In the portion of England not affected by the Orders already
mentioned there will be no restriction on exposure in the Markets of sheep
from Ireland. In the case of Carnarvon and of any other part which may be
for the time being subject to the Sheep-Seab (Compulsory Dipping Areas) Order
of 1906, provision will be made för direct movement through the area of sheep
landed froin Ireland in the area, but in other respects Irish sheep in the area
will not be specially exempted from the requirements of the Order.
The Department do not doubt that it will generally be recognised that
It will be a
the arrangements above outlined possess decided advantages.
considerable benefit to stock-owners throughout Ireland to have the regula-
tions respecting the admission of sheep to British markets simplified to the
extent which will now be the case. The application of uniform sheep dipping
requirements in Ireland will also be in accord with the view repeatedly
expressed by agriculturists ; and the Department trust that your Local
Authority will do all that may be practicable to give full effect to the Order
throughout their district. With this end in view they should arrange to have
supplies of the Forms indicated in the Schedule to the Order printed for local
use. Small supplies of Forms A, E, and F will be suffclent, but larger
quantities of B, C, and D will be needed. As has previously been indicated,
stocks of B and C should be supplied to the Police Stations for the convenience
-of sheep-owners.
The Department propose to have a large stock printed of a Notice briefly
drawing attention to the requirements of the Order, which could be posted
up extensively, for the information of farmers, within a month or so before
the commencement of the prescribed dipping period, and they will be happy
to send a supply of these Notices to your Local Authority, for posting as
desired in their district, if they will kindly say how many are likely to be
required for this purpose.
Any officers whom the Local Authority have specially engaged for sheep
dipping duties may be formally appointed bv them as Inspectors under the
enclosed Order.
The Department hope also that any Local Authority who have not yet
taken steps as regards the provision of dipping apparatus to facilitate dippmg
in their district will now consider anew the propriety of so doing.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Secretary.
A. T. & co. (Ltd.)
son 34.) 3. 1907.—1GS67
Cia htc-IL-udo
e-4C
7tea/te-e/ET
(.P•'L-e-c-ØC '-L.C
Xuz---a;v
the re
quent
givin
The
worki
The
it unne
in rega
will co
prescri
connect
•matter
annuall
at prese
by mean
C--e.,t—
6-0
44/0 a-Zac)
% m az-z/a
/'In-4«vnzø.)
(No. 82):
ORDER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE AND TECHNICAL
INSTRUCTION FOR IRELAND.
(DATED 20TH MARCK, 1907.)
(IRELAND) ORDER OF
1907.
The Department of Agriculture and Technical
Instruction for Ireland, by virtue and in exercise
of the powers vested in them under the Agricul-
ture and Technical Instruction (Ireland) Act,
1899, the Diseases of Animals Acts, 1894 to 1903,
and of every other power enabling them in this
behalf, do order, and it is hereby ordered, as
follows
Appiication of Order.
This Order applies to the whole of
Ireland, hereinafter referred to as the Dipping
.Area.
Prescribed Dipping Period.
2. The prescribed dipping period in the Dipping
Area shall in each year commence on the fifteenth
•day of June, and terminate on the thirty-fir'st day
of August.
Moie of Dipping Prescribed.
3. Where under this Order it is provided that
sheep are to be dipped, they shall be dipped_by a
thorough immersion in a sheep-dip approved by
the Department for sheep-scab by the Sheep-Scab
(Ireland) Order of 1905, or otherwise.
Exemptions jronu Dipping Requireneents.
4. The provisions of this Order which require
the dipping of sheep shall not apply to the fol-
lowing sheep :—
(id Sheep which, in the opinion of the Local
Aut ority of the district where they are kept,
it is impracticable or inexpedient to dip in
accordance with the req' irements of this Order,
on account of their being intended for exhibi-
tion or of any other special circumstances, and
which are accordingly exempted by an exemp-
tion signed by the Clerk of the Local Authority.
The exemption may be granted subject to con-
ditions as to subsequent dipping or otherwise.
A copy of. every exemption shall be sent to the
Department. The exemption shall be in the
Form A set forth in the Schedule hereto, or to
the like effect ;
(ii.) Sheep slaughtered in the Dipping Area
before the expiration of the period within which
their dipping is requn•ed under this Order, if kept
separate from sheep which have been already
dipped under the next following Article.
Annual Prescribed Dipping.
All sheep in the Dipping Area during
any part of the prescribed dipping period (except
those exempted by Article 4 of this Order) shall
be caused to be dipped within the Dipping Area
by the owner or person in charge thereof during
that period.
(2.) In the case of sheep moved into the
Dipping Area on or after the third day of August,
it shall be suffcient compliance with this Article
if the sheep ure dipped within twenty-eight days
after the movement.
(3.) For the purposes of enabling the Local
Authority to be represented at the dipping re-
quired by this Article, whenever they think such
a course desirable, the owner or person in charge
of any sheep required to be dipped shall give
such written notice of his intention to dip his
sheep as is hereinafter provided
(i.) The notice shall be delivered, or sent by
post, to the sergeant of police for the police
sub-district in which the sheep referred to in
such notice are located.
(ii.) The notice shall be sent or delivered at
such time as to be received by the sergeant,
of police five clear days, at least, before the
intended time of dipping.
(iii.) The notice shall state the time and place
of the intended dipping, and the approximate
number of sheep intended to be dipped
(4.) Notices received by the police under this
Article shall forthwith be transmitted by them
to the Clerk of the Local Authority or to such
other Officer of the Local Authority as the Locul
Authority may direct.
(5.) If from any cause the dipping of the sheep
on the. date specified in a notice becomes im-
practicable, no further notice shall be required if
the sheep are dipped as soon after such date as is
practicable.
Movement to Market during Prescribed,
Dipping Period.
6.—(1). During the prescribed dipping period in
any year, no sheep shall enter or be exposed for
sale in any market, fair, or saleyard in the
Dipping Area, unless such sheep shall have been
previously dipped in that year in accordance
with the requirements of this Order, and are
accompanied by declaration stating that they
have been so dipped, signed by the owner of the
sheep or his agent authorised in that behalf.
(2.) In the case of sheep moved to a market,
fair, or saleyard in the Dipping Area during
the first twenty-eight days of the prescribed
dipping period it shall be suffcient compliance
with the provisions of this Article if the sheep
shall have been dipped within twenty-eight days
preceding such movement.
(3.) Declarations under this Article shall be
in the Form B set forth in the Schedule hereto,
or to the like efiöct.
Clipping bejore Dippøng.
7. A sheep shall not be deemed to have been
dipped in accordance with the requirements of
this Order unless it has been previously clipped
in the current year, but this provision shall not
apply to lambs less than nine months old.
Isolation of Sheep after Dipping.
8. All sheep after having been dipped shall
during the remainder of the prescribed dipping
period be kept isolated, as far as practicable,
from sheep which have not been so dipped.
Annual Declaration after Prescribed Dipping
Period.
9. The occupier of a farm or holding in the
Dipping Area on which sheep are kept shall
personally, or by his agent authorised in that
behalf, within fourteen days after the expiration
of the prescribed dipping period, send, in each
year, a declaration as to the dipping of the sheep,
in the Form C set forth in the Schedule hereto,
2
or, to the like effect, to the sergeant of police
for the police sub-district in which the farm or
holding is situate, who shall. thereupon forward
such declaration to the Clerk Of the Local
Authority or to such other Ofhcer of tbe ßcal
Authority as the Local Authority may direct.
Certificates of Dipping.
10. Where, under this Order sheep are dipped
in the presence of an Inspector of the Local
Authority, he shall give the owner or person in
charge of the sheep a certificate to that effect
in the Form D set forth in the Schedule hereto
or to the like effect,
Restriction on Movement of Sheep not Dipped
withiu Prescribed Dipping Period.
11. Where arty sheep shall not have been
dipped as required by this Order an Inspector of
the Local Authority may, without prejudice to
any proceedings for the offence, serve the owner
or person in charge of the sheep aud the owner
or person in charge of any sheep then in contact
with the undipped sheep with a notice, in the
Form E set forth in the Schedule hereto, or to
the like effect, requiring the dipping of the sheep
described in the notice and prohibiting their
movement from the farm, holding, or other place
where they are at the time the notice is served
(except with a licence granted by an Inspector of
the Local Authority of the District) until all
the sheep shall have been dipped after the service
of the notice in the presence of an Inspector of
the Local Authority, or have been slaughtered,
and thereupon it shall be unlawful to move the
sheep in contravention of the notice.
Cleansing of Dipping Places.
12. The place on any farm or premises which
has been used for the dipping shall, without.un-
necessary delay, be thoroughly cleansed by the
occupier, and all tufts of wool gathered and dis-
infected or destroyed.
Samples of Dip may be taken..
13. Every owner or person in charge of sheep
being dipped under this Order shall permit and
give every facility to an Inspector of the Local
Authority or of the Department to take samples
of dip or material which is being or has been
used for the dipping of sheep.
Power to provide Dipping Places
14. The Local Authority may provide and fit
up and maintain dipping places, but subject to the
approval in writing by the Department of the site
of each dipping place ; provided that no dipping
place shall be used under this provision if its use
would injuriously affect the water in any streun,
reservoir, aqueduct, well, pond, or place con-
structed or used tor the supply of water for drink-
ing or other domestic purposes.
Power for Local Authority to regulate time and
place of Dipping in particular cases.
15. The Local Authority may in any case
where they think such procedure desirable serve
a notice on the owner or person in charge of any
sheep requiring that the sheep shall be dipped at
such time and place as is stated in the notice and
to the satisfaction of an Inspector of the Local
Authority, and the sheep shall thereupon be
dipped in accordance with the requirements of
such notice. The notice may be in the: Form r
set forth in the Schedule hereto, or to the like
effect.
Production of Declarations and Licences ; Names
and Addresses.
Any •person in charge of a sheep
being moved where under this Order a declaration
or licence is necessary, shall, on demand of a
Justice or of a constable, or of an Inspector or
•other offcer of the Department, or of a Local
Authority/ produce and show to him the declara-
tion or licence, if any, authorising the movement,
and shall allow iC to be read and a copy of or
extract from it to be taken by the person to
whom it is produced.
(2.) Any person so in charge shall, on demand
as aforesaid, give his name and address to the
Justice, or constable, or Inspector or other
officer
Powers of Entry oj Inspectors.
17. An Inspector of the Department, and au
Inspector of the Local Authority subject to
their direction, may for the purposes of this
Order enter any premises and examine any sheep
thereon.
Local Authority to enforce Order and provide
Forms.
The provisions of this Order shall be
executed and enforced by the Local Authority,
who shall also provide all Forms necessary in
connection with such execution and enforcement.
Offences.
i ) If a sheep is not dipped as required
by this Order, the owner and person in charge of
the sheep at the expiration of the period withirv
which its dipping is required by this Order•
shall, each accotding to and in respect of his own
acts and defaults, be deemed guilty of au otiénce
against the Act of 1894.
(2 ) If any person fail to give any notice or
send any deciaration required by this Order, or
falsely makes any declaration for the purposes of'
this Order, or offers or utters any such declaration
knowing the same to be falsely made, he shall
be deemed guilty of an offence against the Act of
1894.
(3.) If a sheep is moved in contcavention of
this Order, the owner of the sheep, and the
person in charge thereof, and the person causing,
directing, or permitting the movement, and the
person moving or conveyiug the sheep, and the
consignee or other person receiving or keeping
it knowing it to have been moved in contraven-
tiou as aforesaid, and the occupier of the place
from which the sheep is moved, shall, each accord-
ing to and in respect of his own acts and defaults,
be deemed guilty of an offence against the Act of
1894.
(4.) If a sheep is exposed for sale in uny
market, fair, or saleyard, in contravention of
this Order, the occupier of the premises where
the sheep is exposed, and the person exposing
the same, and the owner and person in charge of
the sheep and the purchaser thereof, knowing
the same to be exposed in contravention as afore-
said, shall, each according to and in respect of his
own acts and defaults, be deemed guilty of au
oflönce against the Act of 1894.
(5.) If a person in charge of a sheep being
moved, where under this Order a declaration or
licence is necessary, on demand made under this
Order, fails to give his true name and address, or
gives a false name or address, he shall be deemed
guilty of an offence against the Act of 1894.
(6 u a sheep is not isolated as required by
this er, the owner of the sheep, and the person
in charge thereof, and the occupier of the place
where the sheep is detained, shall, each according
to and in respect of his own acts and defaults,
be deemed guilty of an offence against the Act of
1894.
Interpretation.
20. In this Order, unless the context otherwise
Sheep includes lambs ;
Inspector includes Veterinary Inspector and
any person appointed by a Local Authority
to be their Inspector for the purposes of this
Order ;
Owner includes a joint owner ;
The Department means the Department of
Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland ;
The Act of 1894 means the Diseases of
Animals Act, 1894.
Other terms have the same meaning as in the
Act of 1894 and the Acts amending the same.
Short Title.
21. This Order may be cited as the SHEEP-
DIPPING (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1907.
Tn witness whereof the Department of
Agriculture and Technical Instruction
for Ireland havo hereunto set their
Official Seal this twentieth day of
March, nineteen hundred and seven.
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
SCHEDULE.
F0RM A.
(Article 4.)
Form of Ecemption.
SHEEP-DIPPING (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1907.
The undermentioned sheep are hereby exempted from the dipping requirements
Order on account of *
The exemption shall not extend beyond the current year.
The exemption is subject to the following conditions
(Signature)
Clerk of the Local Authority for the
[county of]
of
the
above
Dated
190
Here state ground of exemption.
t Insert Conditions (if any).
Number and Description of
Sheep exempted.
Particulars of Sheep Exempted.
Name and address of Owner of the Sheep.
A copy of this exemption is to be sent
Technical Instruction for Ireland (Veterinur»e
to the Secretary,
Ch), Dublin.
Department
of Agriculture and
FORM B.
(Article 6.)
Form o/ Declaration to gymnpany Sheep moved into a Market, Fair, or Saleyard during the
Form D.
(ARTICLE 10.)
CERTIFICATE AS TO DIPPING OF SHEEP.
Prescribed Dipping Period.
SHEEP. DIPPING (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1907.
in the [coup!y] Of
solemnly and sincerely declare—
@) that am the owner [or the agept authorised (or Ulis purpose of
of
iu the [county] of
undermentioned sheep ;
, do beveby
the owner) Che
SHEEP DIPPING (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1907.
No.
I, the undersigned, being an Inspector of the Local Authority,
do hereby certify that the under-
of the [County] of
mentioned sheep were this day thoroughly dipped in an efficient
sheep-dip in my presence and to my satisfaction.
(b) that the said sheep were dipped in the present year in accordance with the provisions of the
above-mentioned Order, by the person[sj specified in this declaration.
(c) that the statements contained in this declaration are within my own knowledge ; or
(d) that the statements contained in this declaration are based on ipformation furnisbed to me
by*
Number and
Description
of Sheep.
Dated,
Marks or
Brands on
Sheep.
Name or Descri tion Name Of
of Place an
Owner
Premises where
of Sheep.
Sheep were Dipped.
Description
of Dip.
• Here insert particulars Ofsource of information.
Number and Description of(Sheep.
Name and Address of Personis] by
Date of Dipping.
whom the Sheep have been pped.
De'oription of Dip used.
(Signed),
Dated
190
FORM C.
(Article 9.)
Iji
Annual Declaration as to Dipping of Sheep.
SHEEP-DIPPING (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1907.
being
the occupier of the farm or holding known as
do hereby certify
that all sheep which were on the said farm or
holding on the thirty-first day of August
last (except such as were exempt from the
(Signed A.B.
requirements of the above Order), have been
dipped by thorough immersion in a sheep dip
approved by the Department of Agriculture and
Technical Instruction for Ireland for sheep-scab.
The particulars of such dipping are stated below,
and I further certify that such particulars are,
to the best of my knowledge and belief, correct.
(Signed) A. B.
(or A.B. by his duly authorised. agent C.D.)
CERTIFICATE OF DIPPING.
No.
Number and Description of
Sheep dipped——
Marks or Brands on Sheep
Place and Premises where Sheep
were dipped
Name of Owner of Sheep
Description of Dip
(Signed)
(Dated)
This counterfoil is to be retained by the
person giving the Certificate.
FORM E.
(Article 11.)
Detention Notice.
Dated
Particulars of Dippings.
190 .
Description of Dip used.
SHEEP-DIPPING (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1907.
an Inspector of the Local
, do hereby
Authority of the [county] of
give you notice to detain the following sheep,
of which you
namely,
are the owner or person in charge, upon the fol-
lowing farm, holding, or other place, namely,
until
all the sheep shall have been dipped in the pre-
sence of an Inspector of the Local Authority by
a thorough immersion in a sheep-dip approved by
the Department of Agriculture and Technical
Instruction for Ireland for sheep-scab.
190
FORM F.
(Article 15.)
Notice of Special Dipping.
SHEEP-DIPPING (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1907.
of
, an Inspector of the Local
Authority of the [county] of
direction of the said Local Authority, do hereby
require that the following sheep, namely
, of which you are the owner
or person in charge, shall be dipped by you at
day of
on the
and
between the hours of
to my satisfaction by a thorough immersion in a
sheep-dip approved by the Department of Agri-
culture and Technical Instruction for Ireland for
Number and Desen on of
Sheep dip
Number and Description of Sheep
exempted.
NOTE.
Place of Dipping.
Date Of Dipping.
sheep-scab.
bated
(Signed) A.B.
190
Dated
(Signed) A.B.
190
Particulars. oj-Eæemptions.
Ground for exemption.
If exempted date ot exemption.
Copies of the above Order can' be obtained on application to the Secretary, Department off
Agriculttue and Technical Instruction for Ireland (Veterinary Branch), Dublin.
DUBLIN : Printed for His Ma esty's Statiooery Office
By ALEX 'I'E0M & CO. (Limited}, 87, & 89, Abbey-street„
8,000. 6.19). 1. 1907. (15977).
—If there are no exemptinns this is to be stated.
Dündatk.
LOUTH COUNTY (X)üN01L.
UISORY DIPPING OF SHEEP]
Otiee is hereby given, that tho Execu-
t,ivo Committeoof this Council will, ,
t their Meeting to bo held on Monday,
he 29th of April, 1907, procæd to ap-
int four comp&ent. persons to ta.ke
of the hh.æzTanks, which
as under
2 at Dundalk Rural District.
I at Ardee Rural District.
at Drogheda Rural District.
Sixteen Shillings per week will be
o persons appointed by the Cbmmittee.
Applications Should reach me not IatG
ban 12 0'clock, on Saturday,
ith'k27t,h inst.
i Part.i« applyi for Che work should be
tra-. •attendance a Nho Oourthouse when tab.
ppointmentg are boing made.
T. F. rrr,CA'E,
Secrotacy I-oath (hunt' Council.
this 20th day of April, 1907.
DUN
Æ- BINEika WELLS,
46
eø„zz
/Z MÅZ
449
4/45
z-M-Z/

"544M ÉL4-M
Vetram, Dublin.
•.ny communication on this subject should
Iddressed to
E SECRETARY,
DEPARTMENT or AGRICULTURE
AND TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION
FOR IRELAND,
(VETERINARY BRANCH),
3 UPPER MERRION ST., DUBLIN.
And the Number and Date of this letter
tuld be quoted.
.211d-07.
Sir,
Department or Agriculture
and Cecbnical Instruction Tor Ireland,
(Veterinary Brancb),
13 uner merrion street,
Dublin.
17th April, 1907.
With reference to your letter of 13th Instant, I am
directed hy the Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruc—
tion for Ireland to state that they concur in the proposal, which
as you indicate, the Executive Committee under the Diseases of
Animals Acts for your County, at a meet ing held on the 8th
Instant, adopted as to the appointment again of four superintend—
ents to manage the dipping tanks at the different centres in the
County at the same rate of wages as was paid in the matter last
year, viz. 16/— per man per week.
The names of the men to be
employed, if they are not in all cases the same as were appoint—
ed last year, should be communicated to the Department in due
course .
As regards the matter of the duration of the dipping period
I am to say that the dates fixed in the Department's Order were
arrived at after much consideration.
To have selected any
other period inuld not have fitted in so well with the dipping
arrangements in Great Britain and would probably have caused
difficulties in connection with the admission of sheep from
Ireland to the leading markets in that Country .
Therefore ,
while the Department would be glad to know for what reason the
Executive Committee in your County were desirous of a shortening
of the time allowed under the Order for dipping, it would not,
taking all the circumstances into account, be practicable to
hold out hope of the Order being modified so as to omit the
month of August from the dipping period.
There is nothing to prevent the Executive Committee
endeavouring as far as they can to accelerate dipping throughout
the County once the dipping period commences, but it would not
be within the competence of any Local Authority to vary the
provisions of the general Order.
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Chief Clerk.
I The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Court House,
D U ND ALK.
month


relegrams: Vetram, Dublin. "
Any communication on this subject should
be addressed to
THE SEO*PARY,
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
AND TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION
FOR IRELAND,
(VETERINARY BRANCH),
13 UPPER MERRION ST., DUBLIN.
And the Number and Date of this letter
should be quoted.
.2226-07.
She e
Sir,
Di
Department or Agriculture
and Cecbnical Instruction Tor Ireland,
(Veterinary Brancb),
13 upper merrion Street,
Dublin.
30th April, 1907,
in
With reference to your further letter of 22nd Instant j which
it ig regretted that the Department have not be.en in a position
to reply to earlier, am directed to state that one principal
object cf the Department's recent Order entitled The 'Sheep
Dipping (Ireland) Order of 1907 was to prescrüe for the whole
of Ireland a uniform period for the summer dipping of sheep, and,
as has been mentioned. the time which the Order fixes in this
connection, viz from 15th june to 313t August inclusive, '1B that
which has been found most suitable to the circumstances of the
Country as a whole and to the conditions of the sheep export
trade .
To sanction, in respect of particular districts, modifica-
tions of the Order as regards this dipping period W0U1d mean the
re—introduction of an element of confusion into the Regulations
and might, not improbably, react unfavourably on the export
traffic •
The Department hope,- therefore, that ycur Local
Authority. will deem it advantageous not to press their request'
for such a modification in the case of their district.
It does not, however, follow, - so far as the Departmeot can
see , that the limits fixed for the dipping period under the Order
render it necessary that dipping facilities should be provided
by your Local Authority for the whole of that period, if they
find that all the dipping needing to be carried out by means of
tho se
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
those facilities can be got through sin a shorter time *
As regards the sconziåerations urged in, the paragraph
numbered 2 in your letter the Department would p int out that
compt•gange in s other 'distF•ts thé .of he new
Order may be expected to ensure that sheep moved into •tme
district of your Local Authority after 1st September from •other
karee of Ireland shall öave dipped •prior to such movement.
I The game holds good as regards September movements into the
district from Scotland vide Article 15 of the encloåed copjv
of the existing Dipping Order applying to the Scotland and North
of England Area. -
But , independently of t>ese provisions it is
open to farmers in the County who receive sheep at that time of
the year from any Other part o! ' Ireland or from Scotland to idip
the animals on their own initiative, whether •they have or heve
not already been dipped; or the County Council, if they go choose
could, as. has been indicated in the covering Circular issued with
the Department ts order, make Regulations providing . for a Second
Dipping period annually for all sheep in their district.
Sir,
Your obedient servant ,
C ief Clerk.
71/3/84/
1tzznø,A/4
47-meZZ
//Æ z B4-K

M /ß-ZF
-Z-eeæ--,m-F
ZIZZ HE----$zeuz
FZz
>Lh--F-zP
ZzMæv4zR
74/4 zæZ
r/v---ez-/
/ZÆ----$-e-4/Z
< 444-7

vLp-Z/9;



2/'/-hz/
16/494


CQt4JØtÆ,/-/
cad ML dwEu
anuv/åuf
htc

,f'ä.üe--/

44—-2,"
UZ2J41
hu-w+/u
a_La0
huu/du
tkr
J twkj c-du,c-a4u-w I
Q-fyvc.uLALr-e f-fTJ-e-tW*td
l//--emt,o
Uv-u-(

Teleg s: "VETRAM, DUBLIN."
Any comm cation on thi• subject should be
to :
THE SECRE ARY,
DEPART*ENT OF AGRICULTURE
AND HNICAL INSTRUCTION
FOR IRELAND,
ERINARY BRANCH),
13, MERRION-ST., DUBLIN.
And the N ber and Date of this letter should
be quoted.
No. 1331/08.
SIR,
DEPARTMENT or AGRICULTURE AND
TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION FOR •IRELAND
(VETERINARY BRANCH),
13, UPPER MERRION STREET,
Dum,TN,
April, 1908.
In view of the circumstance that the Summer Dipping Period which
the Sheep Dipping (Ireland) Order of 1907 prescribes for sheep throughout
Ireland will re-commence on 15th June next, and will extend from that date
to the 31st August, inclusive, the Department of Agriculture and Tec ical
Instruction for Ireland desire now to transmit, for the' information of your
•Local Authority, and for their assistance in making arrangements f the
enforcing of the Order,
(1.) Some copies of the latest revise of the List of Sheep Dips a prove
by the Department ;
(2.) A further supply of the Circular, No. 4507—07 V.B., is ed last
year on the subject of precautions against allowing dip to ow into
streams, rivers, or lakes containing fish ; and
(3.) An additional supply of copies of the Order.
The Department will also be prepared to furnish to Local u lorities, as
was done last year, supplies for posting, of the accompanying o ce drawing
the attention of sheep owners to the provisions of the Order
d I have to
ask that you will kindly say, as soon as may be convenient, h number of
copies of such Notice Will probably be needed for the purpose f chsuggested
posting throughout the district of your Local Authority.
It will, as before, be the duty of the Local Author y arrange, in
anticipation of the requirements during the Dipping Peri
, t have supplies
of the Forms indicated in the Schedule to the Order ea
for local use.
Only small quantities of Forms A, E, and F are likel to be needed, and,
perhaps, Local Authorities may, in some cases, have a
cient stock of the
above three Forms already on hands; but, as large antities of Forms B
'and C may be expected to be required, it will be well take steps to renew
the stocks of these and, if necessary, of D also, as soon possible, so as to have
proper supplies available in good time before the com ncement of the Dipping
Period. When ready, the B and C Forms should b distributed to the Police
Stations throughout the district of the Local Aut rity, and it is especially
im ortant, as r , urds the B Form, that the su p of
an s o the o Ice not ater than t e en of the rst week in une.
It may be convenient to repeat here the vario ways in which, as previously
mentioned, the Constabulary, though they can t act as Inspectors, will assist
in the working of the Order, viz : —
(a) By sending on to the Clerk of the Leal utbority, or to such other officer of tW
Local Authority as the Local Author• may direct, any notices of intention to
dip received by the Police from sh wners under Article 3 of the Order,
and any Declarations as to dipping ived under Article 9 of the Order ;
(b) By satisfying themselves while on pat I that the dipping is being carried out, and
by reporting to the Local Author• any cases of neglect or failure to comply
with the Order which may come der their notice. The Police will not be
required to superintend the actu process of dipping, with the view of seeing
that it is properly performed ;
(c) By reporting any cases which ma come under their notice of movements of sheep
in contravention of the Orde
(O By furnishing to tye Local Authori!y, prior to the commencemént of 'the sKéep-
dipping period, ifsC, by •townlandÅ;' Of the names and addresses of persons
having sheep; in each sub-district.
(e) By keeping at the Police Barracks stocks of Forms (which the'
v' ' should' provide) fowpur.poses of Declaration under Articles 6 and 9 of the Order
respectively, and issuing such Forms to persons calling to obtain:
(D Vy institåting legal proceedings, where requested to do so by ,tbe Local Authopi!y,..
against persons guilty of breaches of the Order.
In conclusion the Department would hope that any Local Authority that,
made special arrangements for the supervision of dipping in their dist+iet -last'-
year, will renew, and, if necessary, extend those arrangements this year ; and
that those Local Authorities who have not yet taken such action will consider"
the proprietyqof, year, is heped. that the question of
provisions, of dipping, appor4tus will engpge the attention of .aßy LecaL
Auth rities who,bove not hitherto supplied such for uke by sheep owners who
may .vithou€. satisfactory facilities for- effecting dipping, on "their Öwn
prem' s.
I am, Sir,
' 'YOur obediene servant;
Secretarv.
M üvu-r/
' Zeeæ-ze„-cz 4-7? 4--
4 --4z/.---r
64
LOUTH
County Council
COMPULSORY
Dipping of Sheep.
OTICE is hereby given the
tivo Committee of thig Council.
Meeting held on Monday, 22gd inst, havo
oppointed the undermentioned porgone 'g,
take charge of the Sheep Dipping Tanks in
the reepeotivo Baral Digiricw, followe
For Ardee Diatriot-—
JAMES MEADE, Ardee.
For Droehed• Dietrict—
•JOEN J CONNOR, Sandpit, TermonfeeHn,
For Dundalk (Southern Division)—
EÅOMAS M'ARDLE, Dunbin,
Knockbridge,
And for the Northern Division—
OVEN KEENAN, Aghameen,
LOWD, Dundalk.
Owners of Sheep magt give five clear dare'
aotieo, in writing, etating tima and place, of
iheic intention to have Shoep dipped, to •ny
of the above mentioned persons or io the
neoregi polige Station.
following ecale of charges has been
deoided upon io paraong 'bo intend having
their Shoep dipped in the Count' Council
ranks,
All Sheep, exoepting 800toh, Horned. •nd
Manntain, lid eoch, •nd their L•mb• id
800teh, Eornea, or Mountain Shoop, one
penny e•ob. •nd their Lambs one halfpenny
each.
By grd•r,
T. F. FILOATE.
Bec. Co. CoaneU.
Dated Juno. 1908.


4-7
RCe,K
A_--c--v
/ 9 07
OCC 43
ocoCe
/Cd •zætæeep- -
Q.eo(-2-e
-6 f-v—v
0-6

¯4z/W
f¯/ßAZ3-
Zzß
Æ /„Æz2p
ht-&TUZ
4--d.a J
e-e-.no h


e-g---g/
44M
• F---ß-æp

MHZ ,+z/
'd. To /ur/hcr (/iscuss, ctnd, rteeess€n•;,' the Resolut;oi/ passed -the
count!! me 12th,
last—"
'!'hat
Coptncil, prolcs/ the . guaraniee to the o/'
cuttle as!ccd the o/ the [Jn;tec/ (Troposed b
Mr. X. -B. King).
'Thet07neåt$
set,tled,• at any rate so - far as London is
j concerned. - The IncorpOrated Society of
London Meat Traders at a. meeting yester-
day decided to adopt the. offer recently
inade by the cattle salesmen, by wh;zh
the salesmen shall pay to a firm of banke-
one shilling per head for each bullock
heifer •purchased for slaughter within ten
'days, the said bankers „agreéing to in-
demnify the purchaser against loss Ihraugh
confiscation for disease, the lcss be as-
certained by agreement, but in no ease
to exceed the amount paid for the ani'.ntl
Condemned. •If any disputes should u."ise,
the. matter is to be submitted to arbitra•
tion.

LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
COURT-HOUSE,
DUNDALK,
24th May, 1909.
Appointment of four Sheep Dipping Superintendents.
You are hereby requested to attend a Meeting of
the above Committee, to be held in the Council Chamber,
on Thursday next the 27th instant, at 12 0'clock, noon, for
the purpose of appointing Four Competent persons to super-
intend the Dipping Tanks in the County during the prescribed
dipping period—that is to say :— from the 15th June, 1909,
to the 31st August, 1909, subject to the conditions laid down
in the Secretary's advertisement.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. F. FILGATE,
Secretary.
To each member of the Committee.
Z-Z„F-$--Z
4
r.OÜTUTOVNTY cotJN0tr,
Compulsory
Dipping' of' Sheep. tl
0Trcrg .iN Givéi„ tho Ev- 0
•cutivo Cernt.nitteo of this Council will, d
ac their Meeting b" held or, MONDAY,
'ehe 7,th day of JUNE. 1909. proceed to
appoint Two CompegerÆ. Persons . to take t
chgrk• tho Sheep-Dippine 'I'nnkg, which C
will be fplneed, in the; respective Dural
Districts 88 under
1 in the Northern. Portion of Dundalk' o
Rural ' Distriet:ø
I in Drogheda Rural District.
Tbn remuneration Will bo tho rato of
One Penny per Iinlpenny per
Lsi12b dipped.
applicaLions 78houId. reach mo not Jator d
12 0'clock noon on ' gho dav of M'ettng. c
bane
douse whom the appointment. aeon being r
T F FILOATE,
Secretary CO. CounCiJ3
'Dated 27th May,1909,
ZeZF-<--M

Telegrams: Vetram, Dublin.
An communication on this subject should
be
sed to
THE SECRETARY,
DEPARTMENT or AGRICULTURE
AND TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION
FOR IRELAND,
(VETERINARY nnaxcu),
13 UPPER MERRION ST., DUBLIN.
And the Number and Date Of this letter
should be quoted.
2846-09.
Sir,
Department or Agriculture
and Cecbnical Instruction ror Ireland,
(Veterinary Brancb),
13 upper merrion Street,
Dublin.
June, 1909.
The encloged further copies of an Order,
entitled the Sheep (Iloveraent frcn Ireland) Order of 1908,
made it?elve nonthe oco by the Board of AETicu1ture
and Fisheries for Great Bri€ain, and of a Notice then isaued
this Departuent in relation to Buch Order, are forvarded
for the information of your Local Authority, in vier of the
circumstance that the annual period of operation of the
Order ig nov once nore drawing nigh .
IL would be advanta€eoug if the Local Authority
steps to have the copies of the Notice suitably posted
in their district, for the infomation of persons concerned .
Sir,
Yovr obedient Servant,
1.9. GILL,
Secretary.
The Clerk
of each Local Authority in Ireland .
elegrams: Vetram, Dublin.
Any communication on this subject should
be addressed to
THE SECRETARY,
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
AND TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION
FOR IRELAND,
(VETERINARY BRANCH),
13 UPPER MERRION ST., DUBLIN.
And the Number and Date of this letter
should be quoted.
2566/09.
Sir,
Department or Agriculture
and Cecbnical Instruction ror Ireland,
(Veterinary Brancb),
13 upper merrion Street,
Dublin.
11th june 1909.
With reference to your letter of the 7th instant, I
have hereby to convey the Departrænt ts approval of
the re-appointment, the Local Authority, of the
following persons ag Superintendents of Sheep
Dipping in the districts of County Louth get
opposite their respective names, viz:-
Israrne of Inspector
john j. Connor,
ree nan ,
-as McArdle,
District for which re-au ointe
Drogheda,
Nlorth Dundalk,
South Dundalk,
and
t e appointment of William Leonard in a similar
.capacitJ for the Ardee district,
all such appointments to run for the approaching dipping
period, With remuneration-in the cases of Yessrs.Connor and
reenan-of Id per sheep and per Iamb dipped under their
respective supervision, and in the cases of Yessrs. VcArd1e
and Leonard, at the rate of 16/— per week each during such
period.
Sir,
Your obedient gervmt,
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
Secretary.
DISEASES OF ANIMALS ACT 1894.
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
AND TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION FOR IRELAND,
UPPER MERRION STREET,
DUBLIN.
SIR,
With reference to the Return furnished by you of the Payments made
by the Council of the County
under the provisions of " The Diseases of Animals Act,
1894,"
I am directed to acquaint you, for the information of the Council, that the sum
named in the margin, being half the amount so paid, has been lodged to the
credit of their Treasurer
on behalf of the Council.
I am,
SIR,
Your obedient Servant,
Clerk in Charge of Accounts.
The Secretary of the Councd
of the County
7-0
4Cu
MR-.Ø
1/(-affC/
t/tc
a" Lcgo a-m
dL-!d
46
Any communication on thiå subject should
be addressed to
THE SECRETARY,
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION
FOR IBELAND,
(VETERINARY BRANCH),
13 UPPER MERRION ST., DUBLIN.
And the Number and Date of this letter
should be quoted.
lie. 3110/09
Department or Agriculture
and Cecbnical Instruction ror Ireland,
(Veterinary Brancb),
13 upper merrion Street,
Dublin.
my, 1909.
SHæ
INSPECTOR'S 0FACE,
R. 1. CONSTABULARY,
14
46/-.eÆe
mo of ana Ceohnicai Inøtraotion
zor Ireima aegire to horov±th, for the into—tion
of 'Oar Local Authority, copies of a further Order tho
have made recently, entitled Auttmn Dipping of
Qxocp (Ireland) Order Of 1909.
Ag your Local are, doubtless, aware, it
unaninouøly recarnended gone time ago, by the Council ot
Agriculture established under the Act constituting -the
ment, that sheep in Ireland should dipped trioe in each
year.
VP to the pregent, unaer the Qwep Dipping (Ireland)
Order of 1907, only a Bingle dipping annually • to be carried
out in the • has been generally obligatory; but Looai
Authorities have been encouraged to Segue Regulationø of their
ovn providing for an additional (later) dipping. Ag, however,
only a few Authorities have exereiged their powere in the
nntter, it has been neooggary to reedy thege partial
conditiono by the issue of the enclosed Order, Which applies
to parte of Ireland vh«e iooai Reßüationg for a
dipping are not already in neration .
me Order Till, accordingly, inve force in the DIBtriat
oe ymu• Local Authority, and the tNBt that the
Local e *lose øtatutory duty it ag to execute and
enforce the Order - will cordially co-operate in giving effect
to i tg proviøiong .
In thig connection it 1B suggested that
any epeolal arrangaaentB , such ag the of Inspectors
and provigien of dipping tankB, which the Local may
have made ter tho current Btmter dipping Eight be renewed in
relation to the autumn dipping, the period for Thich last
fren iBt September to 30th November next, .
Or,
Bhould ne arrangætentB of the above nåuro obtain at present in
the Dtgtriot of yott? Local Authority, the propraety Of estab-
iißhlng BUCh In anticipation of the Autunm dipping period might,
the Departnmt would urge now be condderta.
Tomg for uge under Order Bhotüd be provided by the
Local Authority in the way ag hag been done for the
purposes of the etaner dipping, and, in due course, stocks Of
the 3 and C Tomg BhOuid be gent out •to qae various Polioe
Stations in the District the Local Authority.
for Qte convenience Of sheep Omerg the 3 Tome, In
articular, are thug dietributed not later than the end
eptember, ag tie period during which gheep will require ,
under üe Order, to be by Declaration On that
me aerie,
Loeai Authority
County
Form
any or gaieyara in the
Dipping Area, On I Bt October.
Probably it
be veil, ag tending to avoid confugim. if new
•and C Toms are printed onoa different-coloured paper to
thit Used for tb Tomg issued In connedtion with the guns,ie
dippiqg.
-A placard Zotice respecting the Order at present
being prepared; and a supply 7111, then. available v: be Bent
to your Local Authority for posting in mear Digtrict.
It be added that qae Order has been
fra.ted on a tqorary basis, as the Department intend, next
year replace it and the Order of 1907 by a new Order
providing for two dippingg annuauy.
Sir ,
Your Obedient ,
t. P. OLU,
georetary.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
Consideration of Monthly Reports from Veterinary Inspectors, and corres-
pondence from the Department.
(No. 97.)
ORDER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE AND TECHNICAL
INSTRUCTION FOR IRELAND.
(DATED 26TH MAY, 1909.)
IMPORTATION OF DOGS (IRELAND)
ORDER OF 1902, AMENDMENT ORDER.
HE Department of Agriculture and Tech•
nical Instruction for Ireland, by virtue and
in exercise of the powers in them vested under
the Agriculture and Technical Instruction (Ire-
land) Act, 1899, the Diseases of Animals Acts,
1894 to 1903, and of every other power enabling
them in this behalf, do order, and it is hereby
ordered as follows
Prohibition Of Importation of Canine Animals
generally.
l. From and after the first day of January,
nineteen hundred and ten, the Importation of Dogs
(Ireland) Order of 1902 shall be read and have
effect as if the provisions thereof applied, not only
to domestic dogs, but also to wolves, jackals, foxes,
wild dogs, and all other animals of the canine
tribe.
Short Title and Construction.
2. This Order may be cited as the Importation
of Dogs (Ireland) Order of 1902, Amendment
Order."
In' witness whereof the Department of
Agriculture and Technical Instruction
for Ireland have hereunto set their
Official Seal this twenty-sixth day of
May, nineteen hundred and nine.
T. P. Gili,
Secretary.
Any commuuieatiou on this subject should
be addressed to
THE SECRETARY,
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
AND TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION
FOR IRELAND,
(VETERINARY BRANCH),
13 UPPER MERRION ST., DUBLIN.
And the Number and Date of thig letter
should be quoted.
No .34?4-09 .
Sir ,
Department or Agriculture
and Cecbnical Instruction ror Ireland,
(Vererinarp Brancb),
13 upper merrion Street,
3rd August,
Dublin.
1909.
(No. 99.)
ORDER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE AND TECHNICAL
INSTRUCTION FOR IRELAND.
(DATED 28TH JUNE, 1909.)
THE AUTUMN DIPPING OF SHEEP
(IRELAND) (TEMPORARY) ORDER OF
1909.
The Department of Agriculture and Technical
Instruction for Ireland, by virtue and in exercise
Of the powers vested in them under the Agricul-
ture and Technical Instruction (Ireland) Act,
1899, the Diseases of Animals Acts, 1894 to 1903,
and of every other power enabling them in this
behalf, do order, and it is hereby ordered, as
follows :—
Extent of Dipping Area.
The Dipping Area for the purposes of
this Order shall comprise the whole of Ireland
except the exempted counties.
(2.) The exempted counties shall be the
administrative counties of Antrim, Armagh,
Down, Dublin, and Londonderry ; in all of
which regulations requiring a second dipping of
sheep annually are already in force cm behalf of
the Local Authorities.
Prescribed Autumn Dipping Period.
2. prescribed dipping period for the
purposes of this Order shall commence on the
first day of September, and terminate .on the
thirtieth day of November, nineteen hundred
and nine.
Mode of Dipping Prescribed.
3. Where under this Order it is provided that
sheep are to be dipped, they shall be dipped by a
thorough immersion in a sheep-dip approved by
the Department for sheep-scab by the Sheep-Scab
(Ireland) Order of 1905, or otherwise.
Ea:emptions from Dipping Requirements.
the dipping of sheep shall not apply to the fol-
lowing sheep :—
(i.) Sheep which, in the opinion of the Local
Authority of the district where they are kept,
(2.) In the case of sheep moved into the Dip-
ping Area on or after the third day of November,
it shall be suffeient compliance with this Article
if the sheep are dipped within twenty-eight days
after the movement.
(3.) For the purposes of enabling the Local
Authority to be represented at the dipping re-
quired by this Article, whenever they think such
a course desirable, the owner or person in charge
of any sheep required to be dipped shall give
such written notice of his intention to dip his
sheep as is hereinafter provided :—
(i.) The notice shall be delivered, or sent by
post, to the sergeant of police for the police
sub-district in which the sheep referred to in
such notice are located.
(ii.) The notice shall be sent or delivered at
such time as to be received by the sergeant
of police five clear days, at least, beforel the
intended time of dipping.
(iii.) The notice shall state the time and place
of the intended dipping, and the approximate
number of sheep intended to be dipped.
(4.) Notices received by the police under this
Article shall forthwith be transmitted by them
to the Clerk Of the Local Authority or to such
other Officer of the Local Authority as the local
Authority may direct.
(5.) If from any cause the dipping of the sheep
on the date specified in a notice becomes im-
practicable, no further notice shall be required if
the sheep are dipped as soon after such date as is
practicable.
Regulations as to Fairs, Market8, and Saleyards.
From the first duy of October to the
thirtieth day of November, nineteen hundred and
nine, both dates inclusive, it shall not be lawful
Adverting to your letter of the 26th ultimo, expressing
the opinion of your Executive Committee that the month of
would well meet the requiremente of the County Louth ae
a second dipping period, I have to state that the Department t 3
recent Order respecting an Autumn dipping allowe of euch
dipping being carried out at any time during the months of
September, October, or November, subject to the consideration
that from 1st October to 30th November, inclusive, sheep
be exposed at a Fair, &c., in the dipping area unless t
previcuely undergone the preecribed dipping. The Dep
are not advised in favour. of any modification of these r
cannot
Y have
me nt
quire—
men ts .
I
The Secretary '
am
Sir,
Your
it is impracticable or inexpedient to dip in
accordance with the requirements of this Order,
on account of their being intended for exhibi-
tion or of any other special . circumstances, and
which are accordingly exempted by an exemp-
tion signed by the Clerk of the Local Authority.
The exemption may be granted subject to con-
ditions as to subsequent dipping or otherwise.
A copy of every exemption shall be sent to the
Department. The exemption shall be in the
Form A set forth in the Schedule hereto, or to
the like effect ;
(ii.) Sheep slaughtered in the Dipping Area
before the expiration of the period within which
their dipping is required under this Order, if kept
separate from sheep which have been already
dipped under the next following Article.
Prescribed Autumn Dipping.
All sheep in the Dipping Area during
any part of the prescribed dipping period (except
those exempted by Article 4 of this Order) shall
be caused to be dipped within the Dipping Area
by tbe owner or person in charge thereof during
that period.
to move any sheep into or expose them for sale
in any fair, market, or saleyard within the Dip-
ping Area, unless such sheep shall have been
dipped subsequently to the thirty-first day of
August, nineteen hundred and nine, and are
accompanied, at time of such movement and
exposure, by a declaration in respect of such
dipping, signed by the owner of the sheep or his
agent authorised in that behalf.
(2.) Notwithstanding anything in any regula-
tion of a Local Authority sheep that are free
from disease and have been dipped within the
Dipping Area in accordance with this Order
may be moved to and be exposed for sale at any
fair, market, or saleyard in Ireland outside the
Dipping Area, provided they are accompanied, at
time of such movement and exposure, by a de-
claration in, respect of such dipping, signed by
the owner of the sheep or his agent authorised in
that behalf.
(3.) Declarations under this Article shall be
in the Form B set forth in the Schedule hereto,
or to the like effect
Isolation of Sheep after Dipping,
7. All sheep after having been dipped shall
during the of the prescribed dipping
period be kept isolated, as far as practicable,
from sheep which have not been so dipped.
Declaration after Prescribed Dipping Period.
8.. The occupier of a farm or holding in the
Dipping Area on which sheep are kept shall
personally, or by his agent authorised in that
behalf, within fourteen days after the thirtieth
day of November, nineteen hundred and nine,
send a declaration as to the dipping of the sheep,
in the Form C set forth in the Schedule hereto,
obedi ent
servant ,
Secret
b
or to the like effect, to the sergeant of police
for the police sub-district in which the farm or
holding is situate, who shall thereupon forward
such declaration to the Clerk of the Local
Authority or to such Other Officer of the Local
Authority as the Locul Authority may direct.
Certificates of Dipping.
9. Where, under this Order sheep are dipped
in the presence of an Inspector of the Local
Authority, he shall give the owner or person in
charge of the sheep a certificate to that effect
in the Form I) set forth in the Schedule hereto
or to the like effect.
Restriction on Movement of Sheep not Dipped
within Prescribed Dipping Period.
IO. Where any sheep shall not have been
dipped as required by this Order an Inspector of
the Local Authority may, without prejudice to
any proceedings for the offence, serve the owner
or person in charge of the sheep and the owner
or person in charge of any sheep then in contact
with the undipped sheep with a notice, in the
Form E set forth in the Schedule hereto, or to
the like effect, requiring the dipping of the sheep
described in the notice and prohibiting their
movement from the farm, holding, or other place
where they are at the time the notice is served
(except with a licence granted by an Inspector of
the Local Authority of the District) until all
the sheep shall have been dipped after the service
of the notice in the presence of an Inspector of
the Local Authority, or have been slaughtered,
and thereupon it shall be unlawful to move the
sheep in contravention of the notice.
Cleanging of Dipping Places.
11. The place on any farm or premises which
has been used for the dipping shall, without un-
necessary delay, be thoroughly cleansed by the
occupier, and all tufts of wool gathered and dis-
infected or destroyed.
Samples of Dip may be taken.
12. Every owner or person in charge of sheep
being dipped under this Order shall permit and
give every facility to an Inspector of the Local
Authority or of the Department to take samples
of dip or material which is being or has been
used for the dipping of sheep.
Power to provide Dipping Places.
13. The Local Authority may provide and fit
up and maintain dipping places, but subject to the
approval in writing by the Department of the site
of each dipping place ; provided that no dipping
place shall be used under this provision if its use
would injuriously affect the water in any stream,
reservoir, aqueduct, well, pond, or place con-
structed or used for the supply of water for drink-
ing or other domestic purpose'.
Power for Local Authority to regulate time and
place of Dipping in particular cases.
14. The Local Authority may iu any case
where they think such procedure desirable serve
a notice on the owner or person in charge of any
sheep requiring that the sheep shall be dipped at
such time and place as is stated in the notice and
to the satisfaction of an Inspector of the Local
Authority, and the sheep shall thereupon be
dipped in accordance with the requirements of
such notice. The notice may be in the Form F
set forth in the Schedule hereto, or to the like
effect.
The Secretary '
Production of Declarations and Licences ; Names
and Addresses.
15.—(1.) Any person in charge of a sheep
being moved where under this Order a declaration
or licence is necessary,. shall, on demand of a
Justice or of a constable, or of an Inspector or
other offcer of the Department, or of a Local
Authority, produce and show to him the declara-
tion or licence, if any, authorising the movement,
and shall allow it to be read and a copy of or
extract from it to be taken by the person to
whom it is produced.
(2.) Any person so in charge shall, on demand
as aforesaid, give his name and address to the
Justice, or constable, or Inspector or other
offcen
Powers of Entry of Inspectors.
16. An Inspector Of the Department, and an
Inspector of the Local Authority subject to
their direction, may for the purposes of this
Order enter any premises and examine any sheep
thereon.
Local Authority to enforce Order and provide
Forms.
17. The provisions of this Order shall be
executed and enforced by the Local Authority,
who shall also provide all Forms necessary in
connection with such execution and enforcement.
Offences.
18.41.) If a sheep is not dipped as required
by this Order, the owner and person in charge of
the sheep at the expiration of the period within
which its dipping is required by this Order
shall, each according to and in respect of his own
acts and defaults, be deemed guilty of an offence
against the Act of 1894.
(2.) If any person fail to give any notice or
send any declaration required by this Order, or
falsely makes any declaration for the purposes of
this Order, or offers or utters any such declaration
knowing the same to be falsely made, he shall
be deemed guilty of an offence against the Act of
1894.
(3.) If a sheep is moved in contravention of
this Order, the owner of the sheep, and the
person in charge thereof, and the person causing,
directing, or permitting the movement, and the
person moving or conveying the sheep, and the
consignee or other person receiving or keeping
it knowing it to have been moved in contraven-
tion as aforesaid, and the occupier of the place
from which the sheep is moved, shall, each accord-
ing to and in respect of his own acts and defaults,
be deemed guilty of an offence against the Act of
1894.
(4.) If a sheep is exposed for sale in any
market, fair, or saleyard, in contravention of
this Order, the occupier of the premises where
the sheep is exposed, •and the person exposing
the same, and the owner and person in charge of
the sheep and the purchaser thereof, knowing
the same to be exposed in contravention as afore-
said, shall, each according to and in respect of his
own acts and defaults, be deemed guilty of an
offence against the Act of 1894.
(5.) If a person in charge of a sheep being
moved, where under this Order a declaration or
licence is necessary, on demand made under this
Order, fails to give his true name and address, or
gives a false name or address, he shall be deemed
guilty of an oflönce against the Act of 1894.
Secret
(6.) If a sheep is not isolated as required by
this Order, the owner of the sheep, and the person
in charge thereof, and the occupier of the place
where the sheep is detained, shall, each according
to and in respect of his own acts and defaults,
be deemed guilty of an offence against the Act of
1894.
Interpretation.
19. In this Order, unless the context otherwise
Sheep includes Iambs ;
Inspector includes Veterinary Inspector and
any person appointed by a Local Authority
to be their Inspector for the purposes of this
Order ;
Owner includes a joint owner ;
The Department means the Department of
Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland ;
The Act of 1894 means the Diseases of
Animals Act, 1894.
Other terms have the same meaning as in the
Act of 1894 and the Acts amending the same.
Short l'itle.
20. This Order may be cited as the AUTUMN
DIPPING OF SHEEP (IRELAND) (TEMPORARY) ORDER
OF 1909.
Tn witness whereof the Department of
Agriculture and Technical Instruction
for Ireland have hereunto set their
Official Seal this twenty-eighth day
of June, nineteen hundred and nine.
T. P. Gili,
Secretary.
SCHEDULE.
F0RM A.
(Article 4.)
Form oj Exemption.
THE AUTUMN DIPPING OF SHEEP (IRELAND) (TEMPORARY) ORDER OF 1909,
The undermentioned sheep are hewby exempted from the dipping requirements of the above
Order on account of *
The exemption ik subject to the following conditions
(Signature)
Clerk of the Local Authority for the
[county of]
Dated
1909.
Here date ground or exemption.
•i•lngert Conditi0R8 (if any).
Number and Description of
Sheep exempted.
Particulars of Sheep Exempted.
Name and address of Owner of the Sheep.
A copy of this exemption is to be sent to the Secretary,
Technical Instruction för Ireland (Veterinary Branch), Dublin.
Department of Agriculture and
FORM B.
(Article 6.)
Form o/ Declaration to accompany Sheep moved into Market, Fair, or Saleyard.
THE AUTUMN DIPPING OF SHEEP (IRELAND) (TEMPORARY) ORDER OF 1909.
Form D.
(ARTICLE 9.)
CERTIFICATE AS TO DIPPING OF SHEEP.
1, A.B., of
solemnly and sincerely
in the [county] of
(a) that I am the owner [or the agent authorised for this purpose of
in the [county] of
, do hexeby
the owner] of the
CERTIFICATE or DIPPING.
No.
Number and Description of
Sheep dipped——
Marks or Brands on Sheep
Place and Premises where Sheep
were dipped
Name of Owner of Sheep
Description of Dip
(Signed)
(Dated)
Thig counterfoil is to be retained by the
penon giving the Certificate.
(Article IO.)
Detention Notice.
THE AUTUMN DIPPING OF SHEEP (IRELAND)
(TEMPORARY) ORDER OF 1909.
No.
I, the undersigned, being an Inspector of the Local Authority,
, do hereby certify that the under-
of the [County] of
mentioned sheep were this day thoroughly dipped in an efficient
sheep-dip in my presence and to my satisfaction.
undermentioned sheep ;
(b) tbat the said sheep were dipped in the present year, since 31st August, by thorough
immersion in a sheep dip approved b the Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland for sheep-scab, by the person s) specified in this declaration.
(c) that the statements containe In this declaration are within my own knowledge ; or
(d) that the statements contained in this declaration are based on information furnished to me
Number and
Description
ot Sheep.
Dated,
Marks or
Brands on
Sheep.
Name or Descri tion
of Place ancr
Premises where
Sheep were Dipped.
Name of
Owner
of Sheep.
1909.
Descri on
of Ip.
Number and Desmiption of Sheep.
Dated
'*Here insert particulars of wurceoj information.
Name and Address of Person [s] by
Date Of Dipping.
Whom the Sheep have been dipped.
(Signed) A.B.
1909.
Description Of DIP used.
(Signed),
o
tl
a
h
n
o:
u
u
01
a
sb
to
di
(Article 8.)
Declaration as to Dipping of Sheep ; to be made
at close of Autumn Dipping Period.
THE AUTUMN DIPPING OF SHEEP (IRELAND)
(TEMPORARY) ORDER OF 1909.
being
1, A.B., of
the occupier of the farm or holding known as
do hereby certify
that all sheep which were on the said farm or
holding on the thirtieth day of November
last (except such as were exempt from the
requirements of the above Order), have been
dipped in accordance with the provisions of the
above-mentioned Order. The particulars of such
dipping are stated below, and I further certify
that such particulars are, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, correct.
(Signed) A. B.
(or A.B. by his duly authorised agent C.D.)
Dated
Particulars of Dippings.
TRE AUTUMN DIPPING OF SHEEP (IRELAND)
(TEMPORARY) ORDER OF 1909.
, an Inspector of the Local
Authority of the [county] of
, do hereby
give you notice to detain the following sheep,
Of which you
namely,
are the owner or person in charge, upon the fol-
lowing farm, holding, or other place, namely,
until
all the sheep shall have been dipped in the pre-
sence of an Inspector of the Local Authority by
a thorough immersion in a sheep-dip approved by
the Department of Agriculture and Technical
Instruction for Ireland for sheep-scab.
FORM F.
(Article 14.)
Notice of Special Dipping.
THE AUTUMN DIPPING OF SHEEP (IRELAND)
(TEMPORARY) ORDER OF 1909.
of
To
, an Inspector of the Local
1, A.B.,
by
Authority of the [countyl of
direction of the said Local Authority, do hereby
require that the following sheep, namely
, of which you are the owner
or person in charge, shall be dipped by you at
day of
on the
between the hours of
to my satisfaction by a thorough immersion in
sheep-dip approved by the Department of Agri-
culture and Technical Instruction for Ireland for
Numb« and Deseravtion of
Sheep dipped.
Number and Degerlption of Sheep
exempted.
Place of Dipping.
Date of Dipping.
1909.
Description of Dip used.
If exempted state date oi exemption.
Dated
(Signed A.B.
1909.
sheep-scab.
Dated
(Signed) B.
, 1909.
Copies of the above Order can be obtained on application to the Secretary, Department
Agriculture and Technical Instruction for Ireland ( Veterinary Branch), Dublin.
DUBLIN : Printed for His Majesty's Statl
Ofllce
By ALEX. & co. (Limited). 87. & 890 %ley-street•
7,000. (S. 22). 6. 1909. (26041).
of
Particulars of Exemptions.
Ground Ior exemption.
NOTE.
—If there are no exempuions this is to be stated.
Secret
The Secretary '
h
Form
THI
1, A.B., of
solemnly and si
(a) that I
of
under
(b) tbat
immersion in a
Ireland for shee
(c) that thé
(d) that th
N umber and
Dated
Declaration as to
at close of
THE AUTUMN
(TEMPOR
tho occupier of
that all sheep wh
holding on the
NumV_• and Doserxvt
Sheep dipped.
Number and Ijoserli
exempte
Secret
The Secretary,





0-6
ay h-KAH --04'
7
no e,aoeo.
(JHdD.J,JP,
acme;
-f-r&7AJ
c.vrvvh % hu-mu'zeo
z8wm—rW-O'P'
/-u—-t-. oaf--ßre-a-KJ.
J-zegpøca-rr
c-kkØ-/ ag
6-71L• coy
okto
CRY
• CU¯WO
Czaa-v• 0--n-L
VCW4TLtM ((4qvTtR,'
Åau>g
Cdic/Fø
vz.uu-e 3vc//uJ
a-Y- a-au,
(LYN •
CL U(Zq.oe.-zee--Z--Z d/P
-fez,
4--6 C2-/0-æ,C
zuc-fee-/-ed* 6--12
ct-Æ-e-a-d-e-'
coze
42r—aze Qae-a-é-e --6 —Za-ao%c-b
//P&egZ/ z'
Z-æßs.-z/-c.„-a
F-S rc-f-ß
MI)/b,
a-znu O-v-/a-«
-6-«oe-k-d
- Jmzt,
CAL un-c-zoaun-c, /uo:--dÆ-u
au c_/Caza.-z.o au-Ze
4—/ZZeaz
aZGdD
can--,
cf•0t.L4,
Co,
Z-Zu-z/o
a-o (a-eV
ZOo—-,
;zgr$ 044/24-47
Telegrqnu : Vetram, Dublin."
ny communication on this subject should be
THE SECRETARY,
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
AND TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION
FOR IRELAND,
(VETERINARY BRANCH),
13, UPPER MERRION ST., DUBLIN,
the Number and Date of this letter
should be quoted.
2973/10
Sir,
Department of Noriculture
anb Cecbnical 3ngtruction for 3reIanb,
(Veterinarp Srancb),
13, upper merrion Street,
Dublin.
20th June 1910.
Telegrams : Vetram, Dublin."
Äny communication on this subject ebould
addressed to
SECRETARY,
1
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
ND TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION
FOR IRELAND,
(VETERINARY BRANCH),
UPPER MERRION ST., DUBLIN,
the Number and Date thia letta
should be quoted.
Yo. 3119/10.
Sir,
Department of Agriculture
anb Cecbnical 3ngtruction for 3reIanb,
(Veterinarp Srancb),
13, upper merrion Street,
Dublin.
22nd June 1910.
With reference to your letter of the 13th instant,
I have hereby to convey this Department 's approval of the
recent tenporary re-appointments made the CountWLouth
Local Authority of the following persons as Superintendents
of Sheep Dipping, their respective districts and rates of
remuneration to be as shovrn hereunder:—
Vith reference to your letter of the 20th instant,
I have herehy to convey the Departnentts approval of the
temporary appointment by the County Louth Local Authority
on 17th idem of yr. Vlichael YcCu11en, Corstown,Ba11ymakenny,
as Superin'ændent of Sheep Dipping for the Drogheda district
•with a remuneration of Id per sheep and per Iamb dipped
under his supervision.
It is presumed the appointment
Name of
Inspector.
Thomas YOArd1e ,
Owen I(eenan,
Villi am Leonard,
District for which
re-appointed.
South Dundalk,
North
dalk,
Argee
The Department as gurne
their period
Rate of
remuneration
16/- per week;
Id per sheep ,and
I-d per Iamb
dipped;
16/- per week'
Of service will evet
Dipping Order.
the two dipping specified in the recent
i am,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Secretary.
is intended to have force for both the dipping periods
specified in the Sheep Dining (Ireland) Order of 1910.
I am,
Sir,
Your servant,
7 Rfæc
Secretary.
The Secretar& ,
Louth County Counc@l,
Dvndalk.
The Secretary '
Louth County councfl,
Dundalk.

Auy communication on this subject should
je addressed to
{'HE SECRETARY,
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
AND TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION
FOR IRELAND
(VETERINARY BRANCH),
13 UPPER MERRION STREET,
DUBLIN.
nd the Number and Date of this letter
uld be quoted.
Department o/ Agriculture
and Technical Instruction for Ireland
( Veterinary Branch),
13 Upper Merrion Street,
1910 .
Swine Fever Outbreak No.
[emorandum
With reference to the suspected existence of Swine Fever on the
premises of
at
please note that the intestines of the animal which
on
- have now been examined by the Veterinary
Offcers of this Department, who report that in their opinion Swine
Fever
exist.
R. CANTRELL,
Chief Clerk.
61). wt. 1564.—0 250. Gf10. A. T. & co. Ltd.
//7_Ä45Ä
z„/u h-674

bu06ci6
e-f-dU) ///d
avoec-KOVaeØ
&'YflntUCh
ü/(ÅcdJ
4960
0044
778t /367
0-6 X-o
73
(03
70
13
/3
35
703%
95
9-1
91
30
to
57
30
(7
803
70
57
9-3
36
/ 07
/3
90
1-11
/ 09
/ 3-1
35
44
9 go
73
66
/(D83
9-8
7
/ 03
60
73
Z@fo
70
43
84
J•72J
65
7/
/ 07
97
/ 3--1
3/
73
95
37
t ræ-l
497.
9-0
37.
37
98
97
83 Ö
/ 06
33
55
73
34,
60
/ 90
7
(o
99-.
to
97
33.
err.' e
f 35
to 3
/ 6-83
9093
9-7.
83 c
136 y c


//4+-pz/
ZOZZ-Ø
Fi+4ø--Z ZZ
FÆ-m-m4Æ

L
T. F. FILGATE,
8EOREiARV;
UTH
GOU?! TY COUNCIL.
SECRETARY'S OFFICE,
COURT HovsE,
UNDALK,X


