——.zo.
LOUTH COUNT t
COUNCIt
MINUTES
PROM
26th August, 191 i,
tro
16th April,
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL,
Miautes of Proceedings
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
COMN+1?tEES
26th August, 1915,
16th April, 1917.

Coutb County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings of Vhe Louth County Council, at their
Second (Adjourned) Quarterly Meeting, specially convened, held
in the Council Chamber, Coulrt House, Dundalk, on Thursday,
26th August, 1915, at one o'clock, p m.
Present the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Eeq, J P.
Other Members—-Josep11 H M' Ardle, J P ; Michael Meade,
- wm Woods, J P; Thomas O'Rourke, Peter Woods, J P; John F
Murphy, J P; James Wynne, J p; B Finnegan, and Bernard
Hamill, J P, Esquires.
Messrs Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor ; J M C Lyons, and
Jtvrnes Dromgoole, Assistant Surveyors, and Daniel O'Connell,
Solicitor to the Council, were in attendance.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed, unanimously
Proposed by Joseph H M' Ardle, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Thos O'Rourke, Esq, and
county Council at their Second Quarterly Meeting, held on
29011 July, 1915, a copy of which has been sent to each member
of bhe Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
2
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Michael Meade, Esq •
Seeontled by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of the Proceedings of the Fin-
ånee Committee at Cheir Meeting held on the 9th day of Au-
gust, 1915 ,a copy of which has been sent to each member of
the Council, with all payments and recommendations contained
therein, be and are hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF PROPOSAL MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by William Woods, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Thomas O'Rourke, Esq, and
Resolved—Thast the Minutes of Whe Proceedings of Cho Propo-
sal Committee at their Second' Adjourned Quarterly Meeting
helll on tho 9th August, 1915, a copy of which has Loen sent €0
ench mem ber cf the County Council, be and are hereby con-
firmed.
CONVIRMATION OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MINUTES.
The following resolution was passcd unanimously : —
Proposed by John F Murphy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Bernard Finnegan, Esq, and
Resolved—-That Che Minutes of the Proceedings of the Exe-
3
cutive Committee at their Meeting held on the 9t'h August,
1915, a copy of which has been sent to each member of the
County Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Thos O'Rourke, Esq;
Seconded by Bornard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the report of t'.he COunty Surveyor, as ap-
pearinganm Pago I of the Schedule of Proposals for the 19th day
of August, 1915, a copy of which has been furnished to each
member of the Council, be and is hereby adopted by this Coun-
cil.
Mr Bernard Finnegan directed the attention of the Council
and tho County Surveyor to the condition of the kerbing at
Ballymascanlon footpath, and the County Surveyor was directed
to attend to the matter.
TENDERS FOR WORKS.
Tn accordance with the SeerOtarÉ's advertisement t,he Coun--
eil next proceeded to consider fenders for works not set by coil-
tract at adjourned meetings of the Rural District Councils
ARDEE DISTRICP.
For Work No. 257, only one tender was received—that, of
Thomas M 'Cormack, Town Parks, A•xlee, for tho sum of CII
198 Od, but as neither t)ho eontraetor nor his smreties attended
the Bond was not entered into.
DROGHEDA DISTR.ICP.
No tenders were received for €110 work advertised.
DUNDALK msrrmcr.
For Work No. 79 two tenders wero received. Michael Ma-
thews proposed to do the work for the sum of et9 (kl, but
as neitåler Mathews nor his sut•eties wore present his t,ender was
rejected.
Michael Hanratty, of Belloran, tendered Co do the work for
the sum of C50, and his fonder was accepted and the Bond
duly completed.
No tender's were received for Works Nos. 80, 81, or 82.
ARDEE WORKS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Michael Meade, Esq ;
Seconded by Bernard Finnegan, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works formulated by t/he
Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council at their Söeond' Quarterly
Meeting held on Tuesday, 6th day of July, 1915, and set u!
on Form 20, furnished to the County 'Council, and the con-
tracts entered into at their Adjourned Meeting 'held on Tues-
day, 27th July, 1915, be and are hereby approved of, and we
•authorise our Secretary to affix the Common Seal of the Coun-
cil to same.
5
DROGHEDA. WORKS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by John F Murp%y, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Wm Woods, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposals foi• Works formulated by
Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union, at t,heir Second Quar-
ferly Meeting held on Tuesday, 13th July, 1915, and set out
Form 20, furnished €0 Che County Council, and the contrnets
entewd into at their Adjourned Meeting held on 10th August,
1915, bo and are hereby approved of, and we authorise our SOC-
retary to affix the Common Seal of the Council to same.
DUNDALK WORKS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously : —
Proposed by Wm Woods, FAI, J P;
Seconded by Thos O'Rourke, Esq, and
Resolved—Thai tho Proposals 'for WÖrks formulated by the
Dundalk Rural District Chuncil at t'heir Second Quartorly
Meeting, held on Monday, 12th July, 1915, and set out on
Form 20, furnished to the County Council, and the contracts
entered into at their Adjourned Meeting •held on 26th July,
1915, be and are hereby approved of, and we authorise our Sey
retary to affix the Common Seal of the Council to same.
OOUNTY-AT-LARGE.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by James Wynne, Lsq, J p, and
6
Resolved—That the Proyysals for Works formulated by the
Proposal Committee at their Second Qu arterly Meeting 110.1d
on the 5th July, and set out on Form 20 furnished to the
County Council, and tho contracts entered into at, their Ad-
journed Meeting held on Monday , 9th August, 1915, be and
are hereby approved of, ancl we authorise our Secretary to affix
tho Common Seal of the Council to same.
WORKS PLACED IN THE HANDS OF COUNTY
SURVEYOR.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Peter Woods, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by John F Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That [he Proposals for Works passed by tho Rural
District Councils and Proposal Committee at, their last Quar-
terly Meeting, and for which no contracts have been entered
into, be placed in charge of the County Surveyor.
Before the foregoing r«solution was passed the County Sur-
vey«r directed the attention of Che Council to the work in t;he
Drogheda district—No. I—for Che construction of 250 perches
of new road in the townlands of •Moneymore and Yellowbatter.
Ile stated that he had already informed tuxe District Council
that tho money for work was insufficient and that he could
not undertake to do Vhe work by direct labour at the amount
set down, as it was understood that local people would assist
the contractor. I-Io further stated that he would endeavour bo
get a contractor for the work.
The Solicitor, Mr O'Connell, confirmed his former opinion
that. the ' work was a legal one.
The resolution as set out above was then passed.
VOTES OF SYMPATHY.
The following resolutions were passed in silence, and the
Secretary was directed to forward copies to the proper quar-
ters :
Proposed by Michael Meade, ' Esq •
Seconded by Thos O'Rourke, Esq, and
Resolved—That tender to Mr John Fitzgibbon, M P, our
sincere sympathy witli him in the great loss he lias sustained
by the death of his son.
Proposed by Michael Meade, Esq
Seconded by Wm Woods, Esq, J P, and
R'€ssolved—TÅat, wo learn with extreme regret of the
of Major W F C Garstin, 5th Royal Irish Fusiliers, who was
killed in action, , and we tender to his father, Mr J R Ga;rstin,
D L, Braganstown, a former respected member of this Council,
our sincere sympathy in his bereavement.
Proposed by John F Murphy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we tender to Mr P Byrne, J P, a former es-
teemed Inember of this Council, our sincere sympathy with him
on the death of his wife.
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Eyl, J P ,
Seeooll(led by J F Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we beg to tender to Mr J N Armstrong, J P,
8
our deep sympa thy with Ilim on tho great loss he has sustained
by the death of his son.
Proposed by Bernard. Hamill, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Thomas O'Rourke, EtX1, and
Resolved—That we tender to Mr Michael M' Ardle, an cys-
teemed member of this Council, our deep sympathy with him on
the death of his uncle.
CANON LYONS OONGRATULATED.
following resolution was posscd unanimously,
and
Secretary was directed to send a copy to Canon Lyons : —
by A Duffy, nsq, J P;
Seconded by James Wynne, Esq, J P, and
tho
Resolved—That we •beg to congratulate tho Very Rev Canon
Lyons on his recent appointment, as Parish Priest of Ardee, and
on his well deserved elevation to the Canonry. His great
ability and energy in every good work for the well-:being of his
country ancl Church, has earned our respect and admiration,
and we are plcuwecl that a distinguished Louth man will be
enablecl to continue his good work in the Oonnty to which he is
such an ornament.
PENSION TO JAMES CU-WISKEY, HARBOUR CONSTABLE
GILES' QUAY.
In accordance with special notice issued by 'tho Secretary
under Che provisions of the Union Officers Superannuation (Ire-
la nd) Act, 1863, the Council next proceeded to consider tho
question of gr•anting a pension to James Cumiskey, late Har-
9
bour Constable at. Giles' Quay, and Che following resolution was
passed •unanimously
by J H M'A101e, Esq, J P;
Seeoncled by Bernard Finnegan, Esq, and
Resolved—That a pension of C8 Åeight pounds) per year,
being two-thirds of his total annual remuneration of C12
(twelve pounds) be allowc«l to James Cumiskoy, Harbour Con--
stabi,e at Giles' Quay, subject to the approval of the Local Go-
vernrnent Board.
ARDEE DISTRICT SCHOOL ATTENDANCE
COMMITTEE.
The next two items on the agenda—Nos. 9 and taken
togetåer, aml the fallowing notioe of motion standing in tho
name of Mr Patrick M 'Gee was, in the absence of Mr M'Geo
and by his written autihority, moved by Mr J H M 'Ardilo, and
passed unanimously
Proposed by Joseph H M'Ard1e, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Michael Meade, ESA, and
Resolved—That Mr Bartholomew Woods, of Mountainstown,
Ihnleer, be co-opted a member of the Ardee District School
Attendance Committee.
ALI>IIIELANI) FARMERS' CONVENTION.
Circular letter from the Secretary of above was read, request-
ing the Council to send five representative farmer delegates to a
Convention to be held on Tuesday, 31st August next, in tho
Mansion House, Dublin, as to the best methods for the produc-
10
tion, marketing and distribution of agricultural produce, and
other matters relating to agricultural output, etc. The fol
lowing gentlemen were unanimously delegated to represent the
Council at the Convention James M 'Carthy, J P;
N T Murphy, J P; Patk M'Gee, J P; M Meade, and John F
Murphy, J P.
PANE AND WO'ITONSTOWN DRAINAGE DISTRICTS.
The following letter was read and referred t,he Drainage
Sub-Committee : —
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 5th August, 1915.
No. 39,005/1915.
Louth County.
Sir,
With reference to previous oorr€vpondence relative
tho transfer of the business •of the Fane and Wottonstown
Drainage Districts to the Louth County Council, I am directed
by tho Local Government Board for Ireland to stat,e t,hat before
tho Board take any steps towards making Provisional Orders rn
-these cases under Section 20 of the Local Government (Ireland)
Act, 1898, they consider that the County Council would do woll
put themselves in communication with tho last electod or
surviving or continuing trustees of tho Fane and Wott,onstown
Orainage Districts with a view to obtaining their consent +0
the proposed transfer, or, in tho alternative, to ascertaining
definitely that there are no persons ealkible of acting as such
board or body.
am Sir,
Your ol"iient Servant,
J. E DEVLIN,
Secr«tæry.
The
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
11
SPEED OF' MOTORS LN URBAN AREAS.
Letter was read from •the Local Government Board, and one
from Mr O'Connell, Council's Solicitor, informing tho Council
that the Corporation of Drogheda was the local authority Uo
make application fixing the speed limit of motors in tho urban
dristvict of Drogheda, but. that in the urban district Of Dun-
clalk, which was not a Municipal' Borough within the meaning
of the Act, the County Council was the uuthority mako t•he
a.pplication. The let,tors were initialled by tho Chairman.
COMMITTX1as TO INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS.
Letter was read from the Clerk of Petty Sessions, Drogheda,
informing t,he Council that application would be made at
Drogheda Petty Sessions, to be held on Monday, 30th August,
for committal of the following children to Industrial Schools:—
Laurence, James, John, Eva and Rosella Carr, and Patrick J.
Plunkett, all under fourteen years of age. Tho letter was ini-
tialled by the Chairman.
THE ELECTION AND REGISTRATION Acr, 1915.
Circular letter was read from the Local Government Board,
'No 42453-1915, with reference to above Act, which provides that
the Parliamentary and Local Government, Register of Electors,
or any register based on same, shall aremain in force until Par
liament provides for special register [lÅYing made, but in no case
later tJhan 31st December, 1916. The effect of the various pro-
visions of the Act is to arrest from and after the 31st July,
any further proceedings on the part of the officers concerned in
12
regard to the registration of voi,ers for Parliamentary ancl
cal Government putrpuses. The circular was initialled by . the
Chairman.
FORESTRY SCHEME.
The following Lotter was read, and it was decided that before
submitting a, scheme for approval, the Solicitor should inquire
further as to Athe possibility of purchase by the Council of
Omeath Park
Francis Street: Dundalk,
16th August, 1915.
Estate of tho Irish Land Commission, formerly E.stato of Lord
Rat,hdonnell, County Louth, E.T.A. 7071.
Dear Sir,
I have received the following letter dated t.he
14th instant, from the Socretary, Estates Commissioners
' 'With reference to the undertaking executed by tho Lottit',h
County Council for the purchase of a plantation on the abov•
Estate and to previous correspondence, I am directed by the
Estates Commissioners to inquire if the Council has yet sub-
mitted a scheme under Sections 4 and 20 of the Irish Land Act,
1903, for the approval of the Department of Agriculture and
Technical Instruction for Ireland."
In tho terms of the Undertaking referred to, and which is
dated the '23rd day of January, 1914, the Council agreed to holcl
the lands ' 'with such riXhts and powers as may be specified in
a Scheme to be settled pursuant to the provisions of' See. 20 of
the Irish Land Act, 1903, as amended by Section 18 of the Irish
Land Act, 1909." You will see Chat under Sections 4 and 20
13
of the Act of 1903, it, is necessary to have a Scheme submitted
for approval.
r have drafted the Scheme but same was held over in order
to ascertain if it were possible to purchase Orneatli Park and
Ruxton Estate holdings with a view to inclusion in the draft,
Scheme. I would be glad to have your instructions to submit
the draft Scheme for approval of the Department of Agriculture
and Technical Instruction for Ireland, and also of tho Estates
Com mi ssiofiers.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Chas. M 'Alester, Esq, Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
HOLIDAYS.
Applications were read from the County Surveyor and Secre-
tary for annual holidays, and the Council unanimously granted
each officer three weeks' leave of absence.
SUSPENSION OF TUBERCULOSIS (IRELAND) ORDER OF
1914
Letter was rend from the Department of Agriculture dated
24th August, 1915, No. 2985-15, enc10iing copy of an Order
marlo 'by them suspending as from 1st of Septomlnr, 1915,
until if is otherwise ordered, the operation of the Tuberculoeis
(Ireland) Order of 1914, except Article 12 (1) (diseased animals
not to be sent for shipment). The letter was initialled by tho
Chairman. The following is the Order referred to :—
(435.)
Order of tho Department of Agriculture and Technical
Instruction for Ireland.
(Dated 19th August, 1915).
The Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland, by virtue and in exercise of the powers vested in them
under tho Agriculture and Technical Instruction (Ireland) Act,
1899, the Diseases of Animals Acts, 1894, to 1914, and of every
other power enabling them in this behalf, do order, and it is
hereby ordered, as follows :—
From the first clay of September, nineteen hundred and fif-
teen, and until it is otherwise ordered by the Department, the
operation of tho Order described in the Schedule hereto shall bo
suspended to the extent mentioned in the third column of sueh
Schedule: Provided that such suspension shall not—
(i) affect the previous operation of such Order or anything
duly done or suffered under such Order ; or
(ii) affect any right, privileges, obligation or liability ac-
quired, accrued, or incurred under such Order; or
(iii) affect any penalty, forfeiture or pminighrnent, incurred
in respect of any offence committed against such Order ; or
(iv) affect any investigation, legal proceeding, or remedy
in r«spect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability,
penalty, forfeiture, or punishment as aforesaid ;
and any such legal proceeding ,or remedy may be
instituted, continued, or enforced, and any such ponalt,y, for-
15
feituro, or punishment may be imposed, as if this Order had not
been made.
In witness whereof tho Department of Agriculture
and Teehnieal Instruction for Ireland have hereunto
set their Official Seal this nineteenth day of August„
nineteen 'hundred and fifteen.
H. G. Smith,
On behalf of the Sooretary.
COLLECTOR P. HUGHES' REMUNERATION.
The Secretary was directed to write again to the Local Go-
vernment Board requesting their sanction to the payment of au
poundage fees still duo to Mr Patrick Hughes.
finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee. at, fhoir
Meeting held in the Council Chmmber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 23rd August, 1915, at One o'clock p m.
Presen f
In [he Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Bernard Hamill, J P; Thomas O'Rourke. and
William Woods, J P, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, co. Surveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of tho Financo Commit[eo
were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
Tho following accounts were submitted and on examination
were ordered for payment:—
LOANS ACCOUNT.
J Potter and Co., Dublin
SUBSIDIARY ACCOUNT.
Works iri charge of Co. Sürveyor
Secretary's Office
Æ280
O
1
24 11
C90 12
O
4
4
The Bank Books for the General and Subsidiary Accounts wero
examined and initialled by tho Chairman
17
FLOODING OF PUBLIC ROAD AT OMEATII.
As direetod by the Finance Com,mittee the Secretary had written
the London and North Western Railway Company that the fer-
mination on fllirty days' notice of the Agreement between the
(hmpany and Louth County Council whereby the Council wore
permitted to drain the water off the publics road at Omeatli
through a pipe laid on the Railway Company's property did not
suit the views of the Council, and asking for the deletion of the
Clause, and had received the following reply
London and Norf.h WCS'tern Railway,
District Estate Office,
Fhiton Streot, Crowe.
J w/11786/718
G 220.
Flooding of Public Road at (hnoa.th.
Dear Sir,—
In reply to your letter of the Ilfh instant, if is our
usual practice fo make such easements as tha,t included in the
enclosed form of Agreement subject fo termination by thirty days'
notice [o meet the contingency of any alioraiion to railway or
works which the Con.pany may be ealled upon to carry out.
T havo no reason €0 think that you will bo disturbed, but regret
T cannot alter the period of notice.
Yours faithfully,
J. M. WILLIAMS.
Charl(ns NVAIesfer, Esq,
Secretary Louth County Council.
Tt was decided that tho Chairman and Co. Surveyor should
visit: Omeat.h and endeavour to arrange for some method of drain-
ing tho wafer off the public road other than through the Railway
Company's property.
18
COUNTY ANALYST'S REPORT.
Tho following report from Sir Charles A Cameron was read and
initialled by Che Chairman :—
19th August, 1915.
Report of Sir Cha.rles Cameron, C B, M D, Public Ana,1ySf for
the County Louth, on articles submitted to him for analysis dur-
ing the quarter ended 30th June, 1915.
Forty-seven were reeÄved from Food Inspee,tors, R 1 C,
fol low
Articlo
Bu tier
Milk
W Ili skey
Total
Num ber
5
16
5
1
47
One certificate was to Acting Sergeant Levinge, Dundalk,
for specimen of milk deficient of at least 30 per cent, of its fats.
One certificate was sent to Sergeant Sharpe, Drogheda, for
specimen of whiskey, which was 32 degre€*ö under proof, and
was therefore adulterated with 9.33 per eenf of wait r.
For the Guardians of Drogheda Vnion one specimen of butter
was analysed and was puro.
One specimen of water analysed for the Ardee Rural District
Council had the following composition
One imperial gallon contained in grains.
19
Two specimens of milk were analysed for Mrs Maxwell Boyle,
Prospect, I) undalk. One was adulterated with at least 4.9 per
cent of added water and was also deficient of at least 36 petr cent
of it8 fats, and the other was adultorafod with at least 6.25 per
cent of added water and was also deficient of at por cent
of its fats.
In the original report on the water above referred to, full details,
chemical and microscopical, were •given, but in the foregoing only
the more important points are given.
CHARLES A. CAMERON.
LOST PAYING ORDER.
Tho Secretary reportxd to the Committee that a Paying Order
issued on X)th July, 1915, for road maintenance to Peter Kelly,
I)rumcah, Inniskeen, for the surn of C3 19s 6d, had not been
livered to the payee up to the present. On hearing of this
from Mr Kelly he (the had stopped paymnen€ of tho
Order at. the Bank. Kelly had been with Ilim again this morning
and had him a letter from the Retrurned Letter Office
Branch . which was read, and which stated that the letter oon-
taining the Paying Order had not been found.
Tho Committee directed the Secretary fo issue •a duplicato Paying
Order to the contractor, and to advise the Council's Treasurer
to pay same on presentation.
Total solid matter
Including
A Ibutninoid Ammonia
Saline Amnionia
Nitric Acid
Chol rine
Colour
A good water.
49.0m
0.0075
0.0035
6.500
5.090
Almost Colourless
20
Finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, (Aourthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 6th September, 1915, at One o'clock p m.
Present :—
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Michael Meade and Thos O'Rourke, Esquiros.
M«ssrs Janus Dromgoole and John AL C Lyons, Assistant Sur-
veyers, were in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Finance Committee
were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
Tho fol lowing accounts were submitted and on exmnination
21
vious correspondence, relative to t:ho proposed payment by the
Louth (hunty Council of a sum of C50 for the purchase of a Boa.t
Slip at Giles' Quay Tlarbour, I am diroc[ed by the Local Govern-
ment Board for Ireland to iörward to you a oopy -of a let:fer dated
the 7th ultimo received from the Commissioners of Public Works
on the matter, and I am to state that, as soon as tho Board have
heard from the Commissionei•s, they will be in a. position to reply
to your letter of the 1st june last.
The Söcretary,
Louth County
No. 43,596/1915.
8660-15.
Sir,—
I am, Sir,-
Your obedient, Servant,
J. D. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
Council, Dundalk.
Copy.
Office of Public Works. Dublin,
7th August, 1915.
were ordered for payment
Works in charge of County Surveyor
C140 8 0
The Bank Books for tho General and Subsidiary Accounts wero
e.xarnineci and initialled by tthe Chairman
PURCHASE OF GILES' QUAY BOAT SLIP.
Tho following letter and enclosure thorewith were read and
initialled by the Chairman
Tocal Government Board, Dublin,
2nd Sepuymber, 1915.
No.
I,oufh County.
Sir,—
With reference to your letter of the 28th ultimo and pre-
In reply €0 Mr Devlin's letter of the 5th instant, No,
30,400, on tho subject of Giles' Quay Ilarbour, the Board are ad-
vised by their Solicitor that there is some doubt as to whether
they have power to make Bye-Laws and a Schedule of Tolls for
this Slip. A ease has been sent to the Law Officers, and as soon
as their advice has been received tho Board hope to be in a posi.
tion to reply, definitely to your letter of tho 16th June labt.
I a.m, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
GEORGE' E SIIANAIIAN.
Assistant Secretary.
'l':he Seerefary,
Local Government Board, Dublin.
COURTBANE W SUPPLY—AREA OF CIIARGE.
Sealed Order of tho Local Government Board making the entire
Rural District of Dundalk tho area of chargo for uny expenses
incurred or to be incurred for the purposo of improving tho supply
of water and maintaining same at, Courtbane, was submitted and
initialled by tho Chairman.
MAINTENANCE OF LIVE STOCK (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1915.
The Secretary submitted Order of t:he Department of Agriculture
entitled ' 'Maintenance of Live Stock (Ireland) Ordor of 1915,"
dated 24th August, 1915, setting out that for the purpaso of main-
taining a sufficient stock of animals any animal which is visibly
or obviously in-calf or in-pig shall not be slaughterod nor moved
out of Ireland; provided that tho Order shall not. apply to the
slaughter of an animal' under the provisions of tho DiseaN*i of
Animals Acts or the slaughter of an animal desirable on account
of injury €0 tho animal or its illness, or the slaughter of an
animal when considered desirable by tho Dopartanent. The
"Slaughter of Animals (Ireland) Order of 1915" is revoked, and
the Maintenance- of Live Stock Order eomes into operation
on 1st September, 1915.
The Order was initialled by tho
SHEEP REGULATIONS.—DEFAULTERS.
Loiter was read Sergeant Callan, Dunleor, enclosing list
of persons who exposed sheep for sale Dunleer fair on 1st
September; and lotters were from Constable Friel giving
names of persons who exposed sheep for sale at market
on 4th September, without being accompanied by Decluration
that the sheep were dippt«i twice within the Autum Dipping
Tioriod in accordance with tho Dipping (Ireland) Order of'
1915.
The cases were referred fo t,he Executive Committee.
T,OAN FOR ROAD MAKING MACIIVNERY—SOLICITOR'S
BILL OF COSTS.
Letter was read from tho Manager Ilibernitvn Bank, Dundalk,
enclosing the Bank's Solicitor's Bill of Casts incurred on behalf
of the Bank for and incident €0 preparation of mortgage of
C4095 for the purpose of purchasing road making machinery. and
requesting payment of Che amount—C8 06 8d.
The Secretary was directed fo request tho sanction of the Local
Government Board fo the Payment of tho account.
PARK.
As directed at the last meeting of the County Counål,
Secretary had instructed Che Solicitor, Mr O'Connell, €0 enquire
from the Solicitor for the owner of Orneath Park whether there
was any possiibility of the Council's offer for Omoaih Park being
accepted, and the following letter in the maiter Mr O'Con-
nell was read and initialled by the Chairman :—
I) ear
to the
"In
Francis Street, Dundalk,
3rd September, 1915.
Re Forestry Scheme—Sale of Omeath, Park.
Sir,—
The Solicitor for the owner replies to enquiry as
pos«ibility of purchasing Onuut.li Pwrkk—
reply to yours of 30th August, I don't think there is any
likelihood of the offer already macle on behalf of the Council
being accepted by the judge. I think you should mako a sub
stantially increased offer."
Yours faitlifiilly,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M 'Ales[er, Esq, Dundalk.
RATE COIÄÆCTION.
Tli0 Secretory submitted the return of the eondi[ion of the
Poor Rate Collection to the 31st August, 1915, from which it
appeared the following amounts were outstanding: —
P S Donegan
Vatrick M 'Donnell
Patrick M 'Cullougll
John J Kelly
Patrick Ilughes
Pat.rick Cluskey
Peter M 'Donnell
John Woods
James V Johnston
Total outstanding
s
1926
9
1631
4
1'597 14
692 19
905
6
2347
1
2125
9
1430 16
912 15
813569 16
REDWATER IN CATTLE.
The following letter. was read and referred to
Council*—
d
8
4
5
5
3
5
6
3
2
5
the v County
25
but if the Council desire to make a trial of efficacy of a dip they
might do so at small expense by obtaining a loan of a machine
for upplying the dip in the form of u spray.
In this connection the attention of the Council might be
directed to an offer which has been made by Messrs William
Cooper xnd Nephews, Berkhamsted, England, viz: to lend the
necessary spraying apparatus and supply spraying materials and
the services of a fitter, on condition that the firm's out-of-pocket
expenses would be refunded €0 them.
I bave to add that, if tho Council are disposed to consider
Messrs Cooper's offer, the Department would approve of the
spraying trials being undertaken by tho Louth County Commit-
toe of Agrieulture and expenditure referred to above being de•
frayed from the Joint Fund Of the Committee and the Depart-
ment.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL. Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for Ireland,
Upper Merrion Street, Dublin,
4th September, 1915.
No. A. 9296/J5.
Sir,—
Adverting (o your letter of the 7th May last, relative to
tho treatment for Redwater in ca€fle, I have to state, for tho in-
formation of [he Louth County Council, Chat tho Department
would not at presen[ recommend i he erection of a dipping tank,
26
Scbolarsbip Committee.
Report of proceedings of above Committee at their Meeting held
in the Council Chamber, Courthouse. Dundalk, on Thursday, 16th
day of September, 1915, at. One o'clock p m.
Present :—
In the Chair—J T Dolan, Esq, A
Other Members—P O'Connell and Janus Connolly, J P, Etsquires.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Committee were
road by the Secretary and signed by the Chairman.
The Secretary read applications whic)i had been made, under tho
conditions of the Louth County Council Scholarship Scheme,
1915-16, for the Scholarships to be awarded by the County Council
The following are the names of the applicants.•—
Miss M C Murphy, 40, Church Street, Dundalk.
Miss Eileen Mary Teevan, Barronstown Ilouse, Dundalk.
John Vincent A Magrath, Clanbrassil Street, Dundalk.
Joseph Hardy, Newtownfane, Dundalk.
Certificates of character and suitability of Mr Magrath wore
read from Rev Father Hurson, C C, I)undalk; Rov Bro Burke,
Principal; and Rev Bro J G Robinson, B A, Christian Schools,
Dundalk; also certificafe of Pass for the Mairiculation Examina-
Cion of the National University.
27
Mr Hardy submitted testimonials from Rev Bro Burke and Rev
Bro Robinson, Cllrisfian Schools, Dundalk, in which Che suit-
Lbilify of tho candidate was lesbifiod, and Mr Hardy had also
passed the Matriculation Examination.
The Committee examined the Official Pass Lists of the Inter-
mediate Examinations and satisfied themselves that all of the
candidates had passed the examination for the Senior Grado in
1915.
On reviewing the other conditions of t.he Scholarship Scheme,
especially as to means, the Committee were unanimously of the
opinion Cha,t only Mr Magrath and Misses Teevan and Murphy
were strictly eligible.
After long discussion, the following recommendation
Propos«l by James Connolly, Esq, J P,
Seconded by Patrick (Y Connell, ESq,
was passed unanimously
That on 'consideration of all the conditions of Che Louth County
Council Scholarship Scheme, 1915-16, we recommend that a
Scholarship of Z50 be awarded to John Vincent A Magrath, Of
Clanbrassil Street, Dundalk; and that the remaining Scholarship
be divided between Miss Eileen Mary Teevan, Barronstown House,
Dundalk, and Miss C Murphy, 40, (Niurch Street. Dundalk,
giving C25 to each student.
The consideration of the renewal of tho to the
existing students was then discuss€d.
Reports were read from tho University Authority certifying that
the "Council's student—Joseph NI'Parland—whose was
renewable, had passed his 1st University Examination in Engineer-
28
The other two scholars-—Mr
ing with Second Clas Ilonours.
Patrick A Hanratty and Miss Margaret V Lyons—had not pre-
senfed themselves for examination, both having been ill when
tho Examinations were on. Certificate of Miss Lyons' illness
had already been considered by the County Council, and the con-
In Mr Hanratty's
finuanee Of the Scholarship recommended.
case the Council had decided Chat if he obtained a Cömmis.sion in
the Army his Scholarship would be held over for hill! unfil after
Che ware Letter was read from fire Secretary University College
recommending the County Council to renew both these Scholar-
ships.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
'Thaf we recommend the Counfy Council €0 renew the Scholarship
of Margaret V Lyons, Drogheda, for the second year; and that of
Joseph. M' Parland, Dundalk, for the third year. We also recom-
mend the renewal of the Scholarship of Patrick A Hanratty for
the third year, and should he obtain his Commission in the Army
that his Scholarship be held over him until after the war.
29
finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 20th September, 1915, at One o'clock p m.
Present
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—J P Kearney, Michael Meade, Thos O'Rourke,
T J Byrne, J P, and Bernard Finnegan, Esquires.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Finance Committee
were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted and on examination
were ordered for payment
Works in charge of the County Surveyor
Secretary's Office
C39 15 1
39 18 10
Z79 13 11
The Bank Books for the Genoi%ll and Subsidiary Acoounts were
examined and initialled by tlhe Chairman
Letter was read from Mr J M C Lyons, Assistant Surveyor, who
was acting for the County Surveyor, stating that he was unable,
through illness, to attend the Meeting.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman,
.32
COLLECTOR HUGHES' POUNDAGE FEES.
The following letter was read and initialled by tho Chairman :—
Local Government Board, Dublin,
7th September,- 1915.
No. 47,194/1915.
Louth County.
Sir,—
With reference to your further letter of the 27th ultimo,
relative to the payment by t.he Louf.h County Council of poundage
fees to Collector Hughes in respect of the half-years ended the
30th September, 1913, and 30th September, 1914, I am, directed by
the Local Government Board for Ireland to state Chaf they can,
v at present, only refer the County Council to the previous cor-
respondence on the subject.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
The Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Secr€ytaa•y •
ANCIENT MONUMENTS AT BARN AVET)DOGE.
Tho following letter was and initialled by tho :—
17820/15.
Elstafes Commissioners Offices,
Irish Land Commission,
Upper Merrion Street, Dublin,
9th September, 1915.
Estate of Charles A Kingston and Others.
County Louth, E.C., 3773.
Sir,—
I am by tho Estates Commissioners to inform you
that [he Ancient Monuments consisting of two Standing Stones
Bitua.te on the holding of James Stokes on €110 lands of Barna-
V eddoge, in the Barony of Ardee, and County of Inut,h, havo been
vested pursuant to Section 14 of Che Irish Land Act, 1903, in tho
Louth County Council, by Vesting ONIer dated the 14th July, 1915.
The Vesting Order has been fransmifted to [he Land Registry of
Ireland, Central Office, Four Courts; -Dublin, where the ownership
Of the Council will be registered freo of charge under the Local
Registration of Title Act, 1891.
COPY Map Of the holding is sent herewith.
Your Obedient Servant,
JOHN T. DRENNAN.
Tho Secretary,
County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
Circular letter was read fmm, tho U ar Office requ«sting a refurn
Of tho extent if, had been possible €0 release eligible men in tho
Council's employment to join the Army, and the Secretary was
directed to obtain the necessary information and furnish the ro-
turn as soon as possible.
APPOINTMENT OF BACTERIOLOGIST FOR COUNTY
LOUTH.
Tho Secretary reported that Brian O'Brien, Medicvq,l
Pector of the Local Government Board, had called at the Offieo
and interviewed the Chairman with reference to the appoint-
of a bacteriologist, or the establishrnen[ Of a pathological
laboratory in the County of Louth for tihe prevention, diagnosis
34
and treatmonf of disease. A letter from the, Local Government
Board to O'Brien requesting him to endeavour to induce
the County Conneils in his district to prepare such schemes,
was read, in which it was suggested that the Treasury contem-
plated presenting estimates to Parliament for tho defraying of
hali the cost of these schemes. The Chairman informed the
Committee that in his interview with Dr O'Brien he elicited f Ije
information that the. probable eost of such a scheme in County
Louth would be about,
Tho matter was discussed at length, and it was unan,imously
decided to refer the matter to the no-xf quarterly meeting of
tho Council for their cleeision, with the recornmendation that
the present tirne was inopportune for the incurring of the ex-
ponses of suell a scheme.
ELECTIONS AND REGISTRATIONS ACT, 1915.
Circular letter from tho Local Government Board, dated
Septentber, 1915. No. was read, in which if was
out that the present registers were. by Act of Parliament, to
main ih force urtil Parliament provide for special registers
"being nracle, but in no ease after the 31st December, 1916. It
was pointed out that no contracts for future Parliamentary and
local registration work should be entered that this (lid
not refer to the preparation of the Jurors Lists, efe,and that no
payntont, for any work done by officers, cut, in connection with
the Acts relating to Che registration of electors, fo 31st July
last, bo made until they aro roferre€l to the Local Government
Board. The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
FOR. GRANT OUT OF SCHOLARSHIP.
Letter was read from Mr P A Hanratty, County Council
Scholar, Collon, infoming the Committee that he was trying
to arrange for a Connnission in tho Army, and had been pro-
Eilisc•d fltat 110 illight obtain samo, buf that it was suggested bv
the Military that the Candidate should a€fend tho
Ijaracle of npplieants for perfection in, drill, and requesting the
Comtnit,toe to allot Ilim a sunl of CIO out of his remaining year '6
i'.ship fo help to cover the eost of the training.
A f Eer diseussion i ho Secretary was directed to inform Mr.
Hanratty {Ijat his request could not be acceded to.
TUITE COLLECTORS' APPLICATION.
The following letter was read : —
Gentlemen,
Dundalk, 20th Sepdx»mbor, 1915.
Owing fo tho harvest being over three weeks
later ifhan last year, anul at the request of the of Che
Rtnall ratepayers, who depend entirely on the corn crop in outr
0011eetiltg distriels, we, i he undersigned, bog to apply for an
O Xtonsion of af least 21 (lays to enable us eoniplete our res-
Peetive collections.
We remain, Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servants,
PETER WI)ONNEIJL.
JOHN WOODS.
PATRICK HITHES.
PATRICK OLUSKEY.
JAMES V. JOHNSTON.
To tho Chairman and Membe.ns Finance Committee.
The Committee inspected the rato collection returns, from
which it transpired that of the first moiety of the rate amount-
ing to the sum of C17 ,878 only C6,531 had been collected to
date, and that one of the collectors, out of had only
collected C238.
The Cornmittee considered the application in all its 'bearings,
and it was pointed •out that in September, 1913, when the Com-
'Ilittee granted a similar application, Chat the Iuoc<l.l Govern-
ment Board had refused to entertain it, and the collectors had
to romain out of their fees until the following year.
It was unanimously decided that under all the circumstances
the Committee could not grant any extension of time for the
closing of the collection, and the Secretary was directed to ad-
vise each of the applicants accordingly.
VACANCY ON COUNCIL.
The Secretary informed the Committee that Mr James T.
M 'Gee, of Roodstown, who was co-opted €0 fill the vacancy
caused by the resignation of Mr Halpenny, had not cornplied
with the Statutory obligation .10 make the necessary declara-
tion of acceptance of office within the required period. Tho
Committee declared the seat vacant, and the Secretary was di-
rected €0 placo the co-option of a member to fill the vacancy on
the agenda for next Quarterly Meeting of the Council.
37
executive Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of Executive Committee ai t,heiy•
MoeLing held in the Council Chamber, Cotvrt House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 20th September, 1915, at ono o'clock, p m.
the Chair: Chas A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Membens—J P Kearney, Michael Meade, Thomas
O'Rourke, T J Byrne, J P; and Bernard Finnegan, Esquires.
The Minutes of the previous meeting of the Executive Con-
mittee were taken as read and signed by €110 Chairman.
VETERINARY INSPECTORS' REPORTS—AUGUST, 1915.
The following reports were read and initialled by the Chair-
man
MR. CLINTON'S REPORT.
Dundalk, September, 1915.
I)oar Sir,
During tho month of August I dealf with Lhe fol-
lowing outbreaks of sheep seab
P Goodman, Crescent, Dundalk (15 sheep).
L Goodluan, Park Street, Ihnclalk (34 sheep).
Thomas Malone, Drumshambo (22 sheep).
Jos. Murphy, Dorr.ybeg, at Greenore (41 sheep).
Patrick Rooney, Mountinills, at Greenore (48 sheep).
38
In all the eases flie affected sheep were slaughtered, and the
remainder isolated and dipped.
Yours truly,
J. T. CLINTON.
MR. DONNEIXY'S REPORT.
Veterinary Esfa blishrnent,
Drogheda, Septetnber 4th,
Dear Sir,
I •beg [o report that <luring the 111011th of August,
1915, there was no oui,break of contagious disease mnongst
mals in this district, and no animals are at present res-
trieLions.
Yours faithfully,
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
Veterinary Inspector.
To Che Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
MR. MAXWELL'S REPORT.
Ardee, 8th Sep[eljl ber,
The Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk,
Sir,
1915.
J have inspected thc usual fairs and markets held
in the Ardee No. 1 District for the month of August. During
the month I have seen the detained sheep at Corbollis, Arclt.•e,
clipped twice, and visited them at oilier periods. A fresh) Mit-
break occurred at Dowclstown, Ardee, which I am taking pre-
cautions against.
have had disinfected the premises of Green's, John Street,
Ardee.
Tho usual forms have been supplied.
Yours truly,
. W. E MAXWELL, Ardee.
NON-COMPLIANCE WITH SHEEP DIPPING ORDER.
Reports were read from the police from Dunleer ancl West
Gate, Drogheda, giving lists of persons who had exposed Cheir
sheep for sale without being accompanied by a declaration that
they were clipped within the Autumn period, as prescribed by
the. Sheep Dipping Order of 1915. In Dunleer fair on 1st Sep-
tern ber, the Sergeant reported that eleven owners had exposed
their sheep. In Drogheda market on Septelllber the Con-
stable reported that five dofaulters had exposed their sheep,
and on 11th inst one owner had also failed to comply with
Order.
Mr T J Byrne, J P, suggested that the owners of the Shepp
should be written to to produce the declarations t'haf t:he sheep
had been dipped, and if the declarations were produced that no
Prosecutions should ensue in these eases.
The Inatter was discussed at length, and it was ullimatel.y
Proposed by J P Kearney, Esq ;
And seconded by Michael Meade, Esq,
all• the owners who had exposed their sheep for sale, as
reljorCed by the police, and had failed to produce the declara-
tion when requested to do so, be prosecuted -under the Order,
and [haf tho Solicitor of tho Council bo directed to issue su•n
mouses.
This resolution ',vas passed, T J Byrne, Esq, dissenting.
SHEEP SCAB CASES.
The various notiöes served bv the Veterinary Inspectors in
tho cases of sheep scab, were examined by the Committee • ad
initialled by the Chairman.
Tho ea..ses were as follows :—L A Lee-Norman, Corbollis ; Thos
Maione, Drumshambo; Peter Goodinan, Dundalk; J P Rooney,
ills, Newry; Laurence Goodman, Jos.
Mitvrphy, Dorr.vbeg; William Woods, Ca clingford.
PARASITIC MANGE.
Notice was Cabled from Mr Donnelly of a case of Parasitic
nge af John Stroet, Drogheda. The final report stated flint
file animal had been slaughtered and buried and the premises
and liarnoss thoroughly disinfected.
SWINE FEVER.
A ease of swine fever at Mullenstown, Ardoe, was reported by
the police, and Che premises were (loela infected place by
the Veterinary Inspector, Mr Maxwell.
SHEEP DIPPING DEFAULTERS.
TIW Seeretary submitted lists of shoep owners Who failed
to rei urn flie Forms for €110 sutnmer dipping poriotl aeeorcling
After cliseus.sion t'he Seere[ary was
[o the terms of the ()rder.
directed to notify Cho ov,mers that if €110.V did not return 'he
Forms within seven clays prosecutions would ensue,
41
Coutb County Council.
Minutes of proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
Special Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dun-
dalk, on Thursday, 23rd September, 1915, at One o'clock p m.
Presen t
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, .T P.
Other Members—Peter Woods, J P; Bernard Finnegan, Patrick
M'Goe, J P; John Morgan, John Dolan, Bernard Tlmnill, J P;
Michael Meade, T V M'Qui11an, Joseph 11 M'Ardle, J Thomas
O'Rourke, J P Kearney, William Woods, J P; and T J Byrne,
J P, Esquires.
The Secretary read the recommendations of the Scholarship
Cotmniftee, whieh were as follows
"Thaf. n Scholarship of 50 por annum be awarded to John
Vineenf A Magrath, Dundalk, and fhaf the renmining Scholar-
ship of 850 be divided as follows to be awarded to Miss
Eileen M Teevan, Barronsfown, and 825 fo be awarded fo Miss
o•garef C MillNhy, Dundalk; and that a Scholarship of EC50 be
awarded fo Miss Ma rgaret V Drogheda, for her second
Year
; and Scholarships of Z50 each [o Joseph M' Parland and
Patrick A Ilanratty for [heir third years, and that in the event
Of the latter student obtainirvr a Connnission. in the Army that
his ScholatAiip be held over for hilli until afi er t Ile war."
A discussion took place on tluse reeonjmendations, and (T,e Secre-
tary informed the Council that four candidates had applied for the
Scholarships, but that Mr Joseph one of the applicants,
was, in Che view of the Sehol+t•ship Conunifiee, not considered
entitled, as if was alleged i hat liiS' father was possessed of sulli-
cient njeun.s iO give his son a University Edueafion without the
aid of a Scholarship. This view was contested by several Mem-
bers of t.he Council, who stated that Mr Ilardy's father was a
working
blacksmith with a large family.
The following resolution was Chen passed unanimously :—
by T J Byrne, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Joseph I) Kearney, Esti, and
Resolved—That on consideration of the recommendat ions of fhe
Scholarship Commit fee now submitted to a Special Meet ing of the
Council, we hereby decide to divide the two Scholarships of 850
offered by the Council equally between tlie four applicants whose
runties are as follows:—
Miss Eileen Mary 'l'eevan, Barronstown Ilouse, Dundalk.
Miss Margaret C Murphy, 40 Church Street, Dundalk.
Joseph Hardy, Newtownfane, Dundalk; and
John Vincent A Magrath, Clanbrassil Street, Dundalk ;
and in the event of one of the applicants refusing the Scholar-
ships, that a full Scholarship of Æ50 be awarded to Mr Magrath.
A nd we approve of the fee's recommendation regarding
renewals of exisd ing Scholarships, and hereby renew for the
second year Miss Margaret V l.yons' Scholarship of W); and for
the third year Joseph M 'Parland's and Patrick A Ilanraf[y'.s
Scholarships of Z5() each.
And in the evenf of the latter student obtaining a Commission
in the Army, we agree thai this be held over for him
affer the War.
CO-OPTION ON COUNTY
, The following Notice of Motion sfailding in natne of Mr
Alieijael M eacle was put as substantive resolution and passed
unaninjously :—
by Mi%tde, Esq;
Seconded by T J F.sq, J
; and
Resolved—Thai Mr John
lland, Castieljellinglliil'i, lye (O-opted
Nienjber of the Louth County Committee of Agricult tire.
WORKMEN AT JONESBORO' QUARRY.
(On the application of the, County Surveyor [he Members of the
Council decided to hear
him in Cmnmiiiee with regard to the
application Ior an increase of wages made by the workers af
Jonesboro' Quarry. Ile stated that the present wages of i he
labourinev men 158 per week and they had asked for an in-
crease of 3s per week.
Ile understood that the workrnen in Co.
A quarries only received 15s per week. Ile asked for
direction from the (Aouneil in the matter.
It was by Mr llamill that the County Surveyor
0 ntljowereql to increase tho wuges front 15s to IGs per week at, Ili*
discretion, but this was opposed by Messrs M'Gee, Byrne, and
Me;ule on the ground that these men had only been in t lie Coun-
oil's ell] ployrntmt a very short tinte.
and they should not break
through an agreement as to wages so recently made.
After discussion the following resolution was
by M'Geo, L'sq, J r;
by '1' J Byrne, Esq, J P:
"That the application of the workmen at Jonesboro' quarry for
an increase of wages from to 18s per week bo not acceded to."
To this the following Amendment was
Proposed by Bernard Tlamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Joseph P Kearney, :
"Thaf the application of the workmen af Jonesboro' Quarry for
an increase of wages be left in the hands of the County Surveyor,
and [hat he have power to increase their wag«s from lbs to
per week if he thinks it advisable."
The Chairman took a division on fhe Amendment with the
following result
For the Amendment—Messrs John Dolan, Finnegan,
llamill, Joseph P Kearney, Thomas V Thos
O'Rourke, Peter Woods, and William woods—B.
Against—Messrs Thotnas J Byrne, Joseph TI M' Ardle, Vafriek
M'Gee, Michael Meade. John Morgan—5.
The •Chairman declared the Amendment carried, and flie forms
of' saute accepted a.s a substantive resolution, and f Ire County
Surveyor was instructed in accordance therewith.
FISHING IN DUNDALK BAY.
Petition addressed to the Chairman and signed by the fishermen
of Blackrock was rend, in which eotnplaint was made frawlers
and boats using ring-nets are constant Is af work inside
limit in Dundalk Bay. and that if s«nnething was not done im-
mediately to puf a stop to breaches of the law, the fishing
in [he Bay would I ye ruined. As the interests of f,he fishertnon
of Clogherhead, (Gilc«' Quay, and Annagassan were affected, as
well as those of' the Blacklock lijen, the petitioners roque9fed the
45
County Council to bring the maf[er under the notice of the
Fishery Comntissioners with view [o having an inquiry held ;
and to take all necessary steps to save flie fishing in Dundalk Bay
from ruin.
The Council unanimously directed Che Secretary to send a copy
Of the petition to f,he Fishery Branch of the Department of
AgrieuItt11T', drawing attention to the complaints made therein;
and also directed .the Secretary io invite a deputation of the
Blackrock fishermen to (he next. Meeting of the Finance Com-
miftee to discuss the matter.
Second in fliO reeenf competition for plans for the New Offices)
for the autount of flie preliiilllii, namely, Æ25, and iC was unani-
mously agreed fhaf tliis amount should also be paid
Tletv County Offices Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of. [he New County Officw•s
at, flieir Meeting held in ille Conneil Coutdhouse, Dun-
(lalk, on Monday, 4ih 1915. at 1.30 0'eloek m.
Prosenfl :—
Tn Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq. J V.
Other W(As. .J P; Bernard Ilaliiill, J -p;
Woods, J V; and Wynne. .T P, Esquires.
The Minutes of i lie previous Meet ing of the Connnifioe
In ken as read and signed by tho Cha.irtnan.
The Seca•eiar.y tod Professor Scott's account for work
oonneetion with i ho proposed New Cotilify ()fiiees as follows :—
To fee for Asgegsing 19 Designs for the New COIIHty
Ofli ees
One-fift 11. pet' een[ of value oi building (E6.00())
To Survey and measuring of Clerk of the Crown and
Peaeo's Offices and Ilia king drawings Of suggest
$31 10 0
12 0 0
alterations, f'tc.
To Travelling Expense'
550
550
Æ54 0 0
If. was unanilnously aureed i liai the of his aecount
INIid Professor Scoff.
and
Ilickg,
Applieaåion was read frotti Bat ellt•lor
Merrion Square, Dublin (i he designers of Clue drawings placed
finance Committee.
Minufes of Proceedings of the I'hnanee Committee at their
Meeting held iti the C•ouncil Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 4th October, 1915, one o'clock p.m.
Pressent :—
the Chair—Chas. A. Duffy, Esq., J.P.
Other Wynne, J.P.; O'Meaati, J.P.;
Wm. Woods, J.P.; John F. Murphy, J.P.; Michael Meade,
Bernard llamill, J.P.; and Peter Woods, J.P., Esquires.
Mr. Thomas Walsh, Co. Surveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Finance Committee
were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted and, on examination,
ordered for payment
Works in charge of County Surveyor
Sécre[ary's Ofliée (including remuneration to five Rafe
Collectors who closed their collections on 30th
September, 1915)
Total,
Z147
266 10 10
Æ413 12 1
The Bank Books for [Ile General and Subsidiary Accounts were
examined and initialled by the Chairman.
'I'RAWLING AT BLACKROCK.
The following letter from the Department (Fisheries Branch), •
in reply fo the petition of the Blackrock l"i.sherrneli, which . had
been forwarded by the Secretary in accordance witli instructions
received a.t last meeting of the County Council, was read :—
Department of Agriculture and 'l'eehnieal Instruction,
(Fisheries Branch),
3 Kildare Place, Dublin,
29th September, 1913.
No. 4268/'15. E.B.
Sir,—
1 have to acknowledge the receipt' of your letier of
28th instant, and its accompanying copy of a pe€i(ion from tho
fishermen of Blackrock, Co. Louth, in reference 'to alleged illegal
trawling in Dundalk Bay ; and to state, for tile information of .the
Louth County Council, that the Department have received no
('Oruplain€ of illegal trawling in Dundalk Bay. Should such eom-
Plaints be received, supported by information which would assisf
the identification of offenders, the question of instituting proee«l-
ings would be considered.
Tho use of seines or ring nets is not illegal in Dundalk Bay.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. i'. GILL,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
.30
The Connuitfee (leeidecl to hear [he deputation from the fishor-
onen, who had been invited to aftend Chis meeting, a,nd the follow-
ing men appeared before the M'Keown, Michael
Tlamilton and Peter Carroll—and it was Staf.ed that the usage Of
ring nets by trawlers was working havoc with tho fishing in the
Bay, and was even more destructive that steam trawling.
The Committee were unanimously of opinion that as tho use of
ring nets, as embodied in tho Departurent's letter, was not ill€•gal
in Dundalk Bay, that tho only effective way fo deal with the
matter was for all the fishermen of Blackrock. Gyl€xs' Quay,
Annagassan and Clogher-head io jointly pefi fion the proper
authority to make [he use of ring nets illegal in the Bay, and
that the County Council would give all the assistanoe to
f he fishermen in the matter. This was conveyed fo the deputa-
[ion, who thanked the Committe• for affording . (hern this
opport,nnify of ventilating their grievance.
A eornplainf was also re,acle by the deputation that a. wafer eut
in the river near Lurgangreen attention owing to the
em bankntent being broken; and if was arrang€KI fhaf the County
Surveyor would inspect the place and see if anything could be
done to remedy the defect.
CARLINGFORD STORE.
I .otter was road from the County Surveyor req uesting the
Chanmiftee to have transferred from the Carlingford Pier Revenue
Account a sum of EGO, to be expended on any necessary repairs to
the Pier and other works in eonnecfion fhorewith,
The Committee unanimously reeornmended that tho request. be
accedixl to, and the Socretat•y was directed accordingly.
31
51
LETTING OF CARLINGFORD STORE.
The qu«stion of the letting of the above store was eonsidered
at length by the Committee, and the Secretary was directed to
have the consideration of the lei ting of the store placed on the
agenda for nexi Meeting of the Finance Committee, and placed
on the notice convening the
ESTUARY OF BOYNE.
Notice from the Department of Agricmlt ure defining flie
bonndary of the mouth of the River Boyne was tabled by the
Secretary, who was directed to send a copy of same to the Town
Clerk, Drogheda.
GILES' QUAY BOAT SLIP
Tho following let ter frolii t lie Local Governtnenf Board was
local Government Board, IYublin,
mth Septemty•r, IBIS.
No. 51895/1915.
Louth County.
Sir,—
I am directed by the I,oeal Government Board for Ireland
to refer to their letter of the 17th instant on the eubjeet Of
the purchase by the Lolith County Council of a Boat Slip at
Giles' Quay Ilarbour, and I anu to inform the County Couneil
the Board have since received communication from the
Commissioners Of Public Works, in which the expr€s;sion of their
views, as previously conveyed to the I,oeal Government Board, is
qualifi«l as follows:—
correct state»neut should be that the (of Works)
have no power to frame bye-laws for fhe regulation of flie Quay
52
as proposed to be enlarged by the addition of the Boat Slip. The
Board have power to make, and have made, byeslaws under tille
provisions of the Fisheries Acis for the regulation of the works
carried out under [hose Acts and transferred to [he County of
Louth on the 7th February, 1879, consisting of concrete pier, a
sform parapet, a sloping sea pavement and harbour excavation."
1 am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
The Secretary was directed fo reply that, in the opinion of Che
Council, the Slip was not an extension of the Quay, but was part
of tho flarbour and Works.
PENSION TO GILES' QUAY IIARBOU1t CONSTABLE,
Sealed Order from thc Local Government Board sanctioning the
proposal of [Ile Council to grant pension of per annum to
James Cumiskey, late Ilurbour Consta ble at Giles' Quay, was
road and initialled by the Chairnmn.
AGRICULTURAL GRANT.
Letter was read from the Local Government Board enclosing
paying order for the sum of *6,391 15s Od in respect of the
Agricultural Grant-. The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
THIRD PARTY POLICIES.
Let[er was read from the London and Lancashire Fire Insurance
Co., Ltd., enclosing Third Party Policies as approved by the
Council's Solicitor, and account for Premium.s on same. The
Policies were inifialled by the Chairman and payment' of flie
account ordered.
RATE COLLECTION.
The Secretary submitted staternenf of the rafe collection to
30th September, 1915, fronl which appeared all the
e 01 leetors in the Ardee and Drogheda disfrieis. and one colleeior
in Dundalk district. had elosed their eolleeiions.
Four eolleet ors
in Dundalk di8tTief had not closed, and i Ile amounts outsi anding
against them were asfollows
Patrick Ilughes
Patrick Cluskey
Peter M 'Donnell
John Woods
C557
719
1180
C2798
4
6
6
341 14 10
12
6
5
9
6
Letter add roesed to tho Chairman, and signed by the above
eolleefors, was read, in w hiell their applieafion for an
eXtension of time to close their collections, which had been before
the Committee at last Finance Meeting, was renewed. Tn the
Original application an extension of 21 days was asked for.
Messrs Bernard llamill and Peter Woods supported the appli-
eat ion, and the Secretary was directed fo convey the application
the Local Govermneni Board witli the opinion of tho Coni-
that owing io the late harvest and tille faec that, very
lit grain had yet been sold that the extension might be
granted.
IJNTVERSITY SCIIOI,AIRSITTPS.
Lotters were road from Joseph Ila rd.v and Margaref C
thanking the Council for awa ruling them Scholarships of C25
54
each, but' staling f haf they were nof intending to avail themselves
of same.
The Socrofary informed the Committee that under tho terms
of the resolution of the County Council Mr John V Magrath woe
now entitled fo a Seholarship of 250 per annum.
After discussion, it was
Proposed by Mr Bernard llamill, J P;
Seconded by Mr Peter Woods, J P,
and unanimously resolved:—
Thai we recommend the County Council [o incroaso Miss Eileen
Teevan's Scholarship of C25 to E50, this making two Scholarships
for this year's award, namely Teevan and John
Vincent Magrath, C50 per annum each.
BOOK FOR SIIEIUFJ."S
Application was read from the Iligdl Sheariff for Civil Bill book
for records Of decrees and judgments.
TITO Soere€ary read tho Section of the Local Govornmen€ Aet
from which if appeared that the County COuneil should supply
this book, and the Committee unanimously instructed him to
order same.
MOTOR LICENCE DUTY DEFAULTERS.
The Secretary submitted list of motor owners in the County
who had not paid the I ,ieenee Duty as required by the Finance
Act, and the Conunittee unanimously directed the Secretary to
Lave prosecution issued against the defaulters.
55
Proposal Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Cotntnittee at their
Third Quarterly Meeting held in the Council Clhalllber, Court
House, Dundalk, on Monday, 18th October, 1915, at one o'clock
Present the Chair: Chas A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other O'Rourke, William Woods, J P;
James M J r; James Wynne, J P; Tlamill,
J P; J P Kearney, Peter Woods, J P, and T J J P,
Esq uires.
The Minutes of the previous Ineeting of the Proposal Cornmi[-
tee were taken as read, ahld signed by the Chairnjan.
The Secretary submitted County-at-Large accounts for
(Itrar.
ended 30th 1915, antounting to the sum of
Cö,4G9 •Is 4d. Same were examined by the Conlmittee a lid
payment recommended.
56
finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of tho Finance Committee af their
rnoetingx held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 18th October, 191.3, at one o'eloek p m.
Prosent —
: Tn Chair: A Duffy, Esq, .J P.
James M 'Cattily, .J P; .Jam«s Wynne, J P; Bernard Hamill,
.1 P; J P Kearney, Peter Woods, J P; T .J Byrne, .J P,
Esquires.
Mr Thomas AValsh, County Surveyor, was also in attendance.
'I'll. Minuto.s of the previous Meeting of the Conjmittoo wero
iaj•on as read, and signed by the Cltairntan.
The following aeeonnts were submitted ancl on examination
were ordered for payment
LOANS ACCOUNT.
W. ancl Sons for 3 Searifiers eomplote
SUBSIDIARY A(T'OC.NT.
Works in ehargo of County Surveyor
Seere[a.r.v's ()fliee
c'210
C'2G
C'2'2fl
o
12
9
2
o
9
1
Tho Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loan Ac-
counts were examined and initialled by Che Chairman,
57
LETTING OF CARLINGFORD PIER. STORE.
The. next business on the agenda Was the eonsideråtiön of
tho letting of above Store, which vv:xs now completed and ready
for the storage of goods.
the motion of Mr J p Kearney,
Seconded by Mr Peter Woods, J P,
The Committee .unanimously reeommended that the Store be
lot as required from time to time to all persons requiring same.
The Committee then considered the question of the ware-
housing charge for the use of the Store, and the following seale
was unanimously adopted
A charge of 2d (twopence) per ton per week, or any portion
of a week for all goods stored.
Where the Store is used for coal imported fo the pier, tho
rate of 2d por ton per week to be charged on tho full tonnage
first stored until the entire qualitity is rernoved from the Store.
The Harbour Constable to be responsible for the keeping of
the aeeountns of all goods stored.
CRIMINAL T.X.JCRV APPI„ICATIO.XS.
The following letter from the County Solicitor -was road, and
initialled by the Chairman :—
Francis Street,
Dundalk, 14th Oct., 1915.
I)oar Sir,
I beg to reporf on the result of claims heard af the
recent Quarter Sessions as follows :—
JSMAY CHESTER WALSH, croo and Cö.—These are the
cases where cattle are alleged to have been poisoned and' other-
wise killed. The larger claim was dismissed. In the second
claim the sum of C2 was awarded to be levied off Che D. E. D.
of Castlebelli,ngham.
TRUSTEES ARDEE DRAINAGE BOMU), C20.—1njury to
sluice gates. Decree was granted for CIO IOS Od, to be levied
off D. E. Divisions of Ardee Urban and Ardee Rural jointly.
KILLA.X.XY C00PERATlVE F. 1. SOCIETY, I,TD, C20—
Damage to reaping and binding machines. This claim was dis-
m issed.
.JOLI.N M'ARI)LE, Monascriebe, Clö.—Burning of hay. De-
cree was granted for C7 IOS (kl, to be leviöd off the District, El.
Division of Ballymascanlon.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M 'Alester, Esq,
See. Louth County Council, Dundalk.
RATE COLLECTION.
Tho following letter from the Local Government Board was
read antl initialled by the Cliairman, who explained tt:rat copy
had been sent to all the Collectors concerned, with the result
that all of them had now closed their collection of the First
..-oiety, on the date mentioned by the Local Government
Board
59
Local Government Board. Dublin,
6th October, 1915.
No. 53089/1915.
I.out.h County.
Sir,—
The local Government Board for Ireland have had be-
fore Chetn the return showing condition of the collection of
the IS).or rate on the 30th ultimo in Loutit County for half-year
ended on that date, from which they regret to noto that Col-
lectors Jiai.rick 11 ugh«s, Patrick Cluskey, Peter M • Donnell, and
John Woods have failed to close their collections within the half-
year, having outstanding the large amounts of Z557, m 19, ZI 180
and C341 respectively.
The County Council will recollect that when these Collectors
the IBoard were
failed to close on a similar occasion previously,
Obligcxl to suspend the payment of their retnuneration. On tho
representation of the County Council and in view of a guarantee
given by each of the Collectors individually that they would eom-
with the req ui rements of the Board in future, the Local
Government Board, though with considerable reluctance, agreed
to modify this ruling.
Not only therefore have the Ck)llectors by their failure to close
for the past half-year forfeited all claim to the payment of their
remuneration, but it is clear that the question of their fitness to
H.•tain their office must now be considered.
In the meantime the O)llectors or their Sureties should be
upon to lodge the amounts outstanding forthwith to the
eredit Of Che County Council, and the Board req uest that you
will notify them by the 13th instant whether the outstanding
amounts have then been so Lodged.
GO
You should immediately inform each of t he Collectors eoneevnod
of the contents Of [his letter.
T am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVT.IN, Assistant Seerofary.
The Secretary,
T,oufli County Council.
Af t lie request of the Chairman, the Committee (lirec•tod the
their
Secretary to apply to the Local Governmenf Board for
sanction to the paymenf of the poundage fees to Collectors
Ilughes, Cluskey, M'Donnell, and Woods.
CARETAKER CENTRAL TUBERCVTOSIS DISPENSARY.
The following letter was read, and the Committee unanitnously
recommended [he confirmation of fhe appointment of Mrs
Annie M' Parland as caretaker at the salary of C12 per annunl
Couniy of Louth Tuberculosis Comnjittee of Managemeuf.
Clanbrassil Sireef, Dundalk,
7th October, 1915.
Dear Sir,—
T am directed by the Tu bereulosis Commit fee of
Management to inform the I.outh County Council [hat they have
appoinfed as Caretaker of the Central Dispensary, Dundalk, Mrs
Annie M 'Parland, Infirmary Lodge, Dundalk, af a salary of C12
(Twelve Pounds) per annurn; and io request the Council fo ratify
Secretary Louth Co. Council, Dundalk,
61
AGREEMENT BETWEEN COUNTY COUNCIL AND
INSURANCE COMMITTEE.
The iV)llowing circular' letter from the l,oeal' Government Board
was read, and the Committee directed the Secretary to send copies
fo the Secretary of the Insurance Conunitfee and Che Tuberculosis
('Ommittee of Management and ask him to arrange for a Con-
ferenee of the two Committees to discuss the letter and Che terms
Of the agreement referred to therein; the Conference to fake place
in the Council Chamber, Dundalk Courthouse.
Local Government Board, Dublin,
13th October,
No. 53, 987: ,1915.
Miscellaneous.
Sir,—
1915.
the appointment.
Charles M' A lester, Esq,
Yours faithfully,
V. WARREN, Sec.refatw.
1 am directed by the Local GovermnenC Board for Ire-
land to stute, for the information of the Council,
that after
negotiations with the Insurance Commissioners they have ar-
ranged the terms of a standard form of agreement to be entered
into between County and County Borough Cöuncil.s and Insur-
Committees, in regard to the treatment of tuberculous in-
sured and exempt persons recommended for Sanatorium Benefit.
Three copies of the Form are enclosed herewith.
The objects which the Board have had in view have been to
co-ordination between the administration of Insurance
COIMtnittees and County arrangements for the treatment of
'l'nbereulosis, to secure for insured and exempt persons a, fair
(YI Uivalent for the contributions made from the Sanatorium
Benefit Funds, and in all other respects to preserve . the inde-
62
pendenee of County and ( •ounty Borough Councils in regard to
financial control and to the managmnent of their institutions.
I ender the conditions of Agreement as now settlexl, Che services
of the Tuberculosis Officer will be at the disposal of the In-
suranee Committee for the examination of' applicants for Sana-
tori um Benefit, for attendance at meetings the Conunittee, and
for advice on matters arising oui of the administ ration of Sana-
In addition the dispensary systetn and staff,
torium Benefit.
together with the provision of shelters. Will be available for in-
su red and exempt persons for examination and for treatment.
where recommended by the Tubernalosis ( )ffieer. In return for
these services. a contribution ealeulat«l on the basis of one-fifth
of the annual salary and travelling expenses Of the Tuberculosis
Officer will be received from the Sanatorium Benefif Funds.
In regard to institutional treatment, the County Council will
undertake to provide accommodation for insur«l and exempt
patients recommended by the Insurance Cornmifiee on the ad-
vice of' the Tubelvulosis Officer, within a limit of expenditure
hereafter explained. The form facilities for [his upward
lintit to be expressed in terms of Sanatorium and b«ls
to be reservcul for insured and exempt patients, the number of
which can readily be determined upon the basis of an €stirnat«l
annual cost of maintenance.
It will certainly be of convenience
for the practical adrninistmtion of the Insurance Committee and
of the (%unty or County Oorough Council, thaf either body
should be in a position to know the extent of the institutional •
aecommqglation at their disposal from time to time.
Sinyilarly domiciliary treatment in a manner approved by the
Local Govermnent Board will be undertaken by C%unty or County
63
norxjugh Councils for insur«l and exempt persons reeontmended
by the Insnrati(Q Cornuyittee on the advice of the Tuberculosis
Officer, subject to a financial limit also hereafter specified.
The normal annual contribution of the Insurance Conitnittee
towards the funds of fhe (V»unty County Borough Councils
will be at the rate of Is 2d per insured person, out. of the
statutory yearly income of the Insurance Cornmitfee under the
National Insurance Acts.
Four-seven t of this eont ribution
(t.hat is, at the rate of 8d per annum per insured person) is ap-
Ijropriated to tneeting the cost of institutional aeeornmodation re-
•served for insured and exetnpt persons under the Agreement. The
requirements of insured and exetnpt persons for institutional
treatment will doubtless exceed this allowance; the surplus eases
will be dealt with by the Tuberculosis Cornm.ittee of flie County
or County Borough Council. who should consider the claims of
xueh patient* equally with those of uninsur«l persons.
The balan«• of the Insurance (Ont.rilyution (that is, af the rate
Of Gd por insured petson) is charged primarily with the eoni-
payment for the services of i lie Tuberculosis Officer and
Dispensary sysfern. calculated onesfiftti of the salary and
•travelling expenses of the T u l»reulosis ( )fficer, while the re-
liiåiinder is applicable to the expenses of the County or County
IBOHiugh Council in carrying out dotnieiliary freafment of in-
S Ured and exempt persons. (in the recommendation of the In—ur-
anee Cornrnitt«•.
The form further includes provisions for the supply of periodi-
reports. and other statistieal infortnation, as to insured and
patients undergoing treatn•.euf under the eouniy or County
O rough Council, for the visitaiion of C 'ounty Institutions by
Officers of the Insurance Commissionens, and for [he seftlenu•nf of
disputes by reference to the Local Government Board. and Insur-
ance Commissioners, or by arbitration.
In recommending the standard form of Agreenmenf for accept-
ance by County and County Borough Councils, the Board have
no doubt that [he Councils will recognise the eonditions as re-
presenting a reasonable and equitable adjustment of the mutual
rights and obligations of the Ch»uncils and of Insurance Com-
mitt eos, and they trust that agreements will be generally eon-
eluded on the suggested lines af early date, and
tLha,C an
organised sehellle of efficient treatment, of Tuberculosis will now
be put in operation in every County and County Borough in
Ireland.
1 am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BAIU,AS,
The Seere€ury of
Che (%unfy Council.
I'MU<.
Secretary •
The following letter was read, and, after discussion, the COID-
Illitfce recommended that t,he Council's Solicitor should appear
before the Land Judge's Court on 29th instant to represen[ the
County Council, with authority to say that their offer for Omeath
Park of would be adhered to, but that no increase on that
sum would be made
Francis Street, Dundalk,
WOODHOUSE, OWNER:
Dear Sir,
I would be glad to have the
5th October, 1915
ANNESLEY, PETITIONER.
Council's instructions on
following lei.ier as received to-day from Mr. Tlenry F. Chiclley:
Solicitor, relative fo offer recently made for the purchase of
Orneafh Park :—
"Some parties are negotiating as regards flie purchase of
Omea,tll Park, and T propose to bring [Ire matier bef01Q the
Court on t:he 29th inst. fo determine what course should be
adopted.
"If your elienis wish to make another offer you should be
represenied on that day before the Jildge.
It would be well
if you would let me know beforehand, of (sourse. what fliey
would be prepared to do further."
Yours faithfully,
DAN O'CONNELL.
Charles M'AIester, Esq..
Seey., Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
TREASURY IÆTTER RE GOLD COIN.
Lecter was read from the Treasury unpressing upon the Council
the Urgent importance of substituting notes for gold for the
D UTPOse of' paying wages and for cash disbursetnents generally.
The letter Wiis initialled by the C'hairrnan.
OFFENCE UNDER FOOD AND
The following letter was read, also the Report from the Officer
of rtment and the Ana lysis IReport from Sir Chas.
which certified t.hat the sam ple of buffer contained
21•8 cent. of water, 16 per cent. being the maximulii proportion
Of allowable;—
Depavfmenf of Agriculture and
Teehnieal Tnsfruefion for Ireland,
Ilpper Merrion Street,
Dublin, 14th October, 1915.
No. (\.4361-15.
SATAC OF AND I)RVGS ACTS.
Sir,
I have to aequainf you, for [he information of the Tnuth Cajunty
Council, fhaf an Officer of the James J. Nagle—
•aeiing on instructions under Section 2 of the Sale of Food and
Drugs Aet, 1899, purchased on the 27tlv ultimo the
occupied by Mr. P. Wafters, 11 Earl street, Dundalk, a- sample
which was subliiitteql for analysis and was found to
-of butter,
eonfain 21,8 per eenf. of water—16 per cent. being (he maximum
proportion of water allowable in sample of genuine butter under
the Sale of Butter (Ireland) Regulations, 1902 (copy herewith). A
copy of t,lre report. received from Mr. Nagle in regard fo this
matter is enclosed, together with the Analysf's eeriifieate and
copy thereof.
In [his ease an offenee would appear fo have been committed
against. the provision of Section 6 of the Sale of Food and Drugs
Act, 1875, and the Departnjent -are, therefore, desirous that pro-
ceculiugs should, on behalf of your Local Authority, be instituted
in respect of' flie transaction within 28 days frolii t.he date on
which satnple was obfained (Vide Seetions 2 (2) and 19, Sale Of
Food and Drugs Act, 1899).
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
The Seerefary,
il.outll County Council,
Courthouse,
Dundalk,
GILL,
Secretary.
67
A discussion took place on this malter, and Mr. Bernard
llamill, J.P., pointed out that it was impossible for a trader
Who purchased buffer to know the quantify of' water contained
therein, and as there was no deleterious matter discovered on
analysis of (he sample, he proposed that no prosecution be
instituted in the case.
Mr. Peter WKKK1s, .J.P„ seconded.
Mr. T. J. Byrne, J.P., stated that the trader purchasing the
had his remedy against the seller if it contained too neueh
Wafer, and that if was imperative to proseeufe. ITe proposed an
mnendment, that. as suggested by tho Department, a prosecution
be instituted.
There being no seconder to amendment,
Che Cha i tanan
declared Mr. llamill's motion, that the County Couneil do not:
Prosecute in the ease, earriecl, Mr. T. J. Byrne dissenting.
DROGHEDA COURTHOUSE.
The following letter was read and initialled by the (lituirman
Town Clerk's ()ffiee,
I)r€yghoda, 15th Oetober, 1915.
The Secretary,
County Council of 14)utIi,
Dunda 1k.
Ijear Sir,
My Finance (hmmitfoe have now considered your leffer, in
it is suggested' t.haf t.he Corporation should in fill ure pro-
vide fuel, light and water for the portions of Drogheda Courthouse
used by them and their officers.
The suggest ion comes upon t hem with surprise, and they can
only think fliere must be some misunderstanding to account for it.
Perhaps t Ile Counfy Couneil are not fully aware of the circum-
stances under which the Corporation came to use the Courfhoues
for municipal purposes.
Formerly Che "Tholsel" premises were availed of by the Grand
Jury, with the permission of the Corporation, for the purposes
[he present Ctjurfhouse is used for until the erection o! a new
Cou rthonse was decided upon. The Corporation thereupon agreed
with the Grand Jury to lease for ever af a nominal rent of Is.
portion of their principal Market and some of (he A'larket build-
ings, upon the understanding that they would be at liberty to use
the Cou rfhouse for municipal put poses, and thereby be in a
The Courthouse was erected, the
posi€ion to lease the "Tholsel."
Market huildings being altered so as fo form portion of if, and
tlje Corporation moved in. The Grand Jury provided i.he entire
eosf of maintenance, ineluding fuel, light. and wafer. On Che
passing of the T,oea.l Government Act such maintenance, of course.
passed on fo the County Council. and until now no question has
been raised.
The amounf of coal, gas and water used in ille year atnounfs
to but' a. snjall sum.
Yours faithfully,
J. B. CONNOLLY.
EI,ECTIONS ANI) REGISTRATION ACT EXPENSES.
Circular letter was read from the L.G.B. with reference to the
payment €0 officials and contractors (except Clerks of the Crown
tond Peace) for svcvrk in connection with Che Voters' and Jurors'
Lists, in which it was get out thaf, as all [he work in connection
69
with the Registration of Voters is discharged before the 1st
August, påyment on t,he usual seale might be madc, but wit hout
fees for•attendanee at Revision Sessions.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
TUBERCULOSIS COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT
ACCOUNTS.
Letter was read from the L.G.B.—No. the
County Council that Mr. J. A. Reddy had been appointed to audit
the åoeounts of the above (Jk»mmittee for the half-year ended 30th
Septem ber.
COMMITTALS TO INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS.
The following notices of application for committal to Industrial
Schools were read and initialled by the Chairman
Cleek of petty Sessions, Drogheda—For eommiHtaI of Januss. J.
and John Sexton, of Fairv street, Drogheda.
Rev. Father Llurson, C.C., Dundalk—For committal of Kitty,
Margaret and Susan Sullivan, and Lily Grimes, all of
Dundalk.
Sergeant, R.I.C., Ardee—ror of two children to
Drogheda Industrial School.
COUNTY COURT-KEEPER'S APPLICATION.
The following letter was read, and the Committee unanin:ously
that ur. Murray be allowed CIO as usual for extra
70
duties, subject to the sanction of Local Government Board :—
The Courthouse, Dundalk,
18th October, 1915.
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen
of the County Council.
1 respectfully beg to apply for the usual annual allowance for
Che extra work performed by me during the past twelve months.
You very kindy grahted me EIO per year for the past five years
for this extra work, which consists principally in attending to
the Heating Apparatus during the winter months, preparing the
(..kjurts for Petty Sessions every Eriday instead of one as
heretofore, keeping space in front of Courthouse clean, also Courts
and various other duties, including looking after gutters in roof
and cleaning them.
Thanking you, Gentlemen, for past favours.
1 am,
Your obedient Servant,
TIMOTHY
Court Keeper.
IIOSTEL.S FOR COUNTY COUNCIL SCHOLARS.
The Secretary was directed fo write the Scholars who had been
awarded Schola rslrips under t31je (A»uneil and ascertain whether
the hostels where they had arranged to reside were approved by
the College Authorities.
SUNDRIES FOR ARI)EE cotiRT[10USE.
The Seeretary• submit fed a requisition from the ourt Keeper,
Ardee Courfhouse, for stationery, ink, brush, etc., and informed
them that a similar quantify of the same articles had been
supplied in the previous three quarters, and €haf the expenditure
nnder this head had increased in recent years. The Secretary
Was directed to write the Court Keeper thac he would require to
exercise economy in the use of the sundries in future.
72
executive Committee.
Mintltes of Proceedings of the 'Executive 'Committee at their
Meeting held in Uire 'Council Chaniber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 1st November, 1915, at one o'clock p m.
—Ill the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq„ J r.
Present •
Other Metnbers—T J By,me, J P; Bernard Hamill, J P; V
A1 'Gee, J P; John F Murphy, J P; and Laurence M' Keown,
Lsqulires.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Executive Com-
mittee were taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
SALARY 01" CLERK TO LOCAL AUTHORITY.
The following letter was rend and initialled by the Cliair-
rnan :—
Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland (Veterinary Branch).
50 and 51 Upper Merriop Street,
Ihiblin, 16th October, 1915.
so. 3670/15.
Sir,
Having regard to the suspension of thc Tuberculosis (Ireland)
79
Order as from the 1st ultimo, the Department find it necessary
to advert t') the question of bhe rate of remuneration attached
tc your office of Clerk to the Local Authority under the
Diseases of Animals Acts, and to direct attention to the terms
Of their letter of 16th December, 1913, in which approval Of the
present rate of remuneration was conveyed.
It, will be observed that ttne Department's approval of the
proposal to attach a salary of CIO() per annu,m to the post was
given subject to revision in the event of a cessation of work
under the Tuberculosis Order. It became necessary, therefore,
-to consider the question of such revision now that the opera tion
of the Order has been suspended for the time being, and that
bivere is, apparently, no reported case of bovine tuberculosis
remaining to be dealt -with in the county.
I have, accordingly, to request that, at' the first opportunity,
you will be so good as to place the matter before your Local
Authority with a view • to their considering what rate of
remuneration should be attached to the office in question in
the altered circumstances at present existing.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Court House, Dundalk.
The original letter from the Department, dated 18th Decem-
bet', 1913, No. 6147 /13, in which the Department approved of
the appointment of the Secretary to the County Council as
Clerk to the Local Authority under the Diseases of Animals
Acts, was read, in which they expre"ed approval of the
proposal to attach a salary of CIOO per annum to t'he office,
but stipulated that this approval might be subject to revision
in the event of cessation of work under the Tuberculosis (Ire-
land) Order.
The Committee, after considering the proportion of work
under the Tuberculosis Order, which was a very small propor-
Lion of the entire work under the Diseases of Animals Acts,
unanimously decided to reduce the salary of the Clerk to the
Local Authority by the sum of CIO per anntunn, and directed the
Secretary to inform the Department of Sgricul€ure of their de-
eision.
VETERINARY INSPECTORS REPORTS.
The Reports of the Veterinary Inspectors as follows, for toe
months of September and October, were read and initialled
by the Chairman :—
Mr Clinton's Report for September; 1915.
On 1st Septeniber 41 Sheep, the property of Joseph Murphy,
of Derrybeg, were detained at Greenore Port -for scab. The
necessary steps were taken, the affected sheep being slaugh-
tered and the remainder dipped at Greenore and returned to
tlhe owner's farm by order of the Department of Agriculture.
On the same date 48 sheep, the property of Mr P Rooney,
Mountmills, were also detained- at Greenore for scab. The
affected sheep were slaughtered. 'Ille remainder were dipped
at Greenore and returned to Mr Rooney's faun.
Your obedient servant,
J. T. CLINTON,
75
Mr Clinton's Report for October, 1915.
On October 7th 24 sheep {vere detained at Dundalk Port
owing to the presence of scab amongst them. They were the
property of Thomas Malone; l)numghambo, and were consigned
to England. All of them were slaughtered on the premises
by •order of the owner. On Oct'iber 30th 4 lambs suffering from
scab were found in a consignment sent iby Mr J Shevlin to
Dundalk Port from Carrick-macros.s. The necesary steps a re
being taken in the case.
Your olx•dient servant,
J. T. CLINTON.
Mr Donnelly's Report for September, 1915.
During the month of September 1 to do•al with one
outbreak cf sheep scab (tihe animals coming from Co. Down).
There was a case of parasitic mango in a horse, the animal
being destroyed, and I had one or two cases of suspected swine
fever. I also inspected a couple of hundred sheep imported
into the county from Dublin and Ballinasloe.
Your Secretary has been furnished with i]ull particulars and
all the necessary reports relating to each case.
Yours respectfully,
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
Mr Donnelly's Report for October, 1915.
Pl'here has been no outbreak of any of the notifiable diseases
amongst 'animals in my district during the month of October,
1915.
76
There are no animals at present under restrictions. made
inspections in one or two suspected cases reported Co rue, but
found the aninxal:s free from any of the sched'uled contagious
diseuses.
Yours respectfully,
ANDREW A.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
Mr Maxwell's Report for Sept.etn ber, 1915.
I beg Io report that I visited the usual fairs, markets, etc,
held in Che Ardee No.l District during the month of Sep-
tember.
On the 5th, 12th, 21st and 30th of the month I visited the
detained sheep at Dowdstown, and issued a withdrawal notice
•on the 30th September.
A fresh outbreak of scab oecuréed on the 30fi11 September
on the lands of John Crawley, of Artnalivery, Ardee, and I
issued the usual notices. Swipe fever was repotfi•d on P
M 'Goggart's preini.ses, at Debidee, Ardee, and at Mrs M 'Gee's,
77
Of October. The outbreak of sheep scab which occurred on flie
farm of John Crawley, Artnalivery, has been attended to, and
the sheep were dipped in Jn.v prosenee on the 15th October.
The usual notices have been served in all the eases reported
to me.
I am,
Faithfully yours,
W. E. MAXWELL.
Tho Secretary submitted notices from the Veterinary
Inspectors in the following eases
Swine Fever.
Mary M 'Gee, Tallanstown.
Patrick Byrne, Garveystown.
Lester Doran, Harristown.
Sheep Scab.
John Crawley, Artnalivoxw.
L Good Ina n, Dowdstown.
Matthew Skelly, Hammondstown.
Thornas Malone, Dundalk Stoa rnpacket Yard.
James Shevlin, Dundalk Stearn:paeket Yard.
'J'allanstown.
Mr
markets, etc,
In neither case was the disease swine fever.
I am,
Faithfully yotrrs,
W. E. MAXWELL.
Maxwell's Report for October, 1915.
inform you that I inspected the Usual fairs'
held in Che Ardee So. I District for Che month
78
finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 1st November, 1915, at one o'clock p m.
Present dhe Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other J Byrne, .J P; Bernard Hamill, J P; P
M 'Gee, J P; Jolin F Murphy, J P; and Laurence M 'Keown,
Esquir«s.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
Before the Minutes of tihe last Meeting of the Fina neo
Committee were signed Che, Secretary informed the Committoo
that an officer from the Department of Agriculture had ealled
and informed him that the Department were taking steps with
a, view to the institution of proceedings in the ease under the
Sale of Food and Drugs Acts whio,h had been considered at the
last meeting. The minute of the last nu•eting was read, ancl
the Secretary informed the Committee that if the County
Council, ns Che Local Authority under the Sale of Food and
Drugs Acts, 1899, failed to proseente the trader from whom
the sample of burtter was taken that 'had been found on
analysis 60 contain 5.8 per eeut of excessive moisture, that un-
clor Seetion 3 (3) of the said Aet the Council would be liable for
all expenses with costs if the prosecution were taken by the
Department, and that in a recent case the expenses had ruti to
over $15,
79
It, was proposed by Mr J F' Murphy, J P ;
Soeondecl by Mr Laurence M 'Keown,
That we hereby delete frorn tene Minutes of the Fina nee
Committee of the 18th October the recommendation that no
prosecution "be instituted, and that we recommend the County
Council to proceed with the prosecution under Che Sale of
Food and Drugs Acts.
F Murphy, J P; 1, and T.J Byrne, J P,
voted for, and Mr 13 Hamill, J P, against this motion, whioh
was declared earried by •the Chairman.
Minutes as atnended were then signed by the Chairman.
Tho following accounts wore submitted and, on examination,
Were ordered for payment
Loans Account
Su bsidiary
Works in charge of County
Seerefary's Offieo
Aeeonnf.
Survevor
c185
7 10
C3'21 15 4
The Bank Books wore examined and initia Iled by the
Cha irma n .
The R Colleetors' Irrecoverable Arrears lists were sub-
Oiitfod by the Seeretary and payment of same reeonumended.
RATE COLLECTION.
The following letter from the Local Government Poard, in
to the requesf of the Committee for snne€ion to payment,
of
poundage fees to Collectors Hughes, Cluskey, Peter
80
M 'Donnell •and Woods, was read, and payment was made
aecorcling!y : —
Local Government Board, Dublin,
22nd October, 1915.
No. 56,052/1915.
Louth County.
Sir,
The Local Government Board for Ireland have had before
thern your lotter of the 18th instant and previous correspond-
enee with the Lou WI County Council, "relative to the failure of
Collectors Hughes, Cluskey, Peter M 'Donnell and Woods to
lodge tho full amount of their warrants for the past half year
on the prescribed date.
With reference thereto, I am to state that, having regard
io the previous records of these Collectors and their failure to
fulfil tho guarantees given 'by them, the Board feel eonsiderable
hesitation in assenting to their retention in office.
Inasmuch as they lodged within one week of the Board's
lotter of the (6th instant the full amount of t"he half year's
rates, the Board will not now take the extreme step of
removing them. The Board are, however, only prepared IO
allow them a share of their remuneration calculated on the
proportion of the rates actually lodged by them up to tihe 30th
September €0 the t,otal amount of the half-yearly warrant.
The Local Government Board wish the County Council
clearly to understand that this decision is to 'be accepted as
final, and if the Collectors are not prepared to abide by it they
may resign their positions. The Board' cannot admit tlhat
there is any reason why the Collectors of Rates in Louth
81
County should be placed upon a different footing from that of
the Ck)llectors every other County in Ireland.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
J. E, DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
The SecreUary:
Louth County Council.
OBSTRUCTION AT LURGANGREES ON I"A.NE RIVER.
A report ',vas read frotn the County Surveyor on inquiries
by him, as (lircctecl 'by the Finance Conjmittee, on a
eomplaint Iliade by the deputation from t'he Blackrock fisher-
The County Surveyor reported that there was a lyre.ach
in the em bauklnent along the Fane river south of Mr Murphy's
lauds at Haggardsiown. The embankment forins part of the
Fane Drainage Works, and the 'breach was caused by the illigh
tide of 1st January last. The fishermen state that the drain
110t'th of and adjacent to the toe of the embanktnent is being
ancl
filled up with silt and scraws dug off the enlbankment
thrown into the drain to grow. 'P.te object in closing the drain
is alleged •to be to prevent the 'beaching of boats along the
b auks, and advantage is taken of the breach in the embank-
to dra.in the land water which fornrerly went through
the drain. The tide now rises through the •breach and covers
the adjacent lands. The County Surveyor further stated that
he did not think the County Council could expend money in
repairing the embankment, which is part of the drainage
Works.
The report was initialled by the Clhairman.
82
DEATH OF MR. CHARLES E. M'CANS.
Letter was read from Mr T F Ryan, Dublin, stoting he was
directed by Mns M 'Cann to inform the County Council that
Mr Charles E M 'Cann, of late rate
collector of the Drogheda Rural District, and a pensioner
under the County Council, had died at Bettystown on the 1301
October, 1915.
The letter was initialled 'by the Chairman.
NOTICE RE ROAD CONTRACTOR.
T ÄCer was read from H J W Downey, solicitor, of Dublin'
rotifying that his client, Denis M' Ardle, of Cunnicar, was
due a surm of C'27 Ils 3d by Thomas M 'Kevitt, jun, of Barrons-
town, road contractor, and that he intended to obtain an 'Order
for Garnishee of any monies payable to ur M 'Kevitt by the
County Council in respect of road contracts.
The letter was initialled by t)he Chairman.
COUNTY COUNCIL SCHOLARS.
Examinations on Scholarship Holders under the Lcltli€ll Cot111tY
Council as follows
Margaret Callan—Passed B.A. (Honours) degree in Model'!l
Languages.
Ursula M'Par1and—Passed the for of
merce.
Henry Rogan-ZPassed B.E. degree exmnination with 2nd class
Honours.
A further lotter was road from the t 'niversity College Chaf
tho following residences for Louth Council Scholars had •boeu
approved •of
Eileen Teevan—Lore€o Hall, 77 St. Stephen's Green, Dublin.
Patriek A Hanratty and John V A AI 'Grath—12 Grantham
Street, Dublin.
COOS OF MORTGAGE—ROAD MACHINERY
Lotter was read from L. G. B. dated '27th No.
57235/1915, sanctioning payment of bill of costs, amountings to
o.s Sd, furnisf'necl to the Louith County Council by Messrs
and T Fitzgerald, solicitors to the Hibernian Bank.
CIVIL BILL BOOK.
Letter was read from L. G. B. dated 18th ()ctober, NO.
768/15, sanctioning payment for a Civil Bill Book for re-
cording decrees and judgments in the Sheriff's Office, Louth
County.
ACCOUNTS OF DUNDALK r.N10.x AND msrrmcr
corsc1L.
Letters wore read from the Local Government Board (Infed
55292/13, enclosi ng the
nd
18th October, Nos.
aeeonnts and reports thereon of the Dundalk Union
and Dundalk Rural District Council respectively.
84
OMEATH PARK.
The following letter was read and initialled by tho Chair-
Francis Street, Dundalk,
30th October, 1915.
Woodhouse, Owner
• ; Annesley, Petitioner.
Dear Sir,
I bog to roport that, as instructed,
I represented the
Council in this matter before Judge Ross in the Land Judge's
Court in Dublin on yesterday.
Mr Chidley,• as Solicitor having Carriage, entered if in the
.Jnclge's list for directions on several ma tters, viz—Tho ap-
pointment of new caretaker; whether the lands should be let
in the n,sual way for the season, ete; and also to bring under
tho notice of tho.J11(lge two offers before the Court.
His Lordsa'lip stated that since the matter was last in his
List he was in the district and took the opportunity of in-
speeting tho house and grounds. Ile was disappointed in the
whiell he had thought was in bettor condition. Tho
property
110i.•so was an ugi.v structure and tthe tinrber was not good.
had
however, that thero was sorne pieh merchant
looking after it, ancl that he wou lil probably buy it.
Mr Chidloy stated that there was an offer made: him Of
C 1,750 conditional on 'his allowing the purchase to remain Olit
for six months. Then thore the County Council offer Of
I mentioned to the Judge that tho Council would
not increase their offer, but would adhere to tho offer made
provided the Department of Agriculture approved of the Land
Cinti niission making the adva nee for purchase under tile pro-
visions of the Land Act of 1903. The Judge "replied that the
Council's offer ronlly meant that iJhoy wore giving nothing for
the house.
Mr Harris, Solicitor, stated Ile represented one of the
Inortgagees, ancl tlhat if the Council's offer were accepted his
clients would eut out antl woulcl get nothing. Mr Killingley,
Solieibor, also appeared for a mortgagee, and the Jndge asked
him if his clients • elm I ge would be reached if the property
were sold for e He stated—he thought they would, and
that Che first rnortgage was for
His I,ordship adjourned the matter for a month, with
iiivsrty for Mr Chidley to re-enter it if he felt justified at an
earlier date. He asked the latter to try and get into oom-
munieation with this rich merehant that had been spoken of,
but from whom no offer had been received. He also directed
that the lands be not let for grazing as usual, as it would be
inconvenient to have them so let should it be thought ex-
podiont to accept any offer before the Court when the matter
appears again in tho lists.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
ChaAes Esq.,
Seeretary Louth County
Council,
I)tvnda 1k.
ROAD AT SEAEA.NK.
Letter was read from the L. G. B. dated '27 fh October, So.
57989/15, enclosing copy of a letter from Mr P M 'Cartney
re!ative to the eon€lition of a road in Louth County, and
requesting that the Board would be furnished with a report
from the County Surveyor on the subject.
86
The Seeretar.y informed the Committee that he had sub-
mitted tho letter to the County Surveyor, and obtained from
him the subjoined report, a eopy of which had been sent fo the
Local Govern ment Board.
The Comntittoe approved of whaf had been •done, and the
letter was initialled by €he Chairman :—
County Surveyor's Office,
Court House, Dunda 1k,
29th October, 1915.
Charles M 'Aloster, Esq.,
Seeretary, Louth County Council,
Court House, Dundalk.
Dear Sir,
I have your letter of the 28th instant enelosing lotter from
Local Government Board (No 57389/1915), asking for a report
on a letter of eonoplaint reeeived Lyy them from P M 'Cartney,
relative to the condition of a Hjacl in this County.
The road which M 'Cartney complains of is a portion of tho
A-B on enclosed map—i.e., from Lurgan
' 'Old Coast Road
White Tlouse to his (M 'Cartnoy's) residence.
No portion of this old 'Coast Road" is at present under
repair by the County ; and, so far as r ean learn, no money •has
been expended on it during the last 60 years at, least, nor
probably for a much longer period.
-So far as I anj aware no notice of motion in respect of
road has been lodged with the Dundalk Rural District Council'
Government Board communication with
return Local
letter attached.
M 'Cartney's copy
Yours faithfully,
THOMAS WALSH,
County Surveyor..
SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACTS.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man :—
Department of Agriculture ancl Technical Instruction for
Ireland,
Upper Merrion Street, Dublin.
No. G.13SO/1ö.
Sir,
With reference to previous correspondence relative to the
enforcement of the above-mentioned Acts, I have to state, for
the information of your Local Authority, t,hat an officer of Che
Department, acting on instructions under Section 2 of the Act
Of 1899, obtained on the 27th ultimo, at Dundalk, three
samples of butter for analysis. The sarnples were duly sub-
•nitted to the Public Analyst for the County Louth, who
certifies that they proved to be pure.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary ,
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Court House, Dundalk.
SHEEP DIPPING PROSECUTIONS.
The following letter wag read and initialled by the
man
Francis Street, Dundalk,
26th October,
Dear Sir,
Chair-
1915.
89
Summonses against otfher defendants are issued for noxt
Dnnleer Petty Sessions, 9th proximo.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M' Alesier, Esq.,
Secretary Louth County Council.
I beg to report that I attended at I)rogheda Petty Sessions
on yesterday, the 25th instant, on the hearing of seven sum-
ntonses at the suit of the County Council against Che several
defendants hereunder narned, for ' 'exposing for sale" sheep
at, the Drogheda Market during the past month unaceompa,nied
by the Declaration that such sheep were dipped within the
prescribed Au!umn Dipping period. The Declarations of the
Magistrates were as follows :—
Nicholas Lyons, Nyncll, Co. Meath
Fined 6s and 5s costs.
Pa trick Brangan, Ministown, Co. Meath.
Fined 7s (RI and 7s (id costs.
Williatn M •Dona.gll, Bettystown, Co. Meath
Fined C2 Ls Od and 7s Gd costs.
Jarnes (Y Hagan, Omeatll, Co. Louth
Fined 0s Ocl and IOS costs.
G sheep.
3 sheep.
11 sheep.
80 sheep.
The sunjmonses against Patrick Rooney, Mounttnills, Newry ;
Robert Skelly, Ballywad, Banbridge, and Joseph Fitzpa
Clanawhillan, Bryansfort, all in Co. Down, were adjourned for
a fortnight for argument the point of the jurisdiction 'Of
the ruagistrates.
Coutb County Council.
Minutes of proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
Third (AdjournedY Quarterly Meeting held in the Council Chant-
bet', Court House, Dundalk, on Thursday, 25th November,
1915, at one o'clock, p m.
—In the A Duffy, 'Esq, J P.
Present •
Other Members Meade, James Wynne, J P; Patk
AI' Gee, J P; Bernard Finnegan, Thomas O'Rourke, James T
M'Gee, J P; B Hamill, J P; W T Skeffington, J P; T v
M'QuilIan, and Jamee; M 'Carthy, J P, Esquires.
Messrs Daniel O'Connell, Solicitor to the Council; John M C
Lyons and James Dronjgoole, Assistant Surveyors; Dr M 'Quil-
Ian, T' M O, and Mr V Warren, T c M, were in attend-
anee.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
The folloying resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Wm T Skeffington, Esq, J p, ancl
Resolved—That the minutes of the proceedings of the Louth
Council at their Third Quarterly Meeting, held on 11th
overnber, 1915, a copy of which has been sent to each member
Of the Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
2
THE LATE MR. T. J. BYRNE.
The following Resolution was then
Proposed by Charles A Duffy, Lsq, J P ;
Seconded by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we learn with regret of the lamented death
of Mr T J Byrne, a member of this Council since its establish-
ment, and its first Vice-Chaimnan. We desire to place on re-
cord our keen appreciation of the ability and energy displayed
by him in the varied work of the Council and in his skilled ad-
ministrative eapaeity which lent dignity to the Body Corpor-
ate. Wo diroet our Secretary to convey €0 his widow and the
mernbers of his family our sincere condolence in their great loss'
and we adjourn this meeting as a mark of respect to his mem-
ory.
Mr Micheal Meade desired to bo specially associated witli
the resolution, and stated that no man was more straightfor-
ward than •his deceased colleague, Mr Byrne.
Mr O'Connell, County Sol icitor, and the Secretary also eS-
essod foolings of regret at Mr Byrne's (lea th, and the re.soltt-
tion was passed in silence, all members present standing.
It was unanimously decided to adjourn the remaining
ness on the agenda to Thursday, 9th of bet'.
1.915 as follows :—
Number Recgiptg. Expenditure
7 10
3
executive Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Executive Committee at Cheir
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 29th day of November, 1915, at one o'clock, p m.
In the A Duffy, FASO, J P.
Present : —
Other Members :—Wm Woods, J P; Michael Meade, .Jatnes
Wynne, J P; Thomas O'Rourke, T WGee, J P, and
ernard Hamill, J P, Esquires.
The minutes of the previous meeting of the Executive Com-
were taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
SHEEP DIPPING.
The accounts in connection with tho above for the work, etc,
at the Council's tanks at Ballymakonny, Ardeo, Knockbridge,
Aghameon, Carlingford and ()lnca€ll wore examined and recom-
rnended for payment. The accounts were for wages of dipping
Stiperintendents, rents of tank sites, water supply, clip, and
Printing, and amounted to the sum of CS!) IOS 2d.
The Secretary submitted return showing the receipts and ox-
Penditure in connection with the Council's tanks for the year
Result.
Aghamoen.
Carlingford and
Orneath,
Ballymakenny,
Ardee,
Knock bridge,
Total Dinnings.
Dippings R
•2133
5071
142'79
17
12
26 15
14
ell,
Deficit,
Profit,
Deficit,
11
4
9
12
9
7
5
9
11
4
5
S
9
3
The statement was initialled by the Chairmall, who congra,-
tulated Mr James M 'Gee on the successful tmnning of the Ar-
clee Lank.
The Secretary was clirected €0 Wi'ite the Dipping Superinten-
clones and ascertain what (lip was left over after Che season's
work, ancl arrange for the storing or same. He was also in-
structed to arrange for the storuage of the Orneath Cank bill
next, year.
The Secretary informed 'tho Committee t,hat six of the sheep
owners had dipped their sheep at the Knockbriclge Lank oni.V
once in the auttllilll period although the ()rcler made cwo dip-
pings compulsory within a period of not less than seven days or
rnore than. fourteen days. He was directed to write to these
owners and inform them of the fact, and of tho necessity of re-
turning a, declaration to the police before the 15th December
as to the second dipping.
MAINTENANCE OF LIVE STOCK (IRELAND) ORDER OF
1915 (No. 2).
'I'he following Order was read and initialled by the Chair-
man :
The Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction
for Ireland by virtue and in exereise, of the powers vested ill
thenl under the Maintenance Of Live Stock Act, 1915, and
the purpose of maintaining a sufficient stock of animals, (IO
hereby order as follows
Sucking Calves 110t [o be Slaughtered or Exported.
1. From and after the (late of commencement of this Order'
no sucking calf shall
5
(a) 'be slaughtered, or be caused or permitted by its owner
to be slaughtered ; or
(b) be moved out of Ireland, or be ea,usecl or permitted by
its owner to -be moved out of Ireland.
Exemptions from Restrictions.
2. The restrictions imposed by the foregoing Article shall not
apply to
(a) .slaugllfer of an anilnal under tho powers conferred by
the Diseases of Anililals Acts, 1894 to 1914, or any Order
made thereunder; or
(b) slaughter of a ma le ealf of any of the following dairy
breocls, that is €0 say, Channel Island,
Ayrshire or Kerry
breeds; or
(e) slaughter of an animal necessary or desira blo on aeeount
Of accidental injury to the anilnal or its illness ; or
(d) slaughter 01 movement out of Ireland or an animal if in
the opinion of the Departntellt of Agriculture and Technical
Instruefion for Ireland the slaughter or movement out of Ire-
land is desirable for any exceptional reason or purpose and
the slaughter or movement is authorised by a license granted
by the Department or by an officer of the Department.
Application of Order.
a. This Order applies to lt•elancl.
C0'nmencement.
4• This Order shall come into operation on the twenty-second
day Of November, nineteen hundred and fifteen.
6
Short Title.
5. This Order may be cited as the ' 'Maintenance of Live
(Ireland) Orcler of 1915 (No. 2).
In witness whereof the Department of Agriculture and
Technical Instruction for Ireland have hereunto set
their Official Seal this seventeentli day of November,
nineteen hundred and fifteen.
T. P. GILL, Secretary.
SHEEP SCAB.
Reports from the three Veterinary Inspectors on the follow-
ing cases of sheep scab under their care, and the Fornts in ae-
cardanee with the Diseases of Animals Acts, were submit,€ed
and initialled by the Chairman :—
JAMBS SHEVLIN, Canick-macross (Dundalk Port).
MATTHEW SKELLY, Hammonds€own.
JOHN CRAWLEY, Ar€nalivery.
DAVID FARRELL, Cookstown, Kelis (Drogheda Port).
J. CHADWICK, Lancashire (Drogheda Port).
DELEGATES TO LOUTH COUNTY CONVENTION.
Circular letter was read from the Hon Secretaries of the
U I L Louth County Convention, €0 be held on Stlnday, 5th
December, at I) unclalk, requesting •that four delegates be
appointed to represent the County Council.
On the motion of the Chairman,
Seconded by Mr O'Rourke,
The following gentlemen were appointed to represent the
Council Michael Meade, N T MillThy, J P; Joseph
Dolan, and . Thomas B M 'Court.
7
RECOUPMENT DISEASES OF ANIMALS ACTS.
The Secretary submitted half yearly return of Che expenses
under the Diseases of Animals Acts. The Secretary was direc-
ted to apply to the Department for the amount of the recoup-
payable €0 the County Council, amounting to the sum of
CIOI lös Gd for General and Cl under Tuberculosis (Ire-
land) Order, 1914.
8
finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 29th November, 1915, at one o'clock, p m.
Present the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Wm Woods, J P; Michael Meade, James
Wynne, J P; Thomas O'Rourke, James T M'Gee, J P; and
Bernarcl llamill, J P, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attenda•nee.
The minutes of the previous meeting of the Finance Com-
mitiee were taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted and on examination
were ordered for payrnent
Works in hands of County Surveyor
Secretary's Office, including refund of irrecover-
able arcears to rate collectoi•s
Total
C118
359 15
C478
5
1
8
6
2
emnmendations of the County Council, except in certain eases
appearing on the lists of Collectors John Woods, John Kelly,
and Peter M 'Donnell.
The Secretary stated that a number of the items disallowed
by the L G B were for land which was waste or derelict, and it
Would be intpossible for the collectors to recover the rates in
such cases. In previous arrears lists the Board had allowed
claims for refunds of similar amounts.
The Secretary was directed to again submit the, disallowed
itmns for waste land to the L G B ; to point out that these am-
O Unts were irrecoverable and were allowed in previous, lists,
and request the sanction of the Board to the refund of Chese
amounts to the collectors ooneerned.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman, and payment oi
the amounts of refunds sanctioned by Che Board ordered.
OVERPAYMENT BY L. G. B. IN RESPECT' OF THE
TREATMENT OF TUBERCULOSIS.
The following letter was read ancl initialled by the Chair-
man. The Secretary stated that he had verified Cho statetnent
made in the letter as to an overpayment having been made :—
The Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loan
counts were examined, and initialled by the Chairman.
RATE COLLECTORS' IRRECOVERABLE ARREARS.
Lotter was read from the L G B dated 19th November, 1915'
No. returning the lists of arrears of for the
period endecl 30th September, 1915, and approving of the re-
Sir,
Local Government Board Dublin,
16th November, 1915, No 70,292-15.
I am directed by the Local Government Board for
to state, for the 'information of Louth County
Council, that the auditor's certificate of the net expenditure of
the Council on the treatment of Tuberculosis for the year en-
ded 31st March, 1915. has been received, and that it appears
that an overpaymeni of L182 lö.s -ld has been made from the
10
Exchequer Maintenance Grant in respect of the year in ques-
Lion. The •overpayment will be adjusted by deduction from the
next inst,alment payable out of the Grant to Che Louth County
Council.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Asst.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
SHEEP DIPPING PROSECUTION
Secretary.
Letter was read from Mr ()'Connell, dated 23rd November, re-
porting that the adjourned case of the Council versus Joseph
Fitzpatrick, Clanawhillan, Co. Down, was heard at Drogheda
Petty Sessions on 22nd November, and that defendant was con-
victed and fined Gd per sheep, amounting to C'2 IOS in all, and
L'I costs. The letter was initialled •by the Chairman.
GARNISHEE ORDER AGAINST ROAD CONTRACTOR.
Letters were read from H J •W Downey, Solicitor, Dublin,
enclosing order made at the suit of Denis M' Ardle, Barrons-
town, against Thomas M 'Kevitt, jun, also of Barronstowll'
road contractor, for payment of dObt and costs amounting to
the sum of C29 13s 3cl. The order specified that out of a sum
of C20 IOS 5d, payable to the contractor for the quarter to
30th September, a sum of CIO should be paid to M 'Ardle, and
a further sum of CIO out of the following quarterly payment'
and the balance and costs out of the continuing (Iliarterly am-
ounts.
The Secretary was direc€ed to hand all the documents and
M 'Kevitt's paying orders to the Council's solicitor, with in-
11
Structions to pay M' Ardle the first sum of CIO thereout, and
•hand thc balance to M 'Kevitt.
PROVISIONAL APPROVAL OF DR. M'QUILLAN'S
APPOINTMENT.
Letter was read from the L G B dated 20th November, NO.
14710-1915, approving for a further period of six months of tlje
aPP0intment of Dr M 'Quillan as Medical Superintendent of
the Central Tu bercul,osis Dispensary to be established •lv.y the
Louth County Council.
DUNDALK TUBERCULOSIS DISPENSARY.
The Secretary informed Che Committee that he 'had receiverl
±'he architect's certificate of the final instalment of coni,racC
-for the above, amounting to the sum of C49 IOS, and that he
had forwarded same as usual to Che L G B, with a request that
the amount be remitted. The Committee expressed approval
of this.
CARETAKER FOR WILLISTOWN PLANTATION.
A'Ir Meado informed the Comnliftee Chat the caretaker, Wm.
NI'CalltllH, who had been appointed to look after Che Council's
Plantation at Willistown, had left the district, ancl Chat iC was
Urgently necessary fo have some person appointed to take his
Place.
After discussion the Secretary was directed to place Che con-
Sideration of the appointment on the agenda foy the adjourned
meeting of the Council tao be held on Thursday, 9th December.
12
Couth County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
Third Adjourned Quarterly Meeting (adjourned from 25th No-
vember, 1915) held in the C%uncil Chamber, Court House, Dun-
dalk) on Thursday, 9th December, 1915, at one o'clock, p m.
Present the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Bernard Finnegan, Bernard Hamill, J P;
W T Skeffington, J P; M'Gee, J P; '1' V M'Qui11an,
N T Murphy, J P; Thos O'Rourke, Michael Meade, and Peter
Woods, J P, Esquires.
Messrs Thomas Walsh, Co. Surveyor; James Dromgoole and
J M C Lyons, Assistant Surveyors ; Dr •M 'Quillan, T M O, and
Mr V Warren, Clerk T C M, were also in attendance.
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE COMMITTEE MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Patrick M "Gee, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the minutes of proceedings of the Finance
Committee at their Meetings held on the 11th November and
15th November, 1915 (a copy of each having been sent to each
member of thc Council), with all payments and recommenda-
Lions contained therein, be and are hereby confirmed.
13
MOTOR LICENCE DUTY DEFAULTERS.
The Secretary informed the Council that in aeeordanee with.
instructions of the Finance Committee, prosecutions had been
issued against a number of persons who had not paid their
Since the summonses had been served
Motor Licence Duty.
mast of tho defaulters had Vaid, and he requested direction
from the Council whether under the circumstances the sum-
monses should be withdrawn, or—the Solicitor instructed to
proceed for the penalty.
After discussion,
It was proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Thomas (Y Rourke, Esq,
'That we direct our Solicitor to withdraw the summonses is.
sued against those persons who have paid Che Motor Licence
since the summonses were issued, but tilat in all future
eases against defaulters for payment of the said Licence Duty
the Solicitor be directed to recover any penalties for non-
Payment.
FT-NANCE COMMITTEE MEETING.
The Secretary informed the Council that there would be
meeting of the Finance Committee before Christmas, aucl
that the County Surveyor was anxious to poy all the men
Uncler his charge for any wages earned up to Christmas Eve,
he requested authority to convene a meeting of the Committee
for Thursday, 23rd inst, for the purpose of ordering these
Payments and for any other urgent business.-
The Council unanimously directed the Secretary to convene
a meeting of the Finance Committee for Thursday, 23rd
ber.
THE LATE MR. AUGUSTINE ROCHE, M.P. FOR NORTH
LOUTH.
The following resolution was passed unanimously, all the
Members standing
by Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Wm "i' Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we learn with great regret of the lamented
death of Mr Augustine Roche, M P for North Louth. His
gonial disposition, his n nivorsa] charity and his devotion to
duty and to Ireland had endeared him to us all, and we
direct our Sceretary to convey €0 his rela fives our sincere
sytnpathy in their sad bereavement, and we hereby adjourn this
meeting as a mark of respect to his memory.
The Meeting adjourned till the regular Quarterly Meeting
to be .held on 20th January, 1916.
15
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the—Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
on Mondav, 19th December, 1915, at one o'clock p m.
Present—In the Chair: Wm Woods, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Thomas (Y Rourke, J F Murphy, J P ;
Joseph H M 'Ardle, J P, and James Wynne, J P, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was also in attendance
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Finance Com-
rnittee were taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The following Accounts were submitted and, on examination,
Were ordered for payment
Works in Charge of County Surveyor
Secretary's Office
Total
C259 14 10
45 10 8
egor» 5 G
GRANT FOR CENTRAL TUBERCULOSIS DISPENSARY.
Lotter was read from L. G. B. dated 2nd December, 1915,
NO• G:1014i191ö, enclosing Paying Order for C49 IOS Od, repre-
senting the final instalment due to the contractor for the
erection of above. The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
CONTRIBUTION FROM INSURANCE COMMITTEE.
Letter was read from the Clerk, Tuberculosis Committee of
Manauement enclosing Paying Order for the sum of C73,
being a contribution from the County Louth Insurance Com-
mitiee for tho quart,er ended June, 1915, in consequence
of the County Council having discharged the liabilities incurred
during that period.
The letter initiilled by the Chairman.
AGREEMENT RE HIRE OF ROADI ROLLER.
'I'he County Surveyor submitted an agreement between the
County Council ancl Thomas Byrne, of Clonturkmason, for
lure of a Roacl Roller for a period of three months, at the rate
o! 22.s Gd per clay and 3s per hour extra while engaged in scari-
fying. The agreement was approved by the Committee, and,
on the motion of Mr James Wynne, J P, seconded by Mr
'l'homas O'Rourke, it was recommended that the Secretary lye
directed to affl.x the Common Seal of the Council thereto.
MOTOR LICENCE DUTY PROSECUTIONS'.
The following letter was reacl and initialled by the Chair-
man :
Dear Sir.
Francis Street, Dundalk,
10th December, 1915.
I beg to report that at Petty Sessions to-day the
against John Tlughes, Dr E F Flood and Bernard Roeks were
withdrawn, as defendants had paid the duty since the issue of
Summonkes. Ono Justiee expressed the view that he would
17
not favour the withdrawal of the Summonses without the
defenda nts paying the costs i nourrecl. There is no power to
apply for east,s, ancl only a conviction and penalty can be
asked for.
The remaining defendant, Joseph Tobin, was fined C'2().
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Secretary Louth County Council.
CRIMINAL INJURY APPLICATION.
The following letter was read and initialled by ' the Chair-
Francis Street, Dundalk,
7th December, 1915.
Thomas Duffy, Applicant; County Council, ReAponclents.
Dear Sir.
With reference to claim herein for compensation for alleged
malicious burning of hay at Dunleer, and on the hearing of
which application at Drogheda Quarter Sessions the County
Court Judge awarded the applicant the sum of C 18 on foot
Of claim of L'30, vou will recollect the Council succeeded, on
Appeal to the Judge of Assize, in having the Decree reversed
J lodged the Reversal of
with costs against the applicant.
Decree with the Sheriff for execution, and I have only received
tho amount, C7 Os Gd, on yester.day. I lodged amount with
the Council's Treasurer and enclose his receipt herewith.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Secretary Louth County Council,
18
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court-house, Dundalk,
on Thursday, 23rd December, 1915, at one o'clock p m.
Present—In the Chair: James Wynne, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Edward Goodman, John F Murphy, J P,
and Thomas O'Rourke, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was also in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of f'he Finance Com-
mittee were taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The following Accounts were submitted and, on examination,
were mdered for payment :—
Loans Account,
SUBSIDIARY ACCOUNT.
Works in charge of County Surveyor
Secretary's Office
Total
Ell IG 3
C170
egol
190 17 10
o
2 10
8
MOTOR LICENCE PROSECUTIONS.
Letter was read from Council's Solicitor, Mr
O'Connell,
stating that he had lodged to the credit of the Council the
sum of 2s (Sd, being costs received from Mr I) J Reddall'
Drogheda, in the proseetltipn issuod against him by the County
Council for non-payment of Motor Licenee Duty. The Duty
had been paid by Mr Reddan prior to the hearihg of the case'
and the summons had been withdrawn in accordance with
resolution of the County Council.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman,
19
SHEEP DIPPING PROSECUTION.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man
Francis Street, Dundalk,
17th December, 1915.
Dear Sir.
I beg to report that I attended on behalf of the Council at
Dunleer Petty Sessions on Tuesday last, the 14th inst, when
the adjourned ease of the Council v. James O'Hagan, Omoath,
came on for hearing. The defendant was summoned for ex-
posing 81 Sheep for sale at Dunleer fair on the 1st September,
1915, unaccompanied by the necessary Declaration that the
Sheep had 'been dipped within the Autumn Dipping Period.
The magistrates convicted and fined the defendant the sum
of and CI costs.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Secretary Louth County Council.
COSTS OF LEINSTER WINTER ASSIZE.
Letter was read from the tinder Secretary, Dublin Castle,
enclosing certified statement shoqång the amounts due by the
•several Counties comprising the Leinster Winter Assize Coun-
ty for extra expenses of the courtkeeper and servants of the
Green Street Courthouse, Dublin. Il'ne amount certified for
Louth County was IOS, which it was suggested should be for-
Warded to the eourtkeeper. Payment of the amount was
recommended, and the letter was initialled by Che Chairman.
SOLICITOR'S BILI, OF COSTS.
Letter was read from Mr L Maeardle, Solicitor, who had
20
bf on appointed by the Council to attend taxation, enclosing the
County Solicitor's bill of eosfs for the half year to 30th Sep-
tember, 191.5, taxed to the sum of C78 7s Sd. The letter was
initialled by the Chairman.
FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE.
Notice was read from the West Sussex County Council pro-
hi biting the movement into the County from the District of
any Local Authority in England, Wales or Scotland, of animals
landed in Great Britain from Ireland since the 28th day of
November, 1915. Animals may, however, be moved through
West Sussex by rail without untrueking. These regulations
The Notice was
came into force on 23rd December, 1915.
initialled by the Chairman.
HOLIDAYS.
On the suggestio.n of the Chairman, it was unanimou.sly
agreed that [he County Office should •oe closOcl for the Christ-
mas holidays until Thursday morning, 30th December.
The Secretary, on behalf of the staff, thanked the Committee
for their kindness and consideration.
21
Proposal Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Committee at their
Fourth Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council Chamber.
Court House, Dundalk, on Monday, 10th January, 1916, at
one o'clock p m.
In the Chair: James Wynne, Esq, J P.
Present :
Other Members O'Rourke, James T MaGee, .J P;
Patrick M'Gee, J P; Bernard Hamill, J P, and J F Murphy,
J P, Esq
uires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Proposal Com-
thittee were taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The following Proposals were considered by the Committee,
and each was approved :—
APPLICATIONS BY THE COUNTY SURVEYOR.
No 21.
No 25.
To keep in repair Ardee Quarter Sessions Court
House, with the Courtkeeper's residence, for one
year from 1st April, 1916. —Not to exceed Clö.
To provide for the maintenance of Drogheda Court
House for one year from 1st April, 1916. Not to
exceed L'30.
26.
27.
28.
29.
No 30.
No 31.
22
l'o provide for the maintenance of the County Court
House, Dundalk, for one year from Ille 1st April,
1916. Not to exceed ego.
To supply a Press in tile Council Chamber, County
Court House, Dundalk. Cost not €0 exceed C} 5.
APPLICATIONS BY THE SECRETARY.
To supply Printing and Stationery for County pur-
poses for one year from 1st April, 1916, including
the Printing to be done for the Clerk of the Crown
and Peace under Jurors' Acts ancl nnder Registra-
[ion Acts (if required).
To supply for one year from 1st April, 1916, tho
following Court Houses with Best English Coal
(screened) 30 tons; Drogheda,
tons; Ardee, IO tons, delivered at the respective
Court Houses as required.
To prepare the Courts and Court Rooms in County
Court House for Assizes, Quarter -Sessions and
Revisic;n Sessions for one year from 1st April, 1916
Not to exceed Clö.
To insert the County Advertisements in one Dundalk
and one Drogheda paper for one year from 1st
April, 1916. Not to e.xcw•ecl three pence per line.
23
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at théir
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 10th January, 1916, at one o'clock p m.
Present the Chair : Jarnes Wynne, Esq, J P.
Other Members :—Thomas O'Rourke, James T' M 'Gee, J P;
Patrick M 'Gee, J P; Bernard Hamill, J P, and John F
Murphy, J P, Esquires.
Mi' Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous meeting of lime Cotnmittee were
taken as read, and signed by the Chairman
The following Accounts were submitted and, on examination,
were ordered for payment :—
Works in charge of County Surveyor
Secretary's Office
Total
C107 3
0 10 (5
C107 13 10
The Secretary sn bmitted County-at-Large Payments for
(Quarter ended 31st December, 1915, which were recommended
for payment.
The Committee adjourned to Monday, 7th February, 1916,
to receive tenders.
The Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loans
Accounts were examined,' and initialled by the Chairman.
RATE COLLECTION.
The Secretary submitted Return showing state of Collection
Of Poor Rate on 31st December, 1915, which showed that of the
total amount of the second moiety of L'17,850 3s 2d the sum of
C2,113 5s 2cl had been collected, showing the amount outstand
ing C15,73G 18.s ()d. The return was initialled by the Chairman.
HARBOUR RECEIIYI',S.
The Secretary-submitted Clie Returns of Revenue (which were
initialled by Che Chairman) from the Harbours for the Quartey
to- 31st December, 1915, as follows C12 Gd .
Giles' Quay, CIO '2d ; Clogherhead, C9 18s Gd.
WRITING rp OF RATE BOOKS.
The Seeretary informed the Committee that he had received
the Valuation Lists from the Valua [ion Office to enable Che
work of writing up the Rate Books to be put in hands, and
requested direction for the carrying out of the work.
The Committee unanimously directed the Secretary to have
the work performed in the samo manner as last year, namely,
by employing what extra clerks he required, to be paid at, fl'.e
usual scale rates, and two check clerks at the same remunera-
tion as last year.
CO-OPTION OF COUNCILLOR IN ROOM OF MR. T. J.
BYRNE, DECEASED.
The Committee directed the Secretary to place upon
Agenda for the next Meeting of the County Council Vhe
option of Councillor to fill the vacancy caused by the death Of
Mi. T J By„ve.
REFUND OF SURCHARGES.
The Secretary informed the Conunittee that the amounts
surcharged in respect of the railway fares paid to two members
25
of the Council, Messrs N T Murphy, J P, and M O'Meara, J P,
had been refunded by them, and the amounts were lodged to
the credit of the Council.
FINES RECEIVED.
Letter was read from Clerk of Petty Sessions, Collon, enclos-
ing 9s 3cl, fines received under Food and Drugs Prosecution In
the ease of Sharpe v. Doggett.
Letter was: read from Che County Solicitor enclosing receipt
for 4s lodged to the credit of the Council, in respect of costs
ineurred in Motor Duty Prosecution.
The letters were initialled by the Chairman.
FEES FOR ATTENDANCE AT JURORS' REVISION
SESSIONS.
Letter was read from L. G. B. dated 4th January, No.
69178/1915 (and initialled by the Chairman), enclosing eopy of
an Order in Council dated the 23rd Decem,beF, 1915, fixing the
seale to be paid for attendance at Jurors' Revision Sessions, to
existing Clerks of Unions, Seeretaries of County
Clerks of Urban District Councils, and Colleet,ors of Poor Rate,
at the same rate as the scale fixed with respect to the Revision
of Parliamentary Voters.
APPLICATION FOR REDUCTION OF FINE IN MOTOR
LICENCE DVTY PROSECUTION.
The following letter was read :—
County
1)
ear Sir.
am instructed by Mr
Francis Street, Dundalk,
7th January, 1916.
Council v. Tobin.
Joseph Tobin, of Clanbrassil Street,
26
Dundalk, €0 communicate with you in reference to a fine of
C'20 inflicted on him on 10th December last for failing to take
out a licence for his motor bicycle. As you are aware, Chis is
the minimum penalty which the magistrates can impose, but
the C011nty Council can reduce it if the circumstances iustii'y
such a course.
My client is a Victualler in this town, and his business takes
him daily €0 fairs and mai•kets, and particularly to his father's
farm in County Meath. is owing €0 his continued absecyce
from home that he quite overlooked taking out a licence. Ile
had no intention Of evading tlle law, and has since taken cut
the required licentse. He asks me to express regret for the
oversight and Co state Chat it will not occur again.
In the circumstances I would ask your Council to exercise
their power and reduce the fine to a nominal sum.
Yours faithfully,
FRAS. P. JOHNSTON.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
After discussion, the following resolution was unanimously
adopted :
Proposed by T1101nas O'Rourke, Esq ;
Seconded by James T M 'Gee, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we recommend the 'County Council to reduce
the penalty of imposed by the Magistrates on Joseph Tobin,
Clan brassil Street, Dundalk, for non-payment of his Motor
Licence Duty, to the sum of €3.
WITHDRAWAL OF IRISH EDUCATION GRANTS.
Letter was read from the Gaöiic League, Dublin, requesting
the Council to send delegates to a meeting in Dublin on 17th
27
January, to protest against the threatened withdrawal of
in aid of Irish Education, and if delegates could not be
sent in time €0 the meeting by the Council, to express an
opinion favourable to its object.
'l'he follouång resolution, proposed by Patrick M 'Gee, FAI ,
•J P, seconded by Thomas O'Rourke, Esq, was passed unani-
rnously :
That, we protest in the most cunphatie manner against any
ruluction by the Government of the funds for education in
Ireland, and call upon the Trish members of Parliament, and
all public representatives in Ireland to exert their influence to
defeat this threatened alienation of funds from the Irish
language and oilier branches of Irish education, and to prevent
any further attempts of the Treasury to curtail the already
too meagre financial support given to education in Ireland.
APPLICATION FROM COUNTY COUNCIL SCHOLAR.
Letter was read from Miss Margaret V Lyons, Drogho•la,
residence from the
requesting permission to change her
Dominican Hall to Mixs O'Byrne's, 79 Grove Pald€, S C Road,
burblin, a residence approved by the College Authorities. The
alil)lication was unanilnousl.y granted by Che Committee.
APPLICA'I'ION FROM QUARRY MEN.
The following letter, addressed to the County Surveyor and
Si'.bmittecl by him for direction, was read :—
Cockle Hill, Quarry, Blackrock,
Dundalkv 8th January, 1916.
Dear Sir.
We, the undersigned workmen in above works, beg to Gill
attention to the fact that before we receive this pay we are
28
now oworking for, the clays will be at full working hours, and
erytliing the labourer has to buy is still daily increasing,
therefore we must respectfully ask you to increase our wages to
Cl per week.
We are, dear sir, awaiting your reply,
Yours faithfully,
MICHAEL LEE, PATRICK M'GOUGII, JOHN
M'GINN, LAURENCE MVGOUGH, HENRY
LEE, RICR.XAIU) COURTNEY,
.JOHN
CARROLL BERNARD CONLON.
Affer discussion,
it was unanimously decided that as
money for the work did not permit of any increases, that
req nest could not be granted, and the County Surveyor
instructed accordingly.
the
the
was
29
executive Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Executive Conunit€ee at their
Meeting held in the C(juneil Chatn•ber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, January, 1916, at one o'clock p m.
Present —
: In the Chair: James Wynne, E.sq, J p.
Other O'Rourke, James T M 'Gee, J P;
M•Gee, J P; Bernard Hamill, J P
and John IS'
Murphy, J P, Esquires.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Executive Com-
mittee were Laken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
REPOR'I'S FROM VETERINARY INSPECTORS.
The, following Repot is were read, and initialled by
Chairman : —
Mr Clinton's Report.
the
On the 13th December, 1913, an outbreak of Seab occurred
in a consignment of lambs forwarded to Dundalk Port for
Shipment to England by Mr Jarnes Marmion. The lambs were
P Ureljased from a Mr P Hanlon, of Piedmont, and had been
grazing on Mrs Malone's land at Haynestown.
'l'he Iambs
Were slaughtered at Dundalk Port by, order of _t.he owner.
e Oinpan.y with a Departmental Inspector, I visited the farm at
a.ynestowt) and exantined the remaining sheep there (76 in
all) No other case of Seab was found. I had all the sheep
dipped under my personal supervision.
In the case of J •
go
Shevlin's sheep, already reported, the affected
slaughtered and the remainder (40) dipped.
Mr Donnelly's Report.
During the month of November there were
animals were
two outbreaks
of Shoop Scab. In one case the animals came from Co. Menth
The animals (.02) that
and in the other from Dtl'blin market.
enme from Dublin market were all slaughtered with the owner's
In the other ease the diseased animal wn.S
authority.
slaughtered and the in-contacts dipped twice inside 10 days, and
allowed to go forward for shipment at Drogheda
Port.
During the month of December, 1915, I had two outbreaks
of Sheep Scab. The diseased animals were slaughtered and the
in-contacts twire dipped, and I have been able €0 withdraw the
restrictions. There are no other animals in thee district under
restrictions af present date.
Mr Maxwell's Report.
I beg to report that I visited and inspected the usual fairs
and markets in " the Ardee No. I District for the month o
November. I had the detained sheep, the property of M atthc»v
Skelly, Hammondstown, Dunleer, dipped on the 2nd ancl 16th
of the month. On the 15th I released the sheep detained on
the farm of John Crawley, Artnahver.v, Ardee. In consequenee
of Matthew Skelly selling a ram to Henry Sloan, Aclare
Dunleer, Lhe sheep on Mr S'loan's farm had to be examine '
but were found free from disease. Both Crawley's and Skelly s
the
farms have been properly disinfected. I examined the pig,
property of James Ilughes, whieh the owner thought might
All the
have swine fever, but the disease was indigestion.
necessary forms, etc, have been forwarded in connection with
these cases.
31
During the month of December T visited the fafirs and
markets held in Ardee No. I District. The detention placed
on Matthew Skelly's farm, Hammondstown, Dnnloer, has
Withdrawn by me as from the 8th of this month. The usual
forms in connection with this case have been forwarded to the
A suspected case of Scab at H Craigh's farm,
Council.
nohermore, Ardee', was found not to exist.
SHEEP SCAB OUTBREAKS.
Notices and Forms in connection with the following cases of
Sheep Scab, which occurred in Co. Louth since the last Execu-
tivo Meeting, were read, and initiallecl by tho Chairman
•Johne Crawley, Artnalivery (2 outbreaks); M ,S'keIly, Ham-
mondstxjwn; M Coghlan, Haynestown ; H Sloan, A thelare;
James Shevlin, Dundalk Port; David Farrell, Drogheda Pori ;
•J Marmion, Dundalk Port ; James Smyth, Drogheda Port ; and
Sandy Fennell, jnn, same.
FOOT AND MOU'I'H DISEASE (IRELAND) ORDER, 1915.
Lotter was road from the Department of Agriculture dated
l)eeeniber, No. 42021'1,3, enclosing copies of an Order dated
2 lth November, entitled as above. The Order embodied certain
Provisions (1) for the restrictions of movements of animals anci
Of persons in certain eases ; (2) restrictions of movement of hay
The Order was initialled
and straw ; and (3) control of dogs.
by the Chairman.
SHEEP DIPPING (APPOINTMENT OF INSPECTORS)
(IRELAND) ORDER, 1915.
Letter was read from the Department of Agriculture dated
1st December, 4303/15, enclosing copy of Order as above made
24th November, 1915,
$2
The k)llowing are the important provisions of the Order, and
after discussion, it was decided to refer the consideration Of
the Order to the County Council :—
Local Authorities to appoint Inspectors of Sheep Dipping.
Every Local Authority shall temporarily appoint, for service
during Che prescribed dipping periods, as many additional
as may be necessary to enable proper supervision to
be maintained on behalf Of Che Local Authority, with a view
to securing the effective clipping of sheep in their district under
the principal Order.
Department's approval required for appointments.
Appointments under this Order and the remuneration Of
persons appointed shall in all instances be subject to approval
by the Department.
Provisions against delay, etc, in appointing.
If it appears to the Department that a Local Authority has
failed.
(a) to make, within a reasonable time, the appointments
required by this Order, or
(b) foo make a sufficient number of such appointments,
the Department may issue to such Local Authority a Certifi-
cafe,' under the Seal of the Department, specifying what num-
brr of appointments, or of further appointments, as the case
may be, are requisite for the purposes of the Order in the
district of the Local A lithority, and specifying also, if the
Department see fit, the rates of remuneration of the Inspectors
to be appointed and the areas for which they should respectively
act, and the Local Authority, on receipt of such Certificate'
shall proceed, without avoidable delay, to make Che requisite
appointments in accordance with the terms of the Certificate.
1
finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on 'I'hursday, 20th January, 1916, at one o'clpck, p m.
Present the Chair: James Wynne, E,sq, J P.
Other Members—Bernard Hamill, J P, and Michael Meade,
Esquires.
The Secretary submitted payntents as per Form 22 on foot of
contracts for road Inaintenanee as follows, and sanje were • re-
Rural District, L'796 8s Od•,
cornmended for payment
Drogheda Rural District, C49ö 3s Sd; Dundalk Rural District,
"1,077 9d.
GULLET AT JONESBORO.
The. County Surveyor reported that a drain or gullet at Jones-
boro which had "been macle by the Grand Jury, was opened for
the purpose of cleansing satne, and the occupier of thc adjoin-
ing premises clairned that the County Council were liable for its
rnaintenance. The County Surveyor informed the Corn Inittee
that he had told the owner Chat the Council were not bound to
it, as it takes sewage from the yard pretnises; but he
Wished the authority of the Committee to consult the County
SOIicit•or on the matter. On the motion of Mr B Hamill, se-
e Olldecl by Mr Meade, the Committee unanimou.sly• directed the
Surveyor to obtain the Solicitor's advice on the matter.
2
Coutb County Council.
Minutes of proceedings of the Louth County Council af their
Fourth Quarterly Meeting held on Thursday, January,
1916, af one o' elock, p m.
the Chair: James WCarthy, Esq, J P.
Other Member—Michael Meade, Hamill, J P; Jas.
Wynne. J P; J 11 M'AlT11e, J P; Edward Goodman, X T Mur-
pli.v, J P; Tl:omas B M'Court, Thomas O'Rourke, James T.
A1'Gee, J P; J Rath, P Callan, .J P; W T Skeffington,
.J P; P Donegan, J P; M'Gee, .J P; J P J F
M Itrphy, J P, ancl John Morgan, Esquires.
Messrs Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor ; James I)romgcole
and John M C Lyons, Assistant Surveyors; Daniel O'Connell,
County Solicitor, Dr M •Quillan, T M O, and Mr V war-
ren, Clerk T C M, were also in attendance.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
Tho following resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Lsq, J P;
Seconded by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Ilesolved—'l'hat the minutes of proceedings of the I joufll
Conniy Council at their Third (Adjourned) Quarterly Meeting'
Ijelcl on the 2511m •day of November, 1915, and their Third Ad-
i01trned Quarterly Meeting (adjourned from 25th November)
held on the 9th day of December, 1915, a printed copy of each
be and are
having been sent to each member of the Council,
hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by N Mutvhy, Esq, .J P;
Seeondecl by Miehnel Meade, Esq, ancl
Resolved—Thai the minutes of proeeeclings Of the Finance
Cnmmittee at their Ineetings held on the undermentioned dates
eop.v of which has been sent to each member of the Council)
be
With all payments and recommendations eon tained therein,
are hereby confirmed, save and except that the amounf -of
the fine in the ease of Joseph Tobin, be reduced to L'I (one
Pound) :
Monday, 29th November, 1915.
Monday, 13th Deeember, 1915.
Thursday, '23rd Decem ber, 1915.
Monday, 10th January, 1.016.
Arising out of the, Finance Committee minutes of 10th Janu-
at which meeting the fine of C'2() imposed on Joseph Tobin,
Clanbrassii Street, Dundalk, for non-payment of his Motor Li-
eonee Duty, haci been reduced on application by defendant's so-
Mr F Johnston, to the sum of B, Mr J H
' proposed that thi.s be further reduced to I()s, and Mr B
J P, seconded. Mr W 'l' Skeffington, J "P, supported
this motion.
The Secretary read further letter from Mr F P Johnston sug-
gesting reduction of the line €0 a nominal surn of or Is.
Mr P M 'Gee, J P, opposed further reduction of Che fine as
the costs had to be paid out of the fine.
Mr N 'I' Murphy suggested as a eoniprmnise that the fine be
reduced to the sum of El, and Mr M Meade seconded, and this
was unanimously ugreed to, and the resolution as set out alÄ've
was passed unanimously.
CONFIRMA'I'IO.X OF E.XWC'I'IVE MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Thomas M 'Court, Esq ;
Seconded by Joseph P Kearney, E.sq, and
Resolved—That the minutes of proceedings of the Executive
Committee at their meetings held on the 29th Novernber, 1915'
and 10th January, 1916 (a copy of eaeli having been sent to
each member of the Council) be and are hereby confirtned.
CONFIRMATION OF PROPOSAL COMMIT'I'EE MINUTES,
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Thornas O'Rourke, Esq, and
Resolved—That the 'ninnies of proceedings of the Proposa
Conunittee at their Fourth Quarterly Meeting held on the 10th
day of January, 1916, a printed copy of which has been sent to
each member of the Council, be and are hereby confirnjed.
ARDEE PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was passed unanirnously :—
Proposed by Patrick M•Gee, E.sq, J P;
Seconded by Patrick Callan, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the proposal for payrnents formulated by
5
Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council, at their Fourth Quarterly
Mooting held on the 4th day of January, 1916, and set out on
Form 22, furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby
aoproved of. These payments amount to the sum of C79C 8s
DROGHEDA PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Patrick Donegnrr, E.sq, J P;
Seconded by N T Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the propcxsal for payments formulated by the
Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union, at their Fourth
Qnartorly Meeting, held on the 11th day of January, 1916, and
set out on Form 22, furnished to the County Council, be and
are hereby approved of. These payments amount to t.ae sum
of 3s Sd.
DUNDALK PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously:—
Proposed by Joseph P Kearney, Esq ;
Seeonded by John F Murphy, FAI, J P, and
Resolved—That the proposal for payments formulated by the
Undalk 11 nral District Council, at their Fourth Quarterly
Meeting, held on the 10th day of January, 1916, and set out
on Fortli 22, furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby
approved of. These payments amount to the sum of Cl,077
94.
6
COUNTY-AT-LARGE PAYMENTS
The following resolution was passed unaninmousl.y :—
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by 'l'homas B M 'Court, E.sq, and
'I'hat the proposal for payments formulated by Che
Resolved—
Proposal Committee, at their Fourth Juarterly Meeting, held
on the 10th day of Jan 1916, and set out on Form 22'
ishecl to Che County Council, be and are hereby approved
as aP
7
pearing at Page 1 of the Schedule of Proposals for the 25th clay
Of November, 1913), a copy of which has been sent to each mem-
ber of the Council, be and is hereby approved of.
DEFAULTING CON'I'RAC'I'ORS.
As recommended in the County Surveyor's Report :-
The following "esolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed by Edward Goodman, Esq ;
Seconded by Joseph H M•Ardle, Esq, J P, and
—That in accordance with Clause 21 of Che Specifi-
I tesolved
'l'hese payments amount to the sum of 9s öd.
of.
DATES OF QUARTERLY MEETINGS.
The following lwsolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P;
by N T Mutvhy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the County Council hereby determine
flie following slwall be the dates for Che holding of the
Quarterly Meetings of tlle Rural •District Councils :—
4th April, 1916.
DROGHEDA—'1'uesday, 11th April, 1916.
DUGDALK—Mon€1ay, lotif April, 1916.
And that the Proposal Committee meet on
MONDAY, April, 1916.
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
The followillg resolution was passed unanimously :—
-by Callan, Lkq, J P;
Seconded by Denis J Ratll, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Report of the County Surveyor,
Chat
First
cation,
Index
No IS
13
71
78
79
the following contracts are declared to be broken :—
ARDEE RURAL DISTRICT.
Perches
Salterstown,
. Dunany,
Contractor
..Peter O'Neill
-James Devine
1170
594
SIS
783
410
275
Dundalk,
Ardee,
DROGHEDA RURAL DISTRICT.
Collon,
Dundalk,
Dundalk,
Dundalk,
Mills of Louth,
Dundalk.
I)vndalk,
Kingscourt, .
Dundalk,
Dundalk,
Dundalk,
Dundalk,
Dundalk,
...The Sea,
...Michael Maguire
R URAL DISTRICT.
...Castlebellingh«m, Patrick Watters
...Ardee,
...Ardee,
. Rathbri8€,
...Joseph M •Kenna
do
...John Carroll
...Carrick macross, ...Patrick Murray
Carrickmacross, ...Edward Connolly
do
...Dundalk,
. Newtownhamilton, Charles Kelly
T Muck ian
.F0?khill,
. Newtownharnilton, Michael Murphy
...Newtownhnmilton, Peter Boylé
...Newtownhamilton, John Boyle, Jun
PROCEEDINGS AGAINS'I' COVI'RACTORS.
The resolution was passecl unanimously :
by Patrick M'Gee, Esq, J P;
Seconded by N T Murphy, Esq; J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby direct that legal proceedings be
8
instituted against all defaulting contractors and their sureties,
in every ease where any Inss has been occasioned to the county
owing to neglected eon tracts being re-set at increased prices.
DEATH OF MRS. C. A. DUFFY.
On the completion of the Statutory business of the agenda,
Mr W T Skeffington, J P, stated he desired fo propose a reso-
lution of sympathy with their respected Aeting Chairman, Mr
C A Duffy, on the irreparable loss sustainoQl by him in the
death of •his wife. He prefacecl the reading of Che resolution
with the expression of sympathetic references to the deceased
lady.
The Chairman, in putting the resolution, stated that he de
sii•e€l to be specia Ily associated with the sentiments conveyed
therein.
The following resolution was then passed in silence, all the
members standing
Proposed by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we learn with great regret of the lamented
death of MIS Duffy, the wife of our esteemed Vice-Chairman,
Mr Charles A Duffy.
As a member of one of the most impor-
tant boards included in the administrative County of Louth,
the deceased Indy had oeeupio«l a, deservedly high position for
her great capacity ; in every good work for the alleviation of
the distressed and the uplifting of the lowly she was stren-
nous worker, while in all things National her patriotislll was
pure ancl nnsullied. We deplore hor loss, and we beg fo fender
to her Ivusbancl and relatives our sincere condolence in their sad
bereavement,
SHEEP DIPPING (APPOINTMENT OF INSPECTORS)
ORDER, 1915.
The Secretary infortned the Council that in accordance with
instructions from the Executive Conunittee, he had written to
the Department that the above Order would be considered ac
the Council meeting this day, and the Department had written
in reply to say that one of their Veterinary Inspectors, Mr Nor-
ris, had been deputed to attend the meeting to explain the Or-
and answer queries. The Chairman then introduced Mr.
orris, who explained the provisions of the Order, which provi-
ded that every local authority should temporarily appoint for
Service during the prescribed dipping periods as many additional
Inspectors as may be necessary to enable proper supervision to
be maintained on behalf of the local autllority with a view
the effective dipping of sheep in their district, and in the event
Of appointments, the Department power under the Order
to make what appointments miglit be considered necessary.
A long discussion ensued in which Messrs Goodman, N T
Was ultimately decided to refer the consideration of the Order
to a "special meeting of the Executive Committee to 'be con-
Vened, so that their report could be considered at the adjourned
meeting of the Council to be held on 24th February.
The Chairman thanked Mr Norris for his attendance and in-
formation, and Mr Norris suitably responded.
ANCIENT MONUMENTS IN COUNTY LOUTH.
Y permission of the Council, deputa [ion from the Arehaeo-
13
logical Society, composed of Messrs G O'Reilly, Drogheda, and
10
H G Tempest, Dundalk, was heard. The members of the depu-
tation informed the Council that various archaeological remains
in Drogheda, notably John's Gate Tower, known as the Butter
Gate, were in a very dilapidated condition, and while the Cor-
porati011 of Drogheda would be pleased to undertake their care'
that under the Acts of Parliament passed for the preservation
of ancient monuments, it was the County Council in whom
their control should be vested. They requested the Council to
undertake charge of these monuments Of antiquity.
After discussion, in which it was pointed out by Mr Wynne
that there were other antiquarian remains in Dundalk and other
places that, required care, the deputation were requested to pre-
pare a list of the various buildings, etc, which they req•uired
the County Conneil €0 undertake control of, when the matter
, would bo considered by the Finance Committee to report to
the Council.
The deputation undertook to furnish this list, and thanked
the Council for the courtesy extended to them. The Chairman
informed them that the Cotmeil would sympathetically consider
tho matter, and do what was possible to preserve those venera-
ble links with the past.
AGREEMENT BETWEEN COUNCIL AND INSURANCE
Tho next matter considered by the Council was tho propOS(
agreement between the County Council and the Insurance Com-
mi [tee for the treatment of tuberculosis in County Louth.
draft from of :igrcemenf had been considered by the
Io..is Cotillilitfee and tho Insurance Cornutittee, and a basis
ted
These terms had already been prin
agreement arrived at.
and circulated among the members of the Council,
11
•4 long discussion ensued in which exception was faken to the
action of the L G B in curtailing the amount to be spent on
the Drogheda Dispensary to C 100.
Mr Skeffington also stated that the rate struck of one penny
in the C should only have been half of this amount if the Trea-
Sury Grant of CI had been received.
The Secretary informed the Council that the actual rate
•struck only represented about one halfpenny, as the amount re-
ceived in recoupment of the expenditure was credited as a re-
eeipt, and deducted from the C 1,000, leaving the actual am-
ount for which the rate was struck Cö75.
Ultimately the, following resolution was passed unanimously—
Proposed by Bernard Hmnill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by James Wynne, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby approve of the terms of Agreement
between the. Louth County Council and the County Louth In-
•snranee Committee for the treatment of insured and . exempt
Persons suffering from tuberculosis in the County of Louth, 'by
Which the County Council, in consideration of the payment of
Is '2d per insured person by the Insurance Committee, and the
residue from Administration expenses of the additional ld cre-
dited to them, undertake to provide the services of the Tuber-
ctlJosis Medical Officer (subject to the Agreement), nurses, me-
dieines, shelters, dispensaries, provision in a sanatorium of six
beds for treatment of insured and exempt persons, and in the
Louth County Infirmary of one bed • for insured ancl exempt
SUrgieal cases, and any other treatment for which the balance
Of the funds available may be used, subject to a working
Agreement being made with medical practitioners as domi-
ciliary treatrnent. The term of the Agreentcnt to be twelve
months from 1st January, 1916, to 31st Decernbér, 1916.
In connection with the foregoing resolution, and to enable
the County Schenle for the treatment of tuberculosis to be coni-
pleted, the Secretary was directed to write to the L G 13 to in-
crease the grant for the , erection of the Drogheda Dispensary,
as the amount suggested by the L G considered
entirely inadequate.
TIMBER FOR SALTERS'I*OW.N. COAST ROAD.
The next item on the agenda was the consideration of appli-
cation from the County Surveyor for trees from Willistown
Plantation for groining Salterstown Coast Road. This tnatter
had been referred by the Finance Committee to the County
Council.
The follouing resolution was passed unanimously—
Proposed by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Denis J Rath, Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby consent to give the timber to be
cut from Willistown Plantation for the groining of Salterstown
Coast Road ; the trees to be felled to be selected by the Depart-
ment's Instructor, and the price for same to be arranged be-
tween hirn and the County Surveyor.
FORESTRY SCHEME.
Letter from the County Solicitor witfi reference to the propo-
sed County Louth Forestry Scheme, requesting instructions to
submit the draft scheme prepared by him for approval of the
Department of Agriculture, and also of the Estates Commission-
ers was deferred.
19
CARETAKER OF WTLT,TSTOWS PLANTATION.
The next item on the agenda was the appointment of eare-
taker for the Council's Plantation at Willistown. Applications
for the position were read from the following: Williani Rich-
ard.son, Drumear, and Hugh Guinnetty, Willistown.
Mr Michael Meade proposed, and Mr James Wynne secon-
ded, tho appointment of Richardson.
Mr P M 'Gee proposed, and Mr Thomas O'Rourke seconded,
the appointment of Guinnetty.
The Chairman took a vote of the Council with the following
result—
For Guinnetty—Messrs P Callan, P Donegan, E Goodman, B
Hamill, J 11 Mi-Ardle, James T M 'Court, .J M 'Gee
P M 'Gee, J F •Murphy, N T Murphy, J Morgan, T O'Rourke,
D J Ratil, and W T Skeffington—I".
For M Meade and J Wynne—2.
The Chairman declared Guinnitty elected, and the following
resolution was passed
That we hereby appoint Hugh Guinnitty, of Willistown,
Caretaker of the Council's plantation at Willistown, at a salary
Of Ed per annum.
CO-OPTION—ARDEE OLD AGE PENSIONS
COMMI'IVI'EE.
The following resolution was passed unanimously—
P rq)po.secl by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That • we hereby co-opt Very Rev Canon Lyons,
14
p P, a ntetnber of the Ardee Old Age Pensions Conunittee, vice
the late Very Rev Canon Rogers, P P.
OF COUNTY COUNCILLOR.
The following resolution was passed unanimously—
Proposed by John F Murphy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Edward Goodman, E.sq, and
Resolved —'I'ha[ we hereby co-opt Mr Bernard L Coleman,
Ila llybarrack, County Councillor for the Electoral Division of
Castletown, vice Mr T J Byrne, deceased.
APPOI.X'I'.MENI' ON RICHMOND ASYLUM COMMITTEE.
'I'he following resolution was passed unanimously—
by Michael Meade, ;
Seconded by Thomas O'Rourke, E.sq, and
Resolved
'I'hat we hereby appoint Mr James Wynne, J P, a
mevnber of the Richmond District Asylum Connnittee of Man-
agement, vice Mr T J Byrne, deceased.
ON GENERAL COUNCIL 01/ COUNTY
COUNCILS.
The fc!lowing resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Edward Goodman, Esq ;
Seconded by Patrick M'Gee, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—-'l'hat we hereby appoint Mr N T Murphy, J
of the Irish County Councils' General Council,
Mr T J Byrne, deceased.
vice
APPOINTMENT OX COUNTY OF LOUTH AND DUNDALK
TECHNICAL COMMITTEE.
The following resolution was passed unanimously—
by B MCoun, ;
by Ilarnill, Esq, J P, and
Re.soh ed—That . we hereby appoint MI' Thotnas O'Rourke a
member of the County Louth and Dundalk Joint Cormnittee of
Technical Instruction, vice Mr T J Byrne, deceased.
APPOINTMENT ON DUNDALK (SOUTH) OLD AGE
PENSIONS COMMITTEE.
The following resolution was passed unanilnously—
by limnill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by M'Gee, Esq, J P,
Resolved—'l'hat we hereby appoint, Mr Bernard L Colelnan a
member of the Dundalk (South) Old Age Pensions Corn Illittee,
vice Mr T J Byrne, deceased.
CO-OPTION ON DC.XLEER OLD AGE PENSIONS
COMMITTEE.
The follouing resolution was passed unanimously—
Proposed by Patrick M •Gee, Esq, J P;
by Michael Meade, Esq,
Resolved—-'l'hat we hereby eo-opt, Mr Thomas Kearney, of
Slievei»oy, a member of the I)u.nleer Old Age Pensions Conj-
rnittee, vice Mr R Mathews, resigned.
16
CO-OPTION ON LOUTH COUNTY COMMTTTEE OF
AGRICULTURE.
The following Notiee of Motion standing in the name of Mr D J
Rath was put as a substantive resolution and passed unani-
mously
by Denis J Rath, Esq;
Seeonded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That Mr John 13utferly, of Togher, be co-opted a
member of the. Louth County Committee of Agriculture.
MOTOR TUNG BOAT FTSIIING.
The following nofiee of motion standing in the name of Mr D J
Ratli was puf as a substantive resolution and passed unanimously:
Proposed by Denis J T?afh, Esq,
Seeoncl'ocl by James Wynne, Esq, J V, and
Resolved—That the County Couneil of Louth beg to direct the
attention of the Fisheries Branch of the Department of Agri-
culture to the harm done at present by motor ring boat fishing ill
the Bays cvf Drogheda, Clogherhead, and Dundalk, and call upon
this Branch of the Department to pass a Bye-Law prohibiting
same.
Tn connection with the foregoing resolution, a resolution sub-
mitted by the Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council was
directing the Council's attention to the practice referred to
the resolution with a request to move in the matter.
The Secretary was (liroefed, in submitting the resolution to the
Department, to impress upon fhem the urgent necessity of
mediate action.
CTIARGE FOR ROAD IMPROVEMENTS LOAN.
The following resolution was passed unanifijously
Propsed by Wm T Skeffington, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Thontas O'Rourke, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Secretary of the Council having reported
17
that the deed to secure the loan of 424,060, with interest, to
Hibernian Bank, Limited, referred to in the resol ution of
29th July, 1915, though executed,
was not stamped within
Proper time, Vte hereby (lireet that the old engrossment dated
29th July, 1915, be cancelled,
and diree[ our Secretary to affix
Comnron Seal of the Council to the
new. enorossment of
the
the
the
the
the
charge, to the LI ibernian Bank, Limited (now produced and
initialled by the Cllai rman», for E4,060, and that said deed be
handed over to the Bank in consideration of the advances agreed
on.
CORRESPONDENCE.L
The following letters were read and ordered fo be inserted ou
the Minutes :—
Rosstnakea, 1) unclalk,
26111 Novem ber, 1915.
neur Sir,—
Will you kindly convey fo the members of the Louth
County Council Iny and my family's very sincere thanks and ap-
Preciation of their kind message of sympathy in our great grief
and irreparable loss.
Yours sincerely,
IIELEN M. BYRNE.
e. Esq.
December 17th, 1915.
Dear Sir,—
Lef lite thank you most sincerely for your kind words
Of sympathy on Che death of Iny uncle, Mr A I*oehe, and through
You the men) bers of the Council.
CHARLES B. ROCHE.
DELEGATES TO NORTH LOUTII CONVENTION.
Lotter was read from Mr Joseph Devlin, M P, requesting the
Uncil to appoint four delegates to represent them at the above
Convention to be held on 31st January, and
18
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Patrick M 'Gee, Esq, J P;
by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby appoint Messrs James Wynne, J P;
Thornas B M 'Court, 'John F Murphy, .T P, and Thomas O'Rourke
to represent the Council {it the North T.oufh Convention of the
Illiited Trish League to be held on 31st January, 1916
VACANCY' ON INSURANCE COMMITTEE.
Leffer was read from the National Ilealflb Insurance Ckimmis-
Sioners requesting the Council to appoint a representative on
County Louth Insurance Connnittee vice Mrs E A Duffy,
ceased.
The Secreta ry was (liroc•fecl to place flie appoinfinent
Agenda for nexf Meeting of the Council.
GIIÆS' QUAY BOATSLTP.
The following lotter was read. No action W as taken
maffer. and the letter was initialled by the Chairrnan:—
Local Government Board, l)nblin,
16th ber,
No. 61.094/1915.
Louth County.
Sir,—
on
the
de-
the
1915.
Witli reference to your letter of the 12th instant and pre-
vious correspondence on the. subject of Che purchase by the Louth
County Council of a Boatslip at Giles' Quay, T directed JIY
the I,oeal Govermnenf Board. for Ireland to state that they note
the of flie County Council that the Boafslip is noi
Tn tljese eireumstances,
enlargetnent of Che existing pier or quay.
the Board are not aware of any authority under which the
19
Council could proeoed fo purchase the Boat Slip, and they are,
therefore, not in a position fo give their sanction,
T am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
m. REPORT.
At tho request of the Tuberculosis Committee of Management
the following Reporf was ordered to be inserted on the Minutes
of Che Council:—
County of Louth Tnbereulosis Committee of Management.
1st December, 1915,
Gentlemen,—
T beg to submit the following report the
Tuberculosis Dispensaries were started 247 patients were treated
there, viz—At Dundalk, 181* af Carlingford, 38, and af Ardee, 28.
Of these 20 died, 39 withdrew from treatment against my advice,
and 56 have been discharged as cured or much improved. 105
Patients are still under treatment, and most of these are now
able to follow their usual oeeupafions. The Central Dispensary
Dundalk is now in full working order and was opened foi flie
of patients on the 1st November. The patients appre-
very much the arrangements made there for their comfort.
TO oonvenienee patients who are working during the day, and
who find it difficult to attend Central Dispensary on Monday
or Friday mornings, I propose to open this Institution on Mon-
day evenings from 7.30 p m to 8.30 p m. All patients arc; visited
their h01nes occasionally, and advice given on matters of diet,
fresh air, arrangement of sleeping apartments and the prevention
Unfortunately in Drogheda we have no Dis-
Of infection, etc.
and at present patients are freated at their own homes.
At the present time there are 13 pa,fientÅ, but the existing
is unsatisfactory ; for, frequently when I call to
house it is only to be told that the patient is out. Patients
who are out working if is illjpossible to treat; and €1vose from
outlying districts who may . wish to be examined or consult me
don't know where to find me. Even in their own homes if is
frequently iinpossi ble eyuuine patients properly, while the
want of medicine is a great drawback, as it is useless to give a
poor patient a prescript ion who cannot afford to purchase the
medicine.
In 14 eases the condition was Sfa-
have been treated there.
fiona ry, 13 became worse, and 3 died, and at present there are
7 cases under treatment. 25 surgical eases have been treated in
the Infirnrat•y witli very satisfactory results; 8 have been
cured, 9 m uell injproved, 3 rged, (heir condition being
stationary; 3 died, one withdrew from treatment against medical
There is urgent need
advice, and one is still under treatment.
for a hospital for advanced eases, and eotnpulsory powers must
be sought to compel patients to undergo treatment if any per-
It is of
manenf headway is to be Inade against disease.
supretne importance for people who suffer from a persistent cough
and slight loss of energy to seek lijedieal aid immediately in order
fo get at the disease at the earliest possible lnoment, for if
patients seek aid early enough the prospect of eure is greatly
Unfortunately a great numnber delay 17>0 long toxome
enhanced.
to the Dispensary and so allow much damage to be done. to the
lungs and consequently the fruits of treatment are greatly
diminished.
Any doctor in [Ile County who wishes €0 send sputum fo the
Dispensary eun have same exatnined free; 241 such exalninati0LIS
llave been made and reported upon. I am of the opinion that a
21
Number of Dispensary patients refused trea against
medical advice
N unaber of Dispensa ry patients discharged cured or im-
proved
Number of patients that left the County to resume work
Number of patients still under Dispensanv treatment
Number of visits to hotnes of patients:—
39
41
15
Branch Dispensary is necessary at Chneath.
GENERAL SUMMARY.
Nutiibel' of patients (realed the Dispvusat•ies
Number of attendances by patients at the Dispensaries
N urn l)er of deaths of Dispensary patients
247
7,060
Doctor, 986; WII oletilne Nn rse, 2,588, time
Nurse at Ardee, 183.
T am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. A. M'QVIIXAN.
Tuberculosis Medical (iffieer,.
ANNAGASSAN LIIARBOUR.
Leffer was read from the Secretary of Annagassan Ilarbonr
Ccjmmissioners requesting the Council fo apply to the Board of
Trade for permission to eharge dues pending the complet ion of
the Ilarbour Works.
The Seerefary of fhe Council stated fhaf under the provisions
Of the Pier Order it was the Conunissioners who are empowered
the
fo make this application, and the Council directed that
Annagassan Commissioners should be advised accordingly.
MALICIOUS INJURY CLAIMS.
The following letter from the Council's Solieifor was read and
initialled by the Chairman
Francis Street, Dundalk,
17th January, 1916.
Laurence Conlon, Mullaerew, CIAO IOS.
A1 iehael M'Kenna, Mullaerew, IOS.
Dear Sir,—
beg to roport that 1110 above Applications wore heard
af Dundalk Quarter Sessions on the 15th inst, and same were dis-
missed by the County Court Judge.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
LETTERS FROM LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD.
Leffer from L G B on the following matters were read and
initialled by the Chairman :—
Registry letter directing the Council not to incur any
expenditure in connection with the preparation of the
Registry until further advised.
County Council's Aceounfs enclosing auditQd Accounts
and Auditor's Reports for the half-years to 31st Mareh
and 30th Septenl ber, 1915.
Ardee Union and Rural Disfrief Council en-
elosing audited Accounts and Report for half-year 30th
September 1915.
Richmond District Asyluln Accounts .etter enclosing audited
Accounts and report for half-year to 31st MarelJ, 1915.
Board of Tramle Rates :—Letter enclosing Minimum Wages Rates
fixed by Board of Trade in the Confectionery and Shirt-
making Trad«s.
The return of Admissioris of Patients to the Richmond Asylum
for quarter ended 31st December was read and initialled by the
Chairman.
RESOLUTIONS FROM COUNTY COUNCILS.
Resolutions as follows were submitted from the undermentioned
County Councils and decided as noted
23
oseornrnon Repeal of Insurance Act. To eonje up again for
consideration.
co• Dublin Appoint a Red Cross Day. Read.
Kerry Conscription.
Irela nd being e.xmnpted it was
not considered necessary to pass.
'Tippq
Against the West Sussex Regulations prohibit ingo im-
portations of cattle from Ireland. Passed unanimously.
Tho following letter was read, and the Secretary was directed
to bring it, forward at the next of the Council for eon-
sideration
ear Sir.
Westmeath County Council,
Council Chambers, Mullingar,
7th December, 1915.
At the Meeting of my Council held on the 25th Illii1"0,
it Was suggested that the County Councils who have taken bods
in P
earnount, or who send patients there, should take over
altogether, as it was considered that they could run it
on more econotnical lines than at present, and with greater acl-
to themsélves and to the County generally. The further
COhSideration of the Inatter adjourned to next Meeting, and
directed to ascertain the views of the Councils concerned
on the proposal.
I will be obliged if you will kindly bring the
mutter before the next Mepting of your Council and let me have
their views at your earl
y convenience.
Yours faithfully,
Secretory, I-out 11 County Council.
J. T. ROCHE.
WITHDRAWAL OF GRANTS.
Letter was read from the Conference of Irish Colleges request-
the Council to pass resolution against the withdrawal of
24
Grants to fhe Trish Colleges, and requesting that any action faken
in (lie matter woulcl be sent to the Department of Agriculture.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Propo•secl by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Thotnas O'Rourke, Esq. and
Resolved—That we protest in the strongesf manner against the
withdrawal of the Grants usually to the Irish Colleges while
silililar Grants to English Education Authorities are increased,
and we consider the aet ion of the Treasury in this matter deserve••
severest eondcqnnation.
A letter from [he worktnen at above quarry was referred fo the
F.inanee Cornmittee.
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceodings of the Fina neo Comniiftee at their
Meeting hold in the Council Cha niljer, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 24th January, 1916, at one o'clock p m.
Present
In the Chair —
• : Wynne, Esq. .J P.
Other Members—Thonjas O'Rourke, James T M'Gee, J P, and
Bernard l, Colejnan, J P, Esqtiires.
Mr Thornas Walsh, (hunfy Surveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of the Finance Conunittee at their Meetings held
on 10th and 23rd January were taken as read and signed by the
Chairman.
The followino accounts were su ted, and on
Were ordered for paytnent :—
Works in charge of County Surveyor
Secretary's Ofiiee
Total,
examination
C103
42 12 8
R146
1 10
The Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loans Accounts
Wore examined and initialled by the Chairman.
COCKI.EHII,L QUARRY.
A letter from the workmen at above quarry addresqed fo the
Pr«siding Chairman of the County Council Meeting of the 20th
January, and referred to the Connnittee, was raid. The sub-
ject matter of the letter was a request to reconsider the appli-
cation for on increase of wages and giving defails of the alleged
expenditure per week of eaell man with a family of six which
estimate amounted to El Is ld.
After discussion, it was decided unanimously that no alferafion
could be made in the former decision of the Committee, which had
been confirmed by the County Council, namely, that as the money
available for the work under the Road Board Grants did not per-
ntit of an increase, that no advance could be made for the pre-
sent.
INTEREST ON MACHINERY LOAN.
A certificate from the County Surveyor of the amount ex-
pended out of the machinery loan for the purpose of road making
nvaehinery for the sum of C4032 18s 8d was read, and the Secre-
tary was directed to apply to the Road Board for the Grant in
lieu Of interest thereon.
CARLINGFORD PIER STORE.
Letter was read from the Ilarijour Consta ble, Carlingford,
stating that the terms of letting above store would be inoperative,
and suggesting that the store should be let for an annual am-
ount.
The Committee decided that as the terms arranged by the
County Council for the letting of the store could not be altered
follows 10 samples; butter, 14; whiskey, 7; sugar, 5:
eoeoa, 2.
Ono certificate was sent to Sergeant Levinge, Dundalk, for
'SPOCilnen of milk adulterated with at least 37 per cent of added
water.
During the quarter ended 30th September, 1915, one eerfifiéate
Was sent to Sergeant Sharpe, Drogheda, for specimen of whiskey
Which was 30 degrees under proof, and was therefore adulterated
With 6.67 per cent of water. One specimen of milk analysed
for the Guardians of Drogheda Union was of good quality.
There were four specimens of butter analysed by directions from
the Department, which were taken up in the County Louth and
were pure. One specimen of water analysed for the Ardee Rural
District Council had the following composition. One imperial
gallon eon tained in grains. Total solid matter, 13.300, includ-
Albuminoid Amnmonia, 0.018; Saline Ammonia, 0.040; Nitric
Acid trace, Chlorine, 1.090; Colour, light yellow. A polluted
Water. One specinjen of wafer analysed for T B M'Co•urt, Esq, 66,
Clitnbrassil Street, Dundalk, had the following composition :—One
Imperial gallon contained in grains. Total solid matter, 31,500,
Including Albuminoid Ammonia, 0.007; Saline Ammonia, 0.007,
Nitric Acid Trace, Chlorine, 1.590; colour, yellow. A good water.
One specimen of margarine analysed for the Richmond District
Lunatie Asylum was pure.
In the original reports on the waters
now, [hat nothing could be done in the matter for the
ROAD IMPROVEMENT LOAN .
Letter was read from the Manager Hibernian Bank
the Committee that the amount of above Loan, C4,060,
placed to the credit of the Council's I.oan's Account.
SIR CHARLES CAMERON'S REPORT.
present.
informing
llad been
above
given,
given,
The
quest
'I'lye following report was read and initialled by the Chairman
City Laboratory, Chatham Row,
Dublin, 21st January, 1916.
Report Of Sir Charles Cameron.
38 articles were received from the Food Inspectors, R I C, as
referred to, full details, chemical and microscopical, were
but in the only the more important points are
CIIAIUÆS A. CAMERON.
DEFAULTING CONTRACTORS.
following letter was read, and in accordance with the re-
contained therein (Ime following resolution was passed
Proposed by Thomas O'Rourke, Esq ;
Seconded by J T M'Gee, Esq, J P, and
we reconnuend the cancellation of the contracts
County Council.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,—
T beg fo report neglect on the following road
traets. Ten days' notices have been served and the roads
over.
Index
No.
28
set out in the County Surveyor's letter of flie 22nd January, 1916,
the Index Nurnbers of said eonfraets being as follows—69, 106, 115,
122, 143, 146, and 149, all in Dundalk Rural District.
County Surveyor's Office,
Courthouse, Dundalk,
2nd January, 1916.
To tho Chainnan and Gent letnen Finance Co mitteo, Louth
25-.
eon-
taken
69—1020 perches Inniskeen fo Newry-—llenry Fee, Contractor.
106—460 perches Bush to Carlingford—Francis Carroll, Contracfor•
115—1334 perches Dundalk to Carlingford—Thomas Savage,
traefor.
122—993 perches Carlingford
tractor.
143—-396 perches Tullyea han
tractor.
146—224 perches Tejnpletown
fraetor.
fo the sea—Pa frickl Boyle;
to Castlering—.James Filgate,
to the sGl—Franeis Carroll,
Con'
Con-
Con•
Con-
149—386 perches Kerley's Coaeh I"Åetory fo Long Avenue—Patrick
M 'Elroy, Contractor.
All in Dundalk Rural Distrief.
I beg to ask to have the eontracqs cancelled.
TIIC)MAS WAI,SII,
County Surveyor.
Proposal Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Cotnnlittee at their
Fourth Adjourned Quarterly Meeting, held in the Connell
Chamber, Court House, Dundalk, on Monday,
7th February,
1916
, at one o'clock, p m.
Present •.—ln the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members —B L Coletnan, J P; Peter Woods, J P; M
Meade, P .J P; .J Wynne, J P; Hamill, .J P; J T
M'Gee, J P; J F J P; T O'Rourke and J Sl•Carthy,
J P Esquires.
The minutes oi the Proposal Meeting of the 10th January
were taken as lead and signed by the Chairman. The Com-
mittee proceeded to consider tenders for Works, etc, passed at
their Fourth Quarterly Meeting, held on the 10th January,
1916.
21—To keep in repair Ardee Quarter Sessions Court House,
with Court Keeper's residence, for one year from 1st
April, 1916; not to exceed Clö. No tender received.
Ordered to be placed in charge of County Stuxeyor.
'l'o provide for the main tenanee of Drogheda Court;
House for one year from 1st April, 1910 ; not to ex-
No tender received, and placed in
eeed CoO.
charge of Co. Surveyor.
go
No. 26—To provide for the maintenance of the County Court
House, Dundalk, for one year from 1st April, 1916.
not to exceed .C30. No tender received, and placed
in charge of Co. Surveyor.
No. 27 —To supply a press in the Council Chamber, County
Court House, Dundalk ; cost not exceed C15. NO
tender received, and placed in charge of County Sur-
veyor.
No. 28—To supply printing and stationery for County purposes
for one year frorn 1st April, 1916, including the
printing to be done for the Clerk of the Crown and
Peace under Jurors' Acts and under Registration
Aets (ii required).
Tenders were received from Messrs Tempest, M'l)ougall, and
M 'Cullough, and Mrs Mathews, and in each case the lowest•
t,encier was accepted, and where the were the same the
last con tractor was given the preference.
No. 29—To supply for, one year from 1st April, 1916, the fol••
lowing Court Houses with the best English coal
(screened) 30 tons; Drogheda, IO tons;
Arclee, 10 tons; delivered af the respective Court
Houses as required.
The following tenders, being the only ones received, were
cepted :—For Dnnclalk, F O'Neill and Co, at 31s per
ton ; for Drogheda, Messrs Murdock and Sons, at por ton ;
for Ardee, a tender of Me.ssrs O'Neill anel Co, Dundalk, at
per ton, was not accepted, and the matter was placed in the
hands of the Seerotary to obtain supplies when required at the
lowest prices,
91
NO. 30—To prepare the Court and .Court Rooms in the County
Court House for Assizes, Quarter Sessions, and Re-
vision Sessions, for One year from 1st April, 1916 ;
cost not to exceed C15.
The tender of Messrs B Patteson, Dundalk, for the sum of
214 14s Ocl was accepted, this being the only tender received.
NO. 31—1'0 insert the County Advertisements in one Dundalk
and one Drogheda paper ; cost not to exceed three-
pence per line. Tenders were received at the rate of
3d per line from the "Drogheda Argus," "Drogheda
, ' ' "Dundalk l)otnoerat" and "Dundalk
Advertiser
Examiner.'
Mr Patrick M •Gee, J P, proposed, and Mr Meade seconded :
T lyat the tender of the Argus" (M. M 'Keown) and
' 'Dundalk Democrat" ('l'homas Jtoe) being the last contractors,
be accepted.
An amendment was proposed by Mr B Hamill, J P, seconded
by Mr P Woods, .J P:
That the ' 'Dundalk Examiner" be the contractor for one year
for the County Advertisements.
The Chairman took a division of the Committee on the am-
endment, with the f0110\Aing result:—
"—Messrs B Tlamill and P.
For the ' •Dundalk Examiner
Woods—2.
For the ' 'Dundalk Democrat" —Messrs J M 'Carthy, M.
Meade, B 1, Cole,nan, J '1' M'Gee, P M'Gee, J F Murphy, J
ynne, and T O'Rourke—S.
52
The Chairman declared the 'Dundalk Democrat" and
"l)rogineda Argus" the contractors for the County Advertise-
menus for the year from 1st April, 1916", to the 31st March,
1917.
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council C'hamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 7th day of February, 1916, at one o'clock p m.
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Members—B T, Coleman, .J P; P Woods, .T P; M Meade,
P M'Gee, J P; J Wynne, J P; B Hamill, .T P; .J T M'Gee, J P;
J F Murphy, J P; T O'Rourke, and J M 'Cari hy, J P, Esquires.
Messrs Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, and J M C Lyons,
Assistant, were in attendance.
Tho Minutes Of the Committee Meeting of the 24th January,
1916, were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted and examined and pay-
menfs ordered :—
Works in eharge of Co. Surveyor
Secretary's Office
Æ234 16 5
31 13 7
The 13ank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loans Accounts
were examined and initialled by the Chairman.
SECRETARY'S ESTIMATE OF RATES.
Tho Secretary submitted the estimate of Rates for the service
Of the financial year ending 31st March, 1917, which was discussed
at length and the various items for County: I Jnion, and District
Charges examined and compared.
On tho.motion of Mr Bernard Hamill, J P,
Seconded by Mr Jatnes M"Carthy, J P,
It was unanimously decided to recommend the adoption of the
Estimate to the County Council, and the Secretary was directed
to send a copy of same with his explanatory statement, to each
Member of the County Council and to the Clerks of the Unions
and District Councils concerned.
RING-NET FISHING IN DUNDALK BAY.
Letter was read from Department of Agriculture dated 24th
January, 265/16 F. 1}. , referring to the resolution passed by [he
Council with reference to above, and requesting particulars of the
damage alleged to have been caused to the local fishing industry
by the method of fishing complained of.
The Seeretary informed the Comrnittee that he had sent copy Of
the letter to Mr Denis J Rath, Clogherhead, who had moved in
the matter.
After discussion, the Secretary was directed to send copies Of
the letter [o Mr Mathew Clinton, Annagassan; Mr Bernard
Tlalllilton, Blackrock; and the Secretary, Dundalk Ilarbour Com-
missioners. with a request that any information bearing on the
matter would be furnished to the Council to be laid before the
Department.
RATE COLLECTION.
The Secretary submitted Che monthly statement of the collection
of Voor Rate, which showed that a sum of Æ3,895 4s 7d had been
collected to the end of January, leaving a balance outstanding Of
813,954 lbs 7d.
Letter was read from (he L G B requesting a returu of the
collection to the middle of the month of January, and the
Su•re€ary informed the Conjmittee that this had been sent as
well as the full monthly return.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
RECOUPMENT OF TUBERCUI/)SIS EXPENDITURE.
No.
Letter was read from the L G 13 dated 22nd January,
520/6, pointing out that an over-payment of recoupment from the
25
Exehequer Maintenance Grant of the sum of C127 4s 3d had been
made to the Council, and that this amount would be finally ad-
justed on the Auditor's Certificate.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
DROGHEDA TUBERCULOSIS DISPENSARY.
The following letter was read, Yind flie Secretary was directed
to send a copy of same to the Tuberculosis Committee of Manage-
ment for their consideration :—
Local Government Board, Dublin,
29th January, 1916.
No. 4752: 1916.
Louth County.
Sir,—
am directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland
to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 25th instant, rela-
five to the question of providing dispensary facilities at Drogheda
Uhder the Louth County Scheme for the treatment of Tuberculosis;
and I am to point out that the distribution of the Sanatorium
Grant is subject to the consent Of the Treasury.
The Board have reason to believe that their Lordships would
decline to provide funds for the erection of a second Central Dis-
Pensary in County Louth, and in these circumstances they would
reemnmend the County Council to establish a Branch Dispensary
at Drogheda, within the limits of costs already suggesfed.
1 am, Sir;
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS, Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
TJNTJSED BALANCE OF TUBERCULOSIS RATE.
The following letter was read and initialled by fhe Chairman,
but no order. was made thereon :—
County Louth Tuberculosis Committee of Management.
90, Clanbrassil Street, Dundalk,
4th February, 1916.
Dear Sir,—
I am directed by (he Tuberculosis Committee Of
Management fo inform [he Louth County Council that Mr Reddy'
Local Government Board Auditor,
has instructed them to ascer-
tain if the Council has a balance available from the sums realised
from the rate struck for f lye purposes of the treatment Of
Tuberculosis, together with the contributions received from• the
Insurance Committee; and, if so, to further ascertain if such
balance should be transferred to the Account of fhe Tuberculosis
Committee of Management?
Yours faithfully,
V. WARREN,
Secretary •
Seerefary, Louth co. Council.
ANNAGASSAN .11 ARBOUR wonKS.
Letter was read from thc Departrnenf of Agriculture enclosing
copy of the following letter sent by then) to Mr C King, Anna-
gassan
Doparttnent of Agriculture, Etc.,
Dublin, 27th January, 1916.
270/16.—F .B.
Sir,—
With reference to the harbour works ea pried out bv the
Departnjent at Annagassan, T have to state that the Department
understand frotn their Engineer that you have aetually
meneed or eon template cluepening or otherwisi' extending the
shallow eut Inade by the Departujent through the bank oncl the
basin and the river channel above,
37
have to inform you that the Department are unable to ap-
Prove of such aetion by yourself or any of her unauthorised
Person.
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL, Secretary.
C. King, Esq, Annagassan.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
Mr Patrick M •Gee directed the attx•ntion of the Committee io
the fact that Mr King had been discharging cargoes at Annagas-
san Pier for some time past for which the Harbour Commissioners
were unable fo collect dues, and suggested that Che Co. Council
should request Mr King to voluntarily pay the dues or a substan-
tial Portion of then', as his usage of the pier and harbour works
Was a considerable saving of expense to him, both in cartage and
demurrage claims.
Mr Bernard Hamill stated that if the Harbour Connnissioners
received any dues without the certification of the Board of Trade
they might be responsible for any accidents that liiight occur.
After discussion, it was considered that the Committee could
not take any definite action in the matter, and no order was
mude.
WORKMEN AT .JONESBORO' QUARRY.
The follÖwing letters were read and referred to the County
Surveyor
February 3rd, 1916.
Chairman and Gentlemen of the Louth County Council,—
We, the undersigned earters of Jonesboro' quarry, re
speetfully ask an increase of wages from our present rate, 6s per
day' which is not sufficient at present as the cost of feeding is so
high • We ask an increase to 8s per day. We hope your honour-
able Board will give this your best consideration.
Signed—
13. M'GINNITY,
P. M'GJNNITY,
M. MURPHY,
DENNIL M'NAMEL.
38
We, the undersigned workmen quarrying at Jonesboro', hereby
are giving one week's notice from this date for an advance Of
wages from 16s fo 19s per week owing to the high cost of iiving•
Iloping this letter meets your approval.
Yours truly,
Henry Thomson, Thomas Watters, Richard Wafters,
Pat Jemmenson, Pat Mullen, Joe Mullen, Peter
M'Ginnify, James Morgan, Matt Rooney, Peter
M'Kenna.
DEFAULTING ROAD CONTRACTORS.
The following letter from the County Surveyor was read :—
County Surveyor's Office,
Courthouse, Dundalk,
7th February, 1916.
To the Chairman and Gentlemen Finance Committee, Louth
County Cou,neil.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,—
T beg to report neklect on the Pillowing contracts in
Dundalk Rural District. Ten days' notices have been served'
and T beg to ask to have the eontraets eaneelled,
Index
No.
118—700 perches Castlecarra to Blakestown cross and the sea at
Rathcor—Owen M 'A rdle, Benagh, Contractor.
119—596 perches Bellaverfy Bridge fo Ballug and
Thomas Rice, jun. Benagh, Contractor.
47—809 perches Mr Taaffe's hous•• in Louth fo ' the county
Boundary at Channon rock—Jarnes Filgafre, Priorstate'
Contractor.
T 110M AS WALSIT, County Surveyor.
39
After discussion, it was decided that the County Surveyor
Should give these eontraetors a further ten days' notice before the
COImniffee will recommend the cancellation of these contracts.
APPLICATION FOR INCREASE OF TRAVELLING
ALLOWANCE.
The following letter from John M C Lyons, Assistant Snr-
veyor, was read :—
County Surveyor's •Office, Dundalk,
February 7th, 1916.
To tho Finance Committee, Louth County Council.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,—
The amount I am allowed to ex:pend on ear hire for inspections
Of works in my district I find to be insufficienf for some time
past.
Tlie large number of roads worked by dil@f labour, as indicated
by the great number of pay sheets which come before you every
fortnight, road rolling the whole year round, together with
Ordinary and measurements of stone, etc, necessitate
very frequent inspections.
During the past quarter alone. my ear hire anxounted fo C16
4d, although T did a very large anxounf of eyeling for Y'hiell
I am not allowed anything.
The average amount at present allowed for' ear hire is only
15s per quarter. and T frequently have fo pay large sums onf
of rny own poekef.
I would respectfully suggest that you would kindly increase
this atnount to Z12 IOS per quarter, or total increase of C15 per
annum, to enable me to keep up to inereased dilåies.
T am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
JOHN M. e. LYONS.
40
A discussion, the following resolution was unanimously
adopted :—
Proposed by Mr Bernard Ilanjill, and seconded by Mr Thomas
Tha.t we hereby recommend that the allowance for
O' Rourke "
car hire for Mr J M C Lyons, Assistant Surveyor, be increased
from 835 to 850 per annum, payable quarterly, the increase to
date from the 1st January, 1916."
SECRETARY'S SALARY.
The C'hairman stated he wished to refer to the question Of
t!te salary of the Seeretary of the Council, and requested an es-
pression of opinion w'hether the matter of an increase should be
placed on the agenda for the next meeting of the Committee.
After discussion, it was decided to let the question lie over
for three months.
41
executive Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Executive Committee. at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 14th February, 1916, af one o'clock p m.
the Chair: Charles A Duffy, usq, J P.
Other Alembers—Peter Woods, J P; James M 'Carthy, J P;
Finnegan,
'I'homas B M •Court, B L Colc»nan, J P ; James
Wynne, J p; .J F J P; B Hamill, .J P; .J T M'Gee,
J P; ancl Patrick M 'Gee, J P, Esquires.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of tho Executive Com-
mitteevwere taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
SIIEEP DIPPING (APPOINTMENT OF INSPECTORS)
ORDER, OF 1915.
The Cormnit€ee proeeeded to eonsicler the above Order, which
that every Local Authority shall temporarily appoint
or service during the prescribed Dipping periods as many
a (I(litional Inspectors a.s may be necessary to secure flie effeetive
(lipping Of sheep in their district.
The Order further provides that if the Lod•al Authority fail
Within a reasonable time to make a sufficient number of such
the Department may under Seal specify what
quired for the purposes oi the Order, and the • rotes of
remuneration of the Inspectors to be appointed, and the areas
for wl!ic€ll they should i•espectively aet, and [he Local Authority
on receipt of such certificate shali proceed €0 make Ille requisite
appointments in accordance with the terms thereof.
Circular letter was read frolil the Departinenf dated 25th
January, 1916, No. 261/16, requesting the Committee fo report
€0 Che Department what arrangements are proposed Co be Olade
in compliance with the Order.
A letter was reacl from the Clare County Council protesting
which was considered by them
against the issue of the Order,
unnecessary.
A long discussion ensued, in which Mr B L Coleman sug-
gested that Clie owners of private swim baths should be aP-
pointed inspectors at Clieir own tanks, but Che Connnitfee (lid
not approve of the suggestion. 'l'he Conunittee considered that
the tanks u urked .under the control of the County council
were stiflieient to do the work in the county for public dipping•
Eventually the following resolution was unanirnously passed
Proposed by Mr '1' SI'Gee, .J P;
Seconded by Mr Patrick WGee, J P, and
Resolved—That we recomnuend the Superintendents of the
Council's tanks ace, Ballyrnakenny, Ardee, Knock-bridge, Agha-
lileen, Carlingford and ()meath be appointed Inspectors in Cheir
several districts to supervise the dipping at tanks in privqte
0iH1ers11ip in addition to their work at the eou,neils tanks; that
a certain ntllnber of, days in each be arranged for work at'
the Public tanks, ancl the other days be devoted €0 the businesS
of inspection. That all the In.spee€ons be paid two shillingS
per week extra to their usual wages or fees for inspecting
during the 'working periods of Summer and Autumn clipping•
VETERINARY INSPECTORS' SALARIES.
The reconsideration of the application from the Veterinary
Inspectors for an increase of salary, which hacl been adjourned
tlle Council Meeting Of [lye 29th July, for six
was again before the Committee. A letter from Mr
'J T Clinton. V S. was read withdrawing his application.
After a short discussion, on the motion of Mr J F Alurphy,
J P, seconded by Mr Peter Woods, J P, the ntatter was further
adjourned for a period of six months from to-day's meeting.
REPORTS FROM VETERINARY INSPECTORS.
The following reports were read ancl initialled by the
Chairman
Mr Clinton's Report.
Sir.
During the month of January an outbreak of Scab occurred
in sheep the property of J M 'Nally, Carrickmac•ross, at
Port.
The anitnals were slaughtered by order of the
0 lvner, and the hides disinfected. Restrictions were rernoved
from sheep detained at Heynestown on grazing land the
property of P Hanlon, Piedmont.
With reference to your circular regarding Sheep Dipping
I aun of the opinion that the only efficient Inethod is
by the sn•im bath. So far as I know there are only •l of those
in my district, viz, the one owned by Mr O Keenan at Agha-
1 neon, and those owned by your CounciL at Stonetrough,
n naverna and Carlingford. The last two a.re of course move-
able baths.
A few years ago the Department ordered all the
sheep in Che area between Dundalk and ()meath to be clipped
veterinary supervision in swim "baths. This order was
carried out thoroughly,
with the result that for a couple of
years afterwards not a single ease of Seab was reported in the
Under the present system* there is prae€iea Ily no
district.
supervision over the dipping, and in most cases it is only a
matter of form. Dipping by means of the swim bath is, I
believe, less dangerous €0 the sheep than that done by the
hand bath. In the latter ease the sheep have €0 be turned on
their backs and held forcibly down. Only a fow hundred enn be
done in this way by three men in a day, whereas with the swim
bath two men can easily do over a thonsand a day.
J. T. CLINTON.
Mr. Maxwell's Report.
I beg to report that I visited the usual fairs and markets
held in the Ardee No. 1 District for the. month of January.
I visited the detained sheep at Artnalivery, the property Of
John Crawley, on the 8th, 13th, 22nd and 24th, and had them
'l'he
thoroughly clipped. I have not yet removed notice.
necessary forms, etc, have been duly forwarded by me to your
Secretary.
WM. MAXWELL.
Mr Donnelly had nothing of any interest to report during
the month of January.
SHEEP SCAB NOTICLS.
Notices received from Che Veterina ry Inspectors and the
Department of the following eases of sheep seab were read and
initialled by Clie Chairrnan H 11 ghes, Drogheda
Edward M 'Nally, Chrrickmneross (from .l)unda Port); Joh)i
Crawley, Artnalivery, and Patrick Hanlon, Piedmont.
At this stage of the proeeeclings the Chair Iyas taken by
Patrick M'Gee, Esq, J p,
45
WORK UNDER, DISEASES OF ANIMALS ACTS.
"Ille Secretary subtnitted a return of certain work under the
Diseases of Animals Acts during the past year, as follows
Preparation of 21 lists of police sub-distlicts for owners of sheep
in the county; compiling lists of) individual sheep owners, 803
for summer period and 800 foe autA1tnn pei•iod; checking and
entering notices of intention to dip—about 1,600 notices for
the two periods ; cheeking and eptering declarations received,
about 1,600 for the t,wo periods; preparation of dipping super-
intendents' books and checking the accounts; various circulars
to owners of arrang€»nents for (lipping ; preparation of returns
to the Department of summer and autuntn dipping.s, the total
1) timber of dippings 1k'ing in the year 1915 (one for summer and
two for autumn) in all 116,730 clippings; pyeparation of recoup-
ment claims to the Department; minutes and correspondence.
46
Report from Fane anb Wottonstomn
Drainage District Committee.
To the Chairman and Gentletuen of the Louth County Council.
Gentlemen.
Having been appointed by you as a., Committee to consider
the question of the faking over of the •business of the Fano
and Wottonstown Drainage Districts, we beg Co report thnb
we have held a number of meetings and have very carefully
gone into all the matters relative to the transfer. We have
ea refully revised the lists of owners of lands in the original
assessments under both distriets, and have examined the maps
relating thereto. A number of the owners in the original
award wore found not to exist, and various ehanges had taken
place in the holclings included in the award. We eonjmuniea fed
with the Board of Works in eonneetiop witli this, and the
Board sent down an Inspector, who went over the ground in
and various - nges
company with some of the Committee,
were noted, and the narno.s on the list of present
oeeupior.s under both Districts has ly•en broug•ilt 111) to date
and eortifiecl by the Board of Works.
The, Local Government Board Lave roquostecl Chat tho consent
of the existing Trustees of the Drainage Board should be
obtained the transfer, 01' failing this, whether they would
'I'rustees. C'ireulars were sent to each
continue to aet as such
of them, and the following is the result
47
FANE DISTRICT.
Dato of election, 31st July, number elected, 15;
num-
ber dead, 5; number consenting, 3: number refusing, nil ; no
answer, 7.
WO'IVI'ONSTOW.N DISTRICT.
of election, 30th June, 19023 number elected, 11 ;
num-
(lead, 4; number consenting, 4 ; number refusing, 1 ; "0
answer, 2.
On this information being sent to the Local Government
IBoard they requested that a. further effort should be made +3)
Obtain the consent of those existing "l'rnstee.s who did not,
and further application was macle to them for their
or otheru ise, but your Committee have been unable
to Obtain their written consent, although two of them have,
'l'he Local Govermuent Boarcl have
expressed verbnl consent.
requested the County Council to eon[irm their decision
to take over tho business of the Districts, as the conditions
e XPressecl in the resolution of the Council of the '26th day of
O vomljer, 1,911, have now been contl)lieql with. We recontmen€l
tho County Council to pass a further
resolution consenting to
take over the business of the Districts of both Fane
Wottonstown. We should mention that it is the opinion of
Committee that if will be necessary to obtain n loan, in the
first instance, to puf the Drainage in an effective condition,
as it has 'Ijeen •totally neglecte€l for the past years.
bated this day of February, 1916.
Signed on behalf of tho Conjrnittoe.
PA'I'RICK BYRNE, .J.P.
IU)BER'I' A IG.
BER-NARI) MULLEN.
1
Scbolarsbip Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Scholarship Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 21st of February, 1916, af 12 0'clock noon.
Present the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—J T Dolan, M A, and James Connolly, J P,
Esquires.
The Minutes of the previous Moeting of the Committee were
taken as read and signed by the Chui rman.
The Meeting was summoned to consider the conditions of the
Louth County Council Scholarship Scheme for the year 1916-17,
and, after careful consideration, the following Scheme was unani-
m Ously approved of and recommended for adoption by the County
Council
COUNTY COUNCIL SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME, 1916-17.
The Louth County Council offer two Scholarships of a year
each, tenable at the Dublin or other College of the National
University for the Session October, 1916, to June, 1917, and renew-
able for the two succeeding years, and for a fourth year if the
Student follows a Course in Agriculture, or in Industrial or
C Otnmercial Science. The - Scholarships will be open for Com-
2
petition to male and female Students who fulfil the following
requirements :—
(1). Whose parents or guardians are and have been resident in
Co. Louth for the past three years.
(2). Who satisfy the County Council that they are unable Of
their own means to obtain a University Education.
(3). Who have been educated in Ireland.
(4). Who are of good health and character and under 19 years
of age.
(5). Who pass in Irish and reach a standard of honours in the
aggregate of subjects in the Test Examination which gives
proof of abilify enough to put a University Education to
good use.
The Test Examination will be the Intermediate Examination Of
1916, the order of merit being determined by the printed markS
obtained by the applicants in Senior Grade Honours as published
in the Official Results List—a Pass in Irish being essential.
The Scholarships shall be awarded to the two candidates best
qualified in the judgment of the County Council ' on consideration
of merit in this test examination, and of of
other requirements. If either or both of the highest eligible
competitors will not accept Scholarships they shall be awarded
to those next in merit, if qualified.
One or both Scholarships may be altogether withheld if sufficient
merit or need of assistance is not shown.
The Student accepting a Scholarship must pass the Matrictlla•
lion of the National University (unless the University accept
Intermediate Examination as qualification) in 1916, and attend
3
regularly the first year's course in some faculty of the University,
and reside in a hostel or, by special permission of the County
COUncil, in any other residence approved by Clie College authorities.
The College fees Shull be paid direct by the County Council to
the College authorities and the hostel proprietors, the balance, if
any, to be expended on books and other expenses.
The County Council shall obtain from the College authorities
an interim report of the progress and general conduct of each
Student up to the close of the Christmas term, and should the
rePOrt be unsatisfactory as to attendance at lectures or from any
Other cause, the County Council may, on eonsideratiou of the
report, cancel the Scholarship awarded.
In Order to retain a Scholarship for the second and third year
Student must pass the College Examination of that year at. a
Standard of merit to be fixed by the Council in consultation with
the College authorities, and must also pregent a satisfactory report
from the College as to attendance at lectures and general conduct
during thre year.
The County Council shall have complete discretion in applying
Or modifying these rules and in withholding or reducing
Scholarships.
Candidates for Sc'holarships must apply to the Secretary of [lye
County Council before the 15th September, 1916, and the Council
shall meet to consider applications and award Scholarships at the
end of September, 1916.
The Secretary was directed to write flie College authorities for a
report on the Louth County Council Students for the informatiou
of the County Council.
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chambeq•, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 21st February, 1916, at one o'clock p.m
Present the Chair A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Jas M'Carthy, J P; Joseph IT M'Ard1e, J P;
James Wynne, J P; John Morgan, Thomas O'Rourke, and William
Woods, J P, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, and Mr J M C Lyons,
Assistant Surveyor, were in attendance.
The Minutes of the Finance Meeting of
taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted
wero ordered for payment :—
I ,oans account
Works in charge of County Surveyor
Secretary's Office
Total
7111
and,
February,
were
on exatnination,
C15 14
7
137 3 10
22 4
8
2159 8
6
Tije Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loans Account
examined and initialled by the Chairman.
5
TUNG NET FISHING.
With reference to the letter from the Department of Agriculture
Which had been before Che last meeting of the Committee, and in
Which the Department requested Barticularts of the damage alleged
to have been caused to the fishing industry by Ring Net Fishing,
the Secretary informed the Committee that, in accordance with
instructions, he had sent copies (if this letter to Mr M Clinton,
Of Annagassan; to Mr Bernard Hamil€on, Blackrock, and to the
Secretary of •the Dundalk Ilarbour Board. Tle had received
replies from the two first-named gentlemen, setting out some of the
grievances of the fishermen in regard to Ring Net Fishing.
These letters were read and initialled by the Chairman, and the
Secretary was directed to forward copies to the Fisheries Branch
the Department, and to press upon them flie necessity for an
inquiry.
RECOUPMENT UNDER DISEASES OF ANIMALS .wrs.
Letter was read from the Department of Agriculture dated 16th
February, 1916, informing the Council that a sum of Æ103 5s 6d,
Ping recoupment under above Acts, had been, lodged with the
(%uneil's Treasurer to the credit of the COuncil. This sum was
in of the period from 1st April, 1915, to 30th September,
1915.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
PARLIAMENT AND REGISTRATION A,crr.
('hrcular letter was read from the L.G.B. dated 14th February,
1916' No. 6022/16, enclosing copy Of the above Act, which provided
that the Parliamentary and Local Government Register of Electors
6
should remain in force until Parliament Ijiovides for the substitu-
(ion of any special registers or otherwise directs, and that any
claims of any local officer in Ireland discharging Che duties in
connection with pegister would be dealt with under instruction*
issued by the, L.G.B.
DEFAULTING CONTRACTORS.
[lie
Letter was read from tire County Surveyor in fortning
Committee that the contractors for roads, Index Nos. 118, 119 and
47, who haw been reported by him to the last meeting of the
Conjmittee had since failed to do any work on their roads, wlliell
were in a bad state, and also requesting Che cancellation of file
contract on Road No. 145—308 perches—
for some time past.
discussion,
After
un a Ilimously
the
followin€"
which had been neglectedl
resolution was passed
P, and
Proposed by wm WAS, Esq, J P;
Seconded by James Wynne, Esq,
Resolved—That we hereby recommend the County Council €0
0 cancel [he following contracts
I No. 118—7C0 perches—Castleearra fo Blakesfown Cross and
Sea at AI •A rdle, Benagh, Contractor.
Index No. 119-—596 perches—Bellaverfy Bridge to Bal lug and
tullymore—Thos. R ice, jun. Benagli, Contractor.
I Ildex No. 47—809 perches—Mr Taaffe's house ill I,oufll and
County Boundary at Channonrock—.Jame.s Vilgate, Priorsfai
Contractor.
7
I li(lex No: 145—308 pereives of 4th class road between Duffy's Cross
and Aghnaskeagh house •on the Newry Road—John M'Galey,
Feede, (.'öntractor.
STRIKE AT JONESBORO' QUARRY.
Letter was read from the County Surveyor dated flie 19th
February, stating that the men working at above Quarry had
Struck work since the 7th February as their demand for wages at
the rate 19s week had not been acei?ded to, and stating fhaf
he proposed moving the machinery from the Quarry du ring tlié
ensuing week.
The Committee approved of the action of, County Surveyor
in the matt,er, and the letter was initialled by the Chairman.
MONUMENTS IN COUNTY.
The following letter was read
Co. Louth Arehaeologieal Society.
l)ear Sir,
•At a mpeting of the Council of the above Society, a request was
received from the depufafion appointed to wait on the (ü»uncil
referenee to [he taking over by thac body of some ancient
historie remains in the town of Drogheda, so as to save then)
from further destrmefion. The report mentions that the County
COtlneil asks the Council of the above Society to furnish them with
a list of antiquities not only in Drogheda, buf elsewhere in the
County.
Tilis list is in course of preparation and will be sub-
at an early date. Meanwhile, I am directed to ask your
Cornmiftee to take over af once the Butter Gate in Drogheda,
it is feared unless some control is exercised over this ancient
m (jnument, little will be left of it. Some repairs arb needed io
8
preserve it, but these once done, and in the care of the Counqy
Council of Louth, will help to save it.
Kindly lay this letter before flie next meeting of your Finance
Committee.
Faithfully yours,
S. COMERFORD,
Hon. Secretary.
Secretary, Louth co. Council.
After discussion, the following resolution was unanimously
adopted
Proposed by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by James Wynne, Esq, J P,
Resolved—That we recommend the County Council to take over
the control of the Butter Gate in Drogheda and any other ancient
monuments in the County, the list of same to be supplied by the
County Louth Archaeological Society.
TELEPHONE FÖR COUNTY COUNCIL OITI(Æ.
the suggestion of the Chairman, and after discussion, if was
unanimously recommended that the County Council should have
the telephone installed in the Offices of the Council, and the
Secretary was directed to have the matter attended to ilnmediately
after Che meeting of the Council on Thursday, 24th February.
DOWICILIARY" TREATMENT CNDER TU BERCCIOSIS
AGREEMENT.
The following letter was read, and the Secretary informed the
Committee that the amount of 830 was in accordance •with the
figures supplied by the Tuberculosis Committee Of Management
9
as part of the agreement. witli the County Louth Insurance
Committee. The Secretary was directed to inform the L.G.B.
accordingly
Local Government; Board, Dublin,
16th February, 1916.
No. 8179/1916.
Louth (Ajunty.
Sir,
With rt•ference to your letter of the 12th instant, relative to the
Pmposed agreement between the Louth County Council and •the
County Insurance Committee in regard to fhe treatment of insured
exempt persons recommended for sanatorium benefit, I am
directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland to inquire
upon AVhat basis the proposed allocation of BC) for domiciliary
as specified in the schedule, has been arrived at.
1 am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
WITNESS'S EXPENSES AT PETTY SESSIONS.
Letter was read fmv»m Constable Friel, R.I.C., Dunleer, stating
he had attended af Drogheda Petty Sessions a-s a necessary witness
in the eases of the County Council against Robert Skelly, Ban-
and Patrick Rooney, Newry, for with the
Sheep-Dipping Order of 1915, and claiming as 8d cycling allowance,
that the R. M. in granting ZI costs if each ease, stated that
10
the County Council would be good enough to pay the Constable'S
expenses out of that. The letter further contained request
from the deputy for the D. I. to tho Council to remit the as 8d
due to the Constable.
No order was made, and the letter was initialled by the
Chairman.
COMMITTAL TO INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.
Letter was read from Rev. Father Ilurson, C.C., Dundalk'
informing Che' Council of application to the Magistrates at Court
to be held on the 18th February for committal to an Industrial
School of John Finnegan, St. Patrick's Terrace, Dundalk, aged
14 years.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
DEATH OF CARETAKER OF COUNTY OFFICES.
The Secretary informed the Committee that Christopher
M'Garrity, who had performed the duties of caretaker and cleaner
of the County Council Offices, had died on Saturday, 19th
February, and that his widow had him that she would
attend to the Offices until the Council would make a permanent
appointment. Ile further informed the Committee that the Cou
keeper, Mr T Murray, had informed him that, if req uired,
would give the necessary attendance to the Offices; until
appointment was made.
After discussion, Che Committee decided unanimously €0 perlüit
Mrs M'Garrity to attend to the Offices until permanent appoint-
ment was made. The Secretary was directed to place on
11
agenda for next meeting of the Finance Committee the appoint-
of caretaker in room of Christopher M'Garrity, deceased.
FENCE AT TANKARDSROCK.
letter was read from Mr Hugh O'Hare, Tankardsrock,
requesting permission to erect fence at his house at Tankardsrock,
and the matter was referred to the County Surveyor, with instruc-
tions to report to the next meeting of the Finance Committee.
Louth County Council.
Alintltes of proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
Fourth (Adjourned) Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council
Chamber, Court House, Dundalk, on 'l'hursday, '24th February,
1916, at one o'eloek, p m.
Present—In the Chair : Charles A Duffy, E.sq, J P.
Other members T Murphy, J P; James M 'Carthy, J P;
Patnek WGee, J P; James '1' M'Gee, J p; Bernard L Cole-
man, J P; Michael Mende, T V M'Quillan, W 'l' Skeffington,
J P ; Joseph Dolan, James Wynne, J P; Bernard Finegan, and
Thomas ()'IWurke, Esquires.
Messrs Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor; James Dromgoole
and John M C Lyons, Surveyors ; Daniel O'Connell,
S Olieitor to the Council, and Dr J A M 'Quillan, T -YI O, were
attendance.
CONFIRM A'I'ION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed •by Michael Meade, Esq •
Seconded by Janue.s M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, ancl—
Resolved—UPha€ the minutes of the proceedings of the Louth
County Council at their Fourth Quarterly Meeting, held
20th January, 1916, a copy of which has been sent to each
of the Council be and are hereby eonfirmed.
2
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE, MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed Unanimously :—
Proposed by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P ;
SOeoncled by T V MaeQuillan, Esq, and
Resolved—That the minutes of the proceedings of the Fin-
ance Committee at their meetings held on the undermentioned
dates, a copy of each having been sent to each •member of
Council, with all payments ancl recommendations contained
therein, be and are hereby confirmed.
Thursday, 20th January, 1916.
Monday, 24th January, 1916.
Monday, 7th February, 1916.
Monday, 21st February, 1916.
CONFIRMATION OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MINU'I'ES
The following resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed by N T Mtuphy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Patrick M'Gee, Esq, .J P, and
Resolved—That Che minutes of the proceedings of the Exe-
eutivo CommitteeQt their meeting held on the 14th February'
1916, a copy of which has been sent to each member of the co
Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF PROPOSAL COMMIITEE MINUTES•
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved— That the minutes of the proceedings of
tho pro-
posal Gmmittee at their Fourth (Adjourned) Quarterly Meet-
ing held on the 7th February, 1916, a copy of which has been
sent to each member of the County Council, be and aro hereby
confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF SCHOLARSHIP COMMITVI'EE
MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by James Wynne, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by T V M'Qui11an, Esq, and
Resolved—That the minntes of the proceedings of the Seho-
larship Committee at their meeting held on 21st February,
1916, a copy of which has been sent to each member of tho
Council, be and are hereby confirmed,and we hereby approve of
the conditions of the Co. Louth Scholarship Scheme for the
year 1916-1917, as set out therein.
CONFIRMATION 014' COUNTY SURVEYOR?S REPORT.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by N T Murphy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the report of thO County Surveyor, as ap-
Dearing on Page I of the Schedule of Proposals for the 24th
day Of February, 1916, a copy of which has been furnished
member of the Council, be and is hereby adopted by this
each
Council,
ARDEE wom•s.
'I'he following 1 esolution was •passed unauitnously :
Proposed by Michael Meade, Esq ;
Seconded by Patrick M 'Gee, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—T11at [he Proposals for Works formulated by the
Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council at their Fourth Quarterly
Meeting held on Tuesday, 4th January, 1916, and set out 011
Idorm 20, furnished to Che County Council, and the contracts
entered into at their Adjourned Meeting held on Tuesday '
25th January, 1916, be and are hereby approved of, and
authorise our Secretary to affix the Common Seal of the
Council to same.
DROGHEDA WORKS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Joseph Dolan, Esq •
Seconded by N T MlllVhy, Lsq, J P, and
Resolved—That Che Proposals for Works formulated by the
Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union, at their Fourth
Quarterly Meeting held on Tuesday, 11th January, 1916, and
set out on Form 20, furnished to the County Council, and the
contracts entered into at their Adjourned Meeting held on
February, 1916, be and are hereby approved of, and we
thorise our Secretary to affix the Common Seal of the Council
to same.
DUNDALK WORKS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed br Bernard L Coleman, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Thomas O'RoUrke, Esq, and
Resolved—'l'hat the Proposals for Works formulated
by the
5
Dundalk Rural District Council, ni their Quarterly
Meeting held on Monday, 10th January, 191(i, and set out on
20, furnished to the County Council, and the eontraets
01.1tered into at their Adjourned Meeting held on 31st January,
1916 be and are hereby approved of, ancl we authorise See-
rotary to affix •Che Common Seal of the Council to same.
COUNTY-AT-LARGE.
following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by James Wynne, Esq. J P;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, ancl
Resolved—'l'hat the Proposals for Works fornmlafed by the
POPOsal Contmittee at their Fourth Quarterly Meeting held
on the 10th January, 1916, and set out on Form 20, furnished
to the County Council, and the contracts entered into at their
adjourned meeting held on Monday, 7th February, 1916, be
to affix the Conjmon Seal of the Council to same.
TENDERS FOR WORKS.
In accordance Mith the Adiertisement issued by tho Seere-
tar.v, tho Council next proceeded to consider tenclers for works
not set by contract at the adjourned tneetings of Che R tiral
District Councils.
ARDEE DISTRICT.
The following tenders, being the only ones received, were
aeeepted :
No. 268—Peter Liseoe, iehavd.stown, Dun leer L'24.
Work No. Liseoe, Riehardstown, Dunleer—C38 IOS.
6
DROGHEDA DISTRICT.
No tenders received.
DUNDALK DISTRICT.
Only one tender was recei ved, which was accepted
Council
Work No. 89—Peter Kerr, 14s Od.
by the
WORKS PLACED IN THE HANDS OF COUNTY
SURVEYOR.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by James M'Oarthy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by James T M'Gee, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works passed by the Rural
D. Councils and Proposal Committee at their last Quarterly
Meetings, and for which no c Itracts have been entered into'
be placed in charge of the County Surveyor.
SECRETARY'S ESTIMATE OF RATES FOR THE FINAS-
CIAL YEAR TO 31st MARCH, 1917.
The Estimate of Rates for service of the Financial Year to
the 31st March, 1R17, copies of which had 'been sent to each
member of the County Council, and f.o the Clerks of the Rural
District Councils and Urban District Councils, was next con-
sidered.
Letter was read from the Clerk Ardee District Council ill
which exception was taken to a levy of bd in the iC for a separ-
ate charge in the Ardee Rural District. The amount required
was only 04, and as the levy was off the entire district, which
Would produce C147, he requested the Council to strike out
this levy of {d from the estimate.
After discussion the (huncil unanimously agned to the re-
quest.
ESTIMATE OF RATES.
The following resolution was passed unanilnously
Proposed by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P,
Seconded by Bernar, Finegan, Esq, and
Resolved—That the General Estinvate of Rates ,and the
Estimate of Rates for Separate Charges (as amended in red
ink), as set out on Forms 45 and 46, with the various rates in
the C, as set out therein and recommended for adoption by
the Finance Committee ut their meeting held on 7th February,
1916, be ancl are hereby adopted by the County Council.
DEMANDS ON URBAN DISTRICTS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by T Sköffington, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by James Wynne, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby direct our Secretary to affix the
Cmnmon Seal of the Council to the Demands on the Urban
Chnneils of Drogheda and Dundalk, the amounts of which are
as follows :—
os Od.
The Demands were then signed by the Chairman.
8
FANE AND WOTTONSTOW.X DRAINAGE DISTRICTS.
Tho next item on the agenda was the eonsideration of report
fronv the Fano and Wottonstown Drainage Committee, which
appeared on Pages ancl -17 of Che printed minutes, in which
it was recommended that, as suggested by the L G B, the
County Council should confirm their resolution passed on '26th
Novelliljer, 1914, ancl definitely (lecide to take over tho man-
agoment o I)rainage Districts.
Tho f0110MGng resoution Ivas thon passed unan intcjusl.v :
Proposed Michael M earle, Esq ;
T M'Gee, Esq, J P,
Resolved—That we hereby confirlil the resolution paved
the Council at their s tneeting held on 26111 November,
1911,
and decide to tako over the noana,gement of Che, Fane Drainage
District and the Wottonstow•n Drainage District, as all the con-
(litions in said resolution ha now been cornplied with.
COC.VI'Y LOUTH FORES"'RY SCHEME.
'I'lme next matter considered by tho neil was the letter
from the Council's solicitor with
reference to the Forestry
Scheme for the County of Louth,
in which he pointecl that
tho plantation at Willistown could not be vested in the council
until a Forestry Sehente was approved.
Al r O'Connell then
addressed the Council on the tnatter, and explained that the
Council had offered the of C7ö for this plantation to tho
Land Commission, and the offer had been accepted and the
bargain completed. It, was necessary, however, that a For-
estry Scheme should be drafted and approved before the lands
could be vested in the Council, and it was only when this had
been done that any grant would be paid by the Department
from the Development Fund. After discussion
9
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Patrick M'Gee, Esq, J P,
Seconded by Joseph Dolan, E.sq, and
Resolved—That as advised by our solicitor, we hereby direct
him to prepare a Forestry Scheme for the County of Louth ' o
enable the vesting of the plantation at Willistown, •purchased
by the Council to be effected.
PEAMOUNT SANATORIUM.
The letter from the Westmeath County Council,
requesting
the Council •consider the question of the taking over of Pea-
mount Sanatorium 'by the Councils who hail purehased beds
thorein, was the next business on the agenda, but the Council
(leeided not to Lake any action in the matter, and no -order was
made.
CO-OPTION ON COUNTY LOUTH INSURANCE COM-
MITTEL".
Letter was read from the Insurance Commissioners request-
Ing the Council to co-opt a member in room of Mrs E A Duffy,
deceased
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Patrick M 'Gee, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby appoint Mr Bernard L Coleman a
member of the CÄ)unty Louth Insurance Committee vice Mrs
Fu A Duffy, deceased.
10
NOMINATION ON AN-XAGASSAN PIER COMMISSION.
Letter was read from the Secretary Annagassan Pier Corn-
mission informing the Council that Mr John Hoey, local Com-
missioner, had resigned.
A notice •of motion appeared on the agenda from Mr Miehael
Meade, that he would move that Mr Peter M 'Guinness, Anna-
gassan, be nominated to fill Che vacancy thus caused.
Accordingly the notice of motion standing in the name Of
Mr Michael Meade was put as a substantive resolution and
passed unanimously.
Proposed by Michael Meade, Esq ;
Seconded by James T M 'Gee, Esq, J P, ancl
Resolved—That we hereby nominate Mr Peter M'Guinness,
of Annagassan, to fill the vacancy on Che Annagassan Pier
Cornrnission, ca used (by the resignation of Mr John Hoey.
THANKS FOR SYMPATHY.
The following letter was read, and the Secretary was direc-
ted Co have it inserted on the minutes
Dundalk, 22nd January, 1916.
Dear Mr M 'Alester,
I have received your letter transmitting the
very kind resolu€ion of condolence passed by tho County Coun-
eil on the death of my dear wife. I wish you €0 convey to
monibers of the Council my sincere thanks for their exceed-
i ngly kind expression of sympathy in my bereavement, and 1
n Iso thank you, very much for your own personal 'kindness.
I am,
Yours very sincerely,
OHARLES A. DUFFY.
M'A1ester, Esq, Dundalk,
11
THANKS FOR CO-OPTION.
Letter was read from Very Rev Canon Lyons thanking the
Council for his co-option as a member of the Ardee Pensions
Committee.
AGREEMENT WITH INSURANCE COMMWI'EE
Letter was read from the L G B dated 21st February, No.
' 9243-1916, stating that the amount available for domiciliary
treatment should be amended from to being the cor-
allocation of the, funds under Clauses '2 and 5 of the agree-
The Secretary was directed to make the necessary n!-
teration.
TRACTION AND MOTOR TRAFFIC.
On the motion of Thomas (Y Rourke, Esq,
Seconded by Patrick WGee, Esq, P,
The resolution. submitted by the Newtownards Rural District
Council, directing attention the great injustice €0 the rate-
Payers bv Che damage to roads by traction engine and motor
Wagon traffic, and requesting the Government to have the law
so amended that the owners of such vehicles will be brought in
and ineluded for adequate Laxation, was unanimously adop-
ted.
Arising out oi this resolution, on the suggestion of Mr.
Patrick M 'Gee, the Secretary was directed to inquire flom the
Armagh County Council what bye-laws, if any, they had adop-
ted entitling them to charge special licenses €0 traction engines
using their county roads.
ACCOVS'I'S AND AUDITORS' REPORTS.
Letters were read from the L G B enclosing audited accounts
and auditors' reports from the following
•r 'Cbereulusis Conunittee of Management, to 30th September,
12
County Committee of Agriculture, to 30th Septetnbor.
Joint Committee of Technical Instruction, to 30th September.
Drogheda Union, to 30th September.
Dundalk Union, to 30th September.
Dundalk Rural District Council, to 30th September.
The letters were initialled by the Chairman.
MALICIOUS INJURY CLAIMS.
Letter was read from the Down County Council stating that
at a recent, meeting the matter of very heavy claims for com-'
pensation for malicious iniury amounting to more than Cll 000
which were awarded against the County in cases where the
property had been duly insured against fire was considered ;
that their Council had resolved to approach the Members Of
Parliament for the county with a view to having the law affect-
ing Ireland in this matter amended and brought into line with
the practice prevailing in Great Britain, and requesting the
other County Councils in Ireland to co-operate with this view•
A discussion took place on this letter, and Mr O'Connell sta-
ted that in England where property was insured that no claim
for malicious injury could be maintained.
The following resolution was then passed, Mr Joseph Dolan
dissenting : —
Proposed by N T Mlltvhy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby request the Members of Parlia-
ment for the County of Louth C.o endeavour to have the law re
lating to malicious injuries in Ireland amended and 'brought
into line with the practice prevailing inGreat Britain.
13
MALICIOUS INJURY DISMISSES.
Letter was read from Mr O'Connell reporting that he had
received the costs of the dismiss in each case for malicious in-
jury claims 'brought by Laurence Conlon and Michael M'Kenna
and that he had lodged to the credit of the Council the arn-
ounts received, viz—C3 12s 6d and CI 12s ()d.
GRANT FOR. DROGHEDA DISPENSARY.
Leter was read from the L G B enclosing copy of letter sent
by them to the County Louth Insurance Committee, in which
they stated that the Treasury had refused sanction of any ad-
ditional grants for buildings at the present tirne, and that the
amount sanctioned for the Drogheda Tuberculosis Dispensary,
namely, CIOO, could not be increased, and suggesting that two
Ot three rooms might be rented for the Dispensary.
A discussion took place on this matter, and it was ultima-
tely decided that a deputation consisting of the Chairman, Me
N T Murphy, Mr W T Skeffington and the Secretary should
Wait upon the L G B to pross for an increased grant for the
erection of the Dispensary at Drogheda.
SHEEP DIPPING (LOCAL REGULATIONS) (IRELAND)
ORDER.
Letter was read from the Department enclosing copies of the
above Order, and it was decided Co refer the same to the Exe-
eutive Committee for their consideration.
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of tlie Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 6th March, 1916, at one o'clock p m.
Present
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Thomas O'Rourke, James T M 'Gee, J P • T V
M'Qui11an, N T Murphy, J P; Patk M'Gee, J P; Michael Meade,
Edward Goodman, Thomas B M'Court, wm Woods, J P; James
Wynne, J P; James M'Carfhy, J P; Bernard L Coleman, J V;
and John F Murphy, J P, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, Co. Surveyor, was also in attendance.
Tho Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Finance Committee
were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted, and on, examination
were ordered for payment :—
Works in charge of Co. Surveyor
Secretary's Office
Loans account
Tho Bank Books för the
counts were examined and
C82 16. 8
14 110
C96 18 6
General, Subsidiary and Loans
initialled by the Chairman.
1-7,
CARETAKER FOR COUNCIL OFFICES.
accordance with the recommendation made at the last Meet-
ing Of the Finance Committee and approved by the Co. Council,
the Committee then proeeeded to the appointment of a Caretaker
for the County Offices in roorn of Christopher MCGarrity, de-
qnsa.sed. 'The agreement between the lafe Carefakér and the
Council was read, and Che duties of [he Caretaker
noted, which included Che cleaning, attendance and lighting
Of fires in the Council Chamber, Secretary's Offices, Co. Sur-
veyor's Offices, County Committee ()ffice, County Courthouse, etc.
Applications for the position were received from Messrs Timothy
Murray and Joseph Mulligan. In Mr application he
stated that in the event of his not being appointed Ime would be
grateful for tho use of the garden for drying clothes, etc.
The Committee were unanimously of the opinion that the use
Of the garden until such time as it would be taken over by the
Surveyor for the Machinery Depot would only be for the
Curetaker appointed, but the Committee decided that the garden
must be given up immediately it is wanted by the Council.
Mr Patrick M'Gee proposed, and Mr Michael •Meade seconded,
that Joseph Mulligan be appointed Caretaker of the (hunty
(Offices in the Courthouse, Dundalk, at a salary of Z20 per annum
payable quarterly.
There being no other name proposed, the Chairman declared
the resolution carried unanimously, and the Secretary was direc-
ted [o have an agreement prepared between Mulligan and the
Council accordingly.
16
PAYMENT OF MAT,TCTOITS INJURY DECREES.
The Secretary submitted lisf of Malicious Injury Decreea
levy for year ending 31st March, 1916, and was instructed
authorise tlle Council's Treasurer, the Hibernian Bank, Ltd.,
pay same.
The list is as follows :—Joseph Woods, 24 19s; George
on
to
to
Pentland, 87 2s; Annie Johns[on, Z44 17s 6d; Joseph M Johnson'
99 8s 6d; and Joseph Tlamill, C9 3s 6d.
RATE
The Return showing the state of Che Rafe (killeetion on 29th
February was submifted by the Secretary. The amount of the
second moiety of the rate is 817,850 3s 2d, and of this the sum Of
906,088 6s 8d had been eollcotted and lodged, leaving a balance Of
ÆII,761 16s 6d outstanding.
The Refurn was initialled by the Chairman. ,
RECOUPMENT UNDER DISEASES OF ANIMALS ACTS.
A elaim for recoupment of the sum of 839 18s 7<1, being one half
of the net expenditure of the Council under the Diseases Of
Animals Acts during [he quarter ended 31st December, 1915, was
submittc«l by tho Secretary and signed by the Chairman.
DEFAULTING LAND PURCHASE ANNUITANTS.
Letter was read from the Trish Land Commission, dated 25th
February, 1916, enclosing list of defaulting Land Purchase
Annuitants in Co. Louth against whom legal had
been directed for the recovery of the Instalments due under tho
Acts: of 1891-6 and 1903-9, and stating that the non-payment in
proper time of the instalments in these eases had involved a
17
charge upon the Guarantee Fund for the County, and thereby
upon the County Rates. The total arrears amount to [he sum
of 8740 19s 9d.
The list was examined by the Committee, and the letter was
initialled by the-Chairman.
DEDUCTIONS FROM ESTATE DUTY GRANT.
Letter was reacV from the L G B dated 1st March, 1916, No.
5660/1916, informing the Council (hat Chey had received copies of
eertificates of the Irish Land Commission and the National Debt
Commissioners showing the actual arrears in purchase annuities,
etc•, under the Irish Land Acts, and stating that the amount
which will be deducted in respect of land purchase liability from
the Estate or Death Duty Grant payable in flie County in the
course of the month is a sum of C9 7s Ild.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
FANE AND WOTTONSTOWN DRAINAGE DISTRICTS.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chairman:—
Local Government Board, Dublin,
2nd March, 1916.
No.
Louth County.
Sir,—
I am directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland
to acknowledge the receipt of your communication of the 28th
ultimo, rela€ive to the proposed transfer of [he business Of the
and Wottonstown Drainage Districts to the County of
18
Louth ; and I am to state that the Board will cause the necessary
Provisional Orders to he drafted in regard thereto.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARI,AS,
Secretary.
Seeretary, I.outh Co. Council.
MALICIOUS INJURY 1 MS—WALSH V. CO. COUNCJI,.
The following letter was read and initialled loy the Chairman
Francis Street, Dunda 1k,
3rd March, 1916.
Ismay Chester Walsh, Appellant.
Louth County Council.
Respon [s.
Doar Sir,—
I have al ready reported that' in fl•c• maffer Of ille elaitnS
for E50 and €5 herein for compensation for alleged eriminal injury
to stock. the Counfy Court Judge dismissed f he larger claim and
awarded a decree for in small elain),
to be levied off the
Electoral Division of' Castlebellingharn.
'I'lue Appeals on [he part of fhp Applicant were hea rd on yester-
clay at Dundalk Spring Assizes before Mr Justice Pim, when the
sum of was awarded after reversal of dismiss in the first case'
and the decroe of E2 in the second case was affirmed. Tlis Lord-
ship gave the Appellant C5 witnesses' expenses io include fravel•
ling expenses of herd from Waterford, faes of two veterinary
19
snrgeons, etc. The Couneil are granted costs against the Ap-
Pellant in the second ease as tho (lecruo of the Court below was
not increased.
Both sums to be levied off the D. E. D. of Castlebellingham.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Secretary. l,outh Co. Council.
MOTOR ANI) TRACTION ENGINE TRAFFIC.
As direet•ed by the County Council t lie Secretary had written
the Secretary Armagh Co. Council enquiring whaf bye-laws,
if any, had been Inade by his Council empowering them to issue
licences to Motor and Traction Engine Owners using their County
Roads, and submitted reply received in the matter and copy of the
bye-laws. The bye-laws were to [he effect i hat no owner of a
1000tuotive shall use or permit fhe use of such locomotive on any
Ijtiblic road within the County of Armagh unless and until
licence shall have been granted him for the purpose by the County
Council. The iee for the licence is CIO. As, however, the bye-
laws were in respect of locomotives other than agriAiltural loco•
motives. it was found difficult to eollee€ the licence, as all owners
elaimed their machine was used for agricultural purposes, and Che
of Armagh Council if was difficult to obtain
evidence fo the confi•ary.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
AGREEMENT BETWEEN COUNTY COUNCIL AND
INSURANCE COMMITTEE.
Letter was read fronj the L G B dated 1st March, 1916, No.
10755 1916, stating that the agreement the Co. Council
20
and [Ile Louth County Insurance Committee in reference to the
treatment of insured and exempt persons recommended for
Sanatorium Benefit appeared to be now in order, and that
arrangements specified in the sehecluIO are such as •the Board
a pprove.
The agreement was recommended for sealing, and the letter
was initialled by the Chairman.
DROGHEDA DISPENSARY.
The Yollowing letter from the L G B, in reply to letter of Che
Secretary informing the Board that a deputation ha,d been aP-
pointed by the County Council to wait on them to discuss the
question of an increased grant for Drogheda Dispensary, was read
and initialled by the Chairman
Local Government Board, Dublin,
29th February, 1916.
No.
Louth County.
Sir,—
T am directed by the Local Government Board for Ire-
land to acknowledge the receipt of your lettter Of the 26th instant'
and to state that if the object of the proposed deputation is to
press upon the Board the urgent neod for the provision Of a
Branch Tuberculosis Dispensary at Drogheda, the Board do not
eonsider it necessary to trouble the members Of the Deputation
to attend at this office, as the Board are fully satisfied ou thiS
point.
The Board, however, have been informed by Che Treasury that'
during the continuance of the present war, issues from the Grant
21
for building purposes will be suspended, and in these circum-
stances if appears to be useless to submit application of the
Louth County Council to Cheir Lordships.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
Seeretary, Louth Co. Council.
QUARRY WORK AT JONESBORO' AND FAITGHART.
Tho following letter was read and initialled by the Chairman
Counfy Surveyor's Office, Dundalk,
March. 1916.
To the Chainnan and Gentlemen of Finance Committee.
Mr (Alai rman and Gentlemen,—
Following my report re Jonesboro' Quarry €0 your Meeting of
ult, T arranged for starting work in Faughart quarry on 28th
On that date while out in Faughart I got word that the
Jonesboro' quarrymen were ready to return to work. They did
I am now endeavouring to
so on 29th vult, the following day.
keep both quarries working.
On Thursday and Friday, 2nd- and 3rd inst, Mr J P J i3ufler,
Board Engineer, inspected the works in progress with me
ancl was quite satisfied.
T
enclose for sealing agreement in connection with Faughart
quarry.
Your obedient Servant,
THOMAS WALSIT,
22
The Agreement referred to in above letter was that between
William M 'Alester, of Faughart V pper and the County Council
for the usage of the quarry at Faugharf. for three years for the
sum of 250.
It was unanimously agreed to recomnwend the Co. Council to
spal the Agreement.
FENCE AT TANKARDSROCK.
The following report from the County Surveyor in this matter
was read
County Surveyor's Office, Dundalk,
March 6th, 1916.
Re Mr Hugh O'Hare's Appl ieat.ion.
To the Finance Committee Louth Count.y Council.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,—
Mr ITugh (V Hare, of Tankard.sroek, has rebuilt. or repaired 80
lineal yards of his dry stone fence, leaving a grass margin 5 feet
wide between the tence and the watertable, while keeping on the
old foundation.
Tle. now asks for leave to encroach on the grass margin or was
ground where if is 7 to 17 feet wide in continuing the rebuilding
of his fence for a further length 52 lineal yards to the south.
As the road is wide at this place (30 to 40 feet between the
fences), T see no objection to his taking in some of the waste
ground providing that he rang€"s the fence in line with the exist-
ing fenee on the south end. This would still leave a grass mar-
gin 9 feet: wide between the south end of the fence a,nd the
watertable.
Tn conneefion with this matter, Wm Kelly, who occupies the
labourer's cottage at the south eud of Mr O'Hare's field, claims
the site of the ruins of the old cottage with the small garden
attached thereto, while Mr ()'llare' asserts fltat this place has
surrendered to him.
As Kelly's father-in-law, the C)wen Mathews, held the old
qqjttage and garden as a freehold, the fifle to the place appears
to be in dispute.
In order f.o avoid any question of trespass, Mr O'Hare should
give an undertaking not to extend the new fence so far as to
enclose the ruins of the old cottage or the garden.
'I'TIOMAS WALSH
P •S.-—To-day, since above report was furnished, Hugh O'Hare
called to my office laetT% and states he has now knocked down
the Cottage (disputed) and removed flye stones thereof. He again
asserts that the cottage and garden were surrendered to him by
the Owen Mathews, the surrender being prepared by Mr It
Dickie,
After
got
matter.
Solicitor, and completed in Mr Dickie's office.
THOMAS WALSH
diseussion, it was decided that unless a recommendation
from flie Rural District Council no rule be made on the
DROGHEDA DISTRICT ACCOUNTS.
Letter was read from T, G B dated gnd Mawli, 1916, No.
10630/1916, endosing Auditor's report on the aeeount.s of the
Rural Distrief of Drogheda Union for halfsear ended 30th
September, 1915, together with abstracts of the accounts.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
24
EXTITBTTTC)N OF DRAWINGS
Letter was read from the Architectural Association of Ireland'
dated 4th March, 1916, stating that the Association was arranging
for an exhibition of the drawings submitted in the recent eom-
petition for plans for the New County Council Offices of Louth'
and requesting that the Council would be good •enough fo lend
the winning designs for inclusion in the exhibition. The Asso-
eiation would be responsible for the safety of the drawings.
It was unanimously agreed that the plans should be lent for
the exhibition and the Secretary was directed accordingly.
Executive
Minutes Of Proceedings of
Meeting held in the Council
Monday, 6th March, 1916, af
Present
25
Committee.
the Executive Committee at their
Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
one o'clock p m.
Ili the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members-—'l'homas O'Rourke, James T M'Gee, J P; T V
MacQui11an, N T Murphy, J P; Patrick M'Gae, J P; Michael
Meade, Edward, Goochnan, Thomas B wcourf, wm Woods, J P;
•Tames Wynne, J P; James M'Carthy, J P; Bernard L Coleman,
J P; and John F Murphy, J P, Esquires.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Executive (hm-
were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
SIIEEP DIPPING (I.OCAL REGULATIONS) (IRELAND)
ORDER OF 1910.
The Secretary read circular letter from the Department of
Agriculture, dated 25th Febmary, 1916, No. 142—16 V. B., en-
e losing copies of the above Order made by the Department in
ennneetion with sheep dipping. The Olfler gives power to the
Authority to make such regulations as they think fit for
requiring any dipping or double dipping of sheep prescribed
in the principal Order shall be carried out under such conditions
26
and at such times and places as may be specified in a Notice
signed by an InspeeÅor of the Local Authority and served by post
or otherwise on the owner or person in charge of the sheep re-
ferred fo in the Notice.
That this Notice dispenses with the usual Notice of Intention
to Dip.
That each copy of the Regulations made must be approved by
the Department of Agriculture.
ed
That the power €0 make the Regulations shall only be exercis
by the Local Authority or their Connnittee.
That any Inspector of the Local Authority may, subject to their
direction, enter any premises within their district and examine
any sheep thereon, and that such powers of entry and examina-
tion shall be in addition to any other like powers vested in the
Inspector by Che Act of 1894.
That anything done or omitted fo be done in contravention Of
any Regulation made by the Local Authority under this Orden
the owner and [he person in charge of any sheep in respect Of
which the same is done or omitted fo be done, and the lessee
and the occupier of the place in which such sheep are located'
shall be deemed guilty of an offence against the Diseases Of
Animals Act, 1894.
The derms of the Order were discussed by the Committee, and
attention was directed to the first article in the Order—that the
Notice to the owners for dipping appointments should be signed
by an Inspector of the Local Authority; and it was pointed out
that as the Dipping Superintendents would be the; Inspectors
der the principal Order, and that the clerical work might be
27
€'f)hfusing and troublesome to the working superintendents, the
Departmenf suggested that to relieve this difheul€y the Clerk to
the Local Authority might be appointed an Inspector for the
purposes of notification.
After discussion, on the motion of Mr Wm Woods, J P, soccmded
by Mr B L Coleman, J P, it-was unanimously agreed that the
Clerk to the Local Authority be appointed an Inspector under
{he Appointment of Inspectors Order.
NO further arrangements were made about the drafting gf any
Other local regulations, and the Committee adjourned.
28
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Vinanee Comriiiffee at their
Meeting héld in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, 01)
Monday, 20th Maren, 1916, at one o'clock p m.
Present
Tn the Chau—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Mem bers—William Woods, J P, and Thomas O'Rourke'
Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, Co. Surveyor, in attendance.
The Mirjuf,€ss of the Finance Committee Meeting held on •
March, 1916, were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following åeeounfs were submitted, and on
were ordered for payment
Works in charge of County Surveyor—
Loans Account:
Subsidiary Account
Secretary's Office
072 19
172 4
67 17
Total
C313 1
exam inati0J7
3
5
7
3
The Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and T,oans
counts were examined, and initialled by the Chairman.
29
GRANTS—SANITARY SALARIES AND MEDICAL AND
EDUCATIONAL.
Leffer was read from the L G B, dated 11th March, transmitting
aying Order for the sum of Æ5() 19s Id balance in respect of the
amounts paid as salaries fo {he Sanitat1Y Officers of Che Rurml
Districts in Che County for t,he year ended 30th September, 1915.
Further letter from L G B, dated 11th March, was read, trans-
mitting Paying Order for the sum of Z447 8s 2d, being f,he
baliinee in respect of the expenditure incurred for Medical and
Educational purposes by the Board of Guardians in Co. Louth
for the year ended 30t.h September, 1915.
The letters were initialled by the Charman.
TfTF, LATE CAPTAIN ROGER BELLINGHAM.
The following letter was reacl, ancT the Secretary was directed
to have the picture hung in the Council Chamber, and to write
thanking Sir Henry for his kindness in making Che presenta-
fion
Castlebellingham,
March 13th, 1916.
Dear Mr M' Alester,—
I have a good framed engraving of Captain Roger
Bellingham that I should like fo present to [he CO. Council to
remain always in their Board Room, and propose leaving it at
tlle Courthouse (addressed to you) on Wednesday, 15th, the after-
noon Of which day I shall be in for a meeting of the County Louth
Archaeological Society. As Dundalk was the last. plaoe in Tre-
land that my son was in, it seems very fitting that his picture
go
should belong io the Council sitting there, and I have great
pleasure in presenting it for their acceptance:
Yours truly,
HENRY BELLINGHAM.
TELEPHONE FOR COUNTY OFFICES.
The tender for the installation and hire of the telephone for the
offices of the Council was eonsidered by Che Connnittee.
The
minimum annual rent was as follows
Installation rental
500 Exchange calls
2
Minimum annual rental C6
o
o
o
o
For Che first year only there will be a war eharge of C4 in ad
(lition to the E6.
After discussion,
it. was unanimously decided to recommenc
the acceptance of the tender, and the Secretary was directed to
write the eon€raét; Manager of the Telephone Department €0 for-
ward the necessary agreement for the acceptance of the County
Council.
MALICIOUS INJURY DISMISS.
The following letter from Mr ()'ConneII was read, and initialled
by the Chairman :—
Francis Street, Dundalk,
15th March, 1916.
Killanny Co-operative Farm Society, I,tcl, E20.
Malicious Injury Claim v. The Council.
Dear Sir,—
T received to-day from the Solicitor for tho Society
sum of 2s to cover costs of dismiss of this clainr af Dundalk
Ili lary Quarter Sessions anci fee for withdrawal of the appeal
lodged by the Society hetTiu.
1
enclose Treasurer's receipt for amount as lodged with Bank
to-day.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Secretary, Louth Co.
Council.
IIEATING OF COUNTY COURTHOUSE.
Menujrial signed
by flie Counf.y Court Judge and all the
Unclalk Solicitors was read. The memorial complained that
intense eold of the Courthouse during the last Spriug Assizes
was intolerable owing to some defect in Che heating system, and
that same woulcl be renu«liecl before . the ensuing
arch Sessions.
It was decided €0 refer the consideration of the matter to the
next Meeting of tlue Finance Committee, and the Secretary was
directed to plaee same on the agenda for that Meeting.
COMMI'I"J'ATS '1'0 INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS.
Letter was read from the Clerk of Petty Sessions, Drogheda,
initialled by the Chairman, notifying that at tho Court to
be held at Drogheda on 27th March, appliéation would be made
Elizabeth Mary, Owen and 'I'hmnas NLurray, Boyne
Place' Drogheda, children under 14 years of age, to an Inclus-
trial School.
RING NET 141SHLNG.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair -
man
844/16—F.B.
Department of Agriculture, etc,
Fisheries Branch, Dublin,
15th March, 1916.
Sir,
With reference previous correspondence, rela-
tive to ring net fishing from motor boats, I have to state that'
the representations on this subject made by the various public
Boards interested, will be duly considered, with a view to a de-
cision as to •whether they disclose a prima facie ease such as
would justify investigation by means of public Inquiries.
In sueh event, however, the Department must further take
into account, in existing circumstances, the considerable pub-
lic expense involved by such Inquiries, and by the procedllre
which might follow them, and also the difficulty of securing
adequate representation of the various interests involved, ill
the absence of large number of fishermen now serving ill
J am, Sir%
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary, Louth County Council.
assessed for the sum of C264 9s (jåd, »eing the apportionment
on the county for the above found under the Diseases of Ani-
males Acts, 1894, and letter from the Hibernian Bank, Dun-
dalk, was also read stating that this amount had been lodged
by them to the credit of the fund in accordance with the Order.
Ille letters were initialled by the Chairman.
RATE OOLLECI'ION.
The following letter •was read, and the Secretary was directed
to send copy of same to each of the rate collect,ors:—
No. 13023/16
Louth County.
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 15th March, 1916.
Sir,
With reference the return showing the condi-
tion, On the 29th ultimo, of the collection of the poor rate for
tho ourrent half year in Loilth County, I am directed by the
Local Government Board for Ireland to state that they regret
€0 Observe that the collection generally is in a very backward
condition.
The Collectors should be warned of the necessity of lodging
the full amount of their warrants by the end of the present
Seeretary.
GENERAL CATTLE DISEASES FUND.
Circular letter from the L G B dated 16th March
was read, "ating that the County of Louth
8751-
. No.
had been
month.
Secretary,
1 am, Sir,
Your Obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
Louth County Council.
ASSISTANT SURVEYOR'S 'I'RAVEI,LING EXPENSES.
The following letter was read, and the Seeretary was directed
to reply that owing to the largely increased nun]ber of road
contracts taken over by the County Surveyor, the number Of
inspections on .tLese roads for the superintendenee of the sur-
face men was greatly increased : —
No. 10807/16
Louth County.
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 15th Marell, 1916.
Sir,
With refereneo to your letter of the 28th ultimO'
relative to the proposal of the Louth County Council to
ereaso the allowance marle to the Assistant, Surveyor, Mr JOIN)
M C Lyons, for travelling expenses from €35 to C5() a year'
am directed by Lho Local Govermnent Board for Ireland to re-
quest that they may be furnished with particulars as to the
Council's reason for proposing this increase.
By Order of the Boa rcL
S. WATT.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
NAVAL AND MILITARY WAR PENSIONS ACT.
Circular letter was read fronl the Royal Patriotic Fund Cor-
poration directing attention of the Council to the above
which was to make certain provisions relating to Pensions '
to
Grants and Allowances made in respect of the present war
officers and men in the naval and military service, and their
wives, ehifilron and other dependents, ancl the care of officers
and m on disabled in consequence of the prosenc war. The
empowered County Councils to prepare schemes for work of IO"
Committees to be appointed by the County Councils. The
circular requested the Louth County Council jo prepare a draft
scheme for use in County Louth.
After discussion, the Chairman and Secretary were requested
to a draft, scheme and submit same to the next meet-
Ing of the Finance (%nnnittée.
PATRICK .CLARKE'S NEGIN,CI'ED CONTRACT.
The following letter was read, and the Committee unani-
decided to- direct the County Surveyor to have the
usual ten clays' notice served, ancl if the work is not proceeded
with by the contractor to report further ancl have the contract
eaneellecl
County Surveyor's Office,
Court House, Dundalk,
20th 1916.
To tho Chairman ancl Gentlemen, Finance Committee
Meeting.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,
I beg to report neglect on road, index
42, Droghe€ln (Louth) R. 1). , 790 perches, Drogheda. to
avan, by 'l'ownley Hall, between the Cross at the Boyne
Obelisk and Mattock Bridge—Con tractor, Patriek Cla rke of
Mell.
The Contracfor during tho year just passed refused to eom-
ply with speeiiieation in regard to stone, and refused to ae-
eept Killineer limestone, consequently no stone (exeepi a little
SO -called darning) went out this year. (hntraetor refuses to
put
out the best stone Mithin 4 miles of the road (luring Che
corning year.
36
T recommend that IO days' notice be served and the contract'
terminated, so as if possible to provide some stone for nest
year.
Your obedient Servant„
THOMAS WALSH.
MOTOR, LICENCE DUTY DEFAULTERS.
The Secretary submitted list of owners of Motor Cars
Motor Cycles, who have not yet paid the motor licence duties
for Ohe year 1916, and requested a direction as to the prosecti-
tions against tho defaulters. The Secretary was directed IO
place the list in the hands of the SoTicitor to the Council,
was to make application for the payment of the duties, and
same •were not paid within one week from the date of t,he no-
tice, that he should proceed to recover the penalties in each
case.
37
Finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Fin aneo Committee af their
Mooting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, April, 1916, at one o'clock, p m.
Present
•-1n the Chair : Chas A Duffy, F„sq, J P.
Other F' Murphy, J P; Hamill, J P; Poter
Woods, .J p: wm Woods, J P, and B L Coleman, J P, Esquires
Al.r Thomas Wa}sh, County Surveyor, .was in attendance.
The Minutes of the Finance Committee held on the 20th
1916, taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
following accounts wero submitted, and after examina-
tion, were ordered for payment.
Works in Charge of County Surveyor—Loans'
Account
Subsidiary Aeeonnt
Sooretary's Office
2817 8
456 18 5
C591 4 7
The Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loans' Ae-
counts examined and initialled by the Chairman.
38
HEATING OF COUNTY COURT HOUSE, DUNDALK.
The following Memorial was read :
' 'We, the undersigned, request you to have the existing hot
water circulating system in the IReeord Court, Dundalk, U pui
into working ordet at once, before the ensuing March Sessi01bS'
on the 23rd March inst. The condition of the said Court dur-
ing last Spring Assizes was intolerable from the intense cold'
although the court keeper states that the fire was duly kept lit
during the Assizes, and owing €0 some defect in the system
Crown Court, was heated and the Record Court was not heated'
and as business cannot be carried on under suchconditions,
must, re quest bhe matter to receive immediate attention.
Dat,ed this 13th day of March, 1916.
Signed—Geo. C Green, County Court Judge; Chas MacMa-
11011, Dickie, R Espinasse, P L .J H
l) O'Connell, A S Coulter, F p Johnston, S H Moynagb' J
M'Court, M Molony, P J Callan, E G L ward, and c J
11011, Solicitors.
The County Surveyor informed the committee that as far as
as
he could disco nr there was no defect in the heating system'
the pipes inboth courts were very highly heated, •but that
were not suitable to distribute the heat through the COurts•
the ground level the heat from the pipes was very great, While
Oler
in other parts of the Court (luring the recent cold wea
there was extreme coldness. He stated that the heating
tem was very m;tiquated, and that an up-to-date installation o
water heating would probably cost He further inf01'Jll
the Committee that he had obtained arr estimate from the
ager of the Electric Works for the cost of installing electric
radiators to the Courts, which was already wired for electric
39
lighting, and Chis would be C4ö, and idle probable cost of the
boating by radiators would be tibout 6d per hour for each court,
and that the radiators could be regulated easily according t'0
the temperatut•e necessary.
After discussion it was unanilnously recommended, on the
motion of Mr B Hamill, J P, seconded by Mr P Woods, J P,
that the courts be electrically heated, and directed Ehe County
S Urveyor to formulate a proposal for the cost of same; for the
next meeting of the Proposal Cmmitfee.
DEATH OF PENSIONER.
Letter was read from Miss A Davidson, Londonderry, in-
forming the Council that her father, Hugh Davidson, who wa,s
u Pensioner of the Guncil, as an ex-jail official, had died on
tho 14th Mareh ; that his pension was C35 per annum, and re-
questing that the proportion of his quarterly amount would be
Paid to her without t.aking out probate of her father's will.
The Secretary informed the Committee that he had written
to Miss Davidson that no monies could be paid until the pro-
bate was taken out, and the Committee approved, and the let-
ter was initiaiied by the Chairman.
MR. LYONS' TRAVELLING ALLOWANCE.
Letter was read from the L G B dated 22nd March, No.
13643/16, stating that they approved of the proposal of the
to increase the annual allowance to Mr Lyons, Assis-
tant County Surveyor from C3ö €0 for vouched travelling
e Spenses, the reileage travelled being certified by the County
Surveyor.
40
CRIMINAL LNJURY CLAIMS.
.LeCter was read and initialled by the Chairman, from Mr•
O'Oonnell, dated 29th March, 1916, informing the Council that
the County Court Judge had awarded Richard Boyle, B,alIaV-
erty, the sum of C5 for hay burned, the amount, to be levied
off the Electoral Division of Rathcor.
The Secretary informed the Committee that a claim for mali-
cions injury to ploughs, the property of Mr Patrick Hoe.y, Mer-
ehes, for the sum of CIO hawl been lodged,- and that he had sent
the papers to Mr O'Connell as usual.
ROAD BOARD GRANT.
Letter was read and initialled by f he Chairman from the Road
Board enclosing Grant for the sum of 8368 for the interest on Loan
for Machinery purchased by the Council.
The Secretary informed the Committee that he had transmitted
to the Road Board the certificate of [he County Surveyor of the
purchase of the plant, and requested payment of fhe Grant.
RECOUPMENTS AND GRANTS RECEIVED.
Letters were read as follows enclosing ehoques for the amonntS
as undermentioned :—
Department of Agriculture, 22nd Mareh—C39 18s 7d Recoupment
under Diseases of Animals Acts.
Local Government Board,
Grant, Guardians.
Local Government Board,
Grant, Roads.
Local Government Board,
Gran t,
23rd March—C952 18s, Estate Duty
23rd Mareh—C862 10d, Estate
27th Mareh—C6391 15s, Agricultural
.11
IDROGIIEDA VRBAN ROAD BOARD GRANT.
Letter was read from the Town Clerk, Drogheda, dated 28th
si ating [hat the Road Improvement Scheme for the
Urban District of Drogheda was fully completed, und requesting
that application might be made for [Ime sum of Z410 balance
of Grant.
The Secretary informed Che Chat he had requested
the County Surveyor to inspect and report, and when this was
done, the Committee directed the Secretary to apply for payment
to the Road Board.
ARMY SEPARATION ALIT)WANCES AND RATE-AIDED
INSTITUTIONS.
Circular letter was read from the L G B witli rei+rence to tho
admission of recipients of Army Allowances to rate-
a•lded institutions, and the Secretary was directed to send eopy
thereof to the Louth County Infirmary.
NAVAL AND MTI.ITARY WAR PENSIONS ACT.
Letter was read from the Royal Patriotic Fund Corporation re-
q U esfing the Council to obtain an estimate of the widows, children
Other dependents of deceased soldiers in different parts of the
County, and the Secretary was requested to, if possible, obtain
the information required, and furnish same as early as possible
to the proper quarter.
The Committee had under consideration tho draft scheme under
the Naval and Military War Pensions Act as to the constitution
a local Committee for the County of Louth to be appointed by
the County Council, and it was suggested that flie number of
42
members of the Committee should be 36, of whom 6 should be
women, 6 representatives of labour, and 6 members of the Soldiers'
and Sailors' Families' Association or the Soldiers' and Sailors'
Help Society.
The Secretary was directed fo submit a draff scheme fo the
Patriotic Fund Corporation, and if they approved to have the
Committee appointed af the next meeting of the County Council.
RATE COLLECTION.
The Secretary submitted the return of the Rate Collection for
the half year ended 31st March, by which it appeared tilvaf all
Collectors had closed the Collecfion of the second moiety of poor
yate with the exception of Patrick Hughes. This Collector had
a balance outstanding amounting to the sum of C340 18s 6d.
The Seretary was directed to send a copy of the return fo the
L G B and also to the London and Lancashire Fire Insuranee
Company. tho guarantors of the Collectors.
The Seerefary was further direcfed to apply to the L G B for
their sanc€ion to the payment of the balance of the poundage fees
due those Collectors who had not finished their September collec-
tion at the close of that period and were only paid a proportion
of their foes, and who had now completed their eollee€ion Of the
second moiety.
GARNISHEE ORDER.
The following lotter was read and initialled by the Chairman
Francis Street, Dundalk,
31st March, 1916.
•Denis M' Ardle v. Thomas M'Keviff, Jun.
Sir,—
Adverting to your letter of 21st January last enclosing
three Paying Orders and requesting Chat the balance of
lbs 3d be deducted from total of Paying Orders
remaining balanee only be handed defendant,
have ascertained from both parties and their Solici-
tors that this arrangement was not eontempla'ted or agreed on.
Pointed out to all parties that Council were not prepared
to aet otherwise than under the terms of the OHIer. and that the
e OP.Y' Order served on the Council must be wrong. I returned the
eopy Order to Mr Downey, Solicitor for Plaintiff, and yon will
Observe he has now amended same.
Obtained defendant's receipt: on Paying Orders No. 16, C2
5d; NO. 57, Æ13 5s, and No. 94, C12 9d. I eash€ul the three
deducted CIO which I handed Plaintiff and send you his
receipt herewith, and handed balance of C18 4s 2KI to defendant.
again return all papers sent me other than fhe Orders for
payment.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Secretary, Louth County C0uneil.
OF STEAM ROLLER.
The County Surveyor submitted an application from the
Castle Hill Quarries, Carlingford, for the hire of the
Steam Roller for a few hours to roll in a short piece of road from
the Newry road to the Quarries.
The Committee decided unanimously to grant the request on the
Payment of the amount of hire fixed by the Co. Surveyor,
44
JONESBORO' QUARRY.
The following letter and report were read, and after discussiOIl
the County Surveyor was directed to obtafii any evidence that
would lead to a conviction of the parties responsible for the
tempt to injure the county property :—
(hunty Surveyor's Office,
Courthouse, Dundalk,
3rd April, 1916.
To Che Chairman and Gentlemen Finanée Committee Meeting'
3rd April, 1916.
Jonesboro' Quarry.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,—
T beg to lay before you a report from the Overseer in
charge of Jonesboro' and Faughart quarries, of an aftempt• to
clarpage the Council's plant in Jonesboro' quarry.
From what I can learn of Che matter none of Clue men employed
in the quarry was concerned in the act.
It would be advisable to order a prosecution if evidence can be
obtained and the parties identified who were concerned in the
attempt, in order €0 prevent any more such attempts.
Your obedient Serva.nt,
THOMAS WALSH.
14, Chapel Street, Dundalk,
March 30th, 1916.
Dear Sir,—
On visiting Jonesboro' quarry on last Wednesday,
29th, foreman told rue tha,t f,he bogie which he derailed and
tile
left about 15 feet from the lino of rmils on f.he quarry floor
45
Previous evening, he found the nexf morning upended on the
Pithead and quite near the edge. The depth of the pithead on
that day was 12 feet.
am fold that two men were seen about 7.30 p m on Tuesday
evening, Mareh 28th, shifting some stones quite Thear to where the
or Usher is placed, Chey were proba bly trying to undermine the
stones that are now piled for breaking. There are about 430 tons
Piled up. and serious damage might be clone fo [he stonebreaker
is close by, if by accident or, otherwise the pile of stones
fell on fo it.
I have reported the matter to the poliee
Your obedient Servant,
L. V. FEEHAN, OiT.rseer.
TO Thomas Walsh, Esq, Co. Surveyor.
WORKMEN AT ROAD ROLI,ING, ETC.
The County Surveyor i nfk)rmed the Committee that several of
the men employed by the Council had requested leave of absence
for a short time for spring work on their holdings.
After discussion, the Committee unanimously agreed to Che re-
and the matter was left in the Co. Surveyor's hands.
46
Proposal Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Committee at their
First Quarterly Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court
House, Dundalk, on Monday, 10th April, 1916, at one o'clock'
In the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Present
Other Members :—Thomas O'Rourke, James T M 'Gee, J P;
Joseph H M'AlT11e, J P; Benmard L Coleman, J P; John i'
Murphy, J P, and Bernard Hamill, J P, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Wa ISh, County Surveyor, was also in attendance •
The minutes of the previous meeting of the Proposal Corn-
mittee were taken as read and signed .by the Chairman.
The follwing proposals were considered by the Committee'
and each was unanimously approved
APPLICATIONS BY ,THE COUNTY SURVEYOR.
No. 28—T'o defray cost of working stone crushers for Road
Contractors during the year ending 31st March'
1917, if Contractors agree to hire crushers. Not to
exceed 0150. • (The same or such portion thereof
may be expended to be refunded 'by Contractors
ploy!ng crushers).
County-at-Large (ex-Ut"ban) Charge.
47
NO• 29—To instal Electric Heating Radiators in Crown and Re-
cord Courts, Dundalk County 'Court House. Cost
not to exceed *50.
County-at-Large Charge.
Secretary submitted County-at-Large payments for the
quarter ended 31st March, 1916, which were duly examined,
and recommended for payment. Among these payments ap-
Peared a sum of C3'2 IOS Ild for Constabulary expenses on the
County of Louth, in respect of the half year ended 31st March,
1916. The Secretary read circular letter from the Receiver of
Constabulary, Dublin Castle, enclosing the account with a re-
quest bhut same would be laid before the meeting of the Pro-
C%mmittee. A discussion took place on this matter, and
the Secretary was directed to write to the Receiver and express
t'he view of the Committee that the expenditure for extra. Con-
St'abulary was considered unnecessary, ancl as it was presumed
that the extra force was drafted into the county in connection
the recent Parliamentary Election that Che quietude that
Prevailed during the election was a proof that the extra force
Was Unnecessary. The account was then passed for payment.
48
Executive Committee,
Minntos of Proceedings of the Executive Committee af their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, l)undalk'
on Monday, 10th April, 191C, at one o'clock, p Tn.
Present the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Thomas O'Rourke, Janies T M 'Gee, J P
Joseph H M'AHiie, J P; Bernard L Cole,nan, J P; .J F Mur-
phy, J P, and Bernard Hamill, J P, Esquires.
The Minutes of tho previous Meeting of the Committee were
taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
VETERINARY INSPECTORS' REPORTS.
Mr Clinton's rebort.
During the mout,h of February a case of suspect041 scab
curred at Dundalk Port amongst a lot of sheep consigned
England. Wool from the suspected anilnals was forwarded
'l'he two sus-
the Department, but no parasites were found.
pected animals svere killed 'by owner, and the remainder dippe(
and forwarded to England. No other case of infectious disease
occurred in the district.
of in-
I beg to repoit that during the month of March no ease
ted
fectious disease occurred in my district. A case of suspec
49
seab was reported at Dundalk port, •but ou examination of the
animals scab wasp not found to exist.
JOSEPH T. CLLNTON, V S.
Mr Donnelly's Report.
I)nring Mayell I had to investigate one or two cases of sus-
Pected swine fever? but I found the animals in each ease were
not suffering f: Olli the disease. I also made inspection.s in one
01' two other cases -where contagious disease was supposed to
exist. 'I'llere re no anilila[s in the district at present under
restrictions..
A. A. DONNELLY, V S.
The reports were initialled by the Chairman.
so formal report was received from Mr Maxwell, but the
Secretary submitted forms sent in by him for cases of sheep
scab
on the farm of J .Crawley, Artnalivery, Ardee, including
the withdrawal of the detention notice.
APPOINTMENT OF INSPECTORS.
The following letter from the Department of Agriculture was
read and initialled by the Chairman. The Secretary informed
the Committee that with respect to his appointment as an ms-
Pector for the purpose of notifying officially the fixtures made
for Che clippings during the dipping periods, it was not his in-
tention to make any claim for any zremuneration
So. 981-16.
Sir,—
I have to
Department of
acknowledge, with
Agriculture,
Dublin, April, 1916.
thanks, the receipt of your
50
letter of 29th ultimo indicating the point reac.liOd as regards the
formulation of revised sheep dipping arrangements for your
County.
There will be no objection as far as the Deparf.ment are
eerned to the proposed increase of 2s a week in the rate of re-
muneration of the superintendents of the dipping tanks, and it iS
presumed that their names and their respective rates of remunera-
fion as so increased will be -communicated to the Department ill
Tf is also presumed that l)epal+
due course for approval.
ment will be notified in the event of remuneration being attached
to the appointment (which it is observed thje Executive Committee
have recommended) of the Clerk of fliO Local Authority as an
spector for the purpose of notifying officially the fixtures made for
the dippings during the dipping periods.
Tt is noted that a special meeting of the Executive Committee
will be held on 10th inst. to consider and pass local regulatiOD'S
for the County Louth under the Local Regulations Order of 1916'
and Che Department will he glad to receive a copy of such regula-
(ions in due course.
T am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL, Seeretary•
Secretary, Louth County Council.
THE SHEEP DIPPING (LOCAL REGULATIONS) (IRELAND)
ORDER OF 1916.
The oonsideration of the above Order of the Department of
Agriculture came up ou special notice on the agenda. The
Secretary read the circular letter from the Department and
51
general terms of the Order. In Clause 1 of the Order it enacted
that the Local Authority may make such regulations as they think
fit for the following purpose, [hat is to say—for requiring that
any dipping or double dipping of sheep prescribed in the principal
Order shall be carried out under such conditions, and at such
time and place as may be specified in a notice signed by an In-
SPOCtor of the Local Anthority and served by post or otherwise
on the owner or person in charge of the sheep referred to in the
notice.
A discussion took place on this Clause, and Mr M'Gée directed
the attention of the Committee [o the confusion that, would
likely arise if this notification were sent to sheep owners for in-
SPeetions at unsuitable times fo [liem. 110 held that, Che proper
Course to adopt would be for the owner fo serve notice, of his
intentiön to dip and Chat the sel«åion of the clafo of dipping
be left, to him, and that the notieo should be sent to the
Local Inspector and not €0 the police as provided in tho principal
Order. This view was held by the Committee, and the following
resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by James T M'Gee, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Bernard L Coleman, Esq, J P, and
the selection of the date of the dipping be leff
to the Owner of the sheep to be dipped, and that the notification
Of the date be sent to the Local Inspector appointed by the County
under the Sheep Dipping (Appointment of Inspectors)
(Ireland) Order of 1915 and not to the police."
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Nleeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 17th April, 1916, -at one o'clock, p m.
Present :—ln the Chair: Chas A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Wm Woods J P; B Hamill, J P; Joseph
M 'Ardle, J P, and Thos O'Rourke, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Smveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous meeting of 'Jhe Committee were
taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted and on examination
Were ordered for payment :
Works in Charge of County Surveyor—Loans
Aecoun t
Subsidiary Account
Secretary's Office —Subsidiary Account
Total
euo
86
6
14
10
'2
9
5
The Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loans Ac-
counts were examined an.d initialled by the Chairman.
The Committee recommended t.mt a sum of CI,OOO be trans-
erred from the General Account to the Subsidiary Account.
2
The List of Irrecovera ble Arrears of Rates for tho half year
ended 31st March, 1916, were submitted and recommended for
payment.
UNPAID PAYING ORDER.
Letter was reacl from Patrick TEIroy, Haynestown, dated
7th April, 1916, stating that a Paying Order for the sum Of C13
3s Od, dated 28th April, 1913, had been issued to him and was
mislaid at the time, and only now was found. He enclosed the
Paying Order, which was on foot of a road maintenance
tract in the Dundalk District, and requested payment Of
amount.
The Secretary inforfned the Committee that tile Order •had
• been outstanding for over a year, and was eaneelled by Clie Au-
dilor at the encl of 1914. After discussion the Secretary
directed to apply to tlle L G B for sanction for the payment o
the amount to tho contractor.
FOOD AND DRUGS ACTS.
Letter was read from the Department dated 7th April,
(41348-16, informing the Council that five samples of butter 0b-
tained at Dundalk on 6th March, had been snlnnittecl for
lysis, and proved to be pure. The letter was initialled by the
Chairman.
ACCIDENT AT FAUGHART QUARRY.
The Secretary informed the Committee that a man name
Michael Boyd, one of the workmen engaged at Faughart
Quarry, had met with an accident to the knuckle of the left'
hand by a cutter which was being struck to cut a steel-jumpe
The Insurance Company were advised of the accident, and they
had Obtained their doctor's report, whiell stated that the man
W'öuld bo quite fib resume work in about ft fortnight.
Secretary read letter from the Insu rance Comvauy in which
they stated that the injured man's average earnings worked out
Ot' 14s 8d por week, and that it would be in order for the Co.
Council to ray him emupen,sation at tho rate of 7s -Id per week
tho day of the accident. Tae Secretary was directed to pay
the Workman 7s por week, the payments to be made out of
the petty cash account.
GA RXISHEE ORDER.
Lotter was .reacl fronl -Mr H J W Downey, Solicitor, Dublin,
dated 12th April, 1.916, in the matter of the garnishee order ob-
by Denis M 'Ardle, of Cunniear, against Thos M 'Kevitt,
Of- Barronstmvn, a road eon tractor, stating that he 'understood
a further payment on foot of •road eontraets had been sanc-
tioned to M 'Kevitt, and requesting that in accordance with the
terms Of the order the balance clue M €Ardlo, namely, Cl•1 18s 3d
might be paid over to 'him. The Secretary informed the Com-
mitteo that this matter had been dealt with by the County So-
licitor up to the present, and he was directed to hand any pay-
ing orders due M 'Kevitt to the Solicitor to bo dealt with by
bim under the terms of the order.
SHEEP BIPPING ACCOUNT.
was submitted from John Donnelly, Carlingford, for
removing sheep tanks, etc, from Carlingford to Omeatll during
the dipping periods of 1915. The amount of the account—El,
a further sum of IOS for storing the tank, were reconlmen-
(led for paynient.
LOCAL TAXATION (IRELAND) ACCOUNT.
Schedule was submitted and initialled by the Chairman fronl
the Labourers' Department Local Government Board, showing
particulars of ,amounts remitted to the Commissioners of public
Works in Ireland out of the Exchequer contribution to be ape
plied by them towards the repayments of outstanding Loans
under the Labourers Acts on the Rural Districts of Ardee NO 1'
Drogheda and Dundalk, as 17s ld, e185
and C245 (is Ild respectively. The Schedule pointed out
the amounts of the half yearly annuities due to the Commis-
sioners by the a bove-named Rural District Councils in respec
of such Loans will 'be reduced accordingly.
POUNDAGE FEES TO IRATE COLLECTORS.
'I'he following letter in reply to an application •by the secre-
Cary for sanction to the payment of the balance of poundage
fees due three of the collectors in respect of tho half-year endea
30th September, 191.5, was lead •
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 13th April, 1916.
Sir,
I ani directed by the Local Goveunrnent Board for
Ireland to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 6th inst'
lative to the payment by the Louth Co. Ckjuncil to CollectOt•S
Cluskey, Peter M 'Donnell and John Woods, of the balance o
poundage fees for the half-year ended the 30th September last'
and, in reply, I am to refer you to the terms of the
letter of the 22nd October last. (No. 56052-1915).
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS, Secretary •
Secretary Louth County Council.
Secretary informed the Committee that the letter refer.
to in the above, gave sanction to the payment to the Collee.
tors named, of a proportion only of their fees based on the am-
lodged by them on or before the 30th bet'.
COIIeetors referred to had closed their September eolleetion on
13th October, 1915, and furthermore had closed Cho colleeti01i
of the second moiety of their Avarrants on 31st (Marell, 1916.
The Committee were unanimously of the opinic,l that uncler
the circu.mstances the L, G B should not withhold sanction to
the payment of the balances due the collectors, and the Secre-
tary was directed to write the L G 13 accordingly.
MR. PAHUCK HUGHES' COLLECTION.
The Secretary informecl the Committee that Mr Patric;€
ldughos, who had not closed the collection of the second moiety
poor rate on 31st March,
had called on Ilim during last
W 00k, stated that he was prepared to re•ign his position as
enlloetor, if the L G B sanctioned the carrying forward to Che
collector's warrant of any recoverable arrears, and t,ha.t
be allowed to deduct from the amount of his warrant all
arrears, and be allowed any poundage fees duc
him. Tho Secretary had conveyed these facts to the L G B
lotter, and the following reply thereto was read
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 14th April, 1916.
*outh County.
o. 17,914-1916.
Sir,
With reference to your letter of the 11th instant re-
to Mr Patrick Hughes, Poor Rate Collector in Lout-b
I am directed by the Local Government Board for Irc-
6
iand to state the questiön of his resignation, the
ment of any poundage fees, cannot be cmxsidered until tlre COI-
teetor or 'his Sureties first lodge the full amonnt of his warrant
for the yearændecl the 31st ultimo.
T am, ,Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BAIU,AS, SeclVtary.
Secretary,
Louth Corrntv Council.
After discussion the Secretary was directed to send copy
this letter to the Collector, and also to his sureties, the Lond0ß
and Lancashire Fire Insurance Company.
CONTRACTOR'S DELAV IN SUPPLYING ORDERS.
Tho Secreta ry informed the Committee that he had receive
complaint from the County Surveyor of the •delay in the supply
of fortnightly pay-sheets which were requisitioned early
March. The Secretary stated that these sheets wore ordered
from the contractor, Messrs M 'Dougall and co, Drogheda'
the 9th March, that he had written or wired complaining Of the
delay to the contractor on six occasions, and that these sheets
were only received after 4 0'clock on 13th inst. He had wire
to the contractor on the morning •of the 12th instant, and
firmed the wire by letter, that if the sheets were not receive
on the following morning he would order a supply from
Tempest and charge the contractor with any extra cost.
was
the sheets did not arrive on the morning of the 13th, nor
any reply received from Messrs M 'Dougall by that morning
post, he ordered a supply from Mr 'fempest. A letter received
from Messrs M'DougalI apologising for delay, was read. This
letter was received on 17th instant.
iii
The Committee approved of what the Socre€ary had done
the matter-
1
Louth County Council.
Minutc»s of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
First Quarterly' Meeting, held in the Council Chamber, Court
House, Dundalk, on Thursday, 20111 April, 1916, at one
o'clock p m.
Present :—ln the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other B Moore, J P; M Meade, T B
M'Court, P Callan, J P; P Donegan, J P; J Wynne, J P;
J McArdle, J P; M O'Mem, J P; 13 Hamill, J P; J F
Mutvhy, J P; T O'Rourke, B L Coleman, J P, and
Finnegan, Esquires.
essrs Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor; James Dromgoole
and J M C Lyons, Assistant Surveyors; and D. O'Conne}l,
Solicitor to the Council, were in attendance.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Lsq, J P ;
Seconded by Thomas B M'Court, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of the Proceedings of the Lowth
County Council at their Fourth Adjourned Quarterly Meetings.
2
held on the 24th day of February, 1916, a printed copy Of
which has been sent to each Member of the County Council'
be and are hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE COMMITTEE MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by John F Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of the Proceedings of the
Finance Committee, at t,heir Meetings held .on tho under-
mentioned dates, a printed copy of which has been sent to
each Member of the Council, with all payments and recOT11•
mendations contained therein, •bo and uue hereby confirmed
Monday, 6th March, 1916.
Monday, 20th March, 1916.
Monday, 3rd April, 1916.
Monday, 17th April, 1916.
CONFIRMATION OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MINUTES,
When this item on the agenda was reached, the Secretary
road the following letter from the Department of Agriculttlre
relative to the resolution passed by the Executive Committee'
that the selection of the date of Dipping be left to the SheeP
Owners, and that tho notification be sent to the Local Inspector
and not to the Police :—
Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland,
Dublin, 12th April, 1916.
No. 1108—16.
Sir,
I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
11th instant in regard to the. results of consideration, at
3
meeting of your Local A uthority on 1 Ith instant, of the
question of regulations for the County under the, Sheep Dipping
(Local Regulations) (Ireland) Order of 1916. In reply I have
t'C state that such a regulation as that suggested in your letter
Would not be within 'the powers eonferred by the Order above-
A notice of intention to dip: given by a shOep
mentioned.
O Wner under tile Sheep Dipping (Ireland) Order of 1915, must
given to the Police, but it is competent for the Local
AUC110rity, if they choose, to arrange illat the Police, on
receiving it, shall send it on direct to tho Dipping Inspector
for district, instead of, in the ordinary course, to the Clerk
of the Local Authority.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
The Secretaiw, Louth County Council, Dundalk.
After discussion, it was decided unanimously to delete from
the Minutes the resolution directing the owner to send the
notice of int,ention to dip to the Local Inspector instead of
the Police, and the following resolution was passed unani-
mously : —
by P B Moore, nsq, J P;
Seconded by Patrick Donegan, Esq; J p, .and
the Minutes of the Proceedings of the
Exeo-utive Oommibtee at, held the
mentioned dates, a printed copy of which has been sent to
each Member of the Council, be and are hereby confirmed,
Monday, 6th March, 1916.
Monday, 10th April, „191G,
save and except the Minute of the resolution passed by the
Executive Committee at their Meeting on the 10th April, 1916' '
directing that the notice of intention to dip bc sent to tne
Locål Inspector instead of to the Police.
CONFIRMATION OF PROPOSAL COMMITTEE MINUTES
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Thomas O'Rourke, Esq ;
by Potor Moore, Esq, J P,
Resolved—That the Minutes of Che Proceedings of
Proposal Committee at their Meeting held on Monday, the 10th
day of April, 1916, a printed copy of which has been sent to
each Member of the Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
DEATH OF MR EDWARD GOODMAN.
At this stage of the proceedings Che Chairman stated he
wished to propose a, vote of condolence with the relatives Of
Mr Edward Goodman, who was for many years a member of
Council. He referred in most sympathetic terms to the
deceased gentleman's work on the Council, and to the wide
circle of his acquaintances and his interest in his native
county.
He proposed the following resolution
That we learn with regret of the lamented death of
Edward Goodman, who was for many years a respected member
5
Of the Council. His great interest in its work, and in every.
thing that concerned the welfare of our county, has merited
our respect and approbation. We beg to tender to the members
Of his family our sincere condolence in their sad bereavement,
and, after the urgent Statutory business is disposed of, that
We adjourn this meeting as a mark of respect to his memory.
Mr Michael Meado seconded, ancl spoke in feeling terms of
his long and intimate connection with the deceased, anci
lauded his many good qualities.
Tho following members of the Council ancl the Secretary
desired be specially associated with the resolution
Patrick Donegan, J P ; James Wynne, J L P,
mnegan.
Tho resolution then passed in silence,
Standing as n mark of respect.
DEATH OF MISS R.VI'H,
and Bernard
illi
The following resolution was passed in sileuee, all ynernbers
standing
Proposed by Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by .Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That sve beg €0 tender to our respected member,
enis J Rath, our sincere condolence in [he loss sustained
by him in tho death of his daughter.
ARDEE PAYMENTS.
Tho following resolution was passed nnanimously :—
Proposed by Michael Meade, Esq ;
Seconded by Thomas O'Rourke; Esq, and
ROS01ved—-That the Proposal for Payments formulated I-..v
the Ardee No, I Rural Districv Council at Cheir First Quarter!y
6
Meeting, held on the 4th day of April, 1916, and set out
Form 22 furnished Lo the County and are herOnY
approved of. These payments amount to the sum ' of C671
15s fld.
DROGHEDA PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed •by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Proposal- for Payments formulated IN
i lie Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union at, theil
Quarterly Meeting,' held on the 11th day of April, 1916,
set out on Form 22 furnished to the County Council, be and
are hereby approved of. These payments amount to the sum
of L'5ö() 12.s 8d.
DUNDALK PAYMENTS.
'The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by James Wynne, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Bernard L Coleman, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposal for Payments formulated
the Dundalk Rural District Council at their First Quarterly
Meeting held on the 10th day cf April, 1916, and set, Olli 011
Form 22 furnished to the County Conncil, be and are hereby
'I'he.se payments amount to ,bhe sum of Cl ,112
approved of.
COUNTY-AT-LARGE PAYMENTS.
'I'he following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Thomas O'Rourke, Esq, and
Resolved— That the Proposal for Payments formulated by
Proposal Committee at their First Quarterly Meeting held
7
the 10th day of April, 1916, and set out on Form 22, furnished
to the County Council, be are hereby approved of.
These
bayments amount to the sum of 8s 1 ld.
UNION AND ms'1'RIU1' COUNCIL DEMANDS.
The Treasurer's Advice •Note for the payment of the follow-
Ing instalments of above was duly signed
Ardee Union, 1'1,16'2 19s 3d ; Ardee No. 1 R 1) C, ±7'28 lös ocl
Drogheda Union, Cl,430 6s (Sd; Drogheda R 1) C, C381 os
Dundalk •Union, C'2,910 IOS ()d; Dundalk R D C, 5s 0%1.
COLLECTORS' ARREARS SHEETS.
The arrears sheets for the half year ended 31st March, 1916,
Were inspected and signed by Che Chairman.
DATES OF QUAR'I'ERLY METINGS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Peter 13 Moore, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the County Council hereby determine that
the following shall be the dates for the holding of the Second
Quarterly Meetings of the Rural District Councils :—
No. I—4th July, 1916.
Drogheda Jilly, 1916.
Dundalk—3rd July, 1916.
And that the Proposal Committee meet on Monday, Che 1001
July, 1916.
8
MAKING OF RATES FOR YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH,
1917.
Tho following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by James Wynne, Esq, J P, and
nesolved—That in accordance with the Estimate of Rates
for General and Separate Charges adopted by the County (Amn-
eil at their Meeting held on the 24th day of February, 1916,
we hereby make rates to be levied off the County of Louth for
the Financial Year ending 31st March, 1917, as assessed in
rate books, and as set out as follows, viz
The Rates in the C for General Charges are :
Ardee No. I—Land, 31 pence ; Buildings, 47 pence.
Drogheda 34 pence ; Buildings, 55 pence.
Dundalk—Land, 44 pence; Buildings, 65 pence ;
And, fur.ther, that the rates in the C in respect of Separate
Charges, as set out on Form 43, and adopted at the said Meet-
ing of the 24th day of February, 1916, be also made by the
Council, and that the Secretary be directed, in accordance
with Article 78 of the Public Bodies Order, to publish the Stu-
tutory Notice of said Rates for General ancl Separato Charges
having been made.
REVISION OF' SALARIES.
At,- the request of the Chairman, the Council discussed the
question of the revision of tho salaries of the Secretary and
office staff, and the Secretary was unanimously directed to
place on tho notice convening the next meeting of the FinanC'O
Committee the disewsion of the matter.
9
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at ther
Meeting, held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 1st' May, 1916.
Present the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other L Coleman, J P; Michael Meade,
William• Woods, J P; . Thomas O'Rourke, Bernard Finegan,
ernard Hamill, J P; and James Wynne, J P, Esquires.
Mr Thos. Walsh, B E, County Surveyor, was also in attend-
ance.
The minutes of the last meeting of the Finance Committee
Were taken as read, and signed by the Chainnan.
The following accounts were submitted, and on examination,
Wore ordered for payment
Works in charge of County Surveyor
Secretary's Office
ans Account (for Road Board Work)
REVISION OF SALARIES.
C220 17 1
19 19 8
103 5 3
As by the County Council, the Committee, as per
the agenda, took up the consideration of the revision of Che
salaries paid to the Secretary and the offce staff of the Coun-
oil.
After discussion, it was decided to consider the Clerks' sala-
ries first. The Chairman informed the Committee that he had
10
directed the Secretary to obtain information from some of the
neighbouring counties as to the salaries paid to their Secretar-
jes and staff, antl the following replies were laid before the
Cmnrnittee :—
COUNTY MONAGHAN—Salary of Secretary and Clerk to
Local Authority, and Fees under Franchise and Jurors Acts,
annual, C57ö; Aecountant, Clerk, CIOO; Clerk, EGO.
COUNTY under all above heads, C7'25 ;
Accountant, &200; Clerk, $200; Clerk, Ello; Clerk,
COUNTY (appointed 1915) as above,
and as Secretary T C M and O A P Committee, C660 ; Account-
ant •and a.s ,Clerk to Insurance Committee and Clerk to Silb
O. A. P. Committee, caw, ; Clerk, Clö(); Clerk, C150; Clerk,
:C80.
COUNTY MEATH—Secretary Clerk L. A. and Franchise
and Jurors Acts Fees (appointed 1916) C4ö2; Accountant'
C150; Clerk, Clerk, e78.
COUNTY CAVAN—Secretary and Clerk L. A. and Franchise
- ancl Jurors' Acts Fees, C8öö; Accountant, C150; Clerk, CIOO;
Clerk, 52; Clerk, 252.
The present salaricns and the terms of appointment of the
office staff of the Louth County Council are as follows :—
Mr Gilmore, Accountant, C8ö; to raise by annual increments
of to .e120.
Mr Louden, Clerk, C83; to raise by annual increments of C5 to
El'20.
Mr Cotter, Clerk, C.35 ; raising by Cö annually bo C80.
After a long discussion the following resolution was passed'
Mr Michael Meade dissenting
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Wm Woods, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—-That we recommend that the annual increments
of tho office staff of the Council be increased as followø:
11
Gilmore, accountant, Clö per annum, and Messrs Louden and
Cotter EIO per annum, to the maximum; the advance to date
from the 1st May, 1916.
The consideration of the Secretary's salary was then taken
"P. The amount of his salary as Secretary of tho Council was
C'200 per annum. As Clerk to Che Local Auth01ity under the
iseases of Animals Acts C9(), (half of which was recouped by
the Department), and for Franchise and Jurors Fees, e,35,
making the net amount for which t,he county funds were liable
&280.
After discussion the following resolution was passed, Mr.
Michael Meade dissenting
Propcused by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Thomas O'Rourke, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we recommend that the salary of the Seere-
Of the Council be increased from to C'25() per annum,
the increase to date from the 1st May, 1916.
CLOTHING FOR PATIENTS AT PEAMOTJNT.
The following letter was read, and the Secretary was directed
to send copy to tho Tubereulusis Committee for information n
the subject to enable a reply €0 be sent:—
No. 17,222-16.
Louth County.
Sir,
Local Government Board, Dublin,
20th April, 1916.
The Local Government Board for Ireland have had
consideration au entry in the Minutes of Proceedings of
the Tnbereulosis Committee of the Louth County Council on
tho 5th instant, relative to the supply of certain articles of
12
clothing to Robert Corr, an uninsured inmate of Peam•ount
Sanatorium ; and I am to inquire whether any arrangement has
been made with the Sanatorium Authorities with a view to bhe
retention in the Sanatorium of any articles of clothing that
may be supplied to County Louth patients for the use of fu-
ture patients from the county.
Tho Tuberculosis Committee will understand that in necessi-
tous cases clothing should be provided by the Sanatorium Au-
thorities, who are accountable for the treatment of patientS
admitted to the institution,and should therefore defray the cost
of anything that may be necessary for such treatment.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Asistant Secretary.
Secretary, Louth co. Council.
GRANT FOR EXTRAS FOR CENTRAL TUBERCULOSIS
DISPENSARY.
Leter was read from the L G Board, dated the 20th
1916, No. 18643, 1916, enclosing paying order for C13 13s 7d in
respect of work executed at the Central Tuberculcxsis Dispen
sary, Dundalk.
The Committee directed that the amount be paid to the
Contractor at the next meeting of the County Council.
COUNTY SCHOLAR'S RBIDENCE.
Letter was read from Miss Teevan notifying that she was DO
longer residing at the Dominican nall, Stephen's Green' and
I)éali
that her new residence had been chosen by Miss Greene'
13
Of Residence, University College, and stating that if necessary
Miss Greene would send the new address and formally approve
of same.
The Secretary was directed to write Miss Greene in the mat-
ter, and ask the College authorities for their approval, and the
letter was initialled by the Chairman.
ACCIDENTS AT JONESBORO' QUARRY.
The Secretary informed the Committee that another sligh€
accident had occurred at Jonesboro' Quarry to Mathew Roo-
ney, a workman engaged at the Citusher, and that he had •noti-
fled the Insurance Company of the matter.
The Secretary also reported that the other workman, Michael
Boyd, was now about to restime work, and that the Insurance
Company had been advised accordingly.
Tho Committee approved of what, had been done.
CRIMINAL INJURIES.
Notices of the following criminal injury claims were laid bo-
fore the Committee. These claims arose out of the disturixvn-
at Castlebellingham, and the commandeering of vehicles :—
Wm Ireland, Dublin—Inj uries to Motor Car.
Edwin V. Lowry, Dublin—Loss of Motor Car and Rugs.
Mary M 'Gough, Dundalk—lnjury to Horse and Car.
The Secretary informed the Cotmnittee that the paper.s In
C Onneetion tborewitå had been sent to the County Solicitor as
usual,
14
ROAD CONTRACTOR'S CLAIM.
Letter was read from James Filgate, Priorstate, stating that'
the road from Louth to Inniskeen, for which he had been con-
tractor up to the 13th of January, 1916, the contract for which
had been since cancelled, was to come for contract at the
Dundalk Rural Council on 1st instant; that he had purt out 47
yards of broken gravel for steam-rolling, and that the stones
had not been paid for. The contractor stated Lhat unless ar-
rangement was made as to the payment he would return the
stones to the owners. On the advice of the County Surveyor
the Committee decided not to take any notice of the letter'
which was initialled by the Chairman.
CO-OPTION OF COUNTY COUNCILLOR.
The Committee unanimously directed the Secretary to place
on the agenda for the next meeting of the Council, the co-OP-
tion of Councillor in room of the late Mr Edward Goodman'
and also the co-option on the various (hmmittees of which the
late gentleman was a member.
MOTOR LICENCE DUTIES.
Letter was read from the Accountant G. P. o. s Dublin, en
closing instruction as to the payment of tho altered Excise
Duty on motor ears for the present year, and how they would
be dealt with by the Post Office, which specified that any pay -
ments tnacle would be noted as ' 'Licence Deposit." The letter
was initialled by the Chairman.
15
Proposal Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Committee at their
First (adjourned) Quarterly Meeting held in the Council Charn-
ber, Court House, Dundalk, on Monday, 15th May, 1916, at
one o'clock, p m.
the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—James T M'Gee, J P; O'Rourke, Ber-
nard L Coleman, J P; Bernard Hamill, J P; James Wynne,
J P; and Wm Woods, J P, Esquires.
The minutes of the previous meeting of the Cotnmittee were
taken as read, and signed by Che Chairman.
The Committee were called to consider tenders for the un-
dermentioned Work : —
NO' 29—To instal Electric Heating Radiators in Crown and
Record Courts, Dundalk County Court House, not, to
exceed 50.
Only one tender was received for the work, namely, that of
essrs Gaskin Bros., Park Street, Dundalk, who proposed to
carry out the work in accordance -with specification for the sum
of C5() (fifty pounds).
This tender was unanimously accepted.
Tho Secretary submitted County-at-Large payments amount-
ing to the sum of CI,281 2s Which were examined and
passed unanimously.
16
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Commi±tee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk'
on Monday, 15th May, 1916, at one o'clock, p m.
Present tho Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other T M'Gee, J P; Thos O'Rourke, Ber-
nard L (koleman, J P; Bernard Hamill, J P; James it ynne'
J P; ond Wm woods, J P, Esquires.
The Minutes of the Finance Meeting held on 1st May, were
taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted, and on examination
were ordered for payment
Works in Charge of County Surveyor—Loa ns
Account
Subsidiary Account
Secretary's Office—subsidiary Account
C91 10 10
66 11 0
19 6 3
C177 8 1
The Bank Books for Che General, Subsidiary and Loans A
counts wore examined and initialled 'by the Chairman.
PRINTING—OROW.N AND PEACE OFFICE.
Mr A N Sheridan, Clerk of Crown and Peace, attended be-
fore the Committee to make applicatioa for au lucreasod
17
ount for the necessary printing under certain heads for the
Crown and Peace Office. The amount sanctioned by the Co.
Council under these heads was $6, and Mr Sheridan contended
that owing to the greatly increased prices for printing and pa-
Per the amount was entirely inadequate, and requested that
tho limit might be extended to C20.
After discussion, on the motion of Mir Hamill, J P, seconded
by Mr Thomas O'Rourke, the Committee decided to recommend
the Co. Council to increase the amount to the sum of C15.
Mr James T M 'Gee dissented from this recommendation, as
he considered that a good deal of the expense was unnecessary.
COLLECTOR PATRICK HUGHES.
Letter was read from the Local Government —oarqt request-
ing to be informed the f'ull amount of Collector
Hughes' warrant had yet been lodg€xl, and also whether his
resignation had 'been received.
The Chairman explained to the Committee that a sum of
Ils Gd had been lodged since the end of Ale half year,
leaving the amount outstanding Cll(j 7s Od. Of iJ1is amount
lists Of irrecoverable arrears amounting to C23 IOS 2d had been
lodged with the 'Secretary and checked by him. The Chairman
further explained that a representative from the Guarantors,
the London and Lancashire Insurance Company, had been
down about the matter, and had suggested that a deputation
e 0 nsisting of the Council's representatives, the Insurance Com-
and the brother of the rate collector, should interview the,
L B with a view to a proper adjustment of tho collection,
18
and to obtain the consent of the L G B to the recoverable
rears being carried forward to the next collection.
A letter was read from the Insurance Company stating that
the L G B had consented to receive a -deputation from the
Council on Tuesday, 16th instant, in connection with the mat-
ter. The Secretary informed the Committee that the repre-
sentative of the Insurance Company •had stated that his Com-
pany would guarantee the Council against, any possible loss
should all the arrears not be collected, and would make good
any deficiency. He also sbated that it, was urgent that the
matter should be dealt with at once as the new rate 'books were
ready, and would require to be handed to the collectors imme-
diately.
After discussion tho Committee unanimously decided that g
deputation comsisting of the Chairman and the Secretary should
proceed to Dublin on Tuesday to meet, the L G B and the
surance Company on the subject. The Committee also appro-
ved of the carrying forward of the arrears to the •next collectian
subject to the canction of the L G B.
GRANT OF INTEREST ON MACHINERY LOAN.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man
The mad Board,
35, Cromwell Road,
South Kensington, London, S W'
'28th April, 1916.
Sir,
Referring to an application from tho County Surveyor
dated the 21st January last, I am directed by the Road Boal
19
to send you cheque for C368, being Che final oayment, under
*rant No. 3317 ; also form of receipt, which kindly sign and
return.
The duplicate certificate relating to this Grant, which has
be
en initialled here for the purpose of identification is also en-
closed
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
W. REES JEFFREYS,
Secretary, Louth County Council.
Secretary.
CLOTHING FOR SANATORIUM PATIENTS.
The following letter was read, and the Secretary was diroc-
ted to reply to the L G B according to the terms thereof
County Louth Tuberculosis Committee
of Management,
90, Clanbrassil Street, Dundalk,
4th May, 1916.
oar Sir,—
I am directed by Che Tuberculosis Committee of
anagement to reply to your communication dated the 1st inst,
enclosure copy of letter 17,222-16, dated 20th April, 1916,
from the Local Government Board, relative to certain articles
Of clothing provided for a patient named Carr, at PeamounL
Sanatorium. I am to state that clothing is provided in neces-
s i tous cases by the Authorities of the Institution in which the
treatment is given on the recommendation of the Committee,
Who
are guided in their decision by the Resident Medical Su-
20
perintendent of the Institution reporting that the articles are
necessary for the patient's treatment.
No arrangements have been made with the Sanatorium Au •
thorities to retain any clothing provided for the use of future
patients.
I am to add that generally where clothing is proo-
ded the patient is practically destitute.
Yours faithfully,
V. WARREN,
Secretary, Louth County Council.
SHEEP DIPPING PROSECUTIONS.
Secretary.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Char -
man :—
mar Sir,—
Francis Street, Dundalk,
5th May, 1916.
T enclose Treasurer's receipt for C3 Od, being
amount of costs awarded at Dunleer Petty Sessions on the
November, 1915, against Nicholas Cooney and nine other de
fendants (seven shillings and sixpence in each ease), now placed
to the credit of the Council.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Secretary, Louth (-öunty Ckyuncil.
21
MALICIOUS INJURY CLAIMS.
The Secretary informed the Committee that two claims had
been filed as follows, and the claims sent to the solicitor :—
Patrick Cooke, Mullavally, for hay burned.
Patrick J Byrne, Dublin, for Motor Cycle. claim was
lodged late).
He also informed the Committee t'hat notice had been served
by Mr Charles D King, Annagassan, withdrawing the claim for
bread-cart, etc, and in connection with the claim of Mr E V
Lowry, for loss of motor car, the following letter was read and
initialled by the Chairman
Francis Street, Dundalk,
14th May, 1916.
Malicious Injury Claim.
Edwin V. Lowry, Blackrock, Co. Dublin, C300.
boar Sir,—
I have been making inquiries into this claim,. aud
was infornl€•d in Dublin last week that the motor car has been
at Navan, but that some of tho baggage and contents
are missing. Mr Horan, solicitor, who was with Mr Lowry at
tho time, states that Mr Lowry's claim will now be for a sum
not exceeding C6(). Of course I may say that I am prepared to
argue in court that the claim is not sustainable against the
oounty.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Secretory, Louth County Council,
22
NAVAL ANI) MILITARY WAR PENSIONS ACC.
Circular letter was read from the Startutory Committee, Lon-
don, who are dealing with this matter, requesting that, they
might be informed at once whether a draft scheme had been
framed and the local committee appointed. A further circular
letter was read from the same body requesting to know whe-
ther it wavs desired that the Statutory Committee should maKO
arrangements with existing organisations for carrying on the
work temporarily after 1st July.
The Committee decided to recommend the County Council to
reply that, it would bo desirable for the Statutory Committee to
make arrangements with existing organisations for carrying
on the work under the Act.
PROVISIONAL ORDERS IN PARLIAMENT.
Circular letter was read from the L G B stating that Mr E
Bonnor Maurice, of Parliament Street, London, S W, would
have charge of all unopposed bills confirming Provisional
ders made by the Board, and that the Local Authority must'
on receiving notice from him, be prepared to employ a Parlia-
mentory Agent to coriduct the proceedings on their behalf.
The let!or was initialled by the Chairman.
GARNISHEE ORDER„
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair -
man
Francis Street, Dundalk,
8th May, 1916.
M'Ard1e v. M'Kevitt.
Dear Sir,
Rofel']ing to your letter of 22nd ultimo
ing L.åree Paying Orders in favour of Thomas M'Keviti" viø¯ •
23
IOS 5d, CII 8s 9d, and CIO 5s, I have to report that T
cashed the three Orders ofter obtaining defendant's receipt to
same. I deducted from the total the sum of C14 18s 3d, which
f Orvvarded to Mr H J W Downey, plaintiff's solicitor, and you
Will find his receipt with file returned. The balance due plam-
tiff was C9 las 3d, and the sum of C5 5s costs.
After above deduction in payment outta of plaintiff's claim ag.
ainst defendant, I handed M 'Kevitt t,he balance in my hands
amounting to C13 5s 1 ld.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
COUNTY SOLICITOR'S BILL OF COSTS.
Letter was read from Mr O'Connell enclosing his Bill of Costs
With requisition to tax. The Committee unanimously directed
the Secretary to seal the requisition, and Mr P L Macardle,
solicitor, Dundalk, was appointed to represent Cho Council a (
the taxation.
FOOD AND DRUGS ACTS.
Letter was read from the Department of Agriculture dated
12th May, No G19'28-16, stating that samples of butter taken at
on 7th ultimo for analysis proved The
Was initialled by the Chairman.
24
ARDEE BRANCH LINE.
Letter was read from the Great Northern Railway enclosing
an account of receipts and expenditure on the Ardee Branch
Line for the half year ended 31st December, 1915, as follows :
Receipts, Cl,258 IOS 6d; Expenditure, El,ö06 13s (RI; Deficit,
2248 as Od. The account was initialled by the Chairman.
25
Executive Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Executive Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council • Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 15th May, 1916, at one oclock, p m.
Present the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—James T M 'Gee, J P; Thomas O'Rourke,
n L Coleman, J P; Bernard Hamill, J P; James Wynne, J P,
and William Woods, J P, Fsquires.
The Minutes of the previous meeting of the Committee were
taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
VETERINARY INSPECTORS' REPORTS.
The following report was road :—
Drogheda, 13th May, 1916.
Gentlemen,
During the month of April in this district, there
has been
no outbreak of contagious disease in animals, and no
an imals
are at present under restrictions.
made inspections in a few cases reported to me personally
b here
Contagious disease was supposed to exist, but found the
26
animals wore not suffering from any of the notifiable cliseases•
Yours respectfully,
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
The Louth County Council, Executive Committee.
The Secretary was directed to request Messrs Clinton an
Maxwell to send in their reports for the month of April.
TENDERS FOR SHEEP DIP.
The following tenders for the supply of dip for the Council'S
tanks in Ardee and Dundalk districts were accepted
Arcleo—Mr Patrick M 'Gee, at IOS per dozen packets.
Dundalk—Messrs H Backhouse and Co., at 9s per dozen pac-
kets.
The only other tender received was from Mr Patrick ward'
Dundalk, for Dundalk District, at 9s 9d per dozen packets
IDPPING SUPERINTENDENTS OF COUNCIL'S TASKS
FOR 1916.
Tho Committee recommended the following appointments
BALLYMAKENNY TANK—Michae1 M'Qui11an, to
the following fees—ld per sheep and {d per lamb, for all dip-
.pings at the tank.
The following gentlemen to aet as loea) committee—Mass
Donegan, J P; P Callan, J P; Dolan, and D J Ratll•
ARDEE-—Wm Leonard, at lbs per week during the full dip-
ping periods.
Local P M'Gee, J P; J T M'Gee, J 1'
James M 'Donnell, Mullacloe; R Stokes, Ardee; J
Ardee, and J C Kieran, J P, Ashville.
27
NI'Ardle, at 18s per week, during
the full dipping periods.
Local J F Mtuvhy, J P; M M'Ardle,
L Coleman, J P, and B Hughes.
Keenan, Io receive the following fees—
ld sheep and {d per lamb, for all clippings at the tank.
Local Committee—Messrs J H M 'Ardle, J P; J Connolly,
J P; P Woods, J P, and B Finegan.
CARLINGFORD—Patrick O'Hagan, to receive r.he following
fees—ld per sheep and {d per lantl) for all sheep dipped at the
tank.
Local Committee for Carlingford and Omeath Tanks—Messrs
Wm Woods, J P; J P Kearney, P Woods, J P, and Michael
O'Meara, J P.
The question of appointing a Superintendent for the ()meaih
tank was left to the local committee for a recommendation.
The Committee unanimously recommended that all the Su-
lie l'intendents aet as Local inspectors under the Appointment
of Insvectors (Ireland) Order for the inspection of dippings at
the Pfivate tanks of sheep owners at the remuneration of 2s
Per week for the time covered 'by the Summer and Autumn
dipping periods. The Committee further recommended that
the following rates be charged at all the Council's tanks for the
dippings sheep, lid each; their Iambs, ld each ; smali
sheep, ld each; their Iambs, ld each.
It Was decided to leave the definition of the areas of inspec-
tion of the various inspectors to the local committees.
28
LOCAL REGULATIONS.
The following local regulations for the County of Louth
der the Sheep Dipping (Local Regulations) (Ireland) Order Of
1916, were passed unanimously :—
The Department of Agriculture and
Technical Instruction for Ireland.
Sheep Dipping (Local Regulations) (Ireland) Order of 1916.
Administrative County of Louth.
Tn exercise of the powers conferred on them by the ab0Ve-
mentioned Order of the Department of Agriculture and Tech-
nical Instruction for Ireland, and with a view to a better
cution and enforcement of the provisions of the Sheep Dipping
(Ireland) Order of 1915, the County Council of the Administra-
tive Cbunt,y of Louth, being the Local Authority under t'he
Diseases of Animals Acts, have, at a Meeting held the 15th
May, 1916, made the following Regulations, viz
I.—Any owner or person in charge of sheep who is served
post or otherwise with a Notice in the Form in the Schedille
hereto, signed by an Inspector of the Local Authority, shall' in
respect of the sheep referred to in such Notice, carry out' or
cause to be carried out, the dipping or dippings presseribed bY
the Sheep Dipping (I' eland) Order of 1915, under the condi-
iions and at the time and place or times and places specified in
such Notice.
2.—AII dippings taking place under tho foregoing Regula-
tion must be made in the presence of n I,ceal Inspector'
pointed by the LcatlL County ouncii as Local Authority'
29
all sheep must be dipped by thorough immersion as provided in
the principal Order.
Notice of intention to dip served on the Police by a
sheep owner, or person in charge of sheep, will be transmitted
to the Local Inspector appointed by the County Council for the
district where the sheep are located.
It is desirable that sheep owners should arrange with the Lo-
cal Inspectors the days on which they intend to have the dip-
pings done.
SCHEDULE.
FORM OF NOTICE—SHEEP DIPPING.
Regulations of the Local Authority under the Diseases of
Animals Act for the Administrative County of Louth.
—— of
Take Notice that the Local Authority, under the Diseases of
Animals Act for the Administrative County of Louth, require
the sheep to the number of —
or thereabouts, in your
ses.sion or under your charge at
to be dipped during
the SUIomer (Autumn) Dipping Period (as defined by the Sheep
(Ireland) Order of 1915) under the following conditions
and at the following time(s and place(s), viz
Conditions
Time(s)
Plaee(s)
(Signed),
Inspector of the Local Authority.
NOTE —Where sheep aro required by a. Notice under the
ove Regulation to be dipped at a specified time and place,
30
the owner or person in charge need not notify the Police of his
intention to dip.
Failure to comply with the terms of a Notice served under
the above Regulation is an offence against the Diseases of Aill-
mals Act, entailing liability to severe penalty on prosecution•
SHEEP DIPPING ORDER (IRELAND) FORMS.
The following resolution was
Proposed by Mr Jmrnes T M 'Gee, J P ;
Seconded by Mr Bernard L Coleman, J P,
and passed unanimously, and the Secretary was directed to
ward same to the Department:—
That owners or persons im eharge of sheep boing exposed for
sale, whose names have been previously returned to this
cil by the Council's Inspector as having dipped their
within the prescribed time, and in the proper way, be no longer
obliged to accompany same with any further forms.
1
Louth County Council.
Alin ntes of proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
irst (Adjourned) Quorte"ly Meeting held in the Council Cham-
ber, Court House, Dundalk, on 'I'hursday, 25th day of May,
1916, at one o'clock, m.
Present—in the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
er mernbers Hamill, J P; Patrick M 'Gee, J P;
N T Peter Woods, J P; Thomas B
a•mes Wynne, J P; J P Kearney, Bernard Finnegan, B L
Coleman, J P; J T .WGee, .J P; MI. Meade, Thos O'Rourke,
J Ohn Morgan, and J F Murphy, J P, ESquires.
Messms Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor; J M C Lyons and
ames Dromgoole, Assistant Surveyors; Daniel O'Connell, Soli-
eitor to the Council, and V Warren, Clerk T c M, were in at-
ten dance.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Pmposed by Hamill, Esq, J P;
(Seconded by Bernard Finnegan, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of the Proceedings of the Louth
unty Council at their First Quarterly Meeting held on 20th
April, 1916, a copy of which has been sent to each member of
the (%uneil, be and are hereby confirmed.
2
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE MINIVI'ES.
The following resolution was
Proposed by Thomas B M 'Court, Esq •
Seconded by Thomas O'Rourke, Esq :
That, the Minutes of the Proceedings of the Finance Com-
mittee at their meetings _held on Che underjnentioned dates, a
copy of each having been sent to each member of the council'
with all paymerits and recommendations contained therein, be
and ara hereby confirmed.
Monday, 1st, May, 1916.
Monday, 15tIh May, 1916.
To this resolution N. T. Murphy, Faso,
as an
amendment, which was seconded by .J T M 'Gee, F,sq, J P, that
the Minutes of the Meeting of the Committee held on the 1st
May with reference to t'he Salaries of the Council's Office Staff'
be amended to read EIO for all the clerks instead of the
increase recommended in the minutes, which was Clö to the
accountant, Mr Gilmore, and CIO eae'il to Al essrg Louden and
Cotter.
After discussion, the Chairman took a vote of Cae
on t4he amendment, with the following result
Por the Amendment—Messrs Jas T M 'Gee, Patrick M •Gee '
J F Murphy, N T Murphy, John Morgan and Peter Woods—-6•
Against the Amendment—Messrs B Finnegan, B Hamill' J
p Kearney, T B M 'Court, 'l'homas O'Rourke, James Wynne
and B L Coleman—7.
Mr Michael Meade did not vote.
The Chairman declared the amendment lost.
3
The Secretary answered queries of Mr N T Murphy with
reference to the fees paid him for the Motor Licence Duty
collection. He informed the Council that, as the L G B and
Road Board had notified, the Grants made to County Conneils
out Of the Road Board Fund would be based on the amounts
COIIeeted in the various eonnties; that he had increased the
activity in the collection of these duties, and that this factor
had operated in the amount of the Grant made to the Council
for Road the Council received 5 per cent
on the eollection in the county, and the County Council had
Paid over this amount to him and to his predecessor in the
latter's time. He further stated that the amount. collected as
revenue to the County Council for Motor Registration and
riving Licences had been increased from the sum of CGI in
1912 to the sum of in 1915, and that he did not receive
anything whatever on this collection.
The original resolution confirming the Finance Minutes was
then put by the Clvairman and passed.
CONFIRMATION op PROPOSAL COM.MIIVI'TCE MINUTES.
The followirv resolution paesod unanimously : —
Proposed by Thomas O'Rourke, Esq ;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
the Minutes of the vroeeedings• of the
OPsaI Committee at their First (Adjourned) Quarterly Meet-
ing hold on the 15th May, 1916, a eopy of which has been sent
each member of the Countv Council, be and are hereby
ootifirmed.
OOSFIRMATIOS OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MINCTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard L C%lernan, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Joseph P Kearney, nsq, aud
Resolved—That ehe Minute> of the Proceedings of the
Executive Committee at their Meeting held •on the 15th May,
1916, a copy of which has been sent to each member of the
Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
At this stage of Ohe proceedings the following resolution was
passed unanimously, and the Secretary was directed to send
copy to the Department :—
Proposed by N T Murphy, Esq ;
by Patrick IWGee, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—fthat as all Sheep in the County must be dipped
in the presence of a local Inspector appointed by the County
Council, we ask the Department to forego that part of t'heir
regulations compelling sheep owners to dip their sheep twice
within a certain tinie during the Autumn period, as sheep
owners find this regulation very injurious to heavy breeding
DEATH OF MR. LAURENCE M'KEON.
The following resolution was
Proposed by A Duffy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by N T Murfrhy, Esq, and
Resolved—-'l'hat we learn with great regret of the death Of
Mr Laurence M 'Keon, who has been all honoured member Of
the Council for the past fourteen years. His unflinching
advocacy of all National claims, Which during t,he Lond
5
caused him a long term of implåsonment, and his interest in
everything affecting the welfare of our County, has won our
respect and admiration. Although he had reached the patri-
arohal age of 9-5 years, his mental and physical vigour wero
maintained to the very end, and he was looked upon with
affection as the Father of the County Council. We deeply
deplore his loss, and 'beg to tender €0 his family our sincere
SY rnpathy, and, after the urgent business on the Agenda IS
disposed of, that we adjourn this meeting as a mark of respect
to his memory.
Mr M Meade desired to be specially associated the
resolution. which was passed in silence, all members standifig.
CONFIRMATION OF COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Michael Meade, Esq ;
by N T Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Report of Che County Surveyor,
as
aqPPearing on Page I of the Sdhedule of Proposals for the 25th
May, 1916, a copy of which has been furnished to each member
Of the Council, be and is hereby adopted by this Council.
ARDEE WORKS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed by Patrick M 'Gee, ESA, J P ;
Seconded by James T M'Gee, Esq, J P, and
Resolved— That the Proposals för Works formulated by Che
Ardee No. 1 Rural District Oouneil at their First Quarterly
eefing, held on Tuesday, 4th April, 1916, and sei out ot)
Form 20, furnished to the County Council, and the Contract'S
entered into at their Adjourned Meeting, held on Tuesday'
25th April, 1916, and are hereby approved of, and we
authorise our Secretary to affix the mon Seal of the
Council to same.
DROGf1D1)A WORKS.
The following resolution was passed' unanimously
by N T MlllVhy, Esq ;
Second€yl by Patrick M'Gee, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works formulated by the
Louth Rural l)istrict of Drogheda Union at their First
Quarterly Meeting, held on Tuesday, 11th April, 1916, and set
out on Form 20, furnished to the County Council, and that
Tenders received for Works numbered 127, 130, 131 and 133
aro hereby accepted and approved of, and we authorise Ollr
Secretary to affix the Com Seal of the to the
Contracts for same.
DUNDALK WORKS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by John F :Murphy, E.sq, J P ,
Seconded by Bernard L Coleman, Fesq, J P, and
Rcxsolved—T'ha€ the Proposals for Works forniulated by the
Dundalk Rural District Council their First Quarterly Meet-
ing, held on Monday, 10th April, 1916, and sot out on Form
2(), furnishecl to the County Council, and the Contracts enter
into at their Adjourned Meeting, held on Isi May, 1916' be
and are hereby approved of, and we auth01ise our secretary
to affix the Common Seal of tåho Ouncil to same.
OOUNTY-AT-LARGE.
me following resolut.•on was passed unanimously
Proposexl by Bernard Hanlill, Esq, J P •
Seconded by Thomas B 'Conrt, Esq, and
rumsolved—'lihat the Proposals for Works fortnulated by the
Proposal Committee at their First Quarterly Meeting, held on
the 10th April, 1916, and set out on Form 20, furnished to
the County Council, and the Con fraets entered into at their
Adjourned Meeting held on Monday, löt,h May, 1916, be and
are hereby approved of, and we authorise our Secretary to
affix the Common eeal of the Council to same.
'I'ENI)ERS FOR WORI<S.
In aecordanee with advertisetnent issued by the Secretary,
tho Council proceeded to consider Tenders for Works not set
by Contt•aet at Adjourned Meetings of the Rural District
Councils
ARDEE.
Work No. 286 — Only one Tender was received, and was
accepted—Thomas Molloy, Pollbrock, at
DROGHEDA.
our Tenders for Works in this District, Which had been
son t
in to the Adjourned Meeting of the Drogheda Rural
District Council, were not considered by that Council as a
qUorum was not at its meeting, nor at the adjournment
No. 131—Patrick Fitzpatrick, Carricknaslvana
at 'XI
8
thereof. The Tenders had accordingly been forwarded to
County Council.
On the motion of N T Murphy, Esq ;
Seconded by Patrick M'Gee, FAI, J P,
It was unanimously agreed that thege Tenders should now
No. 150
dealt with by the County Council.
The following Tenders were accepted
No. 130—Pa€Iiek Ussher, Balgatherin,
at 42
9
Tenders were received for Works Nos. 127 ard 133, buf
the
be
o
as
the Contractor and this Sureties did not attend, it was df@ided
to place the Works in the hands of the Connty
DUNDALK.
The following Tenders, Ibeing the lowest, were accepted
No.
No.
No.
—James Boden, Upper Merdhes
154
—Patrick Mathews, Jun, Hoarstown
r Patrick M 'Cann, Feede
156-
Peter Eegley, Sheelagh
WORKS NOT BY CONTRACT.
at
at
25 14
8 18
8 19
10 0
8
8
0
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Joseßh P Kearney, Esq ;
seconded by Bernard Hamill, EMI, J P, and
Resolved—That all Works not set by Contract at Adjotlrnc
Meetings of the Rural District, Councils and Proposal
mittee be placed in charge of the County ,Snrveyor.
9
PATRICK HUGHES' RATE COLLECTION.
REPORT OF DEPUTATION TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT
BOARD.
The following report was read :—
The deputation appointed by the Finance Committee to
wait on the Local Government Board with reference to the
state of Mr Pat,riek Hughes' rate collection, beg to report. tajat,
accompanied by the Rate Collector's brother, Mr Peter Hughes,
and 'tho representative of the London and Lancashire Firo
Insurance Company, the Sureties of the Collector, were received
by the Local Government Board on Tuesday, the 16th instant.
The facts were laid before the Board as follows
The amount now outstanding is CIIG 7s Od. The irrecoverable
arrears amount to approximately C30, and the amount of
POUndage fees due to Hughes on thc' present and former collee-
tions is C7(). The examination of Mr Hughes' collection books
shows that. there is still due -by various ratepayers a sum ap-
PrOXirnating to $90, which, with Che irrecoverable arrears,
about amount to the balance outstanding.
The Local Government Board refused to sanction the carry-
ing forward to the next collection of Clie irrecoverable arrears,
and stated the Sureties must be called upon to lodge the amount
0 Utstanding; also tihat any arrears of poundages clue the
COIIeetor and the irrecoverable arrears of rates would be paid
direct to the Sureties, according to the terms of the Bond.
The Board -further directed that the Collector be formally
SUSPended by the Council, and when this was done dho Board
Were to be advised, when the matter would be immediately
acted on. Mr Peter Hughes has promised his assistance in the
matter of the lists of irrecoverable arrears and anything
to facilitate bhe County Council and the Sureties.
The following resolution was then passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard L Colernan, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
msoIved—That we hereby suspend .Mr Patrick Hughes fronl
his position at. Rate Collector for collection district No. •5'
Rural District of Dundalk, and that we call upon his Sureties.
the London and Lancasihire Fire Insura nge .Cornpany, €0 lodge
to the credit of the Council the outstanding balance clue 011
foot of his Warrant for the half-year ended 31st March, 1916.
FORESTRY SCHEME WILLIS'I'OWN PLANTATION.
Letter was read from Mr O'Connell submitting draft ' Of
above scheme, and requcxsting its approval by the Council'
Letter was also read from the Department of Agriculture
stating Bhat they had approved of the draft scheme submitted
the
by the Solicitor, and that when this was approved by
Oounty Council, their sanction to the appointment of Hugh
Ginnety as caretaker of the Willisfowil Plantation would be
expressed.
The following resolution was then passed unaninxousl.y
Proposed by N T Murphy, Esq,
Seconded by Jarnes Wynne, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we luereby adopt the draft scheme now sub-
mitted by our Solicitor and approved by the Department Of
Agriculture under Sections 4 and 20 of the Trish Land Act'
1903, as amended by Section 18 of the Irish Land Act, 1909'
11
for the user of the parcel of land at Willistown, which has
been acquired by t}he Council for Forestry purposes.
CO-OPTION OF COUNTY COUNCILLOR VICE MR. E.
GOODMAN.
The following resoluåon was passed unanimously :
Proposed by Berpard Hamill, Esq, J P ,
Seconded by John F Murphy, EMI, J P, and
RÆsolved—That we hereby co-opt Mr IA11rence Goodman, of
Park Street, Dundalk, a member of the (hunt}' Council for
the Electoral Division of Dundalk Urban, vice Mr Edward
Goodman, deceased.
00-0P1'10N ON COMMITTEES VICE MR. E. GOODMAN,
DECEASED.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
P rolk)sed by Thomas B M 'Court, Esq ;
Seconded by N T Murphy, Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby appoint, Mr Laurence Goodman,
Park St., Dundalk, a member of the following Chnunittees,
viz Committee Louth County Infirmary, County Louth
Insurance (hmmittee, County Committee of Agriculture,
'Ihlberculogis Committee of Management.
Tho reading of the C%rrespondence was referred to the next
Oldinary meeting of the County Council, and the meeting
adjourned.
12
Finance Committee.
Min utes of Proceedings of the Finance 'Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk'
on Monday, 29th May, 1916, •at one o'clock p m.
Present:—ln the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—J F Murphy, .J P; Michael Meade, James
Wynne, J P; .Joseph H WArdle, J P, and Woods, J P,
Esquires.
Mr Thomas WalÅh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
Tho Minutes of the Meeting of the Committee held on 15th
May wore taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted and, on examination •
INLyment was ordered :—
111 5 0
Loans Aocount.—Works in charge of Co Surveyor
Do
Subsidiary Account—
Subsidiary Account—Seeretar.v's Office
'do
88 11
335 c o
C53;3 2 5
Tho Bank Books for {Ihe General, •Slilysi(liary and
Accounts were examined and initialled by the Chairman.
ARREARS LISTS.
Ikt,ter was read from the L. G. B. dated 23rd May,
Loa ns
1916,
18
NO. 22,381/1916, returning the Lists of Irrecoverable Arrears
for half-year ended 31st March, 1916, and approving of the
Payment to the Collectors of the amounts set out on the lists,
exoept as regards some items of rates for land on several of the
lists, and an item on Collector Kelly's Sheets for rates assessed
against the Drogheda Corporation in respect of a quarry. The
letter stated that these items could not be regarded as irre-
coverable, and the collectors should be instructed accordingly.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman, and payment of
bhe amounts approved was ordered.
ACCIDENTS AT QUAIUULS.
Letters were read from the Ocean Accident and Guarantee
Ltd, dated 13th May and 25th May, enclosing
cheques value Cl 9s 4d and Cl 4s 4d, in settlement of claims
for COtnpensation in respect of injuries sustained by Michael
Boyd and Mathew Rooney respectively. The injuries were the
results of accidents at the Council's quarries, and the compen-
sation was based on the average weekly earnings of tCne workers
claiming. The letters were initialled by the' Chairman.
DAYLIGHT (SAVING BILL.
Oircular letter was read from the L. G. B. instructing the
eretary to advise all owners of public clocks to have same
altered in accordance with the terms of the above Bill. The
Secretary stated he had done so, and the letter was initialled
by the Chairman.
RATE COLLECTORS' POUNDAGE.
The follouing letter from the L. G. B. with reference to
14
poundage fees due Collectors Cluskey, Woods and Peter
M 'Donnell, in respect, of the collection of poor rate for half-
year ended 30th September, 1915, was read :
Local Government Board, Dublin,
18th May, 1916.
No. 19334/16.
Louth County.
Sir.
'I'he Local Government Board for Ireland bave had before
htem your letter of the 18th ultimo, applying for permission
to pay to Messrs Cluskey, Peter M 'Donnell and John Woods'
Poor Rate Collectors in County Louth, the balance of the
poundage fees -withheld from them in respect of half-year
ended 30th September last.
The Board consider that these Collectors by their failure
fulfil the guarantees which were given by t]hem a short time
ago, have forfeited any title to special consideration.
At tho same time, if these Collectors are now willing to
amends, by showing good progres with their collections during
the current half-year .and by closing punctually, t1110 Board
would be prepared to reconsider the County Council's applica-
tion at a later date. The Collectors nyust, however, clearly
understand that in determining the extent to which the balance
of tho poundage will be refunded to t'hern, strict regard will
be paid to the manner in which they individually carry out
their duties.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
A. R. BARI,AS,
Secretary ,
geeretary, Louth County Ouncil.
15
RATES DUE FROM NEWCOMEN ESTA'I'E,
The following letter from Collector M 'Cullough was read,
and the Conunittee recommended that the amount due be re-
funded to the Collector subject to Che approval of the L.G.B.
Beltichburne, Drogheda.
26th May, 1916.
The Chairman, Fifianee Committee.
Dear Sir.
I beg to remind you of an application I made to your Com-
mittee, in May, 1913, in reference fo land on the Newcomen
Estate, Clo@herhöad. There were four years? rates due at the
time I made the application, and you referred the matter to
your Solicitor, Mr O'Connell. He proceeded against the
Executors of the late Fr. Clarke. When the ease chme before
the County Court Judge, Mr Mackay, for the Executors,
stated the matter was in Chan eery, and the Judge ruled it out.
NOW T understand dhat all Che money is spent in law costs.
There were two farms sold which realised fourteen hundred
Pounds (El ,400). During the four years the land was derelict,
and Of eourse at the end of each half year I had to lodge the
money as it was part of my warrant.
I dhink in all fairness T should be recouped this money, as I
did all I could in the matter.
Faithfully yours,
P. MCCULLOUGH.
P.S.—The amount due on one holding is C9 19s ld, and the
other 23 las 2d.—P.M'C.
16
DIVISION OF LANDS.
Letter was read from the Estates Comtnissioners dated 24th
May, 1916, No. E6760/16, enclosing list of lands which it is
anticipated will •be, divided by the Commissioners and allotted
to tenant purohasers under the Land Purchase Acts within the
ensuing twelve months, and suggesting that the 6ecretary Of
the Council should include these lands in the lists of lands
requiring revision of valuation which he will forward to the
Valuation Offee by Bhe 27th June, in order that if the lands
are divided this year consequential amendments may be made
in the rate books for the ensuing year.
The Secretary was directed accordingly, and the letter was
initialled by the Chairman.
ANCIENT MONUMENTS.
Letter was read from the Secretary Co Louth Archaeological
Society stating that at a meeting of dhat body letters were
read from the Louth Rural Distlief Council and the Corpora-
lion of Drogheda, consenting to the taking over by the Louth
County Council of the Ancient Monurnents in Drogheda
as the ' 'Butter Gate " "'llhe Old Abbey," and 'Clogh Patrick'
and requesting that the County Council would now exercise
the necessary authority over these antiquities. The Secretary
informed the Gmmittee that the consent of the Lout/h Rural
District Council and the Corporation of Drogheda s'hould be
in the hands of the Council before any steps were taken, and
ho was directed to Bhe Clerks of the bodies mentioned for the
formal consent of their Councils in the matter.
17
SIR CHARLES CAMERON'S REPORT.
The following teport was read and initialled by the Chair-
man
City Laboratory, Chatham Row,
Dublin, 17th May, 1916.
Sir Charles Cameron's Repott. for Quarter ended 31st March,
1916.
Seven mrtieles were received from tlhe Food Inspectors R.I.C.
as 3 samples; milk, 2; whiskey, I; sugar, 1 •
t O tal, 7. 'I'hey were pure. One specimen of water analysed
for the Drogheda Rural District Council had the following
cxnnpo.sition imperial gallon contained in grains—total
solid matter, 21.000, including a Iburninoid 0.012 ;
saline ammonia, 0.0075; nitric acid, 2.870 ;
chlorine, 3.490.
Colour light yellow. A good water.
There were five specimens of butter analysed by directions
from tho Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction
for Ireland, which were taken up in County Louth, and were
Pure.
o poison could be found in the two specimens of feeding
stuff received for analysis from Mr T J Gallagher, Officiai
Sampler, County Committee of Agriculture, Dundalk.
One specimen of water analysed for W J Carroll, Bsq,
Dundalk, had the following composition imperial gallon
00 ntained in grains—total solid matter, 39.900, including
albuminoid ammonia, 0.006; saline ammonia, 0.001; nitric
acid, 2.120; chlorine, 3.780. Colour almost colourless. A good
Water.
18
TWC specimens of margarine analysed for
the Richmond
District Lunatic Asylum were pure.
In the original reports on the waters above referred to, full
details, chemical and miscroscopical, were given, but in Lhe
foregoing only the more inuportant points are given. Total
analyses, 18.
CHARLES A. CAMERON.
FANE AND DRAINAGE msrrmcrs.
Letter was read from the L. G. B. , No. 16717/1916, enclosing
copies of the Provisional Orders made by them transPerr•ing +0
the Louth County Council the businöss of the Fane and Wot-
tonstown Drainage Districts, and stating that copies of the
Order had been forwarded to the Irish Office, London, with a
view to their being' submitted to Parliament for eonfirrnatiOU•
The lotter further stated that the Council should now
themselves in communication with the Board's
agent, Mr Edward A Bonnor-Maurice, •16 Parliament, Street'
London, S W, who will take charge of the Confirming Bill when
introduced int,o Parliament. The letter suggested that a OOPY
of the Wotton.stown Order should be sent to Mr J R, Garstiß'
of Braganstown, who disapproved of the proposed transfer '
informing him that the Order will now go before Parliament
for confirmation.
The Ohnirman said Cha! when the taking over of these
districts was decided upon by the Council it was believed that
'but
the Provisional Orders were all that would be necessary'
that if the Orders had to bo confirmed by Parliament it would
bo desirable that the Council SCIould know who would be
the
responsible for t.he costs. . If the Council were liable'
of lands
amount would have to be levied on Che
owners
19
benefitted by the drainage systems, and it would 'be well that
they should know this before any furt!her action was taken. The
COmmittee unanimously directed the (Secretary to inquire from
tho L. G. B. whether the Council would be liable for any of the
costs incurred by the passage of the Bill through Parliament.
CLOTHING FOR SANATORIUM PATIENTS.
The following letter was read, and referred to the Tuber-
eulosis Committee of Management
Local Government, Board, Dublin,
23rd May, 1916.
No. 23922/1916.
Louth County.
Sir.
The beal Government Böard for Ireland ihave had before
them your letter of the 18th instant, in regard to the supply
Of artiel€*ö of clothing bo an uninsured patient in Penmount
Sanatorimn, and they desire to state [Juat, apart from any
question of legality, the provision of outfits to ' individual
Patients appears to the Board undesirable, as it would tend to
the usual practice, and would thus diminish the funds
available for institutional treatment.
The difficulty, however, might be met by an arrangement
With the Hcuspital Authorities that a sufficient nomber of sets
the main items included in the Outfit List might be kept in
the Hospital for the use of patients sent by the Louth County
Oouncil who rna.v require them. -would be prefera;ble that
Outfits should be provided bS• the Hospital Authorities in
eonsideration of a small addition to the maintenance charges,
but if this course is not found practicable, t,he Tuberculosis
20
Committoe could supply tho Outfits on Che understanding that
they will be retained in the Hospital on the patient's dis-
charge.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
'Vhe Secretary, Louth County Council.
BRANCH TUBERCULOSIS DISPENSARIES.
The following letter was read, and the arrangements noted
therein wero reconnnended for approval by the County
Council :—
County Louth Tuberculosis Cornmittee of Managamont'
Dundalk, 19th May, 1916.
Dear Sir.
I am directed by the Tuberculosis Conon ittee of Management
to inform the Louth County Council that they 'have acquired'
with Che sanction of the Local Government Board, the under-
mentioned premises for the purposes of 13ranch
Dispensaries—
(1) Rose Cottage, Omeath, from Mrs Alice Connolly, Omeabh'
for 28 per year with rates and taxes and C5 per year
for caretaking.
21
(2) Two rooms in the North Quay Dispensary, Drogheda,
from the I)rgheda Board of Guardians for one year at
Ell). • It is also proposed to retain the services of the
existing caretaker, Miss Callaghan, to perform the
extra duties in connection witih the Drogheda premises
at the remuneration of 3s per week.
Yours faithfully,
VAL. WARREN, Secretary.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
HIRE OF TROLI,ER.
Letter was read from Mr E Moore, Curia beg, requesting Chat
Of the Council's Road Rollers should be hired to him for
somo rolling he reguired done.
'l'he County Surveyor informed
the Committee that at present he could not spare a roller for
Private work, and the Secretary was directed to MTite Mr Moore
accordingly, and that if the roller would be available later on
the County Surveyor wonl(i arrange, if possible, to hire same to
liim.
BUILDING SITE IN COLLON.
The follouång letter was read, and referred to the local
00 unty Councillors and the County Surveyor for information
and report :
Sir.
Ancient Order oi Hibernians,
0011011, 23rd May, 1916.
am diree€ed by above body to wfite fo Louth County
qouneil, asking permission to build a Hall on site known as
22
the Market Square, Collon.
If perniis.sion is granted, will
you kindly writo stating terms, etc, and oblige,
Yours respectfully,
P. J. HALPIN.
WAGES DUE LATE CARETAKER.
Letter was read from Mr P J Kerley, solicitor for Mrs•
M 'Garrity, widow of the late caretaker of t,he County council
Offices, roqu«sting that Paying Order for amount duo her
husband might be paid to her without production of letters Of
administration.
The Secretary informed the Gornmittee that, the sum due was
Te2 13s 9d, and he "had been awaiting the letters of administra-
tion before paying over the amount to Mrs M 'Garrity.
The Committee decided to recommend payment of the amount
without production of adtninistration papers to Mrs M •Garrity
if security, to indemnify the Council, is given.
UNIVERSITY SCHOLAR'S RESIDENCE.
Leiter was read and initialled frorn the Secretary, University
Oollege, Dublin, statig that the house, 20 Lower Leeson Street'
in whidil Miss E M Teevan has taken up residence, is approved
by the College authorities. The letter also that all the
foes due by Miss 'I'eevan to the (-k)llege had been paid.
ALL-IRELAND MUNITIONS AND GOVERNMENT
SUPPLY (X)MMTTTEE.
Letter •was read from the Dublin Industrial DeveloPment
Asaociation on behalf of the above Committee, requesting full
details of each of the InduStries carried on in the County, with
23
view to subrnitting sarne to the various Govermnent Depart-
ments purchasing Munitions and other supplies, and securing
as large a share as possible of this business for Irish manu-
facturors.
The Secretary was directed to obtain, and send on to the
Association, the required information.
TUBERCULOSIS MEDICAL OFFICER'S APPOINTMENT.
The following letter was read, and the Secretary was
directed to forward copies of sarne to t).le Tuberculosis Com-
mittee of Management and to Dr M 'Quillan
Local Government Board, Dublin,
27th May, 1916.
so. 14,710/1913.
Louth County.
Sir.
With reference to previous correspondence, r am directed by
the Local Government Board for Ireland to state that they
now approved of the appointment of Dr J A M 'Juillan as
Tuberculosis Officer of County Louth, on the following condi-
bions :
(l) That he Ahall devote his whole time to the discharge
of his duties.
(2) That he shall be precluded from accepting fees or re-
ward of any kind for his services other than his offl-
• Cial salary.
(3) That he shall discharge such duties as may be pres-
cribed from time to time Tyy the' Local Government
Board, and shall carry out such duties as the Tuber-
culosis Committee or the County Council may direct
with the approval pf' the Board.
24
(4) That he Ghall reside within easy reach of the Contral
Tuberculosis Dispensary.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
APPLICATION PROM FAUGHART QUARRY MEN.
The folowing memorial was read
May 27th, 1916.
Sir,
We, the undersigned workmen, employed in the
Louth County Council's quarry at Faughart, wish you to please
Jay before the Council at their next meeting applicati011'
respectfully asking them to grant us an increase of addi-
tional, so as to bring onr wage up to a standard of .CI per wee
Our present weekly wage is I(js, and as you, gentlemen, are
fully aware, the price of food stuffs has gono up by u) per cent
or over, and when ctqleulatod on Chis bae:is our present wage
does not, in purchasing value, exceed IOS per week. Our work
also is both heavy and severe, as is naturally always• the case
in quarry work, and tihe upkeep of wear and tear to our boots'
caused by constant moving on stones, is a very big item Of out-
lay. Besides there is hardly a week in which we do not. lose
time owing to bad weather, and when this happens it leaves
wages still less.
25
We hope, gentlemen, you will give our application favour-
able consideration, and that your decision will be such as to
cause eontentrnent amongst a not overpaid staff of workmen.
We beg to Remain,
Your Servants,
John Halpin, Michael M 'Cann, Patrick Jameson, Jas.
M 'Ardle, Richard O'Hare, Joseph Halpin, Stephen
Fearon, Hugh M'Namee, James Sandes.
To the Secretary Louth County Council.
After discussion the (hmmittee unanimously decided that the
application for an increase could not be acceded to.
QUARRY AT TULLYA14LEN.
I.+tter was read from the County Surveyor that owing to tihe
diffculty of procuring suitable stone for road maintenance m
the vicinity of Drogheda, it would be desirable to have a quarry
Opened on the lands of Mr Roche, of Drybridge, where he be-
lieved a good quarry was obtainable. The owner of tho land
had given the necessary permission, but it would bo also neces-
sary to procure a pass to the quarry over a narrow strip of land
in the ownership of Mr Balfour, Townley Hall, Drogheda, and
S Ugges6ed that the Committee should approach the latter gen-
tleman for his consent to t,ho pass required. The Committee
Unanimously directed tho Secretai•y to write Mr Balfour for his
Permission for the making of the pass required.
WITHDRAWAL OF MALICIOUS INJURY CLAIM.
Letter was read from the Council's Solicitor acknowledging
receipt of notice of Withdrawal of Claims for Malicious Injury
26
in t,ho case of Mary M 'Geough, Park Street, Dundalk, against
the Oouncil for loss of (horse and ear, rugs, etc, during the, re-
cent trouble. The property has been found and returned €0
owner.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
COLLECTOR HUGHES' ARREARS LISTS.
'l'he Secretary submitted lists of irrecovera ble
arrears of
rate in Mr Patrick Hughes' collecting district, and on examin-
ation same were approved, and the Secretai1Y was directed €0
have them declared, and submitted to the Local Government
Board.
27
Executive Committee.
Minutes of proceedin•gs of the Exöcutive Committee at, their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 29th May, 1916, at one o'clock, p m.
the Chair : Chtyrles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
other Members—J F Murphy, J P; Michael Meade, James
Wynne, J P; Joseph H M'Ardle, J P; Peter Woods, J P; and
ernard Finnegan, Esquires.
The Minutes of the previous meeting of the Committee were
taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
MEETINGS OF LOCAL COMMITTEES OF THE COUNTY
COUNCIL'S TANKS.
The following report, was submitted and approved :—
The following Local Committees met at Che Council Challiber,
Court blouse, Dundalk, on Monday, the 22nd May, 1916.
In the Chair at all Committees :C A Duffy, Esq, J P.
ARDEE.
Present —J T M'Gee, J P, and M'l)onnell, Esquires.
Tho question of the water supply for the tank was discussed,
ancl the Secretary was directed to invite quotations per load as
required, from Laurence Callan and Joseph Breen, both of Ar-
dee. It was also decided that a poster be prepared setting •out
tho dipping regulations and that same be posted at all the
tanks.
The area of inspection by the local Inspector, Wm Leonard'
was fixed as follows Electoral Divisions of Ardee Rural,
Ardee Urban, Clonkeen, Mansfieldstown, Tallan,s€own, Castle-
bellingham, Colton, Dromin and Drumcar.
DROGHEDA.
'Phere was no attendance of any member of the
mitt,ee, consequently no business was transacted.
KNOCKBRIDGE.
Local Com-
The following gentlemen were preserit L Coleman, J P'
M M'Ard1e, and B Hughes, Esquires.
The area of inspection by the Local In speet,or, ThornaS
M' Ardle, was fixed as follows Divisions of Dundalk
Rural, Faughart, Castletown, Darver, Dromiskin, Haggards-
town, Barron.stown, Castlering, Killanny, Louth and Upper
Creggan.
AGHAMEEN.
All the members of this Committee attended-—J TI M 'Ardle '
J P; James Connolly, J P; B Finnegan, and P Woods, J
Esquires.
A discussion took plåice as to the suitabili[y of tho site for
t'hi:; tank, which had for some timo been fixed nt Aghameell'
Mi' J H M'ArdIe contended that theie should 'be two tanks for
the area, and moved' Chat if a second tank could be procured
that it should be hired and used at Ravensdale and one other
suitable site for the dipping periods. This was seconded by Mr
Connolly, and the proposition was carried, Mr Peter Woods
dissenting. The Secretary was directed to write Messrs Coo-
pers and arrange for the hire of an .additionnl bath, and Mr
J H M' Ardle agreed to try and arrange for a suitmble site.
The area of inspection of tile Local Inspector, Owen Keenan,
Was fixed as follows Divisions of Ballymascanlon,
Jenkinstown, Ravensdale, and Rathcor.
CARLINGFORD.
The only member of the Committee in attendance was Wm
woods, Esq, J P.
Mr Wm Woods stated that the Superintendent who did the
Work last year was not available, and he agreed to try and
get a suitable man to act for Carlingford and Orneath.
The following area was fixed provisionally
li'isions of Carlingford and Greenore, and if a sit,e at
Piedmont was not procured, Rathcor was to be included.
Omeath—'l'he E. D. of Drummullagll.
The Secretary submitted letter from Messrs Cooper offering
a second-hand Tank, for whidll they would charge hire at Che
same rate as the other Tanks hired by them, namely, 5s per
Year.
The Committee unanimously accepted the offer, and the
Secretary was directed to ask to have the Tank sent on at once.
It Was also arranged that this Tank be used at Ravensdale
30
and Annaloughan alternately, and the appointment of a
Superintendent for this Tank was left in the hands of Messrs
Finnegan and Connolly.
CARLINGFORD AND OMEATH TANKS.
The following arrangements were made in connection with
above Tanks, namely, that the appointment of the Superin-
tendent be left to Mr Wm Woods and the local Committee.
BALLYMAKE.NNV TANK.
The Committee directed the 'Secretary to convene a meeting
of the local Committee, to be held in Drogheda on Thursday '
Isi June.
th is
Mr N T Murßhy was appointod a mom ber of
Committee.
The Tender of Mr L J Healy, Drogheda, for the supply Of
81
VETERINARY INSPECTORS' REPORTS
"l lie following Reports were read, and
initialled lb..y
Chairman : —
Dear Sir.
the
I beg to report that no ease of infeefious disease occurred in
my district during the Mont'h of Apiil.
Sir.
beg to
markets of
April. Ln
of disease.
l)ip to Ballymakenny tank, at Ils per dozen packets,
Yours truly,
J. T. CLINTON.
report that I have examined the usual fairs and
the Ardee No. 1 Rural District for Che month of
the No. 1 District I have had no report,od cases
I am, faithfully yours,
W. E. MAXWELL.
CERTIFICATE OF DIPPING.
accepted.
WATER FOR ARDEE TANK.
The following Tenders for the supply of water
dipping period to Ardee tank were received.
L Callan, Tisdale street, Ardee, at, Is per load.
J Breen, The Green, Ardee, af 10d per load.
for
was
tph e
Chairman
No. 1392/16.
Sir.
following letter was read, and initialled by the
Department of Agriculture,
Veterinary Branch,
Dublin, 23rd May, 1916.
Tho last-named tender, being the lowest, was accepted' nn
the following sureties wero approved of :wJulia Breen
William E Hopkins.
havo Io acknowledge thO receipt of your letter of 17th
I n stant asking the Department to give effect €0 a resolution
a doptecl by the Executive Connnittee of your Council in the
following terms : —
32
'"l'hat the owners or persons in charge of Sheep being
exposed for sale, whose names have 'been previously re-
turned to the Council by the Council's Inspector as having
dipped their sheep within ("he prescribed time and in the
proper way, be no longer obliged to aecornpauy same with
any further forms."
In reply I have to state that the point Co which the resolu-
bion is directed has been considered more Chan once previously
by the Department. They have, however, been unable to
discover means of satisfactorily obviating the practical diffi-
the
culties which procedure such as that recommended in
resolution would be bound to involve. If the sheep owner'
when exposing his sheep for sale, were to bring the Dipping
Inspector's certificate with him, the Police, especially if
were not, well known to them, would scarcely be ,satisficql
without some evidence in addition filat the animals exposed
hi n formed part of the lot described in the certificate, and the
need for a declaration supplementary to the certificate would
thus, in any ease, arise. On the other 'nand, if no cloctnnent
were required to be brought with the sheep, and if the police
were to be content merely with verbal statments by owners
or persons in dharge of sheep at fairs that Che animals e.XI
by them had all been clipped as required, Chere can be little
doubt that a door would thereby be opened to widespread
asion of the Order.
In all the circumstances the existing provision requiring
sheep exposed for sale during the nutrket-regulation periods
shall be accompanied by one docurnent only, i.e., a declaration
in specified t,errns relating solely to those animals, is regarded
as that most adapted to the needs of' the case, and the Depart"
ment accordingly regret that they cannot see their way to
accept your Committee's proposal on the subject.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
Louth County Council,
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at t'heir
'Special Meeting, held in the Council Olarnber, Court HOUSe'
Dundalk, on Monday, 5th day of June, 1916, at I o'clock p
Present the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J
Other Members—Peter Woods, J P; James Wynne,
Laurence Goodman, B L Coleman, J P; Michael Meade'
Woods, J P; Patrick Donegan, J P; J H M'Ardle, J Jdhll
Morgan, Michael M' Ardle, J F Murphy, J P; B Hamill, J
Thomas O'Rourke, and B Finnegan, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance •
Before proceeding to the business of the meeting, the Chair-
mm announced that a telegram had just been received frorn
the
the London and Lancashire Fire Insurance Company'
guarantors of Mr Patrick Hughes, to the effect that they were
lodging to the credit, of the Council the sum of C116 7s
This
being the amount outstanding on Mr Hughes' warrant'
was considered satisfactory by the Council.
The special business for which the meeting was called was
to make arrangements for tho appointment of a rate collector
for the Electoral Division of Dundalk Rural in room Of Mr
Patrick Hughes.
35
After a short discussion, the following resolution Was passed
unanimowsly
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby fix the rate of poundage fees to
be paid on the collection of Poor Rate in the Electoral Division
Of Dundalk Rural at 5å(I in [he C on the amount of tho (hl-
lector's Warrant, and the prescribed fees for Che duties under
the Franchise and Jurors' Acts, and we hereby direct our
Secretary to insert advertisement in the County papers for the
aPPOintrnent of a Collector, to be made,af the Annual Meeting
Of tho County Council to be held in Drogheda on Friday, 16th
day of June, 1916.
BALLYMAKENNY DIPPING TANK.
Tho following Report was read :—
Ballymakenny Dipping Tank Local Committee.
directed by the Executive Committee, a special meeting
Of the Local Committee for the management of tho Ballyma-
Dipping Tank was hold in tho Court House, Drogheda,
on Thursday, Vhe 1st June, at the hour of 12 0'clock noon.
In the Chair Donegan, Esq, J P.
Other Members present T Murphy, P. Callan, J P,
and Joseph Dolan, Esquire'.
The Secretary of tho Council was also in attendance.
Lotter was read from Michael M 'Quillan, the Superintendent
the ken ny Tank, resigning his position. Mr Murphy
directed the attention of the Committee to the fact that owing
36
to the number of private tanks in the disdriet there would be a
large number of inspeetions necessary, and that the entire time
of the person appointed to act as Superintendent and Inspect'Or
would be occupied during the dipping periods, and as
the
Summer dipping period started from the 1st Juno, it would be
absolutely necessary that the appointment should be made at
once.
After discussion, the Committee decided that an advertise-
mcn+o should be inserted in the "Drogheda Argus" on Satur-
day, the 3rd instant, inviting applications for the position, and
recommended that the Inspector and Dipping Superintendent
should be performed by the same person, and that the salary
to be paid should be at the same rate as for the Ardee and
Knockbridge Inspectors, viz, El per week during the d:pping
periods.
Ii; was further recommended, owing to the urgency of the
matter, that appointment should be made at a further
Special Meeting of the Tank Committee, to be held in Drogheda
on Tuesday, the 6th June, at 2 0'clock p m, and that the
Secretary report to the County Council to their Special Meet-
ing to be held on Monday, the 5th June, the findings Of the
Committee for confirmation.
The following resolution was then passed unanimously :
Proposed by Michael Meade, Esq ;
Seconded by James Wynne, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby approve of the recommendations
of the Ballymakenny Dipping Tank Local Committee to
Tank
point a Dipping Superintendent for the Ballymakenny
who will also. act as Local Inspector for the District, at
salary, to cover both appointments, at the rate of CI per
37
for tho Summer and Autumn Dipping Periods, and we confirm
the authority given to tho said Local Committee to appoint
the said officer.
FAUGHAR'I' QUARRY.
The County Surveyor informed the Council that the work-
men engaged at Faughart Quarry had ceased work. He stated
that these men had •applied for an increase in their wages,
whiéh at present were 16s per week, and the Finance Commit-
tee had refused to accede to the application, and that, they
bad now struck work.
-'i discussion took place on the matter, but it was considered
that the resolution of the Cbuncil refusing the former appli-
cations of Vhe quarrymen engaged at Jonesboro' and Cocklehill
eonld not be varied now, as all the quarry work was in
COnneetion with the Road Board Grant, and that the rate of
wages to be paid the men was based on the estimate for this
furnished to the Road Board. Eventually it was decided
to make application to the Road Board for an additional grant,
and if t)his request were acceded to, the question of an inerea.se
to the men would be further considered.
Arising out of tho discussion, Mr Finnegan reque.sted in-
f O rmation from the County Surveyor as to whether he had
a Uthorised the overseer of the quarry to question labourers
aPPl.ving for work if t/hey had the permission of their former
0 rnployers to apply for work under the Council.
County Surveyor replied that he merely wished Chat any
Of the Workmen applying for work under the Council had given
uctiee to their former employers of their intention to leave
employment, as complaints had been made to him on
tho subject by road contractors.
38
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in tho Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk'
on Monday, 12th June, 1916, at one o'clock p m.
Present the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P ,
Other Members Wynne, J p ; Laurence Goodman'
J F Mur+hy, J P; Thomas O'Rourke, W Woods, J P, and DJ
Roth, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the (k»mmittee were
taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The following Accounts were submitted and, on examina
were ordered for payment
195 7 7
Works in chargea of Co Surveyor—Loans Account
do
Subsidiary Account 49 18 3
do
Secretary's Office—Sulsidiary Account
Total
33 12 5
C278 18 3
The Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loans
39
ND. 24166/1916, in reply to letter from the Secretary requesting
that the Board would sanction tho payment by tho Council
Of the amount of a Paying Order issued to Patrick M 'Elroy
on 24th April, 1913, which 'had been mislaid and was not
cashed, stating that the Board could not authorise the payment
of this amount.
The Committee unanimously directed the Secretary to again
write the Board stating tihat the Council considered that the
amount of the paying Order was legally due, and that it was
Unfair to withhold the money, and requesting then Board to
reconsider their decision.
PATRICK HUGHES' COLLECTION.
Letter was read from the London and Lancashire Fire Ins
suranee Company dated 5th June, 1916, enclosing eheque value
7s Od to close Mr Patrick Hughes' rate collection, and
requesting that when tho sanction of the L.G.B. was received,
the balance of fees due Mr Hughes, together with the amount,
Of his irrecoverable arrears, might be paid over to them in
accordance with the terms of their Bond.
Tho Secretary stated he had lodged the cheque for CIIG 7s
Od to the credit of the Council, and the letter was initialled
by the Chairman. The Secretary was directed to transmit tho
Arrears Sheet to t,he L.G.B. and request the sanction for the
Payment to the Insurance Company of these and any poundage
fees due to the ex-eollector.
POUNDAGE FOR RATE COLLECTION.
The following letter was read, and initialled by the
Acecunts were examined and initialled by the Chairinan.
UNPAID PAYING ORDER.
Letter was read from the L.G.B. dated 2nd June'
airman :
Sir.
1
Local Government Board, Dublin,
6th June, 1916. No. 27055/16.
1916,
am directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland
40
to acknowledge Che receipt of your letter of the 5t)h instant,
relative to the collection of the Poor Rate in Louth County'
and, in reply, T am to state that the Board sanction the pro-
posal of the Council to fix the remuneration of the Collector
Io be appointed in the place of Mr Patrick Hughes at the rate
of 51d in the C.
I am to say that the Collector will be required to give a
Bond from an approved Guarantee Society.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
The Secretary, Louth County Council.
INSURANCE.
Letter was received from the Hibernian Insurance ConjpanY
suggesting that owing to the increased cost of building material
and labour, it would be advisable for Public Bodies to increase
their insurances on buildings.
The letter was marked ' 'read."
FLOODING OF PUBLIC ROAD AT OMEATH.
Letter was read fronr the London and North Western
Company requesting reply to their lotters in above
The County Surveyor stated that he was tiying to arrange for
a way tro drain the surface water other than over the Railway
fle
property, but had not been able to settle the matter yet•
suggested leaving over reply to Railway Company for some
time, and tillis was agreed to.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
ACT', 1916.
Letter was read from the L.G.B. enclosing copy of the
above Act, which legalises and regulates the action of local
authorities in grantipg leave of absence and making allow-
anees to their officers and servants who have joined his
Majesty's forces, and which makes various administrative
provisions with a view •to economy during the War.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
COMMITTALS TO INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS.
Letter was read from Rev Father Hurson, C C, Dundalk,
•rotifying that application would be made to the Magistrates
at the Children's Court on 9Uh June for committal of five
Children to an Industrial School, viz, Lizzie and Mary Kearney
and Catherine, Bridget and James Tallon, all of them under
the ago of fourteen years.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
DOG LICENCES.
Letter was read from the Registrar of Petty Sessions Clerks
informing the Council that their proportion of surplus moneys
arising from the sale of Dog Licenses for the year 1915 amounts
to ±222 7s 7d, and that this sum had been lodged with the
County Treasurer to the credit of the Council.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
appointment of Hugh Ginnetty as caretaker over
question at the remuneration of C.3 per annum.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
The Secretary, Louth County Council.
SCHOLARSHIP HOLDER.
42
CARETAKER FOR WILLISTOWN PLANTATION.
The following letter was read, and initialled by the Chair-
man :
Department of Agriculture,
Upper Merrion Street, Dublin,
8th June, 1916. No. A11100/16.
FORESTRY.
Sir.
I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 2nd
instant intimating that the Louth County Council have
approved the draft scheme for the user of the lands at Willis-
town which have been acquired by the Council for forestry
purposes, and to acquaint you, for the information of the
Council, that the Department are pleased to sanction the
T. P. GILL
the lands in
Secretary.
In reply to query by the Secretary, a letter was received
from the Registrar, University College, stating that Patrick
Hanratty, a County Louth Scholarship holder, load joined the
Army last November. The letter was initialled by the Chair-
man.
MALICIOUS INJURY CLAIMS.
The following letters from the County 'Solicitor were read,
and initialled by the Chairman
Francis Street, Dundalk,
5th June, 1916.
Applications—Patrick Cooke, Mullavalley, burning of
straw, C7, and Patrick Hoey, Marshes South, two
ploughs damaged, CIO.
Dear Sir.
I beg to report that the above applications were heard at
1)
unclalk Quarter Sessions on the 3rd instant.
In the first claim his Honor Judge Green awarded the
a PPIicant a decree for CC IOS Od, tb be levied off the Electoral
IVision of Louth.
In the second claim a decree for C5 was awarded, to be
levied off the Electoral Division of Dundalk R.ural.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Secretary, County (huncil.
Francis Street, Dundalk,
5th June, 1916.
Applications—Wm Ireland, ee36 4s 3d; Edwin V Lowry,
2300, and Patrick Joseph Byrne, C70.
1)
ear Sir.
made application to his Honor at Dundalk Quarter Sessions
Week that tho above claims be allowed to stand adjourned
until next Quarter Sessions in October, in view of promised
44
legislation which will possibly effect these claims, and the
The respective Solicitons for the
application was granted.
applicants offered no objection to this course' being adopted'
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Secretary, County Council.
'The Secretary informed the Committee that a further
. had been received from Mr Patrick Hoey, Marshes South' for
Vhe sum of Cl'2ö for the alleged malicious burning of a cottage •
The papers received in this case had been forwarded to the
Council's Solicitor, who was giving the matter his attenti0n•
CLOTHING FOR SANATORIUM PATIENT'S.
Tho following tetter was read, and the Secretary was dir
to forward copy of same to the Local Government Board :
County of Louth Tuberculosis Committee,
Dundalk, 10th June, 1916.
Dear Sir.
I am directed by the Tuebrculosis Chmmittee of ManagemeDt
to acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 31st May, 1916'
fwith enclosure copy of letter No. 23922/16, dated 23 May'
the
to
the Local Government Board, with further reference
question of supplying clothing to a patient at Peamount'
•ttee
in connection with which am •to state that Whe
considers it neither necessary nor desirable that any immediate
change bo made in the existing arrangements for supplying
articles of clothing in necessitous cases, as the sums disbu
as ured
under this 'head are trifling, aud the Committee is
45
the system of retaining clothing in a Sanatoriuni for the
use Of future patients is objectionable and undesirable.
Yours faithfully,
V. WARREN, Secretary.
The Secretary, Louth County Council.
COUNTY AND ASSISTANT SURVEYORS' POSTAGES.
Letter was read from the County Surveyor stating that at
Present he and his assistants defray out of their own pockets
incurred on behalf of the County in the course of
business, and requesting that in future, when properly
Vouched, such postage be refunded to them.
This
was unanimously agreed to, and the letter was initialled
y the Chairman.
NEGLECTED CONTRACTS.
Letter Was read from the County Surveyor requesting to be
a Ut'hori.sed by the Council to take, the necessary steps by ten
days' notice to have the following roads attended to and to
'ive the eontraets cancelled : —
o.
2000 perches Ardoe to Carrickmacross. Contractor.
Patrick Clarke, Rathory.
4¯981 perches from Dundalk to Kingscourt, by Nicholas-
town. Ontractor, John Clarke, Rathory, is at the
front.
59
—-832 perches, Ardee to Slane, by Smarmore. Contrac-
tor, John Corbally, Cluide.
46
No. 57—837 perches, Kingscourt to Drogheda. ContractOr'
Patrick Reilly, Hunterstown, is ill and unable t'O
continue the work.
The Committee unanimously recommended the taking over
of these roads by the County Surveyor qn ten days' notice, and
the cancellation of the contracts.
APPLICATION FOR TAR. BOILER,
Letter was read from the County Surveyor stating that' the
specification for Road Board work now boing carried out by the
Council provides for the tarring of stretches of the road ot
Dunleer, Castlebellingham and near Dundalk, and that the
tmring at Dunleer and Castlebellingham was to be carried out
this summer. He had been offered one of the latest makes
for
tar boiler, with double furnaces and spreading apparatUS'
CBI IOS Od. It could alternatively be had on hire at pel
week from the date of despatch, minimum charge,
desired to ask the Committee whether they would bo agreeable
to the purchase of the boiler, and stated that t,here was a
of C60 to the credit of the Machinery Loan Account
could be used for the purpose.
The Committee unanimously recommended to the 00t111tY
Council the purchase of the tar boiler, and that the
the Machinery Loan to be utilised for tho purpose.
GILES' QUAY PIER.
Letter was read from the County Surveyor stating that
repairs would have to be done to tho above Pier this summer'
esti ng
as the sea slope had been damaged by the tide, and requ
this
that a sum of C4() be transferred in the usual way for
expenditure.
47
Tho Committee unanimously recommended the transfer of
.C4() from the Giles' Quay Revenue Account $0 provide for
necessary work at the Pier.
PIERS.
On the suggestion of Mr Ratli, the County Surveyor was
directed to visit Clogherhead Pier and report if any repairs
Were
Mr William Woods informed the Council that the Store on
Carlingford Pier whic'h had been recently erected by the
Cf•uncil was Wing idle, and he did not believe it would ever bo
used under the present system by which charges were made per
ton per week for storage. He held that the Store should be
advertised to be let by tender.
The Chairman informed Mr Woods that the present system
could not •be altered unless the resolution am»roving of it, were
first rescinded, and Mr Woods agreed to bring up the matter
on Notice of Motion.
FORESTRY SCHEME.
Letter was read from the County Solicitor stating that he
reqt;ired Map of the area of Willistown Plmntation to be drawn
on each copy of the Forestry Scheme, whic/h had now been
engrossed in duplicate for submission to the Department, and
the County Surveyor was requested to attend to this matter.
HOLIDAYS.
The Committee unanimously reOommended that the staff be
granted their annual (holidays, to be taken at, times which
would best suit the work of the office, the Secretary to arrange
acmrdingly.
48
Finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk'
on Monday, 26th June, 1916, at one o'clock, p m.•
Present —
: In the Chair: Charles A Duffy, E«j, J P.
Other Members :—Thoma.s O'Rourke, James Wynne, J P;
Laurence Goodman, J F Murp•ny, J P; Peter Woods, J P; .B
Finnegan, J H M' Ardle, J P, and B L Coleman, J P, Esquil+•
Mr 'I'hornas Walsh, Co. Surveyor, was in attendance.
The 'minutes of the previous meeting of the Committee wero
taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted, and on examinati011
were ordered for payment:—
Works in Charge of Co. Surveyor—Loans Account
Do. Subsidiary Account 188 10
Do.
236 9 10
Secrét.ary's Office—Subsidiary Account
Tho Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loans
counts were examined and initialled by the Chairman.
49
POUND FOR, DROGHEDA.
Letter Tas road from the Clerk of Petty Sessions, Drogheda,
enclosing the- following requisition
Petty Sessions District of Drogheda.
County of Louth.
We, thO undersigned Magistrates assembled at, Drogheda
Petty Sessions on this 19th day of June, 1916, do, in pursuance
Of Section 19 of 14 and 15 Vic. , Cap. 92, authorise the establish-
ment of a Pound at the Corn Market, Fair Street, Drogheda,
Within the Petty Sessions District of Drogheda, and accordingly
we roquest the County Council of Louth (as successors to the
late Grand Jury) to present ancl provide for the erection and
maintenance of sue.h Pound according to the said Statute.
Signed—Laurence Stanley, J P, Mayor; G H Shannon,
Peter Lyons, P p Keeley, S Jordan, Peter Lynch,
A J Macouillan.
The Secretary read tho 'Section of the Act . referred to, in
which it was set out that on the requisition of three or more
•Justices of the Peaco for any Pctty Sessions District within the
e O unty it shall be lawful for the Grand Jury (and consequently
for their successors, the Co. Council) to present such sum, not
e Xeoeding €10, as they shall think fit for the erection or
repair of any pound ; the keeper of such pound paying to the
co• of the county any sum fixed, but not exceeding
as an annual rent for same. The Justices of the Peace to
40s
appoint the keeper of such pound.
After discus,ion the illatter was referred to the Co. Council
for consideration.
50
QUARRY AGREEMENT.
The Secretary submitted agreement with Ellen Fagan, of
Ballymakellett, for the raising of 500 cu bic yards of stone at
Ballymakellett for the sum of CG 5s Od.
The agreement was approved and recommended for sealing
by the County Coåncil.
REVISION LIST.
'Ille Secretary submitted lists of changes of names and revi
sions of valuation to be made by the Valuation Office. Same
were examined by the Committee, and the Secretary was direc-
ted to forward them to the Valuation Office.
NAVAL AND MILITARY WAR PENSIONS ACT.
The Secretary submitted draft scheme for the constitution Of
a, local committee for the County of Louth under the above Act'
The scheme provides for a committee of 20, of which not less
than 5 shall be women, 4 representatives of labour, and 8
bers of either the Soldiers' and Sailors' Families Association or
the Soldiers' and Sailors' Help Society. As specified in the
schedule to the scheme the folowing bodie- would be represen-
ted on tho Committee and Drogheda Branches Of
the Trades Council, Dundalk and Drogheda BranOhes of t'he
Soidiers' and Sailors' Families Association, and the Co. Louth
War Fund Committee.
The schemo was approved by the Committee.
51
•UNPAID PAYING ORDER.
The following etter was read :
No. '3971-1916.
Louth County.
Local Government, Board,
Dublin, 23rd June, 1916.
Sir,
In reply to your letter of tho 14th instant, respecting
the Paying Order issued by the Louth County Council to Mr
Patrick M 'Elroy, on the 24th April, 1913, which was not pre-
sented for payment, I am directed by the Local Government
Board for Ireland to state that they can only repeat that, they
have no legal power to authorise the Council to make this pay-
ment now.
I am, 'Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
The Chair" 4111 Informed Committee that the amount In
question, namely, C13 3s Od, had been paid over to the road
COntractor to whom t'he Paying Order was issued, by a local
The order had been mislaid and had only been
merchant.
found a few weeks ago. It would, he thought, be very unfair
that the merchant should now be at, the loss of this amount.
The Committee were •unanimously of this opinion, and pay-
ment of the amount was recommended.
Tho Secretary informed the Committee that if he could not
Produce an authority from the Local Government Board for
tho payment, the auditor would surcharge the amount, as, nc-
cording to the Public Bodies Order, the P. O. should have been
presented for payment within six months from the date thereof.
52
ROAD IMPROVEMENT IN DROGHEDA URBAN DISTRICT
Letter was read from the lioad Board dated 22nd June, 1916'
enclosing cheque for ,C411, being the final payment undev Grant
No. 3011 for road improvement in the Drogheda Urban District•
Tho Secretary informed the Committee that he had lodged Che
cheque to the credit of the Council, and that Paying Order
for tho amount would be issued to •Drogheda Corporation at
next meeting of the County Council. The letter was initialled
by tho Chairman.
INCREASE OF' WAGES TO MEN EMPLOYED AT ROAD
BOARD WORK.
The following letter, in reply to application made by the
Council for an additional grant for Road Board Work owing to
the increased cost of labour, was read. The matter arose oub Of
an application by the workmen engaged at Faughart quarry
for an increase in wage from 16s to 20s per week, when it was
decided by the Co. Council that if the Road Board gave an
ditional grant, the Council would re-eonsider the question Of
creasing the wages : —
The Road Board,
Manager and Engineer's Office,
South Kensington, London, S W,
22nd June, 1916.
Sir,
Dublin-Belfast Röad.
Grant No. 3013.
In reply to your letter of the 12th inst, T am directed by
Road Board to say that the question of increasing the wages
paid to the workmen engaged in quarrying stone in connection
53
with work being carried out under the above grant, is one
which must be left to the discretion of the County Council.
With regard to the question of making an additional Grant
to cover the extra expenditure to be incurred by the increase of
wages mentionad in your letter, this must stand over until the
works are completed and the County Council are in a position
to furnish details of the actual cost of the works.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant.
H. P. MAYBURY.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
After considerable discussion on tho question of increasing
the wages of the quarry men,
It was proposed by Timos O'Rourke, Esq ;
Seconded by Bernard Finnegan, Esq,
•That the wages of all men engaged on work under the Road
Board Scheme be increased from 16s to 17s per week.
As an amendment to this,
It was propösed by J F Murphy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by J H WArd1e, Esq, J P,
that no increase be granted.
The Chairman took a division on the amendment with the
following result
For tho Amendment—Messrs Coleman, M 'Ardle and Mur-
phy—3.
Against the Amendment—Messrs O'Rourke, Woods, Good-
man, Wynne, and Finnegan—5.
54
The Chairman declared the amendment lost, and the original
resolution—that the wages of all men engaged at work under
the Road Board Scheme be increased from IGs to 17s per week
—wasdeclared carried by the same majority.
JONESBORO' BRIDGE.
Leter was read from the Secretary Armagh Co. Council, re-
questing that P.O. for Ell, being half cost of repairs to Jones-
boro' Bridge, be sent on to him. The work had been carried
out by the Armagh C%unt.y Surveyor on the condition that the
Dundalk Rural District Council would pass a proposal for half
the cost, and the Secretary informed the Council that this had
been done, and it would be in order to issue P. O. for tllé
ount on the certificate of the County Surveyor.
The letter was initialled by t'he Chairman.
55
Executive Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Executive Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 26th June, 1916, at one o'clock, p m.
Present the Chair : Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members O'Rourke, James Wynne, J P ; Lau-
Goodman, J F Murphy, J P; Peter Woods, J P; B Fin-
negan, J H M'Ard1e, J P, and B L Coleman, J P, Esquires.
The minutes of the previous meeting of the Committee were
taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
BALLYMAKENNY TANK.
The following report, was read and unanimously approved :—
Ballym akonny Tank Committee.
As directed by the County Council, a meeting of the Local
Committee of the Ballymakenny Tank was held in Drogheda
urt House on Tuesday, the (ith June, 1916, at the hour of 2
o'clock
Present :—ln the Chair : P Donegan, Esq, J P.
Other Members—P Callan, J P, and N T Murphy, Esquires.
In accordance with the advertisernönt issued the Committee
Proceeded t.o appoint a Dipping Superintendent and Local Ins-
pector for the district.
56
Applications were read from the following Tiernan,
Newhouse, Termonfeekin ; John J Kerr, Philipstown, Ballyma-
kenny, and Patrick F M' Keon, Priorstown, Termonfeckin.
The latter two candidates both attendecl in person and were
interviewed by the Committee.
After a short discussion the following resolution was passed
unanimously
Proposed by N T Murphy, Esq;
Seconded by Patrick Callan, FNI, .J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby appoint John J Kerr, Phillip.••
town, as Dipping Superintendent for the Ballymakenny Tank'
and Local Inspector for the Drogheda District at the salary Of
El per week for the Summer and Autumn Dipping periods.
Ii was unanimously arranged that the Inspoctror make Tns-
poctions on Wednesday, nursday, Friday and Saturday in
. each week, and that he attend at, the tank on each Mnoday and
uc«lay.
It was reeommended that he be• paid 'Iris wages each fortnight
and that he be instructed to lodgeqcll monies received by him
for dipping fees each fortnight.
DUTIES OF DIPPING ISSPFßYl'ORS LOCAL
REGULATIONS.
Mr B L Coleman stated that there appeared to be somo mis-
apprehension in regard to tho duties of the Inspectors under
the Local Regulationos passed by that Council. He understOOd'
and he believed the Inspectors did also, that they were only fo
inspect dippings carried out at proper swim-baths; but it
peared now that they had to attend at all private dippings
57
ther performed in a swim-bath or in a hand-bath. He did not.
think it would be possible for an Inspector to get through his
Work unless dippings in baths other than swim-baths were done
away with, and Chat those people who had not swim-baths were
compelled to bring their sheep to the county tank.
Mr' P Woods agreed with Mr Coleman's views.
The Secretary informed the Committee that the Inspector at
Ardee Tank had called at the office that morning, and had
handed him six notices of Intention to Dip served on him for
diPPings at places far removed from each other. They were all
to take place on that.day (Monday), and it would be impcxsiible
for 'him to inspect them all. This Inspector also complained
that in a few eases when he had göne to inspect, dippings on the
days specified in the notices, no dippings took place, nor was
•there any preparation made at the place for the clippings. "Ilhe
Seccetary further in formed Che (huncil that he had written
the Department requesting to know whether they approved of
the diPPings in hand-baths, and whether it would be within the
PO wers of the Council to compei owners not having a proper
S Wim-bath to dip at the Council's tank. The following reply to
this lotter was read :—
Dopartrnent of Agriculture,
Veterinary Branch, Dublin,
20th June, 1916.
No. 1810-16.
Sir,
have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
19th
instant, in reference to the question of securing in tho pro-
cess of sheep dipping the ' 'thorough immersion" Which the
Sheep Dipping Order requires.
58
In reply I have to state that while dipping in swim baths is'
without doubt, the more expeditious and economical met'hod Of
dipping, it is not impracticable, the Department are advised, by
proper manipulation to effect a thorough immersion in a less
capacious bath. The process in this case is of course a tediOUS
one, and the practice of using small vessels such as you des-
cribe would naturally increase the difficulties of supervision ; but
it does not appear to the Department that it would be compe-
tent for the Local Authority for or other reasons to re-
quire dipping in their district to be carried out in swim baths•
If, however, swim-baths were provided by the Local Authority
it would apparently be open to them, under the Regulations at
present in force in County Louth, to require any owner who had
not suitable means of dipping of his own, to carry out, dipping
in one of these baths. The procedure in such cases would be to
insert the requisite condition as to the manner of dipping in the
Notice specifying tho time and place at which the dipping is re-
quired to be done.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Sæcretary.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
to
After discussion, the Secretary was directed to write again
the Department pointing out the difficulties which had arisen ill
connection with the inspections, and the impossibility of carry-
ing out the work properly unless dipping in hand-baths was
abolished, and requesting a direction in the matter from the
Department. He was also directed to call a meeting Of the
Executive Committee when the reply came to hand.
59
TANK SUPERINTENDENTS.
On the motion of Mr Bernard Finnegan, seconded by Mr
Peter Woods, J P, Thomas M 'Dermott (Doxey), of Ballymakel-
let, was unanimously appointed Dipping Superintendent at the
Ravensdale and Annaloughan Tank, at a salary of 188 per
weok.
The Secretary informed the Committee that the Carlingford
Local Tank Committee had appointed Hugh M 'Kevitt, Carling-
ford, Superintendent at the Carlingford tank, and Owen TreaL
nor, of Corrakit, Superintendent at the Omeath tank. These
men would also act as Local Inspectors for the areas served by
their tanks.
TheCommittee unanirnously approved of these appointments.
SHEEP SCAB.
Forms in connection with t!he following eases of Sheep Scab in
the county submitted by the Veterinary Inspectors,
Messrs Donnelly and Clinton respectively :—
J G O'NEILL, at Drogheda Port.
MICHAEL DAWE, at Dundalk Port.
As notified on the Forms, the affected animals were slaugh-
terod, and the animals not affected were isolated and dipped.
AUTUMN DOUBLE DIPPING.
following letter was read, and initialled by the
Chairman
so 1475-16.
Dopa rtment of Agriculture,
Veterinary Branch,
Dublin, 30th May, 1916.
Sir,
I have to advert to your letter of 25th instant, and to
60
the resolution which, as you indicate, was unanimously passed
•by your County Council at their adjourned Quarterly Meeting
on that day, in the following terms:—
"Resolved—That as all sheep in this county must be dip-
ped in the presence of a local inspector appointed by
the County Council, we hereby request the Department
to forego that part of their regulations compelling
sheep owners to dip their sheep twice within a certain
time during the, Autumn period, as sheep owners find
this regulation very injurious to heavy breeding
In reply I have to state that the circumstances of the life his-
tory of the insect which produces Sheep Scab render it most
desirable that tho prescribed double dipping at an interval of
not less than seven or more than fourteen days in the Autumn
Period should be persevered in, if the end aimed at, viz—the
eradication of the disease from the country, is, in due course, €0
be attained. The Department could not, therefore, but regard
a suspension of the double-dipping requirement as a retrogradk*
step in existing circumstances, and it is accordingly regretted
that they are unable to the proposal in your Council's
resolution.
At the same time they wish to say that thore is no reason to
consider that the second dipping should necessarily be injurioUS
to '{heavy breeding ewes," especially as it is competent to start
tho arrangements for t'he two dipping-s in such cases as early as
may wished after 31st July.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
61
Louth County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings Of the Louth County Council at their
Annual Meeting höld in the Court House, Drogheda, on Friday,
16th June, 1916, at 11 0'clock a m.
Present :—Charles A Duffy, J P ; Bernard Finnegan, Peter B
Moore, J p; Michael Meade, Laurence Goodman, Patk Done-
gun, J P; Joseph H M'Ardle, J P; Joseph Dolan, W Skeff-
ington, J P; James Wynne, J P; Patrick Callan, J P; , Peter
woods, J P; T V MacQuillan, John Dolan, James M'Carthy,
J P; Denis J Rath, N T Mtuphy, and J F MlllVhy, J P, Es-
quires.
Messrs Thos Walsh, County Surveyor, and Daniel O'Connell,
Solicitor to the Council, were in attendance.
On the motion of Peter B Moore, Esq, J P,
Seconded by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P,
the chair was taken by Charles A Duffy, EMI, J P.
Letters were read from the Clerks of the Ardee No. 1 and
I)rogheda (Louth) R ural District Councils statinÅ that at, Lhe
annual meetings of those bodies, Sir A V Foster Bart, •and Tatk
negan, Esq, J P, were elected Clrairmen of the respective
Councils.
Letter was read from the Clerk of Dundalk Rural District
Council stating that the annual meeting of his Council on 9th
rnstant, fell through as a quorum did not attend, but he belle-
62
ved that Mr Wm Woods was entitled to continue to act as
Chairman until the appointment of his successor. The Secre-
tary informed the Council that he had requested the opinion
of the Council's'Solicitor, Mr O'Connell, on this point, and read
reply from him to the effect that in his opinion Mr Woods may
continue to aet as a member of t'he County Council nntil his
successor as Chairman of the Dundalk Rural District Guncil
has accopt,ed the offce and signed the roquired declaration.
ELECTION OF CHAIRMAN.
Joseph Dolan, Esq, proposed the election of Charles A Duffy,
Esq, J P, as Chairman of the Council for the ensuing year, but
Mr Duffy declined to accept nomination. The resolution was
not seconded.
The following resolution was then passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Michael Meade, Esq ;
Seconded by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That Lieutenant William A Doran, of Harristown'
Ardee, be and is hereby elected Chairman of the Louth County
Council for the ensuing year.
ELECTION OF VICE-CHAIRMAN.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by James M 'Carthy, nsq, J P;
Seconded by Denis J Rat.h, Esq, and
Resolved—That Mr Charles A Duffy, J P, of Seatown Place,
Dundalk, be and is hereby elected Vice-Chairman of the Louth
County Council for the coming year.
63
Mr Duffy suitably returned thanks for his unanimous elec-
tion.
APPOINTMENT OF RATE COLLECTOR.
The next business on the agenda was the appointment of a
rate collector for •the District Electoral Division of Dundalk
Rural in place of Mr Patrick Hughes.
Only one application was received, that of Mr James 'V incent
Johnston, of Bellurgan, Dundalk, and the following resolution
Was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
molved—That we hereby appoint Mr James Vincent John-
Of Bellurgan, Dundalk, Poor Rate Collector for the Dis-
triet Electoral Division of Dundalk Rural, on the terms and
conditions as advertised by our Secretary, viz—Remuneration
at the rate of 51d in the on all monies collected and lodged
With the County Treasurer to the credit of the Council, and in
accordance with the Orders, Rules and Regulations of the Local
overnment Board ; together with the prescribed fees for the
duties he will be required to perform under the Franchise and
Jurors' Acts
The Secretary requestOd a direction from the Council as to
the amount of Security from the Guarantee Society, the Lon-
don and Lancas'hire Fire Insurance Company, which the Collec-
tor Would be required to give for this collection district. -He
informed the Council that the late Gllector's bond was C900,
which had not been varied when his former collection district
had been divided. He further stated that Mr Johnston's bond
for collection district No. 9, for which the warrant was about
64
C2,200, was and that the warrant for the collection dl•s-
trict No. 5, to which he was now appointed, was C2,328.
After discussion the following resolution was passed unani-
rnously
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P
Seconded by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby decide that the amount of the
bond for Collection District No. 5. the Electoral Division
Dundalk Rural—to which Mr James V Johnston is now appoin
ted collector, be the sum of CGOO.
THANKS FOR SYMPATHY.
ted
The following letters were read, and ordered -to be inser
on the minutes
Clogherhead,orogheda, 7th May, 1916.
Dear Mr M' Alester,
I would thank you to kindly convey my own and
family's grateful thanks to the Council for their resolution o
sympathy in our recent sad bereavement. I tha.nk you also per
son ally.
Sincerely yours,
DENIS J. RATØ.
Sandpit House, 5-6-'16.
Dear Mr M' Alester,
Please convey eto the Chairman and gentlemen
of the Louth County Council my most sincere thanks for their
sympathy with me on the death of my father. The kind words
of regret expressed by them in their resolution of condolence
65
will always be to me and to my family a source of grateful re-
memberance.
Faithfully yours,
P. L. M'KEON.
BLACKROCK PICTURE THEATRE.
Leter was read from the Manager Blackrock Picture Theatre
Cmnpany, applying for renewal of license for above Picture
Theatre, and the following resolution was passed Imanimously—
• Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P;
Seconded by T V MacQuiIIan, Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby grant a renewal of the Cinemato-
graph License to the Blackrock Picture Theatre for the ensuing
Year.
ANCIENT MONUMENTS.
was read from the Town Clerk, Drogheda, stating that
his Council approved of the taking over by the County amncil
Of the Ancient Monuments in Drogheda known as the Old
bey and the Butter Gate. Letter was also read from the Clerk of
(Louth) Rural District Council stating that his (hun-
cil aroroved of the Ancient Monument known as Clogh Patrick,
sit•uato at Mell, being taken charge of by the County Council.
The following resolution was then passed unanimously
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq, ;
Seconded by John Dolan, Lsq, -and
Resolved—That we hereby decide to take over the charge of
Ancient Monuments in Drogheda, namely, The Old Abbey,
situate at West Gate, and the Butter Gate, situate at
66
John's Gate; also the Monument known as Clogh
Patrick, situate at Mell, in the Rural District of Droghed@, for
their proper preservation.
NATIONAL TEACHERS' SALARIES.
Resolution was submitted from the Waterford County Bor-
ough calling upon the Treasury to grant an increase of salaries
the Irish National Teachers, and to substitute monthly pay-
ments for the present, system of quarterly payments.
On the motion of W T Skeffington, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P,
The resolution was unanimously adopted.
TAXATION OF IRELAND.
A resolution was sumitted from the City of Dublin Municilßl
in
Council protesting against the proposed enormous increase
Irish Taxation, and requesting the Trish representatives in
ted
liament to resent such or any increase. The resolution 1>0111
out that Ireland's building and other chief industries are
tically dead, and that the incidence of taxation is different
that obtaining in Great Britain.
On the motion of N T Murphy, Esq
Seconded by J H WArd1e, nsq, J P,
The resolution unanimously adopted.
AMALGAMATION OF WORKHOUSES.
co.
Resolution in above matter submitted from the Tyrone
Council, calling on the Government to pass a Bill giving PO
67
€0 the L G B to make provision for the more economical admin-
i stration of Poor Relief by closing superfluous workhouses or by
amalgamation of same, was marked "read."
AGRICULTURAL SCHOLARSHIPS.
Letter was read from the County Council of King's County sug-
gesting that Seholarships'in Agriculture should be tenable only
at University College, Oork, was referred to the Scholarship
Committee.
RICHMOND PATIENTS.
Return was submikted, and initialled by the Chairman, show-
ing the nu.mber of patients from Louth County in Richmond
District Asylum.
NOTICE OF MOTION.
Mr •James M 'Carthy, J P, gave notice t'bat at the next meet-
Of the County Council he would move that in future Quar-
terly Meetings of the (hunty Council be held in Drogheda at
10.30
a.m.
DEATH OF CAPTAIN PILGATE.
The following resolution was passed in silence :—
oposod by Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Denis J Roth, nsq, and.
Rosolved—nlat we learn Yith regröt of the death of Capt.
William de Salis Filgate, who was for .many years a respected
member of this Council, and we beg to tender to his widow and
relatives our sincere sympathy in their bereaveJnent.
68
Proposal Committee,
Minuets of Proceedings of the Proposal Committee at their
Second Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court
House, Dundalk, on Monday, July, 1916, at 1 0'clock P
Present the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P;
Other Members—Patrick M 'Gee, J P; Laurence Goodman'
Bernard L Coleman, J P; Thomas O'Rourke, J P Kearney '
Bernard Hamill, J P; John Morgan, James Wynne, J P '
Bernard Finnegan and Denis J Rath, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance•
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Committee were
taken as read, asd signed by the Chairman.
The following Proposals were considered by the committee '
and each was approved unanimously
APPLICATIONS BY THE COUNTY SURVEYOR.
'c No. 30—To purchase Tar Boiler—Johnston's Patent Double
Furnace, with Dotible Waithman's Apparatus'
plete ready for working. Cost not to exceed
(Ys Od, to be provided as follows 0s Od re-
maining of Machinery Loan to be applied to the
purchase, $2,3 0s Od further to be now approved
to 'be a County-at-large, ex-Urban, charge.
69
NO• 31—To Paint Water Cart, and Paint and Repair Mud
Cart provided fop the use of Ardee. Cost not to
exceed CIO Os (kl. County-at-large, ex-Urban,
charge.
The Secretary submitted Oounty-at-large Payments for
Quarter ended 30th June, 1916, which weré examined and
recommended for paymel!t.
The (hmmittee adjourned to Monday, 7th day of August to
receive Tenders.
70
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk'
on Monday, 10th July, 1916, at one o'clock p m.
Present the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P;
Other Members—Patrick M 'Gee, J P; Imurence Goodman'
Bernard L Coleman, J P; Thomas O'Rourke, P J Kearney'
JP;
Bernard Hamill, J P; John Morgan, James Wynne,
Bernard Finnegan and Denis J Rath, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Stilweyor, was in attendance•
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Committee were
taken as read, asci signed by the Chairman.
The following Accounts were submitted and, on examination '
were ordered for payment
215 2
Loans Account—Works in charge of Co. Surveyor
Subsidiary Account—
do.
do.•
Subsidiary Account—Seeretary's Office
188 15 7
120 12
C524 10
The Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and
Accounts were exa mined, and initialled by the Chairman •
71
PETTY CASH ACXX)CNT.
The Secretary informed the Committee that owing to the
large number of workmen employed at quarries and on road
work the amount required for Insurance Stamps was very high,
and the Petty Cash Account, into which a sum of C30 was
each quarter, was unable to meet this and the ordinary
e Xpeuditure for postage and other petty disbursements.
The Committee unanimously recommended that the amount
Paid into the Petty Cash Account each quarter be increased
from to C.50 to meet the increased Outlay.
EX4)OLLEC10R PATRICK HUGHES' ARREARS LISTS.
The Secretary submitted ex-Collector Hughes' Arrears Lists
for period ended 31st March, 1916, and on examination same
were ordered for • payment to the London and Lancashire Fire
Insurance Company.
The following letter from the L.G.B. was read, and initialled
by the Chairman
Local Government Board, Dublin,
28th June, 1916.
No. 29870/16.
Louth County.
Sir.
In reply to your letter of the 19th instant, I am directed by
the vocal Government Board for Ireland to state that, they
Will' not object to the payment by the Louth County Council
to the Londan and Lancashire Fire and Life Insurance Com-
72
pany, Limited, of such arrears of ex-CoIIector Hughes' as have
been approved by the Board.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
EX-COLLECTOR HUGHES POUNDAGE FEES.
The following letter was read, and the Secretary informed
the Committee that the arrangement by which the fees and
arrears due the Collector were being paid to his Guarantors
was in accordance with the terms of the Bond, and •was
unanimously agreed to at the conference in Dublin, at which
the L.G.B., the County Council, the Insurance Company and
the ex-Collector's brother were present :—
Local Governrhent Board, Dublin,
16th June,
78
The arrears sheets and vouchers of the ex-CoIIector should
be forwarded to the Board as usual.
I am, Sir,
Your &dienf servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
RATE OOLLECTTON.
The Seeretary submitted Return showing the condition cf
Of the Poor Rate Collection to 30th June, 1916. Of the 'st
Moiety of the Rate, amounting to the sum of $17,773 18s 5d,
a surn of C468 18s 8d has been collected.
The Return was initialled by the Chairman.
HARBOUR RECEIPTS.
The Secretary submitted the returns of the Harbour Const-
ables for the quarter ended 30th june, 1916, showing that the
No. 27847/16.
Louth Chunty.
Sir.
With reference to your letter of the 8th instant,
1916.
I arn
following dues had been received :—
Clogherhead
Carlingford
Giles' Quay
016 0
21 13 6
10 0 3
directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland to state
that, in the circumstances; they will not object to the payment
by the Louth County (%uncil to the London and
Fire and Life Insurance Company, Limited, of the poundage
fees due to ex-Oollector Patrick Hughes.
TCRERct'1Å)SIS DISPENSARY—ARCHITECTS ACCOUNT
The Secretary submitted account from Mr Vincent O'Connell,
architect of the Central Tuberculosis Dispensary, amounting
74
to the sum of Ci5 17s 2d, being fees and expenses in connection
with the erection of the Dispensary. As it appeared from a
minute of the Tuberculosis Committee of Management that the
amount of C4() paid Mr O'Connell for his work in connection
with the proposed Dispensary at Castletown, which had been
abandoned, was intended to cover his fees in connection with
the Dispensary now erected at the Louth Hospital, the
sideration of the account was adjourned for further informal
tion, which the Secretary was directed to request the Clerk
of the Tuberculosis Committee to supply.
ST. JOSEPH'S ORPHANAGE LOAN.
Letter was read from the Superioress, Convent of MercY'
Dundalk, informing the Committee that sho had lodged to the
credit of the Council with the County Treasurer the sum Of
CIOO, being half yearly instalment of Industrial School Loan•
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
MALICIOUS INJURY CLAIMS.
The following letter was read, and initialled by
Chairman : —
Francis Street, Dundalk,
4th July, 1916.
Dear Sir.
With reference to interview with you and they Chairman
of
for
the Council yesterday, I served notice on the Solicitorg
the respective applicants that the claims should be forwarded
to the Property Insses (Ireland) Committee, and if this course
was not adopted I should make use of notice on the postponed
75
hearing before the County Court Judge at Quarter Sessions.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
MOTOR LICENCE DUTY FEES.
Letter was read from the L.G.B. dated 30th June, 1916,
enclosing Paying Order value C63 Is 2d, being the amount pay-
able to tho County Council in respect of duties on licences for
Motor Cars during tho year ended 31st March, 1916. rnle
Secretary stated that the amount had been lodged to the
credit of the Council, and the letter was initialled by the
Chairman.
EDUCATION Acr COSTS.
Letter was read from the Clerk of Petty Sessions, Collon,
enclosing p .01 4s Gd and vouchers for costs awarded under
above Act at Collon Petty Sessions on 29th June.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
NOXIOUS WEEDS.
Circular letter was read from the Department dated 30th
June, No. A 12794/16, requesting the Council to take all
necesary steps to ensure that all roads and lands in the
control of the Council shall be kept clear of noxious weeds
throughout the present season.
The County Surveyor stated he always attended to this, and
the letter was initialled by the Chairrhan.
76
TRADE BOARDS ACTS, 1909.
Circular letter was read from the L.G.B. dated 30th June,
1916, No. 29589M, informing the Council that the notice
required to be .given by an employer under Section 7 of the
Trade Boards Acts in the case of contracts with Local
Authorities will no longer be necessary.
The letter was
initialled by the Chairman.
RATES—NEWCOMEN ESTATE.
With reference to the Rates due Collector Patrick
M 'Cullough out of the above estate, Tn Chancery, which the
Finance Committee, at their meeting held on 29th May, re-
commended to bé refunded to the Collector, subject to the
sanction of the L.G.B., the Secretary ihforrned the Committee
that he had Written the Board Q for their approval, and had
received in replyU1 letter requesting to be informed as to the
nature of the proceedings taken for the recovery out of the
estate of the amount of Rates due, namely, .C13 12s 3d. He
had replied by forwarding copy of lotter received f rom Mr
Daniel O'Connell, who had been acting in the matter, in which
Mr O'Connell stated that he had brought a Civil Bill at
Dundalk Quarter Sessions on .4th June, 1913, claiming Poor
Rates due by the Executors of the late Rev John Clarke, P P'
on the lands of Collystown. Mr Mackay, who defended'
pointed out to Judge Green that the estate was ill Chancer.Y'
and until allocation the Rates could not be paid. His Honor
said .he felt bound to nil the Civil Bill in the circumstanceS•
Subsequently Mr O'Connell had made enquiry at the Office Of
the Chief Clerk in Chancery, and found that until the final
stage is reached, and the costs of the several parties to the
suits are provided for, this account for Rateø cannot dealt
77
with. Proceedings in Chancery are still pending, and will not
be completed before next term.
On receipt of this reply the L.G.B. had written on 30th
June, 1916, No. 31 ,541/16, that under the circumstances
mentioned in Mr O'Connell's letter the Board do not consuer
the Rates irrecoverable, but to meet the wishes of the Council
they assent to the amounts in question being refunded to the
Collector and carried forward for subsequent collection.
The (hmmittee approved of this/ course, and recommended
the refund to the Collector of the amount in question.
RATE COLLECTOR'S APPIJCATION.
Application was read from Collector Patrick Cluskey re-
questing the Committee to consider the question of. increasing
his salary owing to the very greatly increased amount of his
warrant.
The consideration of the application was adjourned to next
meeting of the Committee, and to be put on Agenda convening
the meeting.
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL PUPIL.
Letter was read from •tho Drogheda Industrial School le-
questing permission of the Council to the transfer of ftomas
Curran, an inmate of their School, to Letterfrack Industrial
School, Galway, ås he is now of age for the transfer.
The Committee unanimously approved of the transfer.
78
APPROVAL OF COLLECTOR JOHNSTON'S
APPOINTMENT.
The following letter was read, and initialled
Chairman
Local Government Board, Dublin,
26th June,
No. 29895/16.
Louth County.
Sir.
by the
1916.
79
the men had not yet resumed work, nor had any formal offer
been made to them. A long discussion took place, after which
the following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Finnegan, Esq ;
Seconded by Denis J Rath, Esq ;
That we give full powers to the County Stirveyor to arrange
terms with the workmen at present on strike at Faughart
Quarry, and with the workmen in the other quarries worked
by the County Council.
h Te Local Government Board for Ireland have luid before
them your letter of the 19th instant, relative to the collection
of the Poor Rate in Louth County, and I am to state that they
havo assented to the collection district of Dundalk being added
to the collection districts of Ballymascanlon and Faughart so
as to form one collection district, and to Mr James Vincent
Johnston being appointed Collector for the entire district.
Mr Johnston should give security for CI,200 in respect Of
the collection, and his Bond, when completed, should be sub-
mitted for the inspection of the Board.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary •
Secretary, Louth Oouniy Council.
FAUGHART QUARRY WORKERS.
Mr Bernard Finnegan raised—the question of the Strike at
Faughart Quarry, and requested information how the matter
stood' The County Surveyor informed the Committee that
80
Executive Committee,
Minutes of Proceedings of the Executive Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk'
on Monday, 10th July, 1916, at one o'clock p.m.
Present :—ln the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members O'Rourke, B L Coleman, J P;
J P Kearney, D J Rath, and L Goodman, Lsquires.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Committee
taken as read and 'signed by the Chairman.
VETERINARY INSPECI'ORS' REPORTS.
following reports were read, and initialled by' the
Chairman :—
MR. CLINTON'S REPORT—JUNE, 1916.
During the mom T visited the fairs and nrarkets in
district as usual. On 24th an outbreak of scab occurr
in one lamb amongst a lot of 13, the property of Mr M Dawe"
of Church street, Dundalk. The affected animal was
slaughtered and the remainder dipped under my supervisiOn•
Other necessary steps will taken regarding disinfection' etc•
Your obedient Servant,
J. T. CLINTON.
81
MR. DONNELLY'S REPORT.
During the month of June f had one case of shéép in lot
Of 79 sheep brought in from the CÖtinty Meath. Tho diséåÅed'
animals were slaughtered, with the owner's permission, and
the
in-contacts dipped twice.
Your Secretary was furnished with full particulars of the
I had no
case on the prescribed forms Of the Department.
Other outbreak of contagious disease in animals, but, made
Inspections in a few suspected cases reported to me.
Yours respectfully,
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
MR. MAXWELL'S REPORT.
I' beg to •report thac I visited the faits• and markets held iii
the Ardee No. I Dist+ict• for tho mOiith Of' Jtine.
Though' I have tio official case of diseåsé to roport; learn
from outside sources that, sheéfr-scab is still prevaléiit ili this
district, but as I can get no names, I cannot personally
investigate.
W. E. MAXWELL.
SHEEP DIPPING (LOCAL RÉGULATIONS)
As directed by the Committee, the Seéretary had Written COJ
the Department informing them of the difficulties of inspection,
by the Geal Inspectors, of private dippings, which, the
Department had stated, might bé legally performed ih hand
baths.
A very large number of shoep owners adopted tlriS'
method, with the result that on several occasions a numbe+ of
notices of intention to dip, on • the same day and at the same
hour, brit at widely divergent parts of their districts, were
82
served on the Local Inspectors. It was impossible, under
circumstances, for the Inspectors to attend at all the dippingS'
and unless' the dipping in hand baths was abolished it would
be Impossible to carry out the regulations.
The following reply had been received from the Department—
Department of Agriculture,
Voberina,ry Branch,
29th June,
No. -1893/16.
Sir,
1916.
In reply to your further letter of 27th instant respecting
certain difficulties {Rising in oonnection with the supervisi011
of sheep-dipping in County Louth, I have to point out that
the object of the Regulation requiring sheep owners' to carry
out dipping at such time and place, and under such conditions
as the Local Authority may direct, is to place the Local
Authority in a position to overcome the difficulties mentioned'
Such Regulation being in force in County Louth, the Local
Authority may, by the due service of notices thereunder '
arrange the dipping of overy owner's sheep so as to admit Of
th dipping being supervised in each instance by one Of the
Dipping Inspectors. Moreover, in cases where there is reason
to believe that the facilitic»s for dipping on the premises of any
owner are not such as to allow of adequate personal super-
the
vision of the dipping, the Local Authority may require
dipping to be carried out under conditions which admit o
such supervision, e.g., in the public dipping tank in charge Of
the Dipping Inspector.
I have to add that it should be practicable, through
83
Police, to ascertain beforehand Che kind of dipping facilities
which each owner possesses.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
Secretary Louth County Council.
The Secretary was directed to write again to the Department
stating that the Inspectors would be unable to carry out their
duties' under the Local Regulations if dipping in hand baths
was not abolished.
DIPPING INSPECTORS.
The following letter was read, and initialled by the
Chairman
Department of Agriculture,
Veterinary Branch,
29th June, 1916.
No. 1892/16.
Sir,
With reference to your letter of [he 27th instant respect-
ing the arrangements recently; made by your Local Authority
under the Diseases of Animals Acts in connection with the
SUPervision of sheep-dipping in County Louth, I have hereby
to
erpress the Department's approval of the temporary
aPPointment by the Local Authority of the undermentioned
Persons as Tank Superintendents, and also as Local Inspectors
Under the Appointment of Inspectors (Ireland) Order, with
84
remuneration (in the Summer and Autumn Dipping Periods)
as indicated opposite their respective names, viz
John J Kerr, Ballymakenny,
18s per week, and 2s as Inspector.
Williana Leonard, Ardee,
I$s per week, and 2s as Inspector.
Thomas M 'Ardle, Knockbridge,
18s per week, and 2s as Inspector.
Thomas M 'Dermott, Ravensdale,
18s per week, and 2s as Inspector.
Owen Keenan, Aghameen,
Fees of ld per sheep and {d per
ancl 2s per week as Inspector.
Hugh M 'Kevitt, Carlingford,
Same.
Owen Traynor, Orneath,
Same.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
lamb,
T. P. GILL,
Seere Cary •
Secyetary, Louth County Council.
JINSPECTION OF SHEEP DIPPING STATIONS.
Letter was read from the Department of Agriculture dated
7th July, 1916, No. 2004/16, enclosing copy of report of their
Inspector, Mr Norris, M.R.C.V.S., on his inspection Of the
Council's Sheep Dipping Tanks in Carlingford and Omeath
.districts. The Report stated that Mr Norris had visited the.
tank at North Commons, Carlingford, where it is conveniently
Situated at the foot of the Carlingford mountain. The bath
is Of the portable swim-bath typo and has a capacity for 240
gallons of wash. The "run" from the draining pen would be
improved by the addition Of a few battens placed crosswise at
the exit of drainer to give the sheep a foothold as they run out.
There is a drop of about foot from the end of drainer to
ground, and this might be improved so that the "run" would
slope gradually from the end of the drainer. The surface of
the catch pen and the ground surrounding would be improved
by being concreted or sheeted in wood. Tn wet weather the
ground becomes boggy, and in addition to its other drawbacks
this condition would help to foul the bath considerably.
M 'Kevitt, the Inspector in charge, appears to be a satisfactory
Mr Norris also visited Corrakit (()meath) tank, where
the hurdle»s to form the draining pen had not yet arrived. The
Inspector also awaited a supply of Forms, etc., from the County
Council. The Dipping season is later at, Omeath than at,
Carlingford. The location of the tank appears to be eon-
V enient, and the Inspector, Owen Treanor, is an active young
man engaged in sheep farming, who will, no doubt, a
satisfae€ory man for the work.
Mr Norlis, in his general remarks, states that the work of
SUPervision of private dippings will be almost impossible •unless
the Local Authority put in force the provisions of the Local
a fairly large size built of concrete. These would give a better
uncil's tanks, as a, number of owners prefer to dip at home
In mqxst unsuitable tubs.
Mr Norris. considers that the County Council would do well
to consid€•• the question of erecting •permanent swim-bath' of
86
a fairly large size 7miIt of concrete. These fould give a better
service than teniporary baths, and would in the end 'be less
expensive.
The report was initialled by the Chairman.
The Secretary informed the Committee that immediately
after the confirmation of the appointment of Treanor by the
Executive Committee, he had been given all books necessary '
and that the hurdles had been sent to Omeath.
SHEEP SCAB CASES.
Vamious forms in connection with eases of sheep scab in sheep'
the property of the following owners, yere sent in by the
Veterinary Inspectors and initialled 'by the
Ogle, Gormanstown, Drogheda Port; J G (Y Neill, Oldcastle;
Michael Dawe, Dundalk, Dundalk Port; 'I'homas Thornt0Ü'
Newtownda rver.
1
Finance Committee.
Minutes of prooecdings of the Finance Conumittee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 24th July, 1916, at o,ne o'clock, p HI.
Present the Chair :CharIes A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—J H M'Ard1e, J P; Hamill, J P; L
Goodman, J F Murphey, J P; J Wynne, J P; W Woods, J P;
, os O'Rourke, and John Morgan, Esquires.
Letter was read from Mr Walsh, €ounty Surveyor, stating ho
Was beginniug the tarring of the streets of Castlebellingham,
might be •unable to -attend the Finance Committeo, but
Would endeavour to get back in time.
Mr John M C Lyons, Assistant Surveyor, was in attend-
The minutes of the previous meeÉing of the Committee wore
en as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts weie submiited, and on
Were ordered for. payment : —
ans in Charge LOECO. Surveyor Clö3 8 11
Subsidiary Account—do.
78 19
do.
Subsidiaty Aeeount•ecretary's Ofliee
540 7
The Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loans Ac-
counts were examined and initialled by the Chairman.
"l'he Secretary submitted Forms 22 for the Rural Districts Of
Ardee, Drogheda, and Dundalk for quarter ended 30th June'
1916, and payment was recommended of the amounts set out
on same, namely—Ardee, $612 12s Ocl ; Drogheda, C360 Is ;
Dundalk, CJ,004 IGs Od.
COLLECTORS' APPLICATION.
The following applications from four of the Rate CollectorS
were read
Mansfieldstown Castlebellingham,
Gentlemen,
8
Dundalk, 10th July; 1916.
We, the undeisigned Collectors, bog to apply
10th July, 1916.
To Charles M' Alester, Esq.
Dear Sir,
Will you kindly bring under notice of Finance
Committee that my Poundage Wees is only 4åd in the C for the
past 12 years. - My collection when County (%uncil started
was about El and it is now C2,G67 half-yearly. My Old
salary before the chhnge was from C220 to C230 per year, or
I()d in the C. I have the worst grievance of any Ck)llector in
the county. There are upwai•ds of 80 extra Labourers'
ges within the past IO years, 'airl also Clermont Park, upwards
of 100 ratings with farms, labourers' cottages, gardens separ-
ately for fishermen of Blackrock. Major Fortesscue's agent
used to pay this in one cheque. I never got any allowance for
this extra work. The late Mr VI' J Byrne told me he would see
and move to get me paid over Clermont, but didn't do so'
Whatever the Finance Meeting consider fair I will 'be satisfied
with it.
Your Obedient Servant,
P. CLUSKE<.
to have onr present salaries revised, as it is now over 13 years
since we came to this arrangement with an Inspector from the
Local Government Board, who calculated our salaries on the
PO Undage rate paid us at that time, taking the amount of our
diffei•ent Warrants for the previous three years as the stand
ard. W
e would suggest to Che Committee •to adopt the same
system
now, taking the past three years as a basis, as we be-
believe this arrangement would be fair both to the Council and
the Collectors. we would request the Committee to re-
commend whatever they may arrive at to bo re-
trospeetive for tl
past three years, as we are confident Che
uncil will agree that there is a big difference as regards the
e Xmnse of a Collector 13 years ago and the time we 'have gone
through for the past three or four years.
When eonsidering this application, the Collectors would be
pleased to attend if roquired as a deputation before the Corn-
rnittee.
We remain, Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servants,
PATRICK JOHN WOODS, PETER
M 'DONNELL.
Til
e Chairman and Members
Finance Committee.
The secretary submitted the following statement of the am-
onnts
Paid these Collectors as salaries, which had been fixed in-
st
qad of
poundage rates : —
P CLUSKEY—CIOI IOS per annum—4 3-561 in the g.
PATRICK 10d per 1-10d in
the C.
PETER M'DONXELL—CIOO Ils 2d per 1-3d in
c.
JOHN WOODS—E88 2s lod per in the C.
On tho basis of the Warrants of these Oollectors for the pre-
sent colléefion, the approximate rate in tho C opposite the
names represent Che present salaries paid.
After a long discussion the resolution was
unanimously
Proposed by John F Murphy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Joseph H M 'Ardle, Ls•q, J P, and
Resolved—That we recommend, subject to the approval Of
the L G B, that the followink rates of poundage fees be fixed
for the collections of the undermenbioned Collectors of poor
rate in the Coun€y of Louth, viz
PATRICK CLUSKEY, at the of in tho C.
PATRICK WDONNELL, at the rate of in the
PETER WDONNELL, at the rate of 7d in C.
JOHN WOODS, the rate of 7d in the C.
With reference to tke roquest of the Collectors that the
of revision should 'be retrospective for the past throe years '
the Committee unanimowly declined Che request.
MR. V. J. O'CONNELL'S FEES FOR CENTRAL
DISPENSARY.
The Seeretary read the correspondence from the Secretary o
the Tuberculosis Committee of Management with Mr O'Connell
5
relative to the arrangement made for the preparation of the
plans for the above Dispensary, and after discussion it was de-
eided to refer the consideration of the matter to the Committee
Of Management and request that a report be made, on their
findings, to the County Council.
QUARRY AT TULLYALLEN.
The follmlfing letter from Mr B R T Balfour's Solicitor was
read, and referred to the Co. SUrveyor for his report :—
36, South Frederick Street,
Dublin, 19th July, 1916.
Blayney R. T. Balfoui•'s Estate.
Dear Sir,
J have heard from Mr Balfour with reference
to the pass through his land in King William's Gleri from the
Proposed quarry in Mr Roche's land at Tullyallen.
principal objection to giving the permission is that he conr
•Riders that .the beauty of the Glen, which is resorted to by a
large number of tourists, would be greatly spoiled by the heavy
ear ting on the road, which is a narrow one, and that there
Would be
a great deal of obstruction by lorries coming to and
from the quarry.
Also if the pass is fenced the grazing of the lower part of the
Glen will be useless, and if not fenced cattle will 'be able to
stray out on the road, which would be most objectionable.
Mr Balfour thinks that if any other quarry in the neighbour-
hood
Would answer the purpose it wotild be a thousand pities to
do anything that would dpmage one of the beauty spots of the
county.
Se
Yours truly,
E. MA UNSELL.
eretars Louth County Council.
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS.
Letter was read from the Canon Hamilton, Dundalk,
tifying that an application would be made for committal to the
Meath Industrial Home, Dublin, of a child named Wm Wagner •
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
Letter was read from Manager Industrial School, Drogheda'
notifying that Bernard Devine, an inmate of the School,
ing reached the required age, would be sent to I,etterfrack In-
dustrial School. The Committee unanimously approved Of the
transfer.
IÄter was read from the Manager, St Patrick's Industrial
School, Mil!town, Belfast, pointing out the necessity of
ing the present Grant for the maintenance of children in
trial Schools during the present war, and also stating that. the
Belfast City Council, and the County Antrim County Council
had granted an increase.
The consideration of the application was adjourn6d for
present.
AOCIDENT AT QUARRY.
The •Secretary informed the Committee that an accident had
occurred to one of the workmen engaged at Cocklehill
by a stone bruising his foot. Insurance Company had been
advised, and they now requested a medical certificate, which
the Secretary was directed to procure from the injured
MOTOR LICENCE DUTIES.
Circular letter was read from the L G B enclosing certifl(a
Statement showing the value of thc Motor Car Licence Duties
levied during year ended 31st March, 1916, by each County and
County Borough Council in Ireland, by which it appeared that
a •sum of .CI,261 3s Gd had beeen collected in the County of
th.
MALICIOUS INJURY APPEAL.
The followingVl.tter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man :
Francis Street, Dundalk,
13th Jilly; 1916.
Richard Boyle, Ballaverty, C15. Criminal Injury
I)
ear Sir
Application.
I beg to report that the appeal against the
ree Of the County Court Judge awarding -the Applicant C5
e O mpensation for burnipg of pike of hay, was heard to-day at
Sununer Assizes, and the Judge of Assize affirmed the debision
Of the County Court a'nd increased the amount awarded to the
sutn of to be levied of the Electoral Division of Rathcor.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
s
ecretary, Louth County Council.
ASISTAXT SURVEYORS' APPLICATION.
Letters were read from Messrs J Dromgoole and J
Yons, Assistant Surveyors, requesting a •revision of their
sala
The ries with
a view to having same increased, by the Council.
retary was directed to send copies of the applications
unty Surveyor and request his report on them for
e onsidera-tion by the Committee at their next meeting.
8
HALL AT COLLON.
The following report was read and initialled by the Chair-
man : —
County Surveyor's Office,
Dundalk, 22nd July, 1916.
Application by A.O.H. for Site for Hall in Market
Square, Collon.
To the Chairnåan and Gentlemen Finance Committee Meeting'
24th July, 1916.
Gentlemen,
I met the representatives of the applicants
for site in Collon on 11th instant, intending when I had seen
the place to ask the local County Councillors to meet me there•
The County Council does not even maintain the Market square
at Collon. I do not see, therefore, how the Council could be
a position to give title for a building site, apart from other
siderations. I did not consider it necessary then to put the
cal County Councillors to the trouble of meeting me
Your obedient Servant,
THOMAS WALSH.
1
Louth County Council.
Minutes of proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
Second Quarterly Meeting, held in the Cmmeil Chamber,
Court House, Dundalk, on Thursday, 27th July, 1916, at one
o'clock, p m.
Present
—In the Chair: Charles A Duffy, nsq, J P.
Other Members—Laurence Goodman, Michael Meade, T V
MaeQui11an, B Hamill, J P; Bernard Finegan, M O'Meara,
J P; J M'Carthy, J P; J Wynne, J P; N T Murphy, J P;
M 'Ardle, J P; John Morgan, Esquires; and Sir A Vere
Foster, Bart.
Messrs Thomas Wylsh, County Surveyor; J M C Lyons, and
'J Dromgoole, Assistant Surveyors, and Daniel O'Connell, Soli-
citor to the Council, were also in attendance,
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Laurence Goodman, Esq, and
Resolved—That the minutes of the proceeding• of the Louth
County Council at their First (Adj ourned) Quarterly Meeting,
held on 25th May, 1916, and their Special Meeting .held on 5th
June, 1916, and their Annual Meeting, held on 16th June,
1916
, a copy of each having been sent to each member of the
Council, be and are hereby confirmed,
2
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by T V MacQuiIlan, Esq ;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That the minutes of the proceedings of the Fin-
ance Committee at their meetings held on the undermentioned
dates, a copy of each having been sent to each member of the
Council, with all payments and recommendations contained
therein, be and are hereby confirmed.
Monday, 29th May, 1916.
Monday, 12th June, 1916.
Monday, 26th June, 1916.
Monday, 10th July, 1916.
Monday, 24th July, 1916.
CONFIRMATION OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by B Finegan, Esq ;
Seconded by J M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the minutes of the proceedings of the Exec U-
tive Committee at their meetings held on the undermentiOned
dates, a oopy of each having been sent to each member Of the
Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
Monday, 29th May, 1916.
Monday, 26th June, 1916.
Monday, 10th July, 1916.
3
OF PROPOSAL COMMii11CE MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by James Wynne, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by N T Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the minutes of the proceedings of the Propo-
"l Committee at their Second Quarterly Meeting, held on 10th
'July, 1916, a copy of which has been sent to each member of
the County Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
VOTES OF CONDOLENCE.
The following resoutions were passed in silence :—
Proposed by Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Bernard Finegan, Esq, and
Resolved—That we learn with regret of the death of ME
'James Connolly, J P, Ravensdale, who was for many years a
r e SPected member of this Council, and we direct our Secretary
to convey to his widow and family our sincere sympathy in
their sad bereavement.
Proposed by Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That we desire €0 place on record our sincere sor-
row at the death of Mr Jarnes Norton, J P, who.se life-long
Work in the noble cause of Temperance has won our admiration.
We hereby direct our Secretary to convey to his widow and fa-
Iniiy our sympathy in their sad loss.
5
the Ardee No. I Rural District Council, at their Second
Quarterly Meeting, held on 4th July, 1916, and set out on
Form 22 furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby
approved of. These payments amount to the sum of C612
12; Od.
DROGHEDA PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by N T Murphy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formulated by'
the Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union, at their Second
Quarterly Meeting, held on 11th July, 1916, and set out OJI
Form 22 furnished to the County Council, be aud are herebS
approved of. These payments amount to the sum of C3GO Is
2d.
DUNDALK PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Laurence Goodman, Esq ;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formulated
the Dundalk Rural District Council at their Second Quarterly
Meeting, held on 3rd July, 1916, and set, out on Form 22 fur-
ARDEE PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was possed unanimously .
Proposed by Sir A Vere Foster, Bart
Seconded by T V MacQuiIInn, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formulated by'
13 10
Cö342 12 11
nished to the County Council, be and are hereby approved of.
These payments amount to the sum of IGs Od
COUNTY-AT-LARGE PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Michael O'Meara, Esq, J P;
Seconded by James M 'Cart'hy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formulated by
the Proposal Committee at their Meeting, held on 10th July,
1916, and set out on Form 22 furnished to the County Council,'
and amounting to the sum of $5,763 14s 4d, be and are hereby
approved of.
UNION AND RURAL DISTRICT DEMANDS.
The Treasurer's Authority for payment of the following Jn-
stalments of Demands was signed :—
Ardee Union
Drogheda do.
Dundalk do.
Drogheda (Louth) do
Ellö6
1379 19
O
2806
5
. C196
0
15
15
271
0
C 483
1
0
0
0
•Dundalk
do
6
DATLS OF QUARTERLY MEETINGS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Sir A Vere Foster, Bart, and
Resolved—That the County Council hereby determine that
the following shall be the dates for the -holding of the Third
Quarterly Meetings of the Rural District Councils:—
ARDEE—Tuesday, 3rd October, 1916.
DROGHEDA —Tuesday, 10th October, 1916.
DUNDALK—Monday, 2nd October, 1916.
antl that the Proposal Committee meet, on
Mondny, October, 1916.
co-orrmos OF' COUNTY COUNCILLOR.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by N T Murphy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, and
Rosovel—That we hereby co-opt Mr Patk L M 'Keon, J Of
Sandpit House, . Termon!eckin, a member of the Oounfy
Vieq Mr Laurenee M 'Keon, deceased.
CO-OPTION OF' MEMBER or DROGHEDA OLD AGE
PENSIONS COMMrr1'EE.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by N T Murphy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, and
ResoveI—That we hereby co-opt Mr Patk L M 'Keon, J P, of
Sandpit House, Termonfeckin, a member of the Drogheda Old
Age Pensions Committee vice Mr Laurence M 'Keon, deceased.
APPOINTMENT OF MEMBER ON ARDEE DISTRICI'
SCHOOL AT'I'E.XDANCE COMMITTEE.
Tho following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Sir A Vere Foster, Bart ;
Seconded by J H M'Ardle, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby appoint Mr John Maguire, J P,
Of Harristown, Ardee, a member of the Ardee District School
Attendance Committee, vice Mr T P O'Carroll, deceased.
POUND FOR DROGHEDA.
The next business on the agenda was the consideration of re-
quisition from the Drogheda Nagisfrate.s for the erection of a
Pound at the Corn Market, Fair Street, Drogheda.
After some discussion, the consideration of this question was
adjourned to next meeting of the Council.
MEETINGS IN DROGHEDA.
In accordance with notice of motion, Mr James M 'Carthy,
J P, moved
' 'That in future two Quarterly and two Adjourned Meetings
Of the Council be held in Drogheda Court House, at the hour of
10.30 0'clock, a m."
Mr N T Murphy, J P, scconded the motion.
After discussion Mr Bernard Hamill, J P, suggested as a
8
compromise that two alternate Adjourned M eetmgs of the
Council be held in Drogheda Court House in addition to the
Annual Meeting. This modification was accepted by Messrs
M 'Carthy and Murphy, and the Council having given leave
to Mr M 'Carthy to amend his motion accordingly, the follow-
ing resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by N T Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That in future awo alternate Adjourned Quarterly
Meetings of the Council be held in Drogheda COurt House, at
the hour of 10.30 0'clock, a m.
NAVAL AND MILITARY WAR PENSIONS coMM1'1TEE.
In accordance with Schente under bhe Naval and Milijar.Y
War Pensions Act, approved by the Council, the following re-
solution was passed unanimously :—-
Proposed by Sir A Vere Foster, Bar! ;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That. we hereby appoint the following to act on
the Local Committee for the County of Louth, under t'he
scheme in connection with the Naval and Military War Pen- '
sions, etc, Act, 1915
Lady Bellingham, Castlebellingham.
Miss Jones, Fort Hill, Dundalk.
Mrs Bailey, Sandymount, Blackrock.
Mrs Barber, Francis Street, Dundalk.
Mrs Macmillan, Ardee House, Ardee.
Colonel T J Jones, •Lisnawilly.
Me•srs Laurence Stanley, Drogheda.
James Davis, Drogheda.
9
R Hesketh, Custom House, Drogheda.
B R Balfour, Townley Hall, Drogheda.
A W Archer, Drogheda.
Max Hesse. Dundalk.
M M 'Gowan, T C, Drogheda.
Thomas Leslie, Drogheda.
Wm Larkin, M 'Dermott's Terrace, Dundalk.
James Smith, 07, Annaville Terrace, Dundalk.
Sir A V Foster, D L, Bart, Glyde Court, Ardee.
Michael Meade, Mountain View, Castlebellinghnm.
Michael O'Meara, J P, Omeath.
Bernard Finegan, Linenhall Street, Dundalk.
TARRING •OF BLACKROCK ROAD.
In reply to Mr James Wynne, the Chunty Surveyor informed
the Chuneil that he could not do any tarring on the Blackrock
Road this season. as no proposal had been passéd for the work
by the Rural District Council.
TULLYALLEN QUARRY.
Mr N T Murphy, J p, referred to the correspondence ap-
Dearing in the printed minutes, from Mr B R T Balfour's Soli-
citor, re above, and spoke of the suit,ability of this quarry for
He urged
work on the main road from Drogheda to Navan.
that Mr Balfour should -be again interviewed with a view to
his consent being obtained for a pass to the quarry.
After discus Sion, the following committee was appointed to
Messrs C A Duffy, .J P;
meet Mr Balfour fs»r this purpose :—
James M 'Carthy, J P; N T Murphy, J P, and the County
Surveyor, the latter to arrange for the interview,
10
DANGEROUS TCRNINGS.
The Chairman •referred to a dangerous turn on the road to
Blackrock, and requested the County Surveyor to bring the
matter before the District Council With a view to its improve-
ment.
Mr Michael O'Meara, J P, referred to a dangerous turning
on the Omeath Road, and the County Surveyor was asked to
see about this also.
'I*HANKS FOR SYMPATHY.
The following letter was read
Lisrenny, Ardee, 21st June, 1916.
Dear Sir,
Would you kindly convey to the members of your
Council my warm appreciation of their extremely kind resolu-
lion of sympathy on the death of my husband, conveyed to me
to
in your letter of the 17th, and at the same time allow me
offer you my sincere thanks for your own personal message•
Yours faithfully,
GEORGINA M. FIIGATE.
The Secretary, Louth Co. Council.
ASSISTED MILK STATIONS.
Resolution submitted from Meath County Council, request-
ing legislation empowering County Councils to establish assisted
milk stations, by giving a bonus to selected farmers undertak-
ing to sell milk at fixed rates in necessitous districts, was
marked "read."
11
ARBITRA'ICJR—ARDEE RAILWAY ACCOUNTS.
The following letter was read? and after discussion wai refer-
red to the Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council •for théir opiniOn
as to the proposed successor to Sir John Barton :—
Great Northtern Rly., (I),
Secretary's Office,. Dublin,
24th July, 1916,
Dear Sir,
It will' be necessary to appoint an Arbitrator, in
the
matter of the Ardee Brauch Railway Accounts, under See. •
Sub-See. of the Great Northern Railway (Ireland) Act,
1892, in place of Sir John G Barton, resigned.
My Company hereby beg to suggest to your Council theop-
Pointment of Mr James Carroll, who has succeeded Sir John
Barton in the Valuation Office os Acting Commissioner of Valu-
ation for Ireland.
• Yours faithfully,
T. MORRISON, Secretary.
The Secretary, Louth County Council.
TUBERCULOSIS COMMITTEE MEETINGS.
Letter was read from Mr Warren, Clerk Tuberculbsis Corn-
njittee of Management, setting Out the names Of those mem-
bers of the Committee who bad failed to attend its meetings
during the past 12 months.
After discussion it was decided to place the question of ap-
Pointments td the Committee on the agenda for next meeting
of the Council.
12
SECRETARY'S SALARY .
The. following letter which had •been achlressed to
siding Chairman, was read and initialled
Local Government ootird, Dublin,
26th June,
No. 30278-1916.
Louth County.
Sir,
the Pre-
1916.
With .refei•enee to the resolution passed by the Lout'h
•County Couneii tit their meeting on the 25th ultimo, proposing
to increase the salary of the Secretary to the County
from to a year, I am directed by the Local Govern-
tuent Board for Ireland tao stnte that they have sapctioned this
proposal.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BAR LAS, Secretary.
The Presiding Chairman,.
Louth County (%uncil.
OMEATH TRISH COLLEGE.
Letter was read from Mr J Dolan, requesting renewal Of
the contributions from the members of the Council IO thé
above, and stating that the Council were entitled to a repre-
sentation of four members on the governing body of
lege, should the subscriptions received equal last year's.
13
AGREEMENT FOR HAULAGE.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, ICsq, J P ;
Seconded by James Wynne, Esq, J -P, and
Resolved—That we hereby approve of the Agreement between
Orzvald M 'Dowell, of Marsh Farm, and t,'.le Ccunty Coupcil for
the haulage of 400 L of itone from Faughart
Quarry to t,he Lurgangreen Road, at the rate of 4s per ton Of
221 cubic feet, and that we authorise our Secretary to affix the
Seal of the Council to the Agreement.
ESTATE DUTY GRANTS.
letter was read from the L G 13 dated 26th July,. 1916, en-
closing Order, with Schedule, for the payment of the sum of
E529 9s Ild in respect of Medical ind Educational Expendi-
ture by Guardians in the Gunt}' Of Louth for year ending 30th
September next.
Letter was also read from the L G B, dated '26th July, trans-
mitting Order 'for the payment of the sum of C88 14s 2d in res-
Pect of salaries of sanitary officers in the rural districts of the
country for the same period.
The letters were initialled by the Chairman.
14
Proposal Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Committee at their
Second ' 1 Adjourned) Quarterly Meeting held in the Council
Chamber, Court House, Dundalk, on Monday, 7th day of Au-
gust; 1916, at one o'clock, p m.
Present' theUhniri Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Bernard Finegan, James Wynne, J P; J F
Murphy; J P; J H M'Ardle, J P; Laurence Goodman, Bernard
Hamill, J P," and Thomas O'Rourke, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, Co. Surveyor, was in attendance.
The minutes of the previous meeting of tho Committee were
taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The Committee were called to consider tender.s for the folloW-
ing Works
APPLICATIONS THE COUNTY SURVEYOR.
No. purchase 'l'ar Boiler—Johnston's Patent l)oü'frle
Fnrnaee, with Dotible Waithman's Apparatus,
plete ready for working. Cost not to exceed
0s Od, to be provided As follows remaining Of
L"2ö
Machinery Loan to bé applied to the purchase,
further to be now approved and to be a County-at-
large, ex-Urban, charge.
15
NO. 31-—'1'0 Paint Water Cart, and Paint and Repair Mud
Cart provided for the use of Ardee. Cost not .10
exceed CIO. County-at-large, ex-Urban, charge.
For Work No. 30 no tender was received, and it was there-
fore placed in charge of County Surveyor.
For Work No. 31 only one tender was received, that of
Patrick M 'Cormack,WArdee, who proposed to do the work for
the sum of C IO, and the tender was unanimoukly accepted.
16
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee - at their
Meeting held in the Corneil Chamber, Court House, Dundalk'
on Monday, 7th August, 1916, at, one o'clock, p m.
Present the Chair : •Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Bernard Finegan, James Wynne, J P; J F
Miirphy, J P; J H M' Ardle, J P ; Laurence Goodman, Bernard
llamill, J P,- and Thomas O'Rourke, Esquires.
Mr Thomas , Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous meeting of the Committee were
taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted and Oli examinatiOll
were ordered for payment
Works in Charge of Co. Surveyor-—Loans Account $175 11 9
Works in charge of Co. Surveyor—Subsidiary
Account
Secretary's Offee.Subsidiary Account
89 15 9
3611 5
C301 18 11
The Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loans
counts were examined and initialled by the Chairman.
The transfer of a sum of C2,000 from the General to the
Subsidiary Account was recommended to the County Council.
ASSISTANT SURVEYORS' APPLICATIONS.
As per special notice on the agenda, the following •applica-
tions from Messrs J.mes Dimngoole and J M C Lyons, were
('Onsidered by the Committee, together with report from Co.
Surveyör on the applicmtions as under :—
Dunleer, 22nd July, 1916.
To the Chairman and Members Louth Co. Council.
Gentlemen,
1 respectfully beg to apply for an increase in my
as Assistant County Surveyor, owing to increased du-
ties.
Since the commencement •of your Road Board Scheme (July
1915), the inspection of work in the quarries, seeing to the dis-
tribution of stone along stretches of the Nort'il Road, and the
checking of paysheets for Finance Meetings, considerably ad-
ded to my usual duties. Also the unusual number of neglected
contracts (mostly in remote parts of the district) taken up by
the County Surveyor, . necessarily doubled the number of my
Inspections.
I am now 35 years in the service of your County, and as this
is my second application inside that fairly long period, I hope
for a favourable copsideration, under existing eircumstances.
Your obedient Servant,
JAMES DROMGOOLE.
18
Castle Road, Dundalk,
July 24th, 1916.
•Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,
I respectfully beg to apply for an increase
my salary. Twelve years have elapsed since last you had this
matter under consider'ation, and my work has largely increase
in the meantime.
Trusting you will kindly give the matter favourable consi-
deration.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
JOHN M C LYONS, B E,
Assißtant Co. Surveyor.
To Louth County Council.
County Survey(fr's Office,
Court House, Dundalk,
5th August, 1916.
To t,he Chairman and Gentlemen,
Finance Committee, 7th August, 1916.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,
In response to your request for a report
from County SVIrve.yor on applications by 'Assistant Surveyors'
I beg to repor€ as follows
So far as I can ascertain there has never been an exact defi-
nition of the duties of Assistant Surveyors by the County
Cotincil. Within the past two years there has Joen undoUb-
tedly a large number of eontraets on whioh Contractors have
failed to carry out their contracts, more especially in M"'
19
Lyons' district, but latterly also in Mr Dromgoole's district.
These neglected contracts undoubtedly impose more work on
the Assistants as on everybody else both in the County Sur-
Veyor's and Seceetary's Departments. A reference to the
-minutes of the County Council proceedings will show the num-
ber of defaulters in each district. Since the outbreak of the
War, owing to labour difficulties and the uncertainties of the
Situation. Contract01? are chary of tendering, and a number of
maintenance and special works have been carried out directly.
In one county I am a percentage of Che expenditure
on such works is given to the Surveyors to compensate them
for extra duties in carrying out the works. -I do not recom-
mend any such course to be introduced into this county.
I would refer to the increases in mileage of roads in contin-
nous maintenance in recent years. - The mileage in each Rural
District in 1898 and 1916 is shown below—to the nearest fur-
long
Ardee R D, 1898 198 miles; 1916—206} miles.
Drogheda R D, 1898—1251 miles; 1916—1381 miles.
Dundalk R D, 1898—2701 1916—304k miles.
It will be seen that the mieage in each Rural District has np-
Preeiably increased since the passing of the Local Government
Aef. The added miles are mostly "fourth-class" roads. In
most other counties such roads are repaired only once in four
or five years, and left to deteriorate again between repairs. As
regards the Road Board Work now in progress, when prepar-
ing the Scheme in 1914, immediately after taking up duty
ere, the Assistants accompanied me when inaking trial bor-
mgs, looking up quarries, etc, and put their local knowledge
at my disposal. The supervision of the work now in progress
20
has of course entailed extra duties on both, but so far more in
Mr Dromgoole's case than in that of Mr Lyons'.
There is no doubt but the work of these officers has increas-
sed since the last revision of their salaries. I recommend their
applications for favourable consideration, and at the same time
I recommend that a list of duties of the office be compiled and
placed on record.
Your obedient Servant,
THOMAS WALSH,
County Surveyor.
The mater was discussed at length by the Committee, and
the various duties of the Assistant Surveyors were gone into in
detail, and approved. The following resolution was then
passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, •Esq, J P;
Seconded by Thomas O'Rourke, Esq, and
Resolved—Thai recommend to the County Council that
the salaries of the Assistant Surveyors, Messrs Jan)es
goole and John M C Lyons, be increased from C13() to C150 per
RATE COLLECTION.
The Secretary submitted return showing tihe condition Of the
poor rate collection as on 31st July, 1916. The total of the
first moiety of „the rate is El 7,773 188 5d, and of this a sum o
C2,023 08 had been collected, leaving Clö,750 17s Ild
standing.
The return was initialled by the Chairman.
21
HAY RESTRICTIONS.
Mr B Hamill stated that number of people who had brought
Old crop hay into the market were prevented. by "the police
from disposing of same, on the grounds that the War Supply
Authorities had first claim on it: •He believed that t.he claim
did not apply the old crop, and he suggested that a strong
resolution should be. forwarded to the authorities on the sub-
jeet.
Mr T O'Rourke supported this view, and stated that the per-
son in charge of the War Supplies locally, could not be found
that morning to arrange matters, and considerable inconven-
ienee was caused to both buyers and sellers in consequence.
Eyentually on the motion of Mr Bernard Hamill, J p,
seconded by Mr T O'Rourke, the following resolution was
Passed unanimously, and the Secretary was directed to forward
same to the proper quarter :—
' 'That owing to the very great inconvenience and hardship
caused to the fanners and the public generally by the restric-
placed upon the sale of hay by the Military Authorities,
We request said Authorities to withdraw these resrictions
the ease of old crop hay, and to limit any restrictions made in
regard to the new crop, so that the buyers and sellers may
have a free market for the quantity not required for military
Purposes "
EXCHEQUER, MAINTENANCE GRANT.
Letter was read from tho L G B dated 1st August, 1916, No.
35792-1916, stating that a Paying Order för the sum of $215
from the above had been ordered in respect of the estimated
22
expenditure for treatment of tuberculosis in LoutJl County
during half year ending 30th September next.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
BALLAST FROM CLOGHERIIEAD PIER. •
The following Ieter from Mr D J Rath was read, and the
Secretary was directed to procuie maps from the Board
Works and the Land Commission, showing the 'boundary Of
the Clogherhead Pier and Mr Rath's property,
when
a direction will be given to the Harbour Master on the sub-
ject : —
Clogher Head, 3rd August, 1916.
The Secretary, Louth Co. Council.
Dear Sir,
The Harbour Master at Clogher Head has been
claiming rights on behalf of bhe County Council for the supply
of ballast for ships leaving the harbour. This ballast is taken
from land which I maintain is on my property, and while
have no objection to give every facility for the ballasting Of
vessels by permitting the masters to use the material taken
from this land, I would wish the Council to instruct the Har-
bour Master that any ballast required must be taken with
permission.
Yours faithfully,
DENIS J. RATEL.
MOTOR LICENCE DUTY.
Circular letters were read from the General Post Office
reference to the procedure with regard to the issue of Motor
23
cense Duties, and to any deposits made with respect thereto
during the. period when the Licences were in abeyance. As
the proposed increased charges for t,hese licences had been abån
doned the old conditions with reference thereto were again in
Operation. The letters were initialled by the Chairman.
ACCIDENT AT FAUGHART QUARRY.
The Secretary informed the Committee Ghat a slight accident
had occurred to Stephen Watters at Fa.ughart Quarry, and
that the Insurance Company had been advised, and the preli-
minaries attended to.
TELEPHONE INSTALLATION.
An account for C7, cost of installation of the telephone in
the County Offices, and deposit for trunk telegrams, etc, svas
submitted, and recommended for payment.
MR. V. O'CONNELL'S FEES.
Letter was read from the Clerk Tuberculosis Committee of
Management, stating that Mr O'Connell had accepted offer
Of 2} per cent on the outlay for the Central Tuberculosis Dis-
Pensary. This was considered satisfactory by the Committee,
and the Secretary was directed to send the papers to the Clerk
for completion.
Executive Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Executive Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk'
on Monday, 7th August, 1916, at one o'clock, p m.
Pre.sent
the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Bernard Finegan, James Wynne, J P; •J
M 'Ardle, J P; Laurence Goodman, Bernard Hamill, J P; and
Thomas O'Rourke, Esquires.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Committee were
taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
INSPECTORS' REPORTS.
The following reports were read
MR. CLINTON'S REPORT.
On July 8th an outbreak of scab occurred in a flock Of 15
sheep, the property of Thomas Thornton, Newtowndarver. The
sheep have been dipped three times, and the necessary mea-
kores were taken to stamp out the disease. An outbreak Of scab
was also detected in a flock of 23 sheep at Dundalk Port,
were consigned €0 England by Mr M Curran, Sligo. The
fected animals were slaughtered and in-contact ones dipped • A
case of swine fever has occurred on the premises of Michael
25
Hanlon, Ramparts, Dundalk. 'l'he matter is being at present
dealt with by the Depattment of Agriculture.
J. T. CLINTON.
MR. DONNELLY'S REPORT.
During the month of July I had two outbreaks of sheep scab
at the Drogheda Port, the anirnals in each case coming from
co. Meath. Tho diseased animals weie slaughtered and the
in-contacts dealt with, and your Secretary was furnished wibh
full reports and particulars in the matter. 'lhere was no ouner
case of contagious disease in animals occurring in this district
during the month.
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
MR. MAXWELL'S REPORT.
I beg to inform you that I attended the usual fairs and mar-
kets held in the Ardee No. 1 District for the month of July. I
have no case of contagious or- infectious disease to report for
this month.
W. E. MAXWELL.
The various Forms in connection with the eases of Sheep
Scab and Swine Fever, served by the Police and Veterinary
Inspectors, were tabled and initialled.
SHEEP DIPPING TANKS.
The following letter was read, 'but no action was decided
the matter
O. 2077-16.
Sir,
Department of Agriculture,
Veterinary Branch,
Dublin, 24th July, 1916.
Sheep Dipping.
With reference fo your letter of 12th instant, con-
26
Caining a further expression of the views of the Diseases Of
Animals Acts Executive Committee of the Louth County Coun-
cil on the procedure needful to make sheep dipping effective
the County, I have to state that it would be a mistake to sup-
pose that the Defartment regard the dipping in hand-baths as
other than a makeshift arrangement, which it would be unde-
sirable to have recourse to when better means can be provided •
The Department are at one with the Committee in srongly fa-
vouring dipping in central baths under supervision as against
the scattered dipping of small flocks in tubs, which renders
adequate inspection impossible.
But t*he Department consider that the readiest way to attain
the desired end of having dipping carried out at central points
is by the full exercise of the Local Au•thority's powers under
Che Sheep Dipping (Local Regulations) (Ireland) Order of 1916'
in pursuance of which the Inspectors can serve notices requir-
ing dipping to be carried out at the place, etc, specified in tbc
notice. It is hoped that this view of the matter will commend
to
itself to the Committee, and that they will be so good as
T. P. GILL
27
DIPPING SUPERINTENDENTS' SALARIES.
applications we're read from William Leonard, Dipping Supt.
Ardee Tank, and Thomas M'Ardle, Dipping Supt. Knockbridge
Tank, requesting advances in wages owing to the increased
Work. Each of the Superintendents asked that their wages for
all the work of clippings and inspections be increased to 30s per
Week. After long discussion the following resolution was
passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Laurence Goodman, Esq, and
Resolved—That we recommend that the wages of William
Leonard and Thomas M 'Ardle, as dipping superintendents, be
increased from 188 to 25s per week during the Autumn Period,
and that they get an additional 2s per week each during the
same period as Local Inspectors.
take action accordingly.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
Secretary, Louth County Council.
AUTUMN SHEEP DIPPING.
Secretary.
Tho Ommittee directed the Secretary t,hat all the arrange-
ments in force for the Summer Dipping Period should be
tinued during the Autumn Period.
28
Dundalk Rural District
School Attendance Committee
Minutes of above at their Meeting held in the Council
ber, Dundalk Court House, on Monday, 24th day of July'
1916.
Present—ln the Chair: J H M'Ard1e, Esq, J P.
'Other Members—Rev F M 'Clelland, M A; Rev J MOOdY'
M A; Rev J Donnelly, C C; P J Finegan, M D, J p; and W
Woods, J P, Esquires.
The Secretary read the- minutes of the last meeting Of
Committee, whioh were confirmed and duly signed by
Chairman.
The Reports from the School Attendance Officers were nest
read and considered satisfactory.
The following notice of motion, which appeared on the
da issued to the members of the Committee, was next
dered : —
' 'I 'hereby give notice that I shall move at the next meeting
of this Committee that the salary of the School
Officer (Mr D O'Meara) be increased from C62 to C78 per
num. (Signed) Rev F M 'Clelland, M A."
29
After due consideration of the subject matter of this notice,
it was—
Proposed by Rev F M'C1e11and, M A;
Seeonded by p J Finegan, M D, J P, and unanimously
recommended—
That the salary of the School Attendance Officer, Mr D.
O'Meara, be increasesl by CIG per annum, and that we ,respect—
fully request the sanetion 'Of the County Council to this re-
commendation.
1). O'MEARA,
Secretary to Committee.
Louth County Council.
Minutes of proceedings of tho Louth Count y Council at their
*acond (Adjourned) Quarterly Meetilig, held in the Ck'uncil
Cluunber, Court House, Drogheda, on 'l'hursday, 17th day of
August, 1916, at 10.30 0'clock, a m.
Present—In the Chair : Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
OtherMembers —P L M•Keon, .J P; M O'Meara, J P; MI.
Meade, I)onis J Rath, Laurence Goodman, Bernard Harnill,
J P; James '1' J P; Peter B Moo,e, J P; John Dolan, J
N! •Carthy, J P; and N 'I'Murphy, J P, Esquires.
•Messrs Thos Walsh, Co. Sitrveyor, John M C Lyons, nncl
Drorngoole, Assistant Surveyors, were in attendance.
Mr Patrick L M 'Keon, J P, who was co-opted to till the va-
e ancy caused by the death of his father, having signed the Sta-
tutor.v declaration of acceptance of office, was welcomed by
the Chairman on t41king his seat on the Council.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :-
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P;
Seconded by John Dolan, Esq, and
Resolved—That the minutes of the proceedings of the Louth
unty Council at their Second Quarterly Meeting, held on the
July 27, 1916, a oopy of which jhas been sent to each rnember of
the Council, be and are hereby coniinned.
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE MINC'I'ES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Denis J Rath, Esq, and
Resolved—That the minutes of proceedings of the Finance
Committee, at their meeting held on the 7th August, 1916. a
eopy of which has been sent to each rnenlber of the Council. be
and are hereby confirmed.
CONFITIMATION OF PROPOSAL COM.MT'I"I'EE MINUTFS
ne following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Peter B Moore, E.sq, J P ;
Seconded James T M'Gee, FAI, J P, and
Resolved—That the minutes of the proceedings of the ProPO-
sal Committee at their meeting, held on the 7th Angust, 1916'
a copy of which has been sen tto each member of the council'
be and are hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF' EXECUTIVE COMMWI'L'E MINUTES'
The following resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P ;
g Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the minutes of the proceedings of the
tive Committee at their meeting, held on the 7th August,
a copy of which has been sent to each member of the ouncil'
be ond aro hereby confirmed.
M,r Jarnes T M'Gee, J P, a-sked whether it was obligatory on
the Veterinary Inspectors to live within the district for which
they were appointed, and the Secretary was direeed to 100k
Lhe matter. and report to ne.yt yneeting of the Finance
tee.
3
CONFIRM A'I'IOS OF DUNDALK SCHOOL ATTENDANCE
COMMITI'ICE MINUTES.
The following resolution was. passed unanirnously
Proposed by Denis J Esq ;
Seconded by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved— That we hereby confirm the minutes of the Dun-
dalk Rural District School Attendance Committee at their
meeting. held on 24th July, 1916, including the proposal to in-
crease the salary of the SehooJ Attendance Officer, Mr Daniel
by E 16 per annum.
CONFIRMATION OF COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Peter B Moore, FAI, J p;
Seconded by James T M 'Gee, Esq, J P, and
Resolved— That the report of the County Surveyor as appear-
Ing on Page of tho Schedule of Proposals for the 17th August,
, a copy of which has been furnished to each member of the
uneil, be and is hereby adopted by this Council.
ARDEE WORKS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by James '1' M'Gee, m, J P,
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That tho proposals for works formulated •by the
No. Rural District Couneil, oat their Second Quarterly
held on Tuesday, 4th July, 1916, and set out on Form
20, furnished to the Count,v Council, and the contracts entered
into
at their Adjourned Meeting held on Tuesday, 25th July,
1916, and are hereby approved of, and we authorise our
eeretary to affx the Common Seal of the Council to •me.
DROGHEDA WORKS.
The following resolution was passed unanitnously :
Proposed by James M 'CartilY, EMI, J P;
Seconded by N T Murphy, Esq, J p, ranci
Resolved—That the proposals for works forni ulated by bhe
Fourth
Louth Ritral Distriöt of I)rogheda Union, at their
Quarterly Meeting, held on Tuesday, 11th July, 1916, as set out
on Form 20, furnished €0 the Cotillty Council, and the contracts
entered into at their Adjourned Meeting held on 8th August'
1916, be ;i1Hl are hereby approved of, and we authorise our
retary to affix the Comynon Seal of the Council to smne.
DUNDALK WORKS.
'1'110 following resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed by Laurence Goodtnan, Esq ;
Seconded by Bernard Ela niill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the proposals for works formulated the
•at their Second Quarterly
Dundalk Rural District Council,
Meeting, held on Monday, 3rd July, 1916, and set ont on
2(), furnished to the County Council, and the contracts entered
into at their Adjourned Meeting held on 31st July, 1916'
to
and are hereby approved of, and we au thorise onr Secretary
affix the Common Seal of thc Council to same.
COUNTY-AT-LARGE.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Hanjill, I':osq, J P;
Seconded by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—'l'hat thet the proposals for works forrnulated b."
Proposal Committee at their Fourth Quarterly Meeting'
on the 10th July, 1916, and set out on Form 20, furnished to
5
the County Council, and the contracts entered into at their
Adjourned Meeting held on Monday, 7th August, 1916, be and
hereby approved of, and we authorise our Seerefar.v to affix
the Common Seal of the Council €0 s:une.
NO tenders were received for any of the works not sot by eon-
tract adjourned meetings of the 'Rural l)istriet Councils and
roposal niittee, and
Tho folloning resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed by N T Mutvhy, Esq, .J P,
Seconded by Jatnes M •Cart,hy, Esq, J P. and
the proposals for works passed by the Rural
District Councils and Proposal mitteo at [heir last Qil,ar-
terl.v Meetings, and for wllieh no eon [rae[s have been entered
into, placed in charge of the County Surveyor.
POUND DROGHEDA.
The consideration of the question of erecting a pound at tho
The
r runarket, Drogheda, was the nexi item on the agenda.
( •erotary read the requisition of the Drogheda Magistrates on
the subject, had already been before the Council, and
also a letter from the Clerk, Drogheda, to the Clerk of
Pott.v Sessions, stating that subject to the precise position and
the required being agreed upon, the Financ•e Comtnittee
Of tho Drogheda Urban Council would ree€)llltnend to his Council
tho alloeation to the County Conneil for the establishment of a
Pound of portion of the Corn Market, for the rent of
antrum. The Secretary also read the Section of the Aet
Which empowers the County Council to present such sum, not
CH), as they shall think fit, for the erec•tion, part
Oreetion, or repair of any pound, 011 the requisition of three or
Justices of any Petty Sessions District.
After disenssiou, in which Mr Peter Jl *Moore, J P, urged on
6
the Council the necessity for a pound in Drogheda, fhe follow-
ing resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Peter B M001T„ Esq, J P;
Seconded by Michael O'Meara, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby decide to erect a Pound at
Corn M,arket, Fair Street, Drogheda, and direct our Co.
veyor to bring iOrward a proposal at the next njeeCing of
Proposal Cornnlittee for the sum of 110 for this purpose,
ARBI'I'R,VI'OR ARDEE R-VILWAY ACU)UN'I'S.
'l'he question of the appointrnent of an arbitrator in Che
ter of tllf' Ardee Branch Railway Accounts, which had been a
journed frorn last tneeting of the OunciI, further adjour-
ned to next meeting.
COUN'I'Y SALARY.
The following application was read
County Surveyor's Office,
Court House, Dundalk,
7th Aygust, 1916.
The Chairrnan -and Gentlenien, Louth County council'
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,
I beg to make application to you at your
Quarterly Meeting on 17th inst, for an increase in Iny salary'
which at present stands at, C300.
As you are aware, 1 devote whole time to rny duties
County Surveyor. In the other Counties of Ireland, with only
one or two exceptions, I believe the salaries paid to the Sur-
veyors run from to C9ö().
Since taking up office in County Louth, the present
Board Schetne now in progress was put through, and the carry-
Ing out of the work initiated. There is no need to recall the
lengthy negotiations with the Road Board before satisfactory
arrangement was come to, and our continued insistence to be
treated on the same terms in the matter of a grant as other
Irish counties, was acceded to, nor need I remark upon the
difficultiems, in difficult times, organising and stm•ting the
work in quarries, ete„ including the purchase of' machinery—all
a new departure in this county, and theref01%e the more trouble-
some. This work, needless say, has entailed and does entail
uch running about, and not a little ivory and anxious
thought.
I think it Mill be adtnittecl that the work of the County Sur-
ve.vor at the present time is much more strenuous than in past
days when you paid a larger salary.
Tho Council allow me $100 per annum for travelling. I have,
out Of Iny own pocket, provided and maintain a, motor for use
my work. Allowing for depreciation T am expending more
than the allowance made rne, as practically ever since I book up
duty here the cost of everything has been daily increasing, so
that at the present, time my salary with allowance is not worth
within CIOO of what it was when I entered into office.
I have not canvassed any of the Councillors in regard to this
as I have every confidence in the sense of justice of
the Council, and in its desire to aet fairly 'by its officials.
Your obedient Servant,
. THOMAS WALSH,
County Surveyor.
Atter discussion Che following resolution was passed unani-
mouslv •
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Denis J Raih, Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby decide to increase the salary of Mr
8
Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor of the Coupty of Louth, from
2.300 to the sum of per annum.
FOOD ANI) DRUGS INSPWI'ORS.
The Secretary road a letter from the County Inspector'
R I C, suggesting the appointment for each Petty Sessions
I)igtriet in the county of an Inspector under Che Food and
Drugs Act, and recommending Poliee Sergeants for each dis-
triet.
'J'he following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby appoint the following to aet as
Inspectors under the Food and Drugs Aets in the County Of
Louth for the Petty Sessions Districts opposite their
Sergeant William Delaney
Sergeant Michael Grace
A ting-Sergeant Michael Connolly
Sergeant Joseph Bustard
Sergeant John Kenny
Sergeant Maurice Quirk
Sergeant Owen Callan
Sergeant Patrick Lally
Sergeant Matthew Sharpe
Petfv Sessions
District of
Ca rlingford,.
. Castlebellingharo,.
Louth.
Ravelbsdale.
Ardee,
Collon.
Dunleer.
'Termonfeekin.
Mell.
RATE COLLECTORS' REMUNERATION.
'I'he followinm lotter was read
No. 37197-16.
Louth County.
laycal Government Board,
Dublin, 7th August, 1916.
Sir ,
With reference to your letter of the 31st ulti100'
relative to tho proposal of €110 Louth County Council to pay
9
certain Collectors in Che enu.ntS poundage fees instead of salary
as heretofore, I am directed 'by the Local Government Board
for Ireland to request that they may be informed of the reasons
for the prol»secl change, which wou ld result in considerable in-
crease in the annual a.mounts payable to these Collectors.
The Board would also •be glad to be informed whether the
County Council propose to make any alteration in the t•etnuner-
ation of Collectors M 'Cullough and Kelly.
am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
After discussion, the *wretary was (lireeted to inform [he
1'• G. B. that the reasons for the change from salary to pound-
age foes, which results in increases to the Collectors, are, that
0 wing to the breaking up of land there is a considerably in-
creased number of holdings on which rates are eolleetable, and
eonseq uently increased work, and increased travelling expen-
ses, besides the high cost of living. He was also directed to in-
form the Board that ng change in the remuneration to Collee-
tors M Thillough and Kelly was contennplated. as they had not
applied for revision of their salaries.
Tho folloqing letter was also read :—
CartQrstown, Drogheda,
14th August, 1916.
The (hairrnan,
Louth County Council.
ear Sir,
I bog to bring under the notice of the members
Of the (huncil that, the rate of poundage (G.}cl in the C) propo-
sod to be paid me as a reduction on the poundage rate which I
Was receiving after being transferred under the Local Govern-
ment Act of 1898
1
Was then paid a poundage rat,e of 7d in the C, and my pre-
10
seng fixed salary is based upon that poundage rate.
I respectfully ask t,he Ck»uncii to fix the poundage rate at
in the C ,satue as I had heretofore, or failing this to leave tn.v
salary as it was.
Your obedient Servant,
PATRICK M'I)ONNELL,
Poor Rate Collector,
The Secretary informed the Council that no alteration could
be made in Mr M 'Donnell's retnuneration now as the resolution
fixing his fees at could not be rescinded for six 111011thS'
The payrnent of fees on his present warrant would result in an
increase of over L'8 on his former salary.
After discussioon it was decided to re-eon.sider Ulle question Of
Mr M 'Donnell's fees before the beginning of the next financial
year, and the Sec. was directed to bring the Inatter forward
at the• proper time.
TUBERCULOUSIS COMMITTEE MEETINGS.
The following letter was read :
Oounty of Louth Tuberculosis Comrniftee of
Management,
90, Clanbrassil Street,
Dundalk, 8th June, 1916.
Cha.rJoa M 'Alester,
Secretary, Louth County Council.
Dear Sir,
I am directed by the 'I'ti'bereulosis Cotmniftee Of
Managernent, to inform the Louth County Council that' the
menvbers of the Committee whos«» names are set out below
have failed to attend a meeting of the General Comntittee
ing the past 12 months.
Yours faithfully,
V. WARTHIN,
Secretary.
SCHEDULE.
Mr. Thotnas M Itrphy, Park Street, Dundalk; Mr Patrick
Donegan, Monasterboiee, Drogheda; Alr L .J Elcoek, Drog-
bedag Mr J M Johnson, Mr James M'Carthy, Newfoundwell,
; Mr Denis J Rati), Mr W T
Skeffington, West Street, Drogheda.
After discussion the following resolution was passed unani-
tnously : —
Proposed by Hamill, Esq, J P
Seconded by Laurence Goodrnan, Esq, and
ResolvedwThat we hereby co-opt the following rnembers of
the County Louth 'Illibercnlosis Committee of .\lanagement
Peter B Moore,..J P; L M 'Keon, J P; Denis .J
Michael Meade, W T Skeffing!on, J P; 'l' .WGee, J P,
and John F Murphy, J P, Esquires.
'I'HANKS SYMPATHY.
'l'he ing letter was read and ordered to be inserted on
tuinutes :
Ravensdale, 5th August, 1916.
Oharles M 'Aloster, Esq.
Dear Sir,
- Allow me to return nvy very sincere thanks to the
T nembers of the County Council for their kind vote of sympathy
In my great beroavernent. My late husband often said he had
no better friend than yourself.
Yours very Sincerely,
ISABELLA CONNOLLY.
Lotter was also read from Mrs and Miss Norton, thanking
the Council for their sympathy on the demmth of the late Mr.
James Norton, J P.
12
HAY RESTRICTIONS.
At last meeting of the Finance Committee the Secretai.v
had been directed to forward resolution requesting the with-
drawal of restrictions on 1915 crop hay, and the limita t.ion Of
restrictions on 1916 hay. 'l'o this resolution a reply dated 8th
August, had been received, in which the Administra,tive Area
Officer stated while desiring to cause the minimum of inconven-
ience, there could not be any alteration in the terms of the Or-
der. The A. A. O. did not think tho Department would re-
quire any old meadow hay, and he had given instructions to the
Purchasing Officer to release old meadow hay on sight. There
is no restriction whatever on 1915 erop hay. With regard to
the new crop, it was necessary, he said, that the War Depart"
ntent, should have first choice. The quantity required for ship-
ment overseas to the forces is a fractional amount of the avail-
able supply. Everything else will be under license'
and provided War Department maximurn prices are not ex-
eeeded there is at the present moment an absolut+l.v free njar-
ket between buyers and sellers for tho hay not. required for
War Department purposes.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
PASS 'I'ULLYAIÄÆN QUARRY.
Lotter was read from tho County Surveyor stating that as
directed by the County Council tho Acting Chairman, Mr C
Duffy, J P N T Mu,vhy, .J P, and himself had interviewed
Mr B R T Balfour with reference to above. Since then he had
received t.he following letter from Mr Balfour's agent, and
recommended the aeeeptaneo of the tortns offered therein
36, South Frederick Street,
Dublin, 10th August, 1916.
1B. tit. T. Balfour's Estate.
Dear Sir,
Referring to your letter of 3rd inst. Co Mr BalfOU1"
and to ouT interview yesterday, I have soy that Mr 13alfour
is prepared to grant a tenjporar;,• perntission for a pass
4
Roche's quarry in King William's Glen on t,he following
terms
(1) That you erect a strong wire fence from a point on the
road bank immediately north of the proposed entrance frot"
the road running S.E. t,he ash tree pointed out on the boun-
dary between Mr Balfour's and Mr Roche's land.
(2) 'l'hat a proper gate be erected on the load entrance and
kept closed when the passage is not actually in use.
(3) That the Council pay a sum of ten shillings for the per-
tnission to make Che passage to the quarry, and for
the loss to Mr Balfour of the small portion of grazing running
south from the quarry to the old •Mill of Alb, for the your end-
ing 1st August, 1917.
(4) No trees, shrubs or bußhes to be cut or (Imnaged on the
above-mentioned lands, and no tenancy is created in them [em-
Porally or otherwise, and the Council are not to perruib any
trespass or grazing on them.
(5) When any blasting is being done the Glen road to be
Properly flagged both above and 'below the quarry.
Subject to th«se Conditions Mr Balfour is prepared to grant
a t€nnporary use of the passage for the purpose of your experi-
mentally working the quarry for a year, but at the end of t,ihat
Period he reserves to hitnself the right to Mithdraw the per-
mission, or to alter the berms in any way he thinks fit.
Balfour's chief wish is to preserve the scenery of t)he Glen
road, and he trusts your Council will assist him in this respect
in every way they can.
Yours truly,
R. E. MAUNSEbL.
Thomas Walsh. Esq,
County Suweyor, Dundalk.
The following resolution was then passed unanimously
Proposed by Peter 13 Moore, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Ja.mes M 'Carthy, Fasq, J P, mncl
ResolveclA'hat we hereby decide to aceept tii10 following con-
ditions for a pass over Mr B R T Balfour's lands to Mr Roche'S
quarry at Drybridge, viz
l. To erect a strong wire fence from a, point inunediately nori]]
of the proposed entrance to the quarry to tile boundary be-
tween Mr Balfour's and Mr Roche's land.
2. To erect a proper gate on the roacl entrance, wh iCh is to
be kept closed when the passage is not actually in use.
3. To pay Mr Balfour a. sum of IOS for the permission to
make the temporary pass to the quarry, and for loss of a small
portion of grazing.
'l. No trees, shrubs or bushes to be cut or (lama ged on the
above-mentioned lands, and no tenancy is created in them tem-
porarily or otherwise, nor will t]he Council Ijerjnit any trespass
or grazing on them.
5. When any blasting is being done that the Glen road be
properly flagged both above and below Che quarry.
NORTH KING ST. SHOOTINGS.
Tho following r«solution, submitted by the Ardee
Guardians, was
. On the tnotion of Michael Meade. Esq,
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P,
unanimously adopted :
'l'hat we respectfully request the Government. to hold
lie inquiry into Ohe death of the three County 1,011Ch
gun, Lawless and Hoey, who were Shoi by Che liiilil:urs in
16
ouse known as the Louth Dairy, North King Street, Dublin,
during the recent rebellion.
COMMI'ITAIÄ TO INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.
Lotter was read from Clerk of Petty Sessions, Drogheda,
stating that an application would be. made at the Court of
Snmmar.v Jurisdiction, sitting at Drogheda on the 28t]h Aug.
commit the following children to Industrial Schools
and Alice Cra vert, Edward, John and Mary. Devine, all of
eorge's Street, Drogheda. The letter was initia Iled by tho
Chai rrnan.
ACX)OUNTS.
Letters were read from the Local Govern ntent Board as fol-
lows ;
8th August, So. 37879-16, enclosing audited accounts of Ar-
doo No. I R D C for half year to 31st March, 1916.
8th August. No. 37881-16, enclosing audited aeeounts of Ar-
dee Union for half year to 31st March, 1916.
27th July, No. 3151.5-16, enclosing audited aeeounts of Rieh-
mond Asylum for half year ended 30th Septem bee, 1915, ancl
31st March, 1916
The letters wero initialled by the Ohairmnn.
CONTRACT'S FOR, LOCAL AUTHORITIES.
Lotter Was road from the L G B dated 10th' Augu.st, No.
37008-16
, informing the Council that the notice to be
Riven by an employer under Section 7 of the Trade Boards Act,
1.909
, in tho ease Of contracts with Local Authorities, will no
longer he
necessary, as it is obligatory on the contractor to pay
minimum rates of wastes as varied by the Tailoring Trade
oard (Ireland).
'Phe letter was initialled by the Chairman,
16
FOOD AND DRUGS.
Lecter was read from the Depmrbment da [ed 11th August'
stating that satnple of butter taken at l)undalk Market 011
10th July, and analysed, proved to be pure.
SECRWI'ARY'S HOLIDAYS.
Tho Council unanitnou.sly granted the Secretary his annual
leave of absence.
4
Finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Conunit,tee at, tlteir
•Mooting held in the Council Chatnber, Court House, Dundalk,
M01iday, 21st August, 1916, at one o'clock, p m.
Present the (Jnair: Michael Meade, Esq.
Other Members—'l'homas O'Rourke, Laurence Goocljnan, ancl
ernnrd Finegan, Esquires.
Mr Thonuus Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
The minutes of the previous nioeting of the Conjrnittee were
taken as .read, and signed by the Chairman,
The following accounts were stibniitted, and on examination
Were ordered for payment :—
Account—Works in Charge of Co. Surveyor Lil 90 O
.Subsidiary Account—do.
do.
do.
Secretary's Office
Total
211 11 7
112 15 0
E514 16 7
Tho Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loans Ac-
(ftjunts were examined, and initialled by iihe, Chainnan.
ACCIDENTS AT QUARRIES.
Letter was read from the Ocean Guarantee Corporation da[egl
15th August, enclosing CI 9s 8d in settlement of the claim of
18
Bernard Courtney, injured at tho Council's quarry at Cockle -
hill, who has now recovered. Letter was also read from
Corporation acknowledging clailil in Che case of Stephen Wai-
ters injured at Faughart quarr.v,and noting that if svas unlikely
t'hat, com,pensation would bo demandecl in this ease. The
lotters
wero initialled by the Chairman.
INJURY TO TYPEWRITER.
The Secretary informed the Committee that he had forwar-
ded the carriage of the office typewriter to the Barloc•k Office
in .l)ublin to have a, small spring aftaehe€l. (hl arrival in Dilb-
Iin it was found that the carriage casting had been broken in
the post, and the part had to 'be forwarded €0 London for a
new carriage casting which would cost 30s.
A claim had been
tetain •it on the grounds that the part was not paeke«l in ae-
eordance with Post ()ffee reqniretnents. On • reference the
eirenlar containing these, the Secretary found that the parcel
was properly packed, and in a letter the Barloek Typewriter
people remarked on the apparent, security of the parcel when it
arrived at Dublin. In the cirournstanees he asked the
Sion of the Committee to pursue the claim. The Cormnitt«»
animously approved of MQ,hat had been done, and directed the
Secretary to insist on po.vtnent of compensation.
NAVAL AND MILITARY WAR PENSIONS
Leter was read from the Statutory Cmnmiftee of above'
No. 11(j-Co-I-3, approving of the scheme submitted by the
Council for the formation of a Local (k»nmit€ee under the
val and Military War Pensions Etc, Act, 1915, and requesting
the date when tho first meeting of the Comtnittee would
called.
Tho Committee unanintously (leeided that the first meeting
bo called on the Secretary's return from holidays, preferably 011
a Thursday.
REFUND OF RATES.
Letter was road from (PConnor, Solicitor,
19
requesting refund of ra.tes paid by Mr John Leland on a hold-
ing at Mell, •which, he stated, has not been in Mr Leland's pos-
since 1901. Aeeording to Mr O'Connor's letter,
Leland was formerly a tenant from yOar to year of the holding
question, 011 the 'Singleton Estate: He set the lands for
grazing to three others, and subsequently by Mr I,eland's ae-
qnieseenee in permitting the grazing tenant to turn the lands
into tillage, they acquired the status of yearly tenant, and
When the estat,o earne to be sold thesé tenants obtained the fee
simple under the Land Purchase Acts.
After discussion, .the Secretary was directed to inform Mr.
O'Connor that fhe• cla for a refuncl of rates paid on tho hold-
in. question could not be enterta ined.
STEAM ROLLING.
The Secretary informed the Committee, thai with the per-
of the Council, the County Surveyor had done sorno
steam rolling for Mrs Thos Murphy, Johnstown, Carlingford ;
Mr Thomas O' Rourke, Castle Hill Quarries, Carlingford, and
Mr Samuel Bothwell, and had furnished accounts for the work
as follows Ils Ild, Cl 14s (Sd, and C2 4s Sd respectively.
Mr Murphy and Mr O'Rourke had settled their aeeounts, but
r Bothwell had not yet paid, and the Secretary was directed
Write him again on the matter asking payment.
SCHOLARSHIPS.
The Secretary was directed to have the County Seholar.ship
for the year 191 (5-17 inserted in tho "Democrat" and
Oti the 26th inst. He was also directed to subniit at
'Argus"
next Ineoting of the Committee for payment to the Students,
the balanees remaining out of Schola awarded for the
year 1915-16.
VETERINARY INSPECTOR'S RFÅSIT)ENCE.
With reference to quest ion raised Che Iasi meeting of
20
bhe County Council fo the residence Of Mr W E Maxwell'
V S, t,he Secretary stated he chad written Mr Maxwell on
subjeet, and had received from him a reply to the effect that
his residence was in Ardee, his address lh*ing c/o J. Kavanau
William Street, Ardee. This was considered satisfactory bY
the Committee.
ROAD OONTRACT.
'The following letter from the (hunty Surveyor was read
County Surveyor's Office,
Court HouÅe, Dundalk,
21st August, 1916.
To the Ohairmnan and Gentlemen Finance Committee Meeting•
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,
I beg report neglect on Road Contract
Index No. 42, Drogheda Rural District—Contractor,
Clarke, of Mell, Drogheda.
Twelve months ago, or thereabouts, I refused to aece,pt soft
litnestone proposed to be supplied on this main road by Clarke'
as a 1M'tter stone could be got within four miles of the roa
provided in specification. I searched up 'a ,nearer quarry
decided on Mr Roche's of 'l'ullyallen, to whieh permission for
pass has now been arranged with Mr. Balfour for one year
from 1st August last. When I approached the contractor
14th instant, on hearing from Mr Balfour's agen&, Che contrac-
tor said he could not get, men now to go into a quarry.
1 ask authority to serve ten days' noticoulnd take over
tract, if contractor persiss in refueing to go on with tho work'
Your obedient Servant,
THOMAÉ WAIBEL
Aftor discussion, bho following resolution •was passed
mously
Proposed by fiomas Rourke, Esq ;
Seconded by Laurence Goodman, FAI, and
21
wo direct the Co. Surveyor to serve ten days'
notice on Patrick Clarke, Contractor, Mell, to proceed with Che
work on Road Index No. 42, Drogheda Rural District, and to
lake over the contract if the contractor does not do so.
HOLIDAYS.
Committee unanimously granted tho County Surveyor
his annual holidays, Mr Walsh to arrange for his work being
done during his absence.
Finance Committee,
Minutes of proceedings of t,lle Finance Cotillilittee at'
meeting theld in the Council Chatnber, Court House, Dundalk'
on Monday, -lth Septenlbet•, 1916, at one o'clock, p m.
the Chair: Charles A Duffy, E.sq, J
Members—'l'110tnas 'O'Rourke, J P Kearney, W Woods'
J P, and B 1, Colernan, J P, Esquires.
Mr John M C Lyons, Assistant Surveyor, was in attendance •
'l'he njinutes of the previous rneeting of the Connnittee
Laken as read, and signed by [he Chairnuuu.
The following accounts were stilblllitted and on exali1inabiOß
were ordered for payment,:—
Loans Account— Works in CILarge of Co. Surveyor C'281 10
Subsidiary
do
do
do.
5
24 10
Secreta Office
Total
$437 311
'l'il.e Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loans
counts were examined and initialled by the Chairnaan.
RATE COLLECTION.
'I'he Secretary sunlitted return of rate collection for the
iod ended 31st August, showing that, of the first li10iety Of
23
Warrant, arnounüing to CT 7,773 18:s öcl, a sunl of .C'I,ö87 lbs 8d
had been collected.
FOOD AND DRUGS INSPECTORS.
The District-Inspector R. I C, wrote requestillg Chaf
Otithorities to carry -out the duties under the Food and Drugs
Acts be handed t, J those Inspectors appointed by the Council at
their rneeting held on the 17th August. The Secretary was
directed to have these prepared in accordance with the usual
form, and Sealed with. the Seal of the County Council.
COUNTY ANALYST'S REPORT.
The report fronl Sir C A Carneron for quarter en-
30th June, 1916, was read and initialled, and tJhe Secretary
informed the Committee that he had as usual forwarded eopy
of same to the L G B
64 articles were received from the Food Inspectors, R I C, as
follows :-—Butter 33 samples, milk 17, whiskey 5, cheese 5, mar-
'l'hey were all pure. There
garine 3, mustard 1 ; total, 64.
were four speeimens of butter analysed by directions fronl the
ePart1nent, of Agriculture, which were taken up in tilte Co.
Louth
, and were pure. For Che Richtnond Asylum three speci-
mens of margarine were analysed. ()ne specimen of water
analysed for the Ardee Rural District Council, had the follow-
cxnnpositions :—One illtperial gallon contained in grains :
total solid • matter, • including alinenoid ammonia
0 '015, Niline amonia nitric acid, trace, chlorine 1.090,
colour very light yellow. A tolerabl.$ good water. In the ori-
report, on the above water referred to, full details, ernemi-
eal and micrcxscopieal, were given, -but in the foregoing oonly
Total analyses, 72.
e more important points are given.
CHARLES A. CAMERON.
ARCHI'I'ECI"S FEES.
Letter
was read from the L G B dated 29th August, No.
10883-1916, stating that an instalment, from the Sanatoritllli
Grant, in respect of the fees, approved by the Council, of Mr
Vincent, O'Connell for work in eonnoction with the Central
Tuberculosis Dispensary at Dunda 1k, would be issued on
ceipt of t'he Architect's fornaal acknowledginent of [he amonnt'
C9 5s ld. 'l'he Secretary was directed t. procure same and
forwa.rd it to the Board.
INCREASES.
Tho following letters were read and initialled by the
man :
Local Government, Board,
Dublin, 29t,h August, 1916.
No. 40297-16.
I ,outll Oonnty.
Sir,
Tho Local Government Board for Troland
had before thom your letter of tho 18th instant, relative to tone'
salary of Mr Thomas Walsh, County Snrvoy»r for the
of Louth, and the Board direct. me to state that they have
proved of the proposal of the (%uneil to inerease the slnry o
this officer from to a year.
T am, Sir,
Your obedient, SorVnnt,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Agsist,anf, Secretary.
Seeretary, T,011th (h. Council.
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 29th August, 1916.
No. 40295-16.
County.
Sir,
Tho Local Govermnont Board for Ireland havo had
fore thorn your lotter of [he 18th instont, relative to
i€+ of Messrs J M O Lyons and James promgoolo,
25
Snrveyors in Loutih County, and the Board direct me to state
that they have approved of the proposal of the Council to Iti-
crease the salaries of these officers f rom L' 13() to L' 13() a your
each.
Secretary,
Sir,
I Sir;
Your obedient, Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Seerot,ary.
Louth Co. CA)uncil.
Department of Agriculture,
Vet,erinary Branch,
Dublin, 23rd August, 1916.
With reference to your reply of '22nd instant
this Department's eommunieatiou No. 2449-16, of the previous
day, r have to state t,ha€ in the circumstances mentioned in
lettor, the Depanment approve of the proposal oi
Local Authority to increase the wages of Messrs Thomas
SI'Ardle and William Leonard, tank superintendents in
eharge of the• Knoekbridge and Ardee sheep dipping tanks res-
Pectivoly, to 2.5* per week during Autumn dipping period
this year. This amount is exclusive of 2s per week payable
of these superintendents as Inspectors of Sheep Dipping.
1 am, Sir,
Your obedient Sorvant,
T. P. GILL, gecrøia,ry.
Sooretary, Louth Co. Council.
ARBITRATOR—ARDEE RAILWAY AOOOUNTS.
Tn. Secretary rend letter dated '24th August, from the
Great Northorn Railway Company, in ro above, stating that as
bhe County Council did not appear to bave dealt with the matr
ter, the Contpans proposed Ko malw application to Che Board Of
'l'o this letter
'I'rade for + be appointlnent of an Arbitrator.
the Secretary, 'by direction of the Chairrnan, had replied that'
had been adjourned to next meeting of the
the rnatter
but that the Railway Conlpany'.s letter would be sub-
Council ,
njitted to the Finance Meeting of the Council on 4th Septelli-
in the Inatter.
ber, after which they would be written further
No reply was received to this, but on the 1st September letter
was received fro"', the Board of Trade enclosing copy of letter
from the G N R , and stating that in the circumstances
rnentione€i bv tho Cornpany the Board proposed to make the
The following is the letter referred to:—
appoin unen 3.
G. N. R. co. (IITAand),
Dublin, 29th Aug, 1916.
Sir,
As this Cornpany have failed to agree with the
County Council 0'} the matter of the appointment of an Arbi-
Crator, in succession to Sir John G Barton, resigned, in
of the Ardee Branch Railway Accounts, under Section 18,
Section 5 of the Great Northern Railway (Ireland) Act, 1892' 1
beg hermvith to make application to the Board of 'l'rade on
half of 1112,' Contpany of an Arbitrator under the said Sub-Sew-
lion.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
'l'. MORRISON, Secretary.
'l'he Secreta ry,
Boarxl of Trade, London, S W.
In reply to this the Secretary, by direction of t,he Chairtnan•
had written the Board of 'l'rade iniorniing thetn that the
Council had adjourned the eoon.sidoi•ati011 of this appointnnelit
had not failed to
until their next meeting; thuc the Council
agree with tll.-• Great Northern Railway Cornpany iu the
ter, and that under the circumstances it was presurnecl
Board of Mould not rnake the appoinfinent until the
Council Lad a further opportunity of considering the
tion.
The Commite€• approved of wha.tr had been done in the mat-
ter, and that question of' the should be
considered at tile Special Meeting of the Council, which would
consider the recolli tions of
Conunitu„., the Secretary to G. S
Board of 'l' racle accordingly,
Rai [way Cornpany and the
and to put question of t,he appointment on Vije agenda, for
the Special Meetiug.
EDUCA'I'ION cos'l's.
Letter read fro,n the C. P. S., Catdi„gf01Ti, dated 22nd
August, enclosing 7s Lld, being Council's portion of costs in
'J'he money has been lodged to
prosucu€;ons under above Act.
credit oi the (huncil.
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL TRASSFER.
Lecter was read frotti Industrial School, Drogheda, inforlning
the Council that one.of their pupils, John Bellew, was now oi
an age ior transfer, aud that it was proposed to send to
'I'he Committee unanirnously ap-
Artane School, Co. Dublin.
proved of the transfer.
APPLICATION INCREASE,
Aghameen Dipping Superin-
tendent for increase of wages, referred to the Executive
(%njmitiee.
MOTOR LICENCE DUTIES.
the 1, G B data '25th •r916,
No. 3-1222-10, setting out, that under the Finance .
a ear used as a hackney is not the
if the car is af any time used as a
within the of the Act. The LG B wil make an order
that ear exempted from of duty shali
have exhil.:ted, in conjunction with the nutnber, a distinctive
mark indicating that the car is so exempted. They Pina neo Act
also provides that registered Veterinary Surgeons shall in eer-
tain eases be entitled to repayment of half the duty on motor
car I It-:ensos i r. the same way as medical practitioners. The
owner o? a mot,or car used exclusively for not less than two
rnont,hs in any year for a.mlyulance or hospital work, or work
under tho Govei•nment in connection with naval or military
service, shali entitled to repayment, of proportionate arn-
ount of dut,y paid on such car.
The eireular was initialled by the Chairman.
VALUATION REVISION.
Leter date i 17 till August, was read from Valuation
stating that Mr J Carbury would eommoneo the annual
Sion of the Valuation of the Rural Districts in the count,y on
'219t Augua'.
Finance Committee.
Minui.e' of procvedings of the Finance Contmittee at, tiheir
meeting in the Council Ohamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, September, 1916, at one o'clock, p m.
Present In the Ohair: Chas A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other bers—Thomas O'Rourke, Wm Woods, J P ; Peter
Woods, J P; James Wynne, J P, and James M 'Gee, J P,
Esquir€w
Mr 'nomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous meeting of the Conunitlee were
Laken as. read, and Signod by the Chairman.
The following oecounts were subrnitt,ed, and on examination
Were or(iered for payment:—
nt —Works in Charge of County
Surveyor
Subsidiary Account—Works in Charge of Co.
Surveyor
Subsidiary Office
Total
"138 14 Jl
101 17 9
27 10 0
$268 2 8
The Bank Books for tahe General, Subisidary, and Loans •Ac-
eonu were exajnined and initialled by the Chairman.
REFUND EDUCATION Acer COSTS.
I.•ot.ey from Mr T Martin, C P S, Carlingford, state
ing that in error he had ledged 3s •141 too much to the oredit
the Council ill respect of Education Act Costs, and requesting a
refund.
The Con:t'litteo unanintously ordered that tho refund bo
made.
A(XJIDE.VI' AT QUARRY.
Letter was read from the overseer, ,JoneSborough Quarry'
sta ting that man named • Patrick Mullen had met with an ae-
ci(leni on the 7th Septenlber, 1916. The Secretary informed
the that the matter had been reported to the.
surance Contpany, and that, the papers in connoetion with elailjl
for compensation had been forwarded to them.
The was initialled by the Chairman.
RATE COLLECTION.
Tbo followil.g letter was
No.
louth (k,unty.
Government Board
Dublin, 11th sopc., 1916.
Sir,
Tho Local Government Board for Ireland havo
'31st
before tholi' the return showing the condition on Che
•ultimo or [he eolleetion of tho poor rate for tho enrrent
yoar in Louth County, from which they observe that out Of a
total of m 7,779, the sum of C13,186 remains to be eollect«l in
the last rnonth of the half-year.
They further observe that Collectors M 'Cnllough, Kelly'
Johnston and Woods attended only once during [he month of
August (or the cheeking of their Aeconntg, while collector
81
Potor M did not attend at all. During the month of
July tljose five Colleetors also only onco attended for checking.
The Bc:aÆ eannot overlook this serious infringement of the go-
verniltg regu:ations, and they request that these Collectors
may ly Iao informed that, if at any tinw in future any oi
them is again found guilty of' this offenee, the Board will be ob-
liged to consider his removal from office.
It should be Inade clear to the Collectors that they are
bound to, attend for cheeking at the appointed tines and places,
though they may a.llege that they have no rates collee-
tod.
The I)epu,•.•, Cheekers should also be warned of this decision,
and the.•.' should be instructed to notify immediately any failure
on tho part, of Collector to attend for cheeking.
A return slit;wing the condition •of this collection at _the mid-
of the current nuonth, should be forw.9 •decl to this Depart-
ment it! due. course.
T am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant.
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
80eretary, Louth Co. (huncil.
The Serretmy informed the ommitee t,haf a copy of this
lettor haqt been sent to each of the rate collectors, and a letter
in repi.v frotn John Woods was read, in which he, statcd that he
had ne objection to lodging each fortnight, and cheeking his
each montli, but that if would be a hardship if he had to
attor«i Ot the each fortnight.
The Secretary stated that in accordance with the terms of
appointment and of the Public Bodies Order each collector was
bounci ehoc•k his •books at least once in each fortnight.
'1910 lot ters wero initialled by the Chairman.
COMMITTALS TO INDUSTRIAL scuoons.
Letter was read from the C P S, Drogheda, stating bhab a
Monda.•', 25th inst, application would be ynamle at bhe Court
Sum 111.0 Jurisdiction sitting at lhygheda for conunitt411 to Jn-
d usirial Schools of John and Anne Bird, children under 14
years.
Letter was initialled by the Chairman.
GRAN'PS.
IA-'Lters were read from L G B, dated 7th Septentber, enclOS-
ing the following grants, which ha+e been lodged to the credit
of the Council
Estabe Duty Grant (Guardians)
E:thtc Duty Grant (Roads)
17 1
• C40'2 1
INCREASES TO RATE COLLECI'ORS.
The following application was read .
Drogheda, 16th Sept., 1916.
Sir,
We beg to make application for an increase in onr
salartes. Our case is somewhat different to the other collec-
tors. Out rates did not increase, but the cost of collection ow-
ing the number of labourers' cotto.ges, and division of land'
such as Rokeby Hall and other places, railway fares, postage '
and other expenses are almost double what they were when tho
present arrangernent was made bhirteon years ago.
Eloping you will consider our application favourably,
We are, Sir,
Your obedient Servants,
PATRICK
JOHN KELLY.
Tile Chai rnlan, Finance Contlilii€ee.
P. S. Our fares are now 7s 4d 111011thly.
The
'l'he Ctunntitee considered this application at length.
Secret,arv Stated that the amounts of each collector's warrant,
for current year and his sa!ary were as folloys:.
Collector M 'Cilllough—Warra11t, C4,329 Ils ; Presnt Salary,
CLIO lös, o: approximately 6 1-7d in the C.
Coll€w•t01 Kelly— Warrant, CT ,863 14; Present Salary, C't(i 13
6d or approxirnatel.y (id in the L',
Collector M'Cullough appeared Zbefore the Conunitteo, anil,
to the Chairman, stated he would be satisfied to be
paid at poundage rate instead of salary, if €1»e rate per
Pound was increased. At present his salary represented a
. poundage rate of about 6 1-7d,
Messrs O'Rourke and M 'Gee suggestæd that a bonus to each
Of collectors would meet the circumstances, but Offer
discuss;or the following resolution was passed unanilnously
by James Wynne, Esq,
Seconded by Peter Woods, Esq, J P, and
reconnnend, subject to the approval of
the 1, G B that of Collector
• and John Kelly be at, the rate of in the
Pound or the amount of each collecor's warrants, instead of
salary as heretofore.
Executive Committee.
of proceedings of the Executive Cotillilittee at their
Dundalk,
rneoting held in the (Ajuncil Chan lyer, Court House,
on Monaay, 18th Septenlber, 1,916, af one o'clock, p 111.
. In the Chair: Chandes A Duffy, J P.
Present
Other Members—Thomas Woods, J P; Peter
J P; Wynne, .J P; and T M•Gee, J P'
Tho minutes of the previous meeting of' the Corntniltk-€• were
Laken us read, and signed by tho Cha irmarv.
VE'I'ERI.XAR.Y REPORTS.
Ellie following was read
MR. CLINTON'S REPORT- AUGUStl', 1916.
I)nring the month of August an cvu:tbrenk of seab occurre
in n. flock of I IP, sheep consigned to England Mr J wood*'
of C}' rrr•kmneross. The affected an ima Is were slaughtered
the remainder dipped on two occasions. A further
in 35 sheep con.Sl%-
occurred at Dundalk Port on August 14th,
ned So England by J Woods, Carrickmacross. 'I'he animals
fected (9) were slaughtered the remaining '26 dipped
occasions. The Department have ordered a prosecution in
case. 'I'he necessary regu lations having boon complie(
'havo withdrawn the Detention Order served on Mr 'l' Thornton '
Neu Gwndarver
J. T. CLINTON.
35
MR. DONNELLY'S REPORT.
ing the month of August no nou.tbreak of contagious dis-
ease in a ninutls oeeurred in my district. I made inspections in
suspeeted eases, but found Che animals were not suffering
a fow
front any of the notifiable diseases.
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
MR. MAXWELL'S REPOR'I'.
I bug to report that I examined the usual fairs, markets,
etc, held in the Ardee No. I District for the month of August.
that month no eases of contagious or infectious disease
have been reported to me.
W. E. MAXWELL.
In reply to Mr James 'l' M 'Gee, the Chairman stated t,hat
Mr Maxwell's report was datecl front A "doe. Mr M 'Gee said
Was not satisfied that Mr Maxwell was resident in Ardee.
The Seeretary stated that as directed by the County Council he
'had writt.•n Mr Maxwell asking whether he resided within the
district of Ardee in accordance with the terms of his appoint-
and had received a reply from him (which had already
on be faro the Finance Connnittee) stating that his address
'I'llis had Ijeen
Was J. Kavanagh, William Street, Ardee.
satisfaetorv 'by the Committee.
'I'h€• reports were initialled Lb.v the Chairman.
SHEEP DIPPING DEFAULTERS.
Secreta ry submitted list of persons who had failed to
eompl." with the Sheep Dipping Order during' the Still) mer Per-
and the Comtnittee uunnimously directed that the names
sent to the District Inspectors of the R I C, to deal
shonl(l be-
With ill" defaulterx
cogr OF SHEEP DIPPING.
following statement, showing the receip[s and expendi-
37
J• J. Kerr, Ballymakenny Tank Receipts,
$6
ture at. the various dipping tanks worked by the G).
during the Siltnrner Period, 1916, together with the ntunbel
ted
sheep dipped at, each, was submitted. 'l'he Secretary
that (ot the Ravensdale, Carlingford and Omeath tanks
. , itr
of $12 us ,3d, Is 7d and L'I'2 12s
cludeci for hurdles, etc. Although these amounts were
durtng the Sumtner Period of this year, the hurdles, etc' would
ot course form, plant, for these tanks, and be used in
years. These expenditures were extraordinary and
pn perly charged against the working of the tanks for
Summe,v Period only. The return was initialled bv bhe
man
SUMMER PERIOD, 1916.
Wages,
Sheep Dip,
Rent.
f7 14 11
Loss, ...
Dipped in Council 'I'ank, 761.
Inspected 82 Private' Tanks.
Owen Keenan, Agharheen 'I'ank Receipts,
Fees,
Wages for Inspection,
0 16
Sheep I)ip,
Sundries,
Ipped in Council Tank, 688.
Inspected 71 Private 'I'auks.
2 14
O
1
W. Leonard, Ardee Tank Receipts,
Wages,
Sheep Dip,
Rent,
Water,
Sundries,
$8 13 4
13 19 11
2
$27 10
26
0
0
Loss,
'l'homas M'l)ermott, Ravensdale Tank Receipts,
Dipped at Council 'l'allk, Sheep and Lambs, 6,146.
Inspected 14 Private tranks.
$13
Thomas M'Ardle, Knockbridge Tank Receipts,
Fees
12 14
iVages for Inspection, 0 6
Rent and Cartage,
Sheep I)ip,
Illirdles,
2 14
.43 18
Wages,
Sheep Dip,
Rent,
$8 12 4
580
0
0
0
Loss,
18 11
12 011
$10 2 0
n 17 4
722
$10 3 8
Loss.
Dipped in Council Tank, Sheep ond Lambs, 2,763 •
Inepected 34 Private Tanks.
IPped in Couucil Tank, 292 Sheep and Lambs.
luspected 46 Private Tanks,
Dipped in Council Tank, 1,980.
Inspected lö Private Tanks.
Owen Traynor, Omeath Tank Receipts, .
Hugh M •Kevitt, Carlingford 'l'ank Receipts,
22 Io
8 11
4 10
lö 10
Fees,
. if; 17 10
99
Less Profit 011 Ardee Tank,
I
Æ55
7
3
Wacres for Inspection, 0
6
19
16
O
14
1
6
0
0
o
7
Loss,
Printing and Posting,
Total,
11
Rent,
Sheep Dip,
Hurdles,
Sundries,
1
2
10
1
Gross
Loss,
9
$15 1/
5
3
Less Extra Expenditure—Ravensdale
12 12
ew Tank,
Less Extra Expenditure—Carlingford
10 1
'l'ank,
Less Extra Expenditure—()meath Tank, 12 12
Net Loss—Summer Period,...
CLAIMS FOR COMPENSATION.
$67 5 9
d
7
4
19 5
Fees,
Wages Inspection, .
Sheep Dip,
Sundries and Rent, ...
'l'imber: Ilurdles,
O
2
4
9
11
8
14
3
10
0
0
6
Loss, ...
Dipped in Council 'I'ank, 1,308.
Inspected 13 Private Tanks.
SUMMARY.
Loss on Knock bridge Tank, $1
Baliymakenny „
Aghameen
4
Ravensdale
10
Carlingford
14
C)meath
19
2
3
8
17
9
o
8
4
3
were read front John Donnelly and Peter Boyle, both
of South Cormnons, iCarIinXford, clairning compensation for two
sheep each, alleged to have died as a result of dipping at the
)nneil's tank at Carlingiörd. Letter from the Superndt of the
Hugh M' Kevitt, was submitted, in which he stated that,
in a dip of I packet of Sheep
sheep were dipped as usual
Dip to 20 gallons of water.
The Secretary wa.s direeted to inform the applicants that,
Ciaitns could not be entertained, as the County Council ac-
no responsibility for the loss of Che sheep.
APPLICA'I'LON I"OR. INCREASE.
Letter was read frotti (hven Keenan, Dipping Superintendent
at Agluuneen tank, sta ting that he haml inspected 'between 50
dippings at private tanks in the district of Jenkins-
atul
d.ua•ing the Sutnmer period
town, Ratheor, and Ballymaseanlon,
Vle
a.tid had to travel long journeys to them in some cases.
bad received only 2s por week for t,his work, and hoped the
C,tommttoe would allow him something more.
After discussion,
On the motion of Peter Esq, J P,
Seconded by Jatnes T M'Gee, Esq, J P,
lb wav, unanimously reconnnended that the rennineration [o
tho
Owen Keenan for inspection of private dippings during
Autun n period, be at the rate of 5s per week.
EXPORTATION OF ORDER AMENDMENT.
'[he above Order of the Depal•tment was submitted by
Seeperory and initialled by the Chairinan. Tho Order provide e
:.iter 31st August, 1916, at each approved place of inspec-
a sufficient amount of suiCable food and water shall 'W
t,ion,
for
provided by the owner or occupier of the place of inspection
the nse of anitnals detained in such places.
NOHCES.
V arums notices served by the Veterinary Tngpeetor.q: in
of Swine Fever and Sheep Sea b, were sublilittod and initialled
by the Chairman
1
Louth County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings of. the Louth County Coupcil at their
Speeial Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse,
Dundalk, on Friday, 22nd Septetnber, 1916, af one o'clock p.m.
Present
Ili flié Chair A Duffy, Esq, J/ P.
Other Members—Peter B J V; Peter Woods, J P; Paik
hl'(iee, J P; I) .1 Roth, Meade, B L Coleman. J P; T, Goodman.
P Donegan, J P; W T Skeffington, J P; '1' O'Rourke, T
M'Court, John Dolan, N T Mum,y, J P; P Callan. J P; J
Wynne, J P; B llaniill, J P; T V M'Qui11an, J F Murphy, J P;
J Morgan, and B Finnegan, Esquires.
The Meeting was sutnmoned to consider the following report
of the Scholarship Committee
Report of Proeeedings of the Scholarship ()onitiiittee at their
Meeting held on Friday, 15th 1916, one o'clock
P resent
the Chair—Charlets A Duffy, .Esq, J P.
other Members—W T Skeffington. J P; .T T Dolan, M A; and
Patk (Y Connell,
The Minutes Of the previous Meeting of the (A)rnmittee were
taken as read, and signed by the ('Alibirrnau.
The Committee had under consideration the of
of existing ScholaIB11ips, lei ter dated 7th
t lie
Septet)) ber from the University College reporting on (he Lonth
County Council Scholars for the Session 1915-16 was laid before
the Committee. The reports on the various scholars were as
follows
Margaret V. Lyons—Passed First Arts Examination with Second
Class Tlonours in French.
Joseph M' Parland—PassecI Secondi Enginenring ExaminatiOt1
with Second ClaséS Honours.'
John V A First Commerce Examination.
Eileen TOevan—-Pa.ssed First Medical Examination.
Tho report further added that [Ile students were very good,
and that their and conduct had been rucxst satisfac-
TA'tter was read from Joseph M 'Parland requesting that;
scholarship might be renewed for a fourth year to enable bilD
to cmnplete his course in Engineering.
After discussion, the following resolution was passed unalli-
1110
Proposed by W T Skeffi ngton, Esq, J P,
Seconded by Patrick C) 'Connell, Esq, and
li'esoIvedVI'hat we recommend the County Council to grant
t he following renewals of scholarships
J oseph M scholarship for fourth year.
Margaret V l..vons—A scholarship for third year.
John V A Magrath—A scholarship for second year.
Eileen sehola rship for second year.
It is further recom that a student [o whom
sell('larsllip is awarded must illimediafely (IOeide what course
education is to be taken, and that no change be permit fed' during
the fertn of the scholarship.
'I'he (-'otntnittee then the applications for the
new scholarships to be awar(led by the Council for the
year.
The following jwere the applicants who each furnished testi-
monials which were considered satisfactory
Gerald F Carroll, Haggardstown, Dundalk.
Leo M'Golriek, Shop Street, Drogheda.
Neal J Treanor, Dublin Dundalk.
Peter Conlon, Channom•ock, Dundalk.
Mary Gertrude WNeilI, Linenhall Street, Dundalk.
The Interrnediato Pass Lists were by the Committee,
and the verification of the examination numbers of, those
udents who had presented themselves for exani inatiorr were
certified by fhe Intermediate Education
'M' Neill was [he only student who had not presented
herself for the Intortnediate Examination, but her certificate
Of Pass for the Matriculation Exanjination for the N U I in
June, 1916, was before the Committee. The subjects of examina-
tion were Latin, Irish, French, English, and Mathematics.
The following were the, [Ionours Marks obtained by the other
st uden ts
G F 1, 636; N J 'IWanor (11),
414; P Conlon 305.
long discussion took place as to the merits of the various
students, and as the Scholarship Scheme specifically stated that
the order of merit would be determined by the printed marks
Ohtaineql by the applicants in Senior Grade Honours as published
in the official results list, it was unanimously decided to recom-
rnend t haf new scholarships be granted to the two students
highest. on the list, and the following resolution was passed:—
Prop•ese€l by W T Skeffington, Esq, J p;
Seconded by J T Esq, M A, and
It we reconnnend t.he County Council to grant
seliOlarships of 250 each to Messrs Gerald F Carroll, Haggards-
town, and Leo M'Golriek, Droghedla, as being Che best qualified
under the conditions of the Scholarship Scheme.
Tho (%mmiteee further recommended that compulsory resid-
ence in a hostel be insisted on, unless a good and sufficient
reason to satisfy the Council to permit students fo residb in an
approved residence be given.
Tho Chairman, after consultation with the Committee, direc-
ted the Secretary to convene a Special Meeting of the Council
to consider Che recommendations for Friday, 22nd September,
at one o'clock p.m.
Mr Bernard Hamill. J P, said that this report should have
beefi in hands of each Member of the Council before l*'ing
The Chai rrnau informed tho
itted' for - confirmation.
Council that this had never been done before, buf that in
future the Secretary would send a copy to each Member beforo
Che Special Mmfing held.
After discussion. the following resolut ion was •vassed unani-
UiOU.SIy
Proposed by W T Skeffington. Esq, J P;
Seconded by Denis J Rath, Esq, and
Passolved—That hereby confirm the reemnmendafions
hy the Scholarship Comtnittee at their Meeting held A 09 Friday •
tho 15th Septeniber, 1916, and award new Scholarships Of
each to Gerald F Carroll. Ilaggardstown, Dundalk, and
M 'Golriek. Shop Street, Drogheda.
Arul, her, that we grant renewals of existing scholarshiP<
as ' follows
For the fourth year a Scholarship of C50 to Joseph M'l)arland•
For the third year a Seholarship C50 to Margaret, V Lyons •
For the second year o Scholarship 'f Æ5() to M Teevan•
For tho second year a of C50 to John V A
gratb.
ARBITRATOR ARDEE AC(ujVNTS.
The next item on the agenda was tho tion Of the
pointrnouf or an Arbit rafor in [he matter of the Ardee Branch
Line Accounts. The late Arbitrator, Sir John G Barton, having
resigned, the Great Northern Railway Cornpany had submitted
the name of Mr Jatnes. Charroll, Acting (%mmissioner of Valua-
lion, for the position, the approval of the Council. The
"latter had been fwice adjourned for the opinion of the Ardee
Rural District eouneil on the appointinent, but no decision had
been arrived at.
Telegrarn had been received this day from Sir A V Foster, tho
Chairman of the District Council, regretting inability to ,atteud
Co. (huncij m€v•ting, but suggesting that the Railway Company's
nominee should be appointed.
The following resolution was [hen passed unanimously
Proposed by Peter B Moore, J P;
Seondod by Denis J Rath, IWI, and
we hereby approVe of fhe appointment or
Carroll, Acting Comtnis.sioner of Valuation, a.s
Arbit rator in connection with the account. of the Ardoe Branch
Railway Line.
REGISTRATION FEES.
R"€olut.ion subtnitted by the Dublin County Council suggest-
ing that the tvrnuneration for this year to the officers concerned
should be on the basis of fhe average for the past, throb years
for the work under the Parlianrentary and Registration Act,
was, after discussion, rederred [o the nest Meeting of the
l•hnance (A'tnmittee for consideration and' report.
Finance Committee.
Mita t€• of proeeedings of the Finanoo at. i,heir
rneot;ng held in the Council Chamber, Court Ilouse, Dundalk.
on MI nda.y, 2nd October, 1916, at 1 0'clock, p 111.
Pr esent
In the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, .J P.
tnetnbers Wynne, J P; B Finnegan,
M aeQ,üllnn. John Dolan, P Woods, J P; Meade,
Woods, J P; 'I'honja.s O' Rourke, and Bernard Ela rnill,
Esquires.
Mr 1! Lornas Walsh, County Stlrve.vor, was in attendance.
'l'he rninutes of the previous meeting of the Covnmitie€'
taken 9s read, and signed by the Chairrnan.
following accounts were itted, •and on exatninati0U
were ordered for payment
Loans Account—Works in Charge of County
Surveyor
Sulxsiconr.v Account— Works in Charge of Co.
Survevo'
S'/ixsidjary ()fliee
Total
47
FRANCHISE FEES.
The following resolution snbrnitte«l bv the Dublin County
Council, and which 11041 been referred by the Co. Council to the
Finance Conon it tee consideration, was laid before the Ineet-
ilvod—'l'hat we approve of Che suggestion that the re-
[ion to the Secretaries, Clerks of Urban Districts, Un-
ions Rate Col lectors, paya ble under the provisions of
Pa rlia ment,ary and Registration Act, 1916, should bo on the
basis ['f tie average of the fees received 'by all the.se officers for
the throe years previous to the suspension of the work in eon-
nection IVith the Parlia rnentary and Local Governjnent Regis-
ters. —Carried.
(Signed), P. J. O'NEILL, Chairman County
l)liblin County Council.
Seepetary explained that tho L G B had written to the
Secretaries of tho Co Couneils,requiring them to lay before their
juncil : statement showing the average of the amounts paid
each ollieer concerned, under the Franchise Act, during the
t,ln ee years. 'l'he statenjent„ ',vith tho vieu•s of the Coun-
the subject should then be bransrnitted to the L G B, who
would
consider the question of remunera Lion to these officers,
eonsoquenee of no registration work being nec•es.s.q ry
YOO' , would not otherwise receive the i'ees which in ac-
Oordanco with tho fernts of Cheir appointments they were entit-
led tu expect.
The following staternent showing the average amounf paid to
each offieor (l nring the past fhree years was sublilitted
7 10
.110 811
C7.31 11
'Tho Bank Books for the (Genoral, Subsidiary I,oans
counts were examined, and initialled bv the Chairman.
•nas Secretary Conn€y Council
J (hnnollv.
P R. Finigan. Clerk, I)undalk Union
rorngoole, Clerk, •Ardee Union
.J Q„illan, Rate Collector, Urban
P S Rate Col lector, Ardee Illtral
at M'l)onnell, 11 ate Collector' Ardee Rural
•Cullougll, Rate Colleet01%
19 8
'2518 7
82 11 5
.31 13 10
20 c; 10
11 19 3
12 2 6
John Ke!lv, Rate Collect01% Rural
Pat!' Hughes. Rate' Collector, Dundalk Urban
P:ttk Clltskey, Rate Collector, Dundalk Rural
Peter M 'Donnell, Rato Collector, Dundalk .
John Woods, Rate Collector, Dundalk Rural
J V Johnston, Rate Collector, Dundalk Rural
3 16 10
68 s
'I'he Chairman explained that owing to the there was
Franchise work done this year, and consequently no fees
der Act payable the officers who usually did this
work. In view. however, of the fact fthat all the officers.
appo in accordance with the terms of Advertisements
which set out that they were entiCled to fees under talle
chise and Jurors Acts, it would be a considerable hardshiP
thenp through no fault of their own these fees were Nithiheld•
The I O B would make no order on the point until the views o
the various County Councils on Che question were sublnitted to
them, when they had promised to consider the matter.
After cousiderable discussion, the following resol uti011
passod, MI James Wynne, J P, dissenting
Proposed rny William Woods, E.sq, J P;
Seconded by Thos O'Rourke, Esq, and
Resolved—That we approve, the terms of
subm tted by the County Dublin Co., Council, and recommell
to the County Council that in consequence of the usual fees
undet• ti.e Franchise Act not -being. payable Chis year, au
ance €0 the average alnouut paid each of the above
natned officers during the past three years jor this be
t,ed year to them.
AGRICULTURAL GRANT.
Letter was read from the L G B dated '28th septet"'ber'
closing paying order for the surn of C6,3.91 lös, being
ounc of Agricultural Grant for half year ending 30th
ber, 1918.
ber
were read from the G B dated 18t,lL
and Septomber, respectively, enclosing audilæd
e accounts of tho Drogheda ural District and Drogheda
nion for half year ended 31st March, 1916.
CHECKING OF RATE COLLWITON BOOKS.
Letter the L G B dated 20th SeptNljiber, 1916,
0• 40047-1916, st41ting that the cheeking, at leasi once in
each fortnight, 0! the Colleet0JS' books, could not be dispensul
with. The letter initialled by the Chairman.
sq'EiOLARSHIPS.
ers thanking tho Council for granting them renewals of
Oil' 'S! hola rships for the year 1916-17, were read fronl Miss
Yons Drogheda, and Miss Teevan, Barronstown.
rs were read from Messrsv G Carroll and L.. Golriek,
e Stl'(ients to whom new scholarships had been awarded this
Year, thanking the Council for same, and requesting permis-
Sion to live in approved boarding in Dublin, of
'Ostel. Each student stated he intended to reside wibh a
ne.qr I'dative, under WI
rose supervision he would be.
After discussion,
(hi the motion of Bernard Hafnill, Esq, J P;
Soeotided by Bernard Finegan, Esq,
Oa nn animously agreed to grant Messrs M 'Gilrick and
Perrnissiot' to reside in residences approved by the Ool-
oge Authorities, instead of in a hostel.
ARDEE RATT,WAY ARBITRATOR.
Left
er Was read from Mr james C%wrroll, Acting Commis-
iluation, thanking Council for his appointment
in
•r Of the accounts of fhe Ardee Branch Railway Line
room of Sir J G Barton
50
FANE AND WOTTONSTOWN DRAINAGE DISTRICTS
Letter was read from f.ho Local Government Board dated 21st
September, 1916. No. 45415/16, forwarding copy of Che Act
firming the Provisional Circlers granted by the Board; in this
matter.
The Secretary stated it. would be necessary for the Council to
appoint a Drainage Board for each District, and he was direc-
ted to place the on the agenda, for next meeting Of the
Council for consideration.
ACCIDENT AT QUARRY.
The Soeretary stated that a. man named Halpin had. met with
The
an aeeidenf at Braganstown quarry on 23rd her.
Insurauee Company had been notified as usual.
CIVIL BTT,L FOR RF,COVERY OF RATES.
With reference to the claim maclö by Mr John Leland'
Beltiehburne. and refugncl by the Council for a refund Of rates
eollee,fod from him. which, ho alleges, should have been
leetecl from the tenants fo whom he had set the lands, the
Seeretary stated that a civil bill for the amonnf of 036 bad been
served on him by Mr Leland's solicitor. Tie had transmitted
same fo Mr O'Connell. and in acknowledging recx•ipt Of
on 2nd instant. Mr O'Connell gaid hig opinioty was _ that
Council have a good defence to the elaim, and he had
defenee.
Tho (hmmittee unanimously approved of fhe action taken
civil
the Secretary fo have the Council's solicitor defend the
bill.
MALICIOUS INJURY CLAIM.
Tho S€•eretary sfafe«l that not-ice of npplioafion for
so [ion for rnalieiotl* injury to eoftle. the property Of
51
Tle had for.
Conophy, Channonroek, had been served n him.
warded same to the Council's solicitor, who was dealing,with
the matter.
RATE COLLECTION.
The Secretary informed the Committee that all the Rate Col-
lectors except Mr Johnston had lodged the first moieties
Of their warrants on or before 30th September. Mr Johnston,
Wh9 did not receive the books for the district formerly covered
by Mr Patk Hughes until late in the year, and whose collec-
fion was backward in consequence, that he would be
able to close on this day, Monday, 2nd October.
This was considered satisfactory by the Committee, and the
retU1tneration of those eollec.tors who had closed on 30th Sep-
her was ordered for payment.
The Seeretary was directed fo write the L G B requesting
sanction to pay those collectors who had not closed in Sept,em•
r, 1916, the balances Of remuneration withheld from them.
DUNDALK U.D.C. DEMAND.
Letter was read from the Town Clerk, Dundalk, stating that
had lodged to the credit, of the Council the first moiety of
the demand for the year 1916-17. arnounting fo the sum of C2,450
In reply to the Chairman, the Secretary informed tho Com-
that the instalment of the Drogheda detnand bad not
Yot boon paid.
LAMP FOR GILES' QUAY PIER.
Tho county Surveyor stated that the Pier Lamp at Giles'
Quay was worn out, and a new one would be 148111tred which
ho. would cost Ell or 812.
discussion, he said he would endeavour Co procure o
gocond-hand one which would be suitable, and the matter w88
left in his hands.
TIME OF FINANCE MEETINGS.
the
The Chairman requested an expression of opinion from
members present as' €0 whetli«r• they would think it desirable
to hold the I"inance Meetings of the Council at 10.30 0'clock
stead of one o'clock. This arrangenrent, he said, would facili-
tate the Dundalk Members, Monday being market day here,
the South Louth Members would be able to return home by
noon train.
The Members unanilnously expressed themselves in favour Of
the probosal, and thé following 'rcsolution was passed
by T V MacQui11ari; Esq;
Seconded by Bernard Tlatnill, Usq, p, and
Resolved—That we recommend the County Council to fis
tinme of meeting of the Finance Committee for 10.30 0'clock
stead of one o'clock as at present.
The Secretary was directed to place ihis on the agenda for
next County Councilo Mleeting.
Proposal Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Committee at their
Third Quarterly Mæting held! in the Council Chamber, CA)urt-
house, Dundalk, on Monday, 16th day of October, 1916, at ono
o'clock p.m.
P resont
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
James Wynne, J P;
Ot her Members—Thomas CYR ourke,
Michael Meade, Bernardi llamill, .J P; and Joseph 11 M'Ardle,
usquires.
The Minutes Of the previous Meeting of the Committee were
taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following proposals were considered by Che (hrnmittee,
ancl earh was unanimously approved
APPI,ICATIONS BY THE COUNTY SURVEYOR.
o. 32—'I'4i provide a Pound in Dyogheda. • Cost not fo exceed
810. Cbuniy-at•large e harge.
n. 33>-rro provide a sum not exee«ling for the repair and
maintenance for one year from 1st December, 1916'
of the Ancient. Monuments in Drogheda recently
taken in charge b.i- the CÅ)unty Omncil. County-at-
large ehurge.
54
No. 34—To instal two Electric Radiofors in Ardee Court.
County-at-large charge.
not to exceed 86.
The Secretary submitted County-at-large payments for quar-
ter ended 30th September, 1916, and saue were examined and
recommended for payment by the County Council.
The Committee adjourned till Monday, 13th November.
i,
6b
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Pinance Committee at their
bleofing held in 'the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk.
on Monday, 16th October, 1916, at one o'clock p.m.
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
( ither Mem bets—Thomas ()'Rourke, James Wynne, J P;
Miehael Meade, Bernard) Ilanlill, J P; and Joseph lil M 'A rdlp,
J P, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
Tho Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Committee were
taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were subnuitted and on examination
were ordered for payment :—
g221 5 1
Loa
ns Account—Works in charge of Co. Surveyor
Subsidiat*' Account—Works in charge of Co. Surveyor 126 19 5
6750
S u bsidiary Accou nt—Secretary's Office
g4L5 9 6
Total
The Banks Books for General, Subsidiary, and T,oans Ac-
were examined and initialled by the Chairman.
RATE REMUNERATION.
Letter was read from the L G B dated 6th October, 1916, No.
47476/16, wifh reference to the poundage fees of Mr James
Johnston, who did not close his eolleetion of the first moiety
of Poor Rate fill 2nd October, 1916, stating that in the
eumstanees mentioned in the Secretary's letter on the subject'
for
they would approve of the payment of his poundage fees
t his collection.
The following letter from the L G was alM) read:—
Local Government Board, Dublin,
10th October, 191B.
No. 47475/16.
Louth County.
Sir.—
With TX*ferenee to your further letter of the 3rd instant'
relative to the. payment by the Louth County C%uncil' Of the
lance of poundage fees fo Collectors Cluskey. Peter M'l)on•
nell and, John Woods. in respect of the half-year ended the
Septmnber, 1915, T am directed by the Local Govern rnent Board
for Troland to state that they observe that Collector
though his progress was not entirely satisfactory, had, out
a warrant of C2,666. lodged E482 at the end of July. and
at the end of August, and that he attended regularly for' tbd
cheeking of his accounts, They, accordingly, will not in bis
case object to the paytnent fo him of the balauee Of
poundage fe€s.
As regards Collectors Peter M'Donne11 and John Woods, the
last
the
I.oc.l Government Board would direct' v attention to
paragraph of their. letter of fhe 18th May' last (No. 19334/1916)'
in which they stat«i that the payment of fees would be
dependent on these Collectors ' 'showing good progreeg witlr their
On an examinatioll
colleefions during the eurrenf half-year."
he Board
of the rate eolleetion returns for the past half-year t
note that out of a warrant of C2,257 Collector M 'Donnel
lodged only 855 at the end of July, and Z154 at the end of
August; while (%lleetor Woods had at. the same dates out of
warrant of El ,930 lodged only 8165 and B91 respectively •
of bis
addition Colliftor M'T)onnAI attended for the, ehecking•
67
only once during July. not at all August, and
once in the month of September, while Colleefor Woods af-
tended only once during each of the same months.
ILaving regard to the highly unsatisfactory conduct of tbßqe
Colleetors, the Board (IO not feel that they would be. in any way
justified in. granting them the proposed concession
T am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Asistant Secretary.
Secretary, LouthL County
After considerable discussion on this letter, the Secretary was
to infortu the 1, G B as the Collectors referred to
had closed their collections of the first moiety of the Poor Rate
on 30th September of this year. m was unanimous wish and
opinion. of the Committee that the balances due should be
paid. and that the would, undertake
ing of the books, would be done Dregularly in future.
Chairman that when he interviewed the L G 13
some time ago he from the official he met that the
payment of these balances would be sanctioned provided the
Collectors closed in September of thié year; and the Secretary
was directed to further inform the Board accordingly. He was
also directed to say the rate collectors were unable to col-
leet a substantial portion of the rates during the early portion
of the half-sear without destraining for same, and it was
the wish of the Comrnittee that this should be done.
The Secretary was directid to write the various County Coun-
oils of Ireland whefber any of their Poor Rate col.
lectors ever fail to their half-yearly collections.
RATE COLIÆCTOI{S' INCREASES,
The following was read. and the was directed
b8
fo inforlll Lhe L G B that if the Rate Collectors close their COL
lection at the proper tirne, the Committee will adhere to their
d!€'ision to grant them increases in accordance with the
poundage scale as sulnnitted to the Boardy and requesting the
l,ocal Government Board to sanction [he increases granted by
the Council Y—
Local Government Board, Dublin,
10th October, 1916.
No. 47476/16.
Louth (Lhunty.
Sir,—
With further refence to your letters of the 18th August
anci 31st July last, relative to the remuneration of certain Poor
Rate Collectors in Louth County, I am directed by the Local
Government Board for Ireland to state that they are not pre-
pared to approve Of the scheme su bmitted.
If, however, a further scheme is su bmitCed allowing extra
remuneration to those Collectors who lodge a fixed proportion
(not less than one-third) of their warrant before tluyJIst July
and' 31st Deogrnber in each half-year, the Board will be pre-
pared to give it their favourable consideration. The rate Of
rem uneration in respect of stuns lodged aft:er tho dates
tioned is not to be disturbed.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
IIARBOU1t R.ETIJRNS'.
urns were submitted and initialled by the Chairman from
the Ilarbour Constables showing tha[ tho following arnoUnt•S
were receiv€xl during the quarter end10(1 30th September, 1916
Clogherhead, Z2 18s 3d ; (Ai rlingford, C5 2s Gd'; Giles' Quay '
nil.
69
COURII'OCEEPF}R'S APPLICATION.
Letter was read from Mr Timothy Murray, Churt-keeper, Dun-
dalk, requesting the Council to grant him the usual allowance
Of ZIO for attending to the heating apparatus,- preparing Courts
for Petty Sessions, keeping (hurts clean, and various other mat-
ters in connection with the Courthouse.
The Committee unanimously lecommended that the usual
allowance of EIO be made to Mr Murray for this work.
ADMISSIONS TO RICHMOND.
Refurn of admissions to Richmond Asylum from Louth County
during quarter ended 30th September was laid the
tuit.tee and' by the Chairman.
MALICIOUS INJURY CLAIM.
Letter was read from the County Solicitor stating that af[or
the hearing of the case Samuel D Babbington v. Monaghan,
Louth and Meath County Councils for the alleged wanton driving
Off tho lands of Ch»olderry and maltreatment of cattle and
goats' the County Court Judge gave a decree for the Z20 claimed,
but refused the application of the Monaghan Council's Solicitor
to levy the amount, or a part thereof, off the County of Louth.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
ARDEE DRAINAGE BOARD DECREE.
Letter was read from Mr P J Kerley, solicitor, requusting pay-
Of the sum of Æ15 14s, being the amount of the decree
awarded the Trustees of the Ardee Drainage Board in an ap-
Plication for compensation for malicious injury to weir gates,
Property. Mr Kerley stated that the weir gates had
their
been re-erected at a considerably greaÜer expense than was
allowed for in the decree, and as Che resources of the Drainage
Board were lirnited it would be a convenience if the amount was
l.•aid now.
60
The Secretary was directed to inform Mr Kerley that
amount of the decree could not be paid until it was levied
eeted.
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL COMMITTALS.
was read from District Tnspeetor Norris notifying
the
and
tho
Council that at the Juvenile Court he would apply for commit-
far to Artane' Indriktrial Sohöol of .Ttaneé Crosby, Blackrock'
aged 11 .Véa.rsI
Letter was also read from Rev C Tlurson, C C, notifying that
he would apply" foi c;omrhitfGI' 'Eo ail Tridusfrial School Of
Thos Reilly, St. Brigid's Terrace, Duodalk, aged. under 14 years'
The letter were initialled by the Chairman.
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL APPJ,TCATTON.
Letter was read • frorp the Manager 'St. Patrick's Industrial
School, Milltown, Belfast, requesting fhaf the Council would
•increase; the surn paid' for maintenance week of each child'
nn riie,ly, 2s 6d, Ild' péi• week, as had been granted by Other
Councils Owing to !lie increased cost Of living.
A ft.er discussion, the consideration of the matter was
jonrned.
RESIDENCES OF SCHOLARS.
Letters were read from ,Met-srs G Carroll and I. M'GolriCk'
who had been granted permission to reside in approved Fök71eneeS'
stating that these residences were, respectively, 28 T,ower Mount
Street, Dublin, and 23 Leeson Park Avenue, Ranelagh.
Letter was read frolii the Registrar of University College,
I in, approving of these residene€*'.
Ii8tter- was read from• Myt Joseph M 'Parland, another Of the
( kjnnty Scholarship; holders, rectilf\stifig permission to eontinne
fo reside at 9 Grantham Street, Dublin, instead of in a hostel'
Ile had' been in this house three years and if was approved b}'
the Authorities.
The permission was unanimously grunted.
ARDEL BRANCU LINE ACCOUNTS.
Letter was read from the Accountant, G N •R, enclosing state-
of Ardee Branch Line accounts for half year ended 30th
June, 1916, as itib1Pitted to the Arbitrator.
NEGLECTED CONTRACTS.
The following letter and [he recommeodafions therein
Were unanimously approved :—
County Surveyor's Office,
Courthouse, Dundalk,
16th Oetober, 1916.
TO the Chairman and Gentlemen Finance Cornmiffee Meeting,
16/10/16.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen.
I beg fo report that the following contracts are
neglected
DROGHEDA RURAL DISTRICT. Index No. 45. 460 perrheg
from Drogheda to Collon by Hill of Rafh. Contractor, John
Drew, Waterunder.
l) UNDAI.K RURAL DISTRICT. Index No. 70. 653 per-
Con-
eh€s. Castleblayney to Chstlebellingham by Tullygee.
tmetor, Peter Halfpenny, Drumcah.
Old Dundalk to Newry road.
Index No. 88. 824 perches.
Contractor, Patk Mathews, Mountpleasant, Dundalk.
These roadk have been absolutely neglected as regards labour,
T have had ten
and no material has been supplied! this year.
day notices served and recommend that the contruct,s be tor-
ruinated if the notices are not complied with.
I beg also to report neglect on
Index No. 14. ARDEE RURAL msrrnrcn. 411 perches.
Dunleer to Louth by Mansfieldstown.
Con tractor, Mathew
Flynn, deceased.
Index No. 24. DUNDALK RURAL 259 per-
Castlebellingham fo Tallanstown by Drumleck. Con-
tractor, Patrick M 'Padden. Contractor has gone fo England•
Ten day notices are being served, and! T recommend the terniinn-
fion of the contracts as in tho other eas€*4.
Your obedient Servant,
THOMAS WALSH.
Finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Mooting held in the Council Charnber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 30th day of October, 1916, at one o'clock, p m.
—In the : Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Present :
Other Members—James M'Carthy, J P; N T Murphy, J p,
Thomas O'Rourke, and William Woods, J P, Esquires.
The County Surveyor was in attendance.
The minutes of the previous meeting of the Committee were
taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The following aeeounts were submitted, and on examination
Wore ordered for payment, :
186 17 7
1
••oans Account—Works in Charge of Co Surveyor .
0Snbsidiary Aeeonnt—
do,
do.
Subsidiary Aeeount—Seerotøry's Office
52 8
42 1 10
C281 4 1
Total
AUDIT.
Notice was rend from R. J Newell, Esq, Local Government
Auditor, informing the Conneil that he would commence the
audit of tho Council's Accounts for half year ended 31st, March,
, on Tuesday, 31st ()etober, at ten o'clock, a m. The Notice
1916
had been advertised in accordance with the, Public Bodies Or-
der
, and was initialled by Che Chairman,
COMMITTALS TO INDUS'I'RIAL SCHOOLD.
Notices were I ead informing Che Council thot applications
would .be made at Petty Sessions Äor the to Indus-
trial Schools of Jas and Anne Bild, of Patrick St, Drogheda'
and Mary M 'Guinness, Ladywell 'I'errace, Dundalk, all children
under the age of fourteen years.
LAW CASES.
Letters were read from the County Solicitor as follows
Letter dated 16th October, stating that the case of John Le-
land v. the Council, for the recovery of rates alleged to have
been paid in error. had been withdrawn by Mr Leland's solici-
tor, and the County Court Judge gave a dismiss with expense'S
to Rate Collector Kelly, who attended on behalf of the Council•
Letter dated 17th October, stating (1) that in the three cases
of application for compensation for alleged malicious injury
siing out of the rebellion, the claims were adjourned pending„
arrangements being made by the Government for settlement'
of the amounts. ('2) an application for C 125 compensation for
the burning of a cottage the property of Patrick Hooy, Lower
Marshes, resulted in a decree for C18 for the applicant, to be
levied off the D. E. D. of Dundalk Rural. (3) a decree for
5s , and Is witnesses expenses, to be levied Of the D. E.
of Castlering, was awarded in the clafm by Mary Conaphy, Of
Channonrock, for C3;3 for injury to two head of cattle.
Leter dated 17th October, re Samuel D Babington v. the
Councils of Mon:ughan, Louth and Meath, -stated that t)he
R. D. C. of Carrickmacross was. appealing against the decisi011
of the Judge in awarding o decree leviable off the I). E. D. Of
Drum boory.
Leter dated 23rd October; st:Lting the applicai;ion of marl and
Countess of Kilmorey, for compensation for the alleged
cious burning of heather was dismissed at Ballybot Quarter
Sessions.
06
Letter dated October, acknowledging recÅ?ipC of Prelim-
i nary Notice of Application for L'3'2 cornpensa [ion in a clailli by
Edward Martin, of Reaghstown, gnd stating thab he was giving
the case his attention.
The letters were initialled by ft;he Chairman.
RATE COLLECTION.
In accordance with instrucbions of the Finance Comjnit,ioo at
last meeting, the Secretary had written each County Council
Ireland asking them to kindly answer cert,ain queries with re-
gard to the collection of poor rate in each county. The indivi-
dual replies Were placed before the Committee, and •the Secre-
tary submitted the following surnmary of the answers, which
were ordered to be inserted on the minutes :—
Query What poundage rates are paid Che Rate Collectors,
and if any special conditions are attached to the collection ?
Reply fees vary from '2åd to Is in the C. The
average is generally 6d and 7d in the C. In sorne count,ies a
condition operates that, if n certain proportion of the rate is not,
IOdgod by the 31st July and 31st December in each year, there
is a reduction of the amount of poundage fees from {d Io Ild in
the on the amounts lodged after these periods.
Query 2--DO yor Collectors close t,heir collections pronuptly
by the 31st March aud 30th Septenjber each year ?
Reply 2—1n 2ö eounties all t,he Collectors close pronjptl.y on
the 31st March and 30th September.
In Do
wn and Derry all the Colleetors close for the second mo-
lety on the last day of February.
remaining six counties all the (Å)llectons close on tille
Prescribed dates with a few exceptions—the euuses of failure
ng given as illne.ss, or exceptional circumstances, or a few
Out of a large number of Collectors were a few days late.
Querv a—Do your Collectors attend regularly each f01tnght
to ehe8k their books ?
66
Reply 3—1n every county, with four exceptions, all 'the COI-
lectors check regularly every fortnight. In these latter countieS
some of the Collectors do not check regularly in the first
months of the 'half-years. One of the Collectors in County
Mayo who resides on Clare Island, in. Clew Bay, only attends
every six weeks, but he sends his books to be checked evelT'
fortnight.
Query you experience any difficulty in obtaining
tion of the Incal Government Board for payments of
iV'es where the full amount is not lodged within, the statutory
period ?
Reply 4—Great difficulty is experienced in obtaining sanct'i0U•
for payments of fees in any county whore the Collectors do
lodge in the prescribed period. Galway County Council do nob
pay any poundage, fees on sums lodged outside the half-year.
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL APPLICATION.
Application was read from / f,he Manager, St. Joseph's
trial School, Dundålk, stating that the present grant by
Council, namely. •6d per head per week, for the maintenance
Of children from the co. Louth in their School was small owing
to the advance in prices of clothing, and .:fuel, and
questing the Council to favourably consider the gra.nting Of
reay»nable increase.
be
After discussion, the decidOcU tluwt the Secretary
instructed to writi* tho proper Department stat-ing that the
plication was considered reusonable and fair, and: t,hat
the grant mado by the 'Government was the
would recommend a proportionate increase in f.he •County
grant to the Sobool.
STEAM 13011J1ts.
The reports by the Insurance Conjpany's Inspector ou
boilers of 5 engines, Che property of [he Council, were subLDl
All the boilers are in order.
INCOME TAX.
The Secretary submitted asessment under Schedule D of the
Income Tax Acts of Tneome Tax on Bank Interest credited to the
(Vmneil during four years ending 5th' April, 1916, as follows:—
Year 1912-13—Bank C80. Tax assessed, Æ4 13s 4d.
Year 1913-14--Bank Interest, C235. Tax assessed, 14s 2d.
Year Interest, Z96. Tax assessed, C8.
Year 1915-16—Bank Interest, C248. Tax assessed, C37 4s,
It Was pointed out by Mr N T Murphy that in his opinion tho
interest wo pay the Bank on foot of Loans, etc, should be set off
against this. and the Seerefary was (Virecåecl to appeal ' against
the assessments.
CENTRAL DTSPENSARV.
Letter was read from the TJ G 13. and initialled by the Chair-
enclosing Paying Order C9 5s 441 for balance of architect's
fees in respeef of the Central Tuberculosis Dispensary.
OMEATTI DISPENSARY.
Clerk Tuberculosis CÅ)m-
Letter was read from Mr V Warren, ,
hliftee of Management, stating that thea Thiberculosis Committee
tnagetnent had instructed the County Solicitor to prepare
tenancy in of Cottage, Omeath, which
had acquired from Mis .Ali«. Cß,nnolly, Lislea, Omeafh,
for the purpose of a Tuberculosis Dispensary at a rent of 28 per
annum. The letter was initialled by the Chairman, and ap-
proved by the Committee.
DROGHEDA DEMAND.
was road from the Town Clerk, Droghedß, stating
to exceptional first instalment of the
Council's demand on the Corporation of Drogheda was not paid
Within half-year ended 30th September. Both moieties would,
however, be paid during current half-year:
This was oonsidered satisfactory.
68
RATE COLLECTORS' TNCRDASES.
'Wif,h reference to [he letter of the L G 13 read at last meeting
of the Committee, refusing to sanelion the scheme of increases
to Rate Collectors submitted by [he (%uneil, and the
of the Committee to adhere to [he Council's Schejne, and
ther req for sanction of same. the following lotter
read
No. 51392/16.
117011th County.
Sir.
T,oeal Government Board' Dublin,
27th October, 1916.
T am directed by the Loeal Government Board for Ire-
land to acknowledge the receipt of your further letter Of the
24th instant. relative to the remuneration of certain Poor Rate
Collectors in Louth County; and, in reply, I am to state
the Boarcl see no reason to depart from the ruling already
veyod.
T am fo add that the suggestion mado in the Board's letter of
the 10th instant (No. 47476/1916) was based on the system in force
in similarly circumstanceyd! counties which hak heen found
work most satisfactorily.
T am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVJ,TN,
Assistant Secretary.
• Secretary, l,outh County Council.
The Board's letter of 10th October stated that if a
lowing extra remuneration to those Collectors who lodge
less than one-third of [heir warrant before the 31st July and 31st
December, [he Board would •give if iheir favourable consider g -
illose
tion, buf that the remuneration for mnounts lodged after
dates was not fo be distributed.
the
Affor discussion, ou the suggestion of Mr N T MurPh.V'
69
Committee unanimously agreed to request the sanction of tho
Board to a scheme by which new rates of poundage would
be, paid on the full amount of their warrant to those Collectors
who lodged aj reasona ble proportion of their warrant by 31st
•Jilly and 31st Deceniber in each year, and subsequently
elose their eolleetions at. the proper time.
CINEMA CENSORSHIP.
Circular letter was read from the Chief Secretary's Office,
T)nblin Castle; with reference to the Censorship of Cinemato-
graph fi lms, and suggesting that each Licensing Authority
If was unan imously
should forward their views on the matter.
agreed that a Censor for Ireland should: be appointed, and the
Seeretary was directed convey, [his opinion to the proper
quarter.
NEGLECTED CONTRACTS.
The co. Surveyor reported neglect on the following roads, and re•
quested a direction from the (hmnjittee
Road No. 103, Dundalk—Bernardi Byrne, Dawestown, Contrac-
for.
Road No. 97, Dundalk—P V Carroll, Benagh, Contractor.
Road No. 2, Dundalk—John Watters, Newrafh. Contractor.
Road No. 16, Dunchi Ik—John Watters, Newrath, Contractor.
mad No. 45, Dundalk—Thos Con roy, Tullagee, Contractor.
No. 65, Dundalk—Patk Mulholland, Carriekrobin, Con-
tractor.
Tho County Surveyor stated that he had' tried to meet these
q»ntraofors in every way, but without result.
•After eonsiderable discussion, the County Surveyor was diree-
ted to take over Che roads in f.he usual way till thi'.y were reset
in January next, and. then proceed against the various eon-
tractors for any inereaql cost eause.d Che ratepayers by gon-
tractors' neglect to work the roads,
.70
INSURANCE REPUND.
Letter was read from the Ocean Accident, and Guarantee Cor
porafion enclosing cheque value C9 12s 901, being rebate due • the
Council under Etnployers' Liability 'Policy No. 1101285.
The letter was initialled by the Chairrnan.
RATES.
The Secretary stated that Collector Woods had asked him to
write for the rates due on a holding lof Captain Claude Wilson •
who was at the front. The Committee (Iveided that this was
the work of the rate • eolleetor, and the Secretary was directed
to so inform- Mr Woods.
FOOD AND DRUGS INSPECTORS' REQUISITES.
Letter was read from the (%unty Inspector, R T C, requesting
supplies for the various Foodf aud Drugs Inspectors throughoUt
the county necessary for the performance of their duties'
and tho Secretary D was directedl to procure same. These re-
quisites are report and record books, seals. boxes, and small
bag.
1
Proposal Committee.
Minute* of Proceedings of the Proposal Committee at ihen•
'l'h'ird (Adjourned) Quarterly Meeting held in the Council
Cha Ili her, Court, House, Dundalk, on Monday,
13th day of
ovornber. 1916, at one o'clock, p m.
osent the Choir: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—nornarc/ Finegan, P MOods, J P; Woods,
J P; Wynne, .J P, and 'l'hos O'Rourke,
mooting was eallod to consider tenders for thefollowing
works
APPLICATIONS BY 'I'HE cot•.N'l'Y SURVEYOR.
32—'I'o provide a Pound in Drogheda. Cost not io excend
C IO. County-at-Large Cha rge.
No. provide sum not for the
maintenance for one year, from rsi December, 1916, i
the Aneiont Monuments in I)' recently taken
in charge by the County Cota;eil. County-at-Large
Charge.
o. 34<1'o instal two Electric Radiators in Ardee Court. Cost
not to exceed CO. County-a t-Large Charge.
no tenders for any of the Works were received, the works
Wero placed in ehargo of the County Surveyor,
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Pi•oeeodings of thes Finance Committee at, their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House; Dundalk,
ot' Monday, 13th November, 1916, at one o?eloek, pa m.
Present the Cha.ir : Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members : —Bornard Finegan, P Woods, J P; Wm
Woods, J P; J Wynne, .J P'; T O'Rourke, and J F
J P, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
Tho Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Committee wore
taken as read aml signed by the Chairman
The following accounts were subrnit,tecl; and on exaaminatiotv
were ordered for payment:—
Loans Account—Works in. Charge of Co Surveyor C225 0 10
Su•bsidiary Account— Works in Charge of Co. Sur-
veyor
Subsidiary Aeeount—Secretary's Office
26 4 0
13 1
The Bank Boolss for the General, aud Loans
coun[s examined and initialled by t)he Chairman.
PAYMENT'S ON FOOT •OF ROADCON'J'IISCI'S.
The Secretary stibtnitted Forni 22 for the eRurnI Districts
showing payment* on foot of road contracts for quarter ended
30th September, 1916, jas 40110ws Ardee So. -1, L'ö(j2 5s öd;
Drogheda (Louth) 3s Ild ; Dundalk, L'I,02ö Us 3d.
Same were recommended for payment.
AGREEMENTS.
The Secretary submitted agreement between Che Council and
Mr Thomas Byrne, of Clont,urkmason, Tor hire of Road Roller.
Scarafier, etc. The hiring to be for a period of three months.
The Committee unanimously reeotmnended the agreement fov
Sealing by the County Council.
Agreement was also submitted between the Council and Mr
James Johnston, of Carrickmbreda, for the raising of 410 bic
yards of stone from Mr Johnston's quarry at Carrickbroad, for
the sum of C5 2s 3d.
The agreement, was also unanimously recommended for Seal-
ing by the Cowncil.
EDUCATION ACI' cos•rs.
Letter was read from C. P. S., Castlebellingham, enclosing
Ds, being in cases under Act at Castle-
to the credit of the Council, and the letter was initialled by
Chairman.
COC-NCTL'S GRANT FOR TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION.
Letter was read from Mr Easthope, Principal and Secretary.
of the LonfIJ Technical Instruction Committee, stating that
[he •work of the Conunittee was seriously å:npeded by he delay
in the receipt of the grants from the Urban ancl Co. Councils :
that no salaries could be naid to the staff for three months,
which need not have been the ease if the local authorities paid
over their contributions for the half year ending 30th Septetn-
ber in May or June previous, so that application could be made
to the Department for furtller funds. Similarly it was desir-
able that the second moiety of the contribution to 31st March
should be paid in November previous.
'I'he Secretary informed the Connnittee that formerly these
grants were paid at the meetings held in April and November
for the period ended 31st March and 30th: •September respecti-
vely, but that on a former application •by Mr Easthope the
Council decided to pay the grant on 1st April and 1st October
and this had been done since.
The Committee unanimously recommended that the moities
of the grant be paid over in advance as request,ed by the Tech-
nical Conjrnittee.
EMPLOYEES' ACVIDENIS.
Letter was read frotn Ocean Insurance CAyrnpan.v enclosing
cheque Cl IOS 3d in settlement of claim in respect of accident to
Patk Mullen at Killen.
The Secretary reported accidents to the following
Kelly, at Jonesborough Quarry; Patrick Hanlon, Faugha!'t
Quarry, and Richard Watters, Jonesborough Quarry.
stated that the various papers in connection with these cases
had been sent to the Insurance Company, and all prelilninaries
perfected in case any claims were made. The letter and re-
ports were initialled by the Chairman.
5
INCOME TAX.
The Secretary stated tha,t as directed by ilme Finance Como
mittee at last meeting, had appealed, against the assess-
ment of Ineorne Tax on the Bank Interest allowed the Council
on their credit balances, and haml received from the Surveyor
laxes letter requesting on what grounds the appeal was made
The Secretary was directed to obtain the opinion of the Coun-
cil's Solicitor as to the Council's liability, and if necessary [o
draft the grounds of' the appeal.
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL TRANSFER.
Letter was read from Industrial School, Drogheda, that Jas.
'Cabe, being now of an age for transfer, would, witli per-
J nission of the Council, be transferred to Artane Industrial
'School. The Comtnit[ee approved, and the letter was initialled
•by the Chairman.
RECOUPMENT.
Letter was read from the Deparånent of Agriculture, dated
ber, 1916, stating they' hacl lodged to the credit of
10th X
the Council the sum of ,C116 7s '241, being •half the expenditure
Of the Council in respect of work under the Diseases of Animals
The
Acts for the nine months ended 30th September, 1916.
letter
Was initialled by the Chairrnan.
FRSSCHISE FEES.
Circular letter from the L G B dated 7th November, 1916,
NO. 117-10 1916, was read with reference to Che claims of cer-
tain offeers for conu»ensa€ion for loss of fees due to the fact
The circular stated
that no register -was prepared this year.
tho Board consider the sclaims of these officers when a
return was subtnitted showing the following particulars
The average arnount received by each officer over the years
1912, 1913 and 1914, or 1913, 1914 and 1915, out of the funds
of the Council.
(2) The average out of pocket expense.s incttr-
recl by each officer during either of these periods seleéted•
(3) 'l'he net amount received by each officer after deducting 011b
of pocket expenses, and (4) The heads under which out of PO c-
ket expenses were incurred. The circular, in order to avoid
hardship to individual officers, authorised the paynwnt on ac-
count to any officer so desiring of a sum up Lo 50 per cent Of
the average amount shown under heading (1) above.
The Secretary was directed to make the return.
ANNUAL REPORT OF T. M. O.
'Ilie following report was read, and ordered to be inserted
the minutes
October 31st, 1916.
Gentlemen,
I beg to submit the following report
ing the past year 200 patients were treated at the TuberculOSiS
Dispen.saries in the county, viz—Ardee 25, Cklrlingford and
Omeath 31, DHjgheda 18, and Dundalk 126. 12 patients
12
fused treatment against medical advice, 3 left the county'
died, and •14 were discharged as cured or much improved ; 122
are still under treatment at the dispensaries. 33 patients were
treated at Peamount Sanatorium; 17 of whom wore discharge
as much improved, 3 slightly improved, 4 condition stationary'
and 3 worse; 6 still under treatment. The Louth County
witb
firtuary provided treatment for lö of our surgical
very satisfaet•y results, i.e., 5 were discharged cured, 8 very
much inu»oved, and 2 as stationary. The Branch Dispensary
at •Omeath was opened on the June, 1916, and Drogheda
Dispensary on the 12th, August, 1.9116. Our shelters were in
fairly constant use (luring the year. Aeeommodåltion• for stor-
ing shelters when not in use is needed in Dundalk. A hospital
for the treatment of •advaneed cases is required. When n, suit-
able time presents itself this work should be press•ed on, as ad-
V amod eases are n great source of infection, and no scheme, for
the treatment of tuberculosis can be complete until adequate
provision is mado for these cases.
J. S. WQUILLAN.
General Summary—Year Ended 30th September, 1916.
200. Num-
Number of patients treated at the Dispensaries,
Of attendances by patients ai Dispe Isaries, 3,992. Number
Of deaths, 12. Number that refused treatment against medical
advice, 12. Number that left county, 3. Number of patients
discharged cured or much improved, 44. Number still under
treatment at Dispensaries, 122. Number treated at Peamount
Sanatorium, 33. Number treated at the Louth Infirmary, 15.
Visits to patients' homes by whole-time nurse, 1,424. Visits
to patients' homes by part-time nuq•se at Ardee, 96. Number
Of specimens of sputum examined and reported on, 143.
NEGLECI*EI) CONTRACTS.
The County Surveyor reported, neglect on the following
roads. He stated that he had served ten days' notices in eaen
ease, aud would take up the roads if' tho notices were not eom-
plied with
Dundalk R. D.—lndox No. 10—553 Dundalk to
bellingham—Contraetor, John M 'Geough.
8
Index No. 18—415 perches Dundalk €0
M 'Elroy.
Drogheda R. No. 56—384 perches Tn rnpike
Tullyesenr €0 Balgalhoran—Contraetor, Patk Tlalligap•
On the motion of Mr James Wynne, J P ;
Seconded by Mr William Woods, J P,
If; was unanimously decided to direct the. County Surveyor IO
have Che work on these roads taken np if the notices were not
complied with.
1
Louth County Council.
Minutes, of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at
their Tnird Quarferly Meeting, held in Che Council Chamber,
Court Howse, Dundalk, on Thursday, 16th day of November,
1916.
Present the Chair : Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members —Michael Meade, Patrick L M'Keon, J P;
Thomas B M'Court, B L Coleman, J P; B Hamill, J P; J H
M'ArdIe, J P; Bernard Finegan, Peter Woods, J P; Thomas
O'Rourke, and John F Murphy, J P, Esquires.
Thomas Walsh, Co. Surveyor ; James Dromgoole and
John M C Lyons, Assistant Surveyors, and Daniel O'Connell,
Solicitor to the Council, were in attendance.
OF GENERAL MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
P toposed by Bernard Finegan, Esq ;
Seconded by Bernard L Coleman, Esq, J P, and
Rosolved—That the minutes of the proceedings of the Louth
unty Council at their Second (Adjourned) Quarterly Meet-
Ing, held on the 17th August, 1916, and Cheir Special Meeting
hold
on the 22nd September, 1916, a copy of each haiing been
2
sent to each member of the Council, be and are hereby confir-
med.
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE COMMITTEE
MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed .by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Thomas B M 'Court, Esq, and
Resolved—That the minutes of the proceedings of the Fin-
ance Committee at their Meetings held on the undermentioned
dates (a copy of which has been sent to each mernber of the
Council), with all payments and recommendations contained
therein be and are hereby confirmed
Monday, 21st August, 1916.
Monday, 4th Septeniber, 1916.
Monday, 18th September, 1916.
Monday, 2nd ()ctober, 1916.
Monday, 16th ()ctober, 1916.
Monday, 30th October, 1916.
Monday, 13th Novem ber, 1916.
CONFIRMATION OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Peter Woods, Esq, J P;
Seeonded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That dhe minutes of Che proceedings of the Ese-
cutive Committee at their Meeting held on the 18th Septem-
ber, 1916, a copy of which has been sent to each Inomber Of the
Council, »e and are hereby confirmed.
3
CONFIRMATION PROPOSAL COMMIT'I'EE MINUTES.
Tho follmving I esolllti011 was passed unanin:ously
Seconded bs B Finegan, Esq, and
lesolvoVI— That the rninufes of the proceedings of the Propo-
sal Conumitfee tit their 'I'llil'd Quarterly Meeting held on Che
16th Oetobor, 1916, and their 'I'llird Adjourned Quarterly Meet-
ing hoid on the 13th Novem ber, 1916, a, copy of encli having
firmed.
ARDEE PAYMENTS.
The following rosolntion was passed unnuimousl.v
by Midhael Meade, ;
Seennclod by 'l'homas (V Rourke, Esq, and
Resolvod—'l'hat the Proposals for Payments formulated by the
'l'hird Quarterly
Ardoo No. I Rural l)i.sCrict, Council at their
and set out on Forni
Meeting, '1101(1 on tlle 7t,h November, (i,
22, furnished to the Council be and are hereby appro-
These paynients amount Co tilte sum of 5s 5(1.
ved of.
DROGHEDA PA YME.XT,S.
Tho follmving resolution was passed unanimously
Patrick L M'l<eon, Esq, .J
Soeonded bv Michael Meade, Esq, and
Ro solved— 'l'hat the Proposals for Payments •by
th R ural District of Drogheda Union, at their
QuarteAy Meeting held on the 8th November, 1916, and set ont
4
on Forli/ 22, furnished to tjhe County Council,
hereby approved of.
These paynients amount to
C40(i lid.
DUNDALK PAYMENTS.
be and are
fhe sum of
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by John F Murphy, Esq, J P •
Seconded bs Bernard Hamill, E.sq, J P, and
Resolved—ThnC the Proposals for Paytnen€s formulatecl b.s
the Dundalk Rural District Council at Cheir Third Quarterly
Meeting, held on the (it'll November, 191(;, and set 0111 on
Form 22, furnished [o the County Council, be and are hereby
approved of. 'I'hese payments amount to fhe sum of Cl 025
(is 9d.
COUNTY-AT-LA RGE PAYMENTS.
'l'ho following resolution was passed unanhnonsly
Proposed by Thomas O'Rourke, Esq ;
Seconded by Bernard L Coleman, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formulated
the Proposal Committee at, their Meeting held on
1916, and sot out on Form 22, furnished to the County
Court?il, and amounting to f,ho sum of L'ö,l.9'2 us 11(1,
are hereby approfed of.
5
DATES OF QU AR'I'L'RLY MEETINGS.
'l'he f01101\Gng resolution Iva.s passed unanilnously :
by B ;
Seconded by Patrick L M •Keon. Esq, J P, and
Resolved—Thai the County Council hereby deletanine that
the following shall be the dates for the holding of the Fourth
Quartetd.v Meetings of the Rural District Ouncils :—
ARDL'E— Tuesday, 2nd January, 1917.
DROGHEDA —Tuesday, 9th .Januar.v, 1917.
DUNDALK Monday, 8th Janumy, 1917,
and t11üÜ the Proposal Conunittee mneet on Monday, Sth Janu-
ary, 1917.
FASE .N.ND WO'IVI'O.NS'IY)WN DRAI-SAGE DJS'I'RIC'I'S.
The next on the agenda- was the question of the ar-
range•nents 10 be Inade for the management of the above
I) iericts. 11)he Secretary read the letter from the
L G which appeared on the printed tes, stating that by
rovißlonal Orders, confirmed by Act of Parlimnent, the man-
agernent of these districts had been transferred to the County
Council.
After discussion the following were appointed a committee
eonsider Ghe an•angernents for the future Ilianagmnent of the
drainage districts, and to report to the Co. Council on same:—
C A Duffy, J P; Bernard L Cole,nan, .J P; Michael
Meade, John Morgan, Patrick M 'Gee, J P, and James T.
6
TIME FINANCE MEWI'INGS.
'l'he Council nexi considered €110 recon) ntendation 01' the Fill-
a lice Conli!littee lilade at €110ir njeeting held on '2nd ()ctober.
that thc hour of meeting of that conunittee be 0'clock,
instead of 1 0'clock as at present.
The following resolution was
Froposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, P •
And seconded by B M•cotllå, :
' 'Tlrvu in futu.re tihe hour of the meetings of
[Ije
Finance
Coturnittee be 10.30 0'clock.
To this the following amenclnjent was
Seconded by J H Esq, J P:
"'l'hat no change be macle in the tinw of
Finance Committee."
On a division there voted :
For the Alnendrnent—Messrs J H M' A rdle
phy--2.
and
tneetings of Lhe
and J F Mur-
Against the A1nendn1ent—Messrs B L Coletuan, l} FinegaJ1'
1B llamill, T B M 'Court, P L WKeon, M Meade, 'l' 0' Rourke,
and P Woods—S.
The Chairntan declared the amendntent lost, and •the original
resolu carried, and Che SecreLary directed Co convene
future tneetings of the Finance Conjlilittee in accordance
the terms of same
7
IRATE COLLECI'ORS'
'I'lle question oi the proposed increased fees to rate collectors
ancl correspondence from tho L G B with reference thereto.
The County Council had adopted a
was next considered.
scheme allowing-increased poundage fees to Collectors Patrick
.WCullough, Kelly, Cluskey, Peter and
John woods, •but the L G B had refused to sanction the increa-
ses e.xoppt 011 the condition that the Collectors would lodge not
loss than one-thiru of their wa rrant.s on 31st J Illy and 31st De-
The Board would on this condition approve
cember each year.
of the increasecl rates of poundage being paid on the amounts
lodged to these dates, but iOr all alnounts lodged after these
(lutes the rates of remuneration already in existence were not
to be disturbed.
Secretary stated that the Finance Corrnnittee had asked
the L G 13 to reconsider this decision, C!ney had refused to
do so. The emnn•ittee 'had t.hen asked the Board whether they
would approve of a schenxe by which the Collectors were to
and 31st De-
lodge one-fourth of their warrants by 31st July, •
each year, and to receive the increased grates of the
P Oilildage on the full arnounL of their warrants, provided fhey
closed their eol!ections on 31st Marell and 30th September
To this no reply Ihas yet been received.
each year.
The Council went fully into [he q.uesti011, and after discus-
Sion, in the course of which it was unanirnon.sl.v agreed that t,he
rate of poundage paid Collectors Donegan and Johnston, nam-
el.v, Gel and in the C, should 'be increased to GOI ancl (id in
and that Collector Patk M' Donnell's fees be
1 nereased froni Gld to 7d in the L', the following resolution was
8
passed unanitnously :—
by John r Murphy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby fix the rates of poundage fees iO
bo paid to the Rate Collectors on talle full ajnount of their war-
rants, as follows
P S Donegan—GEI in the C.
Patrick M 'Donnell—7d in the C.
Patrick M'Cu110uglI—7d in the
John J Kelly 7d in the C.
Jallies V JOhnston—6d in the C.
P a Lrtek in the C.
.WDonne11—7d in the g.
John Woods—7d in the C.
011 the following conditions, viz—'l'hat one-foulill of their war-
rants he lodged on or before the 31st July and 31st December
in year, and that the full antounts be lodged within Ille
prescribed periods.
Failure to fulfil these conditions shall en-
tail a reduction of one halfpenny in ['he C of their fees on the
full tuneunt oi their warrants.
DUNA-NY HARBOUR.
Letter •.vas read frotti Mr Michael Mende, enclosing
frotn the at Dunany, asking that something should
be clone to improve the condition of Jones' Quay.
The County Surveyor said sonle work had been clone to
Harbour by the Departrnent sotne few years ago, but Ullat it
was filled up again now.
9
After discussion, on the motion of Miohael Meade, Esq, se-
eondeci by J 11 M 'Ardle, Esq, J P, it, was unanintonsly
Resolved— 'fhat the Department of Agriculture be asked to
(IO the work of ilnprovelnent nt Dunany rbour, the Sei"
rotary be directed to write them in the rnatfer.
BILL OF COSTS.
The Seere€nry was directed to affix t.he Seal of the Council to
the requisition for taxation of t;he County Solicitor's Bill of
Costs, and Mr P L Macardle, Solicitor, was appointed to repre-
sent tLe Council at taxation.
THANKS FOR RE-ELECTION.
The following letter was rend :—
r 'Dear Mr M' Alester—l see from copy of "Democrat" to
hand that T have been elected again to the Chair of Louth Co.
While this is not, official, T may presume the informa-
[ion correct, so I write to thank the Council for the honour
they have (Ione me. Though nearly two years have
sinee J have been of any assistance to our Council, yet I have
to some extent kept in Louell with ifs affairs. I have seen it go
of itself—resolute, successful. Tho
on its way ever surer
honour dono me is the greater in that. our Council is now ro-
eognixod as having few equals and no superiors in the manage-
ment of affairs. Under the guidance of my friend, Mr Duffy,
the Council has gone on from strength to strength. A fact will
preach down a theory. (hr success iii nunnagenwnt of Io-
eal public businoss, in face of all i;he gloolll.v forecasts macle by
10
interested portios of the 0141 rosximne, is worth more to Trela nd
than fiootls of oratory, in prujving (not our right, that needs no
proof) onr power of self-governtnent,. My only regret is thai
Mr Duffy has nor, the namo as well as being ipso fae€o chair-
Inan. TIO is only barred by kindly instinct,
in heronf. in
Irishmen, not tc sover old relations. He knows what I thought
in tho rnatter. AK Mr M 'Carthy remarked, no clou;bf the ('hair
will bo offered M" Duffy when the suitable occasion arises. 'Phis
is somewhat cryptic! T trust Mr M 'Carthy Ihas not tho Scot-
tisll gifi of soeond sight, and sees a lonely grave on n ha ttle-
field 111 Franeo. I know he does not pray it may be so, other-
wise J would pass sleepless nights in my dug-out, for tho
of the righteous availeth much. You will understand
Lhero is little leisure to write, for tlhe reaping is here.
harvest is hot hard, and many a worker will be down to
sleep •before the 'Cal lcwue' is tied in thc last sheaf, and Che
reapers return at set of sun.—Yours very sineorelv, W.
A.
Doran, 9 R. D. F.
48th Bgd., Division.'
RESOLUTIONS.
Tho following resolutions wore unanimously adopted •
From Co. Dublin Farmers' Association disapproving of'
donb!o (lipping of sheep in €110 Alltumri period.
From Irish Trades r Ilion Congress with regard to printing for
Irish Govorn•nent I)opartrnenis being e.veeuted in offices
low-wage conditions prevail.
electroliers
por[lll'it.v to Irish houses for tho
of
other brass work
11
From Same, asking that, when possible public work should
executed in winter time.
1' rom Dublin City Council, calling for the release of those
arrested in connection with the Rising of Easter week.
From Down County Council, asking for the revision of the
law with regard to malicious injury in Ireland.
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Conunibtee at their
Sleeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, cn
Monday, 27th Novenjber, 1916, at 10.30 0'clock, a m.
Present :
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, .J P.
Other Wynne, J P; M iehael Meade,
nd
Peter woods, J P,
Mr 'l'homas Walsh, Co. Surveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Conunittee were
taken as read and signed by Che Chairlilan.
The following accounts were subnjitted, and on exaniination
were ordered for payrnent
account Works in charge Of Co Surveyor . L'190 13 0
Subsidiary Account,
KIO.
do.
o.
Secretary's Office
164 11 0
435 17 0
L'791 1 0
Rank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loans Ae-
(Ounts were exa Illined and initialled by the Chairman.
2
AR REARS LISTS.
Letter Ivas read from the L G B dated '23rd Novetnber, so.
56171/1916, sanctioning pavnent of irrecoverable arrears
The Board executed certain
rates tc the various collectors.
ite:ns on M r Johnston's sheets pending further information
same.
'l'ile Secret:nuv said he had given the Board Che particulars
asked for, and the payntents to the Collectors were included 011
to-day's pay sheets.
'l'he letter initialled by the Chail'lnan.
SOLICITOR'S CORRESPONDENCE.
Letter was read from the Co. Solicitor dated 13th Noveni-
ber, stating Chat he had lodged the sunt of CI I;3s 3d Co the
ctedit of the Council, the atnounC being cost of (listniss awarded
in the ease of Leland v. the Council.
Letter datecl 13th -November enclosing certificate of 'I'axabion
of his Bill of Costs to 31st MarOli last for the stun of $118 2s
An itelll of CIO 12.s (id paid Messrs (YI lare and ()'lla.gfll"
lid.
solicitors, Newry, for rnakiug title for the landlord in ('011-
necCion with the Ardaghy road had 'been deleted by the Tasing
To
Master, who stated the antount should be laxed separa tely.
avoid expense Mr O'Connell suggested having this itelil
by the Clerk of Crown and Peace, this was unanilnously
agreed to by the Corntnittee.
Leffer dated 22nd November with t•eiOrenee to Che
'l'ax Assesstnent Inade against the Council on Bank Interest
Mr O'Connell wrot,o Chat he had gone into
County Account.
the Inatter carefully and was unable to find anything to indi-
3
that, an appeal against the would successful.
first claim would establish
As, however, Che payment of this
a opinion of should he
ta kon in the matter.
'l'he unanimously decided to have opinion of
counsel as fo the Council's liability.
DUNANY
With €0 letter which Council had directed
the Secretary to write the Department asking thetn io have
(lone the above Pie13 letter submit-
ted from the dated 20th Noven!ber, No. 3037/16,
F. B., owing financial conditions, were
in a position to undertake further expenditure in
with this Harbour.
ROAD ROLLING.
Letter dated 18th November from Sir Tlenr.v Bellingham
stating that he laid stone on a portion of
bosido the Protestant Church in Cast lebellilhglu:tnt, which was
in his keeping, the Council kindly grant
use of a roller €0 roll in the stone properly.
"'he County stated roller now in (lis-
triet, and Sir Ilenry had agreed to pay for
rato of '23s per day, he supplying coal.
Cotntnittee Atnnnimousl.v granted the use of the roller on
t hoso ü•rms.
L COMMIT'I'AL.
Leuer dated 17th Nove,nber \vns rond froni the
4
eijnrge of R I C, Ardee, informing the Council that at Ardee
Petty Sessions on 22nd inst, a child named Christina M•Keever
would prosecuted for larceny, and may consequently be
1Æitted to an Industrial School.
11 'he letter was initialled by Che Chairnmn.
DIPPING I.XSPWI'OIVS T.XCREASE.
Letter was road from tho Dopa rtrnent dated '23rd NovolJiber,
No. 3436-16. sanctioning the increase from 2s to 5s for
spections during the Autuniti period granted by the Council
Inspector Owen Keenan.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
MALICIOUS I.N.JURY CLAIM.
'l'he Secretary stated that a malicious injury claim had been
lodged on behalf of Mr Edward M' Keown, Blackrock, for the
sunl of C2() for the alleged malicious destruction of a fence, his
property. He had forwarded the papers to Mr O'Connell'
The
who wröte stating the ease was having his attention.
Seeretarv stnted that he nnderstood froin Mr M'Keown's soli-
eit,or that this claim was being withdrawn, but no notice to
that effect has yot been served.
AUDIT.
Lotter dated 11th November, No. 549'26/1G, was read
the L G B enclosing audited abstract, of the Council's aeeotlllt*
do 31st, March, 1916, together with anditor's report thereon•
Tho letter was initialled by t.he Chairman,
5
INSURANCE CLAIM.
Tho Sooretary stated the claim of Hanlon, who
with slight aecidenf at Faughar€ quarry, had now been
(liseharxod by the Insurance Contpau.v and the various papers
perfected.
NEGLECTED OONTRACI'S.
25th November, 1916.
Tho Co. Surveyor reported neglect on Clio following Road
Contracts : —
DUNDALK RURAL DISTRICT.
Index No. 84—801 perches Dundalk to Newtownhamilton.
Contractor, John Hollywood.
Indox No. 98—1400 Dundalk to Omenth 'by Big
Contractor, Thos M 'Cann.
Wmnan's Grave.
Index No. 34—413 perches Knoel<bridge to 'l'allanstown. Con-
tractor, Patrick M •Gee.
ARDEE DISTRICI*.
Contractor.
Indos No. 31—878 perches Ardee to Dunany.
John Toris.
Ten days' notices are served and the eontraets will be taken
taken over if notices are not complied with.
The Committee unanimously approved of the. action taken
tho Co. Surveyor in these matters.
6
Executive Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Executive Committee at their
Meeting held in [he Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk'
on Monday, 27th November, 191(i, at 0'clock, a
Prosont : —
In tho Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Mmnbers—James Wynne, J P ; Mi('hael Meade, •P
woods, J v; 13 J P; and wm Woods, J P,
Tho Minutes of the previous Mooting of the Cornmitix•e
taken as remi and signed 'by the Chairtuan.
REPORTS.
Tho following reports were
Mr. Donnelly's Report.
During tho month of Octobor T had two outbreaks of sheep
scab to deal with. Tho animals eamo from Co. Lonch for
shipment at Drogheda Port.
The diseased animals were
slaughtered and tho in-contacts moved under supervision of t'he
polieo to the farms from whence Che animals came. T a
fow inspoctions in eases whoro animals wero suspected of
contagious disease, buf found tho animals wore not suffering
7
of the 110tifia ble diseases. Your Secreta ry has been fur-
nished with full reports on the prescribed forms relative Lo
disease in animals.
ANDREW A.IÖONNELLY.
Mr. Maxwell's mports—September.
'beg to report that I examined the -usual fairs and njarkets
Ardee No. I District for the 111011th of September. No eases
infectious or contagious disease has been reported Io Ine
during that period.
W. E. MAXWELL.
October.
beg to report Chat no reported cases of disease has occurred
in the Ardee No. I District for the month of October. I visited
the usual fairs, lnarkets, etc, and found everything healthy.
W. E. MAXWELLL.
o report had yet been received from Mr Clinton, but
various papers in connection with the cases dealb with by Gini
the period sinee last meeting, together with Chose of
the eases dealt with •by •Messrs Donnelly and Maxwell, were
submitted and initialled by the Chairman.
The
eases reported were as follows :—
AT DUNDALK PORT—John Cunningha,n, J woods,
Malone, Patk M 'Morrow, F and B Al 'Keown, 'l'hos Malone ('2nd
case), Henry Walker (Cootehil l).
AT DROGHEDA PORT—Stephen Henly, Cornelius Lynch,
8
Eagle Lodge, Drogheda (Co. Meath) ; Mullen,
.Jmnes Null.y, Thos Dwyer.
GREE'.NORE POR'1'—BernaHl Quinn, Camlough (3 cases).
CLOGHERITEAI) Parsonstown.
1
Louth County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
Third (Adjourned) Quarterly Meeting held in the Councii
Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Thursday, 30011 November,
JOIG, at one o'clock, p m.
Present .
•—111 the Chair : Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—James Wynne, J p; L Goodman, T B
M'Court, P Donegan, J P; P Callan, J P; P Woods, JP; M.
Meade, Finnegan, J J P; B Hamill, J P; Thos.
O'Rourke, J H M' Ardle, J P; and J Morgan, Esquires.
Messrs Thos Walsh, County Surveyor ; J M C Lyons and Jas.
mgoole, Assistant Suweyors, and Daniel O'Connell, Solici-
tor to the Council, were in attendance.
CONFIRMATION or GENERAL MINUTES.
T?ne follouing resolution was passed unanimously :—
oposed by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P;
by James M 'Carihy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the minutes of proceedings of the Louth Co.
Otaucil at their 3rd Qumuerly Meeting held on 16th Novem-
, 1910
J, a copy of which has been sent to each member of tho
uncil, be and are hereby confirmed.
2
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE MINUTES,
The fc110Ming resolution was passed unanimously :—
Preposed by L Goodman, Esq ;
Seconded bv T 13 M 'Conrt, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of the Proceedings of the Fin-
ance Committee at their Meeting held on the 27th November'
i016, a copy of which has •been sent to each member of the
C.cuncil, be and are hereby confirmed.
CONFIRM AITION OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MINUTES
The following resolution was passed unanitnou.sly :—
Propcsed by James M 'Carthf, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Peter Woods, F»q, J P, ancl
Resolved—That the Minutes of tille Prceeedings of the Exe-
cutive Committee. at their meeting held on the 27th Novem-
ber, 1916, a eopy of Aich has been sent to each member Of the
Council, be and are 'hereby ec,nfirmcd.
DEATH OF MR. RICHARD JONES.
The following resolution was passed in silence
Proposed by Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by James M'C•arthy, Esq, J P, and
RosolvedwThat we beg to express our sincere regret at the
It' mented death oi Mr Richard Jones, late Chairman Of Ibe
P, ichmond District Asylum Committee. The late gentleman
occupied that position for a great, number of years, and his
businesslike qualities in bhe management of the Asylum
3
his solicitude for the finances and representatives of the Con-
tributary Bodies has merited our entire approbation. We di-
rect our Secretary [o convey €0 his wife and faniily Clie sincere
sympathy of the Council in their sad bereavement.
James Wynne, Esq, J P, desired to be specially associated
with the resolution.
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT
The foliowing resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed by James A1'CartIhy, Esq, J P
Seconded bs James Wynne, Esq, J P, and
nosolved—'l'hat, the Report of the County Surveyor as ap-
P earing on Page I of the Schedule of Proposals for the 30111
ovember, 1916, a copy of Which has been furnished to eac}il
member of the Council, be ancl are hereby adopted 'by this
Council.
With reference to the proposal to widen the East side of
the Windmill Road (Dundalk to Blackrock) for which work
the Sut.•veyor in his report stated eight statute perches of land
Would be required, the owner of Che ground had informed a cle-
Putatiou of the Dundalk R. D. C. that be would give the ne-
CNSsary land for the sunl of C20. 'l'he County Surveyor sug-
gested that a deputation of the County Council should meet
the owner and endeavour to arrange better terms; and
On the motion of ISernard Hamill, Esq, J P,
Seconded by James Wynne, Esq, J P,
It was resolved a of
representatives of Dundalk Urban and Dundalk Rural
the
4
Electoral Divisions, together MGth the •Chairman of [he Dun-
dalk R. D. C. should meet, tho owner for the purpose referred
to.
DUNDALK won«s.
following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Thomas C)' Rourke, Esq ;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and,
msolvocI—That the Proposals for Works formulated by the
Dundalk Rural Distlict Council, at their Third Quarterly
Meeting, held on Monday, 2nd October, 1916, and set Olit on
Form 20, furnished to €110 County Council, and the contracts
entered into at their Adjourned Meeting held on Monday,
November, 1916, be and are hereby approved of, and we
thorise our Secretary to affix the Common Seal of the Council
to same.
COUNTY-AT-LARGE.
The foliowing rosolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by T B M •Court, Esq ;
Seconded by J H M 'Ardle, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That tho Proposals for Works formulated by
Proposal Committee at their Third Quartæyrly Meeting, held on
16th October, 1916, and set out on Form 20, furnished 40
Connt,y Council, and the contracts entered into at their
.journod Meeting held on the 13th November, 1916, be and are
hereby approved of ,and we authoriso our Seeretary to nffis
Common Seal of thc Council to same.
5
WORKS PLACED IN CHARGE OF COUNTY SURVEYOM.
As no tenders were received for the works not set by con-
tract at adjourned meetings of the Rural District Councils and
Proposal Committee, the following resolution was passed un-
animously
Proposed by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works passed by the Rural
District Courieils and Proposal Committee, at their last Quar-
terly Meetings, and for which no contracts have been entered
into, be placed in charge of the County Surveyor.
NOTICES OF MOTION.
Telegram was read from Mr William Woods, J P, regretting
inability to attend to-day's meeting, and requesting that
the notice of motion standing in his name, with reference to
the letting of Carlingford Store, should be proposed by some
member present. 'Ille Chairman slated thai in accordance with
the Standing Orders dhis could not be done except by a mem-
ber holding Mr Woods' written authority, and as he had not
sent such an authority Mr Woods' motion would accordingly
fall through.
The following notice of motion, standing in the name of Mr
James T M 'Gee, J P, was next considered. Mr M 'Gee was not
in attendance, but Mr Michael Meade presented written . au-
thorit.v to move in the matter; and accordingly the following
resolution was passed .unanimously
Proposed by Michael Meade, Lsq ;
Seconded bv Patrick Callan, Esq, J P, and
6
Resolved—That Mr Thornas M 'Nello, of Ardee, be co-opted
meniber of the Louth Ckrunty Committee of Agriculture.
Mr James M'Carthy, J P, having obtained permission of
the Council, explained. that the remarks made by him •re Che
Ohairmanship of the Council at the Annual Meeting, would ap-
pear to have been misunderstood by Captain Doran, judging
from his letter which appeared on the printed minutes. Mr
M 'Carthy explained Chat the suitable time for a change Of
Chairprau referred to by hilli would lytve arrived, not, when,
as Captain Doran would appear to 'bave understood it, he was
shot down in action, but when, having returned safely after
the war, the people of County Louth could offer him an even
higher position than that of Chairman to t'his Council. Then,
wit'hout discourtesy, the Chair might be offered to Mr Duffy,
who so capably filled it iu Captain Doran's åbsence.
RESOLUTIONS.
Resolution subtnit€ed •by Killarney It. D. C. with !9ierence
to the output of coal from Wolffiill Ck)llieries, ununi-
tnously adopted.
Resolution submitted by the County Dublin County Council
calling on the Gevermnent to establish an Hospital for Ir.ish
soldiers and sailers suffering from incurable diseases, was •un-
animously adopted.
Resolution submitted by the A. O. H. Division 566, Dun-
dalk, •with referenqs• to the cultivation ot' waste land in the
hands of the Council, was marked "read," as the Council had
no land w+.icll might be so used.
Resolution was subuli€ted by the Irish Cattle 'l'i•aders Asso-
ciation requesting the Board of 'l'rade to revoke the Cattle
7
Detention Regulations, which tend . fo increase the price of
food, cause loss to the owner and do not improve the eondi-
tion of the animals.
On the motion of Laurence Goodman, Esq ;
Seconded "by Michael Meade, FAI,
the resolution was unanimously adopted, and Che Secretary was
drieeted to forward eopies of same €0 Che Members of Parlia-
ment for the County.
RATE COLLECTORS' IREMrSERATTON.
Letter was read from the L G B, dated '27th Sovember, 1916,
56225-'16, refusing sanction to the scheme passed by the
Council scanting increased poundage fees to the rate collee-
tors, on the grounds that scheme conflicts the condi-
tions which govern the collection of rhtes, inastnuelb the pro-
Posed arrangement would perniit of a collector being paid
Poundage fees even though he did not lodge the full amount
01 warrant within each half year. Further, that the pen-
of {d for failare to comply with the conditions of the
scheme was not sufficient, and should be at least ld, and that
scheme granted substantial increases to collectors who had
not hitherto satisfactorily discharged their duties.
The Secretary submitted copy of tho letter written by him
to tho Board on the subject of the increases, from which it
was apparent that the Board's statement bhai the conditions
which govern the collection of rates was with by
tho Council's scheme was without foundation„ as the Secre-
tars's letter distincL1y stated that the lodgment of full
warrants within the half year was one the conditions of the
scheme,
8
On the motion of James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P,
Seconded by Bernård Hamill, Esq, J P
the Secretary was unanimously directed to point this out' €0
the L G n, and to say that as the Council had given very full
and careful consideration to the scherne, they proposed to ad-
here to their decision ; and to request the Board to sanction
the increases.
OOURT-KEEPER'S BONUS.
Letter was read from the L G 13 dated 27th November, NO•
56264-'16, approving of the proposal of the Council to grant a
bonus of CIO to Mr Timothy Murray, County Court-keeper '
for extra work during the past year.
DISEASE.
Letter was read from the (huntY' Cornmittee of AgricultttH2
requesting the Council to authorise the payment of compen-
sation in respect of bees and appliances affected with Isle Of
Wight. Disease.
The following resolution passed unanimously
Proposed by 'Ilhornas (Y Itourke, Esq ;
Seconded Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That we, the Louth Cosunty Council,
hereby eon-
sent to the payment of compensation in accordance with the
Regulations of the Department of Agriculture, in respect Of
bees and appliances affected or suspected to be affected with
Isle of Wight Disease.
9
MOTORS FOR HIRE PURPOSES.
Letter was read from the L G B, enclosing Regulations under
which it is ordered that from the 1st December Motor Cars
which are at any time used for hire purposes, must have
plate affixed over the number and identification plate, bearing
the words, "llaek1i0y Carriage."
The Secretary was directed to Lransmit copy of the Regula-'
tions to owners of motors used for hire purposes, directing
thean to have the plate referred to affixed to their cars.
FRANCHISE FEES.
Letter was read 'from the L G B, dated 28th November, No.
56777-'l(i, stating that they had considered the claims of the
officers in the ecunty for compensation for temporwr.y loss
Of emoluments under the Parliament and Registration Act,
1916, and have directed tihat the officers concerned shall be
paid by the County Council the sums set out on the list, as
. T B L'31 13s 611; P s Donegan, Cl'2 9s
follows
(id; 7s '2d; J B Connolly, C'26 8s 7d;
•J M'Qui11nn, 14s 3d; Charles M'A1ester, $19 9s;
M'Cullougll, eu 8s ld; .J0hn J Kelly, cg 19s 3d; P R Fini-
gan, 15s lei; Cluskey, C9 17s (5d; Peter
nell, Ell 19s ld; Woods, CIS Ils 2d; James V John-
ston, L'12 4s 3d ; John Murphy, ;C20 17s rml.
The letter was initialled by the Ohairman.
SUMMER TIME BILL.
The Council considered a series of questions from the L G 13
with regard to the working and effect of the Summer Time
Bill in tho county, and the directed reply
10
same, and to state that the opinion of the Council was that
the general effect of the Bill was injurious to the farming in-
dustr.v, and not at all suitable for this country, and disapproV-
ing of its renewal.
OLD ROAD AT CARLINGFORD.
Lettor was road from Dr O'Connell, North Louth Coroner'
with reference to nn inquest held by him touching the death
of a woman who died as the result of injuries received by fall-
ing down a quarry from an "old road adjoining.
The jury added a rider to their verdict in this ease drawing
the •attention of the Connby Council and Rural District coun-
cil to the very dangerous state. of the road on which the acwi-
dent occurred, on which three lives havo boon lost alroady•
Tho jury requested the Councils concerned to remove this dan-
ger.
In reply to queries by Councillors, the County Surveyor said
the road in question was not maintained by the County. An
effort had been jnado some time ago to aequire land for widen-
ing the road, but sömo of tho owners refused to give Lhe land'
and [he work fell through. Ile understood, however, that the
matter would bo bronghf forward again at the R.nral District
Council.
The Seerotary was diroetod to inform Dr O'Connell aeeord-
ingly•
XMAS BONUS.
It was unanimously agroed that as tho ordinary meeting Of
tho Corurnittoe would fall this year on Christmas
a meeting should be held a suitable (lay in tho previous
il
yeek, in order that t,he worlonen should receive their money
in time.
Mr Bernard Fimyeg,an and Mr J El M' Ardle secon-
ded, that a bonus of" 5s be granted to each workman as a
Christmas gift. *fler discussion Che matter was referred to
tho Finance Comillittee with the direction that, the bonus be
given.
12
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of tho Finaneo Committ,eo at their
Meeting, held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
on Monday, 11th December, 1916, at 10.30 0'clock, a m.
Present : —
the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, .T P.
Other Members—J P Kearney, Peter Woods, J p; Jurnes
Wynne, J P; B I, Coleman, J P; Michael Meade, B Finnegan,
J H M 'Ardle, J P, and John Morgan, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
The minutes of the previous meeting of the Committee were
taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The following aeeounts were submitt+d, and, on examina-
tion, were ordered for payment
Loans Account—Works in Cbarge of Ch. Surveyor C139 lß 11
Subsidiary Aeeonnt— Works in Charge of Co.
Surveyor
Subsidiary Account—Seeretary's ()ffieo
Total
105 '2 6
185 0 7
C4.30 0 0
Tho Bank Books for the Genera], SII'bNidiary and Loans
oounts were exaniined and initialled by the Chairman.
13
RATE
Tho Secreta ry submitted return showing the condition ot
the Collection bo 30th November:. 'Of the Second Moiety, of
the rate amounting to trne sum of C17,747 IOS 7d, 8s I(kl
had been collected and lodged. All the (A)llectors with the
exception of Mr Kelly, who cheeked once, had checked their
books twice .during the month. Mr Kelly had been ill, and
submitted medical certificate to that effect. Tho return was
initialled by the Chairman.
NEXT MEETING.
As the County Council at last meeting had directed that
the Finance Committee should hold their meeting—which
Would in the •ordinary course fall on 25th December t'his year,
a few days before then, in order that the workmen might re-
ceive their wage before Xmas, it was unanimously decided to
hold the next meeting of the Committee on Friday, 22nd De-
eern ber.
The County Surveyor was directed to include the war bonus
Of 5s whiöh had been approved by the County Council at last
roeeting, on his pay sheets for that day.
GYI,LS' QUAY.
A memorial was submitted signed by the boat owners ancl
fishemen of Gyles' Quay, drawing the Council's attention to
the necessity for a windlass and Wire rope attachment to facili-
tate the launching of boats during the present fishing season.
memorial stated that it was almost impossible to Iannoh
the bigger and heavier boats rendered necessary by the late
Allfntnn and Winter fishing and the largo entehes of herrings,
14
by the old rnetli0d of luand-haulage, and in storiny wea Lher
sueh as has been experienced during the past few months, to
get the 'boats and gear to a place of safety. The appliance
asked for would 1 educe this liibour to a minimum, and be Of
considerable advantage to the fishermen.
'I'he Secretary stated that he understood from
Constable that increased berthage was also
the Quay. At present boats were beached on
Road the danger of traffic.
Messrs Kearney and Woods agreed.
the Harbour
needed at
Che County
After discussion it was unanimously decided that the follow-
ing eonunittee should meet at the Quay on Friday next, the
15th instant, at 11 0'clock, a m, to consider the entire ques-
tiön, and report to next Finance Meeting C A Duffy'
J P; J P Kearney, P Woods, J P; W Woods, J H
M 'Ardle, J P; B Finnegan ,and Thomas Walsh, County StlL"
veyor.
RA'I'E COLLECI'ORS' REMUNERATION.
Letter was read from the I' G B, dated 7th December, 1916'
No. 58487-'16, asking the Council to pass a resolution fixing
the rates of poundage to be paid the collectors at one
penny less in each case than the rate set out in their previous
resolution, adding the proviso bhut if one-fourth of? the
rants are lodged by the 31st July, and, 31st December iu
year, these rates are to be increased by one ludfpenny.
The stated that this was effect, the resolution
passed by the County Council. and there could be no objection
15
to Varying tho: ns suggested by tho Bonid.
The following resolution was then passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Finnegan, Esq ;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That iie hereby fix the rates of poundage to the
rate collectors as follows •.—P S Donegan, 6d; Patk M 'Don-
nell, Gld ; Patrick M 'Cullough, ; John Kelly, Gld ; James V
Johnston, Sid; Patrick Cluskey, 51d ; Peter M 'Donnell, (Slid ;
John Woods, The rates of poundage to be increased by
one halfpenny in each ease wher'e tho collector lodges 25 per
cent of his ha If" yearly collection bS' 31st July and' 31st De-
comber in each half year, ancl• that the rates come into' opera-
Lion in, respect of thö current half year.
Tho Secretary was directed to ask the L G B to sanction pay-
ment of the balanécs due Collectors Peter M 'Donnell and John
Woods in respoet of period ended 30th September, 1915.
BLACKROCK ROAD.
The following report) was road; and
On the motion of .JntneÅ Wynne, Esq, J P,
Soeonded hy Poter Woods, Esq, J P,
was ,unhnimously adopted
Dangerous Turn on Blackrock Road—-Report of'
Committee.
Tho Committee appointed the County Council to inter-
view Mr Charles Glendon, the owner of the land for
e widening of the turn on the Blackrock Road, beg to report
th
that the following members of the Committee, Messik C A
16
Duffy,J P; L Goodman 'l' B M 'Court, and B Finnegan, met, Mr
Glendon by appointment on Thursday, the 7th December, in
Lhe Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk.
The County Surveyor, who was also in attendance, infornjed
Che Committee that the area of the corner of Mr Glendon's
field required for the widening was eight statute perches, and
his estimate of the value of the land was eight pounds (C8).
Mr Glendon stated he m»uld not accept less than iC2() for the
ground.
This offer was considered at length by the Committee, but as
Che price would mean per acre, and would create a pt+
cedent for other land required for sitnilar purposes, it was un-
.al'imously decided 110t to accept same, and the Committee re-
commend that a list of the various sections of land required be
conll)iled, and that application for cornpulsory powers to ac-
quire the lands 'bo made.
Tho interview then terminated.
COMMITTALS '10 INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS.
Leter was read from Rev J M 'Keone, Adm, Dundalk, giving
notice that at the Children's Court on Friday, 8th inst, he
would apply for committal of the ik)llowing children Lo Iudus-
trial Schools :—Francis, Michael and Margaret M 'Aidle, all
children under 14.
Leter was read from C. P. S. Drogheda, stating that a
lar application in respect of Richard and James Marlow, would
be made at Drogheda Sessions on Monday, 18th instant.
The were initialled by the Chairman.
17
ACCOUN'I%S.
The accounts of the County Conunitee of Agriculture for per-
iods ended 31st M arc/h and goth Septelllber, toget,he.v
with Auditor's Report thereon, were subtilitted and initiillled.
NEGLECTED CONTRACTS.
['he County Surveyor reported neglect on Roads Nos. (58 and
73, Ar€lee District; No. 61, Drogheda, and No. 9), Dundalk.
days' notices have been served, and contracts will be taken
over if not eotnplredl with.
The Committee unanimously approved of the County Sur-
Veyor's action.
18
Executive Committee.
18 18
Minutes of Proceedings of the Exeentive Committee at their
Meeting, held in the Council Chamber, Courtlhouse, Dundalk,
on Monday, 11th December, 1916, at 10.30 0'eloek, a m.
Present—Ir the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—J P Kearney, P Woods, J P; B L cole-
man, .J P; Michael Meade, B Finnegan, J H J r,
and John Morgan.
Tho minutes of the previous meeting of the Committee were
taken a.s rend, ancl signed by the Chairman.
EXPENSES, AUTUMN DIPPING PERIOD.
The Secretary submitted detailed return showing t,he num-
ber of sheep and lambs dipped at the various County Chuncil
tanks during the Autumn Period, together with statement of
receipts and expenditure thereat.
The following summary
showing the nett loss on the working of' the tanks during the
Autumn Period, was also submitted and initialled by the
Ballyma kennuv
Agha rneen
Ra vensdale
Carlingford
Corrakit
10 12
o
10 910
2 5 10
12 10
'2
8 10
19
20
18
2
'20 17 10
8
O
o
1
Less
Loss
Loss
Loss
Loss
LOSS
Printing éecouut
9 IO
10 8
16 2
8 15
ce,4 14
C64 8
32 4
$32
2
7
4
7
6
1
o
Less Department's Contribution
Net Loss
T-NSPE(TORS' REPORTS.
Chairman
Summary—Receipts and Expenditure.
Ardee Tank
Knoekbr idge
Receipts.
$44 2 0
2211 6
Expend tre.
15 G
28 0
Profit
Loss
4
following 1 eports from the Veterinary Inspectors were
read and init,iqlled, and it was nnanimously decided that at
next meeting of the Committee Local Regulations to meet the
circumstances mentioned in Clinton's, report be consi-
derod : —
Mr. Clinton's and November,
1916.
r beg to report that during the months 'of October and No-
Vember I dealt with a large number of outbreaks of' sheep
scab which occurred at the Shipping Ports of Dundalk aud
Greenore. In all t'here were over 380 sheep detained, ancl
with the exception of one low of. tens sheep (one of which was
affected) all of the animals came from outside the county.
The disease did not originate in County Louth, but was detec-
ted in the sheep when they were broußht into the Ports for
When the disease (sheep scab) is found to exist it
shipment.
is my duty to dodain the sheep and to serve; i10tice of" deten-
on the owner. I have then@ see the sheep (both affected
20
and in-contact ones) dipped on two occasions within ten days,
and rnake periodic inspections of them in the meantime.
'Blis, especially in the case of sheep detained at Greenore,
Ineans an enormous •amount of work, and is brought about by
diseased sheep being taken into G). Louth, and over whioh I
can have previously no control, and for whose condition I am
not, responsible. I think it is unfair that I should 'be compelled
to deal with animals which have contracted disease in other
counties, and Which are allowed to be rnoved out of the dis-
tricts where the disease originates. I would respectfully ask
your Council to authorise me (if it is within their power to do.
so) to have diseased sheep sent 'back from the Ports to the dis-
trict from which they came. I am one of the very few Veteri-
nary Inspectors in Ireland Who have two big shipping Ports in
their district.
J. T. CLINTON.
Mr. Maxwell's Report.
I beg to report that I examined the usual fairs and markets
held in Ardee No. 1 District for the month of November.
Francis Reilly, Bohernamoe, reported a pig suffering frojll
swine fever.
I examined the anirnal, and in my opinion the
animal died from another disease.
W. E. MAXWELL.
NOTICLS.
Oopies of Notices of Withdrawal of Detention Notices served
on Bernard Quinn, of Camlough, and p M 'Shane, of Greenore•
were submitted and initialled.
Police notice of swine fever in a pig, Ohe property of Francis
Reilly, Bohernamoe, was submitted and initialled.
21
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
!neeting held in the Council Chamber, Court. House, Dundalk,
on Friday, 22nd Deeeniber, 1916, at 10.30 0'clock, a m.
Present the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—B Hamill, J P; M Meade, B Finnegan, aud
J Wynne, J P, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
The minutes of the previous meeting of the Committee were
taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
'Ille following accounts were submitted, and on examination
were ordered for payment.
Loans Aecouut—M'orks in Charge of Co. Surveyor C163 9
Subsidiary Aeeount— Works in Charge of County
207 6
Surveyor
64 10
Subsidiary Account —Secretary's Office
Z435 (j
o
6
6
0
The Bank Books for the General Subsidiary and Loans Ac-
eouuts were exanained and initialled by the Chairman.
FORESTR Y SCHEME.
Letter dated 13th Decem ber, 1916, was read from Mr O'Con-
nell, stating that he had now received the scheme with refer-
once to Willistown Plantation, certified by the Department of
Agriculture, for the user of this parcel of land on the Estate of
the Irish Land Commission, formerly the Lord Rathdonnell Co.
Louth Estate, allotted to the Council for Forestry purposes.
The letter was initialled, by the Chairman, and Che Secretary
was directed to apply to the Department for a. grant for fores-
try purposes.
COSTS RECEIVED.
Letter was read from Mr O'Connell, dated 14th December,
stating that lie had lodged IOS to tho credit of the Conneil,
being costs in Sheep Dipping Prosecution, Co. Council v. Jas.
O'Hagan.
EXCHEQUER MAINTENANCE GRANT.
Letter was read from the L G B dated 14th December, 1910,
53926-1916, stating that overpayment of rod; in ' ros-
pect of the treatment of Tuberculosis in the eo,unty for yonY
ended 31st March, 1916, would be deducted from the noxt in-
stnlment of tho Exchequer Maintx•nanco Grant. The letter fur-
ther stated that Paying Order for the sum of C89 Gs '2(1 out of
the E. M. Grant would now be issued in respoet of the half-
year ended 31st March, 1916.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
ACCOUNTS.
Letters were read from the L. G. B. enclosing the audited
abstrae€s of and ft1Jdifor's reports on tho following for
t,he half years ended 31st March and 30th' 'September, 1916:—
23
County of Louth Tu berculosis Contmittee of Management,
County of Louth Joint Committee of Technical Instruction,
Dundalk Union and Dundalk Rural District Council.
'l'hc letters were initialled by the Chairman.
GILES' QUAY.
The following report was read and adopted :—
County Surveyor's Office,
Court House, Dundalk,
20th December, 1916.
Giles' Quay.
'l'o the Chail'lnan and Gentlemen Finance Committee
Meeting, 22nd Decem ber, 1916.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,
On the 15th instant I met the Local Com-
mittee—Messrs Peter Woods, J P; W Woods, J P; Joseph H
M 'Ardle, J P; Joseph Kearney and Bernard Finnegan—at
Giles' Quay, as agreed at your Just Finance Meeting.
A large number of fishermen were also present.
The memorial before you at your last meeting asked to 'have
winch erected for hauling up boats along the boxtslip, but on
Friday last the fishermen submitted that they had no place to
beach boats, and they asked if some ground for this purpose
eould be got.
The• Committee therefore asked. me to report as soon as pos-
sibJe on a scheme to fill, up a vacant space adjacent to the boat-
slip to form a beaching ground.
24
As the winch conld not be ereet,ed in time for this year's
fishing, which closes in about a month, and as the slip is not
the property of the Council, the question of the erection of the
winch was postponed for eonsideration in conjunction with the
larger project.
Your obecnent Servant,
THOMAS WALSH.
POTASH EXPERIMENTS.
The following lotter was read, and the County Surveyor was
directed to attend to the matter
Goologieal Survey Offce,
14, Hume Street, Dublin,
20th December, 1916.
Dear Sir,
Tho Department of Agriculture is willing to un-
dertake an experiment as to tho natural extraction of potash
from finely powdered rock, and for this purpose the compact
materials of the Louth-Armagh border seem suitable. Tt is
necessary to break the lock into pieces about to }-ineh diame-
[er, not larger than å-ineh at any rate, preparatory to the fine
grinding that v+ould be done in Dublin. 'I'wo tons of each se-
leeted material would be required.
One of the suitable materials is tho rock of tho County Louth
'l'he second proposed
County Council Quarry at Flurrybridgo.
is in the quarry near the National School at Fork-hill,
Armagh.
(1) Would it bo possible, with the kind assistance of your
Council and yourself, to obtain two tons from the county
quarry, delivered on fo tho Groat Northern Railway for
25
lin, and what would in that case be the probable cost, inelud-
ing screening to the desired size? Possibly you may have such
jnaterial, i.e., material under inch or so in diameter, lying in
your quarry.
(2) Then would it be possible to arrange for the cartage of
two tons of the Forkhill rock for similar treatment by your
crusher and screen? It would be very convenient to have the
1
whole transaction in the care of one person on the spot.
neod hardly say that the experiments,whatever way they result,
have great national importance in view of potash supplies, and
this: is my excuse for troubling you.
I am, yours faithfully,
GRENVILLE A. .J. COLE.
The County Surveyor,
Louth County.
HOLIDAYS.
The Committee '11,nanimously decided that the County Office
should be closed for the Christmas Holidays as usual.
26
REPORT
Fane and Wottonstown Drainage
'L'o the Louth County Council at their Meeting
January, 1917.
Gentlemen,
District.
held 18th
27
The entire matter was discussed at great length, and it was
the unanimous opinion of all that the only effective means ot
proeeeding with the, clearance of the drainage systems was to do
the entire, work in. the first instance @horgughly, as ythey Dis-
ti•icts had been derelict for abdut 40 years. As this would en-
tail an expenditure, of possibly C 1,500, which would be an over-
whelming amount for a single assessment, it was considered
that the work could only be done by obtaining a loan for au
about to be repaid in, ten ,years.
Your Committee accordingly recommend the County Ouncil
to endeavour to obtain sanction for a loan of CIs,300, to be re-
paid in ten years, and when the Committees to work the Dis-
• tricts vare properly - established, that the annual amounts for
principal and interest and other neeessary expenditure be le-
vied off the owners assessable.
We beg to report that we have held severwl
meetings of the Committee to consider the question of the
working of the Drainage Districts of Fane and Wotbons-
town.
The first meeting was held on thO 20th November; 1916, Mr
Charles A Duffy, J P, wc.siding, and Messrs J T M'Gee, J P ;
P M'Gcw., J P; M Meade, and J Morgan, attended.
•The County Surveyor informed the Committee that his pre-
war esthnate of expenditure for putting the drains in M orkiug
order was about E750, but that the cost would now ex
Cl,ooo.
It was decided to invite some of Che principal land owners
included in the Districts to a further meeting of the Comillit-
the
tee, to elicit their views about the best mneans of 'having
work done with the least possible hardship on the occupiers to
be assessed.
The adjourned meeting was held on the '27th November, and
with Mr Duffy in the chair, the following Councillors were pre-
sent:—Messrs B L Coleman, J P; M Meade and J Morgan •
The following gentlenjen representing the occupiers were pre-
sent :—Messrs R Byrne, R Craig, 13 M,u.llen, A Murdock, C
Kearnev and B M 'Guinness.
11th December,
CHARLES A. DUFFY.
B. L. COLEMAN.
MICHAEL MEADE.
, JOHN MORGAN.
PATRICK,M'GEE.
JAMES T. M'GEE.
1916.
28
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Cormnittee at their
meeting held in the Council Chamin•r, Court House, Dundalk,
ou Monday, 8th January, 1917, at 10.30 0'clock, a m.
Present :—ln the Chair: B L Gyleman, P.
Other Members—James T M 'Gee, J P; B Finnegan, B Ham-
ill, J P, and Peter Woods, J P, FNItlires.
The County Surveyor was in attendance.
The minutes of the, previous meeting of the Commitfee were
taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were •submitted, and on examination
were ordered for payment.
Loans Account—Works in Charge of Co. Surveyor G 2
Subsidiary Account—-Works in Charge of County
Surveyor
Subsidiary Account—Secretary's Office
123 14 2
12 13 1
C'214 13 5
The Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loans
counts were examined and initialled by the Chairman.
RATE COLLECTION.
The Secretary submitted Rate Return for period ended 31st
29
Dec., 1916, of the second moiety of the Warrant, amounting
to the sum of C17,747 IOS 7d, sum of IOS Ild had been
oollected. All the Collectors, q•ith the exéeption of Mr Kelly,
had lodged one-fourth of their Warrants in accordance with ar-
rangement, and were entitled to an extra poundage fee of {d
in consequence, provided they close their collections on 31st
March. Mr Kelly, out of his warrant of C931, had only lodged
242. The Secretary stated that he had been ill for some time.
Committee directed that Ollector Kelly be written
and urged to press forward his collection.
INSURANCE CLAIM.
The papers in connection with the claim of Joseph Kelly, a
Workman, for compensation, were submitted by the Secretary,
whc stated that the matter was nÖw closed. The' Insurance
Company had paid over the amount, of the claim—C2 2s 8d.
COMMITTALS INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS.
Rev Father Maguire, p p, wrote stating that he would ap-
to Louth Magistrates on 28th Decernber, for committal of a
child named John Lynch, of Carnalohogue, €0 an Industrial
School.
Letter was read from C P S, Drogheda, stating that a simi-
uvplication would be made at Drogheda on 15th January,
iu respect of children named Cornelius Kirwan, Pat Flanagan,
and Michael Pentony.
Letter was read from Sergeant Kenny, R I C, Ardee, asking
the Cbuneil would approve of James Crawley, aged
8 7-12 years, who would be charged with housebreaking at Ar-
30
dee Petty Sessions on the 17th instant, being sent to an TP-
dustrial School.
"I'he Committee nugnimnously approved of all -the applica-
tions.
SCHOOL LOAN.
Letter was read from Manageress St Joseph's Industrial
School, stating that •she had lodged to the credit of the Coun-
eil the sum of Clog 18s Od, being half yearly payment, includ-
ing interest and Insurance on foot of Industrial school Loan•
71 he letter was initiall«l by the Chairman.
SALE OF CHIPPINGS.
ll.etper.wa:s röul from O). Surveyor enclosing cheque. EIG3s Od'
being cost' oi 10 loads ofßhippings, at 2s Gd each, sold to M. A•
M' Ardle. Tho Surveyor stated that this material was, soldos
it was in the way at the quarry. The letter was initialled by
the Chairman.
AGREEMENT.
Letter; i was read f) on: the Ch. Surveyor enclosing Agreement
The agreement is
for lease of quarry at Ballymakellet.
between the Council and Mrs Ellen Fegan, was unanim011Sl•V
recommended for Scaling by 1110 (Younts: Council.
FOOD AND DRUGS.
Letter dated 8th January, was rcad from the Department'
ting that five snrt ples of 'butter taken for analysis at
dalk on 25th Novem ber, proved to be pure.
91
RATE BOOK WORK.
On the motion of Mi' Bernard Hamill, J P,
Secxjnded by Mr James T M 'Gee, J P,
rt was unanitnously decided that the work of the preparation
Of the Rate Books fct• year 1917-1918, be placed in charge
of the Secretayy.
cosT OF GAS.
Letter was read from the 'Secretary Ardee Gas C01npany,
Stating that the Company found it necessary owing to the cost
Of Inaterials, to increase the price of gas in Avdee from 7s Gd
to 8s Od per 1 '000 crbic feet.
The letter was initialled by the (Mlairrnaiil
GRANT FOR 'ILCHNICAL INSTRUCTION.
The following letter was read,' arid was unanimously reférred
to the next meeting oi' County Cbuncil
Municipal Teebnieål School,
Fair Street, Drogheda,
6th January, 1917.
O. M'Alester, Esq,
Secretary, LoritL CO. Cottticfl.
Sir,
I am directed by the Corporation of Drogheda Teclv
Instruction Committee to apply to the Louth County
Council for a grunt towards the provision of Technical Instruc-
tion in South County Louth.
Committee have now been responsible for the administra-
33
32
tion of the scheme of Technical Instruction in the urban dis-
triet of Drogheda for close on nine years, and during that time
have admitted to their classes numerous students from the
Proposal Committee.
south county distriet who have found Drogheda a convenient
centre. They are of opinion that they have justified their exis-
tence as' a separate .body, and are convinced that with some
Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Committee at their
help from your Council they could successfully organise classes
Fourth Quaiterly Meeting held in tho Council Chamber, Court-
in the rural district for students unable on account of the dis-
lunase, Dundalk, on Monday, 8th January, 1917, at 10.30 a m.
tence, to come to bheir Technical SOhooI. For some years past
they have found it increasingly difficult to accommodate all
Present the Chair: B L Coleman, Esq, J P.
the students seeking admission, and this year will have Io seek
Other Members—James T M 'Gee, J P; B Finnegan, B flam-
extra room and provide additional teachers to cope with the
ill, J P; p Woods, J P, and M O'Meara, J p, Esquires.
increased number of students. The services of these teachers
will be available in the south county for a portion of the year
The minutes of the previous meeting of the Committee were
in proportion to the help given by the Council, and will supply
taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
a demand which my Committee know exists.
"I'he Committee wein called to consider the following applica-
A referenee to the published Reports of the Department Of
tions by the County Surveyor and County Secretary, and each
griculture and Technical Instruction will show that the
Was unanimously approved :—
School in Drogheda has been uniformly progressive, a.nd my
Committee have every confidence that the Council, by voting
APPLICATIONS BY THE CO. SURVEYOR.
them a sum equal to that given to Dnndalk, will ena ble them to
extend their usefulness into tho area for which Drogheda is the
—To keep in repair Ardee Quarter Ses.sions Court House
0. 35
with Court Keeper's Residence, for one year from 1st,
natural centre.
April, 1917. Not to exceed C15. County-at-Large
I am, Sir,
Charge.
Your obedient Servant,
36—'1'0 provide for the maintenance of Drogheda Court
House for one year from 1st April, 1917. Not to ex-
EDWARD DALY,
Principal and Secretary.
coed 00. County-at-Large Charge.
•97 —To provide for the maintenance of the County Court
House, Dundalk, for one year from 1st April, 1917.
Not to exceed County-at-Large Charge.
So
38=To provide a moveable hut for accommodation of
quarry worknjen and tools.
Not to exceed C'2().
Change.
APPLICATIONS BY THE SECRETARY.
39—To supply Printing and Stationery for County purpo-
ses for one year- from 1st April, 1917, including the
printing: to bc done for the Clerk of the Crown and
Peace under Jurors' Acts and under Registration
Acts (if required).
To supply for 1 year fi•om April, 1917, the following
Court Houses Mith best English Coal (screened)
dalk, 30 tons; Drogheda, IO tons; Ardee, IO tons ; de-
livered at the respective Court Hbuses as required.
41—'1'0 prepare the Courts and Court Rooms in County
Court House for Assizes, Quarter Sessions, and Revi-
Sion Sessi02is for one year from 1st April, 1917. Not
to exceed Z15.
42—'1'0 insert tibe Ckyunty Advertisernents in one Dundalk
and one Drogheda paper, for one year from 1st April'
1917. Not to exceed threepence per line.
The Secretary submitted County-at-Large Payments for quar-
Let' ended 31st Decel ber, IJI(i, and payment of same by [lie
County Council was recommended.
Committee aöJourned till 5th Fe'bruary, 1017, when teu-
dero for works will be considered.

1
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting (held m the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 19th February, 1917, at 10.30 0'clock, a m.
Present tho Chair: Chas A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Meade, J T M'Gee, J P; T O'Rourke,
W Woods, J P; P Woods, j P; and Hamill, J P,
The minutes of the previous meeting of the Committee were
taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted, and, on examination,
Were ordered for payment :—
Works in Charge of County Surveyor
Works in Charge of Secretary's Office
Total
C'375 13 11
49 6 2
ß4'25 0 1
Dank Books for tho General' Subsidiary and Loans Ac-
Counts were examined and initialled by the Chairman.
CARLINGFORD HARBOUR CONSTABLE.
In aeeordanee with the instructions of the Finance Committee
at last meeting, the Secretary had advertised for a Harbour
2
Constable for Carlingford in room of Mr John Fearon, deceased,
at a salary of Æ2() per anryuxn, and au annual allowance of C.5 for
lighting the leading and Pier Lights.
For the position only one application was received—that of
Daniel M 'Kevitt, Newry Street, Carlingford. Fatrner Quin,
P P, gave the applicant an exoellent, character, as (lid also Mr
W Woods, J P, the member for Carlingford District.
It was proposed by Wm Woods, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Peter Woods, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby appoint Daniel M 'Kevitt, of Newry
Street, Carlingford, Harbour Constable at Carlingford at, the
salary and on the terms stated in the published advertisement.
The Secretary stated that he understood that at full moon it
was the custom at this Pier not to light the leading light.
pointed out that it was absolutely necessary, to conform with
the regulations, to have this lighted every night without refer-
cnee to moonlight, and the Committee, through the Unairmall'
instructed M'Kevitt accordingly, and he undertook to carry
out these instructions, and any other duty imposed by the
Council in connection with the position.
INCREASES TO ROAD CONTRACTORS.
The following letter from tho L G B was read, and refeßed
to the Gunty Council':—
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 14th February, 1917.
No. 6667-1917.
Louth County.
Sir,
The Looal Government Board for Ireland have
before them your letters of the 20th ultimo and brd instant, re-
lative to applications made to tho Louth County COuneiI by
road contractors for an increase of 25 per cent on their contract
prices, and requesting the Board to give a direction to the Coun
cil on the matter.
In reply I am to state that, the Local Government Board
have no 1k)wer to authorise the County Council to pay an in-
creased price to contractors. There is no authority vested in
the Board which would enable them, by concurring in such
payments, to relieve the Council of any liability imposed on
thern by statute.
The Auditor would be bound at the audit of the accounts, to
question any such payment, Inade by the Council, and if 'he al-
lowed it any ratepayer might lodge an appeal against his deci-
Sion, or in the alternative, might apply to the Court of King's
As it
Bench for a Writ of Certiorari to quash allowance.
IS evident that it would be to the financial interest of the rate-
Payers to object to any variations of the terms of a contract
which would result in imposing an extra charge upon them,
the Council will recognise that they would incur considerable
risk in granting an increased price to a cont:actor, unless t'hey
Were in a position to clearly justify their action in doing so.
Any existing contract which contains a clause enabling it to
be terminated with the sanction of the Local Government Board
can, of course, be. cancelled witlEt11e sanction of this Depart-
ment, but generally speaking a contract can only be annulled
With the consent of the two contracting parties, and then only
on grounds which will satisfy the Auditor that any additional
charge to the ratepayers by reason of the action of the local au-
thority was not excessive or unreasonable.
It may be that, in the case of particular roads, the work of
maintenance may be dispensed with in Bhe present crisis, and
in such eases the cancellation of the contract might be justified
and the contractor paid for the work performed by him up to
date. If, however, it is found necessavy to proceed with the
maintenance of particular roads, the question of cancelling the
contracts would depend to some ext,ent on the date on which
the contracts wero entered into. If entered into before the war,
the Council might take that fact into consideration, though it
would not, by itself, be a sufficient ground for cancelling a con-
tract.
The view which the Board take in regard to contracts in eX-
isting circumstances, is that where a contract entered into
since tT1e outbreak of war was for a period of two or more years'
it might be reasonable to assume that a contractor could not at
the time of taking the contract hove foreseen that the wax
would extend for so long a period, and, accordingly, an appli-
cation to cancel such a contract at any time after expiration Of
the first year dru ing which it is running might possibly be jus-
tified. In the case of a contract now running for a period Of a
year or less, the Board think that the contractor should have
been in a position to tender at a rate which would secure his
own interest during the eurrency of the contract, and that it
should not be cancelled unless, for exceptional reasons, the
cessity for taking this course could shown.
In the case of a contract now running for two or more years
where the contractor alleges t'hat owing to war conditions he is
of
unable to complete it at the stipulated price, the Board are
opinion that a safe course for the (huncil to adopt might' be to
ascertain from their contractor the minimum price at which he
would be willing to carry on the work for Ulte period of the
tract, and they should then issue advertisements inviting
5
ders from outside persons for this work. If they obtain tenders
at a price less than that specified by the existing contractor,
the Council might then, with 'his consent, put an end to the
contract, and enter into a new one with the accepted tenderer ;
if, on the other hand, all the tenders received were at a price
higher than tihat specified by the existing contractor, a fresh
contract might then be entered into with the contractor at, the
new price, as agreed to by the Council. .13y adopting this ar-
rangement the Council would be in a vo.•y strong position to
iustify to the auditor any increased charge thrown on the rate-
payers, or to defend their action if any allowance made by that
Officer should be brought either before the Local Government
Board or the Tligh Court.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
Secretary, Louth Co. Council.
LABOUR FOR TILLAGE.
following letter was read and referred to the County
Council : —
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 7th February, 1917.
No. 29-M: 17.
Miscellaneous.
Sir,
The Local Government Board for Ireland desire to
state that, as your County Council are no doubt aware, it is of
the utmost importance in the present crisis that every available
6
effort should be made to set freo the maximum amount of la-
bour for tillage purposes.
This is a motter in which direct assistance can be given by
County Councils and County Surveyors, by releasing for agri-
cultural work as many as possible of tho labourers now em-
ployed on road maintenance, or other road schemes. How far
it may be safe to go in this direction in any county is a ques-
lion which to some extent depends on t;he existing condition of
the county roads. Tn many counties the bulk of the road ma-
terial has already been spread, and during the next few months
labour can perhaps be confined to surface work on roads which
have to bear heavy traffic. Steam rolling operations eau in
case usually be 'held over without disadvantage until the sum-
mer months when labour for agricultural work may not be so
urgently required.
The Board feel confident that, tho County Council will recog-
nise the urgency of t'his matter, and that they will not retain
in their employment any labourers who in the present year can
bo more usefully employed on tillage operations.
Suitable arrangements with this Object can no doubt at once
be made if a meeting of your County Council is not, to be held' at
an early date.
I am Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
To each County Council.
7
INCREASE TO QUARRY WORKERS.
The Committee had again under consideration the applioa-
tions on behalf of the workers in Braganstown Quarry for. an
increase of wages from 18s to 22s weekly.
The County Surveyor asked permission, which was granted,
to reply to a statement made at last meeting about the hour of
starting work in the quarry, which, it was stated, was nine
o'clock, as the whistle was heard going at that hour. He said
that the workers began at, eight o'clock in winter time. Some
of the men, however, did not turn up till nine, but the lost
time was of course deducted from their wages. Those w'ho diå
turn in at, eight were set to work moving stone, etc, and when
the full gang assembled the whistle blew for them to begin
work at the engine and crusher. This explanation was consi-
dered quite satisfactory •by the Committee.
On the question of the increase the Surveyor stated, in reply
to the Chairman, that he expected to be finished at Bragans-
town quarry in a fortnight, and that it would take over a month
to finish the work on the Lurgangreen road. The men began
work at eight o'clock in tihe quarries, as stated, and worked
till six o'clock, except on Saturday, when they worked till two
o'clock, with twenty minutes off for lunch.
After discussion, the following resolution was passed unani-
mously
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by William Woods, Esq, J P, and
Resolved —That we recommend €0 the County Council that
tho wages of workers engaged in all the quarries managed by
tho County Council, be increased from 18s to 22s per week, pro-
vided that the men agree to work on Saturday as on the other
8
week days, that is, from 8 0'clock till 6 0'clock; if t,his be not
agreed to, that the increase be to 20s weekly only, the hours of
work to be as at present.
SCREENINGS.
The County Surveyor wrote stating that he had
for screenings and 11 stone from Mr E Caraher, Mayne, and
Mr C P Kearney, of Wottonstown. If he 'had any surplus of
these materials he would charge, 2s Gd and 3s Gd per load res-
pectively, with the Council's permission.
The Committee unanimously agreed that Che Co. Surveyor
might dispose of surplus material to these gentlemen at the
prices named.
CLOGHERHEAD PIER.
The County Surveyor stated tihat the money in his hands for
repairs to Clogherhead Pier was exhausted, and requested that
sum of C25 might be transferred from the money to credit of
the Clogherhead Pier Account for necessary work.
Tho Committee unanimously agreed, and the Secretary
directed accordingly.
DRAINAGE DISTRICT LOAN.
In reply to a request made by the Secretary, in accordance
witih the instructions of the Council, for the sanction of the
L. G. B. to tho raising of a loan of .C1,500 to carry out the ne-
cessa.ry work in the Fane and Wottonstown Drainage Districts'
the L. G. B. wrote in a letter dated 1st February, No 4353-'17'
that they did not mssess any functions in the matter, either as
regards giving t,heir consent to proposal, or otherwise.
9
The Secretary stated that, from Bhis it would appear that the
County Council, now constituted the Drainage Board for these
districts, could raise the necessary loan without reference to
the L. G. B..
The Ieter was initialled by the Chairman.
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL INCREASES.
Letter was read from the Meath Protestant Industrial School
requesting tihat the Council would increase their grant from
2s Gd to 3s Ocl per week per pupil. Application was also read
from St Joseplfs Orphanage, Dundalk, for an increase.
The Secretary stated that the Treasury were now prepared
to give an increase of (id per head per week for Industrial and
Reformatory School pupils, provided the Local Authority giv,e
an equal grant.
It was proposed by Thomas O'Rourke, Esq ;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Unanimously resolved—That we recommend the Co. Council
to increase the grant per Ihead per week paid for pupils from
Louth County in Refomatory and Industrial Schools 2s
to 3s per week, on the understanding that the Treasury are
granting a similar increase.
MALICIOUS INJURY.
Secretary reported a malicious injury claim by the Dun-
dalk Linen Company for 2,000 yards of linen alleged to have
been maliciously destroyed. He had forwarded the claim to
the County Solicitor, Who was dealing witb it.
10
SIR C A. CAMERON'S REPORT.
The following report was read and initialled by the Chair-
man :—
Report of Public Analyst for County Louth.
Quarter Ended 31st December, 1916.
65 articles were received from tho Food Inspectors, •R I C, as
follows 19 samples; milk, 12; whiskey, IO; flour, 4 ;
margarine, 4; cheese, '3; sugar, 2; oatmeal, 2; rum, 2; tea, 2;
drugs, 2 ; cornflour, 1 ; cocoa, I ; rice, l. Total,6ö. One certificate
yas sent to Sergt. Kenny, Ardee, for specimen of whiskey which
was 30 degrees under proof, and was, therefore, adulterated
with 6.67 per cent of water. There were five specimens of but-
ter analysed by directions from the Department of Agriculture,
Dublin, which were taken up in Co. Louth, and were pure.
CHARLES A. CAMERON.
COUNTY INFIRMARY REPORT.
The Secretary submitted the Report of the County Louth ln-
firmary for the year ended 31st December, 1916, which was ex-
amined and initialled by the Chairman.
NOTICE OF AUDIT.
Notice was read from R. J. Newell, Esq, L. G. Auditor,
ing that he would commence the audit of the Council's Accounts
for period ended 30th Septetliibor, 1916, Friday, 23rd Febrtl-
at 10 0'clock, a m.
The notice was initialled by the Chairman.
11
LAND FOR WIDENING ROAD.
Letter was read from Mr C P Glendon, acknowledging re-
ceipt of and accepting the offer of C15 made on behalf of the
Council for tho land the County Surveyor stated was necessary
to carry out the widening of the dangerous part of the Avenue
Road, the trees tcf remain Mr Glendon's property. eme letter
was initialled by the Chairman.
1
Louth County Council.
Minute« of Proceedings of the Lout•h County Council at Choir
Fourth Adjourned Quarterly Meeting, held in the Court House,
Drogheda, on the 22nd February, 1917, at the hour
of 10.30 0'clock, a m.
In the Chair. Chas A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other members present Callan, J P; B L Coleman, J P;
Joseph Dolan, P Donegan, J P; B Finnegan, B Hamill, J P; J
M'Corthy, J P; J T M'Gee, J P; P M'Gee, J P; P. L.
M'Keon, J P; T V M•Qui11an, M Meade, J F Murphy, J P;
N T Alurphy, J P B Moorv, J P; 1) J Rach, W Skeffing-
ton, J P; P woods, J P; Jas Wynne, J P; John Dolan,
Esq
Ilires, and Sir A V Foster, Bart.
PRESENTATION TO THE CHAIRMAN.
Before the busipess of the meeting was commenced Mr Jas.
M 'Carthy, J P, proposed that the wannest congratulations of
the (%uncil accorded to the Acting Chairman, Mr Chas A
Duffy, J P, on the occasion of •his marriage, which event took
Place recently. Mr M 'Carthy referred to Mr Duffy's long con-
neetion with the work of the Council and to his constaht at—
tendance at its various meetings, and to his unfailing courtesy
in the chair to all the members of the Council. He further
8t•ated that the County Council had decided to mark this ocea-
by present;ng a solid silver service of a chaste Celtic pat—
2
tern, that, known as the "Ardagh" chalice design, as a suitable
memento of the event.
J T M 'Gee, J P, seconded the vote of congratulation,
and Mr W T Skeffington, J P, Mayor of Drogheda, supported
t,he motion, and referred to the oonsideration which the Chair-
man always gave to the Southern mernlnyrs of tho (huncil.
The Secretary ef the Council, Mr M' Alester, stated he wished
on behalf of tlhe officials and staff, which included the medical
officers, Doctors P 11 0'Connell and J A M 'Quillan, the county
staff and rate coltee€ors, to be associated with the congratula-
tions to the Chairman, who was ever considerate and courteous
to all, and begged his acceptance of their gift, a
tray of old Irish pattern.
Mr D O'Connell, County Solicitor. also expressed his pleasure
in being associated with the presentati
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MVNUTB.
The following resolution was
Proposed b.s T Murphy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by I' B Moore, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of the Proceedings of the IA)11th
County Council, at their Fourt.h Quarterly Meeting held on
18th January, 191/, a copy of which has been sent to each mem-
ber of the Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE MINUTB.
T)he following resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed by B Hamill, Bsq, J P, and
Seconded by James Wynne, Esq, J P,
3
That the Minutes of Che Proceedings of the Finance Cont-
mittee at their Meetings held on t,he undermentioned dates, a
eopy of eadh having 'been sent to each member of the Council
with all payment; and recommendations contained therein, be
and are hereby eonfirmed.
Thursday, 18th January, 1917.
Monday, 22nd January, 1917.
Monday, 5th February, 1917.
Monday, 19th Febnmry, 1917.
Mr p M 'Gee, J P, proposed as an amendment, that the follow-
' 'Save and except
ing adliendum b? made to the resolution :
that the minute 01 the decision at meeting on 19th
February, with regard bo bhe wages of the quarry men,
be altered to read : 'That the wages of workers in all the quar-
ries managed by the Co. Council, be increased from 188 to 20s
per week, provided that the men agree to work on Saturday as
on other days, "hat is from 8 0'clock till (j o'clock." '
MT N T Murphy, J P, seconded.
On a division there voted :—
For the Amendment Callan, Coleman, John Dolan,
Joseph Dolan, Donegan, Foster,M'Carth.y, J T M'Gee, P M'Goe
M'Keon, J F' Murphy, N T Murvhy, and Rath—13.
Against the Amendment :—Messrs Finnegan, Hamill, M 'Quil-
Ian, Meade, Moore, Skeffington, Woods, and Wynne—8.
The following resolution was then passed :
mposed by P M'Gee, Esq, J P;
Seconded by N T Murphy, Esq, J P, aud
Resolved—That the minutes of the proceedings of the Fin-
ance Committee at t}heir meetings held on the undermentioned
dates, copy of encli having been sent to each. member of the
Council, with all payments and reéom•mendations contained
iherein, be an.l are here'by confirmed, save and
that the minute of
except
the decision at tho
meeting held 011 the •19th FObruary, 1917, with regard to the
wages of quarrymen, be altered to read the wages of
workers in all the quarries managed by the County Council, be
increased from 18s to '20s per week, ln•ovided that, the men
agree to work on Sattu•days as on otiher days, that is from eight
o'clock till six o'clock."
CONFIRMATION PROPOSAL COMMIH'EE
MINUTES.
'Dhe following resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed •by P B Moore, nsq, J P;
Seconded by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the minutes of the proceedings of the ProÆÅ)-
sal Committee at their Fourth (Adjourned) Quarterly Meeting,
held on the 5th Februmw, 1917, a copy of which has been sent
io each member of the Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMA'I'IO.X OF SCHOLARSHIP COMMITTEE
MTNUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed by J M 'Carthy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved— That Che minutess of the proceedings of the Scho-
tarship Ornrnittee at, their meeting held on the 14th February'
6
1917, a oopy of has been sent to each member of the
(huneil, and are hereby confirmed, and we hereby approve
of the conditions of the (hunty Louth Scholarship Scheme for
the year 1917-1918, as set out therein.
SYMPATHY.
The following resolution was passed in silenoe :—
Proposed by Chas A Duffy, Esq, J P •
Seconded by Midhael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—n'l'hat, we tender our esteemed colleague, Mr Tjaur-
ence Goodman, our sincere sympathy on the lamented death of
his sister, Mrs M 'Geough, and we direct our Secretary to con-
vey to him our sincere condolence.
'IF}CTINJCAL INSTRUCTION.
By leave of the Council, the notice of motion standing in the
name of Mr N T Murphy, J p, was taken out of order, in order
to convenience the members of a deputation from Drogheda
Technical Schools. who appeared to lay their case before the
Council.
Mr James Wynne , J P, stated that the discussion of this
quewtion was Oilt of order, and requested a ruling from the
Chairman. The Chairman rubed t;hat Ghe matt,er was in order,
and, in accordance with his notice of motion.
N T Mutvhy, Esq, J P, proposed, and
DJ Rach, Esq, seoondc«l :
That E75 of the present grant of C150 for Technical Insi,ruc-
be given to the Drogheda Technical Schools in future on
the following condi lions—Tlifl€ a. fair share of Technical Insfrmc-
6
lion be given in the Rural Districts 01' South Louth; that all
pupils from these Rural Districts be admitted to the Drogheda
Schools on the same terms as pupils irom the Urban area; t.hat
the County Council get a fair representation on Lhe Drogheda
'l'echnical Committ,ce, that after Clio end of each year's working
a full report of the working of both the Dundalk and Drogheda
Technical be submitted to the Council.
After considerable discussion, in which Messrs N T Murphy,
Wynne, Hamill. M 'Quillan, P M 'Gee, Skeffington, and M '(hr-
thy Look part, and after the (%uncil had heard (kinon IAoux,
representing the Drogheda Technical Committee, on the matr
ter, the following amendment, was
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Seconded by J F Murphy, Bsq J P:
That the County Council grant for • Technical Instruction in
the Rural Districts be iner€ktsed by C50 per annum to and
that t/he Joint Committee carry out the Technical InstructiOL1
Scheme in the Rural Districts Choroughly and equitably for
both North and South Louth.
On a division there voted :
For the AmendmerIt—Messrs Hamill, Meade, Murphy (J F)'
P Woods and Wynne—5.
Against the Amendment- -Messrs Callan, Coleman, Joseph
Dolan, John Dolan, Donegan, Finnegan, M 'Carthy, P M'Gee'
J T M'Gee, -WKeon, M'Qui11an, N T MILIVhy, Moore,
and Skeffington--15.
Sir A V Foster did not vote.
'I'he Chair:nan dgwlared the atnendment lost, and the original
resolution was thea put, and there voted :
7
For the Resolution—Messrs Callan, Coleman, Joseph Dolan,
John Dolan, I)onegan, Finnegan, M 'Carthy, P M 'Gee, J T
M 'Gee. M 'Keon. M'QuiIlan, N T Murphy, Moore, Rach, Skeff-
ingt,on, and Sir V Foster—16.
Against—Messrs Hamill, Meade, J F Murphy, P Woods and
Wynne—ö.
The Chairman declared the resolution carried, and the Sec-
retary was directed to convey the terms Of same to the Depart-
ment of Agriculture, and request their sanction to the propo-
CONFIRMATION OF COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
'fie following resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed by P B Moene, Esq, J P;
Seconded by B Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the report of the County Surveyor, as ap-
pearing on Page 1 of the Schedule of Proposals for the 22nd
day of February, 1917, a copy of which has been furnished to
each member of the Council, be and is hereby adopted by this
Council.
ARDEE WORKS.
Mr Laurence Halpenny, of Stormanstown, Road Contractor,
appeared before the Council and stated that in filling up his
tender for Road So. 7, Ardee, he put, down bhe price he
was willing to do the work for at 19s lid, instead of .e65
lid; as he intended. He asked the Council to alter the
tender aeoordingly or break the contract, as he was unable, to
do the work at the first-mentioned sum. The Secretary stated
8
that the contract could not be altered now, but an addendum
eould be made to the resolution approving of the Ardee Works
and refusing this particular eontraeC, accordingly
Vhe following resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed by P M'Gee, FAI, J P
Seconded by Sir V Foster, Bart, and
Resolved—That the Proposal for Works formulated by the
Ardee No. I Rural District Council, at their Fourth Quarterly
Meeting, held on Tuesday, 2nd January, 1917, and set out qn
Form 20, furnished to the County Council, and the contracts
entered into at their Adjourned Meeting held on Tuesday, 23rd
January, 1917, be and are hereby approved of, save and except
the oontraet of .Laurenee Halpenny, Stormanstown, for Road
No. 7, and we a,vthorise our Se6retary to affix the Com-
mon Seal of the Council to same.
DROGHEDA WORKS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed by Peter .13 Moore, Esq, J P;
Seconded by P S Donegan, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—Thut the Proposal for Works formulated by the
Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union, at their Fourth
Quarterly Meeting held on Tuesday, 9th January, 1917, and set
out on Form 20, furnished to the County Council, and the con-
tracts entered into at t'heir Adjourned Meeting held on Tues-
day, 30th January, 1917, be and are hereby approved of, and
we authorise our Secretary to affix the Common Seal of the
Council bo same.
9
DUNDALK WORKS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by B Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by B L Coleman, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposal for Works formulated by the
Dundalk Rural District Council, at their Fourth Quarterly
Meeting held on Monday, 8th January, 1917, and set out on
Form 20, furnished to the County Council, and the contracts
entered into at the?r Adjourned Meeting held on Monday, 29th
January, 1917, be and are herOby approved of, and we author-
ise our Secretary to affix the Common Seal of the Council to
same.
COUNTY-AT-LARGE.
Tl'he following resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed by P Donegan, Esq, J P;
Seconded by T V M 'Quillan, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Proposal for Works formulat,ed by the
Proposal Committee at their Fourth Quarterly Meeting held on
the 8th January, 1917, and set out on Form 20, furnished to the
County Qntneil, and the contracts entered into their Ad-
pua-nod Meeting helci on the 5th February, 1917, be and are
boreby approved of, and we authorise our Secretary to affix the
Omrnon Seal of Councål to same.
TENDERS FOR WORKS.
In accordance vath advertisement, issued by the Secretary,
10
the Council next, ptoeeeded €0 consider tenders for, works not
set, at meetings o/ Rural District Councils as follows
ARDEE DISTRICT.
Nos. 295, 296. 300, 301, 302, 303, 304, 312, 313, 315, 316, 317
318.
No tenders were received for any of the above works.
DROGHEDA DISTRICV.
Nos. 137 165 inclusive.
For Work No. 13q Wm Fitzpatrick tendered for the sum of
C34 IOS 8d, and Jarnes Kirk, Hamlinstown, at CBT, and the Iat-
ter tender was accepted.
The following being the only tenders received were aocop-
tod : —
No. Byrne, Clogherhead, C34 8s (VI.
No. 145—James M 'Gauley, Termonfeckin, C19 188 Od.
No. 146—James Finegan, Tormonfeckin, E46 IOS Od.
148— Patrick Ussher, Balgatheran, C89 5s Od.
155-- Patrick Ussher, Balgatheran, C28 15s Od.
158—Wm Fitzpatrick, Foxhall, Cfi9 2s 6d.
No tenders were received for any of the other works not set
at Rural District Council meeting.
DUNDALK DISTRICr.
Only one of the VCorks not set at the Rural District Council
Meeting was tendered for, viz, No. 193. For this John onroy
11
tendered ai C2() 1.3*, and Patrick M 'Cabe, Carrickntullen, at,
C'2() 14s, and the last named tender was accepted.
WORKS NOT SET BY CONTRACI'.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by P B Moore, Esq, J p ;
Seconded T M'Gee, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That t,iye Proposals for Works passed by tho Rural
District Councils at. their last Meetings, aud for
which no contracts have lx•en entered into, be placed in charge
of the Chunty Stumeyor.
ESTIMATE OF ROATLS.
The Secretary's Estimate of Rates for the financial year end-
ing 31st March, 1917, a copy of which had been sent to eaoh
member of t,he Council, and to the Public Bodies concerned, was
next considered, arising out of same the question of the
Council's connection with Richmond Asylum was discussed,
and the Secretary w." ; directed to subliiit, to the Finance Com-
mittee counsel's opinion as to the terms on which separation
from that instituii0'! might be obtained, the Committee to re-
port their deliberations to next meeting of the County Council.
The following then passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by James M'Cart.hy, Esq, J P. and
Resolved- -That the of Rates. and Esti-
mate of Rates for Separate Charges, as set out on Forms 45
•16, with the various rates in the E, as set out, therein and re-
for adoption by the Committee t:heir
12
ilioeting held on .3t11 February, 1917, be and are hereby adopted
by the County Council.
DEMANDS ON URBAN DISTRICI'S.
The following I)elliancls •on tho Urban Districts were 01dered
and signed, and [he Secretary was directed to transmit same at
once to the respective Clerks
Drogheda Urban .
Dundalk Urban
L'3,724 0 0
eö,854 C; 10
VETERINARY INSPECTOR'S RESIDENCE.
In reply Co letter Which the, Secretary had addressed to Mr.
Maxwell, by direction of the Council, tho following letter was
read : —
Ardee, 19th FObtmary, 1917.
Dear Sir,
Tn emnpilanee with t,be request of the Louth County
Council re my residence in Ardee, T 'beg to state that Ardee is
my registered residence both to your Council, the Department
of Agriculture and to tihe Royal College of Veterinary Sur-
goons. To the latter iL is cojnptllsory to have a registered resi-
dence. It has been stated by the Ardee Boardl of Guxrdians
that they have, or qould have, to -send to Dundalk or Drogheda
for a Veterinary Surgeon if urgently needed. I wish state
in connection with this that T, in my official capacity, must get
three clear days' notice frotti the police, Cherefore there
no urgency in
official duties. Since I have received, as
staled in a previous letter, the appointment of Veterinary
13
pector to your Counc,ii, T have never allowed priva,te practice or
personal eonsidera[ions to interfere with Clutt duty.
I am, Sir, faithfully yours,
W. E. MAXWBLL, M.R.C.V.S.
The following resolution was
Proposed by James T M'Gee, Esq, J P, and
Seconded by A V Foster, Bart,
That our Secretary be instructed to convey the terms of his
appointment, to Mr Maxwell, and request that he comply with
same, and that, fail'ng an affirmative reply from him within ten
days and his taking np Oermanent residence in Ardee within
two weeks from this date, the position be declared vacant, and
appointment be ach ertised for next meeting.
After discussion Mr J T M 'Gee withdrew his motion in favour
of an amendment proposed by Mr Joseph Dolan and seconded
by Mr p M 'Gee, adjourning the consideration of the question
till next meeti1U1 to see what Mr Maxwell would do in the mean-
time, and the amendn ent was unanimously agreed to.
DAYLIGHT SAVING BILL.
The following resolution was passed, Mr T V M 'Quillan dis-
senting, and the foih;wing gentlemen were appointed a deputa-
tion to wait on the Secretary of the Department to lay their
views him Joseph Dolan, P M'Gee, J P; J.
M J P; T .J P; W T Skeffington, J P; J T
M 'Gee, J P; M Meade; B Hamill, J P, and the, Chairman and
Secretary
Proposed by James M 'Cnrthy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by S T Murphy, Es•q, J P. a,nd
Resolved— That we, the Connfy Council of Louth, emphati-
cally protest, against the re-enactment (Yi' the Daylight Saving
Bill for Ireland, for thc fo!lowing reasons the hay and corn
harvests farm work cannot be safely commenced before 9 0'clock
a m, dews and nigat frosts rendering the grass and grain damp
and quite unfit for careful harvesting; this fact will apply with
increased force this year, when the MiliLary Authorities ancl
ot,hej' purchasers of farm produce will require it supplied in dry
condition. The weeding of farm crops and [he singling and
hoeing of swedes, mangels and turnips, etc, cannot be done ill
the early morning hours. Owing to t,he dartlP state of Che land
anil leaves of the plants, hands aro most reluctant to undertake
Cho work before 9 c'clock, a m. Tillage farmers are painfully
aware that the steppage of farm work at, 4.30 p m, 0111 Style,
wastes Lhe two best hours of the surmner afternoon for saving
both hay and corn, and too often results in incalculable damage
to crops. Farm hands will not work, unless most reluctantly,
especially in the neighbourhood of towns and villages, after the
hour at which tradesmen and other workers engaged in indus-
trial pursuits cease working, and the result is the .10,ss of
nrost, precious hours daily or roughly a day every week, at a
cost to the community and farmers which it would be hard to
estimate. That the further imposition of Greenwich Time on
Ireland is an additional and serious hindrance to the work Of
ti!lage farmers and loss Co all dependent on tlheir labours, un-
called for, unnecessary, and opposed Io rutional laws; Chat we
resent it, and joc Its pr•mnpt repea.l and that a deputation
from this Council an I the Louth Farming Societies be appointed
to wait, on the Clue! Secretary aud Vice-President of the Irish
Board of Agriculture, .to place their views on the matter before
Chem. 'l'haL copies o/ this resolution be sent to every county
Council in Ireland, ropeetfully and cordially inviting their
nost co-operation anci united support in having a National griev
1b
ance and serious loss to the entire people of Ireland promptly
remedied. That, this resolution be also forwarded to the Prime
Minister, Vice-President of the Irish Board of Agriculture, Mr
John Redmond, Si.• J Lonsdale, and Che Members of Parlia-
ment for the Coue r,ies xuout}h, Meath, and Dublin County and
City.
INCREASES TO ROAD CONTRACTORS.
re-eonsideration of the applica tion by the Ardee and
Drogheda Road Contractors for increase in their maintenance
contracts, was next o'. the agenda. The letter from the L G .13
on the matter, wh:eli appeared on the printed minutes, was
but no order was made.
IAMI'I' OF EXPENDITURE.
Ibile following resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed •by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Secsonc,ecl by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—Thai, B'e hereby approve of the resolution of Che
Dundalk Rural Disirict Council to increase the yearly limit of
expenditure from C 7,443 15s to C8,000, and we direct our Secre-
Cary to apply to the Local Government Board for sanction to
the said increase of expenditure in the Dundalk Rural Dis-
trict.
RELEASE OF LABOUR.
Circular Letter w•.iS read from the L G B suggesting that as
far as possible employed by the Council be released for
'lhllage purposes, the following resolution -was passed un-
16
animously, and bhe County Surveyor was granted discretionary
powers in the matter
Proposed by .Ja,nos .WCm•thy, Esq, .r P;
Seconded by p S Donegan, Esq, J P. and
we hereby direct our County Surveyor to re-
lease any of the under his direct employ, so that their
services may be availed of under tho Food Production Scheme
for increased tillage.
CORRESPONDENCE.
The consideration of the correspondence on the agenda was
adjourned to next, meeting.
17
Finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee at, their
meeting held in the Court House, Dundalk, on Monday, 5th
Matwh, 1917, at 10.30 0'clock, a m.
Present
in the Chair : Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members T M 'Gee, J P; L Goodman and B Ham-
ill, J P, Liquires.
The Minutes of the previous meeting of the Committee wore
taken as read, ai'd signed by the Chairman.
'Ille follouing accounts were subniitted, and on exmnination,
were ordered for payment
C370 6 0
Works in Charge Of County Surveyor
Seoretary's Odicc
51 16 5
422 2 5
'Ithe Bank Boox-s for the General, Subsidiary and Loans Ac-
eounts were examined and initialled by the Chairman.
RATE COLLECTION.
The Secretary submitted Rate Return to 28th February,
Of the seoond molet.,' of Lhe rate amounting to L'17,747 IOS 7d,
the surn of e; .843 Ils '2d had been collected and lodged
18
and all the collectors had checked their books twi06 during the
rnonth.
The return was initialled by the Chairman.
CINEMATOGRAPH EXHIBITIONS.
Letter was read from the Chief Secretary's Office enclosing
model conditions for insertion in Cinematograph Licences, and
requesting the approval of the Council of same. The conditions
give power to the licensing authority to object and to cause the
withdrawal from exhibitions under their control of objectionable
films. The conditions also cover the control of posters of film
subjects, and the lighting of the interior of picture houses.
The conditions were unanimously recommended for approval
by the (hunty Council.
WEICH'I'S ANI) MEASURES OFFICE.
Letter was read from Mr J Callan, landlord of the Dundalk
Weights and Measures Office, for an increased allowancæ for
heating the office. He stated that water was supplied free to
promises, and i't? had been put, to considerable expense from
time €0 time for repairs to burst pipes, etc ; also the cost of coal
had increased enol nous•ly.
The Secretary stated that the rent
at present paid Mr Callan was L'6 IOS por annum witb an au-
nual allowance of Cl for heating.
The Committee unanimously reeomntended an additional al-
lowance of Cl annum for he.ating the office of Weights and
Measures.
19
LA-VI) PURCHASE DEFAULTERS.
Letter was read fron: L G B, dated 8th Mareh, enclosing
lis. of defaulting Land Puvchase Annuitants, and stating that
t'he, non-payment of the instalments in those cases involved a
charge upon the Gt:arantee Fund for the county, and thereby
upon the co. rates: amount which will be deducted in res-
peet of these defaulter from the Estate Duty Grant payable to
the Council, will C339 7s 3d. The list of defaulters was sub-
mitted, and the Comntittee decided to consider and disouss the
question at next meeting.
MALICIOUS INJURY.
The Seorotary reported a elaim by John and Bernard Olarke
for the alleged malicious burning of hay. He had forwarded
the to the County Solicitor, who was attending to the
matter on behalf of the Council.
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.
Letter was rend fron the Chief Secretary's Office, dated 27th
February, No. 4738, stating [hat the Menth Protestant
Industrial School had been taken over by the MilitaiT Authori-
ties, and that the Pitpils had been transferred to the Balmoral
Industrial School, Belfast. The Unnager of the latter school
had agreed to receive the pupils only on the condition that the
Councils would increase t.he allowance during tho
boys' tempornry detention in Balmoral to 3s weekly. The
Secretary stated that the Council had recently increased their
allowance from 2s 6d to 3s per week, and tilte latter figure was
now paid to all schools.
20
The (hmmitt,ee instructed the Secretary to reply that t,hey
were at present giving 3s weekly per head tao all Industrial
Schools, and they could not see their way to increase this al-
lowauee.
FORESTRY SCHEME.
Letter was read from Mr O'Connell, (hunty Solicitor,
closing completed Forestry Scheme in the matter of Willi8town
Plantation. The Secretary was directed to apply for a grant
from the Development Fund for Forestry now that
the scheme is complete.
MILITARY RAILWAYS.
Circular Letter fron the War Office with regard to the for-
mation of companies of quarry men for wo rk' in France, was
read and initialled by the Chairman.
COUNTY COUNCILS GENERAL COUNCIL.
Circular letter was read from the Irish County Councils Gene-
ral Council infor•aing the Council that at their Spring meeting
the question of the desirability of the adoption of ballot instead
of open voting for the election of paid officers of local authori-
ties would be considered. The circular further stated that any
matters which thia Council desired brought forward at, the
spring meeting should be notified to the Secretary by 31st
March.
The circular was initialled by the Chairman.
SUMMER. TTME BILL.
With reference to the resolution passed at last meeting of the
21
(Ayuncil protesting against the reenact,ment of above Bill, and
which had been transmitted to the Depnrtment of Agriculture,
with information that a deputation from the Council would wait
on Mr Russell to discuss the matter, Mr Russell wrote that
the Department had been requested by the Government to in-
vite the views (f Local Authorities in Vhe matter, and have al-
ready communicated the result to the Irish Executive. In t,he
circumstances he hardly thought the reception of a deputation
would serve any useful purpose, but although pressed for time,
at present, he would receive t'he deputation if the (huncil still
90 desired.
The (hmmitteo agreed that as the deputation had been ap-
pointed by Council: the Secretary should inform MT
Russell that it was desirable that the deputation should be met,
and he was direeted accordingly.
PAYING ORDER.
The Secretary stated that a workman named Joltn (kynnolly,
of Belmont, to whom a Paying order tor 8s 9d was due, had
died before it issued. Letter was read from his wife asking
that the Paying Order should be paid to her. The Committee
unanimously agreed that this should be done, and the Secretary
was directed accordingly.
THANKS.
Letter was Mr Goodman thanking the
Oouncil for vote of sympathy with him on the death of his sis-
22
NEGLECTED CONTR ACTS.
The Co. o." reported neglect on Roads Nos. 513 and 6,
Dundalk. He served IO days' notices and would take up
the oontraet.s if work was not done. The Committee appro-
ved cyf the Co. Surveyor's action.
AGREEMENT.
me Committee unanimously recornri.ended the sealing of an
agreement with the Drogheda Corporation for hire of a roller.
QUARRY WORKERS.
Letter was roa from the Kilsaran and Stoba.nnon Labour
Union stating that if their demand for an increase of 4s
week for the workers in Braganstown quarry was not acceded
to, these men would cease work on Thursday next.
AR tho County Council had resolved that the wages be increa-
sed to CI per week provided the men work a full day on Satur-
day (which terms were not accepted) no action was taken, and
no order was made on the letter.
BURIAL OF CARCASES.
The Secretary directed to apply to the Inndon and
North-Wesfr•rn Railway Company for the sum of 13s, )üüng
the amount which the Council have to pay to the Receiver of
Wrecks, Newry, for the burial of carcases which came ashore
after the Wreck of the s.s. Connemara.
The Secretary stated
that the Chuncil were liable for these costs, and would in Che
first instance have to pay them, burt under the Diseases of Ani-
mals Acts they entitled to recover from the Company who
owned the ship wr ecked from which tho carcases came.
Finance Committee.
Minutes of proeeedings of tho Finance Committee at their
meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
ou slonday, 19th March, 1917, at 10.30 0'clock, a m.
Present: . In the Chair: Chas A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other members- Meade, P M'Gee, J P; W Woods, J P;
B Hamill, J P, ar,d John Morgan, Esquires.
The County Surveyor was in attendance.
The minutes of che previous meeting of the Committee were
taken as read, signed by the Chairman.
The following Accounts were submitted, and on examination
were ordered for payment :—
C222 7 4
Works in Charge of County Surveyor
69 15
Secretary's ()ihee
C292 2 8
me Bank Books. for the General, Subsidiary and Loans Ac-
counts were examined and initialled.
Payrnents of the amounts of Malicious Injury Decreog on
the levy for the yea, ending 31st March, were ordered.
24
RIOHMOND ASYLUM.
The next item on the agenda was the consideration of
connection of Louth County with the Joint Committee of above
Asylum. Letter v, as read from Mr J M 'Carthy, J P, approv-
ing of the suggestion to sever the connection, if fea€ible and
goonomica.l, and regretting his inability to att,end to-day'8
meeting.
After a Short discussion it, was agreed that the matter should
come up in Comroit,te€' at next County Council meeting for dis-
cuggion.
COUNTY COUNCIL WORKMEN.
A deputation ft orn the Kilsaran and Stabannon Labour Loa-
gue, and from Dromiskin Branch of the same League, was
admitted before the Committee. In the letter conveying the
roquest for permission to attend, it, was stated that t,he deputa-
tion wiShed to brrug 'before the Committee the case of t,he work-
ers at Braganstowwt quarry and on the Lurgangreen Road, who
had ceased work on Thursday last in consequence of their re-
quest for an increa-e of 4s per week being refused by the O.
Council.
The deputation stated that the decision of the (k)unty Council
granting an increase of 2s per week provided €he men m»rked
till six o'clock on Sattndays instead of till 2 0'clock as formerly,
was of no advantage to tho men, as they would give value for
tihi8 increase by working the extra hours.
After discussion in which it was pointed out that the om-
mit,toe could do nothing in view of the decision of the County
Council, it was uitanimously agreed that a requisition for a spe-
ciad meeting of the County Council to re-consider Che wages
25
question, be handed to the Chairman, and that the meeting be
held on Mondav, '26th instant, at, 1.30 0'clock, p m.
The members oi the deputation promised to consult with t,he
League Branches, and, if possible, to arrange for the return to
work of such men as were required, either on the old terms of
18s and a half on Saturday, or on the Council's terms of
20s and a full day on Saturday, pending the re-considerat,ion
of the matter at the Special meeting of the Council.
ANNAGASSAN PIER.
Letter was reed from Mr M Meade, stating that at a moot-
ing of the Annagassan Pier Commissioners, a letter from t,he,
Department was under discussion, and they had decided to ask
the Finance Committee to receive a deputation at, this meeting
to eonsider and discuss same. The letter from the Department,
No. 786-17, dated 7th March, stated that unless, before the
first day of next month, the Commissioners shall havo appointod
a Harbour Master and taken the necessary steps for eollecting
the dues authorised by the Board of Trade, and for fulfilling
their responsibilities in regard to the lighting of the harbour
and the requirements of the Home Office, the Department will
not proceed with tho completion of the works now in hand.
The deputati€.ti, consisting of M€yssrs Clinton and M 'Guinness
was admitted, an.i stated bhey wanted the advice and influence
Of the (Ijunei! the matter of the completion of the Har41»ur
Works. The Department had left the Harbour in a dangerous
state, and tlhere were now three or four feet, of mud in it, which
The Cotnmissioners
was a danger to vessels using the port.
would be quite prepared take over their responsibilitiee if
the Department would complete the works and leave Har-
26
Mr P M 'Gee, J P, pointed out t,hat the Council had a consi-
clera;ble interest the Annagassan Harbour, inasmuch as they
had advanced a large. sum for the work. The Commissioners
were axions for getting the Harbour inbo such a oondition that
they could take over responsibility and begin Vo collect dues.
It was to the interest of the county that the work should be
expedited. He proposed that the (hunt}' Surveyor inspect Lhe
Tlarbour and report on it,s condition so that the County Chuncil
might be in a position to put the facts before the Department
and urge the ill) mediate completion of the works, at the sarne
time the necesity for diverting the river through tune basin bo
clear out the mud, should be pointed out.
Mr Bernard Hamili, J P, seconded, and the resolution was
unanimously agreed to.
Chairman, behalf of the Committee, informod Che de-
put,ation that t,he Council would be pleased to do what lay in
their m»wer in any matter in connection with the Harbour.
Mr Clinton thanked the Committee and Che deputation with-
drew.
GREENORE WALL.
Letter w:vs read from Mr P J Whitty, M P, enclosing report
of que.stion 'by hir; and answer by Mr Duke in the alX)ve mat-
tor. According to the report Mr Whitty stated in the House
that the sea wall at Greenore had been severely damaged by
floods caused by the storms last winter, and the Greenoro
was in imminent danger of being flooded, and seeing t'hat this
would be the meal'* of driving a number of farmers at
engaged in agriet. Iture from their farms, and as the agent re-
fuses to repair wall, whether Che Government would do any-
thing in the matter. Mr Duke replied Chat no doubt the orope
27
on the adjoining land were in danger. but unless Mr Whitty
could Show reason for believing that the repairs of the wall was
a public he could see no means by which the Govern-
ment can enforce it.
Mr W Woods, J P, requested permission, which was granted.
to int.roduee a deputation of the. land owners concerned, and
accordingly these gentlemen were admitted. Mr "Woodney sta-
tod that. the repttll+ were absolutely necessary to safeguard the
The work had been formerly done by trile
lands adjoining.
landlord, who. at present, derived an income of about CIOO per
annum out of estate. If Che erosion continued Lhe lands
would be below sea level. 'Ilhere were about 80 of land in
the townland of GI ( enore likely to be affected.
After discussion the, County Surveyor was directod t,o meet
Mr Woods, J P, and the deputation on the spot this week if
possible, and repon fully to Lhe special meeting to be held on
Monday next.
TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION.
Lotter dated 13th March, 1917, No. T. 1995-17, was reoeivecl
from the Department suggesting that in connection with the
proposal of the Council to divide the grant for Technical In-
struction in the Rural Districts between the Drogheda a,nd
Dundalk Séhools, it seemed to be desirable that the question at
issue should be discussed between of the lÄ)dies
concerned. Mr Fletcher, of the Department, would attend
such a conferencgg if it cqyuld be arranged.
The Coin mittee unanimously decided that the confotxsnce a.s
suggested be he'd on Wednesday, 28th instant, and that two
representatives of the Drogheda Technical Committee and two
28
of the County Louth and Dundalk Joint Technical (k»mrnittoe
be invited to attend. On behalf of the County Council the
(%mmittee appoirted Messrs Wm Woods, J P, and Bernard
Hamill, J P, to represent North Louth, and Messrs N 'T Mur-
phy, J P, and W T Skeffington, J P, to represent South Louth
at the conference, Mr C A Duffy, J P, to act as Chairman.
Secretacy was directed to notify the bodi«s eoncernod of
the arrangements made, and to inform the Department also,
bhab Mr Fletcher might 2be in attendance.
BABIAGTO.X v. COUNTY COUNCIIS.
Mr D O'ConneiI wrote in a letter dated 7th March, 1917,
that at Monaghan Spring Assizes the Judge confirmed on ap-
peal the decision Gf the (%unty Court Judge levying a
in the above rase over a particular area in t,ho R. D. of Carrick-
macross, and refused to apportion any of the amount against
Louth County.
TUBERCUIÅ)SIS EXPENDITURE.
Lotter from the Town Clerk of Drogheda in connection witål
expenditmre for treatment of Tuberculosis, and the amount of
Government grant for same, was referred to next meeting of
the Committee for consideration.
LA YI) PURCHASE DEFAULTERS.
The certified list of Land Pillx•hase Defaulters was, ae dir€+
ted, again submit 1011, but no discussion took place, and no or-
dor was made.
29
The Soeretar.v reported an accident to James Morgan, a
workman at Jon€+boro' quarry, and stated that the claim
been made on the Insurance Cornpauy in Che matter, and all tth.e
preliminaries perfected.
DEATH DUTY GRANT.
Letters dated löth March, 1917, were read from the L. G. B.
enclosing the following grants
Death Duty Grant ou behalf of Guardians o!' Union, C993
14s ld.
Death Duty Grant to County Council as a Road Authority,
C900 Is 2d.
The amounts have been lodged to the credit of the Council.
Louth
so
County Council.
31
Order 81, could only be effected with the consent of the ma-
jority of the members present, which must be at least half of
This would require an attendapce of seven-
the whole Council.
teen members, only fourteen were present, a motion to
suspend the Standing Orders could not be received.
After a desuitory discussion the matter terminated without
any order being made.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Tubuth County Council at tlheir
Special Meeting hen: in the COUI•€ House, Dundalk, on Monday,
26th March, 1917, C A Duffy, Esq, .J P, presiding. The follow-
ing members were also J Roth, B Hamill, J P; J F
Murphy, J P; W Woods, J P; Wynne, J P; N T
phy, J P; P .J P; L Goodman, M Meade, J Morgan,
JH M'Ardle, JP L M'Keon, J P; and B L Coleman, J P,
Esquires.
The Chairman explained that flie meeting was called on a ro-
quisition signed by five members of Che Council being handed to
him on tho 19th instnnt, requesting hint to convene a Special
Meeting of the Counci! to consider Che question of wages of the
workers in the employment f the Council on t,he Lurgangreen
Road, who had sfl work in consequence of the County Conn-
cli, at their last met ting, deciding that the advance in wages
from 18s to per week was contingent on the men working
until six o'clock, p P), on Saturdays. instead of two o'clock in
tho afternoon a; customary. He further informed the Council
Vhat under Standing Order .12 ' 'no resolution can be rescinded
" and
until a period of six Inonths has elapsed from ifs adoption,
the only way that any ehnnge could be made was by suspension
of the Standing Orders, and that the suspension, according to
32
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proeeul:ngs of Finance Cornmittee at tJheir meet-
ing held in the Cot:ncil Chamber, Court House, Dundalk, on
Monday, 2nd April, 1917, at 10.30 0'clock, a m.
Presen : —
In tho Cirair: Chas A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—L Goodman, J Wynne, J P; M O'Meara,
P, and W Woods, J P, Esquires.
Mr Thornas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
The minutes of the previous meeting of the, Committee were
taken as read, and signed 'by the Chairman.
"Ille following acecatnts were submitted, and on examination
were ordered for payn•ent
Works in Charge of County Surveyor
Secretary's Office
Total
C'24'2
551
2793
O
9
9
O
The Bank Books for the General, Suibsidiary, and Loans Ac-
counts were examinod and initialled by the Chairrnan.
The Committee ou;ered that a sum of C2,0()O be transferred
from the General to the Sutxsidiary Account.
33
RATE RETURN.
The Secretary Rate Return to 31st March, 1917,
showing that, all Rat,e Ollectors had lodged t,he full am-
ounts of their warrants on or that date.
The Committeæordered payment of poundage fees to all the
Collectors, and the arnount,s were included in the payments for
this day.
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES OFFICE.
Mr James Callar, landlord of the Dundalk Weights and Men-
sures Offce, served six months' notice to terminate the County
Council's tenancy of this office, in aeeordaneæ with agreement
and the (hmmittee unanimously accepted same.
INCOME TAX.
"Ille Secretary submitted Income Tax assessment on Interest
allowed by the County Treasurer on crödit balances. He stated
that the tax had assessed in tlhe first instance on a sum of
2323, but he had see 1 the Surveyor in the matter and had had
the assessable amount reduced to C264. 'Ille tax claimed on
this amount was CG$, and payment of same was recommended
to the County Council
ANN AGASSAN PIER.
Tn accordance sv;e directions given at Insf Finance Meeting,
ibe County Surveyor submitted report on the condition of above
Pier and Harbour as follows, and the Secretary was directed to
send copies of same to tho Department nnd to the Harbour
Commissioners, and to urge on the Department the necessity for
completing the work at. the Harbour
34
Report on Annagassan Pier and Harbour by the County
Surveyor of I-A)uth.
To the Chairman and Gentlemen, Finance Meeting,
2nd April, 1917.
Mr Clmirman 'Gentlemen,
Following on your instructions asking be
informed as to the state of the Works, Anna.gassan Harbour and
Pier, I beg Io report:—
STRUCTURAL WORKVBREAKWA'I'ER AND PIER.
These have been constructed fairly conformable to plan. Some
paving on part of the quay has not so far been done. In con-
versation with Mr Griffith, the Department's Engineer (acting
for Mr Hassard), last, September, I agreed that this could be
held over for bhe present and attention devoted to the channel.
It is not a large iten•.
A sloping retainmg Wall shown at the western end of the basin
and running nortlyv, ards to the River Dee shown on plan, has
not l»en constracted, and is not necewsary—in fact the Depart-
ment has been reqvested by the Harbour Commissioners to
dredge a cut to thc river through where it was at first' proposed
to erect this wall.
The quay wall is shown on plan extended westwards to the
end of the County Road to form a retaining wall. This has not
been carried to the full length shown on plan. Tt was left ill
its present state in 1.915, When work ceased for that year.
'believe the Department's then Engineer, Mr Oliver, had under
consideration bhe di€(iging of the cut above-mentioned to the
River Dee. This ii out, as project,ed then, would have
necessitated modifications in the structure of Che wall.
Some additions io the structural works have been made, viz :
a short concrete cros wall to act, as a breakwater [o prevent
waves from breaking over the eastern return wall of the quay;
portion of the bre;ykwater is in course of being raised higher
than at first proposed.
With these structural works the County Council are directly
eoneerned, as an agreement in respect of these exists 'between
the Department ard the County Council.
As to the Champl and Basin—I have not as yet made a sur-
vey of the works.
No dredging ha.s Leen done since 1915, as I am given to un-
derstand it was impossible to get necessary repairs to the dred-
ger carried out in time for work last year.
As to the work has Laken place in the
basin dredged. Sinec 1915 probably about four feet of mud has
been deposited. North of the east end of the breakwater near
the entrance to the basin where, the River Dee meets the Ohan-
nel, a considerable deposit of gravel and stones has accumulated
I arn informed that a, vessel drawing nine feet of water re-
eently grounded n .e this point and had to be lightened before
she was able to gec into the basin alongside the quay. rme
depth of water Fl a Nided for in the place is 13 feet at high
water O.S.T.
Tho Depa rtrnent now inform Che Chmmissioners that unless
the dues sanctioned by the Board of Trade are collected, no fur-
ther work will be carried out on bhe Harl»ur. The Commis-
sioners in view of [he siltnge, and more particu laxly of Che de-
posit above-mentioned at the entrance Co the 'basin, 10th to
charge harbour clues, first,ly, for fear of actions for damages to
vessels entering tie harbour as it, stands; secondly, lest apart
from responsibi!ity the harbour may be dammed, and ship ow-
ners later on, even when the harbour is in more finished state,
refuse to send their boats there.
The Commissioners, there-
fore, suggest that they Oharge quay clues only for the present.
Having regard tc the very considerable siltage, T suggest
that the Department be again asked fo consider the dredging
of the cut 30 ft. from the present basin to the river, as
suggested in March, 1916, to their Engineer, Sir John Griffith,
reporting on the works in 1915, was not unfavourable to the
making of this cut.
You:• obedient Servant,
THOMAS WALSH,
County Surveyor.
31st March, 1917.
DEMANDS.
The Secretary submitted Bank Receipt for $3,326, being full
amount of Che Demand on the Drogheda Corporation for finan-
Cial year ended March, 1917. He stated that the second
instalment of the Dundalk Urban Demand had not yet been
and he wag directed to
lodged to the credit of the Council,
write the Town in the matter.
MALICIOUS INJURY CLAIM.
The County wrote on 29th March that the claim by
the Dundalk Linen Company for malicious injury €0 27 webs of
linen, was heard at Dundalk Quarter Sessions on the 28th inst.
and that the County Court Judge had awarded the sum of Clll
9s 2d as compensation, to be levied off the County-at-Large.
37
A short discussi'tn took place on the question of the area of
charge, •but, no order was Inade.
ASYLUM CAPITATION GRANT.
The following letters were read, and the, Secretary was direc-
ted to write the Treasury and urge the necessity for increasing
the Capitation Gtmntfor lunatics owing to the greatly increased
cost, of maintenance : —
Richmond District Asylum,
Dublin, 23rd March, 1917.
Dear Sir,
I am instructed by the Joint Committee of this
Asylum to transmit you a copy of a letter from the City Trea-
surer of the Dublin Corporation, with reference to the Capita-
tion Grant to Asylums, and I am to express a hope that you uill
take action with a view of representing to Government the
equity of a re-adjusianent to ensure full payment of 4s per head
per week. As you are aware the contri'bution is paid direct
to County Councils from the Local Taxation Account, that this
Aooount has for many years shown a. shrinking revenue with an
expanding liability, and that indications point to further
abatements in the payment to Councils.
Yours truly,
W. J. MURPHY,
Chief Clerk.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
(Copy).
City Treasurer's ()ffee,
Municipal Buildings, Dublin.
Dear Sir,
The Treasury Commissioners, T understand, have
recognised the diftc;ulty of maintaining . Ilildren committed bo
Industrial SOhools by conceding an extra Capitation Granf of
fid per head per we provided the loeal authorify also agree
[o increase their capitation grant by Gd.
This is a recognition of the difficulties of the Managers of
these Schools, which applies with even greater foreo to t,he
maintenance of patients in District Asylums.
As you are aware the original capitation grant, through the
insufficiency of tho Local Taxation Account, has dwindled to
about 3s 4d from the 4s fixed so far back, I think, as 1874. I
suggest that you bling the matter before your Board at, the
earliest possible ,moment as they might be disposed to represent;
the facts to tho Government and seek an increased grant.
They might at least mike good Che deficiency for the current
year, and ease t,he estimates of the Asylum for next year by a
similar concession.
Yours faithfully,
EDMUND W. BYRNE,
City Treasurer.
W. J. Murphy, Esq,
Chief Clerk, Richmond District Asylum.
39
RI AL SCHOOL TRANSFER.
Letter was lead from the Managei• St Michael's Boys' Indus-
tria.l School, Lurgan, stoting that it, was intended, with the
Guncil's approval, to t,musfer a child named Quinn to Artane
Industrial School. The Commitee approved, and the Secretary
was directed to infcéTT' the Manager accordingly.
TRISH EDUCATION ACT.
The Cornmis3ione of National Education wrote notifying
that they had appc.lnted the following members to act with the
members appointed the County Council on the Ardee Dis-
triet School Attetl('ance Committee—Sir H Bellingham, Bart ;
Rev J B M A ; Rev Canon R M P Freeman, M A; Rev
J M Jennings, B and Mr Jarnes M 'Donnell.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
WASTE PAPER.
Circular letter f gora) the L G B re Waste Paper, was submit-
ted and initialled by the Chairman.
GRANTS.
The following grants were received this day, and the Secre-
tary was directed to lodge same to the credit of the Council
Cl,714 14 10
In Aid of Maintenance of Lunatics
6
455 8
In Aid of Medieal auci Educational Expendibure
4
53 14
In Aid of Sanitary Salaries
6,391 15
Agricultural Grant
1
Proposal CommiNee.
'Minutes of Procebdings of 'the' Proposal (hmmittee at their
F'irst Otrit•terlY' Meeting held in Council Chamber, Courthouse,
Dundalk, G Monday, 16th v April, 1917, at 10.30 0'clock a.m.
Present
In Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—J Wynne, J P; L Goodman, B Hamill,
J P; J T J P; P Woods, J P; B L Coleman, J P; and
T O'Rourke, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, Co. Surveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of Lhe Committee were
taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following proposals were consideröd, and each was imani-
mously approved : —
APPLICAHO.NS BY THE COUNTY SURVEYOR.
No. 43.—To provide CI,463 for carrying on the work on the
Dublin-Belfast Road -in the Rural Districts of
Ardee, DrOghéda, and Bund:wlk, pending receipt
2
from the Road Board of Cl,463 final instalment
of Grant: such final instalment to be placed to
credit to refund the amount, of this Proposal to
County-at-Large (ex-Urban).
No. 44.—-To purchase a double set of steels and hose for large
rock drill. Not. to exceed C'25. County-at-
Large (ex-Urban) charge.
No. 4ö.—To provide two Horse Sweeping Machines. Same
to be hired to Road Contractors. Not to exceed
±70. Coun ty-at-Large (ex-Urban) charge.
With reference to proposal No. 43, the Co. Surveyor reported
that the Road Board work, owing to increased cost of labour,
materials, ei,c, could not be carried out for the amount original-
Iy estimated. Ardee Rural District Council 'had passed an
additional proposal of Clö() and Dundalk a proposal of El,000
for the work. The Road Board should be asked to give a
further grant owing to the exceptional circumstances.
After discussion, it was unanimously decided to instruct the
Secretary to approach the Road Board in the matter, and to
state that it was absolutely necessary that in order to com-
plete the work satisfactorily, in view of the change in condi-
tions since the original estimate for the work was passed, that
the Road Board should give a further Grant for the work.
'The County-at-Large Accounts for quarter ended 31st March,
1917, were submitted by the Secretary, examined by the Corn-
mittee, and recommended for payment.
3
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the, Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
on Monday, 16th April, 1917, at 10.30 0'clock a.m.
Present : —
In the ChairÄharles A Duffy, Lsq, J P.
Other Members—J Wynne, J P; L Goodman, B Hamill,
J P; J T M'Gee, J P; P Woods, J P; B L Coleman, J P; and
T O'Rourke, Esquires.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Committee were
taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted and on examination
were ordered for payment :—
Works in charge of the County Surveyor C416 8 6
19 10 11
Secretary's Office
C435 19 5
The Bank Books for the General Subsidiary and Loans Ac-
counts were examined and initialled by the Chairman.
Forms 22 for the Rural Districts and the County-at-Large
4
Accounts for quarter ended 31st March were examined and re-
commended for payment.
HARBOUR DUES.
The Harbour Returns as follows showing dues collected dur-
ing quarter ended 31st March, weepe submitted and initialled :—
Carlingford—Nil.
Giles' 17s Od.
ClogheFhead—CI I'2s 6d.
LIMIT OF EXPENDITURE.
Letter dated 12th April, 1917, No. 17214, was read from the
L G B stating that in accordance with the Council's resolution,
approving of the Dundalk, Rural District Council's resolution
on the subject, an Ordev was boing prepared ,authorising the
extension of the limit of expenditure in Dis-
trict to C8,000 to date from 1st April, 1917.
The letter was initialled by the Ohairrnan.
TECHNICAL GRANT.
The following letter from the Department was road and or-
dered to be inserted on the Minutes
No. T. 3637/17.
Department of Agriculture, Dublin,
12th APIil,. 1917.
Sir,—
Adverting to your letter of the 27th February last,
regardigg thea suggested revision 'Of the administrative are+h,
5
in which the, County Lou:tih Jointn Technical Instruction. Com-
Inittee and .the Drogheda Technical Instruction Tommittee. at
present conduct schemes Technical Instruction, and to.. the.
Conference which the Assistant Secretary in respect of Tewhni-
eal Instruction had Uitly representatives of the con-
corned on the '28th- ultimo, I have to state that the Depart-
ment have given careful consideration fo the proposal that
the annual contribution of C150 granted by t,he County Louth
County Council to the Joint Scheme Should be divided so that
C7ö should be made available for the Drogheda Technical
Sohools, and also to the proposal that another Joint Commit-
tee be established to administer a scheme for Drogheda Urban
District and the Rural Districts of the South of the County.
The Department would •be unable to approve of tho formation
of a second Joint Committee to' administer a scheme in the
South .of the County.
It is understood that the objectu underlying the proposal is
to secure that more instruction should be given in the rural
The Depart-
areas, especially in the South of the County.
ment feel that any such change could readily be secured with-
out establishing •mother Committee, and they are willing €0
approve of the inclusion in the present Joint Scheme of a
clause securing that classes should be given in j t/he southern
Rural Districts involving an expenditure of not less than $.75
during the academie year. They are, however, of the opinion
that such a division of the funds would not entirely meet the
6
need. The contd'ibution from your Council to the sc!heme has,
since its initiation, been very small, and this circumstance has
necessarily limited the operation of the scheme in the rural
areas. They would suggest, therefore, the allocation of at
least C250 per annum from the funds of your Council for the
purposes of the scheme administered by the County Joint
Technical Instruction Committee.
The Department desire
that the Committee should consider whether a portion of the
funds which it is hoped may be allocated should not be em-
ployed in assisting students from the Rural Districts to attend
classes in tlhe Technical Schools at Dundalk' and Drogheda. It
is understood that, in the case of the former school, there
are eighty students attending from the districts outside the
Urban area, while there are thirty such students attending
the Drogheda Technical School. An increased number of
students might be induced to attend the Schools if a small aid
were given to them in the form of a scholarship.
I have to state that therb is nothing to prevent the services
of any t,eadher engaged by the Drogheda Technical Instruction
Committee being utilised for dhe conduct of classes in the rural
districts where such an arrangement would be advantageous
from the poiqt, of view of efficiency and economy. In such a
case the County Louth Joint Technical Instruction Committee
would arrange with the Drogheda Technical Instruction
mittee for a payment in respect of Ghe services of the teacher
so employed.
I am, Sir,
Your oikBdient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary, Louth (huncil.
Secretary.
7
COMMITTAL TO INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.
Letter was read from the Rev Father M 'Keone, Adm, Dun-
dalk, stating that at the Children's Court, Dundalk, he would
make an application for the Committal to Industrial School of
a boy named James Clarke, Ladywell Terrace.
The application was approved by the Committee.
RICHMOND PATIENTS.
The Return of Admissions of County Louth patients to
Richmond Asylum during quarter ended 31st March was sub-
mitted and initialled by the Chairman.
TELEGRAPH POLES.
Notice was read from the Post Office Telegraphs Superin-
tendent stating that it was the intention of the Postmaster
General to open the carriageway at Brewery Street, Castle-
bellingham, for the purpose of erecting two additional pol.es
on existing line.
The matter was referred to County Surveyor.
SEA WALL AT GREENORE.
In accordance with instructions of the Finance
Che County Surveyor, in company with Mr William Woods,
J P, inspe€ted the damage done by erosion to the sea wall at
Greenore, and reported that as the wall did not adjoin the
8
County Road, and as it was originally 'built by the owner of
the lands it protected, he oould not see how the Council could
be legally liable in the matter, nor did he think t,here was any
Governmental Fund out of which a grant could be procured
for the purpose of repairing the wall.
ne report was initialled by the Chairman.
