OV LO,O
1909-12,


Local
Government (Ireland)
Act, 1898.
LOUTI+COUNTY COUNCIL
MINUTES
PROCEEDINGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At their Third Qilarterlv Meeting held 01)
'I'hursclay, 1 lth November :
and the Ad-
journed Meetillg . held on, 25th Novernber,
Special Meeting held on the 23rd
1909.
December. i 909.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
At their Meetings held 22nd Nov€nnber, 19()9 ;
26th l)ecember, 1909 ; and January,
1910.
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE.
At Meeting held on Monday, 3rd January, 19: O.
1
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Niinutes of proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
Third Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council Chamber; Court
House, Dundalk, on the 11th day of November, 1909.
Present :—
In the Chair: Peter Hughes, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Messrs P Woods, J P; M O'Meara, J P; J
MYCourt, J P; P M'Gee, J Wynne, C A Duffy, J P; B Finegan,
J Quinn, J P; J Dolan, Gatilstown ; B Hamill, J P; T Magujre,
P Donegan, J P; J H M ' Ardle, anWJ M Johnson.
A printed copy of the last minutes cf the Council havivg been
transmitted to every •member of the Council, were taken as read
in accordance with the Standing Order, No. 26, and were con-
fil med.
Proposed 'by Mr Chas A Duffy, J P,
Seconded by Mr J M '(hurt, J P, and
the recommendations contained in the
minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee, on the follow-
ing dates, viz—July 26th, 9th August, 23rd August, 13th Sept.,
27th Sept., and 11th October, 1909, be and are hereby adopted
by this Council.
Proposed by Mr J Wynne,
Seconded by Mr B and
Resolved—'Thnt the re:»
"Potions contnined in the minu-
teg of proceedings of the Proposal Committee, together with
the Contracts entered into at their meetings held on the 18th
October and 8th November, 1909, be and are hereby adopted Ly
this Council.
Proposed by Mr J M'Court, J P,
Seconded by Mr J Qumn, J P, and
the recommendations contained in the
minutes of proceedings of the Dundalk Rural District School
AU eudance Committee, at their meeting held on lne 13th day
of October, 1909, be and are hereby adopted by this Council.
Proposed by Mr J M'Court, J P,
Seconded by Mr C A Duffy, J P, and
the County Council hereby determine/ that
the shall be the dates for the holding of the fourth
Quarterly Meetings of the Rural District Councils, and Propo-
sal Committee, viz
Ardee No. I—Tuesday, 4th January, Ibl().
Drogheda 13th January, 1910.
D113daIk—Mnnday, 10th January, 1910.
Proposal Committee—Monday, 3rd January, 1910.
The last day for lodging Notices and apphcations for
Mi etings, will be Tuesday, 14th December, 1909.
ARDEE ROAD PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr B Hamill, J P,
Seconded by Mr J Quinn, J P, and
Resolved—'That the proposals for payments formulated
above
by the
Ardee No. I Rurai District Council, at their third Quarterly
Meeting held on Tuesday, the 5th day of October, 1909, and zet
out on Form 22, furnished to the County Council, be and are
hereby approved of."
These payments amount to C838 6s 5d.
DROGHEDA ROAD PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr Joseph Dolan;
Seconded by Mr P Donegan, J P, and
Resolved—That the proposals for payments formulated ny
the Louth Rural District Council of Drogheda Union, at then•
third Quarterly Meeting held on Thursday, the 14th day cf
October, 1909, and set out on Form 22 furnished to the County
Council, be and are hereby approved of."
These payments amount to C683 16s 9d.
3
DUNDALK ROAD PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr J Wynne,
Seconded by J M 'Court, J P, and
Resolved.' 'That the proposal for payments formulated b.y
the Dundalk Rural District Council, at their third Quartecl.v
Meeting held on Monday, the 11th day of October, 1909, and
set out on Form 22 furnished to the County Couniel, be and
are hereby approved of."
These payments amount to El, 707 Os Ild.
COUNTY AT LARGE PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr B Hamill, J P,
Seconded by Mr B Finegan, and
the proposal for payments, County-at-Large
formulated by the Proposal Committee their adjourned
Quarterly Meeting, held on Monday, the 8th day of November,
1909, be and are hereby approved of by this Council."
Proposed by Mr J M Johnson,
Seconded by Mr Joseph Dolan, and
a deputation consisting Of Messrs P
Hughes, J P, Chairman County Council ;
WCourt, J P.
Chairman Urban Council; B Hamill, J P, Chairman Harbour
Board; P Donegan, J P, Chairman R. D. Council, Drotzheda ;
NV Woods, J P, Chairman R. D. Council, Dundalk; P Byrne,
J P, Chairman P. L. Guardians; and Capt. Filgate, Chairman
P L. Guardians, Ardee, and the Secretary, be appointed to
proceed and interview the Local Government Board, with a
view to explain the position and arrange a satisfactory basis
ot working with the Rate Collectors for extension of time
collection and payment of then• poundage: '
Proposed by Mr B Hamill, J P,
Seconded by Mr J Dolan, Gaulstown, and
VCesolved—'That we beg to tender to our esteemed colleague
Mr Edward Goodman. our sincere sympathy at the, sad he
snstnired in the denth of his wife, hasten to offer onr
4
condolence in his deep bereavement, and that this meeting
adjourned as a mark of our respect.
Proposed by Mr Bernard Hamill, J P,
Seconded by Mr James M 'Court, J P, and
Resolved--'That we beg to tender the expression of our deep
gret at the death of our esteemed coliengue, the late Mr Peter
Callan, and beg to convey to his relatives and friends our most
sincere sympathy in their affliction, and that this meeting
stand adjourned as a mark Of respect to the memory Of the
deceased. '
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at: their
Adjourned Quarterly Meeting. held in the Council Chamber, on
Thursday, the 25th day of November, 1909.
Presen t :—
In the Chair: J wcourt, Esq, J P.
Also P woods, J P; W Woods. J P; B
J P; P Kinahan, Jahn J T Dolmw, M A; P P Keeley, C A
Duffy, J P; J Dolan (Gaulstowni; J Wynne, B Fin:negaa, J 11
M' Ardle, P Donegan, J P; L M' Keown, J M Johnson.
DROGHEDA WORKS.
Propoeed by Mr Donegan, J P,
Seconded by Mr Kinahan, and
the Proposal for Wot±s formulated by tho
Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union at their Third Quarterly
Meeting held on Thursday. the 14th day of October. 1909, and get
out on Form 20 furnisihed to the County Council, be and are
hereby approved of Anrl we now authorise the Secretary to
affix i he common Seal of the Council to the Contracts entered
into. •
DUNDALK WORKS.
Proposed by Mr Woods,
Seconded by Mr Hamill, and
the Prc.potsa,ls for Works form plated by tho
Dundalk Rural District Council at their Third Quarterly Meetivg
held on Monday, the 11th day of October, 1909, set onf en
Form 20 furnished to the County Council. be and are hereby ap-
5
proved of. And we now authoriæ {'he Secretary to a flix he
Common Seal of the County Council to the Contracts en {ere
into."
Proposed by Mr B Ylamill,
Seconded by Mr James W Vnue, ancl
Re all Works not set by Contract at Meeti- gs
the Di trict Councils be placed in charge of the County Surveyor. '
Proposed by Mr Bernard Tlamill, J P,
Seconded by Mr Thomas Kinahan, and
Resolved—'OThat we 'hereby co-opt Mr Thomas Callan
a Memly.•r of the Louth County Council in room of the late
Peter Callan, deceased."
Propo:ed by Mr J M Johnson,
Seconded by Mr Peter Wocds, J P, avd
Mr
Mr James Wynne be appointed Member of
Louth County Infirmary Committee in room of the late Mr Peter
Callan, deceased."
EASTWOOD ESTATE TN CHANCERY.
Proposæd by Mr Bevnavd Hamill. J P,
Seconded by Bernard and
Re reverting to our redntion of Mav urgi:tg
the E tateo Commissioners to reinstate Mr Louden in his formetr
holding at Castlet(Avn, in this County, on or before the first of
this November, we now learn with regret that our request
not yet been complied with, and before bringing the matter
protuinently before Parliament, we hereby request. as a
favour, the Member of North Lou' h to interview the Est ftt
Commi 'sioawrs oseertain from them the cause Of such u
neces ary delay and whaf progress has been made with the Conru
of Chancery towards the completion of the purchase Of this
farm."
Propsed by Mr Bernard Hamill. J P,
Seconded by Mr James Wynne,
Resolved—C'That we hereby direct our Soera\av.v the at
fention of the Memlpr for Novell Louth—Mr T M Tlea!y. K C
M P—to the action of the I ,ocal Government i"' not
plying with t.ho requet*t of this Council in allowing thriv
ao exte of 'ime for i') clrsing the
in re• pect of the half-year ended 30th September last."
6
Proposed by Mr P M'Gee,
Seconded by Mr J T Dolan, and
our Solicitor be hereby in:.tructed to take the
necessary steps to oompul. orily acquire the lands required for
the making of the road at Tuberdoney."
Proposed by Mr Joseph T Dolan,
Seconded by Mr James Wynne, and
Resolved—WThat we, the Louth County Council. hereby approve
of the alloention of L'O made by the Louth County Committee af
their Meeting held on 7th day of September, 1909. for the purpo e
of Compensation being given to Bee Owenrs in this Cotu;ty
Bees, articles, and appliances may have to be destroyed owing
to the presence of Foul Brood in their appliances in accordimee
with Section 6 (3) of the Bee Pest Prevention (Ireland) Act, 1008,
and Clauses 10 (11) of the Bee Pet23t Prevention (Ireland) Regu a.
tions, J.S09, made by fhe Department Of Agriculture and Technica'
Instruction for Ireland."
Proposed by Mr J M Johnson,
Seconded by NLT P M'Gee, and
we desire the Local Government Board to in-
form this Council under what Section of the Aet of 1898. or
what authority, they oppose the payments in full to the RO' g
Collectors of this Council of their just earningG now due."
SPECI AL MEETING.
The minutes of proceedings of a Special Meet;ng of t!'e
Cöunty Council, held in tho Council Chamber on Thursday, the
23rd day of December, 1909, at one o'clock, p m.
The busines specified in the requisition "To elect deleunfms to
represent the Council nt the Divisional Eser•utivo Meeting,
which is to be held on the 27th inst, fo select a Candidate
to
represent North Louth in Parliament.
Present :—
Tn the Chair: TJ Byrne, Esq, J P, V C.
Other memebrs--Messrs T J Dolan, C A Duffy, J p; J
Johnson, J Wynne, B Hamill, J P; P M'Gee. W A Dorm,
F,
Goodman, M O'Meara, J P; J H P Woods, J P,
•J
Quinn, J P; T Kinahan, and Joseph Dolan.
7
Mr Hamill objected to the meeting being held, as the mem-
bels did not get three clear days' notice of the meeting, in
cordance with S. O. No. 13.
After several members had expressed their opinions on Mr
Hamill's objection,
The Chairman gave his decikion that the Standing Order was
against holding the meeting, sufficient notice not having been
given to the members.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of proceedings of the Fii2ance Committee at then•
Meeting held on Monday, the 22nd day of November, 1909.
Present :—
In the Chair : Poter liughes, Egg, J P.
Other members—Joseph Johnson and James Wynne,
Esquires.
The Secretary submitted erreasurer's authority containing
payments for work in charge of the County Surveyor, and other
matters, which, on examination, was passed by the Committee.
The County Surveyor called Cho Committee's attention to the
fact that the Contractors, Mec,srs M 'Dougalss and Co., Drog-
heda, had supplied paper to this office which was not equal to
sample.
Ordered—That the paper in question be returned to the Con-
tractor, and that they be called upon to supply paper in ac-
cordance with the sample had by Mr Lynam.
The Secretary submitted the Collectors' irrecoverable arrears
list, in respect of the half-year ended 30th September last. He
informed the Committee that so far as he was aware the Collec-
tors had complied in every respect with the requirements Of
the Act in the preparation of these lists.
Ordered—That these lists be sent forward to County
would have to continue
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of the Finance Committee at their Meeting held
Monday, the 6th day of December, 1909.
Present :—
In the Chair: Mr C A Duffy, J P.
8
9
Council for ratification on the 25th inst, and finally to the Lo-
Minutes of the Finance Committee held on Monday, the 20th
cal Government Board for their ruling thereon.
Mr James Wynne called the Committees attention to [he
fact that the County Council had to pay yearly to the Great
Northern Railway Company a sum of C80() in respect of the Ar-
dee Railway guarartee. and he failed to see why the Council
should have to collect this money for the Great Northern Rall-
way Company.
The Secretary informed Mr Wynne and the Committee that
20 10
the matter of the Company ana collectors of was governed
•bs Act of Parliament, and until some alteration was made [n
the Act, itself he feared that the Company and the collectors
5 10
15 10
0 13
day of December, 1909.
Present :—
In the Chair: Mr J Wynne.
The following Payments were considered and order for
ment, viz, for Works in hands of the County Surveyor :—
Pay-
No. 459, Dundalk—TB Shevlin (Confract taken up
No. 76, Ardee—J Martin (Contract taken up)
No. 434, Dundalk—P Connolly (Contract taken up)
28
4
No. 282, Dundalk—TI Mathews, j vn, (Contract taken up) 20
Repairs to Clogherhead Pier
o
Total,
o
o
o
o
on
The following Payments were comidered and ordered for Pay-
ments, viz, for Works in hands Of the County Surveyor:—
Mintufes of the Finance Commit!ee at their Meetirg held on
Monday, the 10th day of January, 1910.
P resen t
rn the Chæir: P Hughes, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Messrs C A Duffy, J P; J Wynne. E Goodman,
W A Doran, P M'Gee, J M Johnson. and T KiÄhan.
The following Payments were conoidercd and ordered for Pay-
Repairs to County Court House
Repairs to Clogherhead Pier
Repairs to Giles' Quay
0 710
117 0
Total, 14 4
ment, viz:—
No. 164, Drogheda District—W M 'Guintness
(Contract taken up
Cll
No. 194, Drogheda District—J Shevlin (Con-
tract taken up
Repairs to County Court House
Repairs to Clogherhead Pier
7
0
5
o
4
7
o
The Secretary was instructed to write Mr Hoey to ask him to
meet Mr Lynam at Annagasson.
The Committee recommend that W Leonard, Superintendent
Sheep Dip Tank at. Ardee. be paid at the rate of 166 per week
during the month of November, 1909.
Receiver of Wrecks, Newry. Burial Carcases 21
Receiver of Wrecks. Drogheda, Burial Ca,rcases 0 IO
Cl 17 0
10
Two Temporary Clerks empl oyed in Secre-
tary's Office during Mr absence
Total,
Arising out of tlle last payment,
The following resolution was adopted
82
5
4
"That the Finance Committee consider that the
of the Council Office has been most unsatisfactory,
mend the County Council to ask for an inquiry by
tribunal."
PROPOSAL COMMWI'EE.
Management
and recom-
an impartial
NO.
No.
No.
11
4—To supply the above Court Houses with best Wigan Coal
at
per ton (delivered). Approved.
Contractor to supply coke, bogwood, fire lighting
.etc, Ot Market price, as required.
5—To prepare the (hurts and Court-Rooms for Assizes,
Quarter Sessions and Revision Sessions in (hunty
Court-House, not to exceed C15. Approved.
6—To insert •the County Advertisements, etc, in one Dun-
dalk and one Drogheda Paper, not to exceed 3d •..er
line. Approved.
at their
the 3rd
The Meeting stands adjourned to Monday, the 31st January,
1910.
T. F. FILGATE, Secretary.
Minutes of proceedings of the Proposal Committee
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, on Monday,
January, 1910, at 1 0'clock, p m.
Present :—
In the Chair: P Hughes, Esq, J P.
Other members—Messrs Y P Keely, J Wynne, J M 'Carthy,
P Woods, P M'Gee, and J M Johnson.
The following applications were considered
Applications for the period of One Year, from the 1st April,
1910, to 31st March, 1911.
No. I—To maintain the County Court House, Dundalk, for
year, form 1st April, 1910—not to exceed C30. Ap-
proved.
No. 2—To maintain the Court House, Drogheda, for one year,
from 1st April, 1910, not to exceed C20. Approved.
No. 3—To maintain the Court House, Ardee, for one year, from
1st April, 1910. not to exceed CIO. Approved.
Local Government (Ireland)
Act, 1898.
Louth County Council.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At their Fourth Quarterly Meeting held on Thursday,
20th January, 1910; and Adjourned to 24th
ÉZCU.• ary, 1910.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
At their Meetings held 20th January, 1910 ;
31
January, 1910; and 14th February, 1910.
Adjourned Proposal Committee
Held on Monday, 31st January, 1910.
Executive Comuittee Meeting
Held on 14th February, 1910.
Printed at "Democrat," Office, 1011 Ilda Ik
1
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of proceedings of the Louth County Council held in
the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Thursday, 20th
January, 1910.
Present : —
In the Chair—Peter Huyhes, Esq, J P.
Other Members—T J Byrne, J P; James Wynne, P P
Keeley, James M 'Court, J P; Bernard Hamill, J P ;Joseph
Dolan, Patrick Donegan J P • Patrick M 'Gee, Patrick Callan,
Laurence Moore, T Calian Macardle, J P; Joseph T Dolan,
M A; W A Doran, Thomas Maguire, Stephen Segrave, Denis
J Rath, Esquires.
A printed copy of the last Minutes of the Council having
'been transmitted to every member of the Council were taken
as read, in accordance with the Standing Order No 26, and
were confirmed.
ARDEE NO. 1 ROAD PAYMENTS.
RESOLUTION.
mposed by Mr J T Dolan,
Seconded by Mr P M 'Gee and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formulated by
the Ardee No 1 Rural District Council at their fourth Quar-
terly meeting, held on Tuesday, the 4th day of January, 1910
amounting to C814 Is ld, as set out on Form No 22 furnished
to the County Council, be and are hereby approved of.
DROGHEDA (LOUTH) PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr P Donegan,
Seconded by Mr L Moore, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formulated by
the Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union at their fourth
Quarterly meeting, lheld on Thursday, the 13th day of January,
19102 amounting to CG26 IOS 241, and set out, on Form No 22
furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby approved
of.
DUNDALK 11'OAD PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr T J Byrne,
Seconded by Mr J M 'Court, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formulated by
the Dundalk Rural District Council at their fourth Quarterly
2
meeting, held on Monday, the 10th day of January, 1910
amounting to Cl,621 lös Id, as set out on Form No 2')
furnished to the CountyCouncii, be and are hereby approved of.
Proposed by Mr T J Byrne,
Seconded by Mr J M 'Court, and
Resolved—That the recommendation contained in the
Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Committee held on the
3rd day of January, 1910, be and are hereby adopted by this
Council.
Proposed by Mr P P Keeley,
Seconded by Mr B Hamill.
That i',ie Minutes of the Finance Committee from page 7
to page IO be adopted, wit'il the exception of the paragraph
dealing with the management of the County Council Office,
and that the consideration of l'.)is paragrdph 'be adjourned to
the next meeting of the County Council, to be held on
Thursday, the 24th February, 1510.
DATES FOR QUARTERIN MEETINGS.
Proposed by Mr Byrne,
Seconded by Mr Doran, and
Resolved—That the County Council hereby detennine that
the following shall be the dates for the holding of the First
Quarterly Meetings of the Rural District Councils ond the
Proposal Committee, viz :—
Ardee No I—Tuesdav, 5th April, 1910.
Drogheda 14th April, 1910.
Dundalk—Monday, 11th April, 1910.
Proposal Committee—Monchy, 4th April. 1910.
The last day for lodging Notices and Ap )lications for above
Meetings wilf be Tuesday, 15th March, 1910.
Re Loy's eneroaelunenf on the publie road at Castletown,
the consideration of which was adjourned from last meeting—
The County Surveyor, in reply to the Chairman, stated that
the porch erected by Mr Loy at Castletown inside limit
prescribed by the Act was not yet removed. The Council
unanimously ordered that the Solicitor get instructions to
take proceedings forthwith at the Petty Sessions Court to have
the obstruction removed.
Re Haynestown Criminal Injury—The Solicitor also got
instructions not to appeal in this case. The amount of com-
pensation awarded at Quarter Sessions was C26.
Owing to tho Election for North Louth falling on the samo
day as tho County Council Meetinct, all other business was
adjourned until the next Meeting of the Council on the 24th
day of February, 1910.
3
ADJOURNED PROPOSAL COMMITTEE MEETING.
Held on Monday, 31st January, 1910.
Present—
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq, J P.
Other Hamill J P; C A Duffy J P; P P
Keeley, P Woods, J P• J T bolan (Ardee), M O'Meara, J P;
J H N B king, J P, Esquires.
The Committee was summoned to consider Tenders for the
following Works and Payments, viz
No I—To maintain the County Courthouse, Dundalk, for
one year, from 1st April, 1910, not to exceed C30—No Tender.
No 2—To maintain the Courthouse, Drogheda, for one year,
from the 1st of April, 1910; not to exceed C20.—No Tender.
No 3—To maintain tho Courthouse, Ardee, for one year,
from the 1st of April, 1910; not to exceed CIO.—No Tender.
No 4—To supply the above Courthouses with best, Wigan,
per ton (delivered). . Contractor to supply
Coal, at e
coke, bogwood, fire-lighting materials, etc, at market price, as
19s 5d, Ardee 258, P Curtis, Dundalk,
accepted. Drogheda, no Tender.
No 5—'iO prepare the Court and Court-rooms in County
Courthouse for Assizes, Quarter Sessions and I?evision Sessions ;
not to exceed C15.—B Patteson and Co's Tender, C12 12s,
accepted.
No 6—To insert the County Advertisements, etc, in one
Dundalk and one Drogheda paper; not to exceed 3d per line.-—
The "Drogheda Argus" and "Dundalk Democrat" accepted at
3d per line.
The County-at-large Payments were then examined and
recommended for paymetnt.
Arising out of payments for Furniture and Fittings supplied
for Crown and Peace Offices, the Committee instructed the
Secretary that, any payments amounting to an outlay of CIO
or over must in futuro be advertised.
Arising out of payments for Printing Vo ters' Lists, the Com-
mittee unanimorisly resolved that the Clerk of the Crown and
Peace be requested to conform strictly with the terms of the
printing contract, and to order only 100 copies of the Voters'
Lists at any one time; a second 100 copies only to be ordered
When first, supply is exhausted.
4
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Held on Monday,31st day of January, 1910.
In ithe Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq, J Y.
Other Members present—Messrs B Hamill, J P; C A Duffy,
J P; P P Keeley, P Woods, J P • J T Dolan (Ardee), M
O'Meara,J P; J and N King, J P.
The Committee was convened to consider the following
payments, viz : —
I—Order poyments for work in charge of the County
Surveyor.
2—0rder payments for extra Clerks in, Secre€ary's Office.
3—To consider County-at-large payments for quarter ended
31st December, 1909, and recommend same for payment.
The Ounty Surveyor did not present any payments.
The Secretary presented payments for the following
J F Finigan' two months' salary to 31/12/'09 C20 0 0
Two extra Clerks temporarily employed for
18 days, to 29/1/1910, during Mr Finigan's
absence throngfl illness
Total,
900
e29 0 0
Tho Committee ordered payments and signed Treasurer's
authority for same.
The County-at-large payments for quarter ended 31st
December, 1909. were t,hen submitted and recommended for
payment.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Held on Monday, 14th day of February, 1910.
In the Chair—Pflughes, Esq, J P.
Other Members present—Messrs C A Duffy. J P; P Woods,
J P; E cnodman, M O'Meara. .J P, and J Wynne.
T&'le Seeretary submitted the following payments
Burial of Carcases, Drogheda
Two i em pora,ry clerks. Secretary's Office 6 0 0 C7 1 (j
The Count v Surveyor subynitted payment* for
Road M:wintennnee in his eharge
13 0
Total
e71 14 6
for above was orclered and a Treasurer's anthorits•
duly signed for same.
5
ESTIMATE OF RATES.
The Secretary submitted his Estimate of Rates for the
ensuing year, which was fully considered, and on ithe motion
Of Mr Goodman; seconded by Mr Wynne, it was resolved—That
We approve of same and recommend its adoption by tho County
Council, and that a printed copy be furnishcd to each member
Of the Council, with an explanatory Table settin+ out in detail
the difference between this year's and: last year s Estimates.
PREPARING THE RATE BOOKS, ETC, ENSUING
YEAR.
Tho Cornmittee, after due deliberation, were of opinion thnt
Under the present system the work is most unsatisfactorily
done and, the expenses incurred (C180) excessive. They, there-
fore, recommend' that the Secretary be requested to undertake
this work in future at a fixed sum to be determined by tho
Council.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Meeting held on, Monday, 14th February, 1910.
Tho' Secretary submitted the Veterinary Inspeetors' Monthly
Roports, etc.
Mr Maxwell reported no cases of Constagious Disease in his
District.
Mr Donnelly reported 8 sheep at Drogheda affected with
Seal). The sheep were dippe€i twice during the month, and
are now free from Scab. Gates, rubbing-posts and premises
disinfected, and all loose wool collected and burned.
Mr Clinton reports that two outbreaks of Sheep Scab
in his district—one at Mountpleasant and the other
at Dundalk. The necessary steps for stamping out the disease
were immediately taken and both flocks of sheep were dipped,
etc. A supposed case of rabies in a dog at Knockbridge was
reported. T immediately visited the place and forwarded the
animal's head for examination,. Personally I do not believe
that the ease is ono Of rabies.
Local Government (Ireland)
Act, 1898.
Coulb Countv Council.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
OF
LOUTH CO. COUNCIL
At their Fourth Adjourned Quarterly Meeting
held on 'l'hursclay, 24th February, 1910.
Finance Committee
At their Meetings held 28th February, 14th March,
24th March, 11th April,
1910.
Sub-Committee
7th March, 1910.
Executive Committee
14th February; 11th April,
Meeting
1910.
1
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of proceedings cf the Louth Chill nty Council held in
Council Chamber, Courthouse, I)nnclalk, on Thursday, 24th
"ebruary,
Present
In the Chair—Peter Tinghes, Esq, J P.
Other •vlembers---Patriek Donegan, J p; Joseph T Dolan,
A ; benis J Rath, Luke J Elcock Thomas K i 11 nhan P
Callan. das M •Carthy, j P ; Laurence Ai 'k eone, T J Byrne,] P;
N Rinu, J P; James M •Court, J P; Bernard Hamill, J P;
QIN nn, J P; Edward Goodman. Peter Wocds, J P;
Finegan, William A Doran, James Wynne, Joseoh
M 'Ardle, Miehaei ()'Meara, J P; Joseph Dolan, Ganlstosvn ;
Thcnnas Maguire, Patrick M 'Gee, Esquires.
RESOLUTION.
Profrosed by N Kink".
Seconded by James M •Court, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of the last meeting! Of {110
held on the 20th day of January. 1910, having been
and n copy sent to each Member, were taken as read
and w€re confirmed.
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by T J n,vrre,
Seconded by j Wynne, and
the report of the County Surveyor. , as
ring on page No I oon the Sehedrile of Proposals circulated
to Member oi the Council. be taken as read, and en tered
(on the Minutes.
RESOLUTION.
P ropo. bv j T l)olan. M A.
Secondec by Patrick Donegan, and
Resolved— Thai, in neeordanc•e with Clause 21 of the Specie
Gration, the following Contracts are declared to be broken
No. 76. James Martin,
7.105 perches, Aelint to Tullykeel
and '-ran.
13—Nieholas M •Cabe. •110 perches. Saltor.stow)l noads.
• 31 Pntriek Connollv, •132 perches. Louth to Kilbride.
No lö9- Shevlin,
(iiil perches, Carrick robin to
I)rnmcah.
RESOLUTION.
P rolnsed by Bernard Finnegan,
Seconded by NV A Doran, and
Resolved That the Bye-laws with respect to the use , of
Locomotives be alter so as to include in Clause the throe
following bridges
(3) The Steel Deck Bridge over the Glenmore River f between
.Benagh and Glenmore.
(I) The Steel Deck Bridge over the I tallymaseanlon River,
between Proleek and Bellurgan.
(5) Jonesborough' Bridge, betwe€ll Carrucleaneena and' Feede.
CONTR Kcrs.
COUNTY AT LARGE.
No 3m The Tender of Stephen Malone, of Ardee wag accepted
at CIO, to maintain in repair the Ardee Courtfiouse for one
year from 1st April, 1910.
No '4—The Tender of A Murdock and Sous foc supplying ' the
Drogheda Courthouse with Coal for one year from 1st April,
1910, at 21s per ton, was accepted.
DROGHEDA (LOCTH) RURAL
No 8—The Tender of Thomas Kirk. Hainiinstown, Drogheda f
for maintaining for five years, from 1st April. 1910, 518 perches
of road from Drogheda io Dundalk. by Ballymal€inny, bet weer'
the Mearing 'of •Drogheda and Ferrara the' Schoolhouse
Kellystown was accepted at C3$ IOS Sd' per arrnttrn.
No Tender of Andrew Verdon.
of Cl tlisetown, Clog-
herhead, for maintaing five ars, from 1st April.
1910,
490 perches of road from Colton to the Sen, between the Cross
cepted at C 17 lös Od per annum.
, 11 Ile Tender of M iehaél Crtnsetown, for
litaintninin=r för five years 900 perches of the road from Drog-
Cross of Blackhall. was accepted at 5s Od per anntrm.
No 2-3—'l'lle Tender of Thomps Connor, of Lurgan boy. Tog•her,
for maintaining for one year from 1st Änril. 1910, 550 porches
of road from 00(-Yher to I)lrnany bs the Seashore, between the
Cross of .Kevnoldstown and the Seafield Road, was aeeepted
at €22 441.
. —'I'he Tender of N :eholas Garvov, of Tern»onfeckin. for
No 21
518 perches of
maintaining for one vear• from 1st Ä,pril. 1910.
road from John Callants in Ballymakinn.y. by 'I'll Ilyard'
Milltown, to Sandpit Chapel, was at•eeptecl at L'38 T 7s Od-
3
DUNDALK RURAL DISTRICT.
NO 1 —l'o Inake 94 perches of New Road ancl repair 201 per-
of ()ld Road Duffy's Corner to House on the
New Road, •sas referre€l back to the ICuval District Council.
No 22—tI'he 'l'o:cler of Charles -M 'Elroy, of Cavan. Dundalk.
for maintain iVn• five vcars from 1st Ayril, 191(), 445 perches
Of the road from Dunda)k to Dunle.er by Dun mahon, between
Prospect Gate and the Old River l"ane, was accepted at CI'2
NO '29—'1'he Tender Of Bernard Hanratty, of Killeneoole, for
litainfaining for five years from 1st Apy•il, 1910, perches
Of the road from Kingseourt to Dundalk Corderry, between
•John M •Donnell •s, in Louth, alid M in Cor-
derry. and Allardstown Cross, was accepted at L'37 JOS Od 1 er
NO 3S—'1'he Tender of Michael RfGlly, Of Walterstown, to
maintain for one year fronl 1st April, 1910. 382 perches of
road from Patrick Smyth •s Ilouse on tho Walterstown road
Cttrlinstown 10 1)arver road,
was necepted at C I I
1001.
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by T J Byrne,
Seconded bs N King, and
Resolved That all Works forni!llatucl l).v the Rural l) •.strie€
Conneils at their Fourth Quarterly Meetinu.s and approved i).v
this Council,
but not set bv Contract, be placed in the hands
Of the County Surveyor for Ihree months, new works excepted.
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by N B King.
Sf eonded by James Quinn, and
the Proposals for County at Large Paymenls
s n bmiftecl and passed bv the, Proposal Corn lill€tee and l" inance
COIItmittee meetinus held on Montlav. the 31st clas of
191(), nr,d are herebv approved of.
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by Hamill.
Seconded by J Wynne.
Ikesolve(lmThat the Pria»o.sals for Works fornnllafed by [he
"Otjosal Comtnittee at Font Th Quarterly Meeting: hold
Monday. the 3rd dnv cf Januarv ard the Contracts
at their adjourned meeting held on Nlcmclay, the 31st of
'January, 1910, be and are hereby approved of.
4
RESOLUTION.
J T Dolan,
Seconded by W A Doran, and
Resolved— That the Propcsars for Works formulated by [lie
Arche No I Rural District Council at their vourth Quarterly
meeting held on Tuesdav. the 4th day of oanuar.v, 1910, and
set Oilf 011 Form No 20 Till mi.sh€d to the (ten lit •c Cotineil, and
the Contracts entered into at their nd meeting held
011 Tuesday, the 1st dav of February, and aro herel).v
.ooprovecl of, and thot tho Secretarv be now authorised to affixt
the Seal of the Council to same.
RESOLUTION'.
Proposed bv John Dolan.
Seconded by Thornas Maguire, anci
ResolvedmTha€ the Proposals for Works Toy 1 lie'
1,011 th Rtrral District of Drogheda Union at their Fourth Quar*
ferly meeting held on Thursdav, the 13th day of January, 1910,
alid set out on Form NO 20 furnishecl to the Citlillty Council,
and the Contracts entered into at their acliournecl rne•cting held
on Thursday, the 3rd day of February,
1910.
be and are herei).v
approved of, ancl that the Seere!ary Ive now authorised €0 affix'
the Common Seal of the Council to same.
TIESOIXTIOS.
Proposed by Hamill.
Seconded by James M 'Court, anci
the Proposals for Works by the'
l"clirill Q narterl
Dundalk Rural District Council at their
meeting held Oil Mond •y. the 10th dav of Jan uarv,
1910.
set out on Form .Xo 20 furnished to Che County Council,
the Cortrac•ts entorecl i rto at their adjourned meeting hel(l
oa Mondav. the 31st og .Jnnuar•.v. 1910, be and are hereby
anprovocl of, and that the be now authorised to affix:
the Corn mon Seal of the Connell to same.
rtESOLt,'T10S.
Prop".setl Lv B gamill.
Seconded by James Wynne,
the Mirutes of Prcweedings of the P voposal
Committee at their Fon rth Adiourned Quarterly Sleeting held
on Moncln.y• the 31st dav ef
and the recom-
menclati011.s [herein be and are horeby approved of.
5
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by James Wynne,
Seconded by N B King, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance
Committee held on the 31st day of January and the 14th
February, 1910, and the Payments therein contained, be and
.are hereby approved of.
RESOLUTION.
Proposed bv James Wynne,
Seconded N B King. and
Resolved—That we hereby approve of the Recommendation
•eontained in the Minutes of the Finance Committee held on
Monday, the 14th day of February, 1910, that the Secretary
in future undertake the preparation of the Rate Books and
Demand Notes, etc, and that we fix the remuneration for
same at the sum of e
per annum.
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by D J Rath.
Seconded by E Goodman, and
Resolved—That Mr Donegan be re-appointed as Member of
the Drogheda School Attendance Comrmttiee.
Approved of.
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by W A Doran,
Seconded by Edward Goodman, and
Resolved—That, a Special Meeting of the County Council be
called to investigate the alleged irregularities in tho County
'Council Office.
After considerable discussion, it was finally decided to hold
investigation at the next meeting of Elle County Council
April next.
RESOLUTION.
LOUDEN v. EASTWOOD ESTATE, IN CHANCERY.
Proposed bv J T Dolan, Esq, M A (Ardee)
Seconded by P Hughes, Esq, J P, Chairman, and
Resolved—That we, the Members of the Louth County
Ouncil
, ,being strongly of opinion that this case was one of
eXtrerne •urgency, unanimously resolved on the 28th May last
to request the Estates Commissioners to reinstate this tenant in
his former holding at Castletown, in this county, before the
expiration of the Evicted Tenants (Ireland) Act, 1907, and as
nothing definite appears to have yet been done towards pur-
chase of the farm from the Court of Chancery, and as the said
Act expires at May next, we now ask the Leader Of the United.
Irish Parliamentary Party to bring the matter before Parlia-
ment at the earliest opportune moment, so as to ascertain the
cause of the unnecessarv delay in dealing with this case ; that
a statement, of the true facts of the case be forwarded to each
member of the Party, the Chief Secretary for Ireland, tho
Estates Commissioners, and the Court of Chancery.
Unanimously. adopted.
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by Mr Edward Goodman,
Seconded Ily Mr James M 'Carthy, J P, and
we, the Members Of the Louth County
Council, desire at this crisis in the affairs of our countr.y to
express our implicit confidence in the political wisdom and
integrity of the United Irish Parliamentary Party uncler the
leadership of Mr John Redmond. whose straightforward
Nationalist policy is lucidly and firmly defined in hrs masterly
speech in the Gresham Hotel, Dublin, and again in his able
reply to Mr Asquith in the House of Commons, feeling assured
that the Party will take that course which, in their opinion,
is best calculated to lead up to Home Rule, tho goal of every
that copies of this Resolution be sent
Irish Nationalist •
Mr Redmond, anci Mr Joseph Nolan. M P for South Louth.
Approved of, Mr Hamill dissenting.
Louth County Council Orrice,
Dundalk, 16th February, 1910.
To the Chairman and Members of the County Council.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,
I beg to present the Estimate of Rates for General and'
Separate Charges for the Financial Year commencing on 1st
April, 1910. The subjoined tables for the greater part explain
themselves, and it is only necessary that I should make a short
statement in explanation Of the slight increases proposed.
As to County Charges, the amount you require to malw
provision for is practically the same as last yea r. except that
the portion chargeable to Urban Districts and Rural) is some—
what Ia rger, and that chargeable to Rura Districts is less.
The different items to which Urban Districts contribute will De-
furnished to tho Clerks of these Districts with your Demand.
As to Union Charges. The Demand furnished bv the Guard-
ians of Ardee No 1 Union is increased by C73. 'In Drogheda
there is a decrease ofC'200 and in Dundalk decrease of C711.
As to Rural Districts. in Ardee the Demand from the Rural'
District Council is the same as last year. In Drogheda there is.
a decrease of Ell—too small to affect a rate—and in Dundalk
7
yon are required to provide more than last year.
•s
regards the other items of exoenditure applicable to Rnral Dis-
Charges—that is, Road Works, Agricultural and Technical
Instruction, Education Act Expenses; Collectors' K'emuneration
and irrecoverable arrears of Rate, I have ascertained that the
amount estimated for last vear (taking these neads of account
collectively) was considerably less than it should have been,
judging by actual expenditure, and this is more appa rent in
D ufidalk than in either of the two Rural Districts; also, for
next' year, the County Surveyor anticipates au increase in
respect of Road Work of CIOO each in Drogheda and Dundalk
Rural Districts.
As regards receipts applicable to Rural District Charges (and
Unions), I find the amount estimated last year was excessive,
and have reclueocl this figure in the present Estimate by C300
spread over the three contributory areas.
It is of course, understood that an obligation rests on the
Councii to provide funds in advanee for the various Board of
Guardians and Rural District Councils in the- County, and for
Richmond District I ,uuatie Asylum. For this purpose it is
necessary that the Cryunt.y Treasurer should nave at his dis-
PO.sal a large credit balance, and in my opimon that balance
should be somewhat la rger than it is at present. Not infre-
quently these payments have Io 'be delayed, to the ineon-
V enienee of the-public bodies concerned, and in this eonnection
the Transfers ot'lered at last Quarterly Meeting to Guardians,
District Councils and Richmond Asvlum have beery delft •ced for
of funds, although in some instances urgently called for.
The credit required for these advance payments stands,
Of COurse, to the credit of the District from which it was levied,
and on tho 31st March, (our last completed year) the
amount, standing to credit of Dundalk Rural District Charges
Was only C930, as compared with C3,176 on the 31st March,
1906. Under this head (i.e., District Charges) the Estimate
has been slightly inflated, and more so in Dundalk than in
either of tho two Rural Districts. On the whole Estimate the
net increase is 2d in the e in Ardee and Drogheda Districts,
and 4d in the C in Dundalk.
In my opinion the amount you are asked Co provide is no
more than is absolutely needed for the requirements of the
Gunty.
The Table of Separate Charges (annexed) esplains itself, and
contains only the figures necessary to meet each separate
charge.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
T. r. FILGATE,
Secretary-
8
RESCLUHON.
Proposed by N B King,
Seconded by T J Esrne, and
Resolved—That tho Secretary's Estimate of Kates for the
amounts required for the ensuing Financial Year which includes
one penny in the C under the Agricultural anci Technical ln-
struction Acts. as submitted to and adopted by the Finance
Committee at thair meeting held on the 14th day Of February,
1910. as set out on Forms No 45 46 furnished to each
Member of the Council, be reduced 2d in the C all round on
the three Rural Districts.
Correspcnftlence was referra to, the Finance Chmmittee
Meeting.
NOTICES OF MOTION.
NO I—Mr Rath's Notice of Motion re Sheds at Clogherhead
Pier, to be. nequired for I.enefit cf Fishermen, was not moved.
2—Mr Ardee, Steam Rolling.
3—Tree Planting.
4—Alterntion of Polling Districts was referred to the
Finance Committee.
The above were referred to the Finance Committee.
MR. J. DOLA N'S NOTICE OF MOTION.
Proposed by Mr Dolan, Ga.ulstown,
Seconded by Mr T Kinahan, and
Resolved. "That we tender our best thanks to tho National-
ist3 of North Louth, especially the patriotic priests, who sup-
ported Mr R Hazleton in the grand effort to save our county
from tha stain put upon it of not being found in the fighting
line with the other counties of Ireland in the present great
crisis, making Louth a word of reproach wherever an Irishman
9
Present :—
In the Chair—Petor Hughes, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Chas A Duffy, J P; P Woods, J P;
Goodman, M O'Meara, J P; and James Wynne, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted the following payments :—
Burial of Carcases, Drogheda
Two temporary Clerks Secretary's Offce
The C; •unty Surveyor submitted payments for
Road Maintennnee in his charge
Total
64 13
C71 14
6
0
6
is to be found either in exile or at home."
Mr Goodman proposed.
Mr Magee seconded, and
a copy of this Resolution be sent to
priests referred to."
Passed unanimously.
FIN.\XCE COMMITTEE.
the
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Conneil Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
on Monday, 14th February, 1910.
Payments for above were ordered and a Treasurer's authority
•eduly signed f
or same.
ESTIMATE OF RATES.
The Secretary submitted his Estimate of Rates for the
year, which was fullv considered, and on the motion
Of Mr Goodman. seconded by Mr Wynne, it was resolved—That
we approve of same and recommend its adoption by the County
Conncil, and that n printed copy be furnished to each member
"Of the Cornrcil. with an explanatorv Table setting out in detail
the difference between this year's and last year's Estimate.
PREPARING THE RATE BOOKS, ETC, ENSUING
YEAR.
The Committee, after due deliberation, were of opinion that
Under tho present system the work is most unsatisfactorily
done and the expenses incurred (C180) excessive. They, there-
fore, reromrnend that the Secretary be requested to undertake
this work in future at a fixed sum to be determined by the
Council.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the above Committee held in the
Cejuneil Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, at one o'clock p m on
Monday, the 28th day of February, 1910.
Present :—
In the Chair—B Hamill, Esq, J P.
Other Members—E Goodman, M O'Meara, .T P; J Wynne,
J M'Ardle, J T Dolan, M A (Ardee); and N B King, J P:
—Esquires.
10
Minutes of last meeting were read and confirmed. The Conv
mittee were convened to consider the following business :—
I—To order payments for works in the hands of the County
Surveyor.
2—To order payments, Secretary's Office.
3—Notiees of Motion by Mr J T Dolan (Ardee) :—
(a) 1 beg to propose that the County Council appoint a
Committee to consider the question of Steam Rolling the -
Roads and Lynam's report thereon, and to invite thcy
opinions of the Rural District Councils thereon.
(b) I beg to propose that a Committee be appointed to
inquire into the advisability of adopting a small scheme of
Tree Planting.
(c) I beg to pronose that a Committee be appointed to
examine whether it would be cf any advantage to alter
the Polling Districts of the Cotl nty in accordance with the
powers (riven under the recent Act.
(Signed) Joseph T Dolan, Ardee.
11
ough of Drogheda, and in respect of this payment Drogheda-
does not receiv• anv relief whatever from anv part of the
County of Louth. •But, on the other hand, Drogheda is re-
quired under the Demand of the County Council to pay its fr!l
roportion, according to valuation, of a further salary paid to
ir Charles Cameron by the County Council as county analyst,
which is obviously unfair to Drogheda, and I shall be glad to
know whether the County Council are disposed to have 'ohe
matter adjusted.
Yours faithfully,
J. B. CONNOLLY.
The Committee ordered payments for works in
flie hands of the County Surveyor, amounting
to
Sheep Dip Order
And payments for Secreta.' y's Office
'l'ofal
A Treasurer's authority w2s signed for same.
14
11
45
6
O
C71
5
5
3
O
8
11
The following correspondence, Odjonrned from the last meet.
of the County Council, was considered
(I) Application from H Chamberlain, Receiver of Constabu-
lary, for expenses of extra police in Jilly, 1909, amounting tm
18s 4<1. The Proposal Committee on 'the 8th of November,
1909, declined to recommend the County Council to discharge
same. The Committee adjourned the further consideration of
the matter until the next meeting of the €ounty Council in
April next.
FOOD ANI) DIWGS ACT.
Tho Department of Agriculture, etc, reported their Inspector
took a sample of butter from a trader in Collon which was
found on. ana lysis to contain 3.6 per cent more water than was
allowed by the Act. A prosecution was ordered.
The following letter was read :
Town Clerk's Office, Drogheda,
29th December, 1909.
Dear Sir,
The Corporation of Drogheda pay a salary of C2() per
annum to Sir Charles Cameron as public analyst for the Bor-
The Committee declined to entertain the matter, which cannot
next
adjusted until the Drogheda Corporation got their
Provisional Order.
Mr Dolan's three Notices of Mnf'oo. viz. Steam Rond Rolling,
Tree Planting, and Alteration of Pelling Districts; also
Ring's Motion re Drainage. were referred to the following Sub-
('Ommittee. viz •.—Messrs Hamill, Goodman. O'Meara, M' ynne,
'J H -a' Ardle, J T Dolan (A rdee), King, the Chairman, Vice-
Chairman and P Donegan : the Committee to meet on Monday,
the 7th March, 1910. at .one o'clock, in the Council Chamber.
Mr (Y M earn uncler the notice of the Committee a
enmnplaint nonde by the sheep owners relative to the June Sheep
DiPI)ing Order in Ifs district, the locality being so cold sheep
Could not be clipped and dipped in time for the Warrenpoint
Fair, and requested the Secretary to write to the Secretary
Of Down County Council relative to the matter.
Mr Goodman explained that the County Council of Down
could not vary the Order 111 favour of Louth sheep ; that
Order did not compel owners to clip their sheep before dipping..
The matter theri dropped.
SUB-COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Sub-committee held in i he
Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Monday, the 7th
Of March, 1910, at one o'clock.
Present
Tn the Chair—Thomas J Byrne, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Nicholas B King, J P ; James Wynney
Joseph H M' Ardle, and Joseph T Dolan, M A, Esquires.
ROLLING—The County Surveyor's Report rend.
The Committee directed the Secretary to write to the Local
G Overnment Board and to the Board of Works re loan ; they
also directed the Secretary to write to the Co blin, co
Meath, Armagh, Monaghan and Down Councils to obtain in-
formation on the subject.
TREE PLANTING was referred to the County Committee.
POLLING BOOTHS was referred to the next meeting.
12
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee held m
the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Monday the
14th March
, avl(), at one o'clock.
Present
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Edward Goodman, Charles A Duffy, J I';
James Wynne. Michael O'Meara, J P; and Joseph H M 'Ardle,
Esquires.
The Secretary submitted the following payments
9 11
2 11
Works in Charge of County Survqyor
Salaries: Secretary's Office
Billposting, Valuation Revision
Sheep Dip
Recel ver of Wrecks
Education Act
Total
A Treasurer's authority was signed for same.
16
1
3
1
o
C37
0
15
6
5
6
0
6
6
Dredging was referred to the County Surveyor for report.
The Committee next considered the correspondence which
Nv-as as follows, viz
25th October, 1909.
Local Government Board letter giving the County Council
power to alter Parliamentary Polling Stations. When a scheme
has been adopted by the Council at a Quarterly Meetinx to be
submitted to the Local Government Board. 'lhere shall be a
-separate scheme for each Parliamentary Division.
9th December, 1909.
Local Government Board letter relative to the Collection of
the Poor Rate, and refer to Section 83 (5) of the Local Govern-
ment (Ireland) Act: 1898.
See copy of President's reply.
10th December, 1909
Letter from Mr Healy on same subject.
13th December,
Letter from Mr O'Connell on same.
16th December,
Letter from Mr Healy re Mr Louden's eviction.
•a
1909.
1909.
21st January, 1910.
Local Government Board Order, Bnwntaaffe water supply,
area of Louth Rural District of Drogheda.
13
27th January, 1910.
Lotter from the Departinent of Agriculture, Food and Drugs
Act.
January, 1910.
Letter from General Council— Tobaeco Growing and re Rates
Oil inbourers' Cottages: a Vill enable -Kilral District Coun-
cils to pay the Rates ill respect of Labourers' Cottages.
28th January, 1910.
fi•oxn the Secretary of the County Committee of Agri-
iVoeds and Agricultural Seeds (l reland) Act 1.90," ;
also Resolution asking the consent of the County Councii to put
tho aforesaid Aet into operation.
11th March.
Letter from the Department of Agriculture ancl Technical
Instruction on same subject.
7th February.
Circular from Local Government Board. Inebriates Act, 1898.
16th February.
Fertilisers and
Letter from Department of Agriculture.
Feeding Stuffs Act, 1906, and Regulations.
22nd February.
Cirenlar from the Local Govern tnent Board. The Cinemato-
graph Aet, 1,909.
23rd February.
County Wicklow Home for inebriate Women.
23rd February.
Dern of Order the Diseases ot
Äet,
8th March.
Local Government Board lotter of Poor Rate.
'24th Februar3%
Local Government Board letter, Estate Duty Grano
20th February.
Loeal Governnjent Board letter, Food Drugs Act.
10th March.
General Con neil's increased subscriptions.
19th February.
C. P. S. , I) nnleer, Childrens Act. C. P. S. , Dundalk Child-
Act.
10th
11
Criminal Injury, Conpolly, I{fissan.
'23rd Ft bruary.
Criminal Inj nry, Haynestown Church Body.
r15
The Seeretary submitted tho following payments, viz
Works in charge of County Surveyor, arnount-
ing to
Secretary's Office, amounting to
Total
15 5
72 1 11
Clö5 17
Criminal Injury, Flynn, Castletown.
12th Marell.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings Of the Finance Cornmittee held in
the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Thursday, the
24th day of March, 1910, at one o'clock.
Present :—
111 the Chair—Thomas J Byrne, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Bernard Hamill. J P; and Joseph
Johnson, Esquires.
The Committee ordered payment for the following
Works in charge of the County Surveyor,
amounting to
Secretary's ()ffice
Clerical Staff
Conveyance of Prisoners (Drogheda and Dun-
daik)
Total
17
0
0
16 17 11
4
19
5
A Treasurer's authority was signed for same.
The Committee considered the following correspondence,
Letter from Messrs Corr and O'Connor, solicitors, Crossma-
glen. re Mr Connolly's Criminal Injury.
Bye-laws with respect €0 Locomot ives. 'I'llO Committee
structed the Secretary to employ the Council's Solicitor to at-
tend to same.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Fintwnce Conuniffee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dn ndaik,
on Monday, the 11th day of April, 1910.
P resent—
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq. J P.
Other Members—Thomas Kinahan and James Wynne, Esqs.
A Treasurer's authority was signed for same.
CORRESPONDENCE.
The following letter was read from the Dundalk Gas Com-
bany, re Lighting of County Courthouse
8th April, 1910.
bear Sir,
Further to our eonverkation of to-day with reference to the
lighting of (k) untv Courthouse. behalf of the Dundalk
Gas Company, beg to offer to take down 'the old pipes and
to renew same, but of a larger size. to put in all new Incan-
deseent Burners, and to thoroughly illutninate the Record and
Crown Courts and Hall, for the sum of Thirty Pounds (C30) ;
any renewing of piaster to be done by the Council.
I enclose
a sample of rust which was taken from the pipes in Courthouse
LY our plumber recently,- which, shows that they are in a very
niefficient condition.
Yours truly,
GEORGE AIRTH, Manager.
Town Hall, Dundalk,
6th April, 1910.
Comerford wrote asking for a refund of C 179 Ms which
overlcdgecl, The refund was recomtnended by the Commit-
Francis Street, 8th April, 1910.
Letter Mr O'Connell, Solieitor, ro o•iyninal Injury
Applications.
bent' Sir,
I -beg to report,on the fol lowing claims heard before the
Court Judge, at Dundalk on the 4th inst
Peter Flannagan. Paughanstown—C80 claimed. A decree
was made, to be levied off the D. E. I).'s Dromin and
brumeat•. do advise an appeal to be talü•.ii, as the injury
Was ('learlv malicious.
.Janu•s Toa]. .Mnehgrnnge— L'20 claimed.
A decree for
vivas granted. to be levied off the E. D. of Greenore.
advise an appeal to be taken, as the evidence of malice was very
shadowy.
16
William R ussell, Dundalk-wC7 IOS Od claimed. Deereo, CG
IOS Od.
I)aniel Leavy, Dundalk—-C22 IOS Od claimed. Decree, C 13
IOS Od.
Francis Short, Dundalk—C12 elaimed. Decree, C(i.
The foreuoing three claims were for damage to plate-glass
windows' r do not advise an appeal in a 115' of the eases.
'l'he
Urban Council will have the option of appealing. Mr Short
has already lodged notice of appeal.
I shall Ge pleased to have the Council's instructions.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNiC1,r,.
The Council approved of same.
United Irish League,
Dublin, March. 1910.
Lettei• from Mr Joseph Devlin requesting {Ile election of
Delegates to Divisional Conventions.
The County Council is
Ontitled to four delegates for each Parliamentary division with-
in the district.
CUNA1t'D COMPANY AND IRISH rNTEüESTS.
The Lord Mayor of Dublin wrote intimating that an All-
Ireland meeting will be held on Wednesday, the 20th day of
April, 1910.
As this Meeting will be held before the next meeting of the
County Council- the Committee suggest that the Chairman and
any other mem jers of the Council who could attend this very
important meeting should do so.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of proceedings of the Executive Committee at their
Meeting held the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 14th February, 1910.
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq. J P.
Other Members present Charles .8 buffy. J P: J.
Woods. J P; Goodman, Michael O'Meara, .J P;
James Wynne.
The Secretary submitted the Veterinary Inspectors' montliJy
roport. etc.
Mr Maxwell reported no eases of Contagious Disease in his
district.
Mr Donnelly reported. eight/ sheep at Drogheda affected with
Scab. The sheep were dipped twice during the month, and are
17
now free from Seal). Gates, rubbing posts, and premises disin-
feetecl, and all loose wool eoll€ ctecl ancl burned.
Mr Clinton reports that two outbreaks of Sheol) Seab occurred
in his district—one at Mountpleasant and the other at Dun-
dalk. The necessary steps for stamping out the the disease
immediately taken, and both flocks of sheep were dipped
ete A supposed ease of Rabies in a clog at Knockbriclge, was
reported. He immediately visited the place and forwarded the
animal's head for examination. Personally he did not believe
that tho ease is one Of ralbte.s.
EXECUTIVE COMMI'I"I'EE.
Minutes of proceedings of the above Committee held in
the Courthouse on Monday. the 11th of April, 1910, at 1.30
o'clock.
In the Chair—Chas A Duffy. Esq, J P.
Other Members present—'l'lunnas Kina han and Jas Wynne.
Esq nires.
The Secretary read a report from the Veterinary Inspectors.
Maxwell reported he attended and examined the usual
fairs and markets held in his district during the month.
have been no eases of contagious or infectious disease reported.
Mr Clinton, reported 2 sheep at Mountpleasant. 5 ill Dundalk.
and 3 at Illiteetra. affected witli Sheep Scab, all of which were
detained, and the usual precaution taken, etc.
Local Government (Ireland)
Act, 1898.
Coutb County Council.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At their First Quarterly Meeting held
on THURSDAY. 21st APRIL, 1910.
Finance Committee
At their Meetings held 18th April ;
25th April ;
9th May, 1910.
Proposal Committee
9th May, 1910.
Executive Committee Meeting
9th May, 1910.
1
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Lou th Counts Council at their
irst Quarterly Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court-
house, Dundalk, on Thursdays the 21st das of April, 1910.
Present : —
In the Chair—James M 'Court, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Bernard Hamill, J P. Peter Woods, J P;
O'Meara, J P; -Charles A Duffy, J P; .Jcseph T Dolan,
Al A ; Laurence M 'Keown, 'l]lomas Kinahan, John Dolan,
m rnanl Finnegan and Joseph M Johnson, Esquires .
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by Mr Bernard Hamill,
Seconded by Mr J Dolan ,and
Resolved—That the Minutes of the last Meeting of the
Council, held on the 24th Day of February last, having been
Printed and a copy sent to€ach Member, •be taken as read, and
eonfirrned.
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by Mr Charles A Duffy, J P.
Seconded by Mr Bernard Finnegan, and
esoIved—Thnt the Payments and I?eeommendaiion
tailled in the Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee
•at their Meetings, held on the 28th February, 14th March,
24th March and 11th
firmed by this Council.
Proposed by
Seeonded by
Resolved •That the
April, 1910, be ancl are hereby con-
RESOI,CTION.
Charies A Duffy, „
Mr Peter Woods, J P,
County Cour.eil hereby
and
detennine that
2
the following shall be the dates for holding of the Second
Quarterly Meeting of the Rural District Councils and Proposal
Committee : —
Rural of Ardee No. 1, Tuesday, 5th July.
Rural District of Drogheda (Louth), Thursday, 14th July.
Rural District of Dundalk, Monday, 11th July.
Proposal Committee, Monday, 4th July.
The last day for lodging Notices and Applications will
Tuesday, 14th June.
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by Mr Dolan,
Seconded by Mr Rinahan, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formulated
by
the Ardeexo. I Rural District Council at their First Quarterly
Meeting, held on Tuesday, the 5111 April, 1910, amounting to
•C734 Is 10d, as set out in Form No. 22 furnished to the
County Council, be and are hereby approved of.
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by Mr M 'Keone,
Seconded by Mr Dolan, (Drogheda), and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formulated Dey
the • I jonth Rural District of Drogheda Union at their First
Quarterly Meeting, held on Thursday, the 14th April, 1910,
amounting to C7ö4 1,9s 911, as set out on Form No. '22 furnished
to the County Council, be and are hereby approved of.
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by Mr 'Woods, J P,
Seconded by Mr Bernard Hamill, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formulated
the Dundalk Rural District Council at their First Quarterly
Meeting, held on Monday, the 11th day of April, 1910,
amounting to Cl,325 8s 8d, as set out on Form So 22 furnished
to the County Council. be and are hereby approved of.
3
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by Mr Bernard Hamill, J P,
Seconded by Mr Duffy, J P, and
Resolved—That the Secretary's Estimate Of K'ates as altered
by the County Council at their Meeting held on Thursday,
the 24th February, 1910, be and is hereby adopted by this
Council, viz—A rdee NO. I, Is Ild on Land and 3s 3d on
Hereditaments; Drogheda (Louth), 2s on Land and 4s '2d
on Hereditaments; Dundalk, 3s on Land and 4s on Here-
ditaments, which includes one penny in the under the
Agricultural and Technical Instruction Acts; and also that
the several Rates in respect of Separate Charges, as set : nt
Form 45, be also adopted by this Council ; and that the
Secretary be authorised, in accordance with Article 78, to
public Notice of said rates having been made.
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by Mr Peter Woods, e,
Seconded by Mr Do!an, M A, and
Resolved—That the Chairman, Mr Duffy, and Mr Hamill
authorised on behalf of the Council to sign the Rate Rooks
and Collectors' Warrants in respect of thc Financial Year
ending 31st March, 1911, and that the Secretary place the
Common Seal of the Council on same.
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by Mr J M Johnson,
Seconded by Mr B Hamill, J P, and
Resolved—That our Solicitor be instructed to advise the
Council on the Cinematograph Aet, as to its appliances and
working. That we grant a Provisional Licence under the Act
to Mr Deene for a tent at Castlebellingham for three months
•at 5s per month, the Licence to be withdrawn should any
objectionable pictures be displayed.
4
RESOLUTION.
Propo.zed by Mr Thomas Kinahan,
Seconded by Mr Michael O'Meara, J P, and
Resolved—That we, the Members of the Louth County
Council, having heard with profound astonishment the extra-
ordinary rep'y given by the Chief Secretary for Ireland to Mr
Hazleton's question in the Houge of Commons relative to
reinstatement of Joseph Louden to his former holding, as the
Chief Secretary must have been grossly misinformed in the
matter, we hereby appoint the Chairman, Mr J M 'Court, and
a su b-eommitiee
Mr Joseph Dolan, Ardee,
furnish the
facts of
the case
for
true
to
the information of the Irish Party, and request
them to again urge on the Government the absolute necessity
there is to have this tenant reinstated in Ills former holding
accordance wih the provisions of the Evicted Tenants (Ireland)
Act, 1907.
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by Mr Dolan, Drogheda,
Seconded by Mr Finnegan, and
Resolved—That the Secretary be mnd is hereby directed to
furnish in future, and as soon as may be, to the Clerks of the
Unions and the Urban and Rural District Councils within the
County of Louth, copies of the printed Minutes of the County
Council .and the various Committees, copies of all Estimates
of Rates and Explanatory Tables and other Documents eon-
taining or relating to Financial Proposals affecting the County,
in order that such Clerks may, when considered necessary,
roport thereon to their respective Councils.
RESOLUTION.
Proposed by Mr Joseph T Dolan,
Seconded by Mr Michael (Y Meara, and
IMesolved—That this Meeting proceed to appoint Delegates
to represent the County Council at any Convention of the
Cnited Irish League for the Divisions of South and North
5
Louth which may be called within this year, as the li'ules of
the League require that Delegates be nominated in the early
part of each year before occasions for any Conventions arise,
viz : —
SOUTH LOUTH.
I—Luke J Eleock, Laurence Street, Drogheda.
2—James M 'Carthy, Newfoundwell, Drogheda.
a—Thomas Maguire, Sheetland, Drogheda.
4
William A Doran, Tullykeel, Ardee.
NORTH LOUTH.
I—Charles A Duffy, Seatown Place, Dundalk.
2-—James M 'Court, Clanbrassii Street, Dundalk.
3 —Michael O'Meara, Omeath, Newry.
A—Joseph H M' Ardle, Rampark, Ballymascanlon, Dundalk.
RESOLtiT10N.
Proposed by Joseph T Dolan,
Seconded by Bernard Hamill: J P, and
Resolved—That a Committee be appointed to get the Rate
books of the County revised and the demolished houses finally
Struck off, and to examine whether it is not possible to have
the yearly Rating Lists compiled in our 'Offices, instead of 'n
the General Valuation Office.
RESOIXTION.
Proposed by Mr B Hamill, J P,
Seconded by Mr Charles A Duffy, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby approve of the recommendation
Of the Finance Committee at their Meeting held on Monday,
the 18th day of April, 1910—1 hat as the Collectors have
lodged the full amount Of their Warrants for year ended 31st
nerat;.on, viz
Patrick
Patrick
Patrick
Cha rles
Patrick
Patrick
March, 1910, they are entitled to the balance of their
74 17
31 16
17 10
87 18
remu-
M 'Donnell
M 'Callough
E -M'Cann
HIT ghes
Clnskey
100
71
83
s
18
o
2
10
d
8
9
8
0
Peter M'l)onnell
John Woods
and we order payment for same, subject
Local Government Board
RESOLCTION.
Proposed by Mr Duffy, J P,
to the sanction of the
Seconded by Mr Joseph T Dolan, M A, and
Resolvcd—nat we beg to tender the expression of our deep
regret at the death of our late esteemed colleague, Mr James
Quinn, J P, and beg to convey to his relatives and fr•ends our
most sincere sympathy in their affliction. That copies Of this
resolution be sent to Mrs Quinn and Rev B Quinn.
RESOLUTION.
by Mr Joseph T' Dolan,
Sezoncled by Mr Tltomos Kinahan, and
Resolved—That we. the County Council of Louth, express
011 r sincere sense of the serious injury which Ireland would
suffer from the tl'2n.sfer of tme American Mails from Queens-
town, and request the Cunard Com,pan.y to reconsider their
decision.
And ask our countrymen in America to agitato
against the proposed change, and request the intervention of
their Government in the regulation of the mail contracts so
as to overt this loss to Irish trade.
'Ille following correspondence was referred back to the ocl-
journed meeting of the Council in May next :—
7
I—Claim from Royal Irish Constabulary for extra police
expenses in July, 1909—Co 18s.
from St Briäget's Home, Wexford, asking
the Council to become contributory to their Women's Inebriate
Home at the rate of 5s (id per week per patient.
3—Applieation from Irish County Councils General Council
1 eques€ing the Council to increase their annual affiliation fee
from to Cl().
4—Letters from Catholic Defence Society regarding the un-
fair treatment accorded to the Catholic officials serving in the
Veterinary Branch of the Irish Agricultural Department.
Return of admission to Richmond Lnnatic Asylum was ye-
ferred to the Finance Committee.
Proposal from Dundalk Gas Company to relight the County
Courthouse was rejected.
The Council decided to withdraw €110 appeal James Toal's
Criminal Injury Case.
FINASCE COMMITTEE.
Meeting held ill the C%uneil Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
Monday, the 18th of April, 1910, at one o'clock.
Presen t : —
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Members—P Hamill, J P; E Goodman, J Wynne.
King, J P; and T J Byrne, P, Esquires.
COLLECTORS'
The Secretary submitted the following payments, VIZ
1 10
54 11
0 11
74 17
Struck
9
ARREAR LISTS.
off. Carried Forward.
Total.
Ardee Road Payments
Drogheda Road Payments
Dundalk Road Payments
Total,
TRANSFERS.
Richmond Lunatic Asylum
Refund to Dundalk Urban Council
Ardee Guardians
Drogheda Guardians
Dundalk Guardians
Ardee Rural District Council
Drogheda Rural District Council
Dundalk Rural District Council
Total Transfer,
C
734
754
1
1325
8
C'2813 12
9
7
2
Patrick Moonan
Patrick M 'Donnell
Patk M 'Cullough
Charles E M'Cann
Patrick Hughes .
Patrick Cluskey
Peter
John Woods
Total,
39
17
27
14
40
41
70
C279 lö
s
3
o
3
29 11 11
17
d
o
3
7
4
1
4
8
C
4
19
71
283
d
s
3
5
2
G 10
12
(j
4 11
2
43
36
14
113
111
91
124
562
s
2
14
3
18
12
2
16
16
d
1
8
7
4
9
8
7
1765
1086
1438 15
2735
356
301
1181
15
179 15 11
8
IO
0
5
FLXANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee at
8
1
0
0
0
8
their
e9044
9
COLLECTORS' BALANCE OF REMUNERATION.
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
on Monday, the 25th day of April, 1910, at one o'clock.
Present : —
In the Hughes, Esq, J P.
Other Members—J AI Johnsoli, J Wynne, and B Harmll,
J P, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted the following payments, Vizz
WORKS IN CHARGE OF COUNTY SURVEYOR.
Patrick Moonan
Patrick M 'Donnell
Patrick M 'Cullough
Charles IWCann
Patrick Hughes
Patrick Cluskcy
Peter M 'Donnell
John Woods
Total,
96
106
3.
83
87
s
18
o
71 17 10
2
18
2
d
8
9
8
6
6
5
Carlingford Pier
Gyles' Quay
Ballyreggan Bridge
Shortstone Bridge
Kilbride Tl'oad
Sheed Dip Aceount
Secretary's Offce
Total,
A Treasurer's Authority was duly
2 18 10
56 19
278 2 11
signed for same.
4
3
2
0
8
8
10
FINANCE COMMI'ITEE.
Minutes Of proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
on Monday, the 9th day of May, 1910, at one o'clock.
Present :—
In the Chair—Nicholas B King, J P.
Other Hamill, J P; J Wynne, M O'Meara.
J P; wm A Doran, E Goodman, '1' Kinahan, P Hughes, J P;
and T J Byrne, J P, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted the following payments,
viz
19 11 10
Secretary's Office
County Surveyor's Office
Receiver of Wrecks, Drogheda
Owen Keenan, Sheep Dipping
Total,
9
O
3
E33
9
15
2
A Treasurer's Authority was duly signed for same.
The Secretary submitted Couty-at-Large Payments
7
0
1
6
as set
out on Form No. 22, amounting to Cö592 7s fid, which were
examined and recommended for payment.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Letter from Gaelic League re National University, referred
to next meeting of the County Council.
Letter from Wexford County Council' re National University.
28th April, 1910. I wetter from Dublin Castle directing tlac
deduction of C.3 188 4d from sums payable to the Council from
the Local Taxation Account for expenses of extra Constabu-
lary.
Letter from Local Government Board with reference to the
Collectors' Remuneration and Arrear Lists.
11
30th Apil, 1910. Letter from Irish National Teachers'
Organisation. Resolution referred to next meeting of the Co.
Cotincil.
4th May, 1910.
Letter from Mr Molony, Solicitor, re Toal's
Criminal Injury Claim, ordered to be paid when levied and
collected.
4th May, 1910. Letter from Public Health Department,
Drogheda, and resolution, referred to County Council.
6th May, 1910. Letter from Department of Agriculture ye
Control of Dogs, was referred to County Council.
Finance Committee 9th May, 1910.
Present :—
In the Chair—T J Byrne, Esq, J P.
Other Members present—Messrs N B King, J P; W A
1)
oran, J Wynne, E Goodman, and M O'Meara, J P.
The Secretary reported that Mr Finigan returned to the
Office on Tuesday, 3rd May, at 11 0'clock, and remained until
'2 0'clock p m on Wednesday, the 4th; gave him paying order
for C'20, being 2 months'
salary. He left the Office at 2
o'eloek p m, and did not return on Thursday or Friday.
The Committee recommended the County Council to call on
Mr Finigan to resign owing to his continuous absence without
any explanation.
PROPOSAI, COMMITTEE.
Minutes of proceedings of the Proposal Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
Oil Monday, the 9th day of May, 1910, at one o'clock.
Present : —
In the Chair—N B King, Esq, J P.
Other Members—B Hamill, J P; J Wynne, M O'Meara,
J P; Wm A Doran, E Goodman, T Kinahan, P Hughes, J P;
T J Byrne, J P, Esquires.
12
'Che Secretary submitted County-at-Large Payments as set
ounting to Cö,ö92 7s Gd, which were examined and r•€eotn•
mended for payments.
Account from Royal Irish Constabulary for C49 4s Id, ex-
penses at last Parliamentary Election, recommended for pay-
merit.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of proceedings of the above Committ€e at their
Meeting held in the Council Chambér, Courthouse, Dillldalk,
Obi Monday, the 9th day of May, 1910, at 1.30 0'clock.
Present :—
In the Chair—Thomas J Byrne, Esq, J P.
Other Members--B Hamill, .J P; P Hughes, J P; M
O'Meara, J P; Wm A Doran, E Goodman, King, J P; J
Wynne, and Kinahan, Esquires.
30th April, 1910.
Mr Maxwell, Veterinary Inspector, Ardee, reports his dis-
trict free from contageous disease.
On the 9th of April he examined sheep at Baltrasna sus-
pected of sheep scab, •but found no trace of disease.
1st May, 1910.
Mr Donnelly Veterinary Inspector, Drogheda, reports that
during the month of April there has been no outbreak of eon-
tageous disease in his district, and no animals under observa-
tion.
goth April, 1910.
Mr Clinton, Veterinary Inspector, Dundalk, reports that
there were no fresh outbreaks of contageous disease in his dis-
trict during the month of April. A case of suspected out-
break of sheep seab was reported to him, but on examination
could find no traee of disease. He has still under observa-
tion 3 sheep at Tateetra, 2 at Ballymaseanlon, and 3 at Dun-
Ila 1k.
Letter from the Department of Agriculture enclosing Sheep
Dipping Order, 1910, which was approved of by the Com-
mittee.
Local Government (Ireland) Act,
1898.
Coulb Count) Council.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At their First Adjourned Quarterly Sleeting held ill
the Council Chamber, Dundalk,
MAY,
on THURSDAY,
and
At their Annual Meeting held in the Court House, lirogheda,
on 11th .JUNE, 1910.
Finance Committee
At their Meetings held 23rd May ; 30th May ; (5th .June
11th July, 1 9 IO.
Sub-Committee
Of the Finance Cornmittee at their Meeting held 29th June,
1910.
1
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
first Adjourned Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council Cham-
ber, on Thursday, ths 26th day of May, 1910.
Present
Tn the Chair—Petor Hnghes, Esq, J P.
Other B King, J P; Peter Woods, J P; Michael
O'Meara, J P; M •court, J P; Edward Goodman, T C
.J P; Luke J Eleock. Patrick WGee, Joseph H.
M 'Ardle. .J0seph M Johnson. Charles A' Duffy, J P; Patrick
Donegan, J P; Patrick Callan, James Wynne, Bernard Fine-
gan, and Woods. J P, Esquires.
CONFIRMATION' OF GENERIAL MINUTES.
Seconded by Mr N 13 King, and
Resolved—That the minutes of the last meeting of the Coun-
eil held on the 21st day of April last, having been printed, and a
copy sent to each meniljer, be taken. as read, and aro horeby
confirmed,
CO-OP'I'ION OF MEMBER.
Proposed by Mr Bernard Hamill, J P,
Seconded by Mr Thomas Kinahan, and
Resolved—That we hereby co-opt Mr Peter Woods, of Much-
grange, as member of the Louth Counts Council in room of the
late Mr Jamee Quinn, J P. deena.sed.
2
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
Proposed by Mr Edward Goodman,
Seconded by Mr l) J Itatll, and
Resolved—That the Report of the County Surveyor, as ap-
pearing on page I of the May Schedule of Proposals, and circu-
lated to each member of the Council, he taken as read, and en-
tered on the Minutes.
The following Supplementary Iktvort
was also adopted by tho Council D' 'The l)unbin New Road (So.
I. May. 1903) ought to have been emnpleted two years ago ;
thore is a small a lnount of work not done at a watering place.
I beg to rec•omnwnd that the Contracf cancelled. and au-
thority be given to me to et)lnplete work at the Contractor's
expense."
CONTRACTS.
The. following Contracts were approved of by the Council
. —Bernard Duffy, Carrickboghan—Contraetor to make 18
perches of new fence at Mr 13 Duffy's land at Carrick-
boghan, along the read from Shanmullagh to Drum-
sinnott ; accepted at C2 14s Od.
No. G
Patrick Treanor, Carriekedtnond-- Contractor to main-
tain for 9 months, front the 1st July, 191(), 419 perches
of road from Dundalk to Forkliill, between the old
Police Barrack at Kilcurry anal tho County boundary
at Carrickedrnoncl, at L'ö 12s Gd.
. Peter Begley, Sheelagh —Con tractor to
fence a danger-
ons gripe along the road at Mrs Brady's land at Shee-
Iagh, 0s Od.
ARDEE wom•s.
Proposed by AI r Patrick M 'Gee,
by Mr Pat rick Callan, and
Resolved That the Proposals for Works formulated by the
at their Meeting held on
Ardee No. 1 R ural District Council,-
the 26th (lay of April, 1910, and set out on Form 20,
Thu
furn ished to the County Council, be and are hereby approved
Of, and we now authorise the Secre€arv to affix the (%mmon
Seal of the Council to the Contracts entered into.
DROGHEDA WORKS.
Proposed by Mr T Callan Macurdle, J P,
-Seconded by Mr Joseph Dolan, and
Resolved— 'I'liat the Proposals for Works fornmlated by
'Outli Rural District of Drogheda Union, at their Meeting
1
held on 'I'hursday. the 5th (lay of April, 1910, and set out on
orni 2(), iåu•ni.slled to the County Council, be and are hereby
F
of, and we now authorise the Secretary to afix the
Connnon Seal of the Council to the Contracts entered into ; and,
further, that that portion of the County Surveyor's Report,
which reads as under, be deleted therefrom, and referred to
' 'Tliat the existing lane cannot
tho I{'ural l)istriet Connell, viz
be repaired as a fourth-class road: because it is closed against
the public by gates.."
DUNDAI,K WOR KS.
by Ai r Ilanvill. J p.
Second/"l by Mr C A Duffy, J P, and
Resolved—That tile Proposals for Works forrnulated by tho
4
day, the 2nd day of May, 1910, and set out on Form 20, fur:
nished to the County Council, be and are hereby approved of,
and we now authorise the Secretary to affix the Common Seal of
tho Council to the Contracts entered into.
WORKS NOT SET BY CONTRACT.
Proposed by Mr Hamill, J P,
Seconded by Mr James Wynne, and
Resolved—That all Road Maintenance Works formulated by
the Rural District Councils, and not set by Contract, be placed
in the hands of the County Surveyor.
CONFIRMATION OF PROPOSAL COMMITTEE MINUTES.
Proposed by Mr Bernard Hamill, J P,
Seconded by Mr C A Duffy, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposals
for Paymen ds—County-at-
Large—formulated by the Proposnl Committee at their Meet-
ag held on Monday, the 9th day of May , 1910, and amount-
ing to 17s (id,be and are hereby approved of by this
Council.
Letter from Mr Finigan, dated 26th inst, stating, in ox-
planation Of his absence from the Oflieo on the two days men-
tioned in the Secretary's liteport to. the Finance Committee,
'Will you permit me to say that I did not feel strong enough to
continue at work the entire week: which was the first after a
prolonged illness. Since then I have •attended the Office regu-
laxly every day, and will endeavour to do so ill lulure. Thank-
5
ent kindness towards and as-
ino you sincerely for your
suring yon of my resolve to g:ve my duties every attention.'
Proposed by Mr T Callnn Maearclie, J P,
Seconded -V r icha€l O' Meara, J 19. and
R esolved—
That the Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance (.'oniliiitiee.
be ancl are
held on Monday, the 18th and 25th April, I -911),
hereby adopted by this Council, and that tlle Minutes of Alon-
day, the 9th day of M ay, 1910, be approved of, except the re-
omnmendation calling on Mr Finigan to resign.
That in considerati01' of Mr Finigan, our Assistant Seere-
Cary, complying with certain regulotions laid down to
the satisfaction of Mr Filgate, who, as our Executive ()fhcer,
has full control of our official staff, that in future, in to
give his full time and attention to the' discharge Of his duties
for the County Council, that Mr Finignn undertakes to resign
his extra positions as Secretary €0 tho Education and Pension
Cotumittees, and that Ille Council allow him to retain his posi-
tion as Assistant Secretary.
FINANCE MINUTES.
CONFIRMATION OF
Proposed by Mr T Callan J P,
Seeonded by Mr Michael J P, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the .Finanee
Committee IMeetings, held on Alonday, the 18th and 25th
April, 1910, be• and are hereby approved of by this Council, and
fhat the Minutes of the 9th May, 1910, be approved, except the
recommendation calling on Mr Finigan to resign.
6
EDUCATIONAL GRANTS.
Proposed by Mr Edward Goodman,
Seconded by Mr Michael (Y Meara, J P, and
Revsolvecl—'l'hat we, tile County Council of Louth, hereby de-
Clare that in our opinion the pfesent unsatisfactory system of
Irish Plimary Education is rnainly due to the parsimony of the
British Treasury, which, while overtaxing this country to the
extent of some millions yearly, has for a number of years in
defiance of justice and constitutional rights, withheld from this
country an average annual grant of nearly half a million ster-
ling. (2) That as for the efficiency Of Irish Primary Education,
an essential element cf National progress, it is absolutely ne-
cessary that adequate financial provision should be for
Schools, Pupils, and Teachers, we hold that as an instalment
of justice to thls country, which has hitherto been, in compari-
son with Engl,nncl and Scotland, educationally stayv€d, tho
Treasury sh0i11cl immediately provide for Irish Education in-
creased on liberal a scale ns are given for tho educa-
tion Che people of Scotiand. (3) That the increased grants
should be allocated for the following purposes To improve
the Teachers' Pension Scheme, which. to put it mildly, is a dis-
graee to the British Government. (b) To provide for the pro-
per equipment, sanitation, heating, and staffing of the Na-
tional Schools, and for supplies of hooks and requisites to
Scholars.
(e) To provide the small sunn required to give se-
cnrity of tenure to Assistant Teachers, by allowing a margin
between the averages which warrant their appointment, and
those which compel tlieir dismissal. (d) To abolish the Stand-
ard Numbers which debar form promotion to the higher grades
hundreds of Teachers who are eminently entitled to it by long
and efficient service.
(e) To make provisions for the promotion
7
Of all undergraded Teachers to the grade corresponding to
their classification. (f) To provide for a generous system of
Scholarships, which will enable pupils of industry and ability in
Primary Schools to go forward to the Secondary Schools, and
thence to the Universities, thus alloting to the children of the
masses equality of opportunity, and placing at the disposal Of
the natiou the b«st available talent.
PUBLIC HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
rroposed 'by Mr Bernard Hamill, J p,
Seconded by Alr Luke J Elcock, and
Resolved—That we approve that part one of the Tuberculosis
Prevention (Ireland) Act, 1908, be put in force •by the Drog-
heda Urban Sanitary Authority in the County of Louth.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Dublin Castle, 10th December, 19()9.
Sir,
In reply to your letter of the 29th ultimo, on the
subject of extra Police Expenses for the half year to the 30th
September, 1909, I have to state for the infomation of your
Council, that the County Free Force is maintained out of
funds provided by Parliament: and that no portion of its cost
falls on the county ; no allowance can, therefore, be made to
the county in respect of the absence, under orders of his Ex-
cellency the Lord Lieutenant, of men of the Free Force on de-
tachment duty elsewhere.
N. CHAMBERLAIN,
Col., Inspector-General.
the infortnation of the Louth County Council, copy of an Order
made by their Excellencies directing the deduction of Cö 18s 4d
from su ms payable to the Council from the Local Taxation
(Ireland) Account.
J. J. CULLINAN.
An application from St. Bridget's Home, Wexford,
for Inebriate Women, requesting the Council to contribute
5s (id per week towards the maintenance of each woman sent
from the County, was marked ' 'read.'
R ead letter from the Secretary Irish County Coun-
oil's General Council to increase the amount of the affiliation
fee from L';3 to CIO per year was rejected.
Letter from the Catholic Defence Society pointing out the
unfair treatment accorded to Catholic officials serving in the
Veterinary Branch of the Irish Agricultural Department, was
marked "read.'
'I'lae following communication from the Poor li'ate Collectors
was read
'26th May, 1910.
Gen t lemen ,
AVO, the undersigned Poor Rate Collectors, beg to
bring under your notice these facts, viz. , that we have not
been paid the balance of our salaries due since 31st October
last, although same were to be paid at the close of the financial
year if we closed our accounts within the period, which we did,
lodging both the irrecoverable and uncollected arrears and
Sir,
19 10
37 13
8
30th April, 1910.
I am directed by the Lords Justices to transmit for
9
lying .ont of our money for about six months. We need not
point out to the Council the loss and inconvenience caused to
us by this arrangement. We further wish to call attention to
'the Minutes of the Finance Committee held on the 17th August,
1903, and subsequently ratified by the Council and sanctioned
by the Local Government Board. sve also 'believe that if the
:amounts due us are not ordered at the present meeting they
will be outside the statutory period, as per your notice of the
19th February, 1903. Trusting the above matters will have
.your earliest attention.—We remain, your obedient servants.
P. Moonan, J. Woods, P. Cluskey,
P. Hughes, P. McDonnell, Patk. M'Cu110ugh.
COLLECTORS' BALANCE OF REMtNERATION.
Proposed by Mr. Bernard Hamill, T.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Charles A. Duffy, J.P., and
Resolved—That the Rate Collectors having closed their
teollections and lodged the full amount of their yearly warrants,
including their irrecoverable and uncollected arrears, on' the
31st day of March, 1910, we hereby instruct our Secretary €0
issue Paying Orders forthwith for the balance of their yearly
remuneration due said date :—
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Patrick Moonan
Patrick
Patrick M 'Cullough
Chatoes E. M'Cann
Patrick Hughes
Patrick Cluskey
Peter M 'Donnell
John, Woods
30
28
22
s
9
7
8 15 10
7
8
d
8
3
7
5
6
10
SCHOLARSHIPS IN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY.
Propcxsecl by Mr Peter Hughes, J P,
Seconded by Mr. Thomas Kinahan, and
Resolved—That we, the County Council of Louth, would ap—
prove of a Rate to provide Scholarships in the National:
University if the Senate make Irish an essential subject for
Matriculation from the year 1913.
Mr. T. C. J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Micllael O'Meara. J.P., and
Resolved That the Louth County Council
in meeting
assembled respectfully tender to her Most Gracious Majesty
the Queen Mother and the l{'o.yal Family their heartfelt
sympathy in their bereavement by the lamented death of tho
late King Edward V 11, and they hope that the kindly and
sympathetic feeling entertained by the late King towards the
Irish people, and his desire to have the country governed
according to Irish Ideas, may be a distinctive feature of tho
reign now so auspiciously entered upon.
THE CORONATION OATH.
Proposed by Mr. T. C. Macardle, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. M. O'Meara, J.P., and
Resolved—That the Louth County Council* respectfully call
upon the House of Commons to take such steps at tho opening
Of Parliament as may be necessary to promote a measure
deleting from the Coronation Oath those passages which are so
11
hurtful to the Faith and most tender feelings of the Catholic
subjects of his Majesty King George V, not only in Ireland,
but scattered over the Empire, and thus refieve his Majesty
from taking an oath which must obviously be repugnant to his
wide and varied experience of the world, and against which
the great majority of our Protestant fellow-countrymen join
in protesting.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
M inutes of Proceedings of the Louth Caunt.y Council nf their
Annunl Meeting held in the Courthouse, moghecla, on Satur-
day, the 11th da.v of June, 1910.
Mem hers present—
Peter Hughes, J P; T J Byrne, J P; Patrick Callan,
John •Dolan, Patrick Donegan, J P; William
Joseph Dolan,
A A Duffy, J P; Luke J Elcock,
Finneu:nn, Edward Goodman, Bernard Hamill, J P ; Joseph M
Johnson. Peter P Keeley, Thomas Maguire, T Chllan Macardle,
J P; Joseph H James .J P; James M'Court
J P ; Patrick M •Gee, Laurence M 'Keown, Laurence Moore,
Michael O'Mem, J P; Peter Woods, J P; Peter Woods,
William Woods, and James Wynne, Esquires.
On the Motion of MrC A Duffy, J P, seconded by Mr Joseph
H it was resolved—That Mr James IWCarthy, J P,
do take the chair.
The Council then proee«led to the Election-of Chairman and
Vice-Chairman for the ensuing year, and it was proposed by
Mr Bernard Hamill, J P, seeonded "by Mr Laurence Moore, and
unanimously resolved—That Mr Peter Tlnghes, J P, Of Castle-
ring, Dundalk, be and is hereby eleetecl Chairman of the Louth
County Council for the ensuing year.
12
At this Illiteture of the proceedings Mr M 'Carthy vacated the
chair, and Poter Hnghes was moved thereto.
ELECTION OF VICE-CHAIRMAN.
by T c Macardle, J P,
Seconded l).y Mr James M 'Court, J P,
'I'llat Mr J Eyrno•, J P, of Rossmakea, be and is
elected Vice-Chairman of the Louth County Council for
the ensuing year.
Amendi\it01t. moved by Mr Patrick M 'Gee, seconded by Mr
Luke J Mr Willimn A of Tnllakoel,
Ardoe, 'be is hereby elected Vice-Chairman of the l,outh
Cou.nty for the ensui1Ef year.
The Cha ' I'll!an took a vote of the Council as between, those
two gentlernen, with the following result
For Mr Byrne there voted—Messrs Byrne, T J ; Callan, Patk ;
Dolan, John ; Hamill: T! ; Johnson, Joseph M ; Keeley, Maguire,
T C; MCourt, J; L; Moore, L; and
Woods. Poter—12.
For Mr Doran there voted—Messrs Dolan, Joseph ; Donegan,
Patr:ek ; Doran wm A; Duffy, C A; Elcock, L J; Finnegan, B;
J H; IWCarthy: J; M'Gee, Patrick; O'Meara, M;
Woods, Peter (Mnchgrange) ; Woods. Wm ; and Wynne, James
The Chairman thorefcre {Iec•lared Mr William A Doran, of
Tullakeel, Ardee, elected Vice-Chairman of the Louth County
Council for the onsuing year by 14 votes to 12.
13
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the above Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
on Monday, the 23rd day of May, 1910, at One o'clock p m.
Present :—
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Thomas J Byrne, J P; Edward Goodman,
Michael O'Meara. J P; and James Wynne, Esquires.
The Secretary su bmitted the following payments, viz :
Seereta ry's ()ffiee
Works in charge of 'County Surveyor
24 16 9
svhieh were examined and certified for payment and a Treas-
urer's Authority duly signed for same.
Letter from the Courtke€per, County Courthouse, applying
•to have his kitchen floor tiled.
The Committee referred the matter to the County Surveyor,
and not to exceed IOS, to apply for Tenders f1 am Messrs
Bennett, Duffy, M 'Adorey, M 'Donnell, M 'Guinness and Parks.
Letter from Che Board of Works dated the 31st March, 1910,
asking that certain necessary repairs be executed at Clogher-
head.
County Surveyor Report on same as under
CLOGHERHEAD PIER.
With reference to the letter No. 4032-10 of the 31st of March,
1910, from thc Secretary, Office of Public Works, Dublin, on
the 19th inst T inspected the Pier. Timber curbs, 6 inches
14
square and 370 feet total length, are fixed along the edge of
the Quay to prevent carts being backed over the edge into the-
sea. During a recent storm these curbs were slightly damaged,
but they are still amply strong for their purpose, as they could
not be broken by several carts. To guard against further•
damage by the sea, I have arranged to have iron 'bars bolted
over the damaged beams.
The cracks in the floor of the Pier may indicate weakness,
but to take up the floor and re-lay it would be absurd. Thew
cracks are one-tenth inch or lexs in width, and they do not
cause inconvenience. I do not think that a ll.vthing would be
gained by coment grouting.
Also these cracks act as flow-
holes, and rough weather the pressure under the floor would
he very considerable.
P. J. LY-NAM,
County Surveyor of Louth.
Proposed by Mr T J Byne, J P,
Seconded by Mr E Goodman, and
Resolved—That a copy of the County Surveyor's Report be
forwarded to the Board of Works.
Mr Dolan's Notice of Motion re Revision of Rate Books was
adjourned.
SUBCOMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the a Inve Committee at their
Meeting held in the, Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
on Monday, the 23rd day of Alay. 1910, at 1. lö uo'c•lock p
Present :
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Thomas J Byrne, J P; Edward Goodman,
Michael O'Meara, J P; and .Jam€s W.vnne, Esquires.
15
The Sub-Committee was convened to consider Mr Dolan's
Notice of Motion re Steam l{'oad Rolling and Altering Polling
Districts, Är King's Notice of Motion re Drainage, which were
adjourned until Monday, the 6th day of June.
FL-NANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutfs of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
on Monglny, the 30th day of Alay, 1910.
Present
In Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq, J P.
Othei: Hamill, J P; C A Duffy, J P; E
man, Joseph T Dolan, M A; and Peter Woods, J P.
The Secreta ry
was di rected to instntct Mr O'Connell r
Solicitor, to take ovar the land required for Tully New Road.
Mr O'Connell, Solicitor, wrote
BER-NARI) M•KE.N.NA v. THOMAS SANDS.
Dear Sir,
In this case, heard at Dundalk Petty Sessions on Friday last,
the 27th inst.
the Magistrates refused to grant an Order
enabling the Contractor to go on the lands of defendant, situate
in Clermont Demesne, for purpose Of working a quarry for a
supply of road material to enable him to carry ont his contract.
T wish to have the Council's instructions if they desire me to
move for certiorwri in the King's Bench Division, as the matter
is one affecting the Road Contractors of the Council generally.
The Committee decided to let the Contractor deal .with the
matter himelf.
Mr O'ChnnelI, Solicitor, wrote with reference to the case or
Patrick Loy. of Castletown, re encroachment on public road.
16
The Committee decided to inform Mr O'Connell, Solicitor,
that they are not going to take any action in the matter.
REGULATIONS RE COUNTY COUNCIL OFFICE.
The Committee ordered that a Time Book 'be kept and signed
-every day 'by Mr J F Finegan, and Time Book to be produced
for examination at every Finance Committee noeeting.
The Cornmittee instructed Mr Lynmn to bring the subject
matter of Itoad Rolling before each Rural I)isitiet Council in
July next.
FINANCE COMMIT'I'EE.
Minutes of Proceedings of theu Finance Committee at, their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber on Monday, the 6th day
•of June, 1910.
Present
In the Chai—Peter Hughes, Esq, J P.
Other Hamill, J P; T J Byrne, J P;
Joseph T Dolan, and Thomas Kinahan, Esquires.
The Secreta ry submitted Treasur€sr's A lithority containing
payments for Works in charge of the County Surveyor and
Secretary's Office, amounting to C'27 6s Od, which, on examina-
17
The application of the caretaker—Christopher M 'Garrity—
for remunerat:on in re.sp€ ct Of his services for cleaning
_Borough Court. etc, during the temporary employment Of the,
extra clerteal staff. vcas postponed for a fortnight.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of P;oeeecliugs of the above Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber on monday, the 29th day
of June, 1910.
Present
Ill the Chai—Joseph T Dolan, ES(i, M A.
Other M ellibers—Jü1nes M 'Court, J P; Joseph M Johnson„
Peter Hughes, J P. and James Wynne, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted Treasurer's tithority for Works in
his own and the County Surveyors ()fliee, which, on examina-
tion, were passed by the Comnllttee.
under :—
T Murray, Dundalk
T .ih'lne, Dundalk
P M 'Guinness, Carlingford
Fisher and Sons, Newry
Peter M •Namee, Dundalk
J Clarke, Dundalk
Edward French, Dundalk
Joseph F Finegan, Dillidalk
Total,
SUB('OMMITTEE.
The details were as,
tion, was passed by the Committee.
County Surveyor's Office
Seérotary's Office
Receiver of Wrecks, Drogheda
23 18
o
0
letter to
0 14
o
9
0
0
5
2
0
3 15
3 10
10
0
-c'20 18
0
o
O.
6
Total,
C27 G
The Committee directed the Secretary to write a
•each Collector re delapidated houses and persons who have been
for years dead, to have their names removed from the Rate
Books.
COUNTY St'l€VEYOR'S REPORT ON ROAD ROLLING.
011 the motion of Mr James Wynne, seconded by Mr James
M 'Court, J P, it was recommended—That the undermentioned
Roport of the County Surveyor on the subject of Road Rolling
18
be adopted, and that the said Report be submitted and read
at the next meeting of the C'Ounty Council :
it
follows :—
COUNTY LOUTH.
Sub-Committee on Steam Rolling, 27th June,
Mr Glairman,
I beg to recommend—
reads as
1910.
(1). That a Steam Roller and Plant be purchased by the
•County Council at a price not, exceeding C680, and that .C32()
be provided for repairs during a period of ten years, provided
that the Rural District Councils adopt Steam Rolling.
(2). That if the Rural Councils adopt Steam Rolling CI,OOO
for the above purpose be borrowed from the Commissioners of
Pnblic Works at 31 per cent—principal and interest to be paid
off •by ten annual payments of C116 lis 7d each, the payments
to be levied off the Ckjunty-at-large, Urban districts excepted.
(3). That the Rural Councils be asked to formulate pro-
posal.s for the working expenses of a Roller.
The working
expenses include the wages oi the engineer, driver, flagman and
forernan spreader, coal and coke, oil, ete, and are estimated at,
22s per day for 240 working days, or C264 per annum. A
Roller could be kept at work if Ardee No 1 Rural District,
would pass C99 for 90 working (lays, Drogheda (Louth) C52 IGs
•Od for 48 clays, and Dundalk C112 'Is Od for days. total,
C2(iI.for 240 days' rolling. rnle•s the Rural District Councils
•agree to pay for working expenses, in proportion to the num-
ber of days rolling done in each district, rolling cannot be
carried on, and the matter must be dropped.
(4). That, if Rolling be adopted by the Rural Councils, a
Stearn Rolling Account 'be opened to show the total working
19
•expenses of the Roller for each year (including half wages for
the three men during stoppages, due to accidents, repairs and
frost), also the number of days' rolling done in each district,
and the amount in proportion charged to each district. This
account to be open to inspection by any ratepayer in the Rural
Districts on payment of a small fee.
(5). That if Rolling be adopted and existing contracts ex-
Pire, the County Surveyor be directed to include in each new
'Contract on principal roads a specified number of days' rolling
one day's rolling to each 40 or cubic yards of broken
stones. The Roller to be supplied to contractors free of charge,
but each contractor to be bound to have sufficient men to spread
the broken stones befoie the Roller quickly, provide six men
to blind and sweep, and a driver and horse for one water cart,
or, if necessary, for two water carts. AIBO the contractor should
coal for tho engine—about 4 cwts per day—and a contrac-
tor should be liable io penalties if he delays the Ikt)ller and
.keeps it Idle.
(G). That contractors not now bound to employ a Roller
be asked to volunteer to u.so it under the conditions as above
(paragraph 5). About one-third of the length of a contract
to be heavily sheeted with broken stones and rolled in each
Year, the wmaining two-thirds to have ruts darned. If a
Sufficient nn Inber of contractors do not volunteer, then the
Purchase of a Roller to be postponed for a year or two, or the
blX)ken stones to be spread as usual and the Roller run over
the patches.
(7). That in each district the most expensive roads, with the
Ilighest price per perch per annum, should be first dealt with.
(8). One hundred and one miles of intpcrtant roads leadinv
out of the towns of Ardee, Drogll€da and Dundalk are now
maintained at an expense of per annum, and there is no
room for doubt that at least one-fourth of this amount, CI,IIG
per annum, is wasted. The quantity of broken stones supplied
and spmead in each year on these 101 miles of road amounts to,
16,600 cubic yards, and at least one-fourth of these stones are
ground into dust, to be afterwards swept off as mud, before
the patches of stones are rolled smooth by the traffic. A Roller
roils the, broken stones to a smooth and hard surface withaut
any waste. The existing wastage of El, 116 per annum would
be about sufficient to keep three Rollers at work. One Roller
only roll a boul twelve miles per annunl, dealing in a proper
Six years ago I wrot.e to the other County Surveyors, and
found that thirteen counties had adopted Steam Ikhlling. Since
then several other counties have followed suit, including Mon-
In 1903 Co Tyrone bought one Roller and
aghan and Meath.
cautiously watched for results. Now Tyrone has twelve Rollers
at work, ancl BVO more Rollers have been ordered. The valua-
fion of Tyrone is nearly, and the valuation of Louth
is In this proportion, Tyrone having fourteen
Rollers, Louth ought to have at least seven WI lers. It is a
re;narkable fact that in this respect Louth ran ks with the
most backward counties ir all Ireland. There is not one single,
Road Roller employ€TI in the Louth Rural Districts.
20
3 16
21
FINANCE COMMITTEEI
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held on Monday, the 11th day of July, 1910.
Present :—
In the Chair—Joseph T Dolan, Esq,
Other Members—T J Byrne, J P; James Wynne, Michael
O'Meara, J P, and Edward Goodman, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted Treasurer's Authority for the under-
mentionesl payments, which, on examination, were
the Committee :—
James M •Adorey, Dundalk
Drogheda Iron Works, Drogheda
Receiver of Wrecks, Drogheda
R eceiver of Wrecks, Newry
J A Carberry, Drogheda
11 E Henderson, Dundalk
William Leonard, Ardee
Thomas M 'Ardle, Dundalk
'l'otal,
CORRESPONDENCE.
C
o
1
o
1
3
3
CIS
s
9
9
2
18 11
4
14
passed by
d
3
0
6
2
2
1 am, gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
P. J. LYNAM,
County
Letter from the caretaker, C M •Garrity, as under
I beg to make the usual application for remuneration
for extra labour and attendance on clerical staff in connection
with copying, etc, of Rate Books in norongh Court. As I had
to come here every day during dinner hour to mind the books
and papers and cleaning the court every day.
The Committee refused this cpplication.
Surveyor
of Louth.
'22
LetteF from Mr Daniel O'Connell, solicitor to the Council,
as under :—
Francis Street, Dundalk,
11th July, 1910.
BYE-LAWS WITH RESPECT TO LOCOMOTIVES.
-12 and 43 Vie, Cap 57, See 6.
Dear Sir,
With reference to the procedure indicated in Sec-
tion 221 oi the Public IlfQIth (Ireland) Act, 1878, I have caused
Notice of to Apply to the I ncal Government Board
for Confirmation of the F..s•e-laws to be published in the issues
of the "Dundalk Democrat" and "l)rogheda Argus" of the
4th June. The full calendar month from that date, as pre-
scribed, has now elapsed, and the Council should proceed to
adopt the Bye-laws uncler [heir Comrnon Seal. The Sealing
should be properly attest(41, and the date of Sealing inserted
in the attestation clause. TIVO copies of the Bye-laws, duly
Sealed, should then be forwarded to the Board with a formal
application for their confirmation.
I enclose copies of the newspapers ct:ntaining the advertise-
ment, which should be furnished at the same time.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
T. F. Filgate, Esq.,
Secretary Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
The following letter from Mr Ismay Walsh, Castl€0)eIIingham,
dated 9th insi, was referred to the County Surveyor
As a large ratepayer, I would request thc Road Authorities
to have the hedges cut low at road crossings. They are now
exceedingly dangerous in this district, where the roads are so
23
narrow and fast driving of motor ears and cycles. I was very
near coming to a bad accident yesterday from this cause, other-
wiso I would not trouble you. Paying large taxes for roads
and motors, I think some attention should be given to our
common safety when the cost of removal of the danger falls
on others, and not on your Council.
I call attention €0 the Bush road at Mullin's Cross, road at'
Carroll's. Stabannon, and many others.
Mr l,.vnmn reported that the tiling of the caretaker's kitehon
was not sat isfaetoril.v done. antl €110 Conumit€oe cleeided to loave
the matter in the County Surveyor's own hands.
Local Government (Ireland) Act,
1898.
Coutb County Council.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At their Second Quarterly Meeting held in the
Council Chamber, Dundalk,
on THURSDAY, 28th JULY, 1910; and
At their Adjourned Quarterly Meeting held in the Council
Chamber, Dundalk.
on THURSDAY, 18th August, 1910; and
At their Special Meeting herd October 27th. 1910.
Finance Committee Meetings
Held
25th July; 8th August; 3rd October; 17th October;
31st October. 1910.
1
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
•Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council Chamber on Thursday.
the 28th day of July, 1910.
Prosent
In the Hughes, Esq J P.
Other Members—Messrs T Byrne, J P ; Joseph Dolan,
•C A Duffy, J P; Joseph T Dolan, Patrick Donegan, J P; Wm.
.A Doran, Bernard Finegan, Bernard Hamill, J P; Thomas
Kinahan, N B King, J P; Thomas Maguire, T Callan Macar-
die, J P; James MCourt, J P; Patrick M'Gee, Michael
O'Meara, J P; Peter Woods (Muehgrange), William Woods,
J P; and James Wynne.
The Minutes of the last meeting of the Council having been
orinted, and a copy sent to each member, were taken as read,
.and were confirmed.
OF FINANCE COMMITTEE MINUTES.
Proposed by Mr N B King, .J P,
Seconded by Mr Thomas Kinahan, and
Resolved that the recommendation contained in the minutes
'Of proceedings of the Finance Committee on the undermen-
tioned date, viz—23rd May, 30th May, 6th June, and Ilfh
July, 1910, be and are hereby adopted by Council, save
and except that we refer Garrity's application to the Fin-
'ance Committee.
2
Fixing Dates Quarterly —eetings of the Rural District Courv
cils awl the Proposal Committee
Proposed by Mr T J Byme, J P,
Seconaed by Mr James M 'Court, J Y, and
Resolved—That the County Council hereby determine thaw
the following shall be the dates for the holding of the Third
Quarterly Meetings of the District Councils, viz :—
Ardee No. I—Tuesday, 4th October, 1910.
Drogheda—Thursday, 13th October, 1910.
Dundalk—Monday, 10th October, 1910.
The last day for lodging Notices and Applications for
Dis.
trict Councils will be Tuesday, 13th September,
PAYMENTS TO CONTRACTORS,
Ploposed by Mr William A Doran,
Seconded by Mr Joseph Dolan, and
1910.
ARDEE.
Resolved—That the proposals for payments formulated by
are Ardee No I Rural District Council at. their second Quar-
terly Meetng, held on Tuesday, the 5th day ot July, 1910, and
set out on Form 22, furnished to the County Council, be and'
are hereby approved of.
These payments amount to ±823 6s Gd.
DROGHEDA PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr Patrick Donegan, J P,
Seconded by Mr 'Thomas Maguire, and
3
Resolved—That the proposals for payments formulated by
the Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union, at their second
Quarterly Meeting, held on Thursday, the 14th day of July,
1910, and set out on Form zz furnished to the County Council,
be and are hereby approved of.
These payments -amount to C4ö9 IGs 9d.
DUNDALK.
Proposed by Mr William Woods, J 1'
Seconded by Mr Nicholas B King, J P, and
Resolved— That the proposals for payments formulated by
the Dun lalk Rural District Council, ht their second Quarterly
Meeting held on Monday, the 11th day of July, 1910, and set
out on Form 22 furnished to the County Council, be and are
hereby approved of.
These payments amount to 8s Sd.
COUNTY-AT-LARGE PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr Bernard Hamill, J r,
Seconded Mr James M 'Court, J P, and
Resolved —That the proposals for payments—County-at-
Large—which have been submitted to the Proposal and Fin-
ance Committees. and amounting fo 2s 8d, be and are
hereby approved of by this Council.
4
CONFIRMATION OF BYE-LAWS.
Proposed by Mr Bernard Finegan,
Seconded by Mr Charles A Duffy, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby authorise the Secretary to affix
the Common Seal of the, Council to the Bye-Laws with respect
•to the use of Locomotives over Bridges, which said Bye-Laws
are now made and approved of by us, and that same be forwar-
ded to the Local Government Board for confirmation.
The next item on the Agenda Paper was the consideration
of letter from T{'oad P,oard Authorities, a copy of which was
sent to each member of the Council.
The Chairman and the other members of the Council having
discussed the subject matter of the foregoing letter, it was
decided that Mr I,ynarn should have a Conference with the
Borough Surveyors, and submit a further report at the next
meeting of the Council. Meantime the Secretary was directed
to apply fox 50 copies of the Road Board Circular Letter for
distribution among the Councillors, and summon a special
meeting for its further consideration on 'J'nursday, August
11th next.
Read letter from County Inspector; dated 19th inst, as
under
I return herewith authorities under the Sale of Food and
Drugs Acts for the Petty Sessions Districts ot Ardee, Dunleer,
Castlebellingham, Collon, and Termonfeckin, and beg to re-
commend the following changes
Sergeant David Connor, for Castlebellingham Petty Sessions
District.
Sergeant Mathew Sharpe, for Collon Petty Sessions Dis•
tnct.
5
Acting-Sergeant Edmond M 'Donagh for the Petty Sessions
Districts oi Ardee, Dunleer, and Termonfeckin.
Proposed by Mr Bernard Hamill, J e,
Seconded by Mr C A Duffy, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby authorise our Secretary to ap-
point members of the Royal Irish Constabulary Inspectors
under the Food and Drugs Acts, as in prevaous years.
The Secretary called the Council's attention tQ) the fact that
he had received some three or four claims from Solicitors in
respect of the payment of Criminal Injury Decrees, and asked.
for the Council's guidance on the matter.
Proposed by Mr T C Maeardle, J P,
Seconded by Mr Bernard Hamill: J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby authorise the Secretary to dis—
charge all the Malicious Injury Claims, the amount of which
has been levied and in course of collection, and when the funds.
with the Treasurer are sufficient to meet the decrees in ques-
tion.
Letter and Order from the Department, dated the 21st ult.y
as under: —
No. 2665/10
Department of Agriculture,
And Technical Instruction for Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch),),
13, Upper Merrion St.,
21st June, 1910.
Animals (Notification of Disease) (Ireland) Order
of 1910.
Sir,
The Department of Agriculture and Technical In-
strnction for Ireland desire LO forward herewith, for the infor-
6
nation of your Local Authority, some copies of the above-
named Order, which has been made by tne Department, re-
quiring the notification by Veterinary Surgeons or Veterinary
Practitioners of any. cases of contagious or infectious disease
of certain specified kinds which may come before them in pri-
vate practice, and providing, among other thngs, for the pay-
ment by Local Authorities of a fee of two shillings and six-
pence in respect of each such notification.
This Order, which comes into force on 1st proximo, will give
•effect in Ireland to the Aöt passed on the subject last year,
entitled the "Diseases of Animals Act, 1909," a copy of which
will also he found enclosed.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
DISEASES OF ANIMALS ACT, 1909.
Chapter 26.
An Act i o provide for the Payment of Fees to Veterinary
Surgeons and Practitioners for Notification of Diseases of
Animals.
(25th November, 1909).
Be it enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and
•with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Tem-
poral, and Commons, in this present Parliament assem bled,
.and by the authority ot the same as follows :
2. This Aoet may be cited as the Diseases of Animals Act,
Animals Acts, 1894 to 1903. shall pay to a veterinary surgeon
or veterinary practitioner, in respect of every notification of
•disease made by him to the local authority or any officer of the
local authority in pursuance of an order under those Acts re-
quiring such a notification, such fee not exceeding two shil-
l.•ngs and sixpence as may be prescribed by the order.
7
2. This Act may be cited as the Diseases of Animals Acts,
and shall be construed as one with the Diseases of Animals
Acts, 1894 to 1903, and those Acts and this Act may be cited
together the Diseases of Animals Acts, 1894 to 1909.
Letter from the Town Clerk, Drogheda, dated 15th inst,
complaints having been made to the Water-
works Cornmittee with regard to the water supply, the Cor-
poration think that the great quantity of dust raised by mo-
torists on the main road from Drogheda to Dundalk, which
finds its uay into the service reservoir at Rosehall, containing
•the filteöed water, which is rather close to the road, they think
it well to lay down a coating of tar upon the road for a couple
•or three hundred yards.
' 'The matter has been mentioned to the County Surveyor,
and the work will be carried out in accordance with his wishes,
and every precaution will be taken in the carrying out of the
The Council gave. the necessary permission in accordanee
'With the termg of the foregoing letter.
Letter from Bernard Boyle, Irish Grange, dated 20th iast,
as under : —
C' With regard the pipes to be laid at Crosslaney, Bush,
and Castlebelling ham, 1 beg to state that I cannot carry out
the work according to the terms of my tender. I tendered to
do the work for the sum of Cll 18s Od, taking it that no par-
ticular pipe was specified. I went to Mr Williamson and ar-
ranged to get from him pipes which would cost C4 15s Od.
When reuly to work I approached Mr Lynarn, who gave me
the specification of the particular pipe required. When I
went to Mr I found that by getting the pipe I would
incur an expenditure of over eleven pounds.
' 'Uncler the circumstances I respeetfnlly beg that you will
mt insist upon my carrying out of the work.
Your obedient servant,
BOYLE.
The Conneil decided to release Boyle of his contract, and
left the vork in the hands of the County Surveyor.
8
Letter from the Department, dated 25th inst, No. 3642/10>
as under : —
IMPORTATION OF ANIMALS (IRELAND) ONDER OF 19T
FOOT ANI) MOUTH DISEASE.
Memorandum.
The Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction
for Ireland desire to intimate to all whom it may concern,
that owing to the reported occurrence of an outbreak of Foot
and Mouth Disease in Great Britain, all importation of Cattle,
Sheep, Goats, or other ruminating animals, and Swine, into
Ireland from that country are, for the time being, prohibited.
It is to be understood that equine animals do not eome•
within Che scope of this prohibition, and that, consequently,
Horses, Asses, and Mules may still be imported from across
the Chan 1€•1, if accompanied on each occasion by the necessary
permit from the Department.
The following communications from the Irish Brewers' Asso-
ciation were read :—
Irish Brewers' Association.
Secretary's Office,
Trinity Chambers, 40 and 41 Dame Street,
Dublin: 8th July, 1910.
Dear Sir,
I have been instructed by my Committee to
send you the enclosed resolution, and to ask you to kindly
submit it to your Council, and if approved of and passed, to
further ask you to be good enough to send it to tne Chancellor
of the Exchequer and your Parliarpentary Representative.
Thanking you in anticipation.
Yours truly,
W. G. HILL.
9
IRISH BREWERS' ASSOCIATION.
Resolved :
That inasmuch as many of the smaller Irish
eries in face of mammoth competition have to struggle to con«
tinue their business, the increased taxation of last year sought
to be re:imposed by the Budget introduced by the Chancellor
of the Exchequer for 1910-11 is a real hardship, and will un-
doubtedly be the means of breaking up some of these firms,.
and still further reducing the number of small Breweries in
Ireland which give so much employment, encourage tillage,
und are a distinct benefit to the district in which they are
situated in many ways, as for instance, in providing food-stuffs
such as grain and malt oombings for cattle feeding, and in
keeping alive a healthy competition in the purchase of Barley,.
Fodder, ete
The increased Whiskey Tax has, unfortunately, seriously
affected the Irish Distilleries, causing thereby a distinct loss
to Farmers and Agriculture generally, as well as loss of employ-
ment, and if, in addition to this, Preweries are closed down,
the future prospects of tillage in Ireland must be seriously
jured.
In face of these circumstances, this Council urgently re-.
quests the Irish members of Parliament to insist that they
smaller Trish Breweries be relieved of the extra and excessive.
burdens itnposed lay last year's Budget.
Proposed by Mr James Wynne,
Seconded by Mr Bernard Hamill, J P,
That the foregoing resolution from the Irish Brewers' Assow
ciation be and is hereby adopted by this Council.
Amendment moved by Mr Joseph T Dolan, seconded by Mr
C A Duffy, J P—That the resolution be marked "read."
On a division there voted for the amendment :—Messrs Dolan,
T J; Donegan, Duffy, C A; Finnegan, King, M 'Gee, O'Meara..
Woods, P; and Wocds, Wm—Io.
10
Against the amendment there voted :—Messrs Byrne, T J ,
Dolan, Joseph; Hamill, B; Macardle, T C; M'Court and
W ynne—6.
The Chairman, therefore, declared the amendment carried by
IO votes to 6.
The following discussion took place respecting the introduc-
tion of Electric Light to the County Courthouse:—
LIGHT.
Mr sl Comerford, Town Clerk, Dundalk, stated that he had
been deputed by the Urban Council to wa.u on them for the
purpose of getting an undertaking that they would take
•electric light into the building if it were as cheap as gas. He
•explained that the Urban Council were promoting an Electric
Lighting scheme, and that he required the signature of the
•Chairman to such an undertaking, the entire list to be sent
to the L G B.
Mr Hamill said that when the County Surveyor was about
making application for new gas fittings in the building he
asked him to postpone it, as they were promoting an Electric
Lighting scheme.
Mr King—I don't object to it, but I would like to know
if we adopt it would there be any extra cost with regard to
putting In new fittings?
Mr MaeardIe—Certainly. 'file fittings are all rotten as they
are, and you want new ones (laughter).
Mr M 'Court said that if they continued witn gas they would
have to undergo an expenditure of at least C4() owing to the
fittings. When the question came forward they could get an
.estimate oc what electrical fittings would cost.
Mr Duffy—Mr Lynam estimated that the gas fittings would
cost COO, and we postponed it on account Of this F, lectric
Lighting scheme.
The necessary undertaking was given, and Mr Comerford
thanked the Council..
The
•bride,
11
MARGARINE BILL.
under-mentioned communication from Mr Denis Kil-
M P, was read and approved of by the Council
House of Commons,
z
June 20th, 1910.
Dear Sir,
I am again re-introducing the "Margarine Bill," which nas
for its object the prevention of Margarine being coloured as a
•colourable imitation of butter.
Yon will remember that the Bill was defeated in Committee
last Session after passing Its second reading without a division.
This was uue to the opposition of the Grocers' Association and
the Margarine manufacturers combined, who do not relish the
idea of se!ling margarine in its original colour, which is white,
thus end once and for all the possibility of palming it off
as butter.
It may be pointed out that the English farmer is not hit
by the substitution of margarine for butter, his great aim
being the more profitable one of supplying the big cities with
milk, which is being demanded in ever increasing quantities.
In the first five months of this year the increase in the
import of margarine has been over tons, and this does
not take into account the vast quantities being manufactured
in the United Kingdom from oil and animal fat. Ireland alone
stands to lose, and if the present state of things is allowed to
•continue Irish butter must go to the wall.
Last SesÄ1011 1 asked a question with regard to some samples
'Of ' 'Irish Butter" purchased by the Inspectors of the Depart-
ment of Agriculture for Ireland, both in London and Liver-
pool, and what was the reply—that "out of JIG samples pur-
chased as 'Irish Butter' only 16 were genuine," and this, be
it remenn»ered, in the two greatest cities in the Empire.
During the last few years thousands of acres of land have
been divided among occupiers, uneconomic holding have been
•enlarged, while under the operations of the newly formed
€congested Districts Board—particularly in the counties west
12
of the Shannon—vast tracts of land hitherto ' 'held up" wilh
now for the first time come under cultivation.
Instead of the "rigid and rotten communities" you will soon.
have hundreds of small well cultivated farms, ideal land for
tillage so necessary to Winter dairying, where formerly you
had only the shC1)herd and his dog.
Under snell conditions you are bound to have a vast increase.
in the production og butter ia the near future: and the question
naturally forces itself—can a market be found for it under fair
conditions ? Will fraudulent substitution be allowed to con-
tinue?
If the Bill now introduced for the second time can
be passed into law the future of Irish butter is safe, and I
trust I may have the support of your Council, and that you:
will strengthen my hands by passing a resolution in its favour-
and sending it to the Press.
I am, etc,
D. KILBRIDE.
PROPOSED PIER AT ANNAGASSAN.
NOTICE OF MOTION BY MR. T. J. DOLAN.
' I beg t" give notice that at the next meeting of the County
Council I shall move—That a Pier be constructed at Anna—
gassan in co-operation With the Department of Agriculturey-
by raising loan o! C800 chargeable on the County—the Pier
to be the property of the Cunty Council."
It may here be mentioned that a copy of the under-men-•
tioned memorandum was furnished each member of tho•
Council : —
PROPOSED HARBOUR WORKS AT ANNAGASSAS.
The Local Committee would feel very grateful for your sup-
port of above project. whi('li will come before the Co Councill
for consideration on Thursday, the 28th inst.
13
They desire to state that no contribution whatever is re-
•quired from the rates, the tonnage dues derivable from present
imports being ample to cover interest: sinking fund, and
Harbour Master's salary on the outlay necessary for the works,
æven without the free grant of C7ö0 which the Department of
Agriculture are giving. The return obtamed from H M Cus-
toms, which will be produced at the Council meeting shows
the tonnage as follows for the past five years
1905, 5,494
tons; 1906, 5,255 tons ;1907, 5,570 tons; 1908, 4,829 tons; 1909
4,561 tons. or an average of over 5,000 tons, which at 6d Will
produce 25, so that all that is required is the guarantee of
the County Couneil to enable the work to be carried out.
The following are the Local Committee :—Sir Henry Bel-
Jingham, Charles J Thornhill, the Rev P Fagan, P P; the
Rev P Finegan, 1 P; the Rev J Woods, C C; J J Russell,
Matthew Clinton, Joseph S Harmon.
The following gentlemen appeared before tne Council, all of
whom spoke in favour of the project in question Rev P
Fagan, P P; Rev J Woods, C C; and Messrs Matthew Clinton
and Joseph S Harmon.
The question having been fully discussed by the Council, the
following resolution on the subject was unanimously passed
"by the Council
mposed bs Mr T C Maeardle, J P,
S€eonded by Mr Bernard Hamill, J P, aud
Unanimously resolved—That it is the opinion of the Louth
'County Council that a Pier at Annagassan is desirable and
necessary for the convenience of the district, and we instruct
•our Secretary to communicate with the Department, and ask
them to submit Plans and Specification and Estimate of prob-
ablo cost of the proposed Pier, and what contribution the
Department were prepared to grant.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at their-
Adjourned Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council Chamber-
on Thursday, the 18th Day of August, 1910.
Present, :—
In the Chair—T Callan Esq, J P.
Other Members—Joseph Dolan, Joseph T Dolan, Bernard'
Hamill, J P; Joseph M Johnson, Joseph H M'Ardle, James
M'Court, J P; Michael O'Meara, J P; Peter Woods: J P;
William Woods, J P, Esquires.
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
18th August, 1910.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,
There are only two important Proposals for Special Works,
No. 1, Ardee, C70, to repair Dunan.v Pier ; and No. 3, Dundalk s
C180, to repair the Lane from Greenore to Ballagan as a
class road.
I am, Gentlemen, your obedient Servant,
P. J. LYNAM,
County Surveyor of LouthE
Proposed by Mr J M Johnson,
Seconded by Mr James M 'Court, J P: and
Resolved—That the Report of the County Surveyor, as ap-
pearing on the Schedule of Proposals for the 18th August,
1910, and a copy o! which is appended hereto, be and is hereby
adopted by this Council.
15
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
SUBK'OMMITTEE OX STEAM ROLLING, 27th JUNE, 191(h
Mr Chairman,
I beg to That a Steam Roller and Plant be
purchased by the County Council at a price not exceeding.
$680, and that C32() be provided for repmrs dulling a period'
Of ten years, provided that the Rural District Councils adopt
Steam Rolling.
• (2). That if the Rural Councils adopt Steam li'olling„
for the above purpose be borrowed from the Commis-
sioners of Public Works at 31 per cent—principal and interest
to be paid off by ten annual payments of Cll(j 12s 7d each. the
payments to be levied off the County-atluarge, Urban districts.
excepted.
(3). That the R ural Councils be asked to formulate pro-
posals for the working expenses of a Roller. The working
expenses include the wages of the engine driver, flagman and
foreman spreader, coal and coke, oil, etc, and are estimated
at 22s per day for 240 working days, or C2(j4 per annum. A
Roller could be kept at work if Ardee No. I Rural District
would• pass C99 for 90 working clays, Drogheda (Louth) C,32•
IGs for 48 days, and Dundalk El 12 4s for 102 days—total,
C2ß4 for 240 days' rolling. Unless the Rural District Councils
agree to pay for working expenses, in proportion to the num ber
of days rolling done in each district, rolling cannot be carried
on, and the matter must be dropped.
(4). That, if Rolling be adopted by the Rural Councils,
a Steam Rolling Account bo opened to show the total working•
expenses of the Roller for each year (including half wages for
the threo men during stoppages, clue to aceidents, repairs and'
frost), also the number of days' rolling done in each district,
and the amount in proportion charged to each district. This
account to be open to inspection 'by ratepayer in the Rural.
Districts on payment of a small fee.
(5). That, if Rolling be adopted and existing contracts ex-
Pire, the County Surveyor be directed to inelude in each new
contract on principa! roads a specified number of days' rolling
—about one day's rolling to each 40 or 50 cubie yards of broken
16
.stones.
The Roller to. be supplied to contractors free of
charge, but the contractor to be bound to have sufficient men
to spread the broken stones before the Roller quickly, provide
six men to blind and sweep, and a driver and horse for one
water cart, or, if necessary, for two water carts. Also the
.contrac€or should cart coal for the engine—about 4 cwts per
day—and a contractor should be liable to penalties if he
delays the Roller and keeps it idle.
(C). That contractors not now bound to employ a Roller be
asked to volunteer to use it' under the conditions as above
(paragraph 5). About one-third of the length of a contract
to be heavily sheeted with broken stones and rolled in each
year, the remaining two-thirds to have ruts darned. If a
-sufficient number of contractors do not volunteer, then the
purchase cf a Roller to be postponed for a year or two, or the
broken stones to be spread as usual and the Roller run over
•the patches.
(7). That in each district the most expensive roads, with
the highest price per perch per annum, should be first dealt
•with.
(8). One hundred and one miles of important roads leading
of Lhe towns of Ardee, Drogheda and Dundalk are now
maintained at an expense of C4.4G4 per annum, and there is
no room for doubt that at least one-fourth of this amount,
El ,116 per annum, -is wasted. The quantity of broken stoness
supplied { nd in each year on these 101 miles of road
amounts 16, GOO cubie yards, and at least one-fourth of these
stones are ground into dust, to be afterwards swept off as mud,
'before the patches of stones are rolled smooth by the traffic.
A Roller rolls the broken stones to a smooth and hard surface
without any waste. The existing wastage of ELI 16 per annum
would be about sufficient to keep three Rollers at work. One
Roller can only roll about twelve miles per annum, dealing in
a proper manner with 36 mules in three years.
Six years ago r wrote to the other County Surveyors, and
found that thirteen counties had adopted Steam Rolling.
Since then several other counties have followed suit, including
Monaghan and Meath. In 1903 Co Tyrone bought one l?oller
and cautiously watched for results. Now Tyrone has twelve
Rollers at work and two more Rollers have been ordered. The
17
value lion of Tyrone is nearly, and the valuation of
Louth is In this proportion, Tyrone having four-
teen Rollers, Louth ought to have at least seven Rollers. It
is a remarkable fact that in this respect Louth ranks with
the most backward counties in all Ireland. There is not one
single Road Roller employed in the Louth Rural Districts.
I am, Gentlemen, your obedient Servant,
P. J. LYNAM,
County Surveyor of Louth.
PROPOSALS FOR WORKS.
ARDEE.
Proposed by Mr Joseph T Dolan,
Seconded by Mr Joseph H M 'Ardle, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works formulated by the
Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council at their Second Quarterly
Meeting, held on Tuesday, the 5th day of July, 1910, and set
out on Form 20 furnished to the County Council, be and are
hereby approved of by this Council ; and we now authorise the
Secretary to affix tho Common Seal of the Council to tho
•Contracts entered into.
DROGHEDA.
Proposed by Mr Joseph M Johnson,
Seconded by Mr James M 'Court, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works formulated by the
Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union at their Second
Quarterly Meeting, held on Thursday, the 1407 July, 1910, and
set out on Form 20 furnished to the County Council, be and
18
are hereby approved of by this Council ; and we now authorises
the Secretary to affix the Common Seal of the '-ouncil to th€>
Contracts entered into.
DUNDALK.
Proposed by Mr Joseph M Johnson,
Seconded by Mr James M 'Court, J P: and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works formulated by the.
Dundalk Rural District Council at their Second Quarterly
Meeting, beld on Monday, the 11th day of July, 1910, be and
are hereby approved of by this Council ; and we now authorise
the Secretary to affix the Common Seal of the Council to the•
Contracts entered into.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Letter from the Local Government Board dated 9th instant,
No. 51,879 :1910, acknowledging the receipt of the Secretary's
letter of the 30th ultimo, relative to the Uye-laws made by the
Louth County Council with respect to the use of Locomotives.
in the county, and, in reply thereto, the Board request that
they may be furnished With a copy of a formal resolution Of
the County Council.
OLD AGE PENSIONS ACT. ARDEE EAST SUB-
COMMITTEE.
The following letter was read
Dunleer, 16th August, 1910.
Dear Sir,
T beg to inform you that Mr John Clarke, Castlebellingham,
who was member of the above Sub-committee, has resigned,
and also that the members of the Sub-committee recommend
the appointment of Mr Michael Meade, Castlebellingham, to
fill the vacancy.
Yours truly,
F. FAULKNER, Clerk.
The letter was duly initialled by the Chairman.
19
STEAM ROAD ICOLLING IN COUNTY LOUTH.
Office of Public Works,
Dublin, 22nd March: 1910.
Sir,
I am directed by the Commissioners of Public Works to
acknowledge the receipt of your let-ter of the 21st instant, and,
in reply, to inform .Nou that the Board do make loans for the
purchase of Steam Road Rollers and the necessary appurten-
anceS thereto. If it is desired to obtain a loan from public
funds appiication should, in the first instance, be made to the
Local Government Board, whose recommendation of a loan will
be necessary before this Board can entertain the matter. The
rates of interest at present a.ppuieable to loans charged on the
security of local rates are as follows per cent when the
period does not exceed 30 years ; 3} per cent when the period
does not exceed 50 years.
1 am, etc,
H. WILLIAMS: Secretary.
Letter from Local Government Board on same subject as
under
No. 26,526:1910. Louth County.
24th March, 1910.
Sir,
I am directed by the Incal Government Board for Ireland
to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 21st instant,
relative to the loan proposed to 'be obtained by the County
Council of Louth for the purpose of purehasmg Steam Rollers
and equipment, and, in reference thereto, I am to state that
the Board will be prepared to consider the question of sanction
to a loan for tho purpose in question on receipt of the applica-
tion of the County Council therefor, and on the procedure as
regards the application 'being carried out.
A form on whieh the Couneil may make application for
loan is enclosed.
I am, etc,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary-
20
Letters or the practical working of Road Rolling
following counties were also read, viz, Armagh: Down,
and Monaghan.
ARMAGH LETTER.
Dear Sir,
in the
Dublin
I am in receipt of your letter of the 15th inst making in-
regarding the purchase and use of Steam Road Rollers
in tho county. In answer to your queries I beg to state that
(1). Steam Rolling was adopted here by the County Council
on its own initiative.
Ihave no recollection of the District
Councils being consulted.
(2). I dc not think the li'nral District Councils were par-
ticularly favourable, hut I do not remember any formal
objections.
(3). The cost of the Rollers and the larger road machinery
has always been a County (Rural) charge.
Tt is many years since this Council began purchasing Steam
Rolle•s, but the above answers are, to the best of my belief,
correct.
Yours faithfully,
F. A. REID,
Assistant Secretary.
COUNTY OF DOWN.
Dear Sir,
In reply to yours of 15th instant with reference to the sub-
jeet of Steam Rolling, the Rural District Councils in the first
instance form Illate proposals, which are sent forward to the
County Council for consideration. The Rural Dastrict Councils
were consulted before the adoption of Steam Rolling in this
county.
When Steam Rolling was first adopted here, all the Rural
Councils adopted it, with the exception of one. In the latter
case the County Council took no action. However, Steam
Rt.)lling is now carried out in all the Rural Districts.
21
The cost of Steam Rolling is levied according to the charge-
ability of the road on which the work .is performed, i.e., on
a main road it is a half county and half district charge, and
on a district road, wholly a district charge.
Yours faithfully,
J. L. YOUNG,
Deputy Sec. to the County CounciL
COUNTY OF DUBLIN.
Dear Sir,
Your letter of the 15th inst to the Secretary of this Council
has been referred to me. In reply I have to state—
(I). It was not at the request of the Rural District Councils.
Steam Rolling wag adopted, but they were consulted before
its adoption.
(2). One of the five Rural District Councils, after having
some years ago adopted Steam Rolling for one year, rejected
it for some years until the present year, when they have agam
adopted it, so that at present all five Itural Districts have
adopted Steam Rolling.
(3). The purchase of the Rollers and rolling plant, and the
larger repairs of same only, are made a County at Large
(ex-Urbnn) charge. The cost of the working and maintenance
of the Rollers is charged to the district in which the work is
being done.
Yours faithfully,
W. COLLEN,
County Surveyor.
MONAGHAN COUNTY COUNCIL.
Sir,
In reply to yours of the 15th ultiuo, the Road Machinery was
obtained for this county by the County Council to improve the
roads. The Rural Districts were asked for their support to
the scheme. Some objected, others did not. A proposal is
now submitted by the County Surveyor to each District.
22
Counc:l ot its quarterly meeting for a certain sum for Steam
rolling.
The expenses of the scheme are a County-at-Large (Rural)
charge, and is charged on all the Rural Districts.
Yours truly,
DENIS CAROLAN RUSHE,
Secretary.
FINANCE COMMITTLß.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, on Monday, the
25th day of July, 1910.
Present :—
In the Chair—S B King, Esq, J P.
Other Members—C A Duffy, J P; E Goodman, Bernard
Hamill, J P ; James M 'Court, J P; and Th01nas Kinahan,
Esquires.
'The Secretary submitted County-at-Large payments in
respect of the quart(2' ended the 30th June last, and also
Forms 22 from the Clerks of the respective Rural District
Councils, which, on examination: were recommended for pay-
ment by the County Council.
County-at-Large payments
Ardee Itoncl payments
Drogheda Road payments
Dundalk Road payments
Total
Ld,6S3
823
1,466
Cß,43'2
2
6
16
8
14
8
6
9
8
7
The undermentioned application from the Council's care-
taker, C M 'Garrity, was agam rejected by the Committee :—
Dublin Street,
Dundalk, 25-7-'10.
Gentlemen,
I have been informed that my previous application re annual
23
remuneration for cleaning after extra clerks in Borough Court
and minding books during the dinner hours of same every day.
It 'has been stated that it is my agreement with the Council
.as part of my duties. But for the information of you, gentle-
men, I respectfully beg to herewith submit my agreement to
you, by which you will see that it is not part of my duties.
would, therefore, respectfully ask you to give my application
your favourable consideration.
I remain, Gentlemen, your Obedient servant,
CHRISTOPHER M'GARRITY, Caretaker.
The payments submitted by the County Surveyor, amount-
ling to Cöß 6s 3d, were, on examination, passed by the Com-
mittee.
The County Surveyor was directed to have a report reedy
•on the subject of Steam Rolling for the next meeting of the
'County Council.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Mi Alites of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held on Monday, the 8th day of August, 1910.
Present : —
In the Chair—Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P.
Other Members—C A Duffy, J P; M O'Meara, J P; N B
King, J P; and wm Woods, 'J P, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted Treasurer's Authority containing
payments amounting .to Cll 4s ()d, which, on examination,
•was passed by the Committee.
The application of the caretaker, C M 'Garrity, having been
referred by the County Council to the Finance Committee, was
again considered, and after some discussion on the matter, Mr
A Duffy proposed, end Mr B Hamill seconded, and it was
agreed—That M'Garrity be allowed the sum of C.I for his
24
services m connection with the extra clerical staff, and that
he be informed thät the Committee will not entertain any
further application for extra remuneration from him in respect
of such services.
Letter from Automobile Association dated the 30th ultimo
as under
Dear Sirs,
30th June, 1910.
As you are no doubt aware, this Association is erecting signs
on all the main roads throughout Ireland, and we find that a
direction arm is needed at Ardee. I am, therefore, writing to.
ask if you will kindly give us permission to erect this.
Yours faithfully,
A. ALLEN,
Irish Manager.
The Committee unanimously agreed to have the directionl
arm in question erected at Ardee.
FINANCE COMMWI'EE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, on Monday, the,
3rd day of October, 1910.
Present :—
In the Chair—William A Doran, Esq,
Other Members—M O'Meara, J P; James Wynne, T J
Byrne, J P; Peter Hughes, J P, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted Treasurer's Authority for works in
charge of the County Surveyor, which, on examination, were
passed by tlle Committee.
20
The Committee authorised the Petty Sessions Clerk at Carw
lingford to procure tables and chairs requn•ed during the Re-
vision Sessions.
The Committee accepted Kearney's tender for carting waste
paper to railway station for the sum of 15s.
The Committee directed the Secretary to send a copy of the
Collectors' letter to L G Board, asking for extension of time
to close current collection, and suggest that half years shouldl
end on the 30th April and 31st October in each year.
The Committee authorised Mr Lynam to employ 10 persons
for two days counting vehicles and motor cars on the road at
5s per day.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held on Monday, the 17th day of October, 1910.
Present :—
In the Chai—Peter Hughes, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Wm A Doran, Michael O*Meara, J P; and'
J M Johnson, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted payments for works in chrge of the•
County Surveyor, and those of his own Office, which, on exam—
nation, were passed by the Committee.
Arising out of these payments the Committee directed the
Secretary to write Messrs Cooper and Nephews, and ask them
what price they would be disposed to take for the Tanks in use
in tho county.
The Post Card re the use of Dunleer Petty Sessions Court by
26
the Committee of Agriculture, etc, was refered to the Council's
Solicitor for his opinion thereon.
The Secretary was directed to ask the Urban Council whe-
ther thöy intend appealing in the case of Mrs Hughes, Ro-
•den Ploce, who obtained at Quarter Sessions a decree for C2
7s Od for injury to her property.
The letter from the Local Government Board re the collec-
tion of rates, was ordered €0 appear on the minutes, and a
copy to be sent to each collector.
The following important letter from the R I C Authorities
was read :—
R. I. Constabulary, Omeath, 13th Oct, 1910.
Sir,
I beg to apply for authority to prosecute the following
nsheep owners for failing to send in the annual declaration that
their sheep were dipped within the prescribed Summer Dipping
Period Form C (i) Article 9, of Sheep Dippmg (Ireland) Order
of 1910
Hugh Connachy, Cornamucklagh.
Thomas Maguire, Cornamucklagh.
Owen Duffy, Tully, Omeath.
Bernard M 'Guigan, Bavin.
These people were warned by the police when sending in the
Notice to dip, so thnt they have no excuse.
The Petty Sessions are to be held in Carlingford on the 20th
inst, so that I should feel thankful for an early reply from you.
Yours, etc,
J. ANKETELL, Sergt.
The Committee directed that a short paragraph be sent to
the papers stating unless Sheep Owners in the county send the
Constabulary Authorities the prescribed Form notifying that
their sheep have been dipped. prosecutions are to be institu-
27
The undermentioned letter from the L. G. Board was read,
•and a copy was ordered to be sent to each Collector :—
No. 64,127/1910. Louth County.
Local Government Board, Dublin,
14th October, 1910.
Sir,
I am directed by the Lecal Government Board for
Ireland to inform you that they have had before them your
letter of the 3rd instant, with enclosure, relative to the collec-
tio.a of the poor rate for the past half-year in the County of
Louth ; and, with reference thereto, I am to state that tho
Board much regret to observe that the collection is in an ex-
tremely unsatisfactory condition, there being a sum of no less
than Lf6,3ö7 out of a total of C14,893 outstanding at the close
of the half-year.
This discreditable state of affairs must be entirely attributed
to the failure of the Collectors to proceed with their collections
in the earlier poi fion of the half-year. The Board would point
•out that, although the Collectors received tneir warranta so
far •back as the 3rd of June last, they had, notwithstanding
the repeated warnings given to them, only lodged a sum of
C453 by the 22nd July, while by the 10th of September, or
three weeks before the close of the half-year, the large sum of
CII,G09 remained uncollected.
The Board further observe that the large proportion of the
•rates which the Collectors have lodged was collected during
the month of September, at a time when the Collectors state
that they were continuously employed at the Revision Courts,
and that it was åbsolutely impossible for them to attend to the
•duties of their collections. It is therefore quite evident that
the Collectors must have made little or no effort to prosecute
their collections during the months of June, July, and Au-
gust.
As regards the request of the Finance Committee that ex-
•eeptional treatment should be afforded to County Louth, I am
to state that the Board have nothing to add to their letter of
*the 18th Novembev last, in reply to a sitnilar request then
28
In other agricultural districts:
made by the County Council.
which are much less favourably circumstanced than County-
Louth, and where the difficulties of collection are greater, thev
Collectors have again this year been able to lodge the full'
amount of their warrants within the prescribed time, and tho
Board see no ground for making an exception in the case of •
County Louth to the rule that prevails elsewhere throughout
Ireland as to the date of closing the rates.
I am to add that the law requires the Collectors to collect
and lodge each moiety of tho rate within the half-year, and if
the Collectors in County Louth are not prepared to carry out
the law in this respect, they should be called on to tender
their resignation, so that proper arrangements may be made-
for the collection of the poor rate in the county.
The County Council should require the Collectors to lodge•
the outstanding amounts of the first moiety without any fur—
ther delay.
T am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
To the Secretary to the
Louth County Council.
The following communication from the Chief
Office, was also read by the Secretary :—
Chief Secretary's Office,
Dublin Castle,
Secretary's
12th October, 1910.
Sir,
I am directed by the Lord Lieutenant to transmit
to you herewith an Order for payment of the sum of C(i38 2s Sd
in respect of the cost of maintenance of pauper lunatics for
29
the year ended 31st March, 1910, in the Richmond District
Lunatic Asylum.
I am to state that owing to the insufficiency of the amount
paid under Section 58 of the Local Government (Ireland) Act,
1898, to the Local Taxation (Ireland) Account in the current
financial year, to meet the sums payable thereout in the same
period under the Section ,as amended by the Local Govern-
ment (Ireland) Act, 1902, His Excellency has deemed it neces-
'sary, in pursuance of the provisions of Sub-section (5) of SC c-
tion 58, to direct a proportionate abatement of the sums so
. payable havi:rg regard to the said insufficiency.
The money available in the Account at the present date is
insufficient to pay a larger ptx»portion than 68 per cent. of the
•estimated charges falling to oe met from the Account, and
the amount included in the accompanying Order represents
the proportion, calculated on this basis, of the amount certified
by the Auditor to be payable to the Asylum, less the sum of
Cl,700 already advanced.
I am to add that with the payment into the Account early
in 1911 of the sum of mentioned in Sub-Section (1) (b)
of Section 58, His Excellency expects to be rin a position to
make a further payment from the Account to local authorities,
but the measure of the additional relief that may be thus
afforded cannot be definitely stated until the precise amount of
all the charges falling to be met under the Act oi 1898 and the
Amending Act of 1902 shall have been ascertained towards tho
•close of the present financial year.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. J. CULLINAN.
The Secretary,
County Council of Louth.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of proceedings of the Louth County Council, at
their Special Meeting held in the Council Chamber, on Thurs-
•day, the 27th day of October, 1910.
30
Present :—
In the Chair—T J Byrne, Esq, J P.
Other members—Wm Woods, J P; Bernard Hamill. J
Joseph M Johnson, Patrick M 'Gee, Joseph T Dolan, and Peter
Woods, J P, Esquires.
The Council were summoned for the purpose of taking into
consideration the County Surveyor's Plans re Road Board Cir—
cular, and the consideration of letter from the Department re.
Annagassan Pier.
On the motion ot Mr Edward Goodman. seconded by Mr Ber-
nard Hamill, J P, it was
Resolved—That the recommendations contained in the Re-
ports of the County Surveyor, and the Surveyors of the Urban
Districts of Drogheda and Dundalk, be and are hereby adopted'
by this Council, and that same be sent forward to the Road
Bord for confirmation.
It was also proposed by Mr T C Macardle, J e, seconded by
Mr Bernard Hamill, J P, and
Resolved—That a memorandum embracing the Chairman's
remarks, be embodied in a Report by the County Surveyor for
consideration at next meeting of the Council, with the adene
dum suggested by Mr Goodman, added thereto.
On the motion of Mr Joseph T Dolan, seconded by Mr
Joseph M Johnson, it was
Resolved—That a Committee of the whole Council be alV
pointed to meet the Department's Engineers at Annaga.ssan,
on Thursday, the 10th November, for the purpose of a consuV
tation respecting the erection of the proposed pier.
31
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee, at their
Meeting, held on Monday, the 31st day of October, 1910.
Present :—
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq, J P.
Other Members—James Wynne, Joseph T Dolan, Michael'
O'Meara, J P; Wm A Doran, Bernard Hamill, J P; and
Woods, J P, Esquires.
The Secretary sunrnitted County-at-Large Payments in 1 cs-.
pect ot the quarh• ended 30th September last, which, ex
amination, were passed by the Committee.
The following letter from Collector Cluskey was read, ana
referred to the Council's Solicitor :—
' 'There are about 70 Ratings with the fishermen of Black-
rock—plots they got in Clermont Park. None or them will pay
the rates. They state that the District Council gave them a
Statute acre for CI Gs Od a year, free of everything, and there
is nothing on plots to make a seizure, and 1 receive all kinds
of insults over the matter. "
The folowing letter from Mr James Dromgoole: Clerk OF
Petty Sessions, Dunleer. was read
Sir,
Dunleer, 22nd October, 1910.
r am directed by my Magistrates to bring under tho
notice of your Couneil the necessity for a suitable arm-chair
for the use of the Chairman at Dun leer Petty Sessions.
The
old chair has fallen to pieces through old age, and is now
quite noeless. Kindly firing the matter mnder the notice of
your Council and oblige.
am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
JAS. DROMGOOLE. C. P.
32
The Committee declined to supply the chair in question,
'until they see further about Mr Oldershaw's Post Card, in
which he states that the Magistrates and Mr Dromgoole ob-
.ject to the representative of the County Committee holding
his meetings there.
On the application of the County Surveyor the Committee
tmanimously granted him C'20 for the purpose of paying his
'assistants and others for services rendered in connection with
the Road Board Circular.
It was also agreed to by the Committee that the County Sur-
•veyor apply to the Automobile Association for money to erect
'danger signals throughout the county.
When the foregoing business had been transacted, the same
gentlemen constituted the Executive Committee, and having
•considered the undermentioned correspondence, decided to
•make no order thereon.
The Secretary Louth County Council.
Dear Sir,
Would you bring before the enairman and mem-
bers of the Council at their next meeting, a claim for compen-
sation on account of the deterioration of 71 head of sheep
driven to your dipping tank at Ardee, on Wednesday„ 19th
October, for the purpose of being dipped, a distance of eight
Irish miles, out and back, remaining there from IO o'clock,
a m, till 2.20 p m, waiting for the man in charge of tank, but
he did not come to discharge his duty, although he promised
on the Saturday previous to do so. If this is the way the pub-
lio aro to be treated, it is somewhat high-handed, as this is a
serious loss of time, and damage to stock, to be travelling for
nothing. I must see further about this. I now formally claim
33
T. F. Filgate, Esq, Dundalk.
Sir,
Ardee, October 29, '10.
In reply to yours re Carolan's Sheep. When he
spoko to me about dipping th&+heep on Monday or Tuesday, i
told him 1 eonld not do so; but coul dmanage it next day
(Wednesday). He told me he thought he could not come n
Wednesday, and I asked him if not to send me a post card to
say if he would come on Wednesday, or when? This he did
not do, but sent in the sheep on Wednesday morning up-
awares. Trusting this explanation will be satisfactory,
I remain,
Yours obediently,
W. LEONARD.
for
Deterioration
Men's time .
..... ..... ..... .. 0 10
'Oct, 22nd, 1910.
6
6
C. and P. CAROLAN,
Bedpatrick, Collon.
Local Government (Ireland) Act,
1898.
Coulb Counip Council.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At tlleir 'I'hird Quarterly Yleetiltg held ill the
Council Chamber, Dundalk,
on TIIURSI)AY, 17th 1910; and
at, their Adjourned Quarterly Meeting held in the Council
Chamber, I)undalk,
()n TIIURSI)AY, '24th November. 1910.
Finance Committee Meetings
Held 1 4th November; 28th November; 12th Decenlber ;
9th January, 1911.
23rd December, 1910 ;
1
LOUTH ('OUSTS COUNCIL.
Minutes of proceediug.s of the Louth County
Council at their 'i'hird (Quarterly Meeting, held in
{be Council C Ivaillber, 011 "l'hursday, the 17th day of
Noventber, 1910.
Present :
111 Ilughes, L'sq, J P.
'Other Members—J oseph Dolan, Joseph T I)olan,
William A l)oran, Bernard Finnegan, Bernard
Hamill, J P; James J P; Patrick M'(iee,
Peter Woods, J P; James Wynne; Esquires.
COx OF MINUTES OF THE
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Proposed by Mr William A l)oran,
Seconded by Mr Bernard llamill, J P; and
Resolved— That the minutes of proceedings of the
Finance Committee on the undermentioned dates
and are hereby approved of by this Council, viv
bber,
25th July, 1910; 8th August, ;
( jetober, 191 and the 31st (jetober,
1910: 17th
1910.
'I)XPL'S OF QUARTERLY MEETINGS OF
RURAL DISTRICT COUNCILS
SAL
Proposed by Mr Joseph T l)olan,
Secondeci bv Mr Petey AV00(ls, and
Resolved— -Illmat the Cou Ilty Council hereby de-
termine that the following shall be the dates for the
ng of Che Font th Qual terly Meetings of the
Rural Councils, viz : —
Ardee, Tuesday, 3rd January, 1911.
I)rogheda, Thursday, 12th Januaw, 1911.
I)undalk, Monday, 9th January, 1911.
The last (lay for lodging Notices and Applications
for District Councils will be Tuesday, the 13th
December, 1910.
The Proposal Committee to meet on Monday, the
2nd January, 1911.
VIU)POSALS FOR PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr Pairiek M 'Gee,
Seconded bv Mr Joseph T Dolan, aud
Resolved— That the Proposals for Payments for-
mulated by the Ardee Rural District Council at, their
T h Quarterly Meeting, held on Tuesday, the 1st
day of November, 191(), and set out on Form 22,
furnished to the County (_:ouneil, be and are hereby
approved of.
These payments amount to E8C)2 14s •3(1.
Proposed by Mr Joseph Dolan,
seconded Joseph T Dolan, and
Resolved— That the lh•oposals for Payments
3
mulated by the Louth Rural District of 101 oglvecla
Ilnion at their Third Quarterly Meeting, held on
".['hursday, the 13th day of ()ctober, 191(), and set out
•on Form 22, furnished to the County Council, be and
;are hereby approved of by this Council.
These payments •amount to $638 Is Sd.
PAYMENTS.
On the motion of Yr Bernard Hamill, J P, second-
by James Wynne, and Resolved—That the
proposals for payments formulated by the
Reral District Council at their Third Quarterly
Meeting, loei(i on Monday, the 7th day of November,
1910, and set out on Form 22, furnished fo the
C,ounty Council, and are hereby approved of.
These payments amount to C161() IOS.
CORRESPONDENCE.
The following correspondence from Mr T) Leavy,
Dundalk, was read : —
October 5th, 191().
T)ear Sir,
I repolåecl an accident that happened
io my motor car and driver on Sunday night last in
Grange, owing to a manhole -being left open.
intend putting in my claim in due course when I
know the cost of repairs, etc.
Yours truly,
DAN LEAVY.
for-
4
Ordered —-"lhai the foregoing letter be referred to
the Council's Solicitor.
St. Brigid's Inebriate Home,
AVexford,
5th November, 1910.
The Secretary read the following let t 'T from the
above Institution :
I)ear Sir,—
You will, I trust, pardon the liberty 1
taking of writing to beg a favour. We have
established a Home for Tnebriate Catholic Women.
committed under the Inebriates' Act from any part;
SVe hope to be able to do a great deal
of Irelayci.
of good for these poor victims of drink, by training
them to habits of cleanliness, • industry, and 7 self
respect.
The Government contributes towards the nm•ailltell-
ance of AV omen committed and sent to the Ilorne,.
but on conditions that the T.ocal Authorities will also
contribute. The local contribution is 5s Gd per week,
AV e are now making application to the
per eapita.
members of the Louth County Council, and T shall
feel very grateful if you will be good enough to sup-
port the application, you will be doing a great act
of charity, as sending these poor Women to a Prison
merely hardens and degrades them.
5
With many apologies for trespassing on your valu-
able time, and thanking you in anticipation.
I remain,
Yours tryly,
SISTER M. STANISLAUS DUNNE.
OrdereW—That the further consideration of the
foregoing letter be postponed until the next Meeting
of the County Council.
The eonsi(leration of the undermentioned Notice of
Motion from Mr Joseph T l)olan was postponed until
'the next Meeting of the County Council.
NOTICE OF MOTION :
IRe Polling T)istriets and Registration of Voters'
(Ireland) Act, 1908.
I hereby give Notice that at the ilext •Meeting of
{he County Council, I shall move :
' 'That the County Council of Louth; by virtue of
the Powers vested in them by the Polling l)istriets
and Registration of Voters' (Ireland) Act, 1908,
hereby decide to adopt Section 1 of said Act with re-
ferenee to the alteration of Parliamentary Polling
Districts, and that a Committee of this Council be
appointed to prepare a scheme with reference thereto.
And further, that the County Council adopt Section
3 of said Act, and arrange to have the Register of
Voters prepared Alphabetically in Townlands, or, as
regards Urban l)istricts in Streets, and that the
Council pass such resolution as may be required,
6
arranging, subject to the sanction of the, Loral Go—
vernment Board, that the Register of Voters be pre—
pared accordingly.
(Signed),
JOSEPH T. DOLAN."
TOWNLEY F. FILGATE,
Secretary Louth County Council.
Dated this 12th day of November, 1910.
LOUTIT COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of proceedings of the Louth County Coun—
cil at their .A(ljourned Quarterly Meeting, held in
the Council Chamber, 01) T]lursday, the '24th day of
November, 1910.
Present :
In the Chair-• -Vetrr Ilughes, P.
Other Members-nPatrick Callan, Joseph Dolan,
Joseph T Dolan, Wm A Doran, z Patrick Donegan,
J P; Bernard Finnegan, Edward Goodman, Bernard
•llamill, J P; T Callan Maeardle, J P;
ames
M'Carthy, J P; James MCCourt, J P; Patrick M'Gee,
T)enis J Peter Woods, J P; William Woodsn
J p, Esquires.
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
The following was read:—
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,—
There are only two important proposals:
for works—so. I, I)rogheda (provisional), fov
and No. 4,.
a new road through Rathdaniel ;
Drogheda, $300, to repair the, coast road where
damaged by the sea near Cruicetown.
I am, gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
P. J. LYSA.\I,
County Surveyor of Louth.
Proposed by Mr. James J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Bernard Einnegan, and
Resolved—That the Report of the County Sur-
veyor, as appearing on the, Selmedttie of Proposals for
the 24th November, 1910, be entered on the Minutes.
It was then proposed by Mr Joseph Dolan, seconded
bv Mr Patrick so. 120
Schedule of 1) roposals be rejoefed by the Council.
The Chairman (livided the Council on this Pro-
position, and the, following was the result of the
voting : —
For Mr T)olau's motion there voted - Messrs Joseph
Dolan and Patrick AI 'Gee 2.
Against the motion there voted—Messrs. P. Ca.llau„
8
Volati, Patrick Donegan, Bernard
2) oseph T.
Finnegan, Edward Goodman, rr. C.
Denis
•Carthv, J ames M 'Court,
Woods, William Woods, and James
The Chairman thel'efore declared
tiou lost.
AIRI)EE WORKS.
Maeardle, James
J. Rati), Peter
Wynne—12.
Mr. Dolan's mo-
Proposed by Mr. William A. Doran,
Seconded by Mr. Joseph T. I)olan, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works for-
mulated by the Ardee No. I Rural Distrief Council,
at their Meeting held on 'l'uesday,
the 4th day of
( )etober, 1910, arcl set out in Form 20, furnished to
the County Council, be and are hereby approved of ;
and we now authorise our Secretary to affix the Com-
mon Seal of the Council to the Contracts entered into.
WORKS.
Proposed by J). Rati),
Seconded by Mr. P. l)onegan, and
Resolved— That the Proposals for AVorks for-
D) ulate:l by the Louth Rural DistrieC of Drogheda
Union, at their Meeting held on Thursday, the 13th
day of October, 191(), and set out on Form 20, fur-
Mished to the County Council, be and are hereby ap-
proved of; and we now authorise our Secretary to
affix the Common Seal of the Council to the Con-
tracts entered into.
9
WORKS.
Proposed by Mr. M 'Cotllt,
Seconded by Mr. NV ynne, and
I lesolveci—That the Proposals for \Vorks for-
mulated by the Dundalk Rural District Council, at
their Meeting held on Monday, the 10th day of
October, 1910, and set out on Forni 2(), furnished to
the County ('ouncil, be. and are hereby approved of.
I)ENCE.
The following Correspondence was then read by the
Secretary : —
Letter from tile Clerk of the Dundalk Rural
District Council as under
16th November, 1910.
Dear Sir,—
At their Quarterly Meeting, held on the
10th October last, the Ilural I)istrlet Council of l)un-
• dalk passed the following resolution : —
Ilesolved—-That we request the County Council to
provide a Steam 1101)er for this l)istriet, and we here-
by agree to pay the sum of E2G8 annually to meet the
Avorking expenses, etc., of same.
ours
Proposed by -Mr.
.Seconded by Mr.
faithfully,
P. R. FINIGAS,
Clerk of the (,'ouneil.
T. C. Alacardle,
11 amiil, and
10
Resolved- - "Ilhat we hereby approve of the resolu-
ti011 of the Dundalk Rural District Council, passed
on the 10th October last.
Ennis State, Inebriate Reformatory,
22nd. November, 1910.
l)ear Sir.—
With reference to your letter of 21st.
inst., j regret I am unable to give you the informa-
lion you require. You may, however, be able to ob—
tain the information from the General Prisons'
Board, I)ubiili Castle.
I may add that Ennis Re-
formawory is a State Institution and all expenditure
in eoneetion with its upcv•eep is paid from Imperial
Funds, except M'here an inrnate has property avail„
able from which, under Sec. 12 of the Inebriates Act, r
the cost of maintenance may be recovered.
I am, dear Sir,
Vour obedient Servant,
KING,
The Secretary,
Louth Couutv ('ouncil,
Proposed by Mr. Joseph T. Dolan,
Seconded by -Mr. William A. T)oran, and
Resolved—That we authorise the Finance Com-
mittee to pay out of the Subsidiary Account the cost
of summonses advanced by School Attendance.
Officers, in making prosecutions under directions of
11
School Attendance Committees of the County, whew
vouched by their respective Committees.
T Ile undermentioned Notice of Motion was then,
before the Council: —
I hereby give, Notice that, at the next Meeting of
the County Council to be held on the 24th November,-
' 'That a Committee be appointed
1910, I shall ruove
to consider "the Foundation of I" niversity Scholar-
ships, and to submit a Scheme fo the• Council at its
January Meeting in time to have provision made
the Rates, ii approved."
(Signed) JOSEPH. T. DOLAN.
On the motion of Mr. Joseph T. i)olau, seconded by
Mr. Bernard llamill, it was
Resolved—That a Committee of the whole Council
be appointed discuss Mr J. T. I Dolan's Notice of
24th
Motion, as appeuring on the Agentia for the
November, 1910.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee
at their Meeting held in the Council Chamber on
Monday, the 14th day of November, 1910.
Present :
In the Chair—Peter Ilughes, Esq,. J.P.
Other Members—T. A. Duffy, J.P. ; Michael
O'Meara, .T.P: William woods, J.P; Wm. A.
Joseph T. l)oian, and J dines Wynne, Esquires.
12
The Seeletary submitted Accounts for AVorks in
Vharge of the, County Surveyor and those of his own
011 examination, were passed by the
( )ffiee, which,
Committee.
The following Correspondence was then read by
•the Secretary : •
Letter from the Town Clerk, Drogheda, dated 9th
November, 191(), as under :—-
l)ear Sir,
The County Council hold from the Cor-
Doration o portion of the Weigh Crane on Wellington
Quay at a rent' of $2 per annum as an Office for the
Inspector of Weights and Measures.
I am directed
to apply for the sanction of the County Council to the
Corporation tetnporarily inaking use of this ( )ffice,
upon the condition that suitable prenlises will be pio-
vided elsewhere for the Inspector.
Yours faihtfuliy,
J. J. CONNOLLY.
The Cornnlit,tee decided to refer this letter to the
County Council.
ANSAGASSAN PIER.
The following important letter from the Depart,-
ment was then read :
8604/10. F.B.
Sir,
Adverting
13
or the suli,ieet of the proposed improve,
3rd ultilli(),
aeeomnoclation at Annagassan, I
ment of the I liii'bour
the information of the Loutli
have to state, for
County Council. thnt the I)epartnyenf, 011
re-cou-u
sideration, are willing to alter. their offer to contribute.
one-third of the expenditure on the Scheme, which
is estimated to cost $2,250, and are now prepared to,
offer, Vithill a limit of , 125, one-half the actual
expenditure.
Chis letter Ve read at the next Meet,-
ing of the County Council.
The Seewtary submitted Collectors' irrecoverable.
arrears ill respect of the half-year ended Sep-
tember last, which, on examination, were passed by
the Committee and ordered to be sent to the Local
Government Board for confirmation.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Conunittee.
at their Meeting held in the Council Chamber on.
Monday, the '28th day of November, 1910.
Present :
In the ('hair Peter ITughes, Esq.. J.P.
alid Bernard'
( )ther Metnl»ers -James M' ynne,
llamill, J.I)., Esquires.
The Secretary submitt.ed Treasurer's Authority for
Works iu charge of the County Surveyor, which, on
examination, was passed by the Committee.
to
9th Novemer, 1910.
my letter to you of the
14
The following Correspondence was theu
Secretary :
Local Government Poard,
23rd November,
Sir,
ith reference to your letter
read by
1910.
of the
21st instant relative to the payment of remuneration
to the Collectors of the Poor Rate in the County of
Leuth on the Collection for the half-year ended the
September, 1910, I am directed by the Local
Government Board for Ireland to state that, before
taking this application into consideration, they de-
sire to know whether the, Collectors would be pre-
pared to guarantee that they will comply with the
terjns of the Public Bodies ()rder, 1904, by lodging
t,be full amount of the first moiety of next year's Rate
by the September, 1911.
I am, etc.,
A. 11. BAIUuAS, Secretary.
Ordered—-That a copy of the above letter be sent to
-each Collector.
This having been done, the following letter was
.ul(lressed by the Secretary to the Local Government
Board, accompanied by the undermentioned guaran-
tee from the Collectors : —
Secretary's Letter to L. G. Board : ——
28th November,
-Sir,
In reply io your letter of
1910.
the 23rd
15
•instant, No. 7294011910, I respectfully beg to enclose
copy of guarantee received this (lay from the Col-
lectors respecting the closiug of the September half-
year's Collection.
GUARANTEE.
We, the undersigned Collectork of County Louth,
•hereby undertake to lodge the fuli amount of our
respective arra nts by the Sey.tember in each
year, provided the County Council cousent, and the
Local Government Hoard sanction, that each Col-
lector geis a Bonus to compensate him for the amount
•he has to lodge in respect of irrecoverable rates.
(Signed) Patrick Noonan, Pai,riek M'l)onnell,
Patrick M'Cu110ugh, Peter M'l)onnell,
Patrick Cluskey, and John 'Woods.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee
at their Meeting held in the Council Chamber on
Monday, tile 12th day of December, 1910.
I)reseiit : —
In the Chair—Peter Ilughes, Esq., J.P.
Other- Members—Joseph T. Dolan, Peter Woods
(Muchgrange), and James 'Wynne, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted Treasurer's Authority for
Work in charge of the County Surveyor's and
the Secretary's ()ffices, which, on examination, was
passed by the Committee. These payments amount
to Elö 0s Sd.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Ninutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee-
at, their Meeting held in the Council Chamber on %
Friday, the 23rd day of l)eeemnber, 191().
Present: —
Ill the Cimaiv llamill, Esq., J.P.
( )tv.er Members- -Joseph Al. Johnson, and James
Wynne, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted Treasurer's Authority for
M' orles in ('Ijarge of the Corinty Surveyor's and the
Secretary •s (Offices, which, on examillation, was
passe:l by the Committee.
These amount to $82 18s 501, and
numbered from 48 to (63.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee
at their Meeting held ill the Couneil Chamber on
Monday, Che 9th day of January, 1911.
Present : —
In the Chair—Netor Tlttghes; Esq., J.P.
()ther Members T. C. Maeardle, .J . P. ; Edward
Goodman, James Wynne, and Michael O'Meara,
J .P., Esquires.
T'he Secretary submitted Treasurer's Authority,
numbered from 77 to 95 inclusive, anci amounting to
ÆG2 19s Sd, which, 011 examination, was passed by the
Committee.
17
CORRESPON DEN
SIIEF,P (IRELAND) OF 1911)
Carling f0H1, 4/1/1911.
I beg to apply for permission to proserut? Patrick
ancl Peter
M.aguire, South Commons, Carlingford,
Wart], of Earlsquar[er, for failing to emupl.y with the
Dipping of the Sheep l)ipping (Ireland)
Order, 1910.
DELANY, R.I.C.,
The Commif'ee ordered that tite above-natned pov-
sons be prosecuted under the Sheep .l)ipping (Ireland)
( )rder, 1910.
the
of the ( •ounty Sill se.yor,
On the application
Conunittee recommended an expenditure of each
anci
for the upkeep of Carlingford, Clogherhead,
Giles' Quay Piers.
Local Government (Ireland) Act,
1898.
Coulb Count) Council.
MINUTES
PROCEEDINGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At their l•'irst Quarterly Meeting held in the Council
Chamber, l)undalk,
THURSDAY, 19th January, ; and
At their Adjourned Meeting held on the 23rd Feb., 1911 •
and at their Special Meeting held on the 27th day of
March. 191 1.
Finance Committee Meetings
Ileld on 30th January; 13th February; 6th March, 1911.
P. MACCVLLOVGH, PRINTER, DUNDALK.
1
COUNTY COUNCIL.
RCLLING COMMITTEE.
M hilltes of ? I oeeedings of the above Conrmittee at
-I Leir Meeting, held in the Council Chamber on Mon-
(I•jy, the 1611, Tanuar,y, 1911.
Present : —
In the Chair-• Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
ither Men; bc rs—Joseph T)olau, Michael ( r Meara,
J.P.: William Woods, J.P.;
Joseph H. MSArdle,
Peter Woods, .1 . P. ; and James M •Carthy, Esquires.
he (Bommiitee Mere summoned for the purpose of
eonsilering the subject, of Steam Rolling for County
Louth. and made the following reecmrnendations to
the County (ounc•il, with Mr. Joseph Dolan, Gauls-
town, dissentipg: -
(1st.)
'I'ljey reennunell(led the County (',ouneil to
advertise for die hire of two Steant Ilollers —one for
I Ilurnl l)istiiet, and one for the
11 ural l)istrie€
(2nd.)- ('onditions of hiring these Rollers to .12
settled by our Solicitor. -we also approve of the fol
lowing addition to the typed specification for maili-
recommended by the County Surveyor for the
County of Louth.
If by County Council,
or Ly the
Counts Survevor, the roads shall be Steani Rolled,
about one day's rolling to forty or fifty cubie yards of
2
bioketr stopes specified. A length of the Cou-
fract end) to Lé heavily sheéterl with stones
and Sfeatif Rolled eaelf of the Con-
tract to have only sufficient stones to melid ' ruts.
County Council will supply the Roller ard pay for coal.
oil, and driver's wages free of charge to the Contractor,
the Contractor to supply sufficient men to spread the
stones quickly ahead of the Roller, blind and swepp,
also a flagman.
The Contractor shall also eart cool,
etc., .fer the Roller (',lLout 5 cwt. per day), and provide
•a horse and driver for the water eart, or, if necessaw,
horses and drivers f"? two water carts. It may hap-
pen that the stones for rolling Till be left on the road-
side •luring the winter, to be spread and rolled the fol-
summer season.
If required, ruts shall Ime
nmellded bv picking up the surface, adding stones and
and then ramming the Datt•h; also that the,
Surveyor (litveted to ask Contravtors to volu •Leer
to Steam Roli on existing Contracts.
LOUTIT COUNCIL.
AI illtltes of Proceedi ngs of the Louth
Council at [lieir Fovrtll Qualåerly Meeting, held ill the
Council Ch amber Thursday, the 19th
day of
Jonti.qry, 1911.
Present :
In the Chair—Wm. A. Doran, Esq., V.C.
C)ther Members Joseph Dolan, Joseph T. I)olali,
Patrick l)onegali, J.P.; Edward Goodman, Belmartl
3
J.P.; Sieholas B. King, ,J.v.; . 11.
YI 'Ardie.' Jarnes 'Al •Court, Michael (Y Meara, J.P
i)enis J. Rath', Peter -Woads, J.P.; and James AV ynne,
Esquires.
'I'he Militités Oof •the Inst Meetings of the Covineii,
having been printed and a copy sent to each member,
tn ken as reall and Were confil'lned.
OF FIN ANCF.
MINUTES.
Proposed by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded bv AI L Pcter AVoods, J. P. , and
Resolved
'I'ljat the Mi)iuCes of Proceedings of the
Fi nance Committee on the u dates be,
upcl are hereby, apploved of by this Council, viz :
14th Noven,ber, 28th November. 1910; 12th
Novenmber, 1,910 •
, 1910 ;
ali(l the 5th
1911.
CONFIRMS'I'ION OF MINUTES OF STEAM
)MMITTEE.
On the Inotion of Mr. Bernard llamill, J.P.,
Seconded Lv NIV. Edward Goodman, it was
"l'hat the M in utes of I) of tlv•
Steanx Road Rolling at their Meeting, helci
on the lßth of January, 1911, be, and are hereby, ad-
opierl Ly this C •unci I, Mr Joseph T)olan, Gaulstcwil,
(lisset!ting.
FIVED FOR THE M C.
INGS OF COUSCILS
AND )SAL
Proposed by Mr. Joseph T. I)olau•,
Seconded by Mr. Edward Goodma n, and
TLat the Coui ty Counei.i hereby (let 01
Oline Ihat the following shall Le the dates for the hold-
i ng of the First Quarterly Meetings of the Rural
District Councils and Proposal Committee; viz :
Ardee Tuesday, 4th April, 1911.
l)rogheda- 'l'hursday. April, 1911-
•Monday, April, 1911.
The Proposal Connnittee to meet on Monday, file
3rd April, 1911.
The lasc day for
lodging Sotiees and A pplieat;
for District Councils will be Tuesday, the 14th March..
1911.
PA YAIE'.VI'S TO JU 1) jits
Proposed by Mr,
Joseph Dolan,
Seeonqiecl by Mr. M iehael Metra, J.P., and
Resolved Thaå the P 1 oposals 'for Payments
fov-
I)roghcda
of
n ion at their Fourth Quarter'.y Meeting', hehl ou tite
Janual.y, 1.911, and set out on Farm 22, furnished
to the County ("ouncil, be are hereby approved of
by this Council.
Tli€•se payments amount to ±497 8s ld.
PAYMENTS- -ROAD CONTRACTORS.
Proposed bv Mr. James Wynne,
Seconded by Mr. Peter Woods, .J.l)., and
Resolved Thai the Ä•ropnsals for Payments for-
tnulated by 'the- l)tllillalk Rural Council at,
(l!eir Fourth Quarterly Meeting, held on Monday, the
0th (lay of January, 1011, and set out on Form 22, fur-
nished to the (?ounty Council, Le and are hem eluv ap-
Inwove(l of.
These Payments aurout to Ils I()d.
_I)EN CE.
The fol!owing letter from Loral Government Board
was :
T)ublin
14th Janual+', 1911.
Sir,
I all) bv the Loea! (Government Board
[reland to ill forni the Louth County Cotill('ii that they
have received ft. report flom their Inspeet.or Mr. G. A.
Saunderson- -relative t) the Collection of {he Poov
Rate ill the County for the current half-year, fronx
which it •appears that only has been lodged out
of a total half-vear's collection
of $14,582.
Saunderson furl her reports Illat the Council will re-
(111 ire a sum of on the 19th inst. t) meet the
Quarterly Paytnents and I)emands of dependent
bodies, and that uniess tho eolleetiltg proreeds with
i loe uttuost diligence, the Council will tind themselves
in the unsatisfactory position
of being 111) able t
proll!ljtly fulfil their statutory obligations.
Ili
rection with the present unsatisfactory condition of
the• Collection, I am €0 point otit that although the
Board' have on several warned the Collectors;
that tlye:y are boulid by the terms of' their appoint-
ments to proceed (liligontly with their Collections
[he very beginning of the 'half-year, these officers (Io
not appear to have yet realised the necessity of carry-
ing out, their (bities p. omptly.
'I'he Board coesi(ler that the ( 'ouneil should
Diiuister a severe caution to the Colleefrns, amd
(leavour to impress ou them that tl:ev wili no iouger•
permittihl to 'legleet, their Collections during thev
montlys• of tbe luxtf-year
T am. etc.,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secreta
The following Correspondence, from the Ctlerk of {he
Crown and Peace was then read, and the sullie •t
ter tl,ereof to a special Committee of t.be•
Laud Registry of irelan d,
T)ublin,
4th January, 19 TL
(jeal ( )ffiee fleecyrgls.
l)ear Sir,
I understand float, for Che purposes of fhe Land
Registry Records, your accommodation eonsists of one
safe, capable of holAing• 5 volurnes, and float the re-
Illailftlej' of the folios are on wooden shelves in •an
7
'Did: navv room.
The Registrar desires, nye to point
•out the inmPG1 ta»ee of protecting the Records from risk
of fire, loss or damag•et, and suggests that you should
approach the County Coupcil with a view to obtaining
.tliC »rovisi011 of an adequate strong room. lil actic•ally
overv County Council in Trela,nd h •as now provided
suel! neeomntotlation, and we foel sure that when the
County Council (if the County of Louth appreciate the
inn.poråilljeo of safeguarding the titles of the tenant
pnrclxasers of the County, they will be wil;iug to do all
hat Liy required. If the County Council desire any
further informnation,
or it we can bé of assistance to
you or to them in any way in the matter, kindly let
us know.
Yours faithfully,
RASMON]) SMITII
Chief Clerk.
by Mr Michael O'Meara, J. P. ,
Seconded by 'Mr. Joseph 'ii Dolans ancl
Resolved
Messrs the Chainnan,
Jarnes M •Court, Bernard Ilanöll, Janies Wynne,
J. 'T. Dolan and N JB. Kiiig be appointed •a Committee
io go into the matter of Mr Sheridan 's application for
a strong room.
Proposed by Mr. J. T. l)olüh,
Seconded bv Mr. N. 13. King, and
Resolved—Unrat the County Council do now adjourn
until Monday, the 30th inst, fq r the purpose of taking
into considerafinn Form 22 from the Clerk of the Ardee
Itural District Council,
8
THE COUNCIL'S
17th January, 191 L
Ile Criminal Injtuy Applications.
l)ear Sir,
I beg to formally report on the result of hearing of
above claims at Quarter Sessions
at l)undalk last
week :
Wm. B. Connolly
Same
Same
AI argaret MatheM+
Patk.
Same
Joseph M. Johnson
Franc•is Sli('lt
Sanje
Bernard Finegoaj
10
O
I
1
O
1
o
1
O
8
8
10
o
, 10,
(1
O
o
8
o
0
0
I )eeree 1
0 10
0 10
I
(i
4
10
o
0
0
0
'l'he fowgoing elairns were for damage for breaking
of wilidowg ill the Urban l)istriet, who are the parties
appeal, if such be advised.
San' uel Lockington
o
O
5
0
o
I ) erree
( Larkin
John Maekav
l)aniel .l,eovy
50
8
18 0
o
G
0
o
o
111 these four cases the two former were for alleged
burning of hay and straw, and the latter two for ill-
juries to motor ears.
I am appealing in the four eases.
Ijatiiel Leas-y brought an action against the Council
for damages sustained by motor ear at Irish Grange
9
Ile claimed C!) and awas awarded
I am appeal-
The aetion of Joseplu-hleehan, of Cappoge, claimill'"
(lanxwzes, disjnissed.
Ile .has appealed.
Yours, etc.,
J)ASIEI,
Solicitor
Proposed by Mr. V,ernard 11 anjill, J.P.,
Seconded Ly Mr. Joseph T. l)olan,
That a Coram Ittee be appointed to cousult wi,tll our
Solicitor re avpealing iu certain Malicious liliury l)e-
ceees read this
It was then pointed out Ly several of the Couut'iliors
present that there was a the Minutes to
the effect tliöt our Solicitor appeal in all Malicious Tu-
jury Claims given against the Council at (Quarter Ses-
S (OliS.
further discussion
A Iter sonje
Oli matter, the
-Chait nail divided the Council, ond the following was
(he jesult ot tJ,c• votiug:
For Mr. Hamill's naoiion there votetl- -Messrs I)odal,
.J T, limn ill u, S B, 1) J,
Woods lieter. J
ainst tli? motion there •vole(l Messrs
'l h) ran
IVm Goodl!lfill E, Al' A rale J I [ , Al' (Hoult J allies,
) 'Meara, M, AV.vnne James— (G.
'I'lte vofing be:ng• ('YI lift l,
the Cha iman gave l) is
10
easting vote ag 'Ainsl M r IIüE1iII•s Motion, ich lie
dilly 'leelared lost.
i litites of Proeeedincs of flic Louth
Council at, their (Quarterly Meeting, held
: n the Coun-
eil Ch amber, "l'hursday, the February,
1911.
Present :
Tn the Chair— -Peter '11 uches, Est), J P.
Members—Messrs B namill, P; S B King.
Joseph
J V; C A J P; Patk ('allau,
Joseph T l)olan, Maguire, Laurepee M 'Is-eon,
L J Thos Peter Patk M •Gee
i}ernurd Finneean, Jas AVynne, Edward
William NV oojls, J P; James
Keeley, J P; Maeardle. J P; Joseph M
Josepb 11 Thos J Byrne, P Donegan, .J 1
Til T". COUNTY VEN(
Proposed by Mr C Duffy, J P,
Seconded bv Mr E Gotnlmali. and
Resolved —That the IReport of the County Sumveyor
as appearing on the Schpdu)e of Proposals for the '23rd
'I" 1911, Joe and is hereLv adopted
Ly this
neil.
Tlie following resolutions were then passe!l Ly the
AIU)EF. WORKS.
lh'(jposed by Mr P M •Gee,
Seconded by Mr 1B llamill, and
11
Resoived• -That the Proposals for Works
by thc Artie? No. 1 Rural l)istriet Council
, at their
Foul ili Quarto rly Mee'ving, held on Tuesday, the
(lay of .Janu: iT, 1911 otid set out on Form 20 ft:r-
nisheql to the Co. Council, be and are Inereby approved
of. save and except that we 1 eject Works No. 129.
WORKS.
Proposed by Mr P Donegan,
by Mr L M •Keown, and
esolved
'I'l at the Proposals for fornjutaie.!
the Louth Itural District of lhogheda
Foul th Q etal ter!y Meeting, held
the 12th day Januazy, 1911, and set o Ili 01: Forgn
) furnishecl tc the County Council. be an•i are hereby
approved of.
WORKS.
Ihopased by Mr AVoods,
Seeoucied by Mr B 11 aniill, J P; and
Resolved- - 'I'hat the Proposa)s for AVorks formulated
Ly the I hill(lalk Rural
District Council, at their
Fourth M ectill@, held on Mo. (lay, the 9th
of January, 1911, a' (l set (jilt on
2() fur-
nishe,
I to the ('oun y Couneil, be alid are hereby ap-
prove:l of.
ES'I',MÄ'I'E ENSUING
SCIAL YEAR.
Th Secretary submitted the anvual estilliat{i o (
Rates in re.spæ4 of the year ending
a Eter very considerable discussion
12
tlle Ceuneil decided to reduce same by twopence in time
all round.
PPOI.XTM ENT OF COY MVI"I'EES.
Proposed Mr Edward Goodman,
Seconded ily MI' Bernard 11 alliill, J P; ascl
11' Iud the same that eonstituie
appointed by this Council.
by MiGee,
Seconded by Mr Edward Goodman, and
Resolved— •That ill compliance with tLe
received from C Ginnefv, we authorise the
erection of a Weighbri(lee thereat undev the following
tl'l)üt it be ere Ott' A to Che satisfacti
that guarantees and an
of the County Surveyor :
('otilieil's Soiieitor: ayi(l fhaf f he expense of the
WCA.X-N'S RESIGNATION.
11
he borne by [he A pplieaut,
removed on three mouths •
Couneil.
The letter from Mr
the Weighbri(lg•• to
notice from the Cou nt.v
C M 'Cann was read.—
19 Sorth Quay, Drogheda,
T') the antl Men) ht rs of
C ontlemen,
I regret, I have to inform
my cloetor thot owing €0 my stnte
active as is entailed by
February 15,
the Louth County Conty• .
you that I am advised ny
cf health I ran aot continue
my present office.
13
1 am cmnpellecl, therefore, to tender you my w•signation,
and T would request that you would be good enough to permi.f
1904) for the put pcse closing ms collection.
I can, if required, m•cduee medical certificate concerning
the state of rny health.
I am,
Gentl emen,
Your obedient servant,
CHARLES M'CA.XS.
The Secretarv was alithorise•tl to/ issue an advertisement for
Collector ft)' the St Peter East antl West Electoral Divisions
in room of Mr M 'Cann, resigned.
After cansiee:tltion cf letters from Read Board, the Conacil
appointed Messrs the Cildirman. Vice Chairman, and the
County Surveyo• and the Borough Surveyors of Dun (lalk and
Droghedn, to meet the Road Baard representatives in Dublin
APPOINTMENT 01" _K'E'l'1'R.XiNG OFFICER.
In with Che Secreta rv's advertisement,
the
C Juneil proeeeci€", to elect. a Returning Officer to t.ll€•
fortht•onling I .gwal Govevnment Elcet;ons. There were three
applications the apycintmellt from Mes•rs C J M 'C '111011 ,
Dani/ ! and Jarnes M 'Court, and Ille following was
the result of the voting
For M 'Cc:urt-— Messrs Byrne, T J; Callan, Patrick ; Donegan
Patrick ; and M 'Court. James (4).
Finegan, Bernard ,
Johnst)A,
M ; CIS. William • and W James (5).
For Dolan, T; Duffy, C ; Elcock,
Edward: Keeley, ,ter; K innhan, 'Thomas;
King. N B; J H; M•cce,
e nd Wcecl.s,
Peter (11).
The Chairma therefore clet'larecl Mr 'Charles J
solicitor, duly elected Returning Officer io conduct
coming Local Government Elections.
The unclermeptioned Notice of Motion was next
the forth-
considered
Iby the Council, and after very considera ble discussion, it was
unanimously eecl to allocate the sum of towards
University Scholarships County Louth.
NOTICES OF MOTION.
(1) I beg to give notice tlrat I will move at the next Meeting.
of the Council tll.af a Rate of One Halfpxmn.v in the C
bo levied, and the produce applied to vrovidiltg three
Scholarship:- of Cö() a year each, for three yenrs. tenable
at the Notional University, to be awarded next Summer
to the most qualified Count Louth Students 011 the terms
of the Gel eral Council's Scholarship Scheme: and with
snell addit:onnl regulations as the County Cour.cil lita.v
determine at the February Mecting.
And, I will move, that a Committee be aypointecl to draw trp
these cowtiitions ancl sti'bmit them, to i"ebruar.y
M eefing.
JOSEPH T. DOLAN.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutcs of Prcceedings of the I,autll •County Couneil at a
Special Meetillit held in the Council Chanibe•r nn , M
27th day of March, 1911.
Present
In Che Chair—James M Esq. J P.
()ther XLembers-—James Wsnne. Thomas Kina Joseph
El M' Ardle. Svtpben Segrave, Bernard Hamill: J P; C A Duffy,
J P; au.•l Joseph M Johnson, Esquires.
'i'he Connell were summoned for the ya rpose taking into
eonsideration ille following carrespondence the l)epart-
mont re the proposed Pier at Annagasstlil.
15
The correspor.denc•e is as uncler :—
Depa of Agr iculture. anel Teel)Hital Instruction
For Il'eland.
[ vper M errion Street, Dublin,
1911.
I.SS4/'11—F.b.
FACILITIES FOE LOADING ANI) 11 VESSEI.S
AT AN.XAGASSAN.
Sir,
Adverting to previous correspenr!e 'lee. to an 9 rrqn ge-
tnent come to as: a eon ference M'hich place at Annagassan
the 10th Sovember last between representatives of the
l,outll Counts Council ancl the Department, I have to trans-
mit. herewith. fo: the .iaformatir:n of the Council, plans of
proposals for the improvement of the fneilities for loading and
unloading from vessels at A At the conference
referred €0 thc general outline on I v, of .a scheme for the
pprptjse was agreed to, MO definite derision havi ag Leen conte
Reyresenfations have been
to as to the position of the P ;er.
been made in fnvour of the consttmeti(ili of Pier on the south
and north sirle• respcctively, ancl also in Avour of the prov
vi'io• Of two small quays instead of one I nrge one. The De-
pa rtment?s El,gin eer. m consultation with the County Sur-
vevcr, came to the conclusion that it •advisa ble €0
submit alteynetive plans the Council ; and this is now done
.An:uexed is the report of tile Engineer on tho subject.
In view of fqt•t that negotiations with land owners, the
Board Of Trade others may be neecssary, the Department
ii approve the proposa Is
suggest that the Council,
generally, snoull appojnt a smati C01nmittee, vested with the
necessary powers u Alieh could act, witli the Department in ar
ranging detnils.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
T. P. GILL SeeretalT.
The Seerefuft c; ,
Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
REPORT BY THE DEPARTMENT'S ENGINEER.
(a) The outlined prior to the conference was that
involving the construction of a pier on the south side of the
river, and it on this scheme that the approximate figures
put forward bn.sed when if was proposed that Che I)e•
partment ancl the County Council should each contribute
El, 125 0s Oil. The approach road was not included in this,
but the representat;ves of the Council considered that the road
might be made by the Council independentl> .
I now su a?) estimate for this scheme amounting to
Os Od, towards which the Council should contribute
Cl,125 os 011.
It will be seta, that I have Loen obliged •in order to keep
within the of legal expenditure, to reduce the length of
quay from I to 125 feet. It will also be seen that the l)e-
par€npei]€ must . themseliæs undertake responsibility for earry•
ing out a cctfaiu part. cf the dredging, which I unclerst;ami
they are prepareti to do.
(b) For the same Olitlay on thc north side only 100
feet of quay could be provided, the work being more expen-
Sive owing te the neapssifs of protecting the foe of the piew
from scour on that side of thc. river.
As €110 cost of tho road
approacll woul!d be saved. €110 would'. as I u nclel'sfancl.
Ibo expected to enntribute half the fatal cost involved. and,
therefore,as the Department would have to spend C14G 01! extra
dredging as lwfore, the Council would have to provide CT, 197
"towards the total estimate Of &2.'248 0s Ocl, while the De-
partment would provide IOS towards this estimate, and
also the extra dredging. In my opinion, in which I think the
County SurvA o: eoneuts, this scheme is from an engineering
point of view ilwf'erior to the other: as there will not be at all
the same sheitq• at the Pier for vessels, and there is possibility
of trouble in maintenance owing to scour.
17
Local feeling, however, appears to be largely in favour of
this scheme.
(e) To instead of either of these schemes, two snmll
quays of, say, 40 feet face each, would east an addi-
tional while the ecst of the approach road would still be
involved.
13/3/'11.
CHAS. D. OLIVER.
ANNAGASSAS.
SPECIFICATION OF WORKS.
The works sha.! eon.sist of the excavation of a channel aercss
strand, a swinging basin sheltered by a breakwater, and Of
a quay or quays, all in accordance with one or other of the
alternative phvv prepared by the Engineer to the Department
of Agriculture conferenee, and accompanying this specifica-
tion or such modified plans as may be adopted.
The melhod oi the excavation of the works shall ans ease
be as follows
The channel shall be dredged to a depth of 13ft Gin below
the coping Hoes's quay, this being the depth estimated
as necessary give 11 ft Gin of water in the channel at high
water of neap tides, and shall have a width of not less than
at bottom. with slopes not steeper than 4 to 1.
The basin sl,ai.i be excavated to the area shown OA •one
other of the plans, and the slopes there indicated.
The breakwater shall be eonstruetecl of eoncrete to the spe-
eification giv •below, and to be of the shown, its
toe being protected by an apron where i adicated. Its extrem-
i!ty shall, further be protected by sheet piling if necessary.
A portion of the spoil from the excavations shall be deposited
at the back of the breakwater, so as •to form a beach there to
protect it, as indicated on the general plan.
The quays Shai! be constructed eonerete walls, with filling
of sand O/ Shiiygle,' the Walls ,lieiåg of section shown.- ' if
the Soytll of yuyfaee shall be
paved _in stone wo,vk .or concrete where liable. to be splashed
with spra.€ éonling over the brea)v-watei, the rest olf its sur ace
the quay be' constructed' its '
lbéing
motallecl only.' IQs weste+n :faee angle :shall be Ibråtee
ted •bs sheet piling of creosoted fir. or other, suitable,' inaterialv
for length of 30 feet, and to a. •depth of not less than (j feet
below Che bottom, and its' end shall bé further. protected by
the deposit there of 100 tons of heavy rubble stone.
Conerete sKal! consist of 1 part of Portland cement, appro-
ved by the, Euguneers, to 4 of stone broken to 1 {in. guage, and
2 Of clean, sharp sand, or such other mixture as the Engineers
may L approve, and shall be deposited in bags or casings •as may
be provided in further detailed specification.
All Work shall be carried out to the satisfaction of
CdjuntS : Surveyor.
CHAS. D. OLIVER,
Engliteer to the Depa of Agriculture, etc.
March, 13th. 1911.
The Council. after discussion, unanimously se-
leeted the s,ontl! side for the: pier.
STEAM lu COMMITTEE.
LY (Jtutes of Proceedings of the above Cornmifiee at,
their Meeting, held •n the Council Chatilber, on Mou
.doy, the I (ith January, 1911.
Vrc sent : —
In tLe Clair—Peter ITughes, Esq, J V.
Otl,er Metflbers - Joseph M ( r Meara, .
19
\Villiam woods, J
Joseph M'AH11e,
Woods, J P; ,and James M •Carthy„J P, Esquires.
The Committee. Were' Sum'nåo'lied för'tlie purpoée of
considering flu" of Stealii Iti)lling for Counfy
18911th, and thq following, recommendations, to
(he Coueeii, with, Mr Joseph Dolan, L Gauls•
town, dissenting
1st retonjmend thc County Council ad'
veliise for the hire of two St.-am Rollers—yne for
i)rogh edu I)istriet, and one for the I)undalk
Rural District.
our Solicitor.
We also approve of the fol lowing addition t") time
t v ped Åpeeifientiotv f')l' mail)tenanee recommended by
the County Surveyor for the CounH.v of Louth :
required by the County Council or by the
'ounty Surveyor the should be steam-rolled,
about one day's rolling to forty or fifty cubie yards of
h! oken sft;nes specified.
A short. length of lhe COII-
i Tact (i hill(lalk End b to be heavily sheeted with *toiles
and steam-rollell each year, the rernainder of the eon-
tract to have only sufficient stones to mend ruts.
County Council will supply the Roller and pay for
coal, oil, and driver's wages free of charge to the eon-
tractor, the coy tr.•et to sufficient mep to
spr.eacl the stones quickly ahead of the Roller,
and sweep, a iso a flagman. The contractor should
also eart coal, etc, for the Roller (about 5) ewt per day),
and provide a horse and driver for the water cart, or,
if necessa1Y, horses and drivers for two water carts.
20
it may happen that the stones for rollin.a will bc left
the roadside during the winter, to be spread anci
rolled in the following summer season.
If required,
ruts shall be mended by picking up the surface, acl(i-
Ing stores antl mud. and then rallilliing the patch ;
also that the County Surveyor be directed to ask eon-
on existing con-
tractors to volunteer to steam-roll
tracts.
FIN ANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proeeecliligs of, the Finance (Annmittee
at their Meeting, held in Council Chamber,
on
M 01Eiay, the 30th day of Janua11Y,
Present
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Est', J P.
( )ther Members—T A Duffy, J P; Bernard Ilanlili
P: Peter Woods, J Joseph Johnson,
IVY11!je, 1) I) Keeley, J P; T Kinahnn, N 1B King,
P; and J 11 Esquires.
The Secretary submitted Form 22
ili respect of pay-
utents to the Ardee Itoa.(l Contractors, which the Com-
l"ittee. after examination, recommended the County
Ile also county-at.
Council to discharge.
large paynmenfs in respeet of the qualå?l' ended % Ist
.l)ecernber Iasi, which the Committee also recommenci
ed for paymeni Ly the County Council.
til
On the application of the County Surveyor,
( 'onvmittee •authorised the purchase of new instrumnellts
for under the Iloa(ls Board Circ•tllav, and til'.•y
reeonnnendecl that M re Lynom be allowed El() for
same.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee
at t,heir Meetings held in the Council Chamber, on
Monday, the 13th Febrmary, 1911.
P 1 esent
Iu the Chaii—Petéi• Hughes, Esq, J P.
Oilier Members— -James Wynne, Edward Goodman,
S B Ring, J P; Patk M 'Gee, Thos Kinahan, Bernard
llamill, J V; and Janmes M 'Court, J P, Esquires.
'l'i:e Seevetar.v under the notice of the
Comtnit,tee that the County Council would require at!
their next Meeting to appoint, a Returning ()ffieer to
c•oruluet the ft rthcom;ng Local Government Elections,
und it was ordered— I ,hat the usual advertisement be
issued inviting applications for the appointment, anci
t!iat {he mutter come before the Country Council at,
l!peir next Ilteetili!!.
"I'lje Secretary rend the following letter from
Ginnety, Dromiskin : —
-February, 13th, 1911.
Sir. —
AVfil you kindly put before the, Fiuanee Com
mitte an application of mine to erect a public Weigh-
bridg•e along side of 'the public road at my place in
I)romiskih.
Yours respectfully,
KATE GINNETY.
'l'he , Committee ret•ommellded permission, for vile'
evection, of the AYVcighhri(lce jp: quqstiop, subject to,
certain conditions to be Iwaid down by the County
( :ounOiÅ.
Tl,e Committee left the, appointmel)t of the tempor-
ory clerical sta:ff for the copying and applotting of the
R•eité• Books for {he •euuuing financiåltye'tir in the 'hands:
the. Serretalvv.
ESTIMATE RA'PFS.
-Secretary subniitte.l his Estimate of Rates
vespeet. of 'the Financial Year ending 31st M ,
1912, over wlj;t'h theve was considerable discussion.
The ('omnmiftee recommended that a in Che 011
the County-at-Latge be added in respect of University
Seholaxships, and an additional gmallt of for the
Louth County I nfirmary. Ultimotely it was proposed
by Mr Bernard llamill, J P, seeopded by Mr Edwam•Å'
Goodman, •and recommendeti— the Secretary's
F,stipmate ef Rates in receipt of Financial Year
ending 3 Isf March, 1912, be recommended for adopti01V
this Mr King dissented.
by the County Council.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
M of Pvoeeedings of the Fin am ce Committee
their Meeting, held in the ('ouncil Charul;er,
(6th day of March, 19k I L
In the C bair- Peter VI ughes, Estl, J P.
James NV ynne, Ed Goodmar,
( 'ther Members
•23
woods, J P;' Luke. J El/.oek,Natk M'Gee, T Chillan
'Niac•aéd18, J P g aiid Jbsepll Johliéon, Fßquirbs.
The Secretary submilted Accounts for in
•charge of the County Surveyor, whieTi on •examination
were passed by 'the 'Committe€•
SURVEYORS APPLICATION
TNCREASE OF SALARY.
Mr Lynarn vetul a Stüitement to the Committee, in
whit.•lm he pointed out that under the proposed Steam
Rolling Scheme his duties would Abe. greatly increaseti,
iti consequence of which be applied for an increase of
salary.
After some discussion on the matter. the Committee decided
to postpone the further consideration Of Mr Lynam's appliöa-
tion until a meeting to be held in the month of August next.
The follosvin;r, letter from the Cleik of the Rural Disfriét
Council was read :
Dear Sir,
Dundalk Union,
•Clerk's Office,
18th February, 1911.
ith the. view of extending the main sewer oat Car-
lingford, the Dundalk Rural District Council onstruet me to
apply to the C' Council for their permission to opep the
road there, an.' at Red Barns, for the laying of a water ,main
from the site of the existing fountain to the corner of Sea
l*.aak-s road.
• The Distriet Conneil will give the usÄial indemnify.
Yours faithfully,
P. R. FINIGAN,
Clerk of the Council
T. F. FilgatA Esq. See. County Connci).
24
Ordered—Thac tho Dundalk Rtlral District Council be given
permission to open the roads in question on the distinct utl-
derstanding that they will be responsible for any aecidents or
damage during the opening and closing of the roads referred
to in the Cleres letter.
The applicatJ01i of the Returning Officer—mr C J M 'Gahon
—for on account, was postponed until the April meeting
of the Councii.
Local Government (Ireland) Act,
1898.
Coulb County Council.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At their First Quarterly Meeting held in the Council
Chamber, I)undalk.
RSDAY, '20th April,
1911 ; •and
On
At their Adjourned Quarterly Meeting held in the Council
Chamber, I)undalk,
on TIIURSI)AY, 25th May, and
'l'heir Annual Meeting held iti the Court Ilouse, I)rogheda,
on 13th .June, 1911.
Finance Committee Meeting
Held in the
P.
Council Chaniber, I)undalk, on Monday, 20th
May, 1911.
MACCCLLOVGH, PRINTER, DUNDALK
1
cot-snry COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings -of the Louth County
Council of the First Quarterly Meeting. held iu the
Council Chamber on Thursday, 20th day o? April,
1911.
Present : —
In the C Lail— Wm. A. l)oran, Esq.
Member—Messrs P Woods, J P; P P Keeley,
J B Finnegan, E M'Gee, 1) .J Rath,
llamill, J P; P Donegan, J P; Joseph Dolan, J 11
M 'Xrdle, T M aguire, Jolyn T)olan. Laurence M 'Keown,
Stephen Segrave. Patk Callan. James Wynne, Thomas
Kinahan, Wm AVoods, J P; Peter Woods, and Peter
Hughes, J J).
'I'b•, Minutes of f,he last Meeting of the, Council hav-
ing been printed and a copy sent to each member, were
taken as re ld. and were confirmed.
On the motion of Mr Bernard Tlamill, J P, seconded
by Mr P M'Gee, it Wits resolved That the Minutes of
Vroeeediugs of the Finance Committee, on the under-
mentioned dales, be and are hereby confirmed by this
16th January,
J an uary, 1911 ;
Council—viz., 9th
1911: 30th January, 1911; 10th 1911;
1911.
Proposed by Mt: James Wynne,
Seconded by Mr Edward Goodman, and
Resolved—-That County Council hereby deter-
mine that the following Shail be the dates for the hold-
2
ing of the Second Quarterly Meeting of the Rural Dis-
trict Council and Proposal Committees :—
Ardee—Tuesdoy, Gfh July, 1911.
Drogheda—Thursday, 13th July, 1911.
Duuda1k—Monday, 10th July, 1911.
PAYMENTS TO ROAD CONTRACTORS.
EUNI)ALK.
l)roposed Mr wm Woods, J V,
Seconded by B llamill, J P, and
the, proposals for payments for the
Dundalk Rural District Council at the last Quarterly
Meeting, and set out on Form 22, furnished the County
Council, be and are hereby approved of.
AIU)EE.
Proposed by Mr P M 'Gee,
Secouded by Mr Joseph Dol'an, and
IResolved—That, the proposals for payment for-
mulated by the .vrdee Rural I)istriet Council at the
last Quarterly Meeting, and set out in Form 22. fur-
nished to the County Council, be and are hereby ap-
proved of by this Council.
DROGHEDA.
Proposed Mr Patrick Donegan, J P,
Seconded by Mr Thomas Maguire, and
for payments for-
IResolveil—'l'hat the proposals
xnulaiecl by the Drogheda Rural District Council, and
set, out on Form 22, furnished to the County Council,
be ahld are hereby approved of by this Council.
3
-MAKING OF RATES FOR ENSUING YEAR.
Proposed bv Tlamill, J P,
Seconded by Mr Ed ward Goodman. and
Resolved —That ill accordance with the Estimate of
Rates for General and Separate Charges adopted by the
County Council at their Meeting held on
February, 1911, we hereby make rates, to be levied off
the Couniy of Louth, for the financial year endivg $11st
March, 1912, as set out below.
The Rates in the for General and Separate
Charges are :—
Ardee
I)rogheda
Land.
Buildings
3s Gd
This naty includes I (l in the under the Agricul-
tural and Technical }nstruetion Acts; and it is also
resolved—That the several Rates in respect of Separate
Charges, as set out, on Form 45, be also made by chis
•Council, and that the Secretary be authorised in ae-
eordanee Wii h Altieles 78 to publish Notice of said
nates for General and Separate. Cbarges having been
made.
On the motion of Btr Bernard Hamill, J P, seconded
by Mr Peter Woo.'ls, J P, the following gentlemen were
4
deputed to sign the Rate Books aud Collectors'
rants in respect of the ensuing Financial Year, VIZ
The Chairman,
Mr Bernard Finnegan,
Mr Bernard Hamill, J P.
TilF, ROAD BOARD.
The following Report was then read by the Secretary
re the apointed to meet the Road Board :
"NVe beg to report that, as directed, we waited on the
Road Board in Dublin on the 7th and 10th inst. We
were informed that tho Road Board Grants in Irelanci
during the next two years, ending 31st March, 1.913,
will amount to per annum, nearly. The
share allotted to the Louth County Council is $1,200
per annuli} : and this allotment is based on rvative
population, qualified in some way not explained. A
smaller sum depending on the income of the Board,
will be granted in subs equent years. The Road Board
will not deal with Urban or grant money to
them directly. Messrs Burke and Sellars were al-
lowed to explain their views, because they were mem
bers of your deputation, but no other Borough •Sur-
veyors have been Tiearql. Out of $1,200 for next year
allotted to County Louth, you may allot such shares
as you tll ink fair and reasonable to Che two Urban
I)istriets of Drogheda •and l)undalk. The Road Board
will not pay the whole cost of any work. Every grant
for a work of irnprc;vemellt will be contingent, on the
Councils providing au equal or greater amount out of
the poor rate. The whole of the must be ex-
5)
pended on tv,'0 roads moy:kecl 011 the Road Board map—
ille North Road (tln•ough Drogheda, I)unleer, and
Dundalk, io Flurry Bridge), and the Armagh Road
(from Dundalk to Kilcun•y ancl
It is possible, however, that the road
miles in all.
from l)uudalk to Carrickmaeo.ss may be included. Iu
the Rural I)istriets the proposed works consist of exera
stones, st,ealnrolling, and improvement of sharp ecr-
ners, and for a work which costs $200, $100 mu,i be
provided by Oxe Councils, and wiTI be a free grant
Withill. the limit of
front the Road Board.
(less IJrban Shares), for every El paid by the Councils
the Hurai tine Iloa(l Board will pay an-
In •ehe Urban l)istricts, for El voted by an
other El.
Urban Couuei'l to be spent on tar treatment, t,he Board
Ävill Tontril.•ufe IOS to 15s (half to three-fourths); and
'for to be spellf on re-constn,etion of roads. the
The
Board will contribute 5s (one-fourth).
Board, af least for the present, will grant 110th . ng for
improving, repa;rine. or ro-bui!ding any bridge, or for
•steamrolling in the Urban least in Dun-
(lalk. E por annum in grants for Co. Louth
mean another El at least from the rates
tax of Iåd ill the -e. The Road Board intend to pro-
n Bill in Parliament to levy off every eoura.y in
Ireland I d ill the to meet sirnilar mnounts to be
granted by time Road Board on works of improvement.
In this way, per annum will be raised at) 'I,
with a nearly eqttal amount from the Road Board, a
sum of might now be borrowed, to be re-
Tn tbe next three years it is in-
paid
ten years.
tended that this sum Gf shall be spent on
improvements over 2.000 Yi'il'es c.f (at the average
rate of $500 per mile), while for the following seveu
years no works of improvement will be undertaken.
The, 2,000 miles of Irish roads on which this sum of
is to be expended, are the roads already
shown on the Road Board map sent to you, with some
additions. We understand that the County Councils
will nave only a limited control over the expenditure
the El.ooo,ooo The, Road will, in a few
weeks, send out printed forrns of type specification.
The are requested to send in their applications
as soon as possible, with proper plans, estimates, and
specificatious. But it is obvious that in Co. Louth
nothing can be' done in this respect until you decide as
to whaf share the 11 rhan Districts of Drogheda and
Dundalk are to have out of your $1,200 for the year
P. J. Lyna•u, Co. Surveyor; John J. Burke, Borough
Surveyor, Drogheda; Maurice Sellars, Town Surveyor,
Dundalk."
Proposed bv Edward Goodman,
Seconded by MT William Woods, J P, and
Resolved- -That we accept the E 1,200 allocated for
County Louth, but would strongly urge upon the Roa€i
Board the claim of County Louth to a far larger grant.
'l'he following resolution was also passed the
Council respecting the same subject.
Vroposed by T. Callan Maeardle, J P,
Seconded by Mr P P Keeley, J P, and
Resolved—That the Louth County Council ask the
members for Nomåh and South Louth to Interview the
Road Board avd point out the obsolute inadequacy ot
7
the small sum credited to Louth on the distribution of
Funds, considering importance of the Trunk
IRoads, the amount of motor traffic. and the fact that
tillage prevails so largely within the County, and that
it is the main coast road between l)ublin and Belfast ;
further, that, if 1: ecossåry, the matter be brought be-
if a much
fore Parliament the earliest moment,
larger giant is not given to Louth.
APPOINTMENT OF RATE COLLECT(
In accorolanee with the Secretary's advertisemetå for
the positron of Voor Rate Cc,lleetor for the Electoral
Divisions of St Peter's East and NVest, two applications
"Vere received from the following persons, VIZ—
Patrick J Butcerly and John Kelly.
TIW.' Chnirrnau divided the Cl uncoil as between these
two enndidates, and. lhe following was the result of the
voting : —
For Rntterly—bfessr.s Patrick Callan, Joseph l)olan,
Patrick Donegan, Thos Patk M'Gee, Stephen
Segmve, reter Woods (Piedmont), and Peter AVoods
(Much gra nge)- S.
Kelly there voted—Messrs Jolyn Dolan, Wm X
l)orp, Bernard Finnegn, Friwnvjl Goodman, Peter P
Keeley, Thomas ire, T Callan Macardle,
l)ellis J Raåh, and James
Laurence M' Keown ,
Wynne 12.
The Chairman therefore declared Mr Kelly duly
elected Collector for the St. Peter's East and West
Electoral Divisions of I)rogheda.
8
The following letter from the Department
read :
ANI) AGRICULTURAL SEEDS
(IRELAND) ACT, 1909.
Sir,
was
I have to advert, to the Department's circuiar
letter of the, 10th l)eeember, 1,909 (No. 24888-03), copy
herewith, on the above subject, and to draw the at-
tention of vour Cout:eil to the ptovisi011s of the Aet in
fac as they relate to the pleventiot) of the, spread of
I v suggesting to your Council the
noxious weeds.
desirability of cot:seoting t) an Order being made by
the l)enartment, under Part I of the Act, I have to
state that such Orders were in force ill sixteen counties
last year, and that the lyearty co-operation of agricul-
fillists ili the counties concerned enabled the Orders
to be administered without causing any friction.
Kindly i'lf01'111 the Departmeitt at {111 early (Infe of
the decision of your Council in the matter.
suggested form of consent is enclosed.
I am, Sir,
Yours, etc.,
T. P. GILL, Secretary.
RESOLUTI(
by T C Macardle, .J P,
Seconded by Mr P Hughes, J P, and
Carried—That this Council hereby consent to an
Order being made by the l)epartment of Agrieuliut•e
aud I'eeluueal Insti uetion for Irela,lid declaring that,
Ihi@xughcut the County of Louth, all plants of the fol-
lowing species, vim Vl]iistle, Ragweed, Coltsfoot,
•.711(i
Docking—are noxious weeds for the purposes of the
and. Agricultural Seeds (Ireland) Act, 1909.
'(hl the motion (if Mr Edward Goodman, seconded by
aÄIr J H M 'Ardle, the following Notice of Motion was
put in the form of a resolution, and adopted by the
Council, Mr Jnmes M 'Court, Solicitor, be co-
•opied a member af the Council in rot-nn of Mr James
•Al 'Court, J P, resigned.
Chl the motion o! Mr Patrick M 'Gee, seconded toy
Mr Joseph Y)olar, (Gaulstowll), the, following Notice of
Motion was put ili the forni of a resolution and acl•jpteci
co-opted a meuil.•.er of the Couneil in room of Mr J T
Dolan, resigned.
1 OUTII couN'1'Y eotJNCIL.
Minutes (if Prcceedings (If the Louth County Councii
in the
their Adjourned Quarterly -Meeting, held
Council C',hamber on Thursday, 25th day of May, 1911.
In the Chair—Nntriek l)onegan, Esq., J.P.
Other Meniliers —Messrs Bernard Finnegan, E Good-
man, J 11 M' Ardle, James AI •Court, jun; Patruls••
10
M 'Gee, James Wynne, Peter Woods, J P; Bern
Hamill, J P; T Callan Maeardle, J P, and T J
COUNTY SURVEYORS
At the First Adjourned Quarterly Meeting,
25th May, 1911.
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,
I. The Proposals formulated by the Rural Distinct
Councils include two short lengths of new road, Xos-
127 and 128, in Ardee Rural I)istriet; also five lanes to
be repa ired as 4th class 128 Ardee, Nos.
and 2 Droghedii, and Xos 2 and 3 in Dundalk Rural
District.
2. At last Sprittg Assizes there were three actions for
damages against the County Council owing to alleged
All thre&
neglect on the part of •:oad contractors.
eases were dismissed, Yntt it might be well to insure
against such cases in future.
3. There is. I understand, a considerable sum to the
credit of the C *l'hngford Ilarbour Account (accumulat-
ed dues), which ought to I-.e expended in cleaning the
harbour of mud, if ihe l)epartlltellt of Agriculture, etc,
would lend their dredger for the purpose.
4. Replies to circulars which I sent out early ill
Apeil last show that a number of the contractors on
most important roads refuse to adopt steam-rolling,
althoucrll the roller, witli driver and coal; would be
suppl ied free of charge to them. There must be some
misunderstanding, anol I feel sure that these contrae—
tors will adept rolling when .they see its
11
Anyl:ow, as existing contracts expire, steam-rolling is
'I'he Councils have
specified ill the new contracts.
passed sufficient money to keep three steam-rollers at
work for twelve mon{hy_ from 1st October next, but I
believe there will be work only for two rollers, even if
some. 2nd-class antl 3rd-elass roads have the patches
Such patches can be
rolled during next winter.
steam-rolled only if long and narrow, say 50 to 70'
yards long and 2 yards wide, or less, three or four loads.
to a patch.
5: Out of. 200 allotted t') this county for this
year by the Road Bc,ard, you have allotted El 18 to.
•Drogheda I Trban District, and ;C159 to T)undalk Urban
The Urban l)is-
Distrie[, nearly, on the valuation.
frit•ts ought now to formulate their Proposals with tho
least possible delay.. As to remaining to the
three 11 ural Districts, I am unable to do anything,
cause. I do not know whether the road from Dundalk
to Carriekmaeross, by Castlering and Essexford, is or
is not to be, included ill the Road Board scheme.
I am, Gentlemen, your obedient Servapt,
P. J. LYNA M, County Surveyor of Louih.
A fter consideration of the foregoing report, the,
Council (leeided that Paragraph No. 2 be referred to,
the Finance Commiltee for consideration and report..
PROPOSED PIER AT ANSAGASSAN.
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
The River at Annagassan is tidal for two miles in•
length. and the tidal soour, aided by the fresh water
12
'flow of the hivers Glyde and Dee •aud the White River,
Il'he channel, how-
keeps open the existing channel.
•ever, not of much use, because it is less Chan seven
It is proposed
feet '!eep at high water of neap tides.
to dredge the chaunci four feet deeper than at present
for about half a lil ile in length, so that vessels draw-
ing ten feet water enter or leave at high water
•of lowest neap tides.
There is also to be provided a concrete quay wall
.12Ö feet lovg, basin in which vessels 170 feet Ilong
•can swing round before leaving, and the quay to be
sheltered from sea Ly a concrete breakwater 500
feet long and 7 feet high.
'l' Ile pians a:vd estimates have, been -prepared by Mr
)livér, the Chief Engr; 'lee: to the I)epartment, With
great eare. Tliere fire very good reasons for placing
the qt;ay on the, south side of the river, but it is very
unfortunate th•ai money is not sufficient to pay for
•even short lengåi of limb •r quay in piles on the north
bank of the Yi ver
As the w 711 be (Ire(Lr 'd through hard gravel,
the tidal scour avd freslt wafer scour wili a great
"extent keep the new channel clear of deposit, but some
Also, it is ceftain that
may be require],
the sea will do souve damage, especially at the head and
root of the breakwater; practically every artificial
work in 1,110 sea requires repair oecasponally.
There is now 5,000 ions of coal landed annually at
stated that idle coal mewhant,s
Annagassan, aud it
•41re Willi' g to pay s»xpenee per ton, giving an im-
umecliate enue of ,C12ö per annum, with a probable
Increase, besides other dues.
It is important that
there should be agreement on this suo.ject which
will satisfy your so! ieitot.
Iso, other persons
would not pay dues should not be allowed to use the
harbour.
P. J. LYNAU
15th May, -"'11.
The South side of the Pier was unanimously select'. (l
by the Council.
The Tender of Nicholas M 'Keown, Nicholastown, al•
$124, for making 94 pereh€u of road from Kearney's
Cross to Braganstown, in Ardee District, and repairing
Chapei, was. accepted.
The tender of Joseph M'Kenua, at $15 for repavr«
Ing two flooded ] 01 lows between Prospect Gate and,
Dunmah0!1 Cross, was also accepted.
AR nEE.
Proposed by Mr hl'Gee,
Seconded by Mr Bernard Tiamill, J P, and
Ilesolved —That the Proposal for Works forinulated
by tli+ Aidee So. 1 Rural District Council at the First
Quarterly Meeting, h old 011 'I'llesdny, 4th day of
1911, set on Forum 20 furrtished to the Counts
Council, be and are hereby approved of. and we now
authorise our Secretary to affix the common seal of the
Council to i he eontraets entered into.
14
Proposed by Mr Patrick l)onegan, J P,
Seconded by Mr Bernard Finnegan, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for - SVorks formulated
Äjy the Louth District of Drogheda Union at the
Quarterly '-Meet.iug. li.eld on Thursday, 13th day of
April. 1911, and set out on Form 20 furnished to the
County Council, be and are hereby approved of, and
we now authorise Secretary to affix the common
'seal of the to the contracts entered into.
DUNDALK.
Proposed by Mr Bernoul Tlamill. J P,
Seconded by James M'Court, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for WorkS formulated
by the l)undaik Rural District Council ad the FICSt
Quarterly Meeting, held op- c.nday, 10th day of April,
1911, and set out out on Form 20, furnished to the
•Couvty Council, be and are hereby approved of, a.nd
•we now authorise our Seereta:.y to affix the common
seal of the Council to the contracts entered into.
The Secretary submitted Form 20, County at Large
Payments in respect of the Quarter ended 31st day of
Mareh, J 911, which, on examination, was passed toy
the Committee.
15
LOUT'i1 COUNTY COUNCIL.
ANNUAL MEETING.
Minutes of Proeeedings of the Louth County Couvcll
at their Annual Meeting. held in the Courthou>e,
Drogheda, tlhtesda.y, the 13th day, of June, 1911.
Present
In the Chair—-Patrick Donegan, Esci.; J.P.
Other Members—T J Byrne. J P; Patrick Byrne,
J 7 ; Patrick Callarv, Janjes Connolly, Joseph Dolan,
AV ill iam A Doran, Charles A Duffy, J P; Edward
'Goodman, Bernard llamlll, J P; Joseph P Kearney,
Michael Meacle, Thomas ' Maguire, John F Murphy,
.J P; James M 'Court, jun; Patrick M 'Gee, Patr ck
•O'Connell. Denis J Path, Peter Woods, J P; William
AVoods, J P, and James Wynne, Esquires.
On the suggestion of Mr Luke J Elcock, who np-
peared at the Meeting as a Ratepayer, it was sta:ed
that as the Council was about to elect a Chairman ne
considered it was unfair in the absence of the represen-
tatives of Urban Electoral Division, when
it was agreed that the Council should stand adjourned
for one month; but before adjourning the Councillors
present decided cn hearing their Solicitor—Mr Damel
•O'Connell—on the exist,ine state of affairs
Mr O'Connell then made a statement to the Courcil
expressing I-tis views on lhe situation as it exists, and
memarkcd that it was on his advice the Secretary of the
16
County Council did not summon to meeting the
five Councillors to him as being elected for
the Urban J)ist.rict of Drogheda.
The Secretary was then instructed to communicate
with the Local Government Board, and ask them if
they would receive a deputation from the Council w •th
the view of expediting the Elling up of the vaeancies
now on this Council.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Comnlittee, at their
Meet;ng. held in the Council Chamber, on Monday, the 29th
day of May, 1911.
present :—
In the Chair—Peter Woods, ES(I, J P.
Other Members—Messrs 'l' J Byrne and James M 'Court,
Jun, •Esquires.
'I'he Secretary submitted Payments for \Vorks in charge
of the County Surveyor, which,' on examination, were
•duly passed by the Comrnittee.
'I'he following letter was read by the Secretary, and after
clite consideration. the Collimittee, were unanimous in recom-
mending a sum of to Mr Murray in respect of the extra
ditties he has had to perforill :
'I'HE COCR'I'HOUSE,
1st May, 1911.
'l'o the Gentlemen of the County Council.
I beg to apply for soille remuneration for all the
extra work which I have done in the Courthouse during the
past year, alid for which I received no remuneration what-
'I'here •were two General Elections. and very long
Revision—lasting over three weeks, with two night, sittings—
entailing a lot, of extra work in cleaning, of which I alti
sure a number of the meat bers of your Council are well
During tlte• present year there was alSo an Election,
aware
an Election Petition which lasted a fortnight. ancl entailed
very heavy work : and following tha.t the Special Petty
Sessions held. which are not entirely over as yet
111 addi-
tion to all this, I must prepare two Courts now 011 every
Friday, instead of one as heretofore.
I am five years now in charge Vf the Courthouse, during
which tirne I trust I have given entire satisfaction to all
concerned. My salary is only El per year, which is admit-
tedly very low. I informed my predecessor had El O a
year for extra work, and I tllillk the work of the Courts has
increased since then instead of diminishing. Perhaps the
County Council would see their way to grant me a sinlilar
suit), as I believe my salary cannot be increased. Trusting to
your gent•rosity in the matter,
Your Obedient Servant,
T. MURRAY, Courtkeeper.
'l'he Secretary Louth ('o. Council.
Louth County Council.
Supplemental Minutes.
FIN ANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber on Monday, the 24th day
of July, 1911.
Present: —
In the Chair—William A Doran, Esq.
Other Members—Cha.s A 'Duffy, J P; James M'Court, jun
Michael Meade, James Wynne, Bernard llamill, J P ; and
Joseph P Kearney, Esquires.
The Secretary subniitted payments for Works in charge of
the Countv Surveyor's and his own Office, which on examina-
tion were passed 'by the Committee.
He also submitted Forms 22 from the Clerks of the respective
Ru ral Districts, which on examination were a;so recommended
for payment by the County Council.
The undermentioned communication from Mr John M. C.
Lyons was read, and on consideration of same the Committee
declined to recommend him any remuneration in respect of the
services stated in his lotter, as they consider thev are part of
hig duties which he is 'bound to perform for the County Coun-
eil : —
15, Castle Road,
Dundalk, July 22, 1911.
To Proposals or Finance Committee,
Louth County Council.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,
I respectfully beg to say that I have not
been paid anything -for my Maps or Plans, Sections, Reports.
and attendanee at Quarter Session and Assizes in defending
four actions at law against the County Council (of recent date),
and which I am glad to say have been dismissed, or withdrawn
in each case.
2
The following are the cases referred to :—
1.—MiehneI M 'Keown, Annies, alleged accident at Lisdoo.
2. —Daniel Leavy, Dundalk, alleged accident at Grange
Well.
em—Joseph Meehan, Cappoge, alleged defective drain.
4.—Bernard Wallace, Haggardstown, alleged sanitary nui-
sanee.
The late Mr Rogers. Solicitor, allowed me the usual Court,
Fees in such cases, I should feel obliged if you will allow
Ille tl:e satne fee in these cases as that allowed in Malicious in-
jury Claims.
I may also mention that I had eonsiclerab:e trouble and ex-
pense in preparing Plans and Seet,ions for the Road Board
Sehome, in connection with Mounthalliilton ' 'Corners Improve-
ments" and Ballymascanlon Ibr•€lge Improvements. But as this
work appears to have been, abortive, I fear I cannot expect
any remuneration for such.
Trusting you will favourab:y consider my application,
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
JOHN M. C. LYONS,
Assistant Count}' Survesor.
C/o T. F. Eilgate. Esq,
Secretary Co. Co.
The following letter was read by the Secretary
Francis Street, Dundalk,
18th Ju;y, 1911.
Dear Sir,
Mr Engene Cannon, of Dunloer, has instruc-
ted to apply to tho Countv Council for payment of the arn-
ount due Secretary of Ardee No. 1 School At,tendanee
Comtnitteo. Unless the autount is paid before Friday next, and
also '2s (71, the costs of this letter, I must issue a Civil Bill.
Yours faithfully,
ROBERT DICKIE.
Tho Committee declined to take any notice of thig letter.
Letter from P . J. Kerley, Solicitor, dated 21st inst, an
which he stated hold an affirmance herein against the
County Council for C'2(j Is IOd. Your Council are not bound
to pay M.r M 'Geough the amount until it is levied and allot-
ted ; but as the arnount is so small, T shall feel much obliged if
your Council could see their way to have the amount, paid at
once. ' '
The Committee decided not to dewart from their usual course,
i.e., not to pay any Malicious Injury Claims until the money
has been levied and xlfr)tted.
Letter from Mr H E Henderson, District Inspector, Dundalk,
as under
21st July, 1911.
Dear Sir,
On €110 19th inst I wrote to the Manager of the
Inebriate Reformatory at Waterford, - asking if he would re•
e.eive as an inmate a man who has already been convicted of
drunkenness nine times within twelve months. Tle has replied
that he cannot do so, as he has yet received no intimation
thaf Vhe County Louth CGunty Council axe going to contributo
towmds the expenses of the n:eforma€or.y. Will you kindly let
know whether the County Council to contribute or
not.
I am, etc,
H. E. HENDERSON, D 1.
The Committee, after due consideration of the foregoing Iet•
ter, unanimously reeommencled that the County Council be-
come contributory to the Waterford Inebriate Reformatory for
men, and, the Wexford Inebriate Röformatory for women, as,
in their opinion, it will in the end prove a saving to the ra.tes.
The Committee also recommended payment of C3 3s Gd to the
Wexford Inebriate Reformatory, in respect Of the patient,
Ca.therine Nugent, and also that the account from R I C Au-
thorities in resp€et of extra Constabulary be discharged, and
that same be levied off the County-at-Large.
Forms 22 from the Clerks of the respective Rural Districts,
were submitted by the SeereiJary; and after examination were
recommended for payment by the County Council.
2
The following are the cases referred to
I.—Miehnel Annies, alleged accident at Lisdoo.
2. —Daniel Leavy, Dundalk, alleged aocident at Grange
Well.
g.—Joseph Meehan, Cappoge, alleged defective drain.
4. —Bernard Wallace. Haggard.stown, alleged sanitary nui-
sanee.
The •late Mr Rogers. Solicitor, allowed me the usual Court
Fees in sueh eases, ancl I should feel obliged if you will allow
the snrne fee in these cases as that alloweci in Malicious in-
jury Claims.
I mav also mention that I had considerable trouble and ex-
peruse in preparing Plans and Sections for the Road Board
Sehome, in connection with Mounthamilton ' 'Corner.s Improve-
menus" and Ballymascanlon Ibr•€lge I:nprovements. But as this
work appears to have been abortive, I fear I cannot expect
an v remuner"ation for such.
Trusting you will favourably consider my application,
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
JOHN M. C. INONS,
Assistant County Surveyor.
C/o T. F. Filgate,
Secretary Co. Co.
The following letter was read by the Secretary
Francis Street, Dundalk.
18th Jilly, 1911.
Dear Sir,
Eugene Cannon, of Dunleer, has instrue-
ted 1110, to apply to tho Countv Council for ,payment of the arn-
ount due Secretary of Ardee No. I School Attendaneo
Comtnittoe. Unless the a utount is paid before Friday next, and
also '2s (Sd, the costs of this letter, I must issue a Civil Bill.
Yours faithfully,
ROBERT DICKIE.
Tho Committee declinecl to take any notice of this letter.
Letter from P . J. Kerley, clatcd 21st inst,
which he stated hold an affirmance herein against the
County Council for C2(j Is Your Council are not bound
to pay Mr M 'Geough the amount until it is levied and allot-
ted ; but, as Che amount is so small, T shall feel much obliged if
your Council could see their wxy io have the amount paid at
once. ' '
The Committee decided not to depart from their usual course,
i.e., not to pay any Malicious Injury Claims until the money
has been levied and allotted.
Letter from Mr H E Henderson, District Inspector, Dundalk,
as under
21st July, 1911.
Dear Sir,
- T to the Manager of the
ECONOMY
X S r EN Envelope by gumming thiq Label across flap.
•O P F. N by cutting Label instead Of tearing Envelope.
An Bainiste6ir-Craoibhe,
(The Branch Manager),
Craobh-Oifig Fheadhmanais,
(Branch Employment Office) .
ARDEE_.
IRoinn Tionnscail agus Trachtåla.
E.3öf.
BIOS07. WTA969.D.P/so/ ; /2507.G.33.500m.2/45.D.p.S. 32
Ca.therine Nugent, and also that tne
thorities in respect of extra Constabulary be discharged, and
that same be levied off the County-at-Large.
Forms 22 from the Clerks of the respective Rural Districts,
wore submitted by the Seeretjary, and after examination were
reeotnmended for payment. by the County Council.
4
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE.
Minutes of proceedings of the Proposal Committee at their
Meeting, hold in the Council Chamber on Monday, the 24th
day of July, 1911,
Presen t : —
In the Chair—William A Doran, Esq.
Other Members—Chas A Duffy, J P; James M 'Court, jun ;
Michael Meade, James Wynne, Bernard Hamill, J P; and
Joseph P Kearney, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted Form 20. which eontained the fol-
lowing construct an approach road, 40 perches long, for
tho proposed pier at Annagassan, not to exceed 00, to bo
levied of the County-at-Large."
The County Surveyor sub-
mitted map of the proposed new road, and the Committee hav-
ing discussed the matter for some time, approved of the pro-
posal in question. The account frorn the R I C Authorities
was also submitted to this Committee, and duly recommended
for payment.
Local
Government
1898.
(Ireland) Act,
I
Coulb Count) Council.
MINUTES
PROCEEDINGS
LOUTH CO. COUNCIL
in the Council Ch unber.
At their Quatterl.y Meeting helll
Dundalk.
a nd
on THU RSI)AY, 27th July, 1911 ;
At their Adjourned Meeting held oti the 17th August. 191 1
and at their Special Meeting on the 'ith day of
Septetnber, 1911 ; and at their Special Meeting held on
the '28th day of September, ! 91 1.
Finance Committee
Held on the 24th July; 9th August ;
Meetings
21st August;
4th
September ;
ber, 1911.
P.
25th September; 23rd
M ACCÜLLOVGYI. PRINTER,
October ;
(ith Novem-
DÜNDA LK
i
1
LOUTH COUNIT COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings of t4fie Lou±'l County Council "t
their Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council Chamber on
Thursday, the 27th day of July, 1911.
Present :—
In the Chair—Wm A Doran, Esq.
Other Memlbers—Joseph Dolan, J Connolly, Peter Woods,
J p; Thomas Maguire, Patrick O'Connell, James M 'Court,
jun; T J Byrne, J P; Patrick Byrne, J P, Esquires.
The Minutes of Proceedings of last Meetings of the County
Council having been printed, and a copy sent to each member;
wore taken as read and were confirmed,
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE COMMITTEE MINUTES.
On the motion of Mr Bernard Hamill, J P,
Seronded by Mr Peter Woods, • P, it was
Resolved that the M:inutes of Proceedings of the Finance
Committee held cn the undermentioned dates be and are
hereby approved of by this Council,viz, Monday, the 29th day
of May, 1911, and Monday, the 24th day of July, 1911.
Fixing of dates for Q:wrterly Meetings of Rural District
Councils and Proposal Committee
Proposed by Mr T J Byrne, J P,
Seconded by Mr James Connolly, and
Resolved—That the County Council hereby determine that
2
the following shall be the dates for the holding of the Third
Quarterly Meetings of the Rural District Councils, viz :—
Ardee No. I—Tuesday, the October, 1911.
Drogheda—Thursday, the 12th October, 1911.
Dundalk—Monday, the 9th Cctober, 1911.
The last day for lodging applications by Notice of
will be Tuesday, the 12th Sevt:mber, 1911.
PROPOSALS FOR PAYMENTS.
ARDEE.
Proposed by Mr Jcsepll Dolan;
Seconded Mr Patrick Byme, J P, and
Motion
3
the Dundalk Rural District Council at their second Quarterly
Meeting held on Monday, the 10th day of July, 1911, and set
out on Form 22 furnished tro the Cöuuty Council, be and are
hereby approved of.
ROAD BOARD'S GRANT.
On the motion, of Mr T J Byrne, J P,
Seconded by Mr William A Doran,
The following resolution was unanimoasly • passed by the
Council we, the Louth County Council, call upon each
of the Members of Parliament for this County to raise by
question in the House of Commons, or otherwise as to them
may seem best, tho right of the Reed Board to refuse any
Grant whatever out of the funds at their disposal for the
improvement of the roads they prescribe in this county, unless
an equal sum be contributed proportionately from each Rural
and Urban Council.
Resolved—That the proposals for payments formulated by
the • Ardee No. I Rural District Ccumcil, at their second Quar-
-terly Meeting held on Tuesday, the 4th day of July, 1911, and
set out on Form 22 furnished to the County Council, be and
are hereby approved of.
DROGHEDA PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr Thomas Maguire,
Seconded by -Mr Joseph Dolan, and
Resolved—That the prcposals for payments formulated by
the Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union, at their second
Quarterly Meeting held on Thursday, the 13th day of July,
1911, and set out on Form 22 furnished to bhe County Council,
is
NOXIOUS WELDS (IRELAND) ACT, 1909.
Respecting tåhe communication from the Department re this
was
Proposed by Mr Thomas Maguire,
Seconded by Mr James M 'Court, jun,
be and are hereby approved of.
DUNDALK PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr T J Byrne, J P,
Seconded by Mr Peter Woods, J P, and
Resolved—Thot the proposals for payments formulated
by
That this Council hereby consent to an Order being made by
the Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland declaring that, throughout the County of Louth all
Plants of the following species, viz—Thistles, Docking, Rag-
worth and Coltsfoot, are noxious weeds for Ohe purposes of the
Weeds and Agricultural Seeds (Ireland) A ot, 1909.
4
'The Chairman divided the Council on this matter, with the
following result
FOI +,he Resolution—Messrs T J Byrne, Patrick Byrne,.
Joseph Dolan, Wm A Doran, Thomas Maguire, James M 'Court,
jun ; and Patrick O'Connell—7.
Against the Amendment—Messrs James Connolly, Bernard
Hamill, and William T Skeffington—3.
The Chairman, therefore, declared the amendment lost by
7 votes to 3, and the original motion was in the form of
resolution and declared carried by the same majority.
Letter from Mr J T Dolan, M A, Ardee, on behalf of the
County Louth Archaeological Society, asking tho County
Council to give them permission to put a small door on the
Ardee Castle, and also to put a netting wire over the windows
to keep the pigeons out.
The Counöil unanimously agreed to carry cut these repairs,
and the work was left .in the hands of t; he County Surveyor.
The following correspondence from the Department respect-
ing the Regulations as to the wearing of Collars by Dogs
No. I—No dog shall be allowed to in any highway or
place of public resort in the Administrative County of Louth
unless such dog is wearing, while in such hiuhway or place of
resort, a collar with the name and address of the Owner of
such dog inscribed thereon, or a plate or badge attached
thereto.
5
EXEMPTION FROM REGULATIONS
The foregoing Regulation does not apply to any pack of
hounds, OF to any dog while being used for sporting purposes,
or for the capture or destruction of vermin, or for the driving
or tending of cattle or sheep.
SEIZURE OF DOGS WHERE REGULATIONS ARE
CONTRAVENED.
Any dog in respect of which an offence is being committed
may be seized and treated as a stray dog under the powers
•conferred by Section 3 of the Dogs Act, 1906.
OFFENCES.
If any dog found in a highway or place of public resort is
not wearing a collar as prescribed by th•e Regulations, the
Owner of t;he dog, and the person for the time 'being ill charge
thereof, and the person allowing the same to be in the\highway,
or in the -place of public resort, in contravention of such
Regulations, shall, each according to and in respect of his own
acts and defautts, be deemed guilty of an offence against the
Diseases of Animals Act, 1894.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes oe Proceedings of tho Louth County Counci! at
their adjourned Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council
Chamber on Thursday, the 17th day of August, 1911.
Present : —
Tn Chair
Other Mem bers—T
Patrick Donegan J P ;
Patrick O'Connell, Esq.
J Byrne, J P; Bernard Hamill, J P;
Patrick Byrne, J P; Edward Goodman,
6
James MCo,urt, jun; Patrick Callan, Thomas Maguire, Charles
A Duffy, J P ; Joseph P Kearney: and James Wynne, Esquires,
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
The following report from the County Surveyor was read :—
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,
1. At Oriel Demesne, and at Rokeby Hall, weak 3rd class
roads have been damaged by heavy timber traffic, and sums
of C'20 and C25 have been passed to supply extra broken stones
in addition to the specified quantity (se No 2, Ardee, and No
3, Drogheda). No. 1, Drogheda is a usefu; Lane, now to be
repaired as a 4th class road.
2. Ardee and Dundalk Rural Districts have refused the
Free Grants offered by the •Road Board, applications for
equivalent sums, to be raised by the Poor Rate, being rejected.
I cannot help thinking that this decision was arrived at on
ingufficient information. Members of the Councils seem not
to have read the report of your deputation which attended
the Road Board Conference on 7th Marcrn last, or the verbatim
report of the Chairman's speech, which was published in the
Dublin papers on the 10th March. The Chairman of the
Road Board, Sir George Gibb, stated that before two years a
Bill would be promoted in Parliament tc levy ld in the C off
every county in Ireland, the money to be handed over to the
Road Board, to be expended by them on about 2,000 miles
of the principal roads in Ireland. This proposal is so objection-
able and so universally disapproved that it will probably be
dropped, if it has not been dropped already. Mr Nolan, M P,
informed the Ardee Council that he could hear nothing of
such a Bill, and that if introduced it would certainly be
rej ected.
3. This year and next year, élowever, there is a totally
(Efferent state of things. In each year a free grant of CI,200
is offered to County Louth, provided that an equal amount be
raised by the District Councils, to be spent on improvements,
steam rolling and improved road metal, on 36 miles of the most
important and most: expensive roads in the county. This
money could be expended to such advantage that it seems to
me to be unwise to refuse it.
4. Good road metal is the first essential for good and cheap
roads. Soft stones make bad and expensive roads, and the
question of good quarries is most important. Braganstown
quarry supplies over twenty miles of roads round Castlebelling-
ham, and six road contractors are now at work in this quarry
under, per9haps, the worst possible conditions. The clay and
the soft top of the rock are flung anywhere. quarry is not
drained, and no one contractor will do any pumping, conse-
quntly the quarry is so shallow that the clay and rubbish dealt
with are nearly equal in bulk to the stones quarried. When
really good stone is met it is passed by as too hard to quarry
and break. The approach road to the quarry is a clay track,
impassible in bad weather. Dunleer quasrry is in much the
same state. If these or similar quarries wero to 'be purehased
and properly workal by direeb labour, the sale of stones to
road eon tractors at a fixed wice would pay the working
expenses when the first cost was paid off, and the free grants
from the Road Board Offer an opportuuitv which it would be
a pity to miss. Direct labour scattered over hundreds of miles
of roads cannot be properly supervised, but there is a very
different state of things in a quarry which supplies a measured
quantity of broken stones every year. Better stones in future
would make better roads and also cheaper roads, because the
quantity of broken stones to be supplied might be reduced iny
as much as 40 per cent, and there would not be as nytvch mud bo
8
sweep off. At Beliurgan, Ballymakellett, etc, there is a
practically unlimited supply of excellent stone, perhaps the
best in the British Isles, which ought to be much more widely
used. English Councils find that it pays them to Ahi,p similar
stones from Carlingf01<l.
I am, Gentlemen, your cybetlient servant,
P. J. LYN AM, County Surveyor.
Proposed by Mr Edwa1Tl Goodman,
Seconded by Mr Donegan, J P, and
Resolved-—Thnt the Report of the County Surveyor as ap-
poaring on page, 1 on Schedule of Proposuls and is hereby
adopted by this Council ; that application be made to the Road
Boat•d for corresponding amounts passzd by the Drogheda and
Dundalk Ul ban Districts aryl Drogheda (Louth) Rural District
as soon as specifications are ledged.
PROPCSALS FOR WORKS.
ARDEE.
Proposetl by Mr Patrick Callan
Seconded 'by Mr Patrick Donegan, J P, and
Resolved—That the proposals for works formulated by the
Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council at their second Quarterly
Meeting, heid on Tuesday, the 4th day of July, and set out on
Form 20 furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby
approved of, ancl we now authorise our Secretary to affix the
COrnmon Seal cf the Council to the Contracts entered into.
9
DRCGHEI)A.
Proposed by Mr Patrick Donega•, J P,
Seconded by Mr Patrick Callan, and
Resolved—That the proposals for works formulated by the
Louth Rural D-strict Drogheda Union at their second Quar-
terly Meeting, hold Thursday, the 13th day of July, 1911,
and set out on Form 20 furnished to the County Council, be
and are hereby approvctl of, and we now authorise our Seere-
tnry to af'.ix the 'Ctimmcn Seal cf the Council to the Contracts
4ent,ercd into.
DUNDALK.
Proposed by Mr Patrick Byrne, J P,
Seconde i 'hoy Joseph P Keary•ey, and
Resolved—That the proposals for works formulated by tho
Dundalk Rural District Council at their second Quarterly
Meeting, he'd on Monday, the IOW) das' of July, 1911, and set
•out on Form 20 furnished to the County Council, 'be and ape
hereby approved of, and we now authorise outr Secretary to
•affix the of the Council t the Contracts entered
into.
Confirmation of Minutes of Proceed: ngs of the Finance
Committee of the 9th Angust, 1911.
Propcsetl by Goodman,
Seecndetl by Mr James M 'Court, jun, and
Resolved—That tjie Minutes oof Proceedings of the Finance
Committee at their Meeting held in Che Council Chamber on
Wednesday, the 9th day nguc•t. Ion , a copy of which has
"been forwarded to each member of the (nuncil. be and ere
hereby of.
10
CORRESPONDENCE.
Letter from the Parnell Monument Committee requesting
the Council to appoint delegates to attend the meeting in the
Town Hall, Dundalk, on Sunday evening, August 27th, to
make arrangements for the organising of a demonstration in
Dublin cm October 1st: whicO-1 had been fixed for Che unveiling
of the Parnell Monument.
The Council unanimous:y appointed Messrs James Wynne
and Edward Goc«lman to represent the County Council at 'tlåls
meeting.
CARRAIG PUNCHIN.
The following letter was read and referred to the Council's
solicitor :—
Union Workhouse, Dundalk,
8th August, 1911.
Dear Sir,
The Dundalk Rural District •Council have had their attention
directed to the very dangerous bathing place at Blackrock
known as "Carraig Punchin" Hole: and as.tihey appear to have
no statutory power to deal with the matter, would strongly
urge on the County Council the necessity of having the place
in question made safe, and the further loss of human life
prevented at it.
Yours faithfully,
P. R. FINIGAN,
Clerk of Council.
Or: the application of Mr Patnek Donegan, J P, the Council
unanimously granted him permission to erect a weighbridge
at Monasterboioe.
Owing to the absence of the undermentioned
Messrs William A Doran and Patrick M 'Gee, the following
Notice of Motion fell through
I hereby give notice that at the next meeting of the County
Ck»uncil I shall move—That a gentleman oe co-opted a member
of this Council in room 'Of the late Mr Bernard Halpenny.
Signed, WILLIAM A. DORAN.
On the application of the County Surveyor, the followi'ig
resolutions were passed by the Council
Proposed by Mr Bernard Ham'l!, J. P. ,
Seconded by Mr Patrick Callan, and
Resolved—That permission be given to the Ardee Rural
District Council to re-lay about sixty perches of paved channu
in Collon from the Police Barrack towards the cross; also to
make twenty lineal yards of side drain on the road from Collon
to Starinagh.
Proposed by Mr C A Duffy, J P,
Seconded by Mr Bernard Hamill, J P, and
Resolved—That Thomas Durnin, contractor for No. 148 (of
May. 1911), Ardee Rural District, instead of making a foot-
path at Reaghstown Chapel, be allowed to make å gullet
through his garden to drain the hcllow—the gullet to be ono
foot square ope, and the amount to be paid to Durnin to be,
C9 instead of L'IO.
Proposed by Mr Patrick Byrne, J P,
Seconded by Mr Bernard Hamill, J P, and
Resolved—That permission be given to altcr the fence
Omeath Graveyard, provided a level width of three feet be left
between the new fence and the Water Table of the road.
12
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Alinutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at,
their Special Meeting, in Council Chamber on Monday,
the 4th day of September, 1911.
Present :—
In theß'hair—Peter Hughes, Esq, J P.
Other Members—T J Byrne, J p; Patrick Byrne, J P ;
Patrick Callan, James Connolly, Joseph Dolan, John Doi an,
Patrick Donegan, J P; William A Doran, Charles A Duffy,
J P; Luke J Elcock, wrn de Filgate, D L; Edwa,l
Goodman, Bernard Hamill, J P ; Joseph M Johnson, Joseph 'P
Kearney, James S Kelly, Michael Metcle, Thomas Magui
Laurence wore, F J P, Joseph 1-1 M'.\rdle,
-James M 'Court, jun; Patrick M'Gee, Laurence M' Keotvv,
Patrick O'Connell, Michael O'Meara, J P; Denis J
Peter Wccds, J P, and James Wynne, Esquires.
The, Council prcceeded to eonsider Tenders for the supply
hire cf three Steam Road Rollers in ac with the
COUNTY or LOUTH.
STEAM ROAD ROLIÆRS.
Jihe Louth Chunty Council invite Tenders for the supply on
'hire of three Steam Road Rol!ers, with Drivers, Flagmen and
Plant, for pericds of six months to twelve montms from 10th
October, 1911.
Spocific2tions and Fcyms cf Tender may be seen on a,pplica-
tion to me. to be ledged on or before 0'clock 00
2nd September, 1911, and will be considered at, a Spectal
Meeting of
September,
Courthouse,
13
the County Council to be he:cl on Monday,
1911.
T. F. FILGATE,
County Secretary
Dundalk,
August 9th, 1911.
Two Tenders were received by the Secr etary in response tc
the above advertisement: they yere as follows:—
First—From Mr R J Mvu•vn.v, Riverstown, Co Meath, at
per working day during SIX months, and '2 gs day for a
perkid of eleven months, and 3s per hcur for extra scarifying..
The C.3tmeil to pay sa:.€l quarterly, provided a corv
tificate was granted that the work was properly done. T he.
Contractor would also indemnify the County Council again
any actions or legal proceedings in with the work.
The Edison Steam Roller Compauy, Ltd, Manchester, offer.'d
ta hire an 8, IO or 12 ton Steam Rcller, whichever weight the
Council preferred, cn the terms days' hire, •20s.
per day ; the Council to allow one day's rharge each way for
t:avelling. 200 days' hire, 23s per day ; one day's charge eac'v
way for travelling: 3s per In:ur for scarifying to be allowacl
extia. the men in the employment of the firm are insured.
and the Council would therefore be indemnified against any
actions should an accident oecur during the course of the work.
On the suggestion of Mr T J Byrne, the Tenders were -e-
ferred to tthe County Surveyor for his consideration xnd
report.
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
I beg to that Mr R J Murray's tender for one
Steam Roller be accepted at 23s per day for six months; •xlso
the Edison Company's tender for 200 days' rolling at 23s per
14
•day, and another roller for 100 days at 25s per day . These
tenders do not include flagman, while Murray's tender does.
P. J. LYNAM.
County Surveyor.
.N .B.—Ail three Rollers to be taken from Mr Murray
:available, and one from the Edison Company.
P. J. LYNAM.
After eonsideration of the foregoing report, it was
Proposed by Mr T J Byrne, J P,
Seconded by Mr James Wynne, and
if
Resolved—That the report of the County Surveyor ujst read
on the subject of Steam Road Rolling be and is hereby adopted
by this Council.
Messrs Joseph Dolan and Patrick M 'Gee dissenting.
The Council next proceeded to the appointment of a Coroner
for North Louth in accordance with the undermentioned
-vertisemen€ issued by the Secretary
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
APPOINTMENT OF CORONER FOR NORTH LOUTH.
Notice is hereby given that tho Louth County Council will
at their Special Meeting to be held in the Council Chamber,
Dundalk Courthouse, on Monday, the 4th day of September,
1911, proceed to elect a Coroner for Nordh Louth in room of
the late Dr John C Sellars, at a salary of C66 per annum.
15
Applications should be lodged in the Office of the Secretary,
<County Council (endorsed application for Coronership), on •r
before 4 0'clock on Saturday, the 2nd dhy of September, 1911.
T. F. FILGATE.
Secretary Ollth County Conn.' 'I.
18th August, 1911.
Applications were received from Ih• Peter O'Connell, Roden
Place, Dundalk; Dr P J Finegan, Abbey View, Carlingford ;
and Dr P J O'Hagan, Castlebellingham, the latter gentleman
having subsequently withdrh.wn his application.
The Chairman t\herefore took a vote of the Council as be
tween Dr O'Connell and Dr Finegan, and the following
the result of the voting
For Dr Finegnn there voted—Messrs Byrne, T J; Calion,
Pati ick ; Connony, James; Dolan, John; Donegan, Patric;c ;
Doran, Willim A , Filgate,u Wm de Sabs; Hamill, Bernard,
Johnson, Joseph M; Keurney, Joseph P ; Kelly, James
Maguire, Thomas; Moore, Laurence; Rath Denis J ;
Woods, Peter—15.
For Dr O'Connell there voted—Messrs Byrne, Patrick ;
Dolan, Joseph; I)uffy, Charles A; Elecck, Luke J ; Goodman,
Edward; Hughes, Peter; Meade, Midha,el; Murphy, John ;
M'Ardle, Joseph ; M 'Court, James, jun; M 'Gee, PatrieK ;
Af'Reown, Laurence; O'Connell, Patrick; Woods, William ;
and Wynne, James—15.
Both candidates having received an equal number of votes,
•the Chairman gave his casting vote in favour of Dr O'Connell,
Ävhom he declared duly elected by 16 votes to 15.
16.
It was prcpcsetl Mr Edward Gcodman,
Seconded by Mr James Wynne, and
Resolved—That Dr Peter O'Connell, of Radon Place,
dalk, be and is hereby appointed Coroner for North Louth at.
a salary of per annum, as stated in the Secretary's
vertisement.
CORRESPONDENCE.
The following correspondence was then read by the Sccre•-
Cary :—
Francis Street, Dundaik,
21st August, 1911.
RE NEW ROAD.
Dear Sir.
With reference to this work for •the Ardee Rizal District
Council No. I, and for the purpose of having the necessary
Deeds of Conveyance comfilebed, I actvanced cheques to tho
landlord, Mr George Henry Pentland, for the sum of 'CIO on
29th April last, and handed cheque for C 15 to one ('f the two-
tenants, Mr Owen Pidgeon, on the execution of Deed on ttlv
last. This was t.he understanding come to, as I was.
infcrmed, by Mr Thcmas B Dromgcole, Clerk to the Rural
Dustrict Council.
I shall be glad to have Paying Order to cover the amount
of the above advances at your convenience. The orgginab
Deeds, which I have already handed over to you, aré in them.
selves receipts to the County Council for payment of i he
respective sums.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
11Y1e Council authorised the Secretary to refund Mr O'ConnelV
these amounts.
Sir,
I beg to forward
monsly adopted 'by
17th inst.
you
17
Dublin County Council,
22nd August. 1911.
herewith copy of a resolution unani-
Council at its meeting held on bhe
I am, etc,
R. T. BLACKBURNE,
Secretary.
as uniform time has now 'been ad:jpted by
France and other countries 111 Western Europe, largely
the interest of t;heir export trade, and as, combined by the
disadvantages of being some, 25 minutes behind Greenwich
tinie, we have an increasingly slow telegraplne service with
great trade centres in England and Scotland, the time lifts
come, in the opinion of this Council, when, in the interest of
the export and general trade of the country, Greenwich time
should be adopted in Ireland, and we wish to convey to other
Public Bodies and Chambers of Commerce who have taken
this and the question of telegraphic service with the Govern-
ment, that they can count on our most earnest co-operation.
The Council ordered that this matter appear on the next
agenda issued by the Secretary.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings of tyye Louth County Council, at
a Special Meeting, held in the Council Chamber on Thursday,
the 28th day of September, 1911.
Present
Tn the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq, J P.
Other Members—T J Byrne, J P; Patrick Byrne, J P ;
James Conolly, Joseph Dolan, Bernard Hamill, J P;
18
P Kearney, John F Murphy, J P; James M 'Court, iun;
Patrick O'Connell, Denis J Rath, William T Skeffington,
Joseph Dolan, and Joseph M Johnson} Esquires.
The Council were summoned for the purpose of transact: ng
the following business, viz :—
1st—To consider applications for two Scholarships at LI. o
College of the National tiniversity for the Session October,
1911, to June, 1912.
2nd—To take into consideration the obtaining of a Pro-
visional Order for Annagassan Pier.
In accordance with his instructions, the Secretary issu•d
the undermentioned advertisement for Scholarships to 'he
National University
LOUTH COUNTS COUNCIL SCHOLARSHIPS
TO THE NATIONAL UNIVERSITY.
The County Council of Louth offer Two Scholarships of Cö()
each, providing a Year's Course at Dublin University College.
The ,SGholarships will be awarded to the two applicants who
show highest merit in the Test Examination, tund who Matric-
ulate in September, 1911, or who have already Matriculated
•but have not gone through the first University Year's Course,
and who fulfil the other conditions, viz: -
(1) A Good Stardard of HonourS in the Examination.
(2) A Knowledge of irisih.
(3) Eligibility in Health, Character and Ago.
(4) Three Years' Residence of Parents or Guardians in
County Louth.
(5) Want, of sufficient means to follow a University Course
at their own expense.
19
Tho Intermediate Examination Results Of 1911 and 1910 will
be used as a Competitive Test, but Candidates may be re-
•quired to submit to another Examination, of which due notice
Will 'be given them; and if any should not have taken Irish • n
the Intermediate they must undergo Special Examination
in Irish, to be arranged by the County Council.
Applications must be sent to the Secretary of the County
Council, Dundalk, on or before September 15th.
For further particulars, apply to
THE SECRETARY,
Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
Three applications from the following persons were received
by the Secretary in response to the fcregoing advertisement,
Viz—Henry Rogan, Dundalk ; Miss MaePa.rland, Dundalk ; and
Laurence Brannigan, Drogheda.
The Charrman informed the Council that he {had received
the following letter from the Rev AndreG' Murphy, St Mun-
chin's, Limerick :—
".At the request of Mr Dolan, I beg to send you the award
1
would make •between the two Scholarship candidates. I shall
call the candidates boy and girl. Taking printed marks the boy
gets 347, the girl 508. Comparing thegyourses, the boy rend
the honours course in three subjects ; ; the girl in five. tho
boy passed with honours only in Irish, thc girl in English
Domestic Economy and Hygiene. In languages •the boy got
honours in Irisih, passed in the honours course in French, and
reached mere pass level in Latin and English. The girl got
honours in English, passed in honours course in Latin and
French, and reached mere pass level in Irish. In mathematics
the boy did not take the honours course in any subject, and
pasgéd in, two out of three. The girl took t'.te honours
in two subjects, and passed in that course one of theny
Thogh she failed in two of the maLhematic subjects, her
taking the honurs course would a higher level of
promise her part than on t\hat of the boy. In science {he
boy failed by a few marks to get honours: the girl got ner
honours. On every one of these points the girl seems to me
to be the better candidate, and taking all the points togeth •r y
the balance of advantage in her favour is very considerable. '
After very considerable discussion on, this matter, the Counoil
were unanimous in passing the following resolution :—
Proposed by Mr T J Byrne, J P,
Seconded by Mr J M Johnson, and
Resolved—That Mr Henry Rogan get, tho first
and that the other Scholarship be divided between Miss Mae-.
Parland and Laurence Brannigan.
The second item on the agenda was: ' 'To take into considera..
tion the obtaining of a Provisional Order for Annagassan
Pier.
There was considerable discussion over this matter, and it.
was eventually
Proposed by Mr Denis J Rath,
Seconded by Mr Joseph Dolan,
That we decline to give any guarantee to the promoters •f
the Pier at Annagassan respecting the cost of a Provision fl
Order, until the promoters give us a guarantee that the rate--
payers will be at no
21
Amendment moved by Mr Patrick O'Connell,
Seconded by Mr T J Byrne,
That we hereby agree to guarantee a sum of not more t,ha•)
towards Che expenses which may be incurred in obtaining
a Provisional Order for the proposed Pier at Annagassan,
provided the promoters submit a draft copy of the Provision 11
Order for the consideration of t/he Council for their approval
or rejection, and that this. resolution be stibmitted to -'he
Department for their consideration.
On a division there voted for the amendment—Messrs Byrne,
T J ; Connolly, James; Kearney, Joseph P; Murphy, Jolm ;
M 'Court, James; O'Connell, Patrick ; and Skeffington, Wm
Against the amendment there voted—Messrs Byrne, Patrick ;
Dolan, Joseph; Hamill, Bernard; Rath, Denis J; and Woods,
Peter—5.
The Chairman therefore declared the amendment carried
by 7 votes to 5.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
SUPPLEMENTAL
FINANCE C
Mir.•utes of Pror.@dings of the Finance Committee at iheir
&efing held in the Council Chamber, on Monday, the 24th day
of July, 1911.
Prcsent
the Chmir—Wi11iam A Doran, Esq.
Membtrs—Chas A Duffy, D J p; James M'Court,: jun ;
Michael Meade, „Tamcs Wyano; Bernard Ilarr,ill, J P, and Joseph
Kearney, Esquires
22
The Secretary submit.tjcjd payments for works in charge of tho-
County Surveyor and his own office, which, on examination, were.
passed by the Committee.
Tle also submititted Form 22 from the Clerks of the ret;pective
Rural Distriørs, which, on examination, were also rocomrncndeæ
for payment by the County Council.
Tho undermentioned communication from MI' John M C Lyons
was read, and on consid. ra.t.•on of same, tho Committee declined
to recommend him any remuneration in of the services
Stato,cl in his letter, as they considervd {hay are Pirt of his
duties, which he is bound to perform fo+ the Coun4.(Y Council :—
15, Castle Road,
Dundalk. July 22, 1911.
Tc Proposals of Finance Commit,toe,
Louth Counfy Council.
Mr and Gentlemen,
T ycspeotfull," beg to say that I have not bren paid anything
for my maps or plans, sections, reports, and atte TIE nee at
Quarter . Sessions and Assizes in defending four actions at •law
agail:st thc C' unty (of rec•€tnt, date), and which, I any
glad to say. Fave been disn. isscd, or withdrawn in coch case.
The follov. ing are the cascs referred to:—
(1). Michaql M 'Keown, Anniets, allcged accident aü Lisdoo.
(2). Danirl Leavy. Lundalk, alleged acciden% at Granye Well.
(3). Jaseph Meehan, Cappoge, allfgcd defectivo drain. •
(4). Bernard Wallace, Haggardstown, allegied sanitary nuisnnce
The late Mr Rogers, Solicitor, allowed me f1ho tugual Court
Fees in suzh casqg, and I chould feel obliged if you will allow
me the same fce in these cases as thaw allowed in malicious
injury claims.
I raoy also mention that, r had considerable trouble and ex-
pense .-n preparing plans sections for the Road Board
Schen•e in eonnection with Mounthamilton • 'Corners' Improve-
23
ments" and Bailymascanlon Bridge Improvement. But as this
work appears abortive, I fear I cannot expect any remuneration
for such.
Trasting you will favourmbly oonsiht• my application,
I em, Gentlemen,
Ynur obedient servente,
JOHN M. C. LYONS,
Assistant County Survcyor.
c/o T. F. Fi;gnbe, Esq.,
Secretary County Council.
The following letter wate read Ly t'he Secretary
Francis street, Dundalk,
18th July. 1911.
Dear Sir,
Mr Eugene Gannon, of Dunleer, has instructed me to apply
to the County Council for payment of the amount du. him a;
Secretary of Aidee Nm 1 School Attendancc Committee. Unless
the emouni is paid before Friday roex-tg and also 2s Gd, the COSE
Of Obis letter, I m.vst fssue Civil Bill.
Yours faitnfully,
ROBERT mcKlE.
The Commit9ee declined to take any notice of this letter.
Letter from P. J. Kerry, Solicitor, dafjed 210 inst» in which
he st)tcd hold an offirmance hercin against, the County
Council for Is 10:1. Your Council are noi bound to pay Mr
M CGeoug'1r the amount, until it is levied and allottcd, but as tba
amovnt is so small, I Shall feel much obliged if your Council
could see' their way to have the amount paid at. once."
The Commit'fee derided not to der.art from their usual course,
i.e.. rot tn pay any malicious injury claims until the money
has bcen leviad and allotti('d.
24
Letüer from Mr 11 E Ilcnderson, District Inspaotor,
as under:—
21st July, 1911.
Dear Sir,
On the 10th instant I wrote '.o the Manager of the
Dundalk,
Inebriate
Reformatory, Waterfoyd, asking if he would receive as an in-
mate a man who has convicted of drunkonncss nine times
within twelve months. He has replied thit he cannot do so,
as he. has received no intimation that the Louth County Council
are gGing to ••,ontrihute towards the expense of the Reformatory.
Will you kindly let me knew wheth:r the County Council vro-
pose to contrihu±e or not.
1 am, etc.,
H. E. HENDERSON, J) i
The Committee, afxr dua consideration of the foregoing letter,
unanimously recommtnd the County Council become con-
t,ribv.tory to the Waterford Inebriate Reformatory for men and
the Wexford Ir:ebriate Reformatory for women, as, in their
opinion, it will in the end prove a saving to the rat,qs.
'The •Committee also recommended payment of C3 3s 6d 10 {he
Wexford Inebriate reformatory, in respect of the patient
Catherine N uveilt, aud also that account from R.I.CI
Authoritics in v spect of extra Constnbularj be dischargrd, hild
same to be levied off the County at largo.
22 from ibe Clerks of the respective Rural Dits'riefs were
subm it' ed by Sereary, and, after examination, were re-
25
The Secretary submitted Tretourc•r's Authority for Works; - in
charge of the County Surveyor ancl thc Scer(åary's Officc» which,
-on examination. w: s passed by *ohe Committoe.
On the sugg•stion ofA'Tr William Woods, J P, the Commi
directed Mr Lynam to have d he roof taken Off the closet at Car-
lingford Harbour.
Thu Commi€tee were u!'animous jn making thc' following re-
commendation to the County Corneil :—
That the gkntlemen of this Council who went to Dublin to
interview the Local Govcrnmallt, Board re the recent Election
Crux between the Returning Officer; Mr C J .;hon, B.A., and
the m puty Retmrning Officer, Mr J Connoily, of Droghcda,
be a'lowe€l their travelling expenses to and f •om Dublin. These
gentlemen are—Messrs William A Doran, Ptvvick Don(lgan, J P;
C A Duffy, J P; flamill, J T J Byrne, J t'
and tlie Secretary.
The County Surveyor raad a report on the subject of the hire
purchase of Seam Roed Rollers, and it was tha'. he
-consult with 'he Council's Solicitor on Lhe subjcct maåer of
same.
The following ifttcrs were also read by fhe Secretary
Dear Sir,
King street', Cork,
5/1/i911.
comcnended for p.nyment by County Council.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Mmuttes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at
Meeting held on Wednesday, the 9th -day of August, 1911.
Present :—
In the A- Doran; Asq
their
Other Members—James Wynne, Patrick Byrne, J P; Bernard
Hamill, J P; William Woods, J P; Patrick o•connell, and
Joseph M Johnson,
Tn reply to yours of the 27th ins+., enclosing copy of resolu-
fion paesed by the 1011th Coundy Council. T have put down a
question to the Chief Secrctary an the ma\tor.
Yöurs truly,
AUGUSTINE ROCHE.
Trouse of Commons,
4th Augvst', 1911.
Dear Sir,
Tn reply to your favour re assistance in th improve-msn' of
' from the Road Board, T beg fo shy I diseussr.d tho
matter i+ith Roche as svgg.-steci. Mr Roche flit å rilieéffon
26
on the subjcct, and is sending you at, official copy of the answer—
From thes lafter it would oppebr i/hatj it would mst with any
Council which desired more than the 50 per cent. agreed upon.
to make out, a special case for the increase.
I remain, yours faithfully,
JOSEPH NOLAN.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutcvs of Proceedings of the Finance Committee ot thei
held on Monday. the 21st day of August, 1911.
Pra:alt :—
In A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—J F Murphy, J P; James M.'Court, Wm.
woods, J r; wrn A Doran, O'Meara, J P, and Patrick
O'COI nell, Esquires.
The Sr.crdtary submitted accounts; for works in charge of the•
County Surveyor and his own Office, which, ou examination, o
were passed by the Committee.
Respecting the payment of Z3 to Mi' M'Carthy for temporary
work in the Secretary's Office, it was
Proposed by Mr Wm Loran.
Seconded by Mr Jamas M'Court, jun.,
That Mr M'Cprthy be ptéd for this fortnight's work.
The Committee unanimously recommended payment of 3s
per day to persons counting traffic on principal roads under
Road Board Circular—Application was made by tha County
27
Present
Jn the Choir—Peter H E€,q.; J P.
Other Members—T J T3Y1n.e, J P; Edward Goodman,
llamrll, J P; Jarnes Wynne, P Byrne, J P, and J M Johnsonv
Esquires.
The Secretary submitted Accounts for works in charge of the
County Surveyor and his own Office, which, on examination
by the Commlåt€e, were O"dered for payment.
The Scoretary read a circ ular on the subject of Gencral Time,-
which was referred to the 1 ext meeting Of f1ho County Council,
as was the account, trom St. Brigid's Incbriato Home.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Mil,uias of Proceedings •Jf the Finance Cornmitüee at their-
Meeting held cn Mo»day, the 25th day of mb?r, 1911.
Prcsent —
In Chair—Peter Tlugh«s, Esq., J P.
Other Membrrs—Edward Goodman, M O'Meara, J P; William
A Doran, John F Murphy, J P, and Hamill, T
Esquires.
The S! cref,ary submitted accounts for works in charge of the
County Surv€tyor, etc., which, on examination, were passed by
the Committee.
Thc Chairman directed the Secrotary to ut
the following
questions to our Solicitor
1st.—Can the Borough Magistraüe sit in the Crown Court by•
virtue of his office as Borough Magistrate?
from [be Solicitor has i'he Sheriff any right of
office, with fire, Of.c., in the Counfy Courthouse; and aro we
Survey or, Mr J Lynam.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Mir of Procoedings of the Firvgnce Comr at
Meeting held on Monday, . he 4th day of September, 1911.
their
bound to suppty him witb fire anci li?ht?
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proct€'dings cf the Fin Commit.ee
at
their
28
Meeting held in {'he Council Chamber on
of October, 1911.
Prcs€nt :—
In the Chair—James Wynne, Esq.
Monday,
the
Other Ods, J P; James Connolly,
23rd day
Patrick
O'Connell, Peter Hughes, J .1); John' F Murphy, J P, and Edward
Goodman, Es juires.
The Secretary submitted accounts for works in charge of the
County Suz•vcyor and the Stcrcoary's Office, whiefi, on examina-
tion, were passed by the Committee.
The following corr:spondvnce was then re-ad :—
Courhouse, Dundalk.
To the G:ntlemen of Coun:.v Council.
I •beg to apply for remuneration for (Xtra work done in
I had to prepare it for Ohe
Borough Court during past year.
Locat and Genera: Elections, and a: the time T Iud extra
clerical staff from February until June, so that 1 had get it
thoroughly and wa-.hed. As Mr Filgat.e knows, was
in a filthy State.
Trusting to the garrosity of {lhe Council,
[ r m fill, (kntlemen,
your obedicnt servant',
C. M'GARRITY,
Caretaker.
After somo discussion the Coriimif'ce r fcrrcd thy subject mat-
-ter of thiS I?tter to the meefing of the County Council.
letter fröin TI Pogan, student awarded a SchoiarsT1if by
the County Council as under:—
St. Mt.ry'Å University Hall,
91, Lower L eson gt,reot', i)ublin,
22/10/'i1.
Sir,
T am now att•onding lectures at the National University
College, and I am residing 04, i he above address. The f $ at
Mai y's Hostel is ZI Is ptr weök. This fee is Coc, high con-
29
ring the vaiue of the Seholarship. Besides, I have not
gc od opporimnity of studying here, for the boys rosident in
this convert the stt'.dy hall into a recreation room, and
iti is nigh impossible to study in it. I, therefore, wish
cha my present place of residence, and to take up my abodc
in a cheaper place of reksidence where r can @tudy at will
Kindly let me know whether I am at liberty to do so, i.e., to
charge present place of rasidence.
Under tho ( sisting circumstances it would be impossible to.
renew • the Scholal*öhip next year.
T wis;hcd to bring this
mat.te•s under vot.•t• notice b€fore my fees would bJ paid to the
proprietor of this Hostei.
I hepe th IS matter will ieceive your kind attention.
Truly yours,
H. ROGAN.
The Committce ins: rueted the Secretary {o address tho fol-
lowing letter to Mr Rogan
Dear Sir,
23rd October, 1911.
You:• letter of the 22nd inst. was laid before the Finali0?i
Committee this day, and they desire to know where you intend
to reside, and when you inficnd to leave, and on hearing from
you the Committee will give your letter full consideration.
Yours foifhfully,
T. F. FILGATE,
Secretary.
To 11 Rogan,
St. Mary's Univorsity Vlall,
91. Lower luteson F'tt•eet,
Dublin-
Minutes of
meeting
of Ncvcmber,
FTNANCE COMMITTEE.
Proceedings of the Finance Committee at. their
in • the Ccnnt•i Charriber on Monday, the 6th day
1911.
30
resent. t—-
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq, J P.
()tber Members—Joseph H M'Arde, Peiter Woods, J P; James
Wynne, James Connolly, Michael Meade, James M'Court, jun ;
Edward Goodman, and Joseph P Kearney, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted payments for works in charge of the
County Surveyor and those of his own Office, Vlach, • on examina-
tion, were pæssed by th€, Committee, These payments amounted
to the sum of C43
Tle also submitted County-at-Large payments ip rvspect of the
'quarter ended 30th Soptember last, which Commiltea also
commended for payment by the County Council.
Lotter from Mr Charles J M'Gahon, Solicitor, as under :—
Francis street,
6th Novomber, 1911.
Sir,
Re County Council Elections :
My bill of expenses has been vouched by the Clerk of the
Peace. arid shows a b.a!arce due to me of 52160 12s 3d.
The
certificate cannot however, until his Honor makes an
order at Quarter Sessions. and as we have no So-sions till
January, T would ask for an instalment of, say, Z140 on account.
Yours faithfully,
CHARLES J. M'GATION.
Affter consicErati0*1 of this letter thc Committee recommended
an Ill<alment of subjtct to the a: proval of tha County
Council.
The Commi+,€.ee declined to pa. an account' from Mr William
Tempest for Cl Is, which was in respect of "Thom's Directory,"
supplied to the Offroe of tha Clerk of the Crown and Peace.
The undeq•mentioned lettier was read by the and
ordered to be brought before the next neciug of the County
Council. Jt is as follows :—
31
Drogheda Louth Rural District
School Attendance Committee,
4th, 1911.
Dear Sir,
At a meeting of above Committees held at Drogheda Courte
on Saturday, November 4th, 1911, it was proposed by Rev.
Mr Bryn, se -•onded by Mr Jamcs Leech, and unanimously
oar riad—That the salary of Mr T W Kearney be increased from
E25 t.'t 235 per year for the combined offces of School
Attendanocj Officer and Secretary to the Committee; increase
to start/ from November 4th.
GSigned) N. T. MURPHY, Chairman
THOMAS KEARNEY, Secretary.
N.B.
r also directed by said Committee to know if I am insure,'
by the County Cotmcil.
The Committee referred the consideration of this Ictter to the
County Council.
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Committee at
their Meeting held on Monday, the 30th day of October'
1911.
Present :
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J, P.
Other Members—John 'F. Murphy, J. P. , Edward Good-
man, James VVyune, Patrick O'Connell, and gelix Woods,
•J.P., Esquires,
On the applica!ion of the Vounty Surveyor the Committee-
were unanimous in passing C20 for the undermentioned re-
pairs to Ardee Courthouse, viz, : Æ8 8tove; .E8 for Range
and for two • Grates and Hearth.
Form 22a was also submitted and duly Signed by the
Chairman,
LOUTH COCSTT COUNCIL.
FIX A.XCE COMMITTEE.
Mihlite' ot prc:ctedings of the Finance Committee at thew
Mez•ting Sheld on Alcnday, the ijthüla.v Of November, i911.
P: esent
A Doron,: V C.
()ther M embers—James Connolly,
William .J P;
Miehae! O'Meara, J P; Patrick Byrne, .J ; Bernard Hamill,
J P: John F J P; Michael Meade, Patrick O'Connell,
Joseph H M' Ardle, James Wynne, and Peter Woods, J e,
Esquires.
The Secretary sv bmitted Forms 22 from the Clerks of the pes-
pective Rural Districts, in respect of the quarter ended 30th
September last. which were duly passed and signed by the
lairman.
The Committee next proceeded to consider the undermen-
tamed application from Mr C E M 'Conn, late Poor Rate
tor for the Electoral Divisions of St Peter's East and West,
Drogheda :—
18/9/1911.
Dear Sir,
Having had to resign my position of Rate Col-
leetor owing to my ill health, and my resignation having been
accepted by your Council, I now make application for the pen-
*ion to which I am entitled under the Copy of I)cetor's Certifi-
eate. Will kindly bring this matter before your Council
at their next meeting, and oblige
Yours truly,
CHARLES E. M'CAN.N.
2
(%py: cf. Poeto€s Certificate.
9, Merrion Square, N..
Dublin.
I tiereby certify that Mr Charles M '(hnn has been under my
care for some time, and Chat the state of his health renders
hini incapable peyform;ng any active wor,ls.
J. B. COLEMAN,
13th February, 1911.
Tlte Committee directed the Secretary to Mr M 'Cann's
application• to the Council's Solicitor, and inquire whether the
Council are or are not bound to give Mr M 'Cann superannu:t-
tion allowance, Mr O'Connell report to the next meeting of
the Finance Comnittee.
Letter from Cotleet"l• Cluskey as under :
13th November. 1911.
Dear Sir,
1 will thank you to submit to the County Conucil my appli-
cation for payment in extra work in connection with Clermont
Park—about 120 extra labourers' houses. My work has been
doubled with no increase in my income. I am worst paid
Collector in the county. I only want to be paid according
others. I would feel grateful to the Council for their favour•
able consideration of my application.
After some discussion on the subject matter of the foregoin
letter, it was marked ' 'read."
3
The following letter from the University' College Authorities,
Dublin, dated 10th inst, was read
County Couneii Scholarships, 1911-12.
near Sir,
I am directed by P to inqune
whether your C%uneil propose to pay to this College the whole
amount of the Scholarships al\ocated by the Council out of
which the CA)llege shall pay Fees and the Uoard aud lsd-
ging of the Scholars, or whether your Conncil Intends to pay
'to the College only the College and Class Fees of the holders
of the Scholarships.
As applications for money for Board and Lodging, etc, have
already been received from hoiders of County Council Scholar-
ships, I shall be glad to know your instructions as to the
amount to be paid each month to those Scholars whose account
for Board and Lodging, etc, ape to be paid by the Ol:ege.
Kindly inform me also of the date and manner of the pay-
ment of the Scholarships by your Council.
Yours faithfully,
J. M. BACON,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
I.ou€.h County Council.
The Committee unanimously recommended that the College
Authorities be paid direct by the Counay Council, and to men-
tion the fact that the Council are only responsible for two
Scholarships of C25 each, and one for Cö().
4
Respecting , the C'2() passed the -requirenieiitk' at Äfåoe
Courthouse, the Committee. rweomrnend that ti.ie County Sur'
veyor confer with the Magistrates at Ardee, invite tenders
Contractors, examine same, and then report to the
County Council.
The same gentlenten constitutecl- the Probosal Comnrittee, and
examined and passed Forms 22: and recommended po.vrnent
the Constabulary 6s Ild,
Cocal Government (Irelanb) Hct, 1898.
Coutb County Council.
MINUTES
OF
Proceebings
OF
Coutb County Council
At [heir Quarterly Meeting held in the Council
Challiber, I)undalk,
on 'I'll URSI)AY. 16th November, 1911 ; and
At their Adjourned Meeting held on the 30th November, 1911.
Finance Committee
Held on the 27th Noveniber, 1911, and
P. MACCVLLOUGH, PRINTER,
Meetings
11th 1911.
DUNDALK.
1
COUNTY COUNCIL.
lie inutes of Pror•eedings of the Louth County CouncU
their 'l'hu•d Quart •r!.v Meeting, held in the Council
Q,'hnmber. en Thursday, the J Cith day of November,
Jhesent .
In Chair—Peter Ilughrs, Esq, J P.
T J Byrne, J P; James Wy 1i ne,
( , ther Members
Patk M J P; Patk l)ouegan,
Patrick B;rne, J P; J antes Connolly, John F Murpfry,
j P; Meara. J P; Peter iV00(ls, J P; Will
A I-ictan, V C;
Joseph 'Wm T Skellington, J P;
'I'll(nnas Magu Fre, .Miehael Meacle, Jos
;enis -it 1 h,
N! Johnson J P Kea I ney, Patrick Connell, and .J
M 'A ni!cs, vs.
(hl tho J€•.etion of Mr J M Johnson, seconded by Air
F M• J P, it was
the minutes of the last meetings of
the Coun '1i he'd on the '27t'i July and the
17th
.'\ugnst, •and special meeting heid on the 4th and 28th
days of Senten1Ler. Ijeen inted and eops•
sent to paell Menlb>l', taken as read and were
conf rme.l
A! r Joseph Joh Itson,
Seconded by Mr John F Murphy. .J P. atul
Resolved •Tltat the M invtes of Proceedings of •he
Fin eeC munilt,ec. held on the undermentioned d•ate«.
be ;-tl d are I. erebv approved of by this Council, viz-
24th July, 9th Avgust, 21st August, 4th Septemb•r,
September, ( tober, Gth November,
a nd
1 •3t,h Nc,ve y•ber, 1911.
2
IDA IES FIXED FOR QUARTERLY MEETINGS
OF T'IiL RURAL DISTRICT COUNCILS
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE.
Proposecl by Mr Joseph M Johnson,
K'econded by Mr John F Murphy, J P; it was
TV solved- —That we hereby determine that i he fo'-
lowing Shail be the dates fixed for holding the 11
Qu. •terly Meetings of the u ural District Councils anil
Proposal (ommitlee, viz—
Ardety—Tuesday, 2nd January, 1912.
11th January, 1912
Sth January, 1912.
The last day for lodging Notices and Applieatio:•
will be 'Ihlesday, the 12th December, 1912
The Pr»posal Committee meet on Monday, the
day of January, 1912.
The last clay for lodging Notices will be Wednesd vy,
12th December, 1911.
ARDEE PA YMENTS.
Proposed by Mr AV illiam A Doran,
Seconded by Mr Patrick Callan, and
-That the P {'oposals for po.ymenås formu-
lated bv thc Ardee No. I Rural District
their Quarterly Moet ing, bold on Tllös€lav,
31st day October. 1911, and set out on Form 2'?
fitl".lished the Cotllity Council, be and are hereivc
approved f
These payments amou to 12s
3
PAYMENT'S.
PIT,posecT by Mr Patrick Donegan, J P,
Secon lea by Mr '['homas Maguire, and
Ilpsolved That the Proposals for payjnents formu-
.tated by ; be Louth •Rural District of I)roglieda Union,
lii i'd Quarterly M eetiug, held on Tlmursday,
at their
the 9th day _of Novelilber, 1911, and set out on Fornj
to the County Council, be and are helehy
approved of
These nay menis amount to EGO!) 9s ld.
DUNDALK PAYMENTS.
by Mr William Woods, J P,
Seconded by Mr Peter Woods, J P, and
Ilesolvc•l- That the Proposals for payments forniü-
laiecl by h he l)untlalk Rural Councill, at their
Ti (biarfell.y Meeting, held on Monday,
day of N ovember. 1911, and set out, on Form 22, iur-
hished to the County Council, be and are hereby ap-
proved of.
Qhese pavments amount to 14s 40.
COUNTY AT LARGE PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr James Wynne,
by John -F J P;
Resolv. Ii- -That the Proposals for payments forillu-
latecl by the Proposal Committee, at their Third Q aar-
terl,v Meeting, held on Monday, the l:gtll day of No-
vember, 1911, and set out on Form 22, furnished
the County Council, be and. are hereby approved of.
These payments atuount to IOS Sd.
CONSIDERATION OF PROVISIONAL IIE
ANNAGASSON PIER.
Proposed by Mr Wm T Skeffington, J P,
Seconded by Mr James Wynne, NII(i
Resolveu• - That .this Council approves of the draft
Provisional ( re Annagasson Pier submit:ed to
this Meet lig to-day, subject to the approval of our
Solicitor an; the Local Government Iboal'(i, willi the
alteration t) at Mr Clinton and Mr .11 armon be yet out
us nominees of the County Council in addition t)
and Io remain in Office (luling the term of the
County Council.
Ilespectiljg the same subject the foliowing• resolution
was also 1)tÄBsed .
Proposed -Ly Mr NV m A T)orall,
Seconded by Mr l)enis J Ilath, alid
this (Council agree to refund
any expense.; incutTAl up to 4200 to the, p '011Et rs of
flie Anuagasson Harbour Botiid Older ill the event of
floe Scheme going tluough.
The application of Mr C E M 'Cann, late Poor Tlate
CoVleetor, for a superannuation allowa,nee, ref •rr.'(l
to the Council's Solicitor.
I ett,er from t,i1U Seercåtvy Ar«lee School A
('orc mitfee dated the 14th inst, in which he state• that,
wing to t i.e resignation of Mr Joseph T Dolan on his
, it is suggested that Mr Richard Stokes be
Comm
appointe:1 11' his stead.
( hl the motion of Mr AV m Woods, J P, seconded by
Mr Patrit'< Donegan, J P, it was
5
Ibsolvud— "I'ljat the abové named gelitleman—hlr
ich arcl Su kes—be appointed a member of the Ardee
So. 1 Rural District School Attendance Committee in
of M c T Dolan, resigned.
by Mr W T' Skeffington, J P,
Set enoe(l by Mr J byrne, J P, ancl
Resolved- •That this Council beg to express their
deep regr',t, at the demise of Mr Laurence Moore, •and
that ilme Secoetary convey to the friends 6t Mr Moore
their svmpathy in their Leleavemelit.
Shamrock 11 ouse,
.1 )rogheda,
27 tb November, 19 G .
TF Esq.
ar Sili, •-Plea:ge ccnve.v the members of the.
Louth County Council my since) e thanks for their very
kind vote of sympathy to me and the members ot my
family on the death of my dear father, Mr Laurence
Moore, h was passed meeting held on Che i(jth
inst.
'l'he kind tribute paid to his memory by the mem-
hers of your Council, of which he was a member from
its inceptinn, is highly appreciated by me.
Yours very sincerely,
PETER MOORE.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Lout,h County Council
at their A (I lourned Quarterly Meeting. held in the
( 'Council Chamber, on Thursday, the 00th day of No-
vember, 1.911.
I 'resent :
In Chair—Peter Ilughes, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Patrick Byrne, J P; Jas Connolly,
6
John DOI 11), C A Duffy, J P; Edward Goodman Ber-
nard ilamill, J P; Joseph V Kearney, J S Kelly, Mt.
Meade, l'hos Maguire, J ohn F Murphy, J P;
M 'Aldl'e, Laurence M 'Keown, Patk ()'Connell, Michael
O'Meara, J V; J llafh, W T Skeffington, J 1);
Wm Woods J P; and James Wynne, Esqrs.
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
At the 'flurcl Adjourned Quarterly Meeting, Novem-
ber 30th 1911.
Mr Chairm:m ard Gentlemen,-—
78 bas been passsed to repair a useful Lane
through Thillyraille (I)undalk No. 1) as a 4th Class
road.
lhere is 110 other Proposal of importance.
1 am, Gentlemen,
Ybur obedient Servant,
P. J. LYNAM,
County Surveyor.
(hi the motion of Mr C A Duffy, J P, seconded by
Mr Paik J3yrne, J P, it was
Resolved—That the Report of the County Surveyor
as appearing on the Schedule of Proposals for the 30th
November, 1911, bc and is hereby adopted by this
nncil.
On the motion of Mr Edward Goodman, seconded by
Mr Michael O'Meara, J P, It was
Resolved-—That all works not taken by contran/ be
placed in arge of the County Surveyor.
7
PROPOSALS FOR WORKS.
Proposed by Mr M iehpel Meade,
Seconcied by Mr Goodman, and
so'. ve"l - -That the Proposals for Works forniulatml
by the Ardee So. 1 Rural Council, and set, out,
011 Form 20. furnished to the County Council, be and
and we now authorise our
ore hereby pproved of ;
Secretary 10 affix the seål of tbe Council to the con-
i ract.s entered into.
womcs
MI' Thomns Maq•uire.
Seconded by Mr Denis J Rath, and
nesolve(l T hat the Proposals for AV0i'ks fortnulated
by 'he Leuth Rural l)istrict of Drogheda Union at
their last Quarterly Meeting, and set out on is-orm 2(),
furl ish0(l the ('cunty Coupeil, be and are hereby ap-
l.y•ovecl of; end sve now authorise our Secretary to affix
the seal of the Council to the contracts ill' t.
DUNDALK WORKS.
Seconded by MI John i? J 1),
Resolved —That tho Proposals for NVorks formulafptl
by thp Rural T)istrict Council their lasc
Qt' arterly ilceting, set out on Form 20, furnished
to Coupeil. be and are hereby approved of;
and •ve now authorise cur Secuetary to affix the seal of
•onueil io the contracts entered in to.
COMMITTEE
On tiott of Mr Thos Maguire, seconded by
Mr Michael Meode, it M as
Ike solved • —Thnt the Proposals for Works formulated
the Proposal Committee at their Meeting, held on
8
the day of 1911, and sefi out,
01. Form 20 be. and are. hereby approved of.
Co. option. of of the County Council in
room of Mr Laurence Moore, deceased; and Mr mues
M 'Coult, 2'.tn, resigned.
P Ift.posed by Mr 'I Skeffington, J P,
Seco I'led Ly Mr Michael V.eade, and
liesolvcul —Tliåt Alr James M 'Carthy, Newfoundwel/,
and is hereby co-opted a member of this Council
' n of the late Mr Laurence. Moore.
( the m lion of Air C+(todmtl!), seconded by
Mr O'Meara, J P, if was
I.•oqolve€l- -T Lal P:' trick Kearnev
. of Rathdilff,
be and is hereby ro-opted a of this (Council in
: oom of Mr James M •Court, jtlll, lesigne:l.
Secretary then read the following correspond-
( wee : —
Court,
Drogheda, 27th Nov., 1911.
The Cliildrm Act, 1908.
Dear Sir,
beg to infom you that tho following
under 12, v:z— Wolfe. Bolton Strept. Drogho€ln : Jarnes J
Murphy. Mill Drogheda; .Joeeph Bradley, jr. Mell, Drog-
11011m, and Cavanagh. it v Street, Di'curhe(la, wero
at Petty Sessions to-clov witli larceny. ancl the cases
were ad.jc.v,rneru until next cc,vrt, (Inv. 1 lth December. at 12
o'elot•k. noon, order to havo defendants oommitted to Indus-
rtial Schools, under See. 58 (2).
A prelirmnarv application was also made to-clay to havo Jas.
Gibney. Mary GiLnov, a.nd Fra of Baehelor's Lane,
l)rouheda, sent to Irrlusfrip,! •under Sec. 58 (1). The
was until 11th December, at 12 noon.
Plcase acknowledge receipt.
I a.m. Sir,
Your obedient servant,
JOHN KEALY,
Clerk P. Sessions.
The sec • co. Council, Dundalk.
9
Francis Street,
Dundalk, 27th November, 1911.
Dear Sir,
In reply to your letter of the 18th inst, I would
feel Obliged Vo you if you would convey to the Ckjunty Council
my sincere thanks for t.helr unanimous request that I should
re-consider ms decision as to resignation, but regret that I do
not see my way to alter my decis:on. and I must also thank you
personally for joining witn the Counc,ll in their request.
Youns sincerely ,
JAS.. M'COURT.
T. F. Filgate, FAI, Secretary
.uouth County Council, Dundalk.
Local Government Board, Dublin,
28th November, 1911.
No. 61,787/u1'
Lout;h County.
Sir,
With reference to the lists of arrears of rate in the
County of • 0' tli for the period ended tile 30th of September,
1911, recently forwarded [jy you to this Department, I am di-
reeved by the Inca: Government Board for Ireland to return
lists, herewith, and to stat,e that the Rulings of the Board
are duly thereon.
'J'ne Board desire me to point out Chat no reasons appear in
eolunm 11 opp€vite many items which are proposed to be struck
off as ith pegapd to the lists of Collector P.
Hughes, 1 tun to ,pcnint out that the ee,lumns are not all totted,
the amount propcnse«l to be st,nuek off In Cohnnn 12 in res-
pect of item 490, is Id more than Che amount in Column. IO.
final list of this 'Collector is not signed by the Chairman
of the
I am, at same to point out that, the Rulings of
the Board navt been given on tl.',e assumption that the informa-
tion contained in the several lists is in all respects accurate,
and must not, therefore, be regarded as interfering with the
jurisdiction of the Auditor in ease fir any cause he should at
audit find nece sary to deal otherwise with any item or
Items.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
Loubh County Council, Dundalk,
The Secretary.
10
Tho following resolution was then adopted by the Council :
Deor Sir,
The Ullitccrmrish Women;
The Plunkett House,
84, Merrion Square, Dublin,
'28th Nov., 1911.
an irrgtrneted by my Committee to fomvard you
the following Ile which was passed at cur
Annual held -November 13th. 1911.
I Shail he
olÆigeti there] or
if you will kindly bring it forward at your
next Cc,tmeil Meeting
RESOLUTION.
' 'That it be urged on tile Council of the Ccjnnty
Conneib, and on the County throughout Ireland, the
J InporLanee appointing women to serve on technical corn-
Illitte.es of the County Councils, as with tnese eon; mitt€ers l'cs
Che oppointmelll and supervision of insructresses in dome„tic
poultry, clair.vll!.g, -and other matters in WK. Ch
are chiefly concerned.'
Hoping that it may noeive clue consideration,
Passed.
Yours faithfully,
CONSTANCE PIM,
Hon. Sec.
11
11
FINANCE COMMIEYEE.
Minutes of Ploeeedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held or Monday, the 27th day of November, 1911.
Present :—
In the Cliair—Peter f1ttglieA Fsq, J P.
other Members—C A Dnffy, J P; John F J P;
J a.mes Wynne Jan Rs Connolly, Bernard Hamill, J P; Patk.
O'Connell, W'lliam Wocds, J P, Esquires.
Tlie Secret,'i.v submitted Accounts for warks in of his
own and the Surveyor's Oiliects, which, cn examination,
were passed tbe•€ommittee.
STEAM ROAD ROLLING.
The Seeretavv was instructed Io obtain quotatiom; from third
Party Insurances. ancl the County ave requested to au-
lorise the nance •Camnliitce to complete the Inan•ances
when entered into and approved of by them.
LIGHTING IN THE COUNTY cotiltrr I-IOCSE.
Mr Spaldinz the Etectrie Engineer for the Dundalk Urban
before the Committee with Mr M Comer-
ford, rfown C le•rk, and made the following statelilf'llt
Electric went.io.ne€l about C8() would 'In the
cost of fitting; for the Couny Courthouse, and that he would
expect '21 per cent for preparing specification for the building,
if the Iha,nded over to him for completion it will
cost 5 per cent ov the outlay.
These terms were accepted by the Committee.
The followiltg letter from the Local Covernnwnt Iloarcl
Le gentlement were appointed a Cmn-
'11 ittee to deai matters orising• under
lhe Schoi ar-
shi Scheme. T Skelling[ou, J P. J)rog-
Patrick C C, ;
M earn, I P •
James: (Nonnolly, M C C; Joseph T
Dolan,
-for County.
Proposed by Mr JB 11 amil].
Seerj')ded by Mr C A l)uffy, and
Mr P A Spalding, A M 1 C E.
be to (Irnft a specification and prepare
for an Eleefi•ic Lighting Inst'!Jla.å ion in the
Coulity C%1114house, Dundalk, and that he be paid tho
usual Engineering fee.
read
Sir,
MOTOR CAR LICENCE DUTIES.
FINANCE (1909-10) ACT, 1910.
Loea:l Government Board.
Dublin, '29th November, 1911.
I am directed by tlhe Local Government for
land to state that, in connection with the step : to taken for
tho eolleetion of the duties of licences motar cars under the
Provisions of t,he Motor Car Licence, Duties (Ireland) Col loe-
tinn Order, 1910, the Ccuncils of Conn ties and County Bor-
12
onghs have, several instances, applied to the Board for ad-
vice on questions which have arisen in the levying of the clu-
ties.
The Board i ave thought it desirable to prepare a memoran-
dum for the guidance of local authorities in Ireland as to their
powers and dl'ties witlil respect to the collection of Motor Car
Licence Duties and they accordingly direct me to forward to
you six comes o: the memorandum which contains a summary of
tho statutory provisions and the procedure In relation to these
duties.
The menu rm dum has been drawn up in consultation with
• His Majesty •g Treasury, the Postmaster-General and the Boal'(l
of Customs a•y,•. Excuse. and it is hoped that the information
afforded, while not exfnau.stive, will cover most of the points
with regard to which difficulties appear to have arisen up to
the present.
The memorandum will be placed on sale and copies may be
shortlv obtained. either directly or through any booksel lev,
from Mr E Person,by, Crafton Street, Dublin.
I am, Sir,
Your Obedient Servant,
A. R. BARI.AS,
Secreta ry.
The Secretary of each County Council.
The Town •Clerk of each Chunty Borough.
After some discussion on Ghis letter, the Committee recom-
mended—That the Secretary be appointed to carry out, the
duties nuder the Motor Car Act, 1909-10, and that he reeeive
the sum of C12 this year (31st Marell, 1911) and that •in future
the 5 per eenc or. value of Licenses issued during , tho year, as
allowed by Treasury: be now allowed to our Secretary. Tlre
Committee instrtcted the Secretary to have the officers em-
ployed under Education Act insured.
FINANCE COMMVTTEE.
M inutes Proceedings of the Finance (,kymmittee at their
Meeting held on Mt,mda.y. the Ifth day of Doeemljer, 1911.
P re ent
In the Chair—William A. Doran, Esq.
Othev A Duffy, J P; William Woods, J M
Kearney, awl J antes M' .vnne, Esquires.
and the
'I'he pay mere submitted -by the County Surveyor
Secretary after exarnination, passed by the Committee.
The followinrx lenders; for title, supply of coal to Steam Rollers
were accepted by the Committee :
A HI Casey, '24s (511 per ton.
Butterly and Co., IYs per ton.
Dundalk—Connick amil CD, 17s per ton.
The Committee recommend Che sum of lbs per annum for the
supply of coal Collon Cknn•thou.s•?.
Couth County Council.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
OF
Tbe Proposal Committee
At their Adjourned Quarterly Meeting
held in the Council Chamber, on
Monday, the 29th January, 1912.
P. MACCVLLOVGH, PRINTER, DUNDALK.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Committee
ast their Adjourned Quarterly Meeting, held in the
Council Chamber, on Monday, the 29th day of Janu-
ary, 1912.
Present : —
In tho, Chair—Peter Ilughes, Esq, J P.
( )ther Members—Charles A Duffy, J P; John F
Murphy, J P; Wm Woods, J P; James Connolly,
J P; James Wynne, Joseph P Kearney, Patk Byvne,
J P ; Joseph M Johnson, Patrick ()'Connell, and
Bernard Hamill, J P, Esquires.
'i'he Connnittee were summoned for the purpose of
opening and considering Tenders for the Works as set
out on the undermentioned agenda
LOCTIT COUNTY COUNCIL.
Secretary's Office,
Courthouse, Dundalk,
January 251b. 1912.
Dear Sir,—.
You are hereby requested to attend the
Quarterly Meeting of the Proposals Com-
Adjourned
'2
mittee to be held in the Council Chamber, on Mouday,
the 29th day of January, 1912, at one o'clock p m for
the purpose of considering Tenders for the unner-
mentioned works in accordance with Advertisement
issued by the Secretary, viz :—
APPLICATIONS BY THE COUNTY SURVEYOR.
To repair Ardee Courthouse for one
year, from 1st April, 1912, to 31st
March, 191%,
No. 2
To Repair the County Courthouse,
for One Year, from 1st
April, J912, to March„ 1913,
-To Supply and fix Wires, Lamps,
ete, for an Electric Light Instal-
lation in the County Courthouse;
not to exceed
$3()
No.
No. Supply on carts at Ardee,
Drogheda. and Dundalk, Best
Scotch, Coal (screened), for One
Year, from 1st April, 1912
required for Road Rollers.
APPLICATIONS TITE SECRETARY.
No. 4—To Supply Printing and Stationery
for County Purposes for One
Year, from 1st April, 1912, to
01st March, 1910, including the
3
Printing to be done for the
Clerk of the Crown and Peace,
under Jurors' and Registra-
Acts.
Note—The General
Printing for Clerk of Crown and
Peace other than Jurors and Re-
gistration not to exceed ÆG
—To Supply Ardee, Drogheda and
l)undalk Courthouses, for ()ne
Year, with Best Wigan Coal, at
.E per ton, delivered. Contrac-
tor to supply Coke, Bogwood,
Fire Lighting Materials, etc, at
Market Prices, as required.
(V. To Prepare the Courts and Court
*.ooms for Assizes, Quarter Ses-
stons and Revision Sessions, in
County Courthouse, for One
Year, from 1st April,. 1912, to
: Blst March, 1913, not to exceed $15
'l'o Insert the County Advertise-
ments, etc, in one l)undalk and
I Drogheda Paper, fov One Year,
from 1st April, 1912.- to 31st
March, 1913, not to exceed 3d per
llne.
Yours faithfully,
T. F. FILGATE,
o
Secretary.
To each Member of the Council.
4
Respecting items Nos. I and 2 on the Agenda, 110
Tenders were received by the Secretary, and they were
placed 'in charge of the County Surveyor.
APPLICATION NO. 3.
AMith regard to this application the Secretary
ceived the following Tenders, viz : —
M Gowdy, Belfast—Æ77 8s.
2—1) J Watters, Dundalk—CIOO.
a—James C Meidon, Dublin—ECSS).
Gallacher, Dundalk—Æ90 12s.
BIOS, Dundalk—E90.
'l'ender Ko. I • —No Sureties named or present at the
Meeting. MO 1ked "informal" by Chairman with
consent Of Committee.
Tender No. 2-—llejeeted, being in excess of the am-
ount named in the County Surveyor's Application.
Tender No. Sureties present -as stated in the
Tender (Messrs Fottrell and Stokes, of Dublin), coll-
sequently rnarke,i ' 'informal" bv Chairman with the
eonsent of Committee.
Tender No. 4 -No Sureties mentioned or present at
the Meeting. M arked "informal" by Chairman w lth
eonsellf of the Committee.
5
Tender So. 5— Gaskin Bros, Dundalk. This was
the only 'I'ender found to be in conformity with the
Advertisement issued by the Secretary, and after cou-
siderable diseussion on the matter it was proposed bv
Mr unmill, J P, seconded by Mr Charles A
Duffy, J P, and unanimously resolved That Messrs
Gaskin Tiros Tender for the sum of C90 be and is here-
by accepted by this Committe.
No. 3a—'1'Lere was 110 Tender received for
Che supply of Coal for the Steam Road Roller to be
worked Ardee Rural District.
DROGHEDA DISTRICT.
One Tender was received, viz—Messrs A Murdock
and Sons at 21s per ton, which the Committee ae-
DUNDALK
Patrick Curtis, Dundalk, at 21s nev ton.
F (V Neill and Coy., Dundalk, at 21s per ton.
Both Tenders being equal the Chairman and Com-
mit,tee decided to draw lots between these two Con-
tractors, with the result that Curtis won and was ac-
cordingly declared the Contractor.
With respect to the Tenders received for the supply
of Printing and Stationery for County purposes, the
6
Chairman and Committee went seriatem into each
item, and in every instance the lowest Tender was
accepted.
The Contractors duly declared Ly the
Chairman and Committee are as under : —
William Tempest, Dundalk.
M 'Dougall and Coy. , I)rogheda.
Patrick M 'Cullough, Dundalk, and
Patrick Mathews, Dundalk.
VINEM NO. 5.
F Neill and Coye, Dundalk, 21s per ton and Gs
extra to Ardee.
Natrick Curtis, l)undalk, '20s per ton, and 5S extra,
to Ardee.
The Tender of F O'Neill and Coy. was accepted by
the Connnittee.
ITEM SO. G.
Two Terders were received for this work {is under : —
Messrs Patteson and Coy. , Dundalk—C12 12s.
TI and J C)' Hare
The Committee accepted the Tender of Messrs VI :.nd
J O'Hare $10.
ITEM NO.
The Committee were unanimous 111 accepting
Tenders of the ' 'Dundalk Democrat" and
' 'Drogheda Argus" at 3d per line.
the
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) ACT, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
Louth County Council at their Fourth Quarterly Meeting,
held in the Council Chamber, Dundalk, on Thursday,
the 18th January, 1912 ;
and at their Adjourned
Quarterly Méetlng, on Thursday, the 29th day of
February, 1912; and at their Special Meeting, held
on Monday, the 25th March, 1912.
FINANCE COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Held on 15th qanuary, 29th January, 12th February, 19th
February, 26th February, 11th March, 1st April, 1912.
TEMPEST, PRINTER,
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) ACT, 1898.
LOUTH
COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
Louth County Council a/ lhcir Fourth (Puarlor/y
Meeting, S16ccia/ Mccitn,g• ,
ctnd Finance Com/nillcc Mcdings.
DUNDALK .
WILLIAM TEMPEST, PRINTER AND STATIONER.
1912
Louth County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council
at their Fourth Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council
Chamber, on 'Thursday, the 18th January, 1912.
Present :—
In thc Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Jatnes Connolly,
Other Members—Patrick Byrne,
Joseph Dolan, Patrick Donegan, J.P. ; Luke J. Elcock,
Edward Goodman, Bernard Hamill, J.P.; Joseph M.
Johnson, Patrick Kearney, James S. Kelly, Thomas
Maguire, Michael Meade, oseph H. McArdle, John F.
Murphy, J. P. ; Patrick O' onnell, Denis J. Rath ; and
William T. Skeffington, J.P., Esquires.
The minutes of the last Meetings of the Council,
having been printed, and a copy sent to each Member,
Were taken as read, and were confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES OF THE
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Proposed by Mr. Edward Goodman,
Seconded by Mr. Thomas Maguire, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the
Finance Committee on the undermentioned dates be,
and are hereby confirmed by this Council, viz.
November, 1911, and 11th December, 1911.
4
Dates fixed for Meetings of the Rural District Councils
and Proposal Committee.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P.
Seconded by Mr. Thomas Maguire, and
Resolved-—That the County Council hereby deter-
mine that the following shall be the dates for the holding
of the First Quarterly Meetings of the Rural District
Councils and Proposal Committee, viz..
Ardee,
Drogheda, ...
Dundalk,
Tuesday, 2nd April, 1912.
Thursday, 11th April, 1912.
Monday, 8th April, 1912.
The last day for lodging Notices and Applications for
Rural District Councils will be Tuesday, 12th March,
1912.
The Proposal Committee to meet on Monday, the ISt
April, 1912.
PROPOSALS FOR PAYMENTS.
ARDEE.
Proposed by Mr. Michael Meade,
Seconded by Mr. Joseph Dolan, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formu-
lated by the Ardee Rural District Council fourth
Quarterly Meeting, and set out on Form 22, furnished
to the County Council, be and • are hereby approved •ofa
These payments amount to C 878 (5s. (Yd.
DROGHEDA PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P.
Seconded by Mr. Denis J. Rath, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formu-
lated by the Louth Rural District of Drogheda UnionQ
their fourth Quarterly Meeting, and set out on Form 22,
5
furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby
approyed,
These payments amount to 6615 9s. 3d.
DUNDALK PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P.
Seconded by Mr. Edward Goodman, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formu-
lated by the Dundalk Rural District Council at their
fourth Quarterly Meeting, and set out on Form 22,
furnished to the County Council,
be and are hereby
approved of.
The payments amount to K 1339 6s. 1 ld.
APPOINTMENT OF TWO MEMBERS ON THE
COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURE.
In connection With the foregoing the Secretary read
the following letter :
Departnoent of Agriculture and
Technical Instruction for Irelan(l,
Upper Merrion Street, Dublin,
11th December, 1911.
COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURE.
Sir—I have to acquaint you, for the information of
your Council,
that the term of office of the present
Council of Agriculture will expire on the 31st March,
1912, and to enclose a copy of the regulations for the
appointment of members of the new Council.
The regulations immediately concerning your Council
are Nos. 2, 5, 6, 8, and 11, which provide f0T the ap-
pointment• of two persons, who need not necessarily be
members of your Council, to serve on the Council of
Agriculture in accordance with Section 8 of the Agricul-
ture and Technical Instruction (Ireland) Act, 1899.
elt will be observed that under the regulations now
Issued the appointment of representatives by the County
Council may take place at any meeting of the County
6
Council held between ISt January and ISt April, 1912.
This arrangement has been made in order to obviate the
inconvenience of a special meeting of the County Coun-
cil for the purpose of the election. The new represen-
tatives will, of course, not assume office until ISt April,
1912.
By Section 27 (1) of the Act of 1899, the mernbers of
the Council of Agriculture hold office for terms oi three
years, and may be re-appointed.
A supply of copies of the regulations is sent under
separate cover to enable you to comply with the pro-
visions of Regulation No. 11. Further copies may be
had on application.
I am to request that, in consultation with the Chair-
man, you will have the necessary formal notice given on
the Agenda paper for the meeting at which the appoint-
ments in question will be made; and I am also to ask
you to inform the Department in due course of the date
of that meeting.
I am, sir,
Your obedient servant,
T. P. GILL, Secretary.
The Secretary, Louth County Council.
Proposed by Mr. Thomas Maguire,
Seconded by Mr. Edward Goodman, and
Resolved—That we, the Louth County Council, here-
by appoint the underrnentioned gentlemen to be mem-
bers of the Council of Agriculture, in accordance with
Section 24 of the Agriculture and Technical Instruction
(Ireland) Act, 1899, viz. :
Mr. Jas. NIcCarthy, J.P., Newfoundwell, Drogheda ; and
Mr. Joseph Dolan, Gaulstown, Dunleer.
Respecting the dates to be fixed for the holding of the
Old Age Pensions' Comnoittees in Ardee, Drogheda, and
Dundalk, it was decided, after considerable discussion'
to let the various Committees suggest such dates as
7
would be most suitable to them, and the Council on re-
ceiving same will give them their favourable considera-
tion.
The next item on the Agenda was the application of
Mr. C. E. McCann, late Poor Rate Collector for the
Electoral Divisions of St. Peter's East and West,
Drogheda, for a superannuation allowance.
Proposed by Mr. Joseph Dolan,
Seconded by Mr. Luke J. Elcock, and
Resolved—That we hereby consent to allow Mr. C. E.
McCann, late Poor Rate Collector for Drogheda Rural
District, the sum of C 28 a year as pension, based on the
Civil Service scale, as from the ISt April, 1911. To be
levied off Drogheda Rural District.
On the motion of the Chairman (Mr. Peter Hughes,
J•p.), seconded by Mr. J. M. Johnson, the Council un-
animously passed the following resolution :—
That we, the members of the Louth County Council,
tender to Mr. John E. Redmond our sincere congratu-
lations on his recovery from the injuries sustained by
him in the recent regrettable accident, and that we
rejoice to learn that his indispensable. services shall,
within the next few weeks, be once more available in
the forwarding of the Home Rule cause."
8
Minutes of Proccedings of the Louth County Council
at their adjourned Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council
Chantber, on Thursday, the 29th day of February, 1912.
Present :
In the Chair—William A. Doran, Esq., J.P.
Other NIembers—Thomas J. Byrne, J. P. ; Patrick
Byrne, J.P.; James Connolly, J.P. •
ogeph Dolan,
Patrick Donegan, J. P. ; Luke J. Elcock, dward Good-
man, James Halfpenny, Joseph P. Kearney, Patrick
Kearney, Thomas Maguire, Joseph H. McArdle, Patriék
McGee, John F. Murphy, J.P.; Patrick O'Connell;
Michael O'Meara, J.P. ; Peter \Voods, J.P. ; and Wm.
\Voods, J.P., Esquires.
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
The following Report from the County Surveyor Was
read :
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen;
Your County Surveyor has made the usual appli-
cations to your Rural Councils for the renewal of ex-
piring maintenance contracts, which have been ap-
proved by them.
Nearly all of these have been tendered for, and will
corne before you on Form 20.
Special works have been passed in Drogheda Rural
to the amount of C 460, and special works in Dundalk,
L 158 IS. od.
Some small damages have occurred along your coast
during the high tides this month, two of which are
under repair on Sudden Damage Orders. The other,
at Blackrock, can, I consider, wait for ordinary pro-
posal, at next District Council Meeting.
During the last year nine contractors, as follow, have
failed to carry out their contracts, which have been
taken up by the County Surveyor in accordance with
9
Clause No. 21 of the Specification. I beg to recomnoend
that these contracts be cancelled, and new contracts are
_now applied for
DUNDALK RURAL DISTRICT.
No.
278—MichaeI McCann, 440 perches—Redcow to
Plaster Cross.
Michael McCann, 1,048 perches—Drumna-
319—
carra Cross to Carrickarnan.
Patrick Drum—838 perches— Commons to
330—
Mansfieldstown.
—Michael McCann, 322 perchess — Dundalk
338
Urban Boundary to Redcow.
3742—MichaeI McBride, 1,400 perches—Bellurgan
to Corrakit.
—Patrick Murphy, 432 perches Bush to
382
Castletowncooley.
Patrick McCann, 890 perches—Drunmd to
386—
Narrow Water.
—Thomas McGough, 1,265
432
to Drumleck.
—Thomas McGough, 989 perches—Dumnahon
433
to Drumgeenagh.
am, Gentlemen, your obedient Servant,
F. J. LYNAM,
Court House, Omagh.
Proposed by Mr Willian) Woods, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Patrick-Byrne, J.P., and
Resolved—That the Report of the Deputy County
SUrveyor as appearing on page 1 of the Schedule of
Proposals for Works, and furnished to each member of
the Council, be and is hereby adopted by this Council.
The next item on the Agenda was the consideration
Of Tenders for the undermentioned work, not set by
10
11
Contract at Adjourned Meetings of the Rural District
Respecting the Work No. 1, the Council received no
Council, and the Proposal Committee.
tender, and the work was placed in charge of the
County Surveyor.
Tenders for the following Works will be considered
by the Connty Council, as per advertisement :
No. 3—With regard to this work the following tenders
COUNTY AT LARGE.
No. I—To keep in repair, etc., Ardee Courthouse for
73 19S
were received by the 'Council—
Bernard McBride, C 73
one year, from ISt April, 1912. Approved.
Not to exceed CIO.
DUNDALK DISTRICT.
No. 3—
Maintaining for 5 years, from ISt April, 1912,
513 perches of the road from Dundalk to
Blackrock, between the Rifle Range Gate and
Sandymount Gate. Not to exceed C 81 4s. 6d
No. 22—
Maintaining for 5 years, from ISt April, 1912,
1,334 perches of the road from Dundalk to
Carlingford by Piedmont, between Giles'Quay
and Mr. Kendall's in Loughanmore and the
Castletowncooley new line, with branches to
Riverstown and Maddox Garden. Not to
exceed C 33 7s.
No. 25—Maintaining for 5 years, from ISt April, 1912,
802 perches of the road from Dundalk to
Newry, by Corrakit, between the Big Woman's
Grave at Corrakit and the sea at Omeath, with
branch to Ardaghy Schoolhouse. Not to ex-
ceed C 20 IS.
No. 40—Maintaining for 5 years, from ISt April, 1912,
890 perches of the road from Dundalk to
Newry, by Jonesborough, between the Newry
road at Drumad, and the sea at Narrow
Water. Not to exceed C 37 IS. 8d.
No. 48
—Maintainipg for 3 years, from ISt April, 104
perches of the road from Ballymakenny to
Essexford, in Tullydrum Townland. Not to
exceed C 2 3s. 4d.
—To repair two bridges on the road from Hack-
No. 57
ballscross to Knockbridge, near Mr. M' Ardle's
house in Cunnicar, and near ' Mr. Callan's
house in Carrickrobin. Not to exceed C 12.
Joseph McConnon,
Owen Mathews,
Michael Belton,
Lawrence Conlon,
James Lennon, jun.
Patrick Brennan,
74
75
75
77
77
15S.
os.
os.
os.
os.,
os.
The Council accepted the lowest tender, that of
Bernard McBride, at C 73 15s.
No. 40—Two tenders were before the Council for this
work, as under—
Patrick Hugh McCann, C 37 IS. Sd.
29 19s. od.
John Carron,
The Council accepted the tender of Patrick Hugh
McCann, at 673 IS. 8d. ; Carron having stated to the
Council that he did not tender for this work.
No. 48—There was only one tender before the Meet-
ing, that of Thomas McMahon, for the sum of C 2 3s.,
which the Council accepted.
No. 57—For this work the Council received three
tenders, as follows—
Michael Hamill, -C 7 15s.
John McDonnell,
8 19S.
Thomas McKenna, 9 15s.
The Council accepted the lowest tender, that of
Michael Hamill, for 17 15s.
It was then proposed by Mr. Joseph P. Kearney,
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Byrne, J.P., and resolved—
' That all Maintenance Works not taken by Contract
be placed in• the hands of the County Surveyor."
12
The following resolution was also passed by the
Council. On the motion of Mr. Edward Goodman,
seconded by Mr. Joseph Dolan, resolved—" That the
Contracts (in dispute), Dundalk Rural District Council,
be placed in charge of the County Surveyor for three
months ; Patrick Mulholland not to be included in this
resolution."
Finally, it was proposed by Mr. Peter Woods, J.P.,
seconded by Mr. Joseph P. Kearney, and resolved—
That the Secretary be hereby authorized to place the
Seal of the Council on all contracts ratified this day."
The Council next proceeded to consider the Secretary's
Estimate of Rates in respect of the financial year, end-
ing 31st March, 1913, and after very considerable dis-
cussion on the matter, it was proposed by Mr. Patrick
Magee, seconded by Mr. • James I-Iålfpenny, and re-
solved—That the Secretary's Estimate of Rates, a copy
of which has been furnished to each member of the
Council in respect of the ensuing year ending 31st
March, 1913, be and is hereby adopted by this Council,
save and except that we reduce the Rates in the Ardee
Rural District by one penny in the ; and further, that
the several rates in the as regards Separate Charges
(Fortn 46), as now submitted by the Secretary, be and
is hereby adopted by this Council.
The Secretary next submitted the undermentioned
Illinutes in respect of the Scholarship Committee, at a
meeting held on the 5th February. They are as under :
Present—
In the chair—Patrick O'Connell, Esq. Other mem-
bers—Joseph T. Dolan, M.A., and Jas. Connolly, Esqrs.
The Committee were summoned for the purpose of
taking into consideration correspondence from Univer-
sity Authorities, Hostel Proprietors, and Students.
The first recommendation made, by the Committee
was that in future University and Hostel Fees be dis-
charged monthly by the Finance Committee.
The Committee then went carefully into the Accounts
13
received by the Secretary, and finally recommended that
the following Accounts be discharged •
John W. Bacon, balance Scholarship first term 3 10 0
Sister M. de Ricci, Hostel fees
634
Mrs. M. Murray, board and lodging—H. Rogan 3 12 0
—L. Brannigan 7 17 6
Miss Gaffney,
Mrs. Campbell,
Total,
(24 6 10
Subsequently the Finance Comrnittee, at a „Meeting
held on Monday, the 12th February, 1912, made a
formal recommendation to the County Council that all
Accounts in connection with the Scholarship Scheme be
discharged monthly through the Finance Committee.
Proposed by Mr. Edward Goodman,
Seconded by Mr. Connolly, J.P., and
Resolved—That the minutes of proceedings of the
Scholarship Committee be and is hereby adopted by this
Council, i.e., the minutes of the Committee on the 5th
day of February, 1912—Two Scholarships of 650 each.
CORRESPONDENCE.
The following correspondence was read
Francis Street, Dundalk,
24th February, 1912.
Re TUL7.v NEW ROAD.
Dear Sir,
With reference .to letter of 18th ult. from the
Dundalk Rural District Council, which I return herewith,
to the effect that a resolution was unanimously passed
recommending the County Council to release Patrick
Connolly from his contract for the making of above road,
I desire to state that I can find no express power of
release given to the County Council in the contract and
I am of opinion that the
bond of the 24th April, 1911.
County Council can compel the contractor to proceed
with the work, subject to the grant of easement being
14
executed by the Rural District Council, which has not
yet been done.- The contract gives the County Surveyor
authority to grant an extension of time for completion to
the contractor in such circumstances.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
T. F. Filgate, Esq., sec.
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Referred back to District Council.
Dundalk Rural District,
18th January, 1912.
Dear Sir,
At their Quarterly Meeting, held on the 8th
instant, the Council of this District unanimously passed
a resolution recommending the County Council to release
Patrick Connolly of his contract for the making of a new
road at Tully, in consequence of the long delay in per-
mitting him to commence the work.
The District Council apply for permission to open
portion of the road at Lordship, for the purpose of pro-
viding an improved water supply there.
Yours faithfully,
P. R. FINIGAN,
Clerk of the Council.
To T. F. Filgate, Esq.
Francis Street, Dundalk,
24th February, 1912.
Re CLERK OF THE PEACE'S REGISTRATION EXPENSES.
Dear Sir,
With reference to the application of the Clerk
of the Peace in above, dated the 25th October, 1911, for
the sum of C 140 3s. 9d, payment of which amount I am
informed has been made, it is quite clear that he has re-
ceived remuneration for what is part of his duty by
charging the full scale irrespective of actual expenditure•
I have read the Privy Council Order of the 21st Nov-
ember, 1898, rescinding the previous Order of the 3rd
June, 1889, and on its construction there can be no doubt
that only the actual expenses of the Clerk of the Peace
when duly vouched, but necessarily within the scale,
may be paid. The scale is set out in the Order, and same
"shall be, and the same is hereby fixed, as the scalewithin
which the actual expenses, when duly vouched, exclusive
Of the costs of necessary printing, to be incurred by and
paid to a Clerk of the Peace for carrying into effect the
provisions of the Acts relating to the Registration of
Voters, or otherwise in respect of such Acts, shall be
calculated."
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
T. F. Filgate, Esq„ Sec.
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Clerk's ()ffice, Union Workhouse,
Ardee, 27th day of February, 1912.
Dear Sir,
The Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council have
to-day had under their consideration the question of the
proposed increase of fourpence in the in the General
Rate on this District for the ensuing year, and they
desire to bring under the notice of the Finance Com-
mittee of the Louth County Council the following cir-
cumstances which have arisen since the Ardee estimates
were sent in, showing, as they believe, how a reduction
in the County estimate can be carried out justifiably,
and the District Council would recommend to the Com-
mittee the expediency of giving effect to the reductions
indicated—
new Dietary Scale has, on the recommendation
Of the Local Government Board Inspector, been intro-
duced into the Workhouse, and a couple of weeks' trial
Of it has resulted in a saving of LI 14s 6d per week, and
as there is no reason to think that this saving cannot be
maintained, it is calculated that the gain for the year
will be 190.
2—1t is expected that a number of the inmates of the
16
\'Vorkhouse will this year qualify for the Old Age Pension,
with a possible saving to the Union of L 80.
3—The Rural District Council's estimate includes , a
year's repayment of a new loan originally amounting, to
C 1,800 to complete a scheme of labourers' cottages, but
since the estimate was sent in the amount of the loan .
has been reduced to ,600. This would relieve the
ensuing year's repayment instalment of about 660.
Showing in all a reduction of C 230 in the Ardee esti-
mates, which might be allowed for in striking. the- rate,
without disimproving the original financial position.
Would you kindly bring the matter under the notice
of the Finance Committee or of the Council, which ever
body has next to consider your estimate.
Yours faithfully,
THOMAS B. DROMGOOLE,
Clerk R. D. Council.
T. F. Filgate, Esq.,
Sec. Co. Council, Dundalk.
17
Local Government Board, Dublin,
26th February, 1912.
Local Government Board, Dublin,
29th February, 1912.
Sir,
I am directed by the Local Government Board
for Ireland to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 19th inst., relative to the superannuation allowanqe
proposed to be granted to Mr. C. E. McCann ip respect
of his services as Collector Df Poor Rate in Louth County,
and with reference thereto, I am to point out that Sec.
10 of the Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1902, only
qualifies the provisions of Section 1 of the Local Officers
Superannuation Act (Ireland), 1869, and that the latter
Act is confined in its operation to the officers of certain
specified municipalities.
I am, sir,
Your obedient servant,
A. R. BARI-AS, Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
Sir,
With reference to the preparation of your estimate
to provide for the epcpenditure of the County during the
next financial year in connection with liability for land
purchase, I am directed by the Local Government Board
for Ireland to acquaint you that they have now received
copies of certificates from the Irish Land Commission
and the Commissioners of National Debt, showing the
actual arrears in purchase annuities, &c., under the
Land Purchase Acts, and the Board are, therefore; in a
position to state definitely, for the information of the
County Council, that the amount which will be deducted
in respect of the above liability from the Estate Duty
Grant, payable in the County in the •course of the next
month, is a sum of C127 11S lid.
I am, sir,
Your obedient servant,
A. R. BARLAS, Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
In pursuance of Notice of Motion, it was proposed by
Mr. Luke J. Elcock, seconded by Mr. John F. Murphy,
J.P.—" That the Regulations made by the Department
of Agriculture. and Technical Instruction as to the wear-
ing of collars by dogs, under the . Dogs' Act of 1906, be
put in force in the County of Louth."
On a division there voted for Mr. Elcock's motion—
Messrs. P. Byrne, Joseph Dolan, W. A. Doran, P.
Donegan, L. J. Elcock, E. Goodman, J. P. Kearney, P.
Kearney, T. Maguire, J. F. Murphy, P. O'Connell, M.
O'Meara and William Woods—13.
Against the motion there voted—T. J. Byrne, J. Con-
nolly, J. Halfpenny, and Peter Woods—4.
The Chairman therefore declared Mr. Elcock's motion
duly cgrried by 13 votes to 4.
18
Meeting of Proceedings of the Louth County ('ouncil
at their Special Meeting, held in the Council Chamber,
on Monday, the 25th day of March, 1912.
Present :—
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—T. J. Byrne, J. P. ; Patrick Byrne,
J. P. ; James Connolly, J.P. ; Charles A. Duffy, J.P. ,
Edward Goodman, Joseph M. Johnson, Palk. Kearney,
Joseph H. McArdle, Patrick McGee, J. F. Murphy, J.P.;
Patrick O'Connell, \'ViIIiam Woods, J.P. ; and James
Wynne, Esquires.
The Council was summoned for the purpose of taking
into consideration the subject matter of the following
Agenda :—
Secretary's Office,
Court House, Dundalk,
20th March, 1911.
DEAR SIR,
I have been authorized by Requisition, (signed
by the Chairman) Io summon a Special Meeting of the
County Council for Monday next, the 25th day of March,
1912, at ONE o'clock p.m., for the purpose of considering
the undermentioned business, viz. .—
(1) Consideration of the Provisional Order for the
proposed Harbour at Annagassan, and supporting same
before the Board of Trade.
(2) To consider the advisability of appointing Dele-
gates to represent the County Council at any Con-
ventions of the United Irish League for the Divisions
of South and North Louth, which may be called within
this year.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. F. FILGATE,
Secretary County Council.
The terms of the Draft Order [or the proposed
Harbour at Annagassan having been explained to the
Council by Messrs. O'Connell and Murphy, Solicitors,
19
and the Council having thoroughly discussed the matter,
the following resolution was unanimously agreed to :
Proposed by Mr. Edward Goodman ;
Seconded by Mr. James Wynne, and
Resol ved—That the constitution of the Harbour
Commissioners should be as follows, viz. :—Three
members of the County Council ; three Rated Occupiers
resident within a radius of ftve miles of the proposed
works ; and two Rated Occupiers resident in the County
of Louth ; and further, that we nominate the following
as the first Commissioners, viz.:—Messrs. Patrick Byrne,
J.P. ; Michael Meade, and Patrick McGee, members of
the County Council ; and the following Rated Occupiers
resident within five miles of the proposed works, viz.:—
C. D. King, Joseph Hoey, Peter McGuinness ; and two
Rated Occupiers resident in the County Louth, viz.
Joseph S. Harmon, and Mathew Clinton, subject to
the Board of Trades' sanction to this alteration.
The Council were unanimous in passing the following
resolution, viz. :
Proposed by Mr. T. J. Byrne, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. C. A. Duffy, J.P., and
Resolved-—That in view of the fact that this Draft
Order is unanimously agreed upon by the Louth County
Council, the Dundalk Harbour Commissioners, and the
promoters of the proposed Works—that we, the Louth
County Council, earnestly request the Board of Trade
to sanction the Draft Provisional Order in the terms as
now agreed to.
T. F. FILGATE,
(Signed)
Secretary Louth County Council
21
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at
their Meeting held on Monday, the 15th January, 1912.
Present :—
In the Chair—C. A. Duffy, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Patrick O'Connell, William Woods,
J.P., Peter Woods, J.P., Patrick Byrne, J.P., James
Connolly, J .P., oseph M. Johnson, James Wynne,
Joseph H. M' Ard e, and Michael Meade, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted Payments for Works in
charge of the County Surveyor, and his own office,
which on Examination was passed by the Committee.
The County Surveyor then submitted, and read the
following letter—
GENTLEMEN—DOCtor Lavery will certify that I have
a fungoid growth in my throat, which must be cut out
at once, and after the operation I shall be incapable of
performing my duties for a month at least.
It is therefore desirable that a deputy should be ap-
pointed as soon as possible, under Sec. 85, Sub-sec. 2,
I beg to recommend for the
of the L. G. Act, 1898.
appointment„ my brother/ Francis J. Lynam; Ccunty
Surveyor of North Tyrone, who would act for me with-
out pay. The appointment of course to be temporary,
and revocable without notice, at any meeting of the
County Council.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
P. J. LYMM,
County Surveyor of Louth.
22
The Committee were unanimous in agreeing to the
application of the County Surveyor,
including the
temporary appointment of his brother during his
absence—Mr. Francis l. Lynam, County Surveyor for
North Tyrone.
The Committee further recommended that all men
employed at Steam Road Rolling, be ensured against
accidents.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee, at
their Meeti'tg held in the Council Chamber, on Monday,
the 29th day of yanuary, 1912.
Present :
In the Chair— Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—C. A. Duffy, J.P., John F. Murphy,
J. P. , William Woods, J.P., James Connolly, .P., ames
Wynne, Joseph P. Kearney, Patrick Byrne, . P. , oseph
M. 'Johnson, Bernard Hamill, J .P., and atrick
O'Connell, Esquires.
Thé Secretary submitted Payments for Works, in
charge of the County Surveyor, and his own office, which
on examination, were passed by the Com mittee. These
payments amount to C 31 16s od.
The Committee recommended that all persons em-
ployed by the County Council at Stearn Road Rolling,
be insured by the Secretary, against the possibility of
accident.
On the motion of Mr. Peter Hughes, J.P., seconded
by Mr. C. A. Duffy, J.P., and recommended—" That
the Secretary having reported that he had revised the
' revised Valuation Lists, he was instructed to appoint
and take charge of the extra clerical staff same as last
ye ar."
23
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee, at
their Meeting held in the Council Chantbcr, on Monday,
the 12th day of February, 1912,
Present :—
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—lohn F. Murphy, J.P., Patrick
O'Connell, William Woods, A.P., James Wynne, James
Connolly, J .P., Patrick yrne, J.P., and Patrick
Kearney, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted County Surveyor's Pay
Sheets for Works in his charge, and accounts in connec-
tion with his own office, which on examination was
passed by the Committee.
The Secretary was directed to address a letter to the
Eddison Steam Rolling Company, and state that the
Finance Committee are much disappointed that the re-
mainder of the Steam Rollers have not arrived before
now.
The Committee unanitnously recommended that thé
County Council at their Meeting to be held on the 29th
inst., pass a resolution authorising the Finance Com-
mittee to discharge monthly all Accounts in connection
with the University Scholarships.
Minutes oj Proceedings o/ the Finance Committee, al
their Meeting held in the Council Chamber, on Monday,
the 19th February, 1912,
Present :—
In the Chair—Charles A. Duffy, Esq., J.P.
Other 'Members—Luke A. Elcock, W. Skeffington,
I.P., Michael Meade, Patrick M 'Gee, John Dolan,
Patrick O'Connell, and James Wynne, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted for the consideration of the
Committee, his Estimate of Rates for General and
Separate Charges, in respect of the ensuing financial
year, ending 31st March, 1913. The Committee have
24
gone carefully into the various items of expenditure
under the different heads shown in the Estimate and were
satisfied that they were accurately set out, and recom-
mended that the Estimate be adopted by the County
Council. To this recommendation however, Mr. Patrick
Magee, dissented.
Minutes oj Proceedings o/ the Finance Committee, al
their Meeting held on Monday, the 26th day o/ February
1912,
Present :—
In the chair—C. A. Duffy, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Patrick Byrne, J. P. , William
Woods, J. P., Patrick O'Connell, and Peter \Voods, J.P.,
Esquires.
'I'he Secretary gubmitted Accounts for Works in
charge of the County Surveyor, and for those in con-
nection with his own Office, and after examination of
same, the Committee ordered payinent.
On the application of Mr. Patrick Byrne, .J.P., the
C01nmittee were unanimous in recommending a ,sum
of Two Pounds (C 2), for fire, light and heating of Castle-
bellingham Petty Sessions House.
The Secretary then addressed a copy of the following
letter to the Local Government Board on {he subject.
26th February, 1911.
SIR—I beg to inform you that the Finance Committee
of this Council, at a Meeting held this day, unanimously
recommended that a sum of -Two Pounds (C 2), be
allowed for fire, light, and heating of Castlebellingham
Petty Sessions House, and I now respectfully ask the
formal sanction of the Local Govermnent Board to this
proposal.
I ani, sir, your obedient servant,
T. F. FILGATE, Secretary.
To the Secretary Local Government Board.
25
Minutes o/ Proceedings oj the Finance Commlitee at
their Meeting held in the Council Chamber, on Monday,
the 11th March, 1912,
Present :—
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—John Francis Murphy, J.P., Patrick
O'Connell, James Connolly, J.P., and Michael O'Meara,
J.P., Esquires.
The Secretary submitted Accounts for Works in
charge of the County Surveyor, and those of his own
office, which, on examination were passed by the Com-
mittee. They amounted to the sum of L 56 os 8d.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Letter from James Reilly, Road Contractor, as
under
HUNTERSTOWN ARDEE,
12/2/1912.
DEAR SIR—PIease lay this letter before your Finance
Committee at next Meeting. I, as Road Contractor for
the streets in Ardee, had to get a wheel of the mud cart
repaired, at a cost of One Pound (C 1), as it was broken ;
as you are aware it is also used for drawing water to
I respectfully ask
your dipping tank all the summer.
your Committee to consider the matter, and to forward
me my outlay.
Yours faithfully,
JAMES REILLY.
The Committee ordered that a copy of this letter be
sent to the Assistant Surveyor, Mr. Dromgoole, for a
report on the matter.
The following letter from Messrs. F.
O'Neill, Esq.,
coal merchants, Dundalk, was next fead—
March
9th, 1912.
your Council,
DEAR SIR-—We beg leave to inform
are unable to
that owing to National Coal Strike, we
26
obtain any coal, and since the ISt January, we have been
supplying your Court-house at considerable advance in
prices. We would therefore strive, if possible, to keep
you going at current prices, and trust you will not see us
at such a serious loss on this quarter's supply.
The Committee decided to postpone the further con-
sideration of this letter for a fortnight, but meantime all
coal to be ordered from Messrs. F. O'Neill and Co.
The undermentioned application from the Court-
keeper, Mr. T. Murray, was next read—
THE COURTHOUSE, DUNDALK,
11th March, 1911.
MR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN—I respectfully beg to
apply for some remuneration for the extra work imposed
on me through the Revision, which lasted a fortnight
last year, and for which work there was no extra pay ;
also the preparation of the two Courts for Petty
Sessions every week now, instead of one as heretofore.
The Courts have to be heated every Friday during the
winter months, which work I do.
I understand you have no power to increase my salary,
which is only CIO per annum, but my predecessor had
CIO a year for extra work, and had not nearly as
much work to do as I have, and now that matters have
considerably changed since then, might I respectfully
ask that you will grant me a similar sum to what my
predecessor enjoyed. am now nearly six years in the
Courthouse, and trust I have carried out the duties of
same to your entire satisfaction.
Thanking you in anticipation.
I am, Gentlemen, your obedient servant,
T. MURRAY, Court-keeper.
The Committee referred the further consideration Of
this letter, to the next Meeting of the County Council.
27
Respecting the paynent of Malicious Injury Decrees,
which are now being levied, the Secretary was directed
to address the undermentioned letter to the erreasurer.
11th March, 1912.
DEAR SIR—NV ith reference to previous correspondence
on the subject respecting the payment of Malicious
I brought the matter before the
Injury Decrees,
Finance Committee this day, and they desire me to say
that they have recommended the County Council to dis-
charge all these payments after their Meeting, which
will be held on the 18th April next.
Yours faithfully,
T. F. FILGATE, Secretary.
To J J. Flynn, Esq., Hibernian Bank.
28
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Conunittee at
their Meeting held in thc Council Chamber on Monday,
the ISt day of Alhril, 1912.
Presen t—
In the chair—James Wynne, Esq. Other members—
Patrick O'Connell and James Connolly, Esqrs.
The Secretary submitted accounts for works in charge
of the County Surveyor and those in connection with his
own office which, on examination, were passed by the
Committee. These accounts amount to 631 7s 8d.
THE NATIONAL INSURANCE ACT OF 1911.
Irish County Councils General Council,
28th March, 1912.
Re COUNTY INSURANCE SOCIETIES.
Dear Sir,
Referring to my circular letter of 23rd ult.,
1
have much pleasure in forwarding for the information of
your Council the enclosed scheme for a County Society
under the National Health Insurance Act. The scheme
has been prepared by the Dublin County Solicitor, and
approved of by the Dublin County Council. The adop-
tion of a more or less uniform scheme for County
Societies would tend to greater con venience in working
the Act.
I am pleased to inform you that in view of represen-
tations made to them, the National Health Commission-
ers for Ireland have altered the date fixed for priority of
consideration of Schemes from the 30th March to the
15th April.
Yours faithfully,
A. KERAGH NOLAN, Secretary.
29
Irish County Councils General Council,
10 Leinster Street, Dublin,
February 23rd, 1912.
COUNTY INSURANCE SOCIETIES.
Dear Sir,
I am directed by the Executive Committee of
the Irish County Councils General Council to draw the
attention of your Council to the provisions contained in
the National Insurance Act for the formation of County
Health Insurance Societies by County Councils
Under Section 81 (7) of the Act it is provided that if
it appears to any County Council that having regard to
the number of employed authorities resident in the
County who are not members of any society approved of
under the provisions of the Act, it is desirable that steps
should be taken by the Council för the establishment of
an approved society under the Council, they may at any
time, before the expiration of one year from the com-
mencement of the Act, submit to the Irish Insurance
Commission a scheme for the establishment of a County
Society. The Scheme may provide for—
(a) The representation of the Council on the COID -
mittee of Management of the Society.
(b) The appointment of Officers, subject to the ap-
proval of the County Council.
(c) The delegation of powers to Committees.
(d) The giving of security by means of a charge upon
the general purposes rate or otherwise.
(e) The- restriction of membership to insured persons
resident in the County, not being members of any other
approved Society.
(f) The reduction of benefits below the minimum rates
fixed by this part of this Act ; and
(g) Such other matters as may appear necessary, and
in particular such further modifications of the provisions
Of this part of this Act, with respect to approved
Societies as may be required for the purpose of adapting
those provisions to the case of a County Society.
County Councils are further authorised at any time
after the passing of the Act, to take such steps as appear
30
necessary to ascertain what persons resident in the
County are eligible and willing to become members of
the proposed County Society, and generally for the
formation of the Society.
I am further directed to inform you that the desir-
ability of the formation of County Societies has been
considered by the Exective Cornmittee of the General
Council, who have unanimously decided to recommend
the afflliated Councils to take the necessary steps for
the formation of Schemes for their establishment, in
order that every employed " insurable person in their
area may be afforded an opportunity of participating in
the superior advantages conferred by membership of
an " Approved Society," over those enjoyed by "Deposit
Contributors."
I may point out that membership of a County Society
would be confined to residents in the county ; its funds
could not be made available to meet deficits elsewhere ;
and each claim for benefit would be dealt with by local
committees having full knowledge of the facts, so that
even the most remote districts of the county would be
provided with an effective organization.
I have to forward, later, a draft skeleton scheme for
the information of your Council.
Yours faithfully,
A. KEOGH NOLAN, Secretary.
Ordered that a copy of the foregoing correspondence
be sent to the Council's Solicitor with a request that he
furnish the Finance Cotmnittee with an explanatory re-
port and advise what action the Council should take in
the matter.
The following letter from Mr. Oswald Hardy, C.P.S.,
Dundalk, dated 19th ult., was read by the Secretary
March 19th, 1912.
Sir,
Please take notice that on Friday next, the 22nd
inst., an application will be made to the magistrates at
Dundalk Petty Sessions for the committal to an Indus-
trial School of two children, Josephine and Mary Hoey,
of Park Street, Dundalk, on the grounds that they are
without proper guardianship.
31
Letter from Mr. James Dromgoole as under—
Dunleer, 21st March, 1912.
Dear Sir,
In reply to your query re order mud cart, Reilly
reports that Leonard took the cart last July to supply
water to the Sheep Dipping tanks, and that one wheel
fell to pieces, after being returned, necessitating the
building of a new wheel which cost 20s.
The contractor for Ardee streets is responsible for
ordinary repairs, but now that the cart is being used for
other purposes than mud removal, I think the responsi-
bility ought to be divided.
J was present when Mr. Lynam told Reilly to report
the matter to Leonard so that he might bring the matter
before the Committee.
The Committee agreed with the suggestion of Mr.
Lynam which was that Reilly be allowed C 1 by the
Sheep Dipping Authority.
The Secretary reported that 7 of the 8 collectors had
duly lodged the full amount of their warrants in respect
of the half-year ended 31st March last, the exception
being Mr. Patrick Hughes, Park Street, Dundalk.
Having been called upon for an explanation by the
Committee as to his failure in not closing by the statu-
tory time, Mr. Hughes addressed the following letter to
the Committee
Park Street, Dundalk,
ISt April, 1912.
To the Finance Committee,
Louth County Council.
Gentlemen,
I beg to apply for an extension of about one
month to enable me to close my collection. Owing to
32
illness during portion of period, I found it impossible to
finish on 31st ult. Hoping my application will receive
favourable consideration,
I remain, yours,
PATRICK HUGHES,
Collector of Poor Rate.
In the circumstances the Committee were unanimous
in granting Mr. Hughes one month's time to close his
current collection.
The correspondence received from Mr. Kearney,
Secretary and School Attendance Officer, Drogheda, for
an increase of salary was referred to the Co. Council.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) ACT, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of lhe Finance Comnlittee at
their Meeting held in the Council Chamber on Monday,
the 15th day of April, 1912.
Presen t—
In the chair—James Connolly, Esq., J.P.
Other members—James Wynne, Edward Goodman,
Bernard Hamill, J.P., Patrick O'Connell, and Joseph
H. McArdle, Esqrs.
The Secretary submitted accounts for works in charge
of the County Surveyor and those of his own office
which, on exaniination, were passed by the Cormnittee.
These accounts amount to C 76 J9S. od.
2
The following correspondence was then read :—
Francis Street, Dundalk,
15th April, 1912.
Dear Sir,
I duly received your letter of ISt inst., en-
closing letters received from the Irish County Councils
General Council with Draft Scheme of the County
Dublin County Council for the e.stablishment of a
County of Dublin Society under the Act.
With reference to the establishment of a County
Society under Section 81 (7) of the Act, I am of opinion
that it is a matter that should receive the immediate
attention of the Council. This Act is a new one, and
does not come into operation until the 15th July next,
save as otherwise expressly provided therein. It must
be remembered that as yet the membership of friendly
societies inu Ireland is distinctly limited, in fact their
operations have been chiefly, confined to England.
Probably 1,000,000 persons will be insured in Ireland.
At the present time it is doubtful if there are 100,000
members of Benefit Societies.
In order, therefore, to
avoid any difficulty in the matter of Irish insured per-
sons joining an approved Society, and lest, owing to
any such difficulty, large numbers should be forced to
become Post Office contributors, the Act provides that
a County Council may at any time beföre one year from
the 15th July, 1912; submitfto the Irish Insurance Com-
missioners a scheme for the establishment of a County
Society, where having regard to the number of em-
ployed contributors, who are not members of an
approved society, it may appear desirable to adopt this
1.
3
course. Such Scheme may provide for the objects
detailed in the letter of the County Councils General
Council.
It is eminently desirable that every employed " in-
surable person within the County may be offered an
opportunity of participating in the superior advantages
conferred by membership of an approved society" over
those enjoyed by " Deposit Contributors."
I would suggest that a Committee be appointed to
draft a Scheme to be approved by the Council, and
afterwards submitted to the Insurance Commissioners.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
On hearing this communication read, the Committee
were unanimous in recommending—That the County
Council at their meeting, to be held on Thursday next,
the 18th inst., appoint a Committee to draft a Scheme
for the County of Louth.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) ACT, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES
PROCEEDINGS
Louth County Council at their First Quarterly Meeting, held
in the Council Chamber, Dundalk, on Thursday, the
18th April, 1912; Special Meeting, 9th May, 1912
Adjourned Quarterly Meeting on Thursday, 30th May,
1912 ; Special Meeting, 6th June, 1912 ; Annual Meet-
ing, 13th June, 1912 and Special Meeting, on Thurc-
day, the 20th day 't June, 1912.
FINANCE COMMITTEE MINUTES
Held on 'f 5th April, 29th April, 13th May, 29th May, Itth
June, 24th June, 1912.
TEMPEST, PRINTER, DUNDALK.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) ACT, 1898.
LOUTH
COUNTY
COUNCIL.
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
Louth County Council ctt their First Quarterly Meeting,
Special Meeting ; and Finance Committee Meetings.
DUNDALK :
WILLIAM TEMPEST, PRINTER AND STATIONER.
1912.
Louth County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council
at their First Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council Chamber
On Thursday, the 18th day of April, 1912.
Present :—
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
James Connolly, :J.P. ;
Patrick
Other Members —
Donegan, .P.; L. J. Elcock, Edward Goodman, Bernard
Hamill,
Joseph M. Johnson, James S. Kelly, Michael
Meade, oseph H. M 'Ardle, James M 'Carthy, J.P. ; Laurence
M'Keown, Patrick O'Connell, and James Wynne, Esquires.
The minutes of the last Meetings of Council having been
Printed, and a copy sent to each Member, were taken as read,
and were confirmed, save and except that the Chairman
called the Council's attention to the fact that on the printed
minutes issued to the Members of the Council the names of
the delegates appointed to attend the National Con vention
did not appear thereon.
Mr. Finnegan explained to the Council the cause of the
omission.
4
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE COMMITTEE
MINUTES.
Proposed by Mr. Edward Goodman,
Seconded by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P., and
Resolved—That the Minutes of the Proceedings of the
Finance Committee on the undermentioned dates be and are
hereby approved by this Council—-viz., 15th January, 1912,
29th January, 1912, 12th February, 1912, 19th February,
1912, 11th March, 1912, ISt April, 1912 ; and 15th April, 1912 ;
that a Committee be formed consisting of the whole Council to
draft a Scheme under the Insurance Act. Meeting to be held
on next Adjourned Quarterly Meeting, May 30th at 11 a.m.
On the motion of Mr. James M 'Carthy, J.P. ; seconded by
Mr. Joseph H. M' Ardle, it was resolved—That the County
Council hereby determine that the following shall be the
dates for the holding of the First Quarterly Meetings of the
Rural District Councils and the Proposal Committee, viz. :
Ardee,
Drogheda,
Dundalk,
Tuesday, 2nd July, 1912.
Thursday, 11th July, 1912.
Monday, 8th July, 1912.
The last day for lodging Notices and Applications for
District Councils will be Tuesday, 11th June, 1912.
The Proposal Committee to meet on Monday, ISt July,
1912.
PROPOSALS FOR PAYMENTS.
ARDEE.
Proposed by Mr. Michael Meade,
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Byrne, J.P., and
Resolved—Thot the Proposals for Payments formulated by
the Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council at their First
Quarterly Meeting, held on Tuesday, the 2nd day of April,
1912, and set out on Form 22 furnished to the County Council
be and are hereby approved of.
5
DROGHEDA.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Laurence M' Keown, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formulated by
the Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union at their First
Quarterly Meeting, held on Thursday the 11th day of April,
1912, and set out on Form 22 furnished to the County Council,
beand are hereby approved of.
DUNDALK.
On the motion of Mr. PatrickiByrne, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Joseph H. M 'Ardle, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formulated by
the Dundalk Rural District Council at their First Quarterly
Meeting, held on Monday, the 8th April, 1912, and set out on
Form 22 furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby
approved of.
MAKING OF RATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR
ENDING 31st MARCH, 1913.
Proposed by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P., and
Resolved—That in accordance with estimate of rates for
General and Separate Charges adopted by the County Council
at their Meeting, held on Thursday, the 29th day of February,
1912, we hereby make rates to be levied off the Cotinty of
Louth for the financial year ending the 31st March, 1913, as
set out below. The rates in the for General and Separate
Charges are
Ardee,
Drogheda,
Dnndalk,
LAND.
2/3
2/7
3/1
BUILDINGS.
3/7
4/4
4/11
6
The rate includes one penny in the under the Agri-
cultural and Technical Instruction Acts; and it is also
resolved :
That the General Rates in respect of Separate Charges, as
set out on Form 43, be also made by this Council, and that
the Secretary be authorised in accordance with Article 78 to
publish Notice of said Rates for General and Separate
Charges having been made.
The Secretary laid before the Council a considerable
amount of correspondence received from the School Attend-
ance Offlcer for Drogheda Rural District, Mr. Thomas
Kearney, whose Committee recommended an increase in his
salary from 625 to C 35 per annum. After very consider-
able discussion on the matter, it was proposed by Mr. Jas. S.
Kelly, seconded by Mr. Laurence M 'Keown, and resolved—
That Mr. Kearney's salary be increased from 625 to L 35 per
annum, to begin from ISt April, 1912.
The following letter from Mr. M. Comerford, Town Clerk,
Dundalk, was read by the Secretary :
18th April, 1912.
DEAR SIR,
I beg to renew my Council's application for share of the
Road Board Grant, which I understand yonr Council agreed
to give the Urban District.
I enclose copy of our former application, together with an
account of the work of surface tarring done last year.
My Council hope you will aid them in obtaining this
683 7s. 6d., which is only a share of what they expended in
anticipation of the grant.
Messrs. T. F. M 'Gahon, J.P., Chairman of the Dundalk
Urban Council, Maurice Sellars, C.E., and M. Comerford
appeared before the Council in respect of the foregoing appli-
cation, and the County Council unanimously decided to render
all the assistance in their power in obtaining the amount
mentioned in the Town Clerk's letter.
7
The undermentioned letter was handed by the Secretary
to the Chairman, which was marked " private."
AUGHAVANAGH, AUGRIM,
Co. WICKLOW,
January 24th, 1912.
DEAR SIR,
I am directed by Mr. Redmond to acknowledge receipt of
your letter of the 18th inst., enclosing copy of resolution
passed by your Council, the contents of which he has duly
noted, and which he is pleased to receive.
Yours very truly,
T. J. HANNA.
To T. F. FILGATE, Esq.
UNITED IRISH LEAGUE.
39, UPPER O'CONNELL STREET,
DUBLIN,
4th April, 1912.
DEAR SIR,
I beg to inform you that a National Convention will be
held in the Round Room, Mansion House, Dublin, on Tuesday,
23rd April, for the purpose of considering the Home Rule
Bill, which will be introduced in the House of Commons on
Thursday, 11th April.
Vour Body is entitled to be represented at the Convention,
and I will ask you to kindly have your delegates elected as
soon as possible, after which their names and addresses
should be sent in to this office on the enclosed slip, which
should be signed by you. The Cards of Admission will then
be posted to the delegates who have been appointed. Vou
will see by the enclosed scale of representation the number
of delegates your Body is entitled to.
Yours faithfully,
JOSEPH DEVLIN.
8
The names of the following gentlemen were duly forwarded
to Mr. Devlin—viz..
Joseph H. M' Ardle, Rampark, Dundalk.
James M 'Carthy, J.P., Newfoundwell, Drogheda.
Peter Hughes, J.P., Castlering, Channonrock, Louth.
Wm. A. Doran, J.P., Harristown, Ardee.
Wm. Woods, J.P., Carlingford.
Patrick M 'Gee, Charleville, Dunleer.
On the motion of Mr. Peter Hughes; J.P., seconded by
Mr. Edward Goodman, the following resolution was unani-
mously passed by the Council :—
That we the mernbers of the Louth County Council tender
to Mr. John E. Redmond, M.P., the Chairman of the Irish
Nationalist Party, our congratulations on the position to
which he has brought the Irish cause, and his able and capable
leadership of the Independent Parliamentary Party.
NOTICE OF MOTION DOGS' ACT.
Proposed by Mr. L. J. Elcock,
Seconded by Mr. E. Goodman, and
Resolved—C' That the notice of motion standing in the
proposer's name be now put in the form of a resolution and
adopted by this Council."
There voted for the resolution—Messrs. James Connolly,
Patrick Donegan, Luke J. Elcock, Edward Goodman, Michael
Meade, J. H. M'Ard1e, J. M'Carthy, P. O'Connell, James
Wynne—9.
Against—Messrs. J. M. Johnson, L. M'Keown—2.
The resolution was passed by a majority of 7.
9
Mr. Elcock's Notice of Motion is as under :
ADMINISTRATIVE COUNTY OF Lowry.
THE DOGS' ACT, 1906.
Regulations for the Control o/ Dogs between Sunset and
Sunrise.
Notice is hereby given that I shall move at the next Meeting
of the County Council, to be held on the 18ti1 day of April,
1912—That the following regulations come into operation
when same shall have been submitted to and confirmed by
the Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction
for Ireland :
1. That no dog during any of the hours between sunset and
sunrise shall be allowed outside the house or adjoining
premises of the owner thereof unless such dog shall be under
the effectual control of and in the company of its owner or
some other responsible person, so as to prevent such dog
from breaking away and worrying cattle or sheep.
2. Any dog in respect of which an offence is committed
against any of these regulations may be seized and treated
as a stray dog under the powers conferred by Section 3 of the
Dogs' Act, 1906.
.—lf a dog between the hours of sunset and sunrise
Offences
is allowed outside the house or adjoining premises of the owner
and such dog shall not be in the charge of and in the company
Of the owner or some other person, and shall not be under
such control that such dog cannot break away or worry
cattle or sheep, the owner of the dog and the person (if any)
for the time being in charge thereof, and any person causing,
directing or permitting such dog to be outside such house or
premises shall each be deemed guilty of an offence against the
Act of 1894.
3. These Regulations shall apply to the entire Adminis-
trative County of Louth, and shall be in force during the
whole year.
Signed,
LUKE J. ELCOCK.
10
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council
'heir Special Meeting, held in the Council Chamber,
Thursday, thc 9th day of May, 1912.
Present :—
In the Chair—Luke J. Elcock, Esq.
on
James Connolly, J.P. ; Patrick Kearney,
Other Members—
Edward Goodman, Patrick Byrne, J.P. ; James Wynne,
Joseph H. McArdle, Michael Meade, William Woods, J.P. ;
Joseph M. Iohnson, Bernard Hamill, J. P. ; and Patrick
O'Connell, Esquires.
The Secretary summoned the Council for the purpose
of taking into consideration the undermentioned Agenda :
Secretary's Office,
Court House,
Dundalk,
4th May,
Dear Sir,
You are hereby requested to attend a Special
Meeting of the County Council, to be held in the Council
Chamber, on Thursday next, the 9th inst., at one o'clock,
for the purpose of taking into consideration the undermen-
tioned business, viz. :
(1) The formation of County Insurance Committees.
(2) Consideration of Control of Dogs' Order received from
the Department.
(3) Correspondence.
Yours faithfully,
T. F. FILGATE,
Secretary.
il
The following letter from the Secretary National I--lealth
Insurance Commission, Dublin, dated, 14th April, 1912,
was read :
Urgent.
NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE COMMISSION.
24th April, 1912.
The Secretary,
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Formation of County Insurance Committees.
Sir,
I am directed by the National Health InsUrance Com-
mission (Ireland), to inform you that they propose to appoint
Insurance Committees under Section 59 sub-section (1) and
Section 81 sub-section (8) of the National Insurance Act, 1911.
Under Clause (b) of the Section referred to, eight members
(Of whom one at least shall be a member of a local sanitary
authority and at least two shall be women) shall be appointed
by the County Council or County Borough.
Where the Council agrees to defray any part of the cost
Of sanatorium benefit, under sub-section (4) of Section 81, the
Cotnmissioners may increase the membership oi the County
Council or County Borough on the County Committee.
I am, therefore, to request that you will be good enough
to submit this question to the next meeting of your Council
and forward for the information of the Insurance Commis-
Sioners the names of the members appointed by the County
Council or County Borough, to represent it on the Insurance
Committee.
Should the Council decide to exercise its powers under
Part 11 of the Tuberculosis (Ireland) Act, 1908, the fact
Should be stated on the Memorandum attached hereto and
the names of two additional members should be forwarded
for the consideration of the Cotnmission.
I am, sir,
Your obedient servant,
JOHN HOULIHAN, Secretary.
12
On the motion of Mr. Edward Goodman, seconded by
Mr. James Wynne, it was resolved: That we hereby decide
to adopt part 11 of the National Insurance Act, 1911.
It was then proposed by Mr. Wm. Woods, J.P. ;
Tha t
seconded by Mr. James Connolly, J. P. , aml Resolved :
the undermentioned ladies and gentlemen be the County In-
surance Comnlittee for County Lotlth, viz
Mrs C. A. Duffy, Seatown Place, Dundalk.
Mrs. McKittrick,
Drogheda.
and the following gentlemen members of the County Council,
viz. : Peter Hughes, J.P.; Jospph H. McArdle, Luke J.
Elcock, W. T. Skeffington, J.P. ; Patrick McGee, William A.
Doran, J.P.; James Wynne anal Edward Goodman, Esquires.
The following communication from Her Excellency the
Countess of Aberdeen was next read by the Secretary :
WOMEN'S NATIONAL HEALTH ASSOCIATION OF
IRELAND.
VICE REGAL LODGE,
Dum,1N,
May 4th, 1912.
DEAR SIR,
At the recent Annual Meeting of the Council of the Women's
National Health Association a resolution was passed tlllani-
mottsly recommending conference between the workers of
the Women's National Health Association and the Local
Health Authorities in Ireland with reference, to the National
Scheme for the suppression of Ttlberculosis about to be
inaugurated in connection with the National Health Insurance
Act.
A large proportion of the Branches of the W.N.H.A. have
taken a deep and practical interest in the anti-Tuberculosis
Campaign, encouraging their members to study the question
of the best means of prevention and cure of the insidious
disease which is so fatal to humanity. They have used the
knowledge thus gained in various ways for the benefit of
patients brought under their notice, and funds have been
13
raised to provide suitable Institutions, to maintain specially
trained Nurses, to arrange for home treatment under adequate
supervision, and to supply the necessary nourishment, clothes,
separate beds, suitable lodgings, etc.
Vour attention has doubtless been drawn to the very
interesting and important interim report just issued by the
Committee on Tuberculosis appointed to advise on the most
efficacious system of treatment in England, Scotland, Ireland
and Wales, and probably you will shortly be considering a
scheme under which you can take advantage of the assistance
provided under the Act for the treatment and ultimate ex-
termination of Tuberculosis.
The voluntary Workers of the Women's National Health
Association desire to put themselves at the disposition of the
Local Health Authorities in Ireland for the carrying out of
such schemes, and also for the establishment and maintenance
Of properly trained Nurses and Midwives who will be required
in order to make the provisions of the National Health Insur-
ance Act effective.
We therefore beg to invite you to appoint a delegate or
delegates to attend a Conference, to be held on Thursday and
Friday, May 23rd and 24th, in the Lecture Hall of Leinster
House, by kind pernmission of the Royal Dublin Society.
We hope that in any case the Medical Officer of Health
may be one of the delegates appointed.
We are authorised to state that the Local Government
Board will regard this Conference as a Central Conference
Within the meaning of the L.G.B. Order governing such
Conferences. An excerpt of this Order is appended.
The Agenda will be sent to the delegates later, but the
subjects proposed for discussion will include the different
POints raised by the report of the Special Tuberculosis Com-
mittee already mentioned, and will also include Infant
Mortality ; consideration of the Death-rate of Women in
Child-birth in Ireland ; the provision of qualified Nurses and
Midwives ; the Health of Children ; the question of Food ;
Milk ; Water ; Housing and Sanitation, as all these subjects
will be affected by the operations of the Insurance Act and the
appointment of the County Insurance Committees.
I remain, Vours very faithfully,
ISABEL ABERDEEN.
EXCERPT FROM ORDER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD OF
13th JULYS 1894.
We, the Local Government Board for Ireland do, by this
Our Order, empower the Sanitary Authorities, for the time
being, of the several Urban and Rural Sanitary Districts in
Ireland, to pay the reasonable expenses incurred by any
member or members or by the clerk in attending any such
collference or meeting as is mentioned in the said section 2,
and any reasonable expenses incurred in purchasing reports
of the proceedings of any such conference or meeting, subjecf
to the following regulations :—
(i) The expenses incurred in attending a conference or
meeting shall only be paid in respect of attendance at
a central conference or meeting open to representatives
of all Sanitary Authorities, or at a conference or meet-
ing convened for an area including the Sanitary District
front which the persons attending as representatives
are sent and held at a place distant not more than one
hundred miles from such Sanitary District.
(2) The attendance at any conference or meeting of a
member or members of, or of the clerk to, the Sanitary
Authority of any such Sanitary District shali be
expressly authorised by a resolution passed at a meeting
of the Sanitary Authority of such Sanitary District—a
written or printed notice that the proposal is to be
considered at that meeting having been sent, by post
or otherwise, to each member of the Sanitary Authority
concerned not less than four days prior to the date of
such meeting ; and where the attendance of more than
one member is authorised, the number of members
authorised to attend shall be specified in lhe resolution.
(3) In the case of a central conference or meeting open Io lhe
representatives of all Sanitary Au/,horities only one
member shall be authorised to attend from a Sanitary
District which is situated at a distance of more than fifty
miles from the Place at which such conference or meeting
may be held.
4)
15
(4) The number of copies which may be purchased by the
Sanitary Authority of any Sanitery District of the
report of a central conference or meeting, or of any
conference or meeting "for an area including the Sanitary
District of such Sanitary Authority, shall be such as
the Sanitary Authority of the Sanitary District may,
by resolution, determine.
Proposed by Mr. Joseph M. Johnson,
Seconded by Mr. James Wynne, and
Recolved—That Messrs. Patrick Byrne, J.P., and Dr. Peter
O'Connell, M. Y). , be appointed delegates from this Council
to attend the conference, to be held on Thursday and Friday,
May 23rd and 24th, in the Lecture Hall of Leinster House,
Dublin, and further, that the necessary expenses incurred
by the delegates now appointed to and from Dublin be de-
frayed by the County Council, subject to the sancti011 of the
Local Government Board.
The Council next proceeded to the next item on the Agenda
paper—viz. :—Consideration of Control of Dogs' Order as
received from the Department, and on the motion of Mr. Luke
J. Elcock, seconded by Mr. Edward Goodman, it was resolved :
4' That we hereby decide to put the Control of Dogs' Order
in force in the County of Louth—i.e., Regulations for the
Control of Dogs between Sunset and Sunrise, which was
adopted by the County Council at their meeting, held on
Thursday, 18th day of April, 1912, and that these Regulations
come into force on the ISt July-next."
16
Minutes of the Proceedings oj thc Louth County Council, at
their (First) Adjourned Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council
Chamber, Dundalk Courthouse, on Thursday, the 30th day oj
May, 1912.
Present :—
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other members—Patrick Byrne, . P. ;
ames Connolly,
. P. ; Joseph Dolan, Wm. A. Doran, . P. ; atrick Donegan,
. P. ; Edward Goodman, Bernard Hamill, J. P. ; Patrick
Kearney, James S. Kelly, Michael Meade, Jaines M 'Carthy,
J.P.; Patrick O'Connell, Michael O'Meara, J.P.; Denis J.
Rath, Peter Woods, J.P., and James Wynne, Esquires.
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
At the 2nd Quarterly Meeting, May, 1912.
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,
The Proposal No. 1, Drogheda, for the construction of
576 perches of new road through Castlelumley, was passed
provisionally last quarter, and now comes up for final consi-
deration. Practically half the road is made already, and the
remaining half is to be metalled only twelve feet wide—still
the sum allowed, C 150, is very small.
(11.) As to No. 1, Dundalk, the footpath along the Newry
Road, from Mr. Rice's stores, near Lisdoo, to the New
Cemetery, is 204 perches in length nearly, of which about 52
perches are situated in the Urban District, and 152 perches in
the Rural District of Dundalk.
If this footpath is to be re-
paired, the usual and legal course is that each Council should
repair its own portion of the footpath, quite independently of
the other Council.
In July next the Rural Council can for-
mulate a Proposal, and set a Contract, to repair their 152
„ perches, and then there may possibly be a year or two to wait
before the Urban Council find it convenient to repair their
52 perches.
It seems that the Urban Council now intend to
complete their own 52 perches, and 25 perches in the Rural
District at an indefinite cost, with a contribution of L 50 from
the Rural District. But a Council cannot get rid of its legal
17
obligations to the public, by paying over a sum of money to
Joint works are carried out by a oint
another Council.
Board, armed with special legal powers, as iti the case o the
beg to recommend that this Proposal be
New Cemetery.
rejected, aud that, if required, a new Proposal be formulatéd
in June and July next, for the Rural District only, to extend
over two or three years if thought convenient.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
P. J. LYNAM, Co. Surveyor.
On the motion of Mr. Edward Goodman, seconded by Mr.
Bernard Hamill, J.P., it was resolved-—" That the report of
the County Surveyor, as appearing on the Schedule of Pro-
posals, for the 30th of May, 1912, be and is hereby adopted
by this Council, and that part No. 2 of this Report be referred
to the Local Government Board, re the arrangement between
the Urban and the Rural District Councils of Dundalk, re-
specting the footpath to St. Patrick's Cemetery."
In accordance with the advertisement issued by the Secre-
tary, the Council next proceeded to consider Tenders for the
undermentioned works, which were not set by contract at ad-
journed meeting of the Rural District Council. They are as
under :—
WORKS.
Tenders for the following Works will be considered by the
County Council, as per advertisement, &c.
COUNTY AT LARGE.
(1) To keep the County Court in repair to 31st March, 1912,
not to exceed C 30•
DROGHEDA DISTRICT.
(1) To make 576 perches of new road, Castlelumney and
Rathdaniel, from Peter Mathew's house on Drogheda Road,
to Richard Campbell's house on the Collon Road. Not to
exceed Cl 50.
(4)' To repair the gullat at Slate Row Cross, on the road
from Termonfeckin to Castlecoe, not to exceed C 4.
18
DUNDALK DISTRICT.
(8) To make a new gullet on the road from Dundalk to
Forkhill, between the turn to Roskeagh and Kilcurry Post
Offlce. Not to exceed C 4.
(10) To repair the sea wall at Blackrock, between Miss
Ferguson's land and the men's bathing place. Not to exceed
On consideration of Tenders for these Works, the Council
duly accepted the lowest in each case, save and except that of
a contractor named Roe, who informed the Chairman that the
sureties named in his Tender were not present, and in conse-
quence of this the next lowest Tender was accepted, that of
Joseph McConnon, Newrath, for the snm of C 33 IOS. od.
Roe's Tender was for C 29 17s. 6d.
Confirmation of Works formulated by Rural District
Council.
ARDEE WORKS.
Proposed by Mr. W. A. Doran, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Meade, and
Resolved—" That the Proposals for Works formulated by
the Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council, at their Quarterly
Meeting held on Tuesday, the 23rd day of April, 1912, and
set out on Form 20, furnished to the County Council, be and
are hereby approved of—and we now authorise our Secretary
to afflX the the Common Seal of the Council to the Contracts
entered into."
DROGHEDA WORKS.
Proposed by Mr. James M'Carthy, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P., and
Resolved—" That the Proposals for Works formulated by
the Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union, at their
Quarterly Meeting held on Thursday, the 9th day of May,
1912, and set out on Form 20, furnished to the County
Council, be and are hereby approved of, and we now authorise
our Secretary to affix the Common Seal of the Council to the
Contracts entered into.
19
DUNDALK WORKS.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Byrne, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Kearney, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works formulated by the
Dundalk Rural District Council at the Quarterly Meeting,
held on Monday, the 6th day of May, 1912, and set out on
Form 20 furnished to the County Council be and are hereby ap-
proved of. And we now authorise our Secretary to affix the
Common Seal of the Council to the Contracts entered into.
The Secretary then submitted Form 22, containing County
at Large Payments, a printed copy of which had been furnished
to each melilber of the Council, and after due consideration
payment of same was duly atlthorised by the Council.
The following series of resolutions were then passed by the
Council—viz. .
On the motion of Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Joseph Dolan, it was resolved—
' That the Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Com-
mittee, held on the 29th May last be and are hereby adopted
by this Council."
Proposed by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. James S. Kelly, J.P., and
Resolved—" That we hereby authorise our Secretary to
discharge all Malicious Injury Claims against the County
Council after our meeting held this day, and that the County
Treasurer be notified to this effect."
The Secretary brought the undermentioned letter before
the Council, which he explained was overlooked at last meeting
Of the Council, and after consideration the application was
refused.
20
The undermentioned application
Mr. T. Murray, was next read :—
THE
Mr. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN,
from the Court Keeper,
COURTHOUSE,
DUNDALK,
11th March, 1912.
I respectfully beg to apply for some remuneration for the
extra work imposed on me through the Revision, which
lasted a fortnight last year, and for which work there was no
extra pay ; also the preparation of the two Courts for Petty
Sessions every week nöw, instead of one as heretofore. The
Courts have to be heated every Friday during the winter
months, which work I do.
I understand you have no power to increase my salary,
which is only LIO per annum, but my predecessor had LIO a
year for extra work, and had not nearly as much work to do
as I have, and now that matters have considerably changed
since then, Illight I respectfully ask that you will grant me a
similar sum to what my predecessor enjoyed. I am now
liearly six years in the Courthouse, and trust I have carried
out the duties of same to your entire satisfaction.
Thanking you in anticipation,
I am, Gentlemen,
Vour obedient servant,
T. MURRAY, Court-keeper.
The Committee referred the further consideration of this
letter to the next meeting of the County Council.
NATIONAL INSURANCE ACT.
On the motion of Mr. Wm. A Doran, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. James S. Kelly, it was resolved—
' That we hereby appoint a Committee of the whole Council
to draft a Scheme under the National Insurance Act, 1911."
21
Proposed by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Edward Goodman, and resolved—
That we hereby resolve ourselves into a County Society,
and that a Committee be formed to draft a Scheme, to be
submitted to the Irish Insurance Commissioners, for the
establishment of a County of Louth Society under the pro-
visions of the National Insurance Act, 1911."
The Secretary then read the following letter from Mr. M.
Comerford, Town Clerk, Dundalk •
TOWN CLERK'S OFFICE,
TOWN HALL, DUNDALK,
29th day of May, 1912.
DEAR SIR,
I am directed to request that you will kindly lay before
your Council at tlleir meeting to-morrow my Council's appli-
cation for a share of the Road Board Grant for the current
year, as follows, viz.
150 os. ocl. for surface tarring 12,000 square yards of the
roads within tile Road Board Scheme.
My Council desire to have the necessary resolution passed
and recorded at the meeting, and since your Council is the
Administration Body for this Grant, my Council wish to be
informed of the necessary steps to be taken by them to obtain
this Grant.
Yours truly,
M. COMERFORD, Town Clerk.
Proposed by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Peter Woods, J.P., and
Resolved—" That we hereby apply to the Road Board for
the Grant to which Dundalk Urban District is justly entitled
to."
22
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
Special Meeting, held in the Council Chamber, on Thursday
the 6th day of June, 1912.
Present :
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Edward Goodman, M. O'Meara, J.P. •
James Wynne, Wm. A. Doran, J.P. ; J. F. Murphy, J.P. ;
Bernard Hamill, J.P. ; James I-lalpenlly, Patrick Kearney,
Patrick M'Gee, and J. H. M'Ard1e, Esquires.
The Council were sunlmoned for the purpose of taking
into consideration the following Agenda :—
SECRETARY'S OFFICE,
COURTHOUSE, DUNDALK.
ISt June, 1912.
SIR,
I have been authorised to summon a Special Meeting of
the County Council for Thursday next, the 6th day of June,
1912, at one o'clock p.m., for the purpose of taking into
consideration the undertnentioned business :
First—Application of Collector Patrick Hughes, to be
relieved of the Electoral Division of Ballymaseanlon and
Faughart, and to retain the Electoral Division of Dundalk
Rural.
Second—Correspondence, and any other business that may
be brought forward.
When the foregoing business has been transacted, the
County Committee are then requested to meet for the purpose
of taking into consideration :
The Drafting of a Scheme under the National Insurance
Act, 1911."
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
T. F. FILGATE, Secretary.
23
• The undermentioned letter from Mr. Patrick Hughes,
Poor Rate Collector, was taken into considerati011 .
PARK STREET,
DUNDALK,
4/5/12.
GENTLEMEN,
I am in receipt of a copy of a letter of the Local Govern-
ment Board dated 14th ultimo, relating to my non-closing
collection on 31st March last.
In reply, I beg to state that ever sillce my appointment I
have found it impossible to collect the total amount of recover-
able rates in my warrant on the date fixed by the Local
Government Board without resorting to extreme measures
against many respectable ratepayers. who, if given a little
extrat ime, would discharge their obligations honourably.
However, subject to your approval, I shall relinquish the
Electoral Divisions of Ballymascanlon and Faughart and
retain Dundalk Rural, which with my duties as Collector
Dundalk Urban I shall be able to discharge in a manner
that will give no cause of complaint.
Trusting you will give my proposal your favourable con-
sideration, and thanking you for past kindness,
I am, Gentlemen,
Vours faithfully,
PATRICK HUGHES.
To the Chairman and Gentlemen Louth County Council.
The Council, having given due consideration to the fore-
going letter, were unanimous in passing the following
resolution :—
Proposed by Mr. B. Hamill, J.P..
Seconded by Mr. P. Kearney, and
Resolved—That in compliance with the request contained
in the letter of Mr. Patrick Hughes we hereby relieve him of
the Electoral Divisions of Ballymascanlon and Faughart,
and allow him to retain Dundalk Rural Electoral Division,
aud that we advertise for a Collector for the Electoral Divisions
of Ballymaseanlon and Faughart, subject to the approval
of the Local Government Board.
PETER HUGHES, Chairman.
T. F. FILGATE, Secretary.
6th day of June, 1912.
Elavillg transacted the foregoing business the County
Committee then met and discussed with the Council's Soliticor,
Mr. D. O'Connell, the provisions of the National Insurance
Act, 1911.
25
ANNUAL MEETING.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
Annual Meeting, held in the Court House, Drogheda, on Thurs-
day, the 13th day of June, 1912, at 11 0'clock a.m.
Present :—
In the Chair—Peter Huglles, Esq., J •P •
Other Members—Wm. A. Doran, J.P. ; T. J. Byrne, J.P. ;
Patrick Byrne, J.P. ; Patrick Callan, Joseph Dolan, Luke J.
Elcock, Edward Goodman, James Halpenny, Joseph P.
Kearney, Patrick Kearney, James S. Kelly, Thomas Maguire,
Michael Meade, James M 'Carthy, J.P. ; Patrick M 'Gee,
Laurence M' Keown, J. F. Murphy, J.P. ; Patrick O'Connell,
Denis J. Rath, Wm. T. Skeffington, J.P., and James Wynne,
Esquires.
On the motion of Mr. Edward Goodman,
Seconded by Mr. T. J. Byrne, J.P., it was resolved—
' That Mr. James M 'Carthy, J.P., do take the chair.
The Council next proceeded to the election of Chairman
and Vice-chairman of the County Council for the ensuing
year.
On the motion of Mr. T. J. Byrne. J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Luke J. Elcock, it was unanimously
resol ved—
' That we hereby elect Mr. Peter Hughes, J.P., of Castlering,
Dundalk, Chairman of the Louth Cotlnty Council for the
ensuing year.
ELECTION OF VICE-CHAIRMAN.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Kearney,
Seconded by Mr. Joseph Dolan, and unanimously resolved
' That we hereby elect Mr. William A. Doran, of Harris-
town, Ardee, Vice-chairman of the Louth County Council
for the ensuing year.'
The following communication from the Local Governmen
Board was then read by tho Secretary :—
No. 30,420, 1912, LOUTH COUNTY.
11th June, 1912.
SIR,
In reply to your letter of the 6th instant relative to the
proposal of the Louth County Council to re-arrange the
Collection District of Collector Patrick Hughes, I am directed
by the • Local Government Board for Ireland to state that
they now agree to Mr. Hughes retaining the Dundalk Electoral
Division as his Collection District.
The Board consider that it might have been more desirable
to merge the remaining District Electoral Divisions in the
adjacent Collection Districts ; but they will not object to their
being treated as a separate Collection District for the current
year, at the end of which period the arrangement will be
reconsidered.
A list of queries (in duplicate) respecting the person who
may be appointed as Collector for the new Collection District
is enclosed herewith.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
A. R. BARLAS, Secretary.
The Secretary then submitted the following statement for
the consideration of the Council •
Statement showing the remuneration to be paid to Mr. Patk.
Hughes in future for the Collection of the Electoral Divisions
of Dundalk Rural, and for the person who shall be appointed
to collect the Electoral Divisions of Ballymascanlon and
Faughart.
1
The present salary paid Mr. Hughes for the three Electora
Divisions is {86 2s. 6d.
Valuation of Electoral Divisions—
Ballymascanlon
Faughart,
Dundalk Rural,
Total valuation,
15705.
4410.
9990.
120,105
DUNDALK RURAL,
86 2 6. Result—142 15s. rod.
As 20,105 : 9990
BALLYMASCANLON and FAUGHART.
86 2 6. Result—L43 6s. 8d.
As 20,105 : 10,115
After the consideration of the foregoing statement the
Council were unanimous in passing the following resolution :
Proposed by Mr. Edward Goodman,
Seconded by Mr. James M 'Carthy, J.P., and
Resolved—That we hereby authorise our Secretary to
advertise for a Poor Rate Collector in room of Mr. Patrick
Hughes, resigned,for the Electoral Divisions of Ballymascanlon
and Faughart, for the current financial year expiring on the
31st March, 1913, at the remuneration of 143 6s. Sd. together
with the usual fees under the Franchise and Jurors' Acts.
PETER HUGHES, Chairman.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Letter from the Department of Agriculture and Technical
Instruction, as under
WEEDS AND AGRICULTURAL SEEDS (Ireland) ACT, 1909.
8th June, 1912.
SIR,
I have to acquaint you that the Department propose to
commence the work of inspection under the above Act in your
County at an early date. In this connection I have to express
28
the hope that your Council will assist the Department in this
matter as far as possible, by taking steps to assure that all
roads and lands in their control should be kept clear of harm-
ful weeds.
The Department feel that the co-operation of your Council
in this way will be appreciably reduce any difficulty which
may be experienced in inducing farmers and other occupiers
to keep their lands freed, and that the useful purposes for
which the Act was passed will be thereby greatly promoted.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
T. P. GILL, Secretary.
Letter from Sister Clare Redman, Drogheda Industrial
School, as follows :—
June 11th, 1912.
SIR,
We purpose to transfer William Bolton (990) to the Kilty-
begs Industrial Schools, as he is now of an age for transfer.
Will you kindly send by return a note to show that you have
consented to this arrangement.
Vours truly,
SISTER CLARE REDMAN, Mgr.
The Council unanimously complied with the request con-
tained in the foregoing letter.
Letter from the Local Government Board, dated 11th June,
1912, as under :—
SIR,
With reference to you letter of the 13th ultimo relative to
the proposal Of the Louth County Council to refund rates paid
by the Local Government Board for Ireland to state that in
other cases they have expressed the view that rates when
once paid cannot be refunded, and they cannot discover any
reason which would justify the exemption of the present
ease from the operation of this rule.
I am, &c.,
A. R. BARLAS, Secretary.
Secretary, Louth County Council.
29
SPECIAL MEETINGS.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
Special Meeting, held in the Council Chamber, on Thursday,
the 20th day of June, 1912.
Present :—
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Menlbers—patrick Byrne, J.P. ; James Connolly, .T .P.;
Joseph Dolan, Edward Goodman, James Halpenny, Joseph P.
Kearney, Patrick Kearney, Thomas Maguire, Michael M 'Cabe,
Joseph H. M'Ard1e, James M'Carthy, J.P. ; Patrick M'Gee,
Laurence M' Keown, John F. Murphy, J.P. ; Patrick O'Connell,
and William Woods, J.P., Esquires.
In accordance with the advertisement issued by the
Secretary, the Council proceeded to elect a Poor Rate Collector
for the Electoral Divisions of Ballymascanlon and Faughart,
in room of Mr. Patrick Hughes resigned.
Applications for the appointment from the following
Persons were then considered by the Council, viz. :
James V. Johnston, Bellurgan ; Matthew Quinn, Castle-
town Road, Dundalk ; Matthew M 'Gallon, Coolcreedan, Louth;
James Murphy, Redcow ; Robert M'LoughIin, Scarlet Street,
Drogheda.
The Chairman adopted the usual course ill the appointment
Of one of {he above candi(lafeg, by inking a vote Of fhe Cotlnc\l
as between them, and the following was the result of the
Voting
For Johnston—Messrs. P. Byme, J.P. ; Jas. Connolly, J.P. ,
Joseph Dolan, Edward Goodman, James Halpenny, Joseph P.
Kearney, Patrick Kearney, Thomas Maguire, Joseph H.
M' Ardle, James M'Carthy, J.P. ; Patrick M'Gee, Laurence
NI'Keown, and William • Woods, J.P.—13.
30,
For M'Gahon—Messrs. Peter Hughes, J. P. ; Michael Meade,
and John Francis Murphy, J.P.—3.
For Quinn—Patrick O'Connell.—1.
No votes having been cast for the other candidates, the
Chairman duly declared that Mr. James V. Johnston was
elected Poor Rate Collector for the Electoral Division of
Ballymascanlon and Faughart.
The following resolution respecting Mr. Johnston's appoint-
ment was then passed by the Council —
Proposed by Mr. Edward Goodman,
Seconded by Mr. Jcxseph Dolan, and
Resolved—That we hereby appoint Mr. James V. Johnston,
Dundalk, Poor Rate Collector for the Electoral Division of
Ballymascanlon and Faughart on the same conditions and
terms as contained in the advertisement issued by the
Secretary.
Respecting the appointment, the Secretary read the follow-
ing communication from the Local Government Board :—
11th June, 1912.
SIR,
In reply to your letter of the 6th instant relative to the
proposal of the Louth County Council to re-arrange the
Collection District of Collector Patrick Hughes, I am directed
by the Local Government Board for Ireland to state that
they now agree to Mr. Hughes retaining the Dundalk Rural
District Electoral Division as his Collection District. The
Board consider that it might have been more desirable to
merge the remaining District Electoral Divisions in the
adjacent Collection Districts, but they will not object to their.
being treated as a separate Collection District for the current
year, at the end of which period the arrangement will be re-
considered.
A list of queries (in duplicate) respecting the person who
may be appointed as Collector for the new Collection District
is enclosed herewith.
I am, &c.,
A. R. BAhLAS, Secretary.
31
NATIONAL INSURANCE ACT, 1912.
Subsequently the following resolution under the above
Act was passed by the Council :—
Proposed by Mr. John F. Murphy,
Seconded by Mr. William Woods, and
Resolved—That the draft Scheme, settled by a Committee
of the entire Council, for the establishment of a County of
Louth Society under the National Insurance Act, 1911, be
approved, and be forthwith submitted to the Irish Insurance
Commissioners for their approval.
32
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council, at their
Special Meeting, held in the Council Chamber, on Monday,
the ISt day Q/ July, 1912, at 1 0'clock p.m.
Present :—
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Edward Goodman, Patrick O'Connell,
James Wynne, Patrick Byrne, J.P. ; James Connolly, J.P. •
Joseph H. M'Ard1e, B. Hamill, J.P. ; and Peter Woods, J.P.,
Esquires.
The following communication from the Local Government
Board was read by the Secretary :—
28th June, 1912.
SIR,
The Local Government Board for Ireland have had before
them your letter of the 20th instant, relative to the proposed
appointment of Mr. J. V. Johnston as Collector of Poor Rate
for the Collection District consisting of the District Electoral
Divisions of Ballymascanlon and Faughart, and with reference
thereto, they direct me to state that they observe the scale
of remuneration of the Collector has not been inserted in the
query forms (returned herewith). The Board are of opinion
that in the case of this appointment the Collector should be
paid by poundage, and not by an annual salary, and they
would be glad to learn what rate of poundage the County
Council would propose.
I am at the same time to point out that the remuneration
of Collector Hughes in respect of the District which he has
been allowed to retain has not been approved, and they
consider that in his case also payment by poundage should
be adopted, as long experience satisfies them that this method
of payment provides an incentive to expeditions collection.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN, Assistant Secretary.
33
After due consideration of the foregoing letter the Council
were unanimous in passing the undermentioned resolution :
Proposed by Mr. Peter Hughes, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Edward Goodman, aild
Resolved—That with reference to the letter of the Local
Government Board, dated 28th June, 1912, we are of the
opinion that the arrangement made by the Cotlllty Council
at the meeting held on the 13th ultimo respecting the annual
salaries to be paid Messrs. Patrick Hughes and James V.
Johnston are on the same basis as the other Collectors, and
in our opinion fair and equitable.
On further consideration of the provisions of the National
Insurance Act, 1911, and the following letter, the Council
passed the undermentioned resolutions.
NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE COMMISSION (Ireland).
25th June, 1912.
SIR,
I am directed by tlle National Health Insurance Com-
mission (Ireland) to state for the information of the Louth
County Council that they have had under consideration the
general question of the establishment of county societies for
the purposes of the National Insurance Act, 1911.
The Commission have already decided that they could not
allow more than one-fourth of the total number of members
Of the Committee of Management of such a society to be elected
by a County Council.
It has, however, been represented to
the Commission by a deputation from the General Council
Of County Councils that County Councils generally did not
regard this proportion as affording to them from their point
Of view adequate representation on the Committees of Manage-
ment, and the Commission will in the circumstances be pre-
pared to allow, subject to certain conditions, a larger pro-
Portion of the members of such committees to be elected
by County Councils.
34
It will be observed that under Section 81 (7) (b) (vi.) of the
Act, a scheme for the establishment of a County Society may
provide for the reduction of benefits below the minimum rates
fixed by Part I. The intention of the Legislature in granting
this special privilege to county societies was that such societies
might be enabled to admit to membership, without financial
risk, persons who though not quite up to the normal standard
of health could not be regarded as actually unhealthy lives,
and who would otherwise have to become deposit contributors
owing to the unwillingness which might be felt by ordinary
approved societies, bound to pay the normal benefits pre-
scribed by the Act, to admit such persons as members.
The Commission propose to have tables of reduced benefits
to be paid in respect of such persons prepared by their Actuary,
and if the County Council will agree to the principle of having
such reduced benefits incorporated in their scheme, the Com-
mission will allow the County Council to elect one-third of
the members of the Committee of Management of the county
society. It is to be borne in mind that the provision of reduced
benefits of this nature will not preclude the county society
from paying the ordinary benefits to those members whose
stateof health on admission shall be considered satisfactory.
As the preparation of the tables referred to will necessarily
involve some delay, and as it is proposed to issue a further
list Of approved societies early next week, the Commission
suggest that if the County Council decides to provide reduced
Ipenefits, the following rule should be inserted in the scheme
and the necessary changes made therein with regard to the
respective number of the members of the Committee of
Management to be elected by the Council and by the members
of the society :—
' The society will accept and comply with any scheme or
schemes giving effect to Section 81 (7) (b) (vi. and vii.)
of the Act which may be submitted by the County
Council and approved by the National Health Insur-
ance Commission (Ireland), and on such approval being
given the aforesaid scheme or schemes shall be deemed
to be incorporated in these rules, and it shall be the
duty of the Secretary to furnish every member affected
by such scheme or schemes with information regarding
same.'
95
In the event of the Council adopting a scheme of reduced
benefits it will be desirable to incorporate in the form of
application for membership some further questions, details
of which will be embodied in the scheme to be prepared by
the Commission. It will be necessary for each county society
to make its own arrangements with regard to the medical
examination of applicants cotning under the scheme of re-
duced benefits, but the acceptance of normal lives will be
unaffected. The tables of benefits will be drawn up in such
a manner as to ensure actuarially that any expenses falling
upon the society in connection with the medical examinations
referred to shall not entail any loss to the funds.
I am to add that if it is desired that the Louth County Society
should be included in the next list of approved societies,
it is essential that the Commission should be furnished by
Saturday next at latest with the decision of the County Council
and the scheme drafted in accordance with such decision,
should also be received in this Department by that date.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
JOHN HOULIHAN, Secretary.
The Secretary County Council.
Proposed by Mr. B. Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. E. Goodman, and
Resolved—That we hereby appoint all the members of the
County Council to constitute the Provisional County Society
Under the National Insurance -Act, 1911, until the election
Of the Committee of Management under the Rules. Five
members to form a quorum.
Proposed by Mr. P. O'Connell,
Seconded by Mr. William Woods, and
Resolved—That the reduction of benefits below the mini-
mum rates fixed by Section 81 (7) (b) (vi.) of the National
Insurance Act, 1911, be not adopted under the scheme for
formation of a County Society.
37
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting, held in the Council Chamber, on Monday, the 15th
day of April, 1912.
Present :
In the Chair—James Connolly, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—J ames Wynne, Edward Goodman, Bernard
Hamill, J.P. ; Patrick O'Connell, and Joseph H. M' Ardle,
Esquires.
The Secretary submitted accounts for Works in Charge of
the County Surveyor and those of his own office, which, on
examination, were passed by the Committee.
These accounts amount to {76 19s. od.
The following correspondence was then read :—
FRANCIS STREET,
DUNDALK,
15th April, 1912.
DEAR SIR,
I duly received your letter of ISt instant enclosing letters
received from the Irish County Councils General Council
with draft scheme of the County Dublin County Council for
the establishment of a County of Louth Society under the
Act.
With reference to the establishment of a County Society
under Section 81 (7) of the Act, I am of opinion that it is a
matter that should receive the immediate attention of the
Council. The Act is a new one and does not come into
OPeration until the 15th July next, save as otherwise expressly
provided therein. It must be remembered that as yet the
membership of Friendly Societies in Ireland is disticntly
limited ; in fact, their operations have been chiefly confined
to England. Probably 1,000,000 persons will be insured in
Ireland. At the present time it is doubtful if there are
100,000 members of benefit societies. In order, therefore,
to avoid any difficulty in the matter of Irish insured persons
joining an approved society, and lest, owing to any such
difficulty, large numbers should be forced to become Post
Office Contributors, the Act provides that a County Council
may at any time before one year from the 15th July, 1912,
submit to the Irish Insurance Commissioners a scheme for
the establishment of a County Society, where, having regard
to the number of employed contributors who are not members
of an approved society, it may appear desirable to adopt this
course. Such Scheme may provide for the objects detailed
in the letter of the County Councils General Council.
It is eminently desirable that every " employed " insurable
person within the County may be afforded an opportunity
of participating in the superior advantages conferred by
membership of an approved society over those enjoyed by
Deposit Contributors.
I would suggest that a Committee be appointed to draft
a Scheme to be approved by the Council, and afterwards
submitted to the Insurance Commissioners.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
On hearing this communication read the Committee were
unanimous in recommending—" That the County Council
at their meeting, to be held on Thursday next, the 18th inst.,
appoint a Committee to draft a Scheme for the County of
Louth."
11
.1
89
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee, at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, on Monday, the 29th
day of Aftril, 1912.
Present :
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Edward Goodman, C. A. Duffy, J.P. ,
Patrick Byrne, J.P. ; Wm. Woods, J.P. ; Bernard Hamill, J.P. ;
John F. Murphy, J.P. ; Patrick Kearney, Joseph P. Kearney,
Patrick O'Connell, Michael Meade, and Jas. Wynne, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted accounts for Works in Charge of
the County Surveyor and those in respect of his own office,
which, on examination, were duly passed by the Committee.
The Committee also examilled County-at-Large Payments
in respect of tile quarter ended 31st March, 1912, which were
recommended for payment at the next meeting of the County
Council. Among these latter payments was Taxed Bill of
Costs from the Council's Solicitor, Mr. Daniel O'Connell.
which the Committee recommended to be discharged at next
meeting of the County Council.
The next item on the Agenda was the consideration of the
Undermentioned letter from the Local Government Board
L.G. BOARD, DUBLIN,
16th Aftril, 1912.
SIR,
I am directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland
to state for the information of the Louth County Council
that the Board have had before them your letter of the ISt
Instant, in which you state that all the Collectors in the
County had closed their collections on the 30th ultimo, with
the exception of Collector Hughes, in whose district the large
sum of {619 43. 6d. was outstanding at the close of the-half-
Year.
40
The County Council are doubtless aware that Collector
Hughes is also Poor Rate Collector under the Dundalk Urban
District Council and closed his collection in that town within
the prescribed time.
It is therefore evident that Collector Hughes is unable to
properly discharge his duties under the two Councils, as while
he closed his collection in Dundalk Urban District, he has
been negligent in the discharge of his duties as regards the
County collection.
The County Council should, therefore, request him to forth-
with close his collection, and at the same time to inform him
that he must resign his position as a County Poor Rate
Collector or cease to act in Dundalk Urban District, and that
unless he undertakes to do this, measures will be taken to
compel him to do so.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN, Assistant Secretary.
The Secretary then submitted the following statement,
showing the state of Mr. Hughes' collection up to date :—
41
The Secretary then informed the Committee that Collector
Hughes had this day lodged the sum of {261 6s. 8d., leaving
a stun of 1357 17s. rod. to complete the amount of his Warrant.
Accordingly the Secretary addressed the following reply
to the letter of the Local Government Board :—
SIR,
29th Aéril, 1912.
HALF-YEAR ENDED 31st MARCH,
Amount of Warrant—L2056 3s. 7d.
Lodgments — No. 1. 170 13 0
2. 56 10 0
„ 3• 57 10 0
4. 101 8 3
, 5. 231 9 10
6. 320 4 9
, 7. 599 3 3
Amount outstanding—L619 4s.
19
1912.
1
11436
C)d.
I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
16th instant (No. 17,557 : 1912), which I duly submitted to
a meeting of the Finance Committee held this day.
Respecting the last paragraph contained in your letter,
the C01nmittee decided to make no recommendation on the
matter until Collector Hughes has closed his collection.
Mr. Hughes, who appeared before the Committee, gave a
specific promise that the amount outstanding, viz, 4357
Vs. rod. would be lodged by him on or before Saturday
next, the 4th May, without fail. When this has been done by
Mr. Hughes I shall address a further ietter to the Board on
the subject matter of your last communication.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
T. F. FILGATE, Secretary.
In connection with the foregoing matter the following was
also read by the Secretary :—
WESTMORELAND STREET,
DUBLIN,
27th April, 1912.
Re F. G. BOND 1056—PATRICK HUGHES.
DEAR SIR,
We are in receipt of your favour of the 26th instant in the
above connection, and are obliged for your advices.
We shall be glad to learn the amount now outstanding on
foot of the Collector's Warrant for the half-year ended 31st
ult., and also the entire amount of the Warrant for the year.
Vours faithfully,
SYDNEY L. FRY,
Local Manager.
42
The Secretary sent the following reply to this letter of the
Insurance Company :—
29th April, 1912.
DEAR SIR,
I am in receipt of your favour of the 27th inst., which I
duly submitted to a meeting of the Finance Committee held
this day. For your information I herewith append a state-
ment showing the state of Collector Hughes' Collection up
to this day.
I submitted a similar statement to the Finance Committee
this day, at which Mr. Hughes was present, and, in reply to
questions put to him by the Chairman, he gave the Committee
a specific undertaking that the amount outstanding, viz. :—
1357 17s. 10d.—wou1d be lodged to the credit of the Council
on or before Saturday next, the 4th May, 1912.
Yours faithfully,
T. F. FILGATE, Secretary.
NATIONAL HEAIÆH INSURANCE ACT, 1912.
In connection with the above the Secretary read the follow-
ing correspondence :—
DUBLIN,
24th April, 1912.
FORMATION OF COUNTY INSURANCE COMMITTEES.
SIR,
I am directed by the National Health Insurance Commission
(Ireland) to inform you that they propose to appoint Insurance
Committees under Section 59 Sub-section (1), and Section 81
Sub-section (8) of the National Insurance Act, 1911.
Under Clause. (b) of the Sub-section referred to, eight mem-
bers (of whom at least one should be a member of a Local
Sanitary Authority, and at least two should be women) shall
be appointed by the County Council or County Borough.
Where the Council agrees to defray any part of the cost of
Sanitorium benefit under Sub section (14) of Section 81,
the Commissioners may increase the Membership of the County
Council or County Borough on the County Committee.
I am, therefore, to request that you will be good enough
to submit this question to the next meeting of your Council,
and forward for the information of the Insurance Com-
missioners the names of the members appointed by the County
Council or County Borough to represent it on the Insurance
Committee.
Should the Council decide to exercise its powers under
Part 11. of the Tuberculosis (Ireland) Act, 1908, the fact
should be stated on the Memorandum attached hereto, and
the names of two additional members should be forwarded
for the consideration of the Commission.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
JOHN HOULIHAN, Secretary.
The Committee authorised the Secretary to summon a
Special Meeting of the County Council for Thursday the 9th
May. for the purpose of taking into consideration the for-
mation of County Insurance Comnlittees, &c.
44
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting, held in the Council Chamber, on Monday, the 13th
May, 1912.
Present :—
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J. P.. (Subsequently
C. A. Duffy, Esq., J.P.)
Other Members—Edward Goodman, James Wynne, Patrick
Byrne, J.P. ; William Woods, J.P. ; Patrick O'Connell, and
William A. Doran, J. P. , Esquires.
The Secretary submitted accounts for Works in charge of
his own office and those of the County Surveyor, which, on
examination, were passed by the Committee. The Treasurer's
authorities amounted to 140 1 IS. od. and {16 respectively.
CORRESPONDENCE :
The following letter from Mr. Harry G. Tempest, for the
Hon. Sec. County Louth Archæological Society, was then
read by the Secretary
DUNDALK,
A15ril 23rd, 1912.
DEAR Mr. FILGATE,
During the last year the Archæological Society here paid
Rates to the County Council amounting in all to {5 13s. 9d.
on " Dun Dealgan," which place has been all that time
practically public property as a National Monument and
Museum. We have spent as much money as we have been
able to collect on it, and intend, if we are able, to lay out
more in making it a worthy memorial of ancient Ireland
and of the County Louth.
As you are aware, there has not been, and will not be any
profit made out of it, and as the property has now been formally
exempted from rates, the Society wish to petition for the
refund to them of the amount already paid before steps could
be taken to obtain exemption.
I should be obliged if you would kindly bring this matter
before the Finance Committee at their next meeting, and I
am sure that we may count on their acceding to our request.
Yours, &c.,
HARRY G. TEMPEST.
45
The Committee unanimously recommended thac the sum
Of {5 13s. 9d. be refunded to the County Louth Archæological
Society, provided the Local Government Board gave their
sanction to this course.
The following letter from the Secretary, Irish Automobile
Club, Dawson Street, Dublin, was then read :—
3rd May, 1912.
DEAR SIR,
The Committee of this Club has had under consideration
the fact that certain Councils in this country has made no
application to the Road Board for a Grant out of the monies
contributed by Motorists for taxes in aid of the improvement
of roads.
As it appears that no such application has been made from
Co. Louth, I am instructed to ask you to be good enough to
inform me whether any additional steam rolling is intended
to be done in your County during the present year.
Vou are, of course, aware that it is optional that motorists
should pay their annual license and also register their cars
in any County, and it is felt that those Counties which are
Prepared to take steps to improve their roads should be
Stlpported. The Committee are, however, reluctant to give
any advice to motorists on the subject, realizing that non-
Payment of their license duties in particular Counties in
addition to registering their cars elsewhere would be a consider-
able loss to sucll Counties, While their abstention from
visiting any particular Counties would be a loss to the Hotel-
keepers in these districts.
Under the circumstances, I trust you will be good enough
to let me hear from you all the information which I have
asked.
Yours faithfully,
H. S. CHAVTOR, Secretary.
The Committee then directed the Secretary to send the
following reply to the Secretary of the Automobile Club :—
LotJTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
SECRETARY'S OFFICE,
13th May, 1912.
DEAR SIR,
I submitted your letter of the 3rd instant to a meeting of
the Finance Committee held this day, and, in reply thereto,
the Committee direct me to state for the information of the
Automobile Club, that the Dundalk Urban Council have
expended a sum of 183 in respect of tarring and surface
repairs on their roads, while in the Rural Districts of the
County the County Council have two steam rollers at work
for a considerable time past, and will continue to work all
year.
Vours faithfully,
T. F. FILGATE, Secretary.
To The Secretary the Irish Automobile Club, Dublin.
Letter from Patrick Hodgins, Harbour Constable at Clogher
Head, as under :
May 10, 1912.
DEAR SIR,
I beg to state that Mr. Geoghegan has not paid for the
sheds for last quarter yet, also a man named Ferguson refuses
to pay dues. Kindly tell me how I am to deal with him.
I am, &c.,
PATRICK HODGINS.
The Committee referred this letter to the Council's Solicitor.
The following letter from the Clerk of the Dundalk Rural
District Council was next read by the Secretary :—
May 9th, 1912.
DEAR SIR,
By direction of the Dundalk Rural District Council I send
you herewith to be laid before the County Council a letter
received from Sir C. A. Cameron, M.D., County Analyst,
in reply to an application of the District Council to examine and
47
report on samples of waters recently sent him from this
District. Heretofore this work was discharged by the County
Analyst free of charge ; now he claims LI 1 IS. 6d. per sample
reported on.
Kindly inform me if the terms governing Sir C. Cameron's
appointment cover the examination of water sent him from
Public Health Authorities in this County.
Yours faithfully,
Sir C. A. Cameron's letter :
DEAR SIR,
P. R. FINEGAN,
Clerk of the Council.
DUBLIN,
2nd April, 1912.
Pathological and Bacterological examination are no parts
Of my duty as Public Analyist. Under the provisions of the
Tuberculosis Prevention Act (Ireland) County Councils are
empowered to appoint Bactereologists.
Faithfully yours,
CHARLES A. CAMERON.
The Committee also referred this letter to the Council's
Solicitor.
The following letter from Collector Patrick Hughes was
then submitted for the Committee's consideration :—
PARK-ST., DUNDALK.
4/5/12.
GENTLEMEN,
I am in receipt of copy of the Local Government Board,
dated 14th ultimo, relating to my non-closing collection on
the 31st March last.
In reply, I beg to say that ever since my appointment I
ave found it impossible to collect the total amount of re-
COVerable rates in my Warrant on the dates fixed by the
Local Government Board, without resorting to extreme
measures against many respectable ratepayers, who, if given
a little extra time, would discharge their obligations houonr-
ably. However, subject to your approval, I shall relinquish
48
the Electoral Divisions of Ballymascanlon and Faughart,
and retain Dundalk Rural, which, with my duties as Collector
Dundalk Urban, I shall be able to discharge in a manner that
will give no cause of complaint.
Trusting you will give my proposal your favourable con-
sideration and thanking you for past kindness,
I am, Gentlemen,
Vours faithfully,
PATRICK HUGHES.
The Committee directed the Secretary to send the follow-
ing reply to the letter of the Local Government Board :—
13th May, 1912.
SIR,
With reference to previous correspondence on the subject
I herewith enclose copy of a letter received from Collector
Hughes, which I duly submitted to a meeting of the Finance
Committee held this day, and they unanimously recom-
mended that the Local Government Board accede to his
request—i.e., to relieve him of the Electoral Divisions of
Ballymascanlon and Faughart, and allow him to retain the
Electoral Division of Dundalk Rural. The sum of 1137 9s. 7d.
still outstanding is of course represented by his irrecoverable
and uncollectible arrear lists, which in course will be duly
forwarded to the Local Government Board.
I am, &c.,
T. F. FILGATE,
Secretary County Council.
The Secretary was authorised to instruct the Council's
Solicitor to institute legal proceedings against those personS
who failed to pay the License Duties for Motor Cars.
Finally, the Committee were unanimous in recommending
the appointment of the present four Dipping Superintendents
(Sheep Dipping Order, 1906) as employed by the County
Council in previous years.
49
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting, held in the Council Chamber. on Wednesday, 29th
day of May, 1912.
Present :
In the Chair—LMichael O'Meara, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Edward Goodman, William Woods, J .P..;
Bernard Hamill, J.P. ; and Patrick O'Connell, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted accounts for Works in charge of
the County Surveyor and those of his own office, which, on
examination, were passed by the Committee. These pay-
ments amounted in all to the sum of 144 8s. cod.
The Secretary then submitted the Collectors' irrecoverable
arrears in respect of the Half-year ended 31st March last,
which the Committee also recommended payment, subject
to the sanction of the Local Government Board.
CORRESPONDENCE.
'IShe following letter from the Local Government Board,
dated 23rd May, 1912 (No. 25,714) was read by the Secretary :
SIR,
With reference to your letter of the 13th instant relative
to the proposed re-arrangement of the Collection District
of Mr. Hughes, Poor Rate Collector in County Louth, I am
directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland to state
that on learning that the Collector has lodged the balance of
his Warrant for the past year, the Board will be prepared
to entertain this proposal. Any sums found to be irrecover-
able will be refunded to him in the ordinary course.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN, Assist. Secretary.
The Committee were unanimous in recommending the
County Council to comply with the request of CollectorHughes,
who has now lodged the full amount of his Warrant—i.e.,
To relieve him from the Electoral Division of Ballymascanlon
and Faughart, and to allow him to retain Dundalk Rural
Electoral Division.
50
The undermentioned letter from Mr. T. B. Dromgoole,
Clerk of the Ardee Rural District Council, was read :—
23rd day of May, 1912.
DEAR SIR,
In reply to your letter of the 17th inst., the Ardee No. 1
Rural District Council have directed me to say that they
agree to allow the County Council to use the field in High
Street, Ardee, in which the sewerage is situated for the erection
of their Sheep Dipping Tank at the same rate as that which
the County Council have hitherto paid for other places in
Ardee, which the District Council understand is L'2 per annum.
The District Council made it a condition Gf the letting that
the County Council would erect a suitable paling between
the portion of the field wich they will use and the portion
in which the sewerage tanks are situated.
Yours faithfully,
T. B. DROMGOOLE,
Clerk Ardee Rural District Council.
The Committee, having duly considered the terms set
forth in the foregoing letter, unanimously agreed to accept
same, subject to the approval of the County Council.
The following minute of the proceedings of the Ardee No. I
Rural District Council was next read by the Secretary
ARDEE No. I RURAL DISTRICT.
Minutes of Proceedings of the above Rural District Council,
at a Meeting, held at the Board Room, Union Workhouse, Ardee,
on Tuesday, the 14th day of May, 1912, al 11.30 a.m.
51
GENERAL PROCEEDINGS.
The following letters from the Local Government Board
for Ireland, and others, were read by the Clerk, and directions
were given thereon, respectively, as hereunder stated :—
Read communication from Mr. J. A. Reddy, Local Govern-
ment Auditor, dated 10th May, 1912, appointing the 22nd
inst. for the audit of the accounts of the Council for the Half-
year ending 31st March, 1912.
Read letters from the Clerk of the Ardee Town Commiss-
ioners, dated 14th May, 1912, requesting that the District
Council would ask the County Council to supply a watering
cart for use in watering the streets of the town of Ardee.
The Commissioners would horse the cart themselves.
Resolved—That the District Council desire to bring this
matter under the notice of the Councy Council, and request
them to supply a watering cart for Ardee Council.
The Council believe that Mr. Lynam, County Surveyor,
recommends that the cart be supplied.
After consideration of the foregoing minute, the Com-
mittee recommended that Mr. Dromgoole's minute be referred
to the Council's Solicitor, Mr. D. (YConne11, for his opinion
thereon.
The County Surveyor called the attention of the Committee
to the several inaccuracies contained in the Quarterly Schedule
for May, and after due consideration by the Committee they
recommended that in the County Printing we notice in-
accuracies in Mr. MacDougall's work, and if this occurs in
future the County Council will take serious notice of it.
Number of Members on Council,
Number present,
Members present :—
In the Chair—W. de S. Filgate, Esq.
28
7
Other Members—Richard Stokes, William A. Doran,
Anthony Malone, Patrick M' Keever, James M'Keever, and
John M'Ard1e, Esquires.
52
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting, held in the Council Chamber, on Monday, the 10th
day of June, 1912.
Present :—
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., j. P.
Other Members—John F. Murphy, J.P. ; M. O'Meara, J.P. ;
James Wynne, James Connolly, J.P. ; Patrick Byrlle, J.P. ;
William Woods, J.P. ; and J. H. M'Ard1e, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted accounts for Works in charge of
the County Surveyor and those of his own office, which, on
examination, were passed by the Committee.
Having transacted the business of the Finance Committee,
the County Committee then met and discussed further with
the County Solicitor the provisions of the National Insurance
Act, 1911.
It was decided that the Committee of Management should
consist of 26 Members in all—14 to be County Councillors
and 12 Society Members.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting, held in the Council Chamber, on Monday, 24th day
of June, 1912.
Present
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—C. A. Duffy, J.P. ; James Connolly, J.P. ;
Patrick O'Connell, James Wynne, and Edward Goodman,
Esquires.
The Secretary submitted accounts for Works in charge of
his own office and those of the County Surveyor, which, on
examination, were passed by the Committee.
The Secretary submitted a list of persons who had failed
to pay or renew their Licenses under the Motor Car Act, and
the Committee ordered that the list be handed to the Council's
Solicitor, Mr. D. O'Connell, with instructions that he take
immediate action in the matter.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) ACT,
1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
Finance Committee at their Meeting held in the
Council Chamber, on Monday, 2nd day
WILLIAM
of September, 1912.
DUNDALK :
TEMPEST, PRINTER AND STATIONER.
1912
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings q/ the Finance Committee at
their Meeting, held in the Count it Chamber, on Monday,
the 2nd day o/ Sehtember, 1912.
Present :—
In the Chair—Bernard Hamill, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—James Wynne, Patrick O'Connell,
and Joseph M. Johnson, Esquires. Mr. D. O'Connell,
Solicitor, was also present at the Meeting.
The Secretary submitted accounts for works in charge
of the County Stlrveyor and those of his own office,
which, on examination, were passed by the Committee.
The Treasurer's authorities amounted respectively to
{44 13. od. and 12s. 6d.
The following correspondence was read by the
Secretary :—
Letter from Mr. Joseph Moonan, dated 31st August,
as under :
ARDEE,
31st August, 1912.
GENTLEMEN,
As you are no doubt aware the Rate Collectorship
of Ardee Urban and Rural, Clonkeen, Mansfieldstown
and Tallanstown has been rendered vacant owing to
the recent death of my father, Mr. Patrick Moonan,
who, I am sure your Council will grant, capably filled
the position for a long number of years. Having been
4
assisting him in his business and in the Collection of the
Rates, I possess an intimate knowledge of what is re-
quired to efficiently carry out the duties, and I beg to
apply -to your Council for the favour of a temporary
appointment to the vacant position to enable me to
complete the current years collection.
Thanking you in anticipation,
I am, Gentlemen,
Vour obedient servant,
JOSEPH MOON AN.
The Committee were unanimous in recommending
that Mr. Joseph Moonan complete the current Collection
in respect of the Electoral Divisions melltioned in his
letter.
The undermentioned correspondence from the Council's
Solicitor, Mr. Daniel O'Connell, was. then read by the
Secretary :
FRANCIS STREET, DUNDALK,
19th August, 1912.
Re holding MiiS MARY TOAL, Commons, Dromiskin.
i)EAk SIR,
With reference to letter of Poor Rate Collector
Cluskey of to-day's date applying for refund of L 3' 13s. 4d.
Poor Rates paid by him to 31st March last, I act for
Miss Toal and am aware of my ,owll knowledge that the
lands were let in eon-acre for the last time in May, 1010.
They hgve been vacant from November, 1910, to the
present time. Poor Rates were paid to 31st March, 1911,
by Mr. Thomas J. Byrne, Auctioneer, who acts as agent
for Miss Toal.
The holding had been let frolll year to year, and Miss
Toal finally put up the farm for sale by public auction
on the 19th Novelliber, 1909. The lands were knocked
down to Mr. Lawlor for L380, but he refused to complete
5
the purchase by reason of the threats made to him and
his wife by John Toal the Vendor's brother. Similarly
no person would further take the lands yearly by reason
of the threats of John Toal. The holding is lying
derelict, and Miss Toal is coming over from Washington
D.C., U.S.A., at the 'end -of the present month in an
endeavour to effect a sale.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
FRANCIS STREET, DUNDALK,
29th August, 1912.
Re Dr. B. A. M'GINITY's claim.
DEAR SIR,
With reference to letter of Dr. B. A. M 'Ginity enclosing
his account of fees, amounting to 130, in connection
with the case of M'Connell v. the Council, and which
letter you referred to me for a report, I now beg to state
as follows
The action was brought by the Plaintiff for damages
for alleged injuries sustained at Carlingford Pier.
Dr. M 'Ginity was retained by the Council and profession-
ally examined the Plaintiff at Newry, attending on the
late .Nlr. W. R. Rogers, Solicitor, on several occasions
reporting on the condition Of the Plaintiff, &c., and
attended on the hearing in Dublin two days, all in the
month of February, 1907, so far as I am able to ascertain.
It would appear that the Doctor was not called as a
witness, though present in Court. A verdict was given
by Mr. Justice Kenny and a jury in favour of Plaintiff.
Vour Council moved 'the Divisional Court of King's
Bench, and were successful in having the verdict set
aside. The Plaintiff appealed to the Court of Appeal,
but was unsuccessful. On those two hearings no
witnesses, of course. were required.
I find that in the Bill of Costs taxed as against the
Plaintiff the item of 121 included therein as fees as
6
medical Witness to Dr. M 'Ginity was disallowed, as he
had •not been examined. I am informed the late
Mr. Rogers, Solicitor, frequently wrote" to Dr. 2M 'Ginity
subsequent to the termination oof J the action, and re-
questing him to furnish his bill with a view topayment
bythe Council,mnd that he ineglected to do so. Tie now,
after five years; furnishes his bill, and fixes the amount
at [30.
I have given 'the matter closer attention, and have
ascertained in detail the work done by Dr. M 'Ginity
on behalf 'Of the Council, and in all the circumstances
would suggest •that a fee of Fifteen Guineas is fair
and reasonable L one to be paid him. He would be
entitled to a fee of Three Guineas and expenses for
his visit to Newry and for each day in Dublin at the
trial and to smaller fees for the various attendances
and reports made. His claini •Of 121 being disallowed
by the Taxing Master as not being properly chargeable
in a party and party Bill of Costs as against the un-
successful Plaintiff in the action, it is for the Council
to pay him what he is legally entitled to and a fee such
as the Taxing Master would have allowed.
I return herewith the letter and account submitted.
Vours faithfully;
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
The Committee were unanimous in recommending
the County Council to adopt their Solicitor's suggestion—
that is, to allow Dr. M 'Ginity a sum of L 15 15s. od, for
his services in connection with the M 'Connell case.
Re SHEEP DIPPERS.
The following letter from the Department was read,
but the Committee made no order respecting it :
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND TECHNICAL
INSTRUCTION FOR IRELAND.
(Veterinary Branch),
13, UPPER MERRION STREET,
23rd August,
DEAR SIR,
With reference to your letter of 21st instant, I have
7
to state, for • the information of the County Louth
Executive Committee under the Diseases, Of • Animals
Acts, that the restrictions ou the movement of animals
imposed by the Departme!ltts Orders in relation. to
Foot and Mouth Disease do, •not relieve sheep-owners
from their obligation under the Sheep Dipping (Irelalld)
Order to dip their sheep within the autumn period,- and
there can be no objection to such dipping being carried
out on the lauds or premises, of the. respective .owners.
In these circumstances the Department consider nit
would be inadvisable/ for your Local. Authority to
dispense with the services of the Sheep L)ipping Superin-
tendents. who• could be, very usefully employed in seeing
that . Ä)vvners duly complied with the Sheep Dipping
Regulations and in furnishing statistics as to the Iltlluber
of sheep dipped. In existing circumstances ' there is
great nece ssity for neglecting no precautionary measure
calculated to, prevent the spread of animal disease,
and the Department trust, therc fore, that your Local
Authority will reconsider their decision in this matter,
and retain the services of the Sheep Dipping Superin-
tendents for the better enforcement of, the provisions
of the Order.
I am; Sir,
Vour obedient servant.
T. V. GILL, Secrebrv.
Letter from NIV. Peter Mll)onnell on behalf of the
Poor Rate Collectors. as under :—
DUNDALK,
22nd August, 1912.
DEAR Mr. FILGA'I'E,
Some time ago the Chairmall, Mr. Hughes, wanted
to know fronl me, would the Rate Collectors be satisfied
if the County Council made an order that they be asked
to lodge only 90 per cent. of their warrants, allowing
JO per cent. for Irreccxerable Rates on vacant
8
The Collectors unanimously agree that this would be
a very fair arrangement, as under the present system
some of them had to lodge as much as 160 in the half-
year on such premises, and remain out of that amount
for almost three months.
Please have this matter brought before your Council
at their Meeting to-day, with the view of having the
Chairman's suggestions carried out before the close of
our present Collections.
Vour obedient servant,
(Signed),
P. M'DONNELL.
On behalf of Collectors.
On hearing this letter read, the Committee
unanimously recommended the County Council to allow
the Collectors one month's extension of time, i.e., to
31st Octobel next.
ANNAGASSON PIER.
The Draft Agreement was tabled as approved by the
Solicitor to the Council, and it was recommended
that same be returned to the Department as so approved.
The accounts from the Eddison Stéalu Rolling Co.
were submit ted bv the Sécretary, and having been
certified correct, payment was duly authorised.
7
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) ACTi 1898'
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At their Special Meeting held in the Council Chamber,
on •Thursday, 15th August ; Adjourned Quarterly
Meeting held ; ori Thursdåy,1 5th September ;
Special Meeting held on 26th September, -and
Special Meeting held on Monday, 4th November,
L1912.
FINANCE COMMITTEE
At their Meetings held on Monday, 8th July ; Monday,
22nd July; Wednesday, 7th 'August ; ' ' Monday,
12th August; Mondåy, 19th August ; Monday,' 2nd
September ; Monday, 16th September ; Monday,
30th' September; Monday, 14th October, and
Monday;• 28th October, _1912.
PIERS AND HARBOURS COMMITTEE
At their Meeting held on Monday, 21st October; 1912.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) ACT, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At their Special Meeting held in the Council Chamber,
on Thursday, 15th August ; Adjourned Quarterly
Meeting held on Thursday, 5th September ;
Special Meeting held on 26th September, and
Special Meeting held on Monday, 4th November,
1912.
FINANCE COMMITTEE
At their Meetings held on Monday, 8th July ; Monday,
22nd July; Wednesday, 7th August; Monday,
12th August; Monday, 19th August ; Monday, 2nd
September ; Monday, 16th September; Monday,
30th September; Monday, 14th October, and
Monday, 28th October, 1912.
PIERS AND HARBOURS' COMMITTEE
At their Meeting held on Monday, 21st October, 1912.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of. Proceedings of the Louth County Council
at their Special Meeting, held in the Council Chamber
on Thursday, the 15th day of August, 1912.
Present :
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—James Connolly, J.P. ; Jos. Dolan,
Patrick Donegan, J.P. ; Edward Goodman, Bernard
Hamill, J.P. ; Joseph P. Kearney, Patrick Kearney,
Thomas Maguire, Joseph H. M 'Ardle, Patrick M 'Gee,
Laurence M' Keown, John F. Murphy, J.P. ; Patrick
O'Connell, and Peter Woods, J.P., Esquires.
The Council were summoned for the purpose-of takillg
into consideration the undermentioned Agellda :
LOUTH COUNTV COUNCIL.
SECRETARY'S OFFICE,
COURT HousE, DUNDALK,
10th Angust. 1912.
DEAR SIR,—VOU are hereby requested to attend a
the 12th inst., at one o'clock p.m., for the purpose of
taking into consideration the present vacancy of County
Surveyor, owing to the lamented death of the late
Mr. Lynam.
Vou are also requested to attend a Meeting of the
County Council on Thursday, the 15th inst., at one
4
o'clock p.m.', for the purpose of appointing an Acting
County Surveyor, and to make arrangements for filling
the vacancy caused by the death of Mr. Lynam.
Vours faithfully,
T. F. FILGATE, Secretary.
The Secretary having circulated printed copy of the
Minutes of Proceedings Of the Finance Committee at
tlleir Meeting, held on Monday, the 12th August, 1912,
a copy of which is herewith appended, it was
Proposed by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Joseph Dolan, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the
Finance Committee at their Meeting, held on Monday,
the 12th day of August, 1912, and a copy furnished to
each member of the Council, be and are hereby approved
of by this Ccuneil.
The Council next proceeded to fix a salary for the
future County Surveyor for County Louth, over which
there was considerable discussion.
The first resolution proposed was that by Mr. Edward
Goodman, seconded by Mr. John F. Murphy, J.P.—
That we hereby decide, that the salary to be paid
to the future County Surveyor for County Louth be
{300 per annunl, with L 50 allowance for clerk and office.
Amendment, moved by Mr. Joseph Dolan, seconded
by Mr. Patrick M 'Gee—That we hereby decide to pay
the future Cotillty Surveyor for County Louth the sum
of 1250 per annum, aud 150 allowance for clerk and office.
On a division there voted for this amendment :
Messrs. Joseph Dolan, Patrick Donegan, Patk. Kearney,
Thomas Maguire, J. H. M' Ardle, Patrick M 'Gee, and
Peter Woods
Against the amendment there voted :—Messrs. J allies
Connolly, Edward Goodman, Bernard Hamill: Jos. P.
5
Kearney, Laurence M 'Keown, John F. Murphy, and
Patrick O'Connell (7).
The voting being equal, the Chairman declared the
amendment lost.
As an amendment to the amendment, Mr. Patrick
M 'Gee moved and Mr. Peter Woods seconded—That
we hereby decide that the salary to be paid to the future
County Surveyor for County Louth be {275 per annum,
and an allowance of {50 for clerk and office.
For this amendment there voted—Messrs. Joseph
Dolan, Patrick Donegan, Patrick Kearney, Thomas
Maguire; Joseph H. M' Ardle, Patrick M 'Gee, and Peter
Woods (7),
Against the amendment there voted—Messrs. James
Connolly, Edward Goodman, Bernard Hamill, Jos. P.
Kearney, Laurence M' Keown, John F. Murphy, and
Patrick O'Connell (7).
• The Chairman again declared the voting equal, and
gave his casting vote in favour of this second amend-
ment, which he duly declared carried by 8 votes to 7.
The following letter from the Local Government
Board on the subject was then read by the Secretary :
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD, DUBLIN,
13th August, 1912.
SIR,—I am directed by the Local Government Board
for Ireland to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 12th inst., respecting a vacancy in the office of
County Surveyor for the County of Lctlth, and, in
reply, I am to forward to you, -as requested, the ac-
C0mpanying memorandum as to the appointment of
County Surveyors in Ireland. A copy of a model form
Of advertisement is also enclosed for the information
Of the County Council ; but before being issued it will
6
be necessary that the salary fixed by the Council for the
office of County Surveyor shall be approved of by the
Board.
I am to add that the Board see no objection to the
Finance Committee's proposal for the discharge of
the duties of County Surveyor pending a permanent
appointment.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
A ssistant Secretary.
In reply to the foregoing letter the Secretary was
directed to make the following reply :—
SECRETARY'S OFFICE,
Courer HOUSE, DUNDALK,
15th August, 1910.
SIR,—I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
of the 13th inst. (No. 43,341), and in reply I have to
state that at a Special Meeting of the County Council
held this day the undermentioned resolution was passed
by 8 votes to 7—viz. :
Proposed by Mr. Patrick M 'Gee,
Seconded by Mr. Peter Woods, J.P., and
Resolved—That We hereby decide that the salary to
be paid to the future County Surveyor for County Louth
be [275 per annum, with an allowance of 150 for clerk
and office.
By request of the Chairman, I have been directed to
ask you is it absolutely necessary for the age limit
mentioned in your copy of advertisement (Article 2 a)
for the appointment of a County Surveyor for this County
to appear in the Press, as the Senior Assistant Surveyor
7
of 28 years service wishes to compete for the vacant
post, he being two years over the age limit mentioned.
I am, v Ir,
Vour obedient servant,
T. F. FILGATE, Secretary.
N.B.—KindIy send me a few copies of memorandum
for Appointment of County Surveyors in Ireland.'
Finally, the Chairman having suitably referred to
the death of the late County Surveyor (Mr. P. J. Lynam),
proposed the following resolution, which was seconded
by Mr. Edward Goodman and unanimously passed by
the Council. It is as under—
Proposed by Mr. Peter Hughes,
Seconded by Mr. Edward Goodman, and
Resolved—That we, the Members of the Louth County
Council, have heard with sincere regret the death of
Mr. LY11am, and we wish to express our heartfelt
sympathy with Miss I,ynam, Mr. Frank Lynam, and all
the members of his family in their sad bereavement,
and also the irreparable loss the Cotlllty has sustained
by the death of an esteemed official, and that a copy of
this resolution be sz•nt to all the members of his family,
and that the Council now adjourn as a mark of respect
to his memorv.
15th Aug], 1912.
8
Minutes of Proceedings QI the Louth County Council
at their adjourned Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council
Chamber on Thursday, the 5th day of September, 1912.
Present :
in the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq.. J.P.
J. Byrne, J.P.; Patrick
Other
Byrne, J.P. ; Jas. Connolly, J.P. ; Patk. Donegan, J, P. ;
Chas. A. Duffy, J.P.s Edward Goodman, B. Hamill, J .P.;
Joseph M. Johnson; Patrick J. Kearney, Patrick Kearney,
Jos. 11. M'Ard1e, Patk. O'Connell, Michael O'Meara, J .P. ;
Denis J. Rath, Wm. Woods, J.P., and James Wynne,
Esquires.
Confirmation of Minutes of Proceedings of Finance
Committee on Monday the 5th September, 1912.
Proposed by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P.•,
Seconded by Mr. Joseph M. Johnson, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the
Finance Committee at their Meeting, held on Monday,
the 5th day of September, 1912, be and is hereby adopted
by this Council.
The following reports from the Acting County
Surveyors were tllen submitted to the Council :—
ARDEE AND DROGHEDA DISTRICT.
MR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN,
There were no Applications for Works by members
of the Ardee and Drogheda District Councils at July
The Ardee Council passed a sum
Quarterly Meetings.
of 1187, and Drogheda a sum of 170, to pay expenses
for Steam-rolling for a further period of about six
months.
9
These sums, in addition to the balances remaining
over from last year's Rolling will, I think, be ample to
continue the work in South Louth to about the same
extent as last year.
Steam-rolling commenced in Ardee District on 12th
January, and finished up in Drogheda on 13th July,
after working six months (about three months in each
District). Practically the whole of the stone available
has been rolled in, and the Roller is now lying idle.
Vour contract with Messrs. Eddison & Co. was for a
period of nine months or more, and as the Rolling has
been completed in six months your contractor may
claim 7s. per day for each working day the Roller is
idle during the unexpired portion of contract.
I understand Messrs. Eddison & Co. have agreed to
relinquish this claim, and allow the Roller to remain
idle until ISt October next, provided YGt1 allow them
to do next year's Rolling.
I am, gentlemen,
Vour obedient servant,
J AMES DROMGOOLE.
DUNDALK DISTRICT.
MR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN,
1. Of the important special works passed by the
Dundalk Rural District Council, and exhibited on
Form 20 for your consideration, Proposal No. 6 is for
necessary repairs to the road at Rathcor shore, damaged
by sea erosion.
2. Nos. 7 and 10 are Provisional Proposals for New
Works exceeding 150, and need not now be considered.
3. Proposal No. 12, Footpath improvements between
Mr. Rice's house in Lisdoo and St. Patrick's Cemetery,
•at a cost of {50, has been again passed, but owing
necessary details as to the extent and nature of the
10
repairs being omitted in the Application, a Specification
could not be prepared, and it might be well to reject it
in its present form.
4. {150 (No. 14) has been passed for Steam Rolling
Roads in Dundalk Rural District for about six months.
5. The Eddison Co.'s Roller, No. 189, will have finished
Rolling in the present supply of stone before the end of
the month, and will stand idle until new stone has been
measured—about October ISt next.
I am, Gentlemen,
Vour obedient servant,
JOHN M. C. LYONS.
ARDEE AND DROGHEDA DISTRICTS.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Denis J. Rath, and
Resolved—That the report of the Acting County
Surveyor for Ardee and Drogheda Districts—Mr. James
I)romgoole—as appearing on the Schedule of Proposals
for the 22nd August, 1912, be and is hereby approved
of by this Council.
DUNDALK DISTRICT.
Proposed by Mr. P. Byrne,
Seconded by Mr. B. Hamill, and
Resolved—That the report of the Acting County
Surveyor for Dundalk Rural District—Mr. John M. C.
Lyons—as appearing on the Schedule of Proposals for
the 22nd August, 1912, be and is hereby approved of
by this Council, with the exception of paragraph 3, which
we refer to our Solicitor.
11
Consideration of Proposals for Works formulated by
Rural District Councils—viz. :
ARDEE WORKS.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. James Connolly, J.P., and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works formulated
by the Ardee Rural District Council at their Second
Quarterly Meeting, held on the 2nd July, 1912, and set
out on Form 20, furnished to the County Council, be
and are hereby approved of by this Council.
DROGHEDA WORKS.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Denis J. Rath, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works formulated
by the Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union at their
Second Quarterly Meeting, held on the 11th day of
July, 1912, and set out on Form 20, furnished to the
County Council, be and are hereby approved of by this
Council.
DUNDALK WORKS.
Proposed by Mri William Woods, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. P. Byrne, J.P., and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works formulated
by the Dundalk Rural District Council at their Second
Quarterly Meeting, held on the 8th July, 1912, and set
out on Form 20, furnished to the County Council, be
and are hereby approved of by this Council.
12
CORRESPONDENCE.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD, DUBLIN,
14th August, 1912.
Collection of Rates.
am directed by the Local Government Board
for Ireland to state that they have observed from the
returns periodically furnished to this Department
showing the progress of the •collection " of poor rate,.
that in the case of some Collectors only a. very small
percentage of the amount of their warrents is lodged
during the early portion of each half-year. In some
districts this failure on the part of the Collectors prevails
to such an extent as to cause considerable embarrass-
ment to the Council in meeting their liabilities and in
honouring the demands made upon them by other
public bodies.
The Collectors should be aware that the first moiety
of the poor rate becomes payable once the rate is made
and the demand note served, and the second moiety
on the ISt October in each year, and there can therefore
be no reason why, if the Collectors proceed in proper
time with the work of collection, they should not be in
a position to make substantial lodgments in the earlier
months of each half-year.
The Board consider that ' it would be well for the
Council to remind the Rate Collectors that it is D their
duty to collect with due diligence all moneys payable
011 account of the rate, and to take all lawful and proper
steps for enforcing the payment of any rate not duly
paid, and it should also be made clear that any Collector
who by disregard of this regulation, -fails to close his
collection within the appointed period, forfeits his right
to any remuneration.
I am, Ir,
Vour obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
No order was made on the foregoing letter.
13
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD,
19th August, 1912.
SIR,—The Local Government Board for Ireland have
had before them your letter of the 15th inst., respecting
the vacancy in the office of the County Surveyor for
Louth County, and the Board direct me to state that
they concur ill" the' .salary proposed by the County
Council, viz. : 1275 a year; to be paid to the person to
be appointed to the•xacant office.
As regards the inquiry in the: concluding portion of
your letter, the Board desire me to add that the limits
of age specified in the memorandum already sent to
you should be set out in the advertisement to be issued
by the Cotlnty Council.
Further copies of the Memorandum in question, are
enclosed as requested.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD,
31st August, 1912.
SIR,—I am directed by the Local Government Board
for Ireland to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 28th inst., relative to a vacancy in -the office of
Collector of Poor Rate in Louth County ; and in reply
I am to state that the Board eonsider that the County
Council should take the necessary steps to appoint
a person to the vacant office. In the meantime the
sureties of the late Collector should not be released until
his accounts have been. checked.
A form of queries (in duplicate) to be duly filled up
in respect of the person appointed is enclosed.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
WESTMORELAND-ST. & D'OLIER-ST.,
DUBLIN,
2nd September, 1912.
Re F. G. Bond—Patrick Moonan, Rate Collector.
DEAR SIR,
We are in receipt of your letter of the 30th tilt.
We note that the warrant for the half-year ending
30th September, 1912, is for {2,845 7s. 4d., and that
of this amount only 1250 has been collected.
Very little progress appears to have been made by
the late Collector, as the amount outstanding is con-
siderable, but it may be that he was indisposed for some
time prior to his death.
We are afraid it will be necessary for Mr. Moonan's
successor to be granted an extension of time, and we
shall be glad if you will kindly advise us in due course
of the arrangements made by the Council with regard
to a new Collector.
Vours faithfully,
Local Manager.
THE COURT HOUSE,
DUNDALK,
5th September, 1912.
MR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN,
May I respectfully request that you will kindly re-
consider your decision on my application of 11th March
last.
Vou granted me 110 relnuneration last year for the
same extra work.
Vour obedient servant,
T. MURRAY, Court-keeper.
To be put on Agenda for next meeting of the
County Council in November.
15
The following series of resolutions were then passed
by the Council :
Proposed by Mr. T. J. Byrne, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Edward Goodman, and
Resolved—That inasmuch as the existing Stand Still
Orders have proved quite ineffectual to stamp out the
present outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease, we, the
Louth County Council, call on the Department to
relax same and allow the free transit of Cattle, Sheep
and Pigs outside a reasonable area of where the
suspected cases exist, and that we also call on the
Department and all the Irish Members of Parliament
to press upon the English Department of Agriculture
the justice of our claim to similar treatment for this
country as exists for England and Scotland.
Proposed by Mr. B. Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. D. J. Rath, and
Resolved—That we hereby adopt the draft agreement
between the Department of Agriculture and Technical
Instruction for Ireland and the Council, having reference
to the proposed construction of Marine Works at Anna-
gassan. as submitted by the Department and in the
form as now approved cf by the Council's Solicitor.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Denis J. Rath, and
Resolved—That we hereby convey to the widow and
family of the late Patrick Moonan our expression of
sincere sympathy in the loss they have sustained.
16
Special Meeting held on the 26th September, 1912.
Present :—
In the Chair—James M'Carthy, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—M. O'Meara, J.P. ; J. Connolly, J.P. ,
W. Woods, J.P. ; Chas. A. Duffy, JN. ; James Wynne,
J. P. Kearney, B. Hamill, J.P. ; P. Woods, J.P. ; W. T.
Skeffington, J.P. ; P. O'Connell, J. F. Murphy, J.P. ;
P. Donegan, J.P., J. Dolan, L. A1'Keown, M. Meade,
P. Callan, L. J. Elcock, J. H. M'Ard1e, T. J. Byrne, J.P. ;
and E. Goodman, Esquires.
COUN'ÉY SURVEYORSHIP.
The following applications were received for the
position of County Surveyor—Messrs. R. H. King,
Stafford Gaffney, W. Stewart, Wilfred B. Hackett,
D. J. O'Hara, R. W. Jones. Joseph S. Cairns, Gerald A.
Adair, J. J. Murphy, John Caffrey, C. H. Watson, V.
Smith, and John M. C. Lyotls.
Proposed by Mr. Goodman,
Seconded by Mr. Skeffington, and
Resolved—That the Secretary forward the names of
all the applicants to the Local Government Board for
the purpose of arranging for the necessary Civil Service
Examination.
COUNTY COUNCIL SCHOLARSHIPS.
The Scholarship Committee had three applications
for this year's Scholarships, frolll Miss Margt. Callan, a
daughter of Mr. Joseph Callan, Corderry, Co. Louth ;
Miss Eileen M 'Loughlin, of Dublin, whose father was au
Excise Officer, and lived nine years in this County ;
17
and Mr. Michael M 'Dermott, Drogheda. The conditions
in the adve?tisement were—
(1.)
(2.)
(4.)
(5.)
Whose-parents or guardians are and have been
resident in County Louth for at least three
years.
W 110 the County Council that they are
in need of assistance :—That they are unable
of their own means to obtain a University
Education.
Who have been educated in Ireland.
Who are of good health and character and
under 19 years of age.
Who pass in Irish and reach a standard of
honours in the aggregate of subjects ill the
Test Examination which gives proof of ability
enough to put a University Education to good
use.
The Test Examination will be the Intermediate
Examination of 1909, 1910 and 1911—the order of
merit being determined by the marks obtained by the
applicants in Senior Grade Honours—or if there be not
enough competitors in that Grade—in the Middle
Grade Honours—a Pass in Irish being essential.
The Scholarships shall be awarded to the two candi-
dates best qualified in the judgment of the County
Council on consideration of merit in this test exarnination,
and Gf the fulfilment of other requirements.
If either
or both of the highest eligible competitors will not accept
Scholarships they shall be awarded to those next in
merit, if qualified.
One or both Scholarships may be altogether with-
held if sufficient nlerit or need of assistance is not shown.
The Student accepting a Scholarship must pass the
Matriculation of the Nati011al University (unless the
University accept his Intermediate Exarnination as
qualification) in 1909, 1910, 1911. and attend regularly
18
the first year's. course in some faculty of the University,
and reside in a hostel or other residence approved by
the County Council and the College authorities.
The County Council shall have complete discretion
in applying or modifying these rules and in withholding
Schola rships.
Proposed by Mr. E. Goodmall,
Seconded by Mr. J. H. M' Ardle, and
the Scholarships should be confined
to residents of County Louth, who contribute to the
upkeep of the County—viz. , Miss Callan, 150, and
Mr. M'l)onnell, 150.
Amendment—
Proposed by Mr. Skeffington,
Seconded by Mr. Connolly, and
Resolved—That Miss Callan get a Scholarship of 150,
and that the rernaining {50 be divided between Miss
M 'Loughlin and Mr. M 'Dermott.
There voted for the amendment—Messrs. Connolly,
Duffy, Skeffington, Harnill, Kearney, Murphy, O'Meara,
Wynne.—(8)
Against—
Messrs. Dolan John, Donegan, Elcock, Goodman,
Johnson. Meade, M' Ardle, M' Keown, O'Connell, Woods
Peter, Woods W., and the
Further aillendment—
Proposed by Mr. Byrne,
Seconded by Mr. O'Meara, and
Resolved—That the report of the Committee be
adopted.
19
For—Messrs. Byrne, Connolly, Murphy, O'Connell,
and
Agai1hst—Messrg. Callan, Donegan, Dolan, Duffy,
Elcock, Goodman, Johnson, Keårney;, Meade, M' Ardle,
M'Carthy, M'Keown, P. woods, W. Woods, J. Wynne—
(15)•
Proposed by Mr. O'Connell,
Seconded by Mr. Connolly, •and
Resolved—To divide this year's Scholarships as
follows Callan, {50 ; Mr. M'l)erlnott, 125 and
Miss M' Parland an additional 125.
For—Messrs. Connolly,s Duffy, Hamill, Johnson,
Kearney, Murphy, O'Connell, O'Meara, P. Woods,
and Wynne—(10).
Against—Messrs. Callan, Dolan, Donegan, Elcock,
Goodman, Meade, M'Ard1e, W. Woods, M'Keown, and
the Chairman—(10),
The Chairman gave his casting vote . againSt the
atnendment, which was defeated,
The original motion being put to the Meeting, was
carried without a division.
Seconded by Mr. Duffy, and
Resolved—That Miss M' Parland's Scholarship be
increased by 125 Oilt of the remaining from
last year.—earried unanirnously.
20
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council
at their Special Meeting. held in the Council Chamber,
Courthouse, Dundalk, on Monday, 4th day of November;
1912, at one o'clock—To consider a Permanent Scheme
for the treatment of the Tuberculous Population Q/ County
Louth.
Present :
In the Chair—Peter' Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Charles A. Duffy, J.P. ; Jas. Wynne,
Patrick Kearney, Jos. H. M'Axd1e, Johll F. Murphy, J.P.,
Michael Meade, Edward Goodman, Patrick O'Connell,
James Connolly, J.P. ; John Dolan and Bernard Hamill,
J.P., Esquires.
The following deputation from the Louth National
Health Insurance Committee was also present :
Rev. Archdeacon Segrave, Rev. Canon Lockett-Ford,
Mrs. M 'Kitterick and Miss Patteson.
There was also present—Doctors O' Brien, Irwin,
Dickson, M'Quillan. Mr. D. O'Connell, Solicitor, and
Mr. V. Warren, Secretary.
The Secretary read the following :—
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD, DUBLIN,
15th October, 1912.
SIR.—'I'11e Local Governillellt Board for Ireland have
had before them your letter of the 12th ultimo, relative
to the proposals of the Louth County Council in regard
to the treatment of persons ill the County suffering
from Tuberculosis ; and, in reference to YOUT inquiry
on the subject, I am to point out that the draft scheme
submitted by the County Council appears to be one for
providing treatment for tuberculous patients in the
21
County recommended by the. County Insurance Com-
mittee. It is indefinite on many essential points, and
there is no estimate of the annual expenditure to be
incurred thereunder.
The Board would suggest the appointment of a small
Committee of the County Council to elaborate a scheme
on definite lines in consulation with their Tuberculosis
Medical Officer, setting forth the proposed provision
in regard to :
(a) Central Tuberculosis Dispensary and Branch
Dispensaries.
(b) Sanatorium Beds.
(c) Observation Beds.
(d) Beds for advanced cases.
The approximate number of the foregoing beds to be
set apart for insured and non-insured persons re-
spectively, should also be stated.
I am, Sir,
Vour obenient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE COMMISSION,
DUBLIN,
23rd October, 1912.
SIR,—The National Health Insurance Commission
(Ireland) have under consideration at present the
question of the arrangements which may be made by
Insurance Committees in Ireland for the administration
of sanatorium benefit in accordance with the provisions
of the National Insurance Act, 1911 ; and, in cotlllection
with this matter, the Commission would be grateful if
you would be so good as to inform them whether your
County Council have prepared any schetlle for the
treatment of tuberculosis in pursuance of the Tubercu-
losis Prevention (Ireland) Act, 1908.
Should your Council have not as yet drawn up a scheme
22
for dealing with tuberculosis in the County, the Com-
mission, on learning of the date of the next meeting of
the Council, would be pleased •to instruct one of their
Medical Inspectors to attend the meeting and lay before
the Council a model scheme on which a suitable perma-
nent. scheme for the treatment of the disease might be
based. The Commission recognise, of course, that the
preparation of such a scheme, is a Imatter altogether
outside their province, but they are most anxious -to
give every possible assistance to County Councils in
this matter, and they trust that your Council will not
regard thei! action in any other light.
The Commission desire to add that the attendance of
their Medical Inspector would be with the concurrence
of the Local Government Board.
I am, Sif,
Vour obedient servant,
PIERCE KENT,
Assistant Secretary.
The Chairman explained that the Local Government
Board did not sanction the scheme formulated by. the
County Council on 20t11 June last. The, object of the
meeting to-day was to consider •the following draft
scheme suggested by the National Health Insurance
Commission furnished to each member of the Council—
PERMANENT SCHEME FOR THE TREATMENT OF THE
TUBERCUI,OUS POPULATION OF COUNTY LOUTH.
The local authorities throughout the country no doubt
appreciate that the inducements. which are being offered
under the Finance, Act (1911) and the Insurance Act
(1911) do not free them from responsibility in dealing
in a thorough 'manner with the grave economic problem
of Tuberculosis, bv the execrise of the powers conferred
upon them by tfie Tuberculosis Prevention (Ireland)
Act, 1908.
23
They will realise that these inducements are rather to
assist them in bringing into operation such measures as
will ensure that no case of this disease may be permitted
to go uncared for, as in this way only can adequate
provision be made for. attaining the object of all such
schemes—namely the complete eradication of Tubercu-
losis.
In the carrying out-of such measures a large proportion
of County Councils have already undertaken to strike
a penny rate, others a halfpenny rate. They have ad-
mitted that -had they, as Councils, taken action four
years ago when the power was first conferred upon them
by Act of Parliament, the total charges both for building
purposes and maintenance for the whole tuberculous
population would, of necessity, have fallen on the rates ;
but now the Treasury Grant for building purposes
provides for the capital expenditure, and in addition
a large part of the cost of maintenance is now to be
borne by the Insurance Committee and by the Treasury,
and in this way
The population may now be divided into three classes
(a) insured persons, (b) the dependants of insured persons,
and (c) those who are neither insured persons nor the
dependants of such. /
The insured persons are provided for by means of the
funds at the disposal of the Insurance Committee,
(which in County 14011th will ultimately amount to the
sum of 1814 per annum at the rate of IS. 3d. per insured
person), and if the County Council comes to an agree-
ment with the Insurance Committee to provide treat-
ment for insured persons and their dependants, the
Committee may hand over their funds to the Cotlllcil
and in so far as thc funds of the Committee are insufficient
to meet the demands of dependants, the Cotlnty Council
may come to an agreement with tlle Treasury, each
paying half of the resulting deficit. The Councy Council
will provide also for the treatement of non-insured
persons who are not 'dependants, and provision will
shortly be made whereby the Council will be relieved
of' half' this amount also.
The following data refer to the County of Louth :
Population (1911), .
Number of Insured persons ultimately
Deaths from Tuberculosis (1910)
63,665
12,733
130
Estimated number of cases of Tuberculosis existing
in the County (all classes of the disease)
1,040
One-third of the existing cases may be calculated
as representing tuberculous insured persons—
that is
346
If each ingured person is calculated as possessing on
on an average one dependant. there will be
in addition a sirnilar number representing tuber-
culous dependants
346
Finance .
Treasury Grant for capital expenditure on buildings
e.g., Sanatorium and Dispensaries—proportion
of L 120,000 distributed 011 basis of population L 1,783
Income of Insurance Committee for Sanatorium
Benefit—Is. 301. per insured person per annum {814
Any scheme of a permanent and conlprehensive
character must take into account the particulars detailed
above, and the problem reduces itself to the consideration
of the most effective way by which such facts may be
dealt witll by means of the Treasury Grant, the income
of the Insurance Committee and by a supplementary
contribution from the rates.
The treatnlent to be provided by such a scheme falls
naturally under four heads :
(1) Dispensary.
(2) Sanatorium• (Phthisis).
(3) General Hospital (Surgical Tubercul(k5is).
(4) Domiciliary or Home Treatment.
25
(1)—The Dispensary system should consist of two
essential parts (a) The Tuberculosis Medical Officer—a
whole-time Medical Officer, who will act as Superin-
tendant of the dispensary system—with nurses, (b) The
dispensary buildings, consisting of one central dis-
pensary in some accessible position in the County and
a number of branches, the location of which will depend
on the local requirements.
One whole-time nurse at LIOO and the services of four
others as part time officials at {25 each would probably
be adequate, and it is recommended that this money
should be handed over to existing nursing societies
who will agree to supply such nurses. A Caretaker and
Clerk of the central Dispensary will be required, and
may be obtained for LI per week. The cost of medicine
and appliances might be provisionally estimated at L 100.
As regards (b) it is stated in the Intorim Report of
the Tuberculosis Committee that existing houses should
where possible be obtained, the necessary alterations
being satisfactorily carried out for L250. With respect
to the branch Dispensaries it is desirable that authorities
should be approached with a view to obtaining the use
of the existing dispensary buildings, say once a fortnight
or once a week, in certain districts, on a day distinct
from the ordinary dispensary days. These arrangements
are being carried out in certain counties already.
Where provision of such Dispensaries involves building
or alteration of existing buildings, the expense will be
borne by the Capital Grant from the Treasury.
(2) The amount of the Capital Grant is L 1.783, and
if {700 be deducted tentatively for the provision of
Dispensary buildings, there remains the sum of LI ,083
for capital Sanatorium charge. If a Sanatuorim were
built with this money at the cost of 190 per bed, an
institution of 12 beds could be provided, and this would
provide adequate treatment for only 50 persons in any
It is for the County Council to
one year at the most.
decide whether they will join with some neighbouring
county in a Joint Scheme, or make permanent arrange-
ments with existing Sanatoria (where this is legally
26
possible) or borrow a sum of money sufficient to bring
the number of beds up to the requirements of the County.
(3) Arrangements will be made with general hospitals,
such as County Infirmaries or Cottage Hospitals for the
treatment of cases of Surgical Tuberculosis—such as
gland, skin, bone and' joint disease.
(4) This is a most important factor in combating the
disease, both as regards active treatment in the first
instance and in the after care of the patients when they
leave institutions and in the discovery and rescue of
contact cases in the home.
The services of the Medical Practitioners will Ilere be
available, and in addition the patients will have the
advantage of the export knowledge of the Tuberculosis
Officer and the attention. of the Nurses. In this con-
nection, on account of the difficulty of otherwise obtain-
ing adequate isolation in many of the houses, it is
recommended that a number of movable shelters should
be provided, as in this way the other members of the
family may be protected.
The Chairman invited the Deputation from the
Louth National Health Insurance Committee to express
their views on the subject.
'IShe Rev. Canon Lockett—
Ford explained the views of this Committee. The
following members—Messrs. Goodman, Wynne, I-iamill,
and Doctors O'Brien and Irwin having addressed the
meeting, it was decided that the further consideration
of the scheme be adjourned until the next meeting Of
the County Council on 14th inst.,
SECRETARY'S OFFICE,
COIJRT HOUSE, DUNDALK,
29th October, 1912.
DEAR am directed by the Louth County
Insurance Committee to inform you that, at their meeting
held On the 24th inst. they appointed as their Medical
27
Adviser Dr. M'Qt1i11an or his locum-tenens until such
time as the services of the Tuberculosis Officer ap-
pointed by the County Council are available.
It will be esteemed a favour if you bring this to the
notice of the Council at the earliest opportunity.
yours faithfully,
V. WARREN, Secretary.
Vroposed by' iNIru Hamill, J.P.s
Secoåded by Mr. Murphy, J.P., and
Resolved—That Dr. M 'Quillan be appointed pro-
visional Medical Officer for Tuberculosis for County
Louth, provided he supplies a qualified substitute until
he (Dr. M 'Quillan) completes his course, and that the
Local Government Board approve of same.
WOMEN'S NATIONAL HEALTH. ASSOCIATION OF IRELAND.
VICE-REGAL LODGE, DUBLIN,
November 2nd, -1912.
DEAR Women's National Health Associ-
ation are very anxious to make arrangements for the
appointment of Permanent Committees of Management
of Peamount and Rossclare Sanatuorims on a basis
which would secure full representation of those Councils
who intend having permanent L accommodation for
Tuberculosis Patients al these Institutions, and at the
same time to secure also some representation for Councils
or County Insurance Committees sending patients there
from time to time.
It has been suggested, that if a meeting of represen-
tatives of County Councils were convened for December
5th, the day before the, meeting of the General Council
Of County Councils, on Friday, December 6th, that a
good attendance might be expected, and I therefore
write to ask if your County Council would be so good as
to appoint a Representative to attend a meeting on
Thursday, December 5th, at Ely House,_ Ely Place,
28
Dublin, with powers to give an opinion on your behalf
as to basis of representation preferred.
A Special Council Meeting of the Women's National
Health Association is to be called for Friday December
6th, for the purpose of appointing Committees of Manage-
ment for Peamount and Rossclare amongst other items
of business. The recommendations of the representa-
fives of the County Councils would thell be submitted,
and I am sure these recommendations would be practi-
cally certain of adoption.
Vours faithfully,
ISABEL ABERDEEN.
WOMEN'S NATIONAL HEALTH ASSOCIATION OF IRELAND.
VICE-REGAL LODGE, DUBLIN,
November 5th, 1912.
DEAR SIR,—Referring to Her Excellency's letter of
November 4th, I am desired to say that the proposed
hour for the meeting of Representatives of County
Councils on December 5th, at Ely House, Ely Place,
Dublin, is 4 p.m.
I remain,
Yours very faithfully,
CHARLOTTE TONER.
Referred to the next meeting of the County Council.
29
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at
their Meeting, held in the Touncil Chamber on Monday,
the 8th day of July, 1912.
Present
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—James Halfpenny, J.P. ; Bernard
Hamill, J.P. ; James Wynne, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted accounts for Works in
charge of the County Surveyor and those of his own
office, which, on exatnination, were passed bv the
Committee.
The Committee instructed the Secretary to summon
a Special Meeting of the County Council, for the purpose
of considering the Draft Scheme to be submitted with
reference to Sanatorium Benefits, and the appointment
of six Members of the County Council to go on the Com-
mittee of Management of the County Society.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at
'heir Meeting, held on Monday, 22nd July, 1912.
Present
In the Chair—C. A. Duffy, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—E. Goodman, M. O'Meara, J.P.
and William Woods, J.P., Esquires.
The Secretary submitted account; for Works in
charge of the County Surveyor and tllose of his own
30
office, which, on examination, •were passed by the
Committee.
He also submitted County-at-Large Payments and
Forms 22 from the Clerks of the respective Rural District
Councils, which, on examination, were passed by the
Committee.
Minides of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at
their Meeting, held in the Council Chamber, on Wednesday,
7th Augusts 1912.
Present :
In the Chair—Beinard Harnill, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Edward Goodman, Patk. O'Connell,
James Wynne, and John F. Murphy, J.P., Esquires.
Mr. F. J. Lynam was also present at the Meeting.
The Secretary submitted accounts for Works in
charge of his office and those of the County Surveyor,
which, on examination, were passed by the Comtnittee.
These payments amounted to the sum of 1159 16s. lid.
The following letter was tllen read by the Secretary,
and the Committee, on consideration of same, declined
to take any responsibility in the matter
WATERVNDF.R,
July 30th, 1912.2
DEAR SIR,—There is a gullet which opens up into my
land at Waterunder, and this gullet is undef the control
of the County Council. On Saturday, 27th inst.,
1
missed a cne-and-a-half-year-old Bullock from my
field, which ' adjoins the gullet. After making seareh
for him on Saturday and Sunday, my man and myself
found him dead in this gullet on Monday 29th. If the
mouth of the gullet had been properly protected this
could not have occurred, and of course I could not
31
interfere to protect it, as it is the Council's property.
I must ask your Council for payment of 18, the value
of the beast.
Yours sincerely,
1). J. DREW.
With respect to Mr. Lynam's illness, the Committee
recommended that the two Assistant Surveyors,
Messrs. LY011s and Dromgoole, continue to act during
same.
Finallv, the Committee recommended the continuance
of Steam Rolling in the respective Rural Districts for
the present, and that the account from the Eddison
Steam Rolling Co. certified correct by Mr. F. J. Lynam,
and amounting to L 191 us. 6d. be discharged by the
Finance Committee.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
SECRE'rARV'S OFFICE,
COURT HOUSE, DUNDALK,
10th August, 19121
DEAR SIR,—VOU are hereby requested to attend a
Meeting of the Finance Committee on Monday next,
the 12th instant, at one o'clock p.nl., for the purpose
of taking into consideration the present vacancy of
County Surveyor, owing to the lamented death of the
late Mr. Lynam.
Vou are also reqtlested to attend a Meeting of. the
County Council on Thursday, the 15th instant, at one
o'clock p.m., for the purpose of appointing an Acting
County Surveyor, and to make arrangenlents for filling
the vacancy caused by the death of Mr. Lynam.
Vours faithfully,
T. F. FILGATE,
Secretary County Council.
To each Member of the Finance Committee, and to
each Member of the Louth County Council.
32
Minutes of P;oceedings of the Finance Committee, a'
their Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House,
Dundalk, on Monday, 12th day of August, 1912.
Present :
In the Chair—-Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—C. A. Duffy, J.P. ; B. Hamill, J.P. ,
Joseph H. M'ArdIe, Wm. Woods, J.P. ; Edw. Goodman,
Patk. O'Connell, Patk. Byrne, J.P. ; Michi. O'Meara, J .P.
James Wynne, Joseph P. Kearney, Jos. M. Johnson,
and John F. Murphy, J.P., Esquires.
The Committee was summoned (by authorisation of
the Chairman) for the purpose of taking into consider-
ation the undermen tioned Agenda :
LotJTY1 COUNTY COUNCIL.
SECRETARY's OFFICE,
COURT-HOUSE, DUNDALK,
10th August, 1912.
DEAR SIR,—Vou are hereby requested to attend a
Meeting of tlle Finance Committee on Monday next,
the 12th instant, at one o'clock p.m., for the purpose
of taking into consideration the present vacancy of
County Surveyor, owing to the lamented death of the
late Mr. Lynanl.
Vou are also requested to attend a Meeting of the
County Council on Thursday, the 15th instant, at one
o'clöck p.m., for the purpose of appointing an Acting
County Surveyor, and to Illake arrangements for filling
the vacancy caused by the death of Mr. Lynam.
Vours faithfully,
T. F. FILGATE,
Secretary County Council.
On the motion of Mr. Bernard Halnill, J.P., seconded
by Mr. Edward Goodman, the Committee recommended
33
that the County Council appoint the two Assistant
Surveyors to do the work of their respective districts
the appointment of a County Surveyor.
The C vumittee further recommended that the two
Assistant S Lyons and Dromgoole—
to their ordinary salary, whilst acting in the capacity
Of the late Mr. Lynatn as Surveyor of County Louth,
and that they pay jointly the present clerk in ofliee
the salary heretofore receiverl by him from Mr. Lynam.
Respecting the salary to be paid to the future County
Sarvevor of County Louth. the Committee decided to
refer the question for con;ideration to the Meeting of
the County Cutncil, to be held on Tnursday next, the
15th instant.
The further recomtW11dation was, that no appoint-
Illent be Illude until Candidates are certified duly
qualified bv the Local Goveriltueut Board. It was then
decided that the Secretary ask the Local Government
Board to arrange a day for the examination of Candi-
dates nominated by the County Council.
Finally, Mr. I). O'Connell, Solicitor to the County
Council, was instructed •to draw up au advertisement,
when all these preliminaries were gone through; for the
appointinent of a County Surveyor for County Louth.
The following is a copy-of a letter addressed by the
Secretary to the Local Governtnellt Board on the stlbject ;
12th August, 1912.
1 enclose Agenda convening a Special
Meeting of the Finance Committee for this day, the
Purport of which was to take into considera.tion tile
present vacancy of County Surveyor for this County,
caused by the death of the late Mr. Lynam.
'IShe Committee recommended the appointtuent of
the two Assistant Surveyors in this County at a salary
c
34
of {12 IOS. each per month pending the appointment
of a permanent County Stlrveyor.
Further, the Committee specially directed me to
respectfully request the Local Government Board to
furnish them by return of post with a copy of the
regulations governing the qualifications . of a County
Surveyor, and the appointment of same.
Vou will kindly note that the County Council will
meet on Thursday next, the 15th instant, and that a
reply by that date to this letter will be esteemed a special
favour.
I am, &c.,
T. F. FILGATE,
Secretary County Council.
To The Secretary, Local Government Board.
N.B.—The County Council have two Assistant Sur-
veyors in County Louth. Can they both act in their
several districts ?
TOWNLEY F. FILGATE,
Secretary Louth County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee a!
their Meeting held in the Council Chamber, on Monday,
the 19th day of August, 1912.
Present :
In the Chair—John F. Murphy, Esq., J.P.
James Connolly, J.P. ; Edward. Goodman, Patrick
Byrne, J.P., and Patrick O'Connell, Esquires.
The Secretary sublilitted L accounts for Works in
charge of the County Surveyor and tllose of his own
office, which, on examination, were passed bv the
Comnlittee.
35
CORRESPONDENCE.
The following correspondence was then read by tlle
Secretary :
Letter from Dr. B. A._ M'Ginity as under :
I.otJTH, DUNDALK.
DEAR I never got paid (fees) for the case
(M'Conne11 v. the Louth County Council) I beg to enclose
account for settlement. The late Mr. Rogers, Solicitor,
had charge of the matter, but I was left out in the cold.
Please kindly see to it for me, and oblige
Yours faithfully,
B. A. M 'GINITY.
'ISHE LOUTH COUN'rv COUNCIL.
To Dr. M'Ginity, Louth, Dr.
Year 1907.
M'CONNELL V. Co. COUNCIL.
1st—Interview with Mr. W. R. Rogers, Solicitor, at
Dundalk, Monday, February 4th, 1907.
2nd—Special journey to Newry to professionally
examine Plaintiff (Mr. M 'Connell) with Dr. Crosslie,
Newry.
3rd—Special interview with Mr. Rogers (late) at
Dundalk, and written report handed in and explained
on February 11th, 1907.
4th—Wednesday, February 13th aud 'I'hursday, 14th
February, 1907, jottrneyed to Dublin to give Medical and
Surgical evidence at Court.
5th—Train expenses to Newry (1 journey), two days
to Dublin (2 journeys), hired car to Dundalk on Feb. 4th,
7th, 11th, 13th, and 14th, same remaining until my
return ; also my expenses in Dublin ot! 13th and 14t11
February, 1907.
I beg to fix the arnount of my account for all the above
at Thirty Pounds (130 os. od.)
36
After due consideration of the foregoillg letter, the
Committee were unanimous•in referring the matter to
the Council's Solicitor, Mr. D. O'Connell.
The following letter from Mr. Patrick Cluskey, Poor
Rate Collector, was read and referred also to the Council's
Solicitor.
MANSFIELDSTOWN,
CASTLEBELLINGHAM,
19th August, 1912.
DEAR SIR,—I beg to get a refund of L 3 13s. 4d. Poor
Rates paid by me 30th March, 1912, for John Toa],
Commons. This farnl is vacant and boycotted, and
nothing on the lands to make a seizure.
Mr. T. J. Byrne, Auctioneer, knows the facts of the
case.
Having heard the undermentioned letter read from
Mr. Patrick Hughes, Poor Rate Collector, the Cotnmittee
deferred its further consideration until the close of his
present collection.
It is as under :
PARK STREET, DUNDALK,
August 15th, 1912.
SIR.—With reference to our conversation on Monday
last re remuneration, I beg to refer you to the terms of
my appointment and subsequent Minutes, dated 28th
May, 1903, 27th August, 1903, and 31st August, 1903.
I am willing to accept poundage or salary as then
arranged (Pro ratio).
PATRICK HUGHES.
37
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee, at
their Meeting held in lhe Council Chamber, on Monday,
2nd day of September, 1912.
Present .
In the Chair—Bernard Hamill, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—J ames Wynne, Patk. O'Connell,
and Joseph M. Johnson, Esquires. Mr. D. O'Connell,
Solicitor, was also present at the Meeting.
The Secretary submitted accounts for Works in
charge of the County Surveyors and those of his own
office, which, on examination, were passed by the
Committee. The Treasurer's authorities amounted re-
spectively to 144 175. od. and 1191 12s. 6d.
The following correspondence was read by the
Secretary :
Letter from Mr. Joseph Moonan, dated 31st August,
as under :
ARDEE,
31st August,] 1912.
GENTLEMEN,—As you are no doubt aware the Rate
Collectorship of Ardee Urban and Rural—Clonkeen,
Mansfieldstown, and Tallanstown, has been rendered
vacant owing to the recent death of my father, Mr. Patk.
Moonan, who, I am sure, your Council will grant, capably
Having been assisting him in his business and in the
Collection of the Rates, I possess an illtimate knowledge
of what is required to efficiently carry out the duties,
and I beg to apply to your Council for the favour of a
temporary appointmellt to the vacant position to enable
me to complete the current year's collection.
'I'hanking you in anticipation,
I am, Gentlemen,
Vour obedient servant,
JOSEPH MOONAN.
38
The Committee were unanimous in recommending
that My. Joseph Moonan complete the current collection
in respect of the Electoral Divisions mentioned in his
letter.
The undermentioned correspondence from the
Council's Solicitor, Mr. Daniel 'O'Connell, was read by
the Secretary :
FRANCIS STREET, DUNDALK,
19th August, 1912.
Re Holding, Miss Mary Toal, Commons, Dromiskin.
DEAR reference. to letter of Poor Rate
Collector Cluskey of to-day's date applying for refund
of 13 13s. 4d. Poor Rates paid by Ilitn to 31st March
last, I act for Miss Toal, and I am aware of my own
knowledge, that the lands were let in eon-acre for the
last time in May, 1910. They have been vacant from
November, 1910, to the present time. Poor Rates were
paid to 31st March, 1911, by Mr. Thomas J. Byrne,
Auctioneer, •who acts as Agent for Miss 'l'oal.
The holding had been let frotll year to year, and
Miss Toal finally put up the farm for sale. by public
auction on the. 19th November, 1909. The lands were
knocked down to Mr. Lawlor for L 380, but he refused
to complete the purchase by reason of the threats made
to him and his wife by John Toal, the Vendor's brother.
Similarly, no person would further. take the lands
yearly, by reason of the threats of John Toal.
The holding is lying derelict, and Miss Toa] is coming
over from -Washington D.C., United States, America,
at the end of the present month in an endeavour to
effect a sale.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
39
FRANCIS STREET, DUNDALK,
29th August, 1912.
Re Dr. B. A. M'GINITV's CLAIM.
DEAR reference to letter of Dr. B. A.
M 'Ginity enclosing his account of fees amounting to
130 in ccnnection with the case of M 'Connell v. The
Council, and which letter was referred to me. for a Report,
I now beg to state as follows :—The action was brought
by the Plaintiff for damages for alleged injuries sustained
at Carlingford Pier. Dr. M'Ginity was retained by the
Council, and professionally examined the Plaintiff at
Newry, attending on the late Mr. W. R. Rogers,
Solicitor, on several occasions, reporting on the con-
dition of the Plaintiff, &c., and attended on the hearing
in Dublin two days, all in the month of February, 1907,
so far as I am able to ascertain. It would appear that
the Doctor was not called as a witness: though present
in Court. A verdict was given by Mr. Justice Kenny
and a jury in favour of Plaintiff.
Vour Council moved the Divisional Court' of King'S
Bench, and were successful in having the verdict set
aside. The Plaintiff appealed to the Court ,of Appeal,
but was unsuccessful. On those two hearings no
witnesses, of course, were required.
I find that on the Bill of Costs taxed as against the
Plaintiff the item of [21 included therein as fees as
Medical witness to Dr. M 'Ginity was disallowed, as he
had not been examined.
I am informed the late Mr. Rogers, Solicitor, frequently
wrote to Dr. M'Ginity, subsequent to the termination
of the action, and reqtlesting him to furnish his bill
with a view to payment by the Council, and that he
neglected to do so. Tle now, after five years, furnishes
his bill, and fixes the amount at 130.
I have given the matter close attention. and have
ascertained in detail the work clone by Dr. M 'Ginity
on behalf of the Council, and ill all the circumstances
would suggest that a fee of Fifteen Guineas (115 15s. od.)
is a fair and reasonable one to be paid him. He would
be ent:tled to a fee of Three Guineas (13 3s. Od.) and
expenses for his visit to Newry, and for each day in
Dublin at the 'trial, and to smaller fees for the various
attendances and reports made.
His claim of 121 being disallowed by the Taxing Master
has not been properly chargeable in a Party and Party
Bill of Costs as against the unsuccessful Plaintiff in the
action, it is not for the Council to pay him what he is
legally entitled to, and a fee such as the Taxing Master
would have allowed. I return herewith the letter and
account subnlitted.
Vours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
The Committee were unanimous in reconlmending
the County Council to adopt their Solicitor's suggestion,
that is, to allow Dr. M 'Ginity a sum of L 15 15s. od. for
his services in connection with the M'Connc11 case.
Re SHEEP DIPPERS.
The following letter from the Department was read,
but the Committee made no order respecting it :—
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND TECHNICAL
INSTRUCTION FOR IRELAND.
(Veterinary Branch.)
13 UPPER MERRION STREET, DUBLIN,
23rd August, 1912.
SIR,—With reference to your letter of 21st instant,
I have to state for the information of the County Loutll
Executive Committee tlllder the Diseases of Animals
Acts, that the restrictions on the Movement of Animals
imposed by the Department's Orders in relation to
Foot and Mouth Disease do not relieve Sheep Owners
41
from their obligation under the Sheep Dipping (Ireland)
Order to dip their sheep within the autumn period, and
there can be no objection to such dipping being carried
out on the lands or premises of the respective owners.
In-these circumstances, _the Department consider it
would be inadvisable for your Local Authority to dis-
pense with the services of the Sheep Dipping Superin-
tendents, who could be very usefully employed in
seeing that owners duly comply with the Sheep Dipping
Regulations, and in furnishing statistics as to the
number of sheep dipped. In existing circumstances
there is great necessity for neglecting no precautionary
measure calculated to prevent the spread of animal
disease, and the Department trust, therefore, that your
Local Authority will reconsider their decision in the
matter, and retain the services of the Sheep Dipping
Superintendents for the better enforcement of the pro-
visions of the Order.
I am, v Ir,
Vour obedient servant,
T. P. GILL, Secretary.
Letter from Mr. Peter M'Donne11 on behalf of the
Poor Rate Collectors, as under :
DUNDALK,
22nd August, 1912.
DEAR MR. FILGATE,
Some time ago the Chairman, Mr. Hughes, wanted
to know from me would the Ratc Collectors be satisfied
if the County Council made an order that they be asked
to lodge only Ninety per cent. of their Warrants, allowing
Ten per cent. for irrecoverable rates on vacant houses,
The Collectors unanimously agree that this wotlld
be a very fair arrangement, as llnder the present system
some of them had to lodge as much as 160 in the half-
year on such premises, and remain out of that amount
for almost three months.
Please have this matter brought before your Council
42
at their Meeting to-day with the view of having the
Chairman's suggestions carried out before the close of
our present collections.
Vour obedient servant,
'(Signed) on . behalf of the Collectors,
PETER
On hearing this letter read, the- Committee unani-
mously recommended the County Council to allow the
Collectors one month's extension of time—i.e., to 31st
of October next.
ANNAGASSAN PIER.
The Draft Agreement was tabled as approved by the
Solicitor to the Council, and it was recommended that
same be returned to the ,Department as so approved.
The accounts from the Eddison Steam Rolling Co.
were submitted by the Secretary, and having been
certified correct, payment was duly authorised.
Minutes of Proceedings OJ the •Finance Committee at
their Meeting held in the Council Chamber. on- Monday,
the 16th day of September, 1912.
Present ;
In the Chair—Michael O'Meara,• Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Patrick Byrne, J. V.,vatrick Kearney
and Edward Goodman, Esquires.
The Secretarv stlbmitted accounts from the Assistant
Surveyor, Mr. J. M. C. Lyons. for Works in his charge,
which, on examination, were passed by the Comtnittee.
These accounts amounted to the sum of 131 IOS. od.
Among . these accounts was one from Mr. Matthew
M 'Gahon for 12 ulldev the Sheep Dipping (Ireland)
Order, which the •Committce duly passed for payment.
43
-Minutes of Proceedings of, the Finance -Committee at
their Meeting held on Monday, 30th September, 1912.
Present :
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Melilbers—-Messfs.vJ. M. Johnson,• M. Meade,
C. A. Duffy, J.P. ; J. Wynne, J. Connolly, J.P. ; P.
O'Connell, and P. Woods, J.P.
The following accounts were ordered for payment—
Messrs. w.c Fisher & Sons, for Carlingford Pier Lo
T. F. Filgate, Postage Stamp account for six
months
14
P. Gaffney, Expns. Education Act—Ardee Dist. 5
T. J. Harmon
J. Faulkner
J. Malone
Browne & Nolan
do.
do.
do.
do.
D. O'Meara, Dundalk Distriét
M. M 'Gahon, Sheep Dip account
P. M'Namee, Bill posting
J. F. Finegan, Month's Salary .
Re- REPAIRS TO DUNANY PIERO
2
o
o
o
15
o
10
{51
2
3
12
2
2
18
17
1
15
O
13
6
O
6
6
9
10
6
O
9
The Committee recommended that the cost of .repair-
ing this Pier be a County-at-large charge.
Minutes of Proceedings 01 the Finance Committee at
their Meeting, held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse,
Dundalk, on Monday, 14th October, i912, at •one o'clock.
Present
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Messrs. , James Connolly; J.P. ;
Bernard Hamill, J. P. ; Patrick O'Connell, and William
Woods, J.P. Messrs. J. M. C. Lyons and Jas. Dromgoole,
Acting County Surveyors, were also present.
and ordered for payment :
Secretary's Office, Receiver of Wrecks
D.I. R.I.C. Drogheda, Conveyance of Prisoners 4
D.I. R.I.C. Dundalk
19
Thomas Kearney (Education Act) to 30/9/1912 9
Cooper & Nephew, Rent of Tank
44
Payments for the following amounts were considered
9 11
J.
F.
P.
F.
County Surveyor's Office :
Durnin, Road Rolling
M'l)ermott
Carroll, Road Repairs
Murphy,
Total,
5
138
o
7
7
{14
{53
8 10
2
1
6
4
6
14
o
-o
8
8
9
9
o
o
O
O
18
5
8
4
The Secretary submitted the following certificate
from Dr. Clarke :—
DOUGLAS PLACE,
DUNDALK.
I hereby certify that Mr. Joseph Finegan, residing
at Seatown, is under my care and unable to follow bis
employment, suffering from Bronchis Pneumonia.
(Signed),
J AMES J. CLARKE.
6th Oct., 1912.
The Committee instructed the Secretary to employ
Mr. Mathew McGahon temporarily during Mr. Finegan's
illness, at five shillings per day.
DUNDALK RURAL DISTRICT SCHOOL ATTENDANCE
COMMITTEE.
The following abstract of the Minutes of Proceedings
of this Committee was read, viz. :—The advisibilitv of
appointing an Assistant School Attendance Officer.
The subject matter of this item was very fully discussed
45
by the Committee, and Laving taken into consideration
the large number of rural children who live in the im-
mediate vicinity of Dundalk and who attend school
within the Urban area, it was deemed advisable to
recommend the appointment of an Assistant School
Attendance-Offlcer.
The Committee considered that the Urban School
Attendance Officer would be the best suited for the
position, and the Secretary was instructed to ascertain
if he would accept the position if appointed, at a salary
of Five Pounds per annum, the amount the Committee
unanimously agreed to recommend.
Finally, it was proposed by J. H. M 'Ardle, Esq.,
Seconded by M. O'Meara, Esq., J.P., and
Recommended—That an Assistant School Attendance
Oflicer to the Dundalk Rural District School Attendance
Committee be appointed at a salary of Five Pounds per
annum, and that we respectfully request the sanction
, of the County Council to this recommelldation.
The Committee unanimously recommended the
County Council to adopt the resolution to appoint the
Urban School Attendance Officer as an Assistant School
Attendance Officer to supervise the Rural District
children who attend the Urban District Schools, at a
salary of Five Pounds per annum.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD, DUBLIN,
2nd October, 1912.
reference to your letter of the 28th ultimo,
submitting tile bond of Mr. James V. Johnston, Poor
Rate Collector in Louth County, I anl directed by the
Local Government Board for Ireland to return the bond
herewith, and to state that it is in satisfactory form.
I am to add that the ruling of the Board is duly
stamped thereon.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
N. B. BARLAS.
46
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD, DUBLIN,
10th October, 1912.
SIR,—With reference to your letter of the 2nd inst.
and enclosures relative to the collection of the Poor
Rate in County Louth for the Half-year ended the 30th
September, 1912, I am directed by the Local Govern-
ment Board for Ireland to draw attention to the Board's
letter of the 18th ultimo (No. 49,135/1912), and I am
to state that the Board are not at present prepared to re-
consider the question of an extension of time, and the
Collectors should be called upon forthwith to lodge the
outstanding balances of their warrants.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servallt,
N. B. BARLAS, Secretary.
The following letter, was sent to each Collector
to the application of the Collectors
for an extension of time to close the half-year collection
ended 30th September last, the I vocal Government
Board beg to draw attention to their letter of the 18th
-ultimo—a copy of which was sent you—and are not •at
present, prepared to reconsider the question, and direct
me to call upon the Collectors to lodge forthwith the
outstanding balances of their warrants.
Please note and oblige,
Vours faithfully,
T. F. FILGATE,
Secretary Louth, County Council.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD,
10th October, 1912.
reference to your letter of the 27th ult.,
forwarding the applications, etc., received by the Louth
County Council for the position of County Surveyor,
47
I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Ireland to state that they are' communicating with the
applicants respecting their qualifications for the position.
By order of the Board,
EDWARD LEACH.
Proposed by William Woods, J.P.,
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, J.P., and
Resolved—That we wish to draw attention to the
regulations referring to the feeding of troops in Ireland,
by which it is compulsory to issue frozen meat on three
days of the week, and to point out that at a tiwe when
the law forbids the normal exportation of cattle for
consumption in England, such regulations restricting
its consumption at home should be withdrawn, and
that copies of this resolution be sent to' our County
representatives in Parliament and all the local public
bodies.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at
their Meeting, held in the Council Chamber, on Monday,
the 28th day of October, 1912.
Present :—
In the Chair—P. Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Messrs. Patk. O'Connell, J. Connolly,
J.P. ; J. F. Murphy, J.P. ; P. Byrne, J.P., and James
Wynne, Esquires. Mr. D. O'Connell, Solicitor, and
Messrs. Lyons and Dromgoole, Acting County Surveyors,
were also present.
48
The following payments were submitted and ordered
for payment :
Secretary's Office—
M. M'Gahon, Clerk,
Mr. Campbell, Beard, &c., Scholarships,
Eliza Madden,
T. F. Filgate (Insurance Stamps)
County Surveyor's Office—
James Durnin, Road Rolling
Patrick M' Dermott,
J. Rice, Road Maintenance
Patrick Mathews, Road Maintenance,
Laurence Conlon, Road Maintenance
Total,
CORRESPONDENCE.
12
1
1
5
1
12
6
25
157
15
12
12
10
9
6
6
o
O
o
12
1
o
o
O
o
o
o
o
O
o
o
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD, DUBLIN,
24th October, 1912.
SIR,—With reference to the return showing the
condition to the 19th inst. of the collection of the Poor
Rate in Louth County in respect of the half-year ended
the 30th ultimo, I am directed by the Local Government
Board for Irel«nd to state that the Collectors should be
called upon to immediately 'close their collection.
the event of their failing to do so, their Sureties should
be duly notified.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
N. B. BARLAS,
Secretary.
49
The Committee ordered that a copy of this letter be
sent to the Sureties of the Rate Collectors.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD, DUBLIN,
24th October, 1912.
reference to the previous correspondence
relative to the collection of the Poor Rate ill County
Louth for the half-year elided the 30th September last,
I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Ireland to forward herewith for the information of the
County Council the enclosed copy of a letter which the
Board have addressed to the Dundalk Urban District
Council relative to the manner in which Patrick Hughes
has discharged his duties as Poor Rate Collector in that
District. and I am to direct the attention of the Council
to the second paragraph thereof.
Having regard to the failure of Mr. Tlughes to carry
out the terms of the guarantee given by him when his
collection district in the County Louth was reduced,
that he would discharge his duties in a Inanncr that
would give no cause for complaint, tlle Board consider
that the County Council should, at their next meeting,
call upon Mr. Hughes for an innnediate resignation of
his office oi Poor Rate Collector in the County.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
N. B. BARI, IS, Secretary.
The Committee ordered tllat a copy of. this letter be
sent to Mr. Hughes.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD,
25th October, 1912.
SIR,—The Local Government Board for Ireland have
had before them the replies to tlleir inquiries respecting
Mr. Charles E. M 'Cann, to whom the County Council of
50
Louth propose to grant . a tsuperannuation allowance
in •respect of his• services as Collector of Poor Rate ill
the County ; and with reference to the reply to query
No, IOS in which the County Council state that
Mr, M 'Canu did not devote his whole time to the service
of the County, the Board desire to call attention to the
terms •of the Unioil Officers (Ireland) Superannuation
Act, 1865, as adopted by Secticn 83 of the Local Govern-
nyent (Ireland) Act, 1898, which provides that the
Cotllity Council may, with the consent of the Board,
grant a pension to any officer whose whole time has been
devoted to the services of the County.
It appears from the records of this Department, that
Mr. M 'Cann, prior to the passing of the Local Govern-
ment (Ireland) Act, 1898, held the office of Poor Rate
Collector under the Board of Guardians of Drogheda
Union, and that he was by that Act transferred as an
existing officer to the Louth County Council and other
public bodies in his capacity of Poor Rate Collector.
In these circumstances the Board would be glad to
be furnished with the further observations of the County
Council, as to whether in their opinion Mr. M'Cann
devoted his whole time to the duties of Poor Rate
Collector. The form of queries is returned herewith
for amendment, if necessary. With regard to the
amount of his superannuation allowance, the Board
desires to point Out thåt on his actual services in the
County Mr. M'Can11 could be granted a pension of
L 16 15s. 9d. a year. With the addition of seven years
he could be allowed 122 19s. 5d. Alld with ten years
added 125 12s. 5d. a year. The Local Government
Board are not prepared to consent to a greater addition
of years than ten but if the County Council so desire
they will' be prepared to consent to a superannuation
allowance of 125 12s. 5d., provided that the reply to
51
The Committee ordered that a copy of this letter
be sent to Mr. MCann, and that the matter. be put on
the Agenda for next meeting oft the County CounciL
The Secretary_ read a letter from Mr. Dolan, Ardee,
with reference to the County Students ill- University
College. The Secretary was instructed to find out the
information Mr. Dolan required, and that the Scholar-
ship Scheme for 1913 be put on the Agenda- forJanuary
meeting next.
1
query No. 10 is satisfactory:
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
N. B. BARLAS,
Secretary.
52
PIERS AND HARBOURS' COMMITTEE
Minutes of Proceedings of the Piers and Harbours'
Committee, held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse,
Dundalk, on Monday 21st October, 1912, at one o'clock.
Present :
In the Chair—James Wynne, Esq.
Other Members—Messrs. Patrick O'Connell, Richard
Mathews, John F. Murphy, J.P., and Wm. Woods, J.P.
Mr. Daniel O'Connell, Solicitor, Mr. Lyons, Mr. Drom-
goole, Acting Co. Surveyors, were also in attendance.
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
7th October, 1912.
SIR,—Adverting to your letter of the 26th ultimo, I
have to transmit herewith to be laid before the Louth
County Council the plan, estimate and specification in
duplicate of certain marine works at Annagassan.
Should these be approved of by the County Council,
perhaps you would be good enough to initial all the
documents and have them signed by theCounty Surveyor
and returned to me at your early convenience.
I am, Sir,
Vour obediellt servant,
T. P. GILL, Secretary.
The Committee, having carefully examined the plans,
estimates and specifications finally approved of same,
and instructed the Secretary to initial all the documents
and have them signed by the Acting County Surveyor
and returned to the Department.
53
'LiGHTS OFFICE,'
CARLISLE BUILDINGS, DUBLIN,
18th October, 1912'
Carli"gford Pier Head Light.
SIR,—Referring to your letter Of the 14th inst., ' I
shall feel obliged by,your submitting an Admiralty Chart
of Carlillgford Lough or. a 6in. Ordnance Sheet, showing
the position of the light referred to, and with the area
over which the proposed red light will be visible marked
thereon. 'I'he area over which the light shows white
should be also shown on the map, and should be ac-
companied by a sketch or description of the structure
on which the light is mounted.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
SECRETARY.
This letter was referred to Mr. Lyons, Acting County
Surveyor, to supply all the necessary information
required by the Irish Lights Commissioners.
ARDEE UNION,
16th October, 1912.
Dunany Pier.
DEAR SIR,—The Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council
have directed me to say fthat they have had before them
a copy of a letter addressed by the Department of
Agriculture, etc., to the County Council. offering to give
a sum not exceeding {250 towards the improvement
of Dunany Pier, provided an equal sum is forthcoming
'IShe Council consider that there is
from local sources.
no pressing necessity for this improvement, and that
as the rates are already so high and the condition of
agriculture here so unfavourable this year, the public
54
could hardly bear such an addition to local taxation,
and they think the matter could afford to lie over for
consideration twelve months hence.
THOMAS B. DROMGOOLE.
The Committee, having regard to the number of large
ratepayers in the district who signed the memorial
requesting the Department to repair the Peir, and the
Department's offer to give a grant of 1250 towards the
repair, are of opinion that the Ardee No. 1 Rural
District Council should take advantage of the Depart-
ment's generous offer and have the Pier repaired forth-
with.
55
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
PROPOSALS AND FINANCE
COMMITTEE MEETINGS.
Mimdes of Meeting held on Monday, 11th NÖvember,
1912, in the Council Chamber, at One o'clock p.m.
Present :
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Messrs.' T. F. Murphy, J.P. ;
R. Mathews, William Woods, J.P. ; B. Hamill, J.P. ;
J. Connolly, J.P. ; P. O'Connell, P. Kearney, and J. H.
M' Ardle.
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE.
The Secretary submitted the County-at-Large Pay-
Illents as set out on Forni 22, amounting to 14,946 14s 6d
which were exarninecl and recommended for payment.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
The Secretary submitted Proposals for PaymentS to
Road Contractors recommended by the Rural District
Council of Ardee No. 1 atnounting to L891 3s. 5d.
Drogheda (Louth), amounting to 1606 17s. 1 ld. ; and
Dundalk Rural, amounting to 11739 IOS. od. ; and the
Coilnty;at-LargeVayments, amounting to 14,946 14s 6d,
which :were; duly examined and recommended for pay-
ment.
The following amounts wereexailiiiled'ånd ordered for
payment .
Secretary's Office—
M. 1M'Gahon
Mrs. E. Madden
•Mrs. Short'
_Cpunty Suyveyorls,
P.: Con•nor
T. J. Reilly
M'Keown:
M. Halpin
P. Hodgins
J. Durnin
•J. O'Hanlon:
Gaskin Bros.
F. M'Dermott
C. Malone
P. Carroll:
M. Ferguson
Total,
13
1
o
12
tlic€—'
5
4
o
1
O
5
1
i
16
.14 i
6
0' 10'<0
6
9
o
1
o
O'
2
O
o
o
o
6
o
5
31
L37i
10
6
3
3
CORRESPONDENCE.
DOUGLAS PLACE,
DUNDALK,
57
strict instructions not' to „closo.æut -will -therefore 'be
necessary to have the, Minutemxelating to (the.SchoIar-:
ships prepared in the Office, or {Illowed to wait over,
for the adjourped meeting,
Vcurs faithfullv,
MARIANNE,
J. Comiskey, the Harbour Constable for Gyless Qu?åy,
reported that Mr. Mackay, Dundalk, had purchased the
old Coastguayd Station arid' claimed the Boal "Slip at
Gyles's Quay.
The matter was referred to • the Council's •Solicitor,
Mr. D. O'Connell, Ito investigate.
The following correspondence was referred to the
County Council
-COUNTY COUNCIL CHAMBERS,
COUNTV HALL, TRALEÉ,
27th October, 1912.
DEAR SIR, —Kindly bring the subject Inatter of
enclosed letter before your County Council and Members
of Parliament and oblige,
Vours faithfully,
P. -M u QUINLAN, County Secretary.
November 3rd, 1912.
This is to certify that Mr. Joseph Finegan, Seatown,
is suffering from I)ebiiity after Pneumonia, atl(l will
be unfit for work for 14 days.
J. J. CLARKE, L.M.L., R.C.S. & P.l.
SEATOWN, DUNDALK,
November 7th, 1912.
DEAR SIRA much regret my husband is unable to
do 'any work at present. •The T)octor has given' him
URGENT.
COUNTY COUNCIL
COUNTY HALL, TRALEE,
25th Octobei, iöl±.
(I) Deductions /rom County Council Gr_ants (Local Taxation
Account) ; and (2) Land Purchase I.osses.
DEAR have again to respectfully direct attention to
the fact that the i' Imperial and Local •raxation Committee,"
which was appointed in April, 1911,' has; not yet submitted fits
reperto and a AvttU ,tq. hand from the Seggtary statey .thag
58
he regrets he is unable to give any information as to when his
Committee is likely to report." As the Government, meantime,
declines to make good the deductions from our grants, it is
obvious that this Committee, which is sitting" for such a consider-
able period, should be required to report without /urthev delay.
steps should then be taken to place the " Local
Taxation Account " in a solvent position, and a refund at the
same time secured of the deductions already made from our
grants. These deductions in Kerry have amounted to 15,062,
made up of Asylum, Railway and Harbour, Medical Charities,
and - other grantS.
This. amount, should—tate, independent of the Land
Purchase Losses, .which are now going on, for several years, and
have amounted in this countyl after allowing for a trifling refund,
to 15,671, and as to which, I previously stated, 'Y that thousandS
of ppunds. were withheld, no particulars worth having supplied,
no money, with a trifling exception, refunded, and no audit
authorised on behalf of the Councils concerned." More time
should also be given for the collection Of these annuities, in the
manner previously suggested, before any deductions are made
from our grants
The Home Rule Bill, which standari.ses the grants to be
transferred to the Irish Government at the passing of the Act,
at the amounts actually PAID at the time by the Treasury to
the Irish Local Authorities, as distinct from the amounts due,
makes the question of those grants a matter of additional im-
portance, if •the Irish Ratepayers are not to be required to meet
liabilities morally and lawfully due by the British Treasury.
In this respect 1 previously stated that " to repair the serious
neglect of the past, which is so sadly apparent on the face and
the intellect of Ireland, to rebuild this Nation, and, by meeting
the new and growing demands of advancing civilization, to keep
it anywhere placed in the race of progress, will need all the
money at the disposal of the Irish Government without having,
at the same time, to make good losses or deductions—and
substantial and growing ones—which should be provided for-
out of the Imperial Treasury."
As the time is arriving for, I fear, further annual deductions,'
as well as for preparing our Rate Estimates Ior the coming year,
may I again respectfully direct immediate attention to this
important matter, and once more suggest that the " Imperial
and Local Taxation Committee " be called on, in Parliament,
to report, without further delay, and that the necessary steps be
taken generally to protect the, Irish Ratepayers interests while
there is yet time.
Your obedient servant,
P. M. QUINLAN, County Secretary.
To each Irish Member of Parliament.
59
UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, DUB LIN.
SECRETARY and BURSAR'S OFFICE;
86 ST. STEPHEN'S GREEN,
DUBLIN.
October 30th, 1912.%
Ursula MacPar1and and Messrs. Rogan
and Brannigan have resumed attendance in their Courses
here, The fees payable in respect of these, Students
are as follows :—
Mi" MacFarland
Mr. Brannigan
MI, Rogan, 2 Engineering
Vours faithfully,
10 ' Q
10 10 0
15 10 0
136 10 0
J. M. LUCAS, Secretary.
THE NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND.
49 MERRION SQUARE, DUBLIN,
November '2nd, 1912.
SIR,—In reply to your letter, I beg to certify that
Miss Margaret Callan passed the Matriculation Exami-
nation of this University in autumn, 1912 ; the subjects
of examination being Latin, Irish, German, Englich, and
Mathematics. No Candidate named M. K. M 'Dermott
passed the Matriculation Examination in 1912.
JOSEPH M'GRATYI, Registrar.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD,
DUBLIN,
29th October, 1912.
am directed by the I,ocal Governlnent Board
for Ireland to forwarcl herewith, to be laid before the
Louth County Council, a copy of a letter which they
have received from Mr. Peter M'Loughlin, Dublin,
60
'tbåhe award Of Unive+sity Scholarships' by the
Council, and I am to request' that you -will be so good
as to fll+nish the Board with the Council's observation
- thefé01Q.
By ordef Of Che' Boård,
E.N. LEACH.
13 ST. ANNE'S •VILLAS,
SOUTII CIRCULAR ROAD, DUBLIN,
23rd October, 1912.
desire to draw the attention of the, Local
Government Board to a decision • of the Louth County
Council, .at their meeting, held -on the 26th ultimo.
This meeting was convened amongst other, things to
consider a report from a Sub-Committee on three appli-
cations that had been received from Candidates for two
Countv Council University Scholarships. The Sub-
Committee unanimously reported that two of the Candi-
dates had fulfilled all the conditions governing a grant
of a Scholarship„ but that the third Candidate was below
the required literary standard, and, therefore, not
eligible for a Scholarship.- 'Elle Sub-Committee further
.recommended • that o one of the • qualified Candidates
should get a 150 Scholarship, and the other should get
•a [25 Scholarship; the grounds .fof the xeduction being
that' her parents were at present living in I)ublin.' .The
[50 recommendation Svas confirmed r by the Council,
'Of' ,divisions (see Dundalk Democrat' of 28th ultilno.)
issued, not to the qualified to 'the third
Candidate, who ' was reported by •the Sub-Committee
as 'iiléligible. , As the qualified , Candidate, -who was in
justice entitled to the 125 Scholarship, is my daughter,
I feel that I have a grievanée, and this has been accentu-
ated •by fthel knowledge that I have been penalised. on
theo grounds, that I wasn an : itinerant Government
I may add for your information that I hold
official."
-aoosition in the Excise Department, and. in my official
capacity have resided in County Louth for over twelve
years. My J daughter,- the : applicant,' was born at
lived there, , four. years+894•8.
GI
During the years 1904-9, we . lived at Dundalk. We
removed to I)L1blin inu September, 1909.
My colleagues in the ,Exeise in: County Louth are
justly indignant at tbe treatment Ineted out to my
daughter by the Louth County Council, One of them,
Mr. O'Logb1eng of Castlebellingham, has addressed a
letter on the subject to time Dundalk Democrat, a copy
of wllicll I enclose, , 'l'ilis letter- has been heartily en-
dorsed by otoer Civil Servants, residing in County Louth.
I Illa y add •for yotirillforlhatiori, t nat the decision of
ill';tauce is not only
the 'LotithRo'anty' Council ill this
•at -variance witn- t:ie• governing '-own
•scheme Of. COtmty C0ünciiSenolarsÅips; but;is in marked
•contrast •wil -otherl County Councils.
ZICOGitv-
ie oeci,
standard. - Sona,' , parae;, Ixoweaer,
voureU, to nave. a Sc:i0iars lip awarde.d to one tile
Candidates. Tilis was opposed witli dignity and effect
by the Chairman, who held that the County Council
was •bound by the conditions, embodied -in their scheme
of Scholarships$ and the result was that .110t a single
Candidate received aSci101års11ip:
A somewhat similar cage occurred this year in con-
fiection with the City of Dublin Scholarships. Twenty-
four . Scholarships were judvertised; for , which appli-
cations were received from seventeen •Candidates.
Fourteen of these; however, were only—awarded Scholar-
ships, •the remaining uthrec Imaving been rejected, being
standard.
below the: required: honours
I respectfully appeal tc the Local GOvernme1it Board
to ' review the decisionq»f the- Louth County CoUnci1.
and to restore -the Scholarship to my daughter; jin
accordance with the, recommendation of the: Scholar-
ship Committee. L 'l'here is a principle -at, ,stake in this
matter far stnore •reaching ill' its consequences to I rish
Civil Servants than the monetary value of the Scholar-
ship.
, I am,; sir, your obedient servant,
PETER M'LACGHi41N.
Referred to COUnty Cotiitcil.
62
UNIVERSITV COLLEGE, DUBLIN,
7th November, i912.
COUNTY COUNCIL SCHOLARSHIPS.
Shall. be .much obliged if you will kindly send
me at your earliest convenience an Official, list of the
Whom Scholarships.ov Bursarie» tenable in this
College have been granted by, your County Council for
the Session 1912-13. I shall also be glad to know
whether it is the intention of your Council to pay. the.
whole amount of the Scholarships to this College, or
to pay .tp the College Vhe Lecture Fees only of the
Scholars.
If your Council has decided to pay the Scfiolarships
to the College, I shall be obliged by you sending me an
authorisation to advance money out of the Scholarships
to the respective holders.
Vours faithfully,
J. W. BACON,
Secretary Burser.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD,
5th Nov., 1912.
SIR,—With reference to your letter or the 31st ult.'
and previous correspondence relative to tlle Collection
of the Poor Rates in Louth County in respect pf the half-
year ended 30th September last, I am directed by the
Local Government Board for Ireland to state that
'Collectors Patrick ,and Joseph Noonan .håye had their
Warrants since the 5th June, and should' be called upon
to immediately close their collections. In the event of
their failure, their sureties should be called upon to do so.
I am, &c.,
N. B. BARLAS, Secretary.
ARDEE,
9th Novcmber, 1912.
DEAR SIR,—I am in receipt of your letter requesting
me to close the current half-year's rate collection with
63
my next lodgment. As you will quite understand the
death of my father, the late Collector, caused something
of a set back in the Collection and a considerable time
elapsed after the death before I was provisionally
appointed, and, in fact. the . Bond was not executed by
me until the 20th ultimo, being handed over • to your
Council on the 24th ultiino.
In face of thése facts; I think your Council Will grant;
that fit would •be utterly for me to do sö as
requested, and I' therefore ask the time to be extended
until the 30th inst., on Which date the Collection will be
closed without' fail.
respectfully submit that' Ltlle extension asked for is
most reasonable under the circumstances.
Vour obedient servant,
JOSEPH MOONAN.
CORPORATION OF DROGHEDA,
7th November, 1912.
DEAR SIR,—At the Meeting of the Corporation held
on yesterday, His Worship the Mayor informed the
Council that he had been requested by His Honour Judge
Green, K.C., to draw attention to the condition of the
Drogheda Court House, with a view to have it impröved.
I am to suggegt thåt if the County Council so desire,
the Borough Surveyor,' Mr.' T. J. Delahunty, B.E.,
will prepare a report and estimate, and to reqtlest that
the County Council will have the goodness to take the
matter into their consideration at' the earliest oppor-
tunity.
Yours faithfully,
J. B. CONNOLLY.
CASTLE STREET, ARDEE,
Co. LOUTH,
8th November, 1912.
DEAR SIR— Will you please inform the Members of
the County Council that I have appointed Dr. O'Connell
64
•:to act ag. locum 'tenens as Tuberculosis •Officer: while
ram tåking . out the necessary -post •graduate course.
Alid Oblige; yottrs trulv,'
LOCAL GOVEkYMENT BOARD,
8th November,: 19J2.
SIR,—I am directed by the Local GOverntnent 136afd
for Ireland to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
of the 4th inst.,
transmitting ' 'copy of a Resolution
,P4ssecl by. the Louth *County Council respecting the
appointmént of I)iÄ1'Qüii11ån, Ardee, as Medical Superin-
tendent of the Central Tuberculous Dispensary to be
established by the_ County .Counqil, .aud in reply. I am
to state that thé Board Will bé prepai&l to approve,
for a period of six montlis, .of the arrangement sev fortli
in the ResolL1ti011, on being furnished witli tae name of
Dr. M 'Qaillan's substittlte.
I am,
e Your obedient *ervant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistånt Secretarv.
IRISH COUNTY COUNCILS GENERAL' COUNCIL,
OFFIES : 10 LEINSTER STREET,
DUBLIN,
'Növehiber, 1912.
DEAR shall 0k glad, to receive,pgrticulqrsfrom
; you regardingüülyvmatters'tllatyourouoeil may desire
Ito. bring. In-afore: the Annual' Meetingltof ,Genera1
•iCouneiI; ito be ,held- on Friduy, 6th • I)ecember.c
In:order that a question mayoappear on •thecagenda,
it will be ,necessavy -tomotify me by the *ISt inste
| 3 am directed by the Executive tCom1)1ittee.f the
-Irish County. Councils General, Councilfto forward . you,
•for the -information 'of your; Council the: accompanying
Report of the: ,Standing Committee on Legisla.tipp 911
65
the. conditions , attached to the , proposed Scheme for
Scholarships tenable at Intermediate •Schools: for :bojs
and girls from Primary, School' be held in connection
with Scholarships at Irish' Universities.
The Repoft has. been approved of by the Executive
Committee, and will be laid before the Annual Meeting
of the Geneval; Council, on the 6th: prox.
I shall be greatly obliged if you will be so good as to
let' me have a Cow Of your Council's University County
Scholarship Scheme.
Vourk faithfully,
'IN. NOi,ANl ISeéÉétåi9.
COVNTVSC110LAkSfi1PS.
FROM PR\MARV TO INTERMEDIATE SCti00LS.
Report of the Standing Committee on Legislation on the
conditions attached to a draft Stheme for -Scholarships
tenable at (ntermeciiate Schools by boys and girls _/rom
Primary Schools to be held in connection with Scholar-
shifts at Irish Universities.
Whilst we believe that Ireland owes a deep debt of
gratitude to the Right Hon. Augustine Birrell, P.C.,
Chief: Sécrétary; 'for 'his; successftil efforts -tot provide a
v system r Of' higher jeducationm acceptablec _ to, . the: great
majority of •thevlrish people, v and' whilst: we- stiggest
that the thanks bfÄhe Council] arer (Itie ,to: him 'for LI)is
further effort ttv meet 'Of the : Council by
providing •from Imperial' funds n sum- per
eannum for the' purpose- of foundillg a system1H)f Scholar-
ships from' Piitnary to 'Intermediate Schools, , the con-
• ditions attached to this; proposed Arrant, are such that
'having given themøour; most- earnest and :careiul
66
consideration, we are Compelled very reluctantly but
unhesitatingly to recommend the Councils to refuse to
avail themselves of any grant associated with conditions
of this nature, which in our opinion are highly objection-
able from many points of view.
In the first place, the acceptance Of the conditions
sought to be imposed would utterly vitiate and render
negatory an important agreement entered into between
the Senate of the National University and a deputation
from the General Council, whereby the Senate agreed
accede to the request of the deputation • that Irish
should be an essential subject for Matriculation in the
University as from 1913, and the Councils represented
agreed to strike a rate in aid of University Education
and tos found Scholarships tenable in, the National
University, the mandate of the deputation being con-
tained in a resolution adopted with but one dissentient
vote at ran important meeting of the General Council,
held on 2nd June, 1909, this resolution being founded
upon nunterous representations received from the
individual Councils forming the association, twenty-
four of which Councils had bound themselves by
resolution to strike no rate save on the above terms.
This is clearly an agreement. which should not be
lightly disregarded or set aside, aud it, is equally clear
that the Councils cannot look to the Senate for its
adhere honourably to their side of the bargain, and to
resist all inducements to violate it.
To open County Council Scholarships to any Univer-
sity which fails uto comply with the vital .condition as to
essential Irish would . manifestly . be „unfair treatment
of the University which has agreed to accept it.
It has been alleged in some quarters that in confining
their Scholarships to the National University the Irish
County Councils. whilst within their strict legal right
have acted in a narrowminded and illiberal spirit. ' We
deny that there is the smallest justifieation for this
contention, and we invite reference to facts.
The Irish Universities Act, 1908, gives, to the elected
represelltatives of the ratepayers, whose money provides
the County Scholarships, effective representation upon
67
the governing bodies of the Constituent College of the
National University and of thc National University
only. In pursuance of tlle powers thus conferred, the
Council will, before the close of thé present year, proceed
to elect nine members 'Ofl the Governing body' of Uni-
ver -tity College, Dublin, fi+e members of the Governing
body of University College, Cork, and six members of
the Governing body; : of University College, Galway:
The ratepayers -possess no Such safeguard with regard
to the' wise• and prudent expenditure of their money
ill relati011' to' any other Tjilivérsity-in Ireland, and in
ccntining their support to the University Over which
they possess some degree of control, the Councils buq
follow the example set tllem by many Corporate' and
other authorities in Great Britain, who liberally sub-
sidise Universities upon thc Governing bodies of which
they possess representation.
The Act manifestly contemplates assistance from the
County Councils supplementary to its; parsimonious
financial provision for the Universities it creates, and it
would be highly inequitable to expect the Guardians
of the ratepayers interests to add to this burden by
subsidies to already wealthy and highly endowed
Institutions.
The constitution of the National University of Ireland
has been framed by its authors with thc most scrupulous
care upon absolutely non:sectarian lines. All possi-
bility of religious preference of any description hag beeri
wholly eliminated. Thc principle' of proportional re-
presentation has been fully observed in the composition
of the Senate and of the Professional Staff, and any
objections by an Irish Student winning a County Council
Scholarship to pursue his course of studies Din this
University would be based 110t upon ieason, but upon
prejudice.
In exercising the power of election c0nferred by the
Charter, we strongly urge that the General Council
should carefully select the best qualified members of the
Council as their representative 011 the Governing Body
of University College, L)ublin, with view to retainillg
in our own hands intinlate association with the develop-
ment and progress of the University.
'68
We regard as .the- proposal to
award 'to children of tender years upon. tile, results of
an examination based chiefly upon personal estimates
of theiv natural intelligence Scholavship:; tenable at Inter-
mediåteQ Seh001Å 'linked ' with ' the extraordinary con-
ditjonfthat •at theyconclusion: of, a_ three years' •course
they are: to possess, Subject •onlyfto thé ,vetov •of, their
op.n preceptors„ an inalienable, rightÄo demand from
thé' Of theif Cotlllffåhe proviliöu of L 240 of the
ratepayers the •cost -'of •an University
Course, subject. to' 004 control, •bythe: Council tint its
award or expenditure, subject to 110 examination to
determine whether the original estimate of the child's
intelli+ency• has beep . fully justified, or whether the
youth si •préséilt intelligence and acquirements point
to a material advautageto be derived by him from Uni-
versity Education and conditional only tlpon a mere
pass. matriculation.
Viewed from a financial standpoint the proposals
are equally unsatisfactory. , For each 110,000 of free
grants, the eCouncils liltl.st covenallt. to jprovide 120,000
and to hand this sum cver for expenditure upon Scholar-
ships allocated upon a flat rate •scale vastly more
expensive . than the County Councils .own„ carefully
prepared Scholarship Scheme, framed with a view to
encourage, study in scientific agriculture and, other
stibjecté of vital iinporfance to Ireland. In facf',' it is
quite . demonstrable that 'ther County Councils coQIId
from the rate ' day school Scholavships the
Intermediate Schools and ' CO." Council Scholarships' •iif
National University at considgrable• less' •total st to
the ratepayers than the provision of University.Sch01ar-
ships: alone •under •this •Schemec would elitail.
In its 'gelnerål•agpect' the éfTédt Of •tlle• ' åec'éptanee Of
thik Scheme axelinqtiiéhlliéllt[by thé 'County
Councils of ' the '01 COntrOl 'over University
Educåti01iN1aceci in theii harids by I)åiliament and its
transféi' tO'a -body Of illirepres01itåtivéQharacter.
•We' cannot regard witli 'approval any prOPosa1& take
thé retrograde- stqb 'Of •tiansfeiriilg 'important dutieS
in Geland 'froilh •tllé Olected representatives of the people
69
to •nominated irresponsible authority, nor Yean r'{ve
recommend the aeneral, Council: to advise the acceptance,
of this offer.
(Sigil€{p, M. Chairman, ou behali• of'
P. J. O'NEILL, Chairmair Irish County Councils': 'General
Council GChairman. Dublin County •Counei!w
J. IS. IjÖWDÅL1,.t'Cha'itiüa1i, Wéktiiieath Counte Cpt111Ci;1m
J. T. Louth Cqup!y Council,il
JOSEPH •Dublin CountywCouncil. •
CotlNTY SUISVEVQR3S OFFiCE,.
'DUNDALK,'
November 0th, 1912.
DEAR reference 'to my application for the
position of County Surveyor, and subsequent form' of,
queries which I was obliged to forward to the L.G.B.,
settillg out full particulars of my education,' professional
training, character, 'health •and age 'in ithe form Of: •a
declaration.
iVou1d you kindlybring under the notice of the County
Council the fact that I lit!ve. been informed by letter
of to-day's date that the ,Loca1 ,Governmenf Board hold
that I am ineligible for the appoiptment, owing to being
over tilé prescribed age limit,
This inevitable disability in •my, case appears. to be att
variance with- the conditions,åxs _ tovage Jimnit set, out: ill
the Memorandum for Appointpwnt of County qurvey.qus,.
which states that tlxe age, limit Shall liottapplywhere the,
candidates are, esistiug. County . Supveyorss, or, have,
Although. Degree
passed the pvescribed examination, r.
in Engineering appears, to, recognized, as jhavipg,
saple value as ,the of the Sivil Seyv,ice COPI-
missioners of having passed flie prescribed examination,
I Was ,preparéä to myself
(page 1436-7
for examination ; but I am denied this privilege and the
chance of promotion after 28 years service.
Thanking you and the County Council for the invari-
able kindness always received,
I am, dear Sir,
Faithfully yours,
JOHN M. C, LYONS'.
J,0CAL GOVERNMENT BOARD,
I)IJRLJN,
8th November, 1912.
SIR,—With reference to your application to the Louth
County Council for the position of County Surveyor,
I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Ireland to inform you that you are ineligible for such
appointment, as you are over the prescribed maximum
age limit of 45 years.
I am, Ir,
Vour obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN, Assistant Sec.
J. M. •C. LYONS, Esq.,
County Surveyor's Office,
Court House, Dundalk.
Co. LotjT11 NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE COMMITTEE.
" I)UNDAIX,
8th November, h1912.
DEAR beg leave to inform you that Mr. Patk.
M'Gee, Charleville, Dumleer, has resigned Membership
of the Louth County Insurance Committee.
I am, sir,
Vours faithfully,
.V. Sec.
