42
FORESTRY SCHEME.
Mr Forbes, Chief Forestry Inspector of till,e Department of
Agriculture, -was then introduced to the Committee by the
Chairman, and briefly explained the linos •on which the Fores-
try Séhemes 'were worked, and whi071 he stated were formula-
ted in 1906. 'He explained that woodlands of 50 aeros and
over wore the only ones entitled to Departmental •Grants; t\hat
the average of caretaking, incl uding re-planting, was
a bout El per acre, and that the sum of 5s per acre would be
about the maximum cccst for caretaking without re-pla.nting ;
that the consent of the Department would be necessary before
could 'be effect•cd, and that grants would be available
from thre Development Fund for maintenance when certified by
the I) epartment. He stated that it would be necessary for the
County Council to strike a small rate of about one halfpenny
in the e for one year, and that the amount realised from this
lodged in a separate Fund with the County Tre:wurer,
bearing interest at 2 per cent. He also stated that the wood-
land known as Omeath Park, which he Inad •inspected himself,
would be a most desirable one to acquire under a Con.nty Louth
Forestry 'Sdheme ; that County Kildare had Obtained grants
under their scheme of C 1,600, and that if County Louth, being
the second county, came forward with their application
now, the grmnt would likely be as generous, O.nd iilso that the
present was an opportune time, as the period for -which grants
are to be made begins this year, and County Louth, by adopt-
ing their Forestry Scheme, would now be 'eligible for participa-
tion.
Mr 'Goodman opposed the Scheme, as the purchase money
would come out of the rates.
Mr '(V Meara stated that. the purchase could be effected
through the Land Judge;' Court, and the transfer made by the
Land Commission, and that the actual costs to the rates would
be comparatively small. This view was substantiated by Mr.
F orbes.
Eventually the Committee tunanimously deeiclcd to proceed
wit'h the purchase of Orneath Park, ancl to include in the
scheme Williston-n plantation, and also whatever portion of
the Ruxton grcuncls at Ardee that the County Council would
arrange t.o purd.ha.se.
The Chairman thanked Mr Forbes for coming down to assist
them, and for t:he information and advice he had given in the
matter.
TUBERCULOSIS BISPE.NSARY VREMISES AT
DROGHEDA.
The following letter was read from Mr J B Connolly, Town
Clerk Of Drogheda, in connection with the claim of Go-
garty. Drogheda, for rent and costs of alterations of the pre—
mises provisionally taken some time ago by the County Louth
Tuberculosis Dispensary Committee of Management.
'l',xe Cornm ittee, after considering the matter, considered that
the settlement made was very satisfactory, and recommended
the County Council to accept same.
Corporation of Drogheda,
Town Clerk's Office,
5th March, 1914.
Charles M' Alester, Esq,
Secretary County Council of Louth, Dundalk.
Dear Mr. M' Alester,
At, the request of Alderman Elcock I
ged for Mr Christopher Gogarty to meet the Drogheda
a.rran
County Councillors here on yesterday, and settle the claim
his mother in connection with the Church Lane premises, h
were at one time contemplated for a "Ihlberculosis Dispensary.
C'25 IOS was claimed in respect of alterations, etc, and C'26 in
respect of rent. Mr Gogarty has agreed to accept CIO for the
44
alterations •and C13 for rent, and the Drogheda County Couli-
eil,lors recommend that these sums should paid.
I return the pep,ers which you sent to Mr Eleock-
Yours faithfully,
J. B. CONNOLLY.
TUBERCULOSIS SCHEME.
Ä circular letter from the Lccal Gavcxrnmont Board •dated the
'3110 March, instant, was read stating that the Board were ili
correspondence with the Insurance Commissioners on the sub-
jeet af Agreements between County Councils and Insurance
Committees in regard to the treatment of Tuberculosis, and
asking to be supplied with details of County Schemes as a pre-
limina to giving their consent to such agreements.
A schedule giving details of the Tuberculosis Scheme was en-
Olcsetl, and the Local Government Board requested that same
would 'be filled up and returned.
After a discwsicn the Committee decided to refer the matter
to the Tuberculosis Committee of Management to have the
schedule completed.
A further circular letter from the Lcca;l Government Board,
dated the 6th Marc/h, in reference to agreements between the
County Councils and Insurance Cornmi€teers as to the arrange-
ments to be made and the agteements to be entered into be-
tween these bcdies, was referred to the Tuberculosis Commit-
tee of Management for report.
REFUND FROM SANATORIUM PATIENT.
Letter was read from Mr V W:yrren, Clerk of the Elhlbercu-
Iosis Committee of Management, dated Che. 14th Mardh, en-
closing Money Order for €5, being amount received from Mr
Michael Kavanagh, Arclee, for the maintenance for ten weeks
•at Pea,mount Sanatorium of his son, Tobias IS avanagh, treated
[rom the 18th September to 27th November, 1913.
'I'he Committee were pleased to note this first refund under
the Tuberculosis Scheme, and the letter was initialled by the
Chairman.
COLLECTION OF MOTOR CAR LICENCE DUTIES.
The following letter from the Road Board was read :—
The Road Pezard,
Westminster, London,
10th March, 1914.
Sir,
I am directed by the Road Board to refer to the re-
cent, «wrespondence that has taken place respecting the col-
of Motor Car Licence Duties, and to enclose herewith a
memorandum that has 'been prepared by the direction of the
Board, it is hoped will prove of assistance to County
Councils in carrying out their statutory obligations in this mat-
I am Vo ask that you will be good enough €0 read this letter,
ancl explain the contents of the memorandum to the next
meeting of your County Council, ancl thereafter acquaint the
Bowrd with the action taken by the County Council thereon,
and the steps proposed to be taken to secure. the proper col-
lection of the duties. In particular I am to inquire whether
prosecutions have been instituted against the owners of motor
vehicles in respect of arrears of •duties which accrued during
1913, •or for other offences in connection with the collection of
the duties.
It will be olßerved that the memorandum divides itself in
tW0 parts, the first being addressed particularly €0 the County
Councils, while the second part is in the nature of suggested
instructions to the officials, who it is assumed have already
been or will be appointed by the County Councils t.o carry out
the work of the collection of the duties. "Ilme Board hope that
the Council Mill by resolution direct their officers to give effect
to these instructions.
46
I need hardly add that in the opinion of the mard a radical
alteration of the methods employed for tile collection of Motor
Car License Duties is necessary in many counties in view of
tho fact that the amount of duties collected in Ireland in
1910-11, viz, C19,Oö7 (only a fraction of the amount which
should have bren collected) has fallen to even lower in
the years 1911-12 and 1912-13, notwithstanding the in
the number of motor vehicles in 'Ilse.
I am, Sits
Your obedient Servant,
W. REES JEFFREYS,
Seoletan•y.
The Secretary to the Louth County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
The memorandum enc•lcsed with this letter was a lengthy
document giving detailed directions Vo County Councils and
their officers as to the methods to 'be employed for the efficient
collection of the Motor' Car License Duties. It set out that
it was desirable to appoint an officer or officers whose sole or
principal duties it would be to carry out the statutory duties
imposed on County Councils in respect to the collection of the
duties, and to give sud-l officers facilities for travelling so
that, all owners and other motor ear users resident in tho
county, who are suspected of not having paid the duties,
might be visit(d. Various matters relating to registrations,
declarations, and methods of measuring the horse-power of
motors, and systems of inter-comm.unica tion between County
Councils were embodied in the Memorandum.
The Committee authorised the Secretary to formally appoint
Mr. Joseph Louden as his and t).hat he would have
authority to make inspeeticns throughout the county in con-
nection with the collection of duties, service of not.iees, or any
other necessary matters relating to same.
47
The •Seeretar.v was also directed to have circular issued to
all Motorists who hacl not paid the Licence Duty to have this
done ln•ore Bhe end of the present month, and to proceed with
despatch in the collection of the duties.
ALLEGED DAMAGE TO HEDGES.
Th following letter from Sir Henry Bellingham was
and the acting County Surveyor, Mr. Lyons, was directed to
investigate the complaint and report to the Committee at
next meeting
Dear Sira
Castlebe,llingharn, Ireland,
11th March. 1914.
T write regarding some damage that has been done to my
fence along the Sta tion road here. Tho contractor has moved
too much earth and eutting too near the roots of the quicks,
and thus damaged them. It has been done wilfully. The
contractor was spoken to by my steward, ibut paid no atten-
tion. The hedge thereby suffers; I am put to the e.'q»nse of
making a new one. I it better to write straight to
the County Guncil, and ask them to see to it.
Yours truly,
Henry Bellingha m.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
MALICIOUS INJURY CLAIMS.
The following letter was
read and initialled by tho Chair-
man :—
Francis Streot, Dundalk,
4th March, 1914.
Criminal Injury Application.
Josepll Woods, Monascreebe, El 50.
Dear Sira
1 beg to report that on the hearing of the appeal of the
applicant in above claim to-day before Mr. Justice Boyd at
48
the Spring Assizes, the Decreo of e 12 awarded by the County
Court Jildge was increased to one of CIG I(is. Od., to be levied
off the Electoral Division of Ballymascanlorr.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles MacAlester, Esq., Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
The following letter was rend
Roden Plaee, Dundalk,
10th March, 1914.
Joseph Woods, Applicant.
The County Council of Lout:n, Respondents.
Dear Sir,
I have received from the Clerk of the Peace the affirmance
herein, whiéh amounts to C'24 IOS. Od. Please .1et me have
cheque for amount of same at your convenience, and oblige.
Yours faithfully,
STEPHEN H. MOYNAGH.
Charles MacAlest.er, Esq., Secretary,
County Council of Louth,
Courthouse, Dunda 1k,
The Secretary was directed to wdite Mr. Moynagh that the
amount would be paid uÅÅen the affirmance was levied and
col lectod.
The following letter was read :—
Francis Stroot, Dundalk,
14th Marv.h, 1911.
The Secretary,
County Council, Dundalk.
Title
R. and G. Gray.
Miss Robson.
Dear Sir,
Please let 'us hear from yon when we may expect cheque in
settlement of the Decrees in these caswss for malicious
damage.
Yours faithfully,
SHERIDAN & CO.
The Secretary was diveeted to reply that the xmounts clue
in these cases were now placed on levy for collection, and
would be paid to the proper parties after the *1st March,
1915.
DECADAL REDUCTIONS UNDER NEW LANI)
PURCHASE BILL.
'Ille following Resolution, submitted by the Bandon District
Council, was adopted a,nd recommended to the County
Council :
Resolved—That a Deeaclhl Reduction yrovi.sion be inserted
in the Land Purchase Bill to be introduced into Parliament
for this country Sitell as is in the, Ashbourne Act ,and also
that the same concession be granted to the tenants who
purchased under the Aets of 1903 and 1909.
INSURANCE COMMISSIONERS A-ND MEDICAL
AI)VISERS.
The following Resolution, submitted 'by the King's County
Council, was marked •read" :
That this C%rnmi€tee, acting on behalf of the County
Council of King's County, hereby unanimously and emphatie-
a Ily approve of the resolution passed on this subject by the
King's Coun€.y Insurance Committee as follows
"That we consider the proposals of tthe National ln.smranee
Commission appointing the Medical Advisers as the sole
anthority in connection with the certification of Tuberculosis
patients on Form 2 as most inadvisable, as we eonsider they
would make the administra Lion of Sanatorium benefit most
unworkable, and create a strong feeling of animosity amongst
the medical profession of the county. We consequently decline
to enforce the scheme as submitted by the Commissioners, ancl
we further declare it to be' our emphatic opinion that the
exclusion of the medical practitioncus, or imposition of Medical
Advisers as appointed by the National Insurance Commis-
50
sioners, would break up the whole system of Sanatoritliit
benefits, whether administered by the Insurance Commissioners
itin,dor the Insurance Act of 1911, of 'by bhe County Council
under the Tuberculosis Prevention Act of 1908. Copies of
this Resolution to be sent €0 the Local Government Board
and the National Insurance Commission."
UNIVERSITY SCHOLARSHIPS.
Circular letter, dated Che 12th Mareh, from the
University College, was read as follows
University College, Dubliri,
12th, 1914.
Dear Sir,
Enclosed wre copies of Regulations for the Examination for'
County Council Scholarships. You will please noto that the
date •of t'hese examinations has been changed vo J Illy 3rd and
the following days. This date has been selected by tho
College as being more csonvenient for the Candidates.
Please have early not-ices of this announced in yot1V local
papers.
Yours faith falty,
A. W. CONWAY',
Registrar.
flye Committee decided that in the ease Of' t,fie Senolårships
awarded by the Louth County Council it was not, necessary to
advertise, as Che basis of Che award "-as the results of the
Intermediate Examination for tho student,s applying for the
Scholarsh ,
Sf. PATRICK's DAY.
/141e (hmmittee directed that ttle Sat.ionnti Holiday,
Patrick's Day, be observed as a General Holiday, ancl t,hat the
Office be closed for the clay,
51
CARLINGFORD PIER. LAMP.
The question of Chrlingford Pier Lamp was again under
discussion, and Mr. Lyons, acting County Surveyor, produced
before the Committee the new la.rnp that had been pu rehased.
Ile explained that he was anxious to demonstrate the fact that
notwithstanding any statement to the contrary the lighting
of the lamp was an easy matter. He then proceeded to light
the lamp.
It was pointed out by Mr. William Woods thxt t.he lighting
of the hvmp in the frame in a chamber like the County Council
was entirely different from the lightin,g of the lamp as it
would be in the standard on the Pier at Carlingford, especially
when the weather was stormy. He also stated that even if
the lamp were taken out of the frame and carried to till hut
to be filled and lighted, it would be impossible to keep it
lighted until it was replaced in the frame.
The Committee generally considered that the lamp was
rather unsuitable for the purpose it was required for, but no
order was made.
STORE AT CARLINGFORD rlARBOUR.
Mr. William Woods brought under the notice of the
Committee the want of a proper store for the warehousing of
goods and usage by shippers at Carlingford Harbour, arnd
stated that if this were providOd by the County Council
increased business would undoubtedly result to the port.
No order was made in connection with the matter.
own office, which on examination
payment by the Committee.
SURVEYOR'S OFFICE.
M M'Gnigan
3 11
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of above Committee at their Meet-
ing held ill the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, the 30th March, 1914, at 1 0'clock p m.
Present
In A. Duffy, Esq., J.P.
()ther Members —Joseph M Johnson, J P ; John F Murphy,
J P ; Patrick Kearney, Patrick O'Connell, William Woods,
J P; Joseph 1+1 WAITIle, J P; and James Wynne, J P,
Esquires.
Also present—Meg-rs Jollil M C Lyons, James Dromgoole,
Acting County
The Secretary submitted the following aeconn€s for works
in charge of the, Acting County Surveyors, and those of his
18 12
1 11
14 12
3 11
A
T
P
T
F
P
P
J
T
A
Callan
M' Kenna
Mathews
M 'l)onald
M •Dermott
Ha n] on
M 'Connoti
O'Hare
Clarke
O' H are
M Mathews
M Lynch
J Craven
J Lennon
H Mathews
T Little
Thomas Kearney,
Pa triek Garvey
P Gaffney
T P Harmon
P M 'Kenna
T Faulkner
1
o
5
o
5
44
1
3
1
3
517
1
8
1
1
4
O
3
0
7
o
1
3
0 17
5
0
3
o
18
SECRETARY'S OFFICE.
Expenses Education Act
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
were passed and
21
o
1
5
15
3
3
23
6
3
1
1
orcletwd for
Independent Office do
1)
do
P J Campbell
do
M Short, per L Branagan, Scholar
S J Medealfe, per P A Hanratty. Scholar
M Murray, per H Rogan, Scholar
p J Clarke, Preparing Rate Books
P Connor
P Garvev
J Corba]iy
.J Can-oil
T Hagan
J C Kieran
J Durnin
Eddison and
Eddison and
O
11
o
8
o
O
o
11
16
O
5
0
0
9
0
6
o
O
o
4
o
0
O
0
0
8
J
J
C
E
F
T
M
M 'Guinness
K incllan
M 'Carthy
French
Moneypenny
A J Palmer
O Gorman
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
M 'Gahan, 2 weeks' salary
T
P
T
T
B
T
M'l)onald
Tierney
Morgan
Callaghan
G rogan
Byrne
J Louden, 2 weeks' salary
Charles MacA lester, postage and petty
aeeonnts from September, 1913, till
1914
30th
1
3
1
4
4
4
3
2
1
1
1
2
3
14
C92
o
o
6
6
5
7
O
0
o
(j
2
0
o
9
o
9
5
0
5
6
3
8
o
2
0
4
o
3
5
o
1 10
16
7
8
3 15
0
3
15
10
9
19
0
2
5
3
0
6
6
0
7
3
0
0
1
6
4
5
9
4
1
6
0
5
5
SITE OF ARDEE DISPENSARY.
The following letter svas read from Mr O'Connell, Solicitor
Francis Street, Dundalk,
18th Marx,h, 1914.
Ardee Commissioners to the Council.
Dear Sir.
With reference to site on Fair Green, Ardee, on which
Branch Dispensary has erected under the Council's
scheme, I was instructed that said site was to be granted free
It appears from a letter written by the Town Clerk
of rent.
to Che Secreta,ry of the County Insurance Committee that the
Commissioners propose to let the site to the Council for a sum
of C2 per an:num. You might kindly let me have instructions
as to whether agreewnent of tenancy is to oe prepared on that.
basis.
Yours fait,hfttlly,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles MacA lest,er, Esq, Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
After discussion it was decided to adjourn the matter uptil
the next meeting to enable the Secretary to find out from the
Secretary to the Tuberculosis Committee of Management what
arrangement his Committee had made with the Ardee Town
Commissioners.
TUBERCULOSIS GRANTS.
The following letter in eonneg€ion with the Tuberculosis
Scheme was read and initialled by the Chairman :—
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 19th March, 1914.
No. 13792, 1914.
Louth County.
Sir,
Adverting your letter of the 13th instant, I am di-
rected by the Local Government Board for Ireland to inform
55
that they have given directions for the payment of '2s
9d, in respect of the expenditure of the Louth County Council
on the treatment Of Tutbu•eulcsis for the half-year to the 30th
September last.
The payment is made subject to the Audit.or's examination of
the Council's accounts and relevant voueners.
The vouchers submitted by you are returned herewith.
am, Sir,
Vour obedient Servant,
.Å. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
The Secretary Louth County Council,
Courthou.se, Dun clalks
VETERINARY INSPECTORS' DUTIES.
The following letter from the Town Clerk, Drogheda, Was
read, and the was directed to communicate with the
Department of Agriculture as to the duCies of Veterinary Ins-
pectors in eonnection with €hte Diseasæs of Animals in Urban
Districts, which were debited With their proportion of the sala-
Ties of the Ifispectors•.—
Corporation of Drogheda,
Town Clork*s Offee,
March, 1911.
The Seeretars.
County Council of Louth, Dundalk.
bear Sr.
The Municipal Council of Drogheda observe t,hat
salary of the local Veterinary Inspector has been increased by
the County Council from C3() to C90 pens annum, and they wish
to know whether they entitled to call his services at
any time as an Inspector of animals, or of meat exposed for sale
wibhin the
Yours faithfully,
J. B. CONNOLLY.
56
BURNING OF SHEI) ON CARLINGFORD PIER.
The following letters from the Harbour Constable, Carling-
ford, were read. The Secretary explained that when he re-
eeived the first letter, he wrote to the Constable for a formal
report as to how the aecident occurred, and the letter clated
the 23rd instant v,as his reply.
Carlingford, 20th March, 1914.
Charles M' Alester. Esq.
Dear Sir.
I request to inform you that tar-boarded oil hut
on old pier, Carlingford, accidentally caught fire on last night,
and was burned :and all its contents, only the new lamp saved,
which happened to be erected on pier head.
JOHN FEARON,
H. Constable.
Carlingford, 23rd March, 1914.
Dear Sir.
Yours of 21st instant reeoivecl this morning. In reply
the fire must have occurred this way: When I lit the new lamp
I muse have dropped the half-lighted match cn the floor,
was saturated witli Oil, and when I earne baek from pier head
after having Pilt up new lamp the hut was afire. I rushed in
trying to get out oil barrel, was nearly caught in the
flames. no help near, the only things destroyed, the oil barrel,
in which there might have been about three or fotr, at most,
gallons of oil, and the four lamps which were in use on old
quay, and of course the tar boards of the hut. I need not say
how easily the hut, Wllioh was tarred eve,ry altet•njatx• year for
the past 40 years, caught fire ; the tvhole thing was over in a
few minutes.
The w.e. recently repaired, which was attached to oil hut, all
right ; no harm done to it.
Yours faithfu Ily,
JOHN FEARON.
Ila:rbour Constable.
Charles M' Alester, Secretary.
Louth County Council.
57
A discussion ensued cn tho matter of the accident and of the
necessity of providing a on the pier for stores. Some mem-
b?r.s of the Committee advocated the erection of a perma nent,
ancl substantial stone building which would proper stc,r-
age for imports of coal, etc, and wr,ald aet as a feeder to the
port. Eventually tho following su b-eommitt,ee was appointeo
to visit Carlingford on Thursday, the 2nd and report ou
the whole matter
Sub-Committee—MÄ.s C A Duffy, J P; O'Connell, J P
Kearney, M O'Meara, J P; J H M'AlT111e, J P; P woods, J P;
Wm Woods, J P; and James Wynne. J P, with Mr Lyons,
Acting Cou'nty Surev.vor.
FORESTRY SCHEME.
The following letter from the Trustees of the Ruxton Estate,
Ärdee, was read, and t.hf' Seeretary was directed to send the
letter and map to Mr W Doran, J P, for his report .a,nd oom—
ment
Dear Sir.
16, College Green,
Dublin, 19th March,
Ruxton Estate.
In reply to yours of the 14th instant, we think the owner
would be prepared to sell either the whole or part of the De-
mesne (including Ardee TIouse) and the other lands on hands,
if an adequate price were offered.
We enclose a rough tracing of Che Demesne and the other
lands referred to. All the divisions edged green and numbered
are on hands. Perhaps you would kindly let us know how
much of the land your Council would like to buy, and the price
they would be prepared to pay. The trueing was m ade from a
six-inch Ordnance Map, so you can easily estimate the area of
each of tthe divisions.
Voors faithfully,
GUINNESS, MAHON & CO.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
58
The following letter from the Department of Agriculture
also read ,and the Acting County Surveyors were directed to
furnish maps of Willistown and Omeath to the Secretary, to
have thom forwarded €0 the Department
Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland,
•Upper Merrion Street,
Dublin, 21st March, 1914.
so. A 5988/14.
Forestry.
Sir,
I have to acquaint you, for the information of the Louth
County Council, that the Department have had before them a
report submitted by their Chief Forestry Inspector, Mr A C
Forbes, regarding his interview on Che 16th instant with the
Finance Committee of the Council relative to the proposed ad-
option of a scheme of Forestry for County Louth.
The Department note from Mr Forbes' report that in addi-
lion €0 ()meath Park the Council aro consid«ring the question
of acquiring certain woods on the Ardee House Estate, as well
as a small wood at Willistown, and that the Council desire to
have these two properties inspected by the Department.
The Department will be pleased to arrange to 'have these ins-
pections made, and reports thereon furnished €0 t;he Council,
and as it is understood that timber has ITOenly been felled at
Orneath Park, they consider that a f,utr€her inspection of this
property at the same time would also be desirable.
In order that these inspections may be made the Department
will be glad to receive from ycu at an. early date copies of the
maps of the lands proposed €0 lie acquired on the Ardee House
Estate, and at Willistown.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
Tile Secretary Louth County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
59
APPLICATION FOR INCIREASE OF WAGES.
The following letter from two of the Road Rolling Staff, who
aet as flagmen, was reaxl
Proleek, Ravew«lale,
23rd Mmh, 1914.
To Presiding Chairman,
Louth County Council.
Dear Sir,
We, the undersigned flagmen in your employment,
beg to appeal to your consideration for an increase in our
wage, thirteen shillings per week, living out in all kinds of wea-
ther, away from home. This we consider quite inadequate
as a living wage under existing circumstances, price of food,
and also in face of fact that your neighbouring counties,
Arrna.g.h amd Monaghan, pay at the rate of from 16s to 17s per
week wage.
Trusting to you. favourable consideration of this matter, we
beg to subscribe ourselves your obedient servants,
FRANK MOERMOtrr.
PATRICK HANLON,
After discussion, the Committee nna,nimonsly deeided to re-
commend the County Council to grant an increase of 2s per
week to the three flagmen employed in connection with the
Road Rollers, whose names are Francis M 'Dermott, Patrick
Hanlon, and James Durnin.
CASTLEBELLING-
IU)AT) IMPROVEMENT AT
HAM.
The following letter was read : —
Castlebell!ingham,
22nd March, 1914.
Dear Sir,
I. write regarding a niftfter ill this village.
My steward informs me that the County Council have
been widen ili.g or making a new bit of road opposite
a cottage by itself at junction of l)undalk and l)ro-
I wish to point out that the land in
miskin, roads.
front of that hottse• to the point beyond •tJ1e pump, be-
longs Co this estate • tnere was only a pathway to the
cottage angl it was never kept up as a public road.
Permission has a 'ways been asked for any strolling
eolnpanies who have made use of this lancl, but in tliis
instance the work has been done without any leave
being asked, and the ma.li who d:id it informed my
steward it was for the convenience of rnotors.
I thought it In iter, therefore, to write to you OIL
the matter aud explain the nositiou.
Yours truly.
IIENRY BELLINGHAM.
The Acting County Surveyor. Mr Lyons, stated that
the place where the I)undalk and Ardee districts eon-
joined was just abouf the place referred to in the letter,
aud tl)tat what haol been (Ione was the clearing away of
a grass angular patell to the improvement of the road.
Mr l)romgoole explaine-
at he had seen Sir 11 enry
61
Bellingham's steward, and that he was now satisfied
at what had been done.
The Secretary was directed 'to write to Sir I I eury
Bellingham that, the matter had been satisfactorily
arranged with his steward, Mr Cranston.
-MOTOR LICENSE DUTIES.
The following letter this question was read and
initialled by the Chairnxan :
Francis Street, Dundalk.
2.grd March, 1914.
IIE CAR LICLÄSE DUTIES.
Dear Sir,
NV'ith further reference to your letter of 5th
inst., it is obvious that the, question of the liability for
payment of duty by persons keeping motor ears for hire
nnust engage the attention of the -Court in the near
future for definite decision.
llaving regard to the wording of the Fi:nanee
1909-10 Act, 191(), I am of opinion that no duty is
payabile on a Inotor ear kept for hire in Ireland. 'l'hose
dealers in [he County to whom you make speeia.l re-
ferenee will require to register the ears hired out by
them in the usual way; but I consider they come
within the defiliif,ion of haekney carriage in Section 4
62
of the Custom and Ian.d Revenue Act,
such, those ears do not require to have
out, as per SectiA1 (3) of the Act, 1910.
Yours faithfully,
1888, and, as
licenses taken.
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M 'Alester, Esq.,
Secretary, Louth County Council,
CRIMINAL JURY CLAIMS.
The following letter from Mr (VCommeIl 011 these
claims was read and initialled bv the Chairman : —
Francis Street, Dundalk.
23rd March, 1914.
Re Criminal Ilijury Applications.
John J Callan, Drogheda, $25.
Geo 11 Pentland, Courtown, $20.
Dear Sir,
I beg to report Chat I affeli(led
Quarter Sessions on 21st inst., •when above claims for
compensation for criminal injury were heard.
The
ease of Callan, for breaking of plfat.c»glass windows,
was adjourned to next Quarter Sessions to enable the
applicant to produce proper proof of aetual value of the
glass destroyed.
The County Comtiå Judge the sum of Æö
as decree in Pentland's ease, to be/ • l?vied off the
Division of "l'ermonfeekin.
Yours faithfully,
IEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M' Aiester, Esq.,
Secretary, Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
RESOLUTIONS RE PARTITION OF ULSTER,
ETC.
Resolutions submitted from the Sinn Fein Organisa-
tion and the Cork Corporation were marked "read."
RESOLUTION FIU)M INSTITUTE OF CIVIL
ENGINEERS.
The following resolution was marked "read"
"The attention of The Institution of Civil Engineers
of Ireland has been drawn to recent cases in which
Coun.ty Councils have proposed terms of remuneration
for County Surveyors which appear quite inadequate,
having regard to the great responsibility and arduous
duty eon with such: a position.
S' "l Ile Council aue of opinion that in no ease should
the initial salary for the office be less Chau a year,
with provision for reasonable increments dependent on
satisfactory service, and tnat such salary should be
independent of allowances for office, travelling and
ot,her necessary expenses.
' 'That coimies be sent to each County Council {IS
the Local Government Board."
WOTTONSTOWS DRAINAGE.
Letter was read from the Boa,rd of Works, stating
they were preparing copy of the map of this l)rainage
l)istriet, and asking the Coundil to remit the cost of
same, 12s Gd. The Committee were of opinion that as
the Solicitor was dealing with this matter the pay-
ment should be made by him, and the Secretary was
directed to ask the Board of Works to retteive the pay-
ment through the Council's Solicitor.
CONTRACTS WITII LOCAL AUTHORITIES.
Circular letter was read from the Local Government
Board and initialled bv the Ulurirlllan, setting out thai
ill all cases that contracts are entered into Ivy Local
Authorit,ies in which any Trade Boards have been
Chaf a specified
is obligatory
established, that if,
minimum rate of wages should be paid.
AGRICULTURAL GRANT.
Letter from the Local Government Board, dated
28th March, was read. enclosing amount of the Agri•
cultural Grant for the half-year eliding 31st March,
amounting to the sum of ÆG$191 lös.
AT A ASAGASSAS PIER,
The Acting County Surveyor, Mr I)romgoole.
brough€ under the notice of Committee some corres•
65
pondence which Mr C I) King, Annagassan, had with
the Engineer of the Department of Agriculture rela-
tive to the (lumpfinu of the dredged materiml inshore at
Annagassan Pier.
Mr Dromgoole explained that tlie Department were
anxious to have the dredged stuff deposited along the
shore, instead of taking it out to sea, and that this
method would be a prop and moteetion to the road
along the shore, where it was threatened with erosion.
That the Department were desirous that the County
Council would apply for permission from the Board of
Trade to have Che dredged material so deposited.
After discussion the Committee instructed Mr Drom-
goole to prepare a map, aud mark on same where it
was proposed to deposit the material at Annagassan,
and that the Secretary be directed to forward the, map
to the Board of Trade and request their permission to
deposit the dredged stuff along the shore at the point
indicated.
ACCOUNTS FROM ASYLUM ANI)
ARDEE UNION ANI) DISTRICT COUNCIL.
The Statement of Accounts for Itiehmond Asylum
and the Ardee -Union and the Ardee No. I I)istrief
Council were laid before the Committee and initialled
by the Chairman.
MUD BANKS AT I)RUMLECK.
The following report from Mr Lyons, Acting County
Surveyor, in eonueetion with a complaint macle by Sir
Ilenry Bellingham, was read and initialled bv [Ije
Chairman :
County Surveyor's Office,
Dundalk, 30th March, 1914.
To thet Finance Committee Louth County Council',
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,—
111 reference to Sir Ilenry Bellingham's letter
re removing of the mud banks at Drumleek, I beg to
re;port that, I inspected the place 01m the 21st inst.
The removal of the mud bank exposed some roots
of the hedge.
I suggested restoring some of the material, but the
Steward says that this is not necessary if the Road
Contractor will replace the road scrapings against the
roots from time to, t;ime.
T Ilis of course will be done.
The dressing and cleaning of the pass or road over
the grassy Lank in front of the Cyclists' Rest, also re-
ferred to, is admitted to be au improvement by Mr
Cranston, but he considers that by doing the cleaning
up we are asserting a Yight or claim to the ground,
whilst he holds that this little grassy plot belongs to
ijandlord.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
JOHN M. C. LYONS,
67
APPLICATION FROM ACTING CO. SURVEYORS.
tme following was read :
County Suweyor's Office,
Dundalk, 30th March, 1914.
To the Fiuanee Committee Louth County Council.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,—
As our duties as Acting County Surveyors
will necessarily contliuue during the coming quarter,
viz Reporting 011 new application to the Rural Dis-
certifying for
trict Councils •and County Councils ;
payments to Road Contractors, etc,
We respectfully ask that the present salary as Acting
County Surveyors be continued for another quarter, or
until Mr IValsh is fully conversant with the works and
working of the County.
We are. Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servants,
JOHN M. C. LYONS,
JAMES DROMGOOLE.
After discussion, the Committee recommended that
the services of Messrs J M C Lyons and James
Dromgoole be continued as Acting County Surveyors
for a period of three months„ and that they be paid at
the rate of E IO per month for 'their services as so acting.
68
Proposal Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of Proposal Committee, held
in the Council Chamber, County Courthouse, Dundalk,
on. Monday, the 6th day of April, 1914, at one
o'clock p.m.
Present :
111 the Chair—Thas A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members O'Meara, J P;
Joseph 11 M'Ard1e, J P; James Wynne, J P; John F
Murphy, J P • Michael Meade aud Patrick O'Connel$,
Esquires.
Mesrs J M C Lyons and James I)romgoole were also
present. Applications for Works—Nil.
The Secretary submitted County at Lal•ge Payments
for quarter ended 31st March, 1914, as set out, on Form
22, which were examined and passed by the Committee.
executive Committee.
Minutes of Proceedi ngs of the Executive Committee,
held iu the Council Chamber, County Courthouse, I)un-
dalk, at 1.30 0'clock on Monday, the (ith day of April,
1914.
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members present-—Michael O'Meara, J P;
Joseph Tl M'Ard1e, J P; James Wynne, J P; John E
Murphy, J P; Michaeli Meade, and Patrick O'Connell,
Esquirös.
Messrs Joseph T Clinton and William E Maxwell,
Veterinary Inspectors, were also present.
The following reports from the Veterinary Inspectors
were read and initialled by the Chairman : —
MR. CLINTON'S REPORT.
Dundalk,
4th April, 1914.
Sir,
1 beg to report that no case of contagious
disease occurred in this district during the past month.
Two eases of suspected Foot and Mouth Disease were
reported, but they Droved, on examination, to be
ordinary cases of "timber tongue."
70
I have had the premises at the Great Northern
Railway disinfected 'curd ha.ve withdrawn the l)etentiou
Notice which was served on the Company. No owner
has been foun.(l for the sheep which strayed on t,he
Railway premises, and I have disposed of it for IOS.
'l'he stnaltness of the price is explained by the fact that
thc animal was a mere skeleton.
I would respectfullv• suggest that the Council issue
posters tluroughouf the district drawing attention to the
Bovine Tuberculosis (Ireland) ( )rder, and explaining
its provisions.
I believe that the majority of stock
owners are not aware of the existence of the Order.
Your obedient, Servant,
.J. T. M.R.C.V.S.
The Secretary in formed the Committee that the
Tuberculosis (Ireland) ()rder of 1913 had, as suggested
by Mr Clinton, beem posted throughout the entire
county.
MR. DON -NELLY'S REPORT.
Veterinary Report for March, 1914.
Drogheda Ulliou.
Gentlemen,
I am pleased to state t.hut during the month
of March, with the exception of two existing outbreaks
of Sheep Scab, my dist,rict has been free from eon-
tagious disease amongst animals.
With regard to the two eases of Sheep Scab, I am
having the affected and in-contact animals treated for
71
the disease. and the premises disinfected as far as
practicable.
I furnished your Secretary with fuller particulars
on copies of the prescribed forms issued by [he l)epart-
ment in relation to the above cases.
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
Louth County Council
(Executive Comin i,ttee)
Dundalk.
MR. MAXNVELL'S
Ardee,
Mareh, 1914.
Fl'he Chairman,
Louth County Council.
I beg to report that I visited the usual fairs
and markets held in the Ardee No. I l)istriet for the
month of March. I visited at regular periods e
sheep detained on the fanns of Messrs E and C Caraher,
Coole, and of Mr Arthur Macan, l)rumeashel.
I lield a post mortenm on the body of a heifer, the
property of Mr Thomas Murray, Ilurlestone, under the
Tu bereular Aet„ all'l foun(l this disease did not exist.
As the animal was (lead when I arrived, the County
Council is not ea bled upon to pay aali.v ecnnpensation.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
W. E. MAXWELL.
72
SHEEP SCAB ORDER.
The following circular letter from the Department,
No. 242/14. V.B.., was read, enclosing copy ()rder of the
'23rd January, 1914, and the Secretary was directed to
send copi,es of the Order to the Veterinary
Inspectors : —
I)epartncellt of Agriculture and Technical
Instruction for Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch),
51 Upper Mount Street,
March, 1914.
No. 242/14. V. B.
Sir,
I have to forward, to be laid before
your Local Authority, copies of an Order entitled "The
Sheep Scab (Local Regulations) (Ireland) Order. oi
1914," and, at the same time, to invite the earnest
attention of the Local Authorities to the new situation,
which demands that immediate and energetic measures
should be taken by them to advance the object aimed at
by this ()rder, viz., the eradication of Sheep Scab from
their respective districts
The ()rder confers on IOC&I Authorities
additional powers for dealing with this mat-
already
supplementary to the powers
ter,
conferred by previous Orders of the Depalt-
It enables them to make regulations to arrest
ment.
the spread of Sheep Seab ill their districts by regulating
the movement of sheep into them from other districts.
With these powers and those already possessed
bv
73
them; with the aid of the Illsper•tors or officers whom
they employ, or have the power to employ; with the
generaV support of the Royal Irish Constabulary behind
their local officers; and with the further assistance
which the Department are prepared to give them by
means of advice and in the supervision of their staffs,
the Loral Authorities are now in a state of complete
effectiveness for operating against this disease.
tliat is needed to secure success is vigour on their part,
and earnest co-operation from the public of Lhe distriei,
and especially co-operat0i1 from those whose interests
are most directly injured by the spread of the disease
and moot directly benefited by its suppression.
The Department wish to sef before all eoneerned
in each County—both the general public and those en-
trusted with any (lut,y or placed ili any position eon-
li.eeted with the administration of the law in this
in the interests of the
matter the imi porta nee,
country, of au efficient. enforcement of these Orders ili
all their details, including adequate of any
offences against them.
As mentioned above, a new situation has been
ereatecl by the imminent danger that, unless effective
measures are now taken, t,he export trade in Irish sheep
may be subjected to damaging interruption.
Great Britain there is growing a be?ief that the impor-
t,a.tion of Irish sheep. amongst which
eases of the
disease continue to be found, is now the principal, if
not the sole, obstacle to the complete elimi.nat,ion of the
disease i n that eon n,iry. Prejudice has been created
of
against sheep from Ireland, aml the question
regulating or proh ibiting their importation into Great
Britain for the better protection of British flocks has
been raised.
The Department desire. plainly to inform the Local
Authorities that, in their opin ion, unless immediate
steps are taken to clear the country of the disease,
measures of this nature are likely to be declared at an
(late. To save the country generally from the
earl
heavy loss whiteh would thus be involved, and to secure
the valuable improvement to our Irish flocks which
would be the result of clearing out this disease and
restoring to Irish sheep a clean of health, all that
is needed is that the Local Authorities throw them-
selves with vigour in to a common campaign
this pest, and that the farmers and sheep owners eo-
The disease is one, which can be
operate witli them.
completely extirpated simply by the practice of regular
and thorough dipping.
rl'he mall who does not dip his sheep, but allows
them to Ilapse into this unhealthy condition, and to
carry infection with them wherever they go, is not only
guilty of folly in his own personal interests, but is,
without thinking it, a public enemy propagating infee-
tion and inflicting injury aud loss upon his fellow-
farmers and sheep raisers a,nxl all who depend upon the
sheep ra.ising industry in the country.
The purpose of the (Orders is to see that the sheep
of a county are dipped at least twice a year, •and to pro-
vide, where necessary, facilities for (lipping a measure
of the greatest personal advantage to owners of sheep;
to see that where the disease appears it is promptly
notified, so that the proper steps may be taken for its
75
suppression ; and to protect the markets and fairs from
the entry into them of sheep affected with the disease.
Tlme I)epartmen€ desire to draw your Local Authority's
attention to the following ways, in particular, in which
they eau further the object ill view, viz :
(I) By making adequate provision for having the
In the Depart-
Dipping Order fuli'y eoiuplied with.
ment's view it will be necessary, in most instances, to
Oave the Local Authority's Veterina1Y Officers specially
assigned to this duty during the dipping period, and to
appoint, where necessary during that period, persons
to assist them.
(2) By requiring their Inspectors to take the most
prompt action in the treatment of reported eases; and
to exercise the greatest care ill removing restrictions.
(3) By using Che persons employed to assist their
( )ffieers in supervising the dipping, who should be
experienced in the care of sheep, to range their
(lisfriet with a view to the, detection of unreported eases.
(4) By arranging for the systematic inspection by
[heir Veterinary Inspectors of sheep exposed for sale
at markets aud fairs.
(5) Bv the adoption of regulations, under the
enclosed ()rder, where it seems desirable, too regulate the
movement of sheep from an affeefecl into a free district.
(G) By makiumg it apparent that they regard the
concealment of Sheep Scab, the movement of diseased
sheep, and Che failure to clip sheep, as serious offences
eonunitted by private individuals against the general
interest, and that they consider that such offences cali
76
for prosecution and justify the imfåietion of heavy
penalties, and should be condemned by public opinion.
To assist the Local Authorities in the furtherance
of these duties the Department, whose inspectorial staff
has been strengthened for the purpose, have now ar-
ranged to co-operate in supervising the work of the
officers of the Local Authorities employed in the
administration of the Diseases of Animals Acts. 'Illis
provision should materially help the Local Authorities
ill bracing up the general efficiency of their officers
employed under these Aets.
The l)epartmelit will further, should circumstances
permit, be glad to arrange for one of their Superintend-
ing Veterinary Inspectors to confer with your Local
Authority on this subject generally.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient, Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
The Clerk of
each Loea,lL Authority.
ORDER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE A-ND
TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION FOR IRELAND.
(Dated 23rd January, 1914).
THE SHEEP-SCAB (LOCAL REGULATIONS) (IRELAND)
ORDER OF 1914 (No.
The Depai•trnent of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland, by virtue ancl in exercise Of the, powers in them vested
under the Agrictplture ancl Technical Instruction (Ireland) Act,
1893, the Diseases of Animals Acts, 1894 to 1911, and of every
other powers enabling them in this behalf, do order, and it is
hereby ordered as follows :—
POWERS OF' A LOCAL AUTHORITY AS TO MAKING
REGULATIONS.
1. A Local Authority may, with a view of preventing Che
spreading of sheep-scab, make such Regulations as they think
fit for the following purposes, or any of them :
(a.) For regulating the movement by land or water of sheep
into their District from the District of any other Local
Authority in Ireland.
(b.) For requiring tille occupier of any premises within their
District to which sheep are moved from outside such Dis-
trict to notify forthwith the arrival •of the sheep to a
Constable or other member of the Police Force at the
nearest Police Baarraek or Station who shall forthwith
transmit thc information to the Clerk of the Local Au-
thority under the Diseases of Animals Acts for such Dis-
trict.
(c.) For prescribing, regulating and securing the dipping
within a specified pelöcl in an approved sheep-dip and in
the presence and to the satisfaction of an Inspector of
the Local Authority of sheep moved into their District
from the District of any other Local Authority in Ire-
land or of sheep imported direct into t;heir District.
78
(d.) For prohibiting or regulating the movement or securing
the isolation of sheep moved into their District from
outside such District unless and until such sheep have
been dipped as prescribed.
PROVISIONS AS TO REGULATIONS OF LOCAL
AUTHORITY.
2. (I.) A I aoca] Authority shall forthwith send to the See-
retar.v, Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction
for Ireland, Dublin, a copy of every Regulation made by tihem
under this Order.
(2.) If the Depoliment are satisfied on inquiry, with respect
to any Regulation or part of a Regulation made by a Local Au-
thority under this that t'he same is for any reason objec-
tional"e, a.ncl divoet the revocation thereof, the Same shall
thereupon cease to operate.
(3.) A Local Authority shall send a copy of every Regula-
tion made by then. in relation to the movement of s leer under
Chis Order to every railway company having a, railway station
within the Distric+ of the Local Authority, or within the part
of their District to which the Regulation applies, and shall also
forthwith send a copy of the Regulation to the Secretary, Rail-
way Cearing House, 5, Kildare Street, Dublin, and to the
Clerk of each, Local Authority in Irela nd.
(4.) For the purpose of any R egulation made by a Local Au-
thority under this Order, an Inspector of such Local Authority
may enter any premises within the District of the Lo-
eal Authority and examine any sheep thereon, and such powers
of entry and examination shall be in addition to any other like
powers vested in the Inspector by the Act of 1894 or other-
wise.
(5.) Any powers extreisable under a Regulation made by a
Local Ant,hority under this Order by a Vetelinary Inspector
acting for a Local Authority shall be exercisable also by a
Veterinary Inspector of the Department.
79
POWER 'ro MAKE REGULATIONS NOT TO BE
DEPUTED.
3. The power to make Regulations under this Order shall be
exercised only by a Local Authority or their Excentive Com-
mitt,ee, ancl shall not be deputed to any other nor
to a Sub-Committee.
LIMITATION AS To REGULATIONS OF l,oc.xm,
AVTUOIUTY.
4. For the of this Order, or of any Regulation made
by a Local Authority thereunder, sheep shall not be cleerned to
be moved from, into, or within the District of a LoealAuthority
or within the part of the District to vvhieh the Regulation np-
plies, where they are moved through the or such part
thereof by railway from a place outside the District, or such
part thereof—
(a.) to another place ou tho District, or such part there-
of, without nn neeessar.y delay and without the sheep
being untrnele«l within the District, or sueå part there-
of; or
(b.) direct to port within the Dist,riet or to a lair at such
port for shipment froin snell port within two days.
OFI•'E.XCES.
5. If a sheep is moved in eontravention of any Regula-
tion made by the Local Anthority under this Order, the owner
Of the sheep, and the person in enarge thereof, and the person
eausi ng, directing, or permitting the movement, and the person
moving or conve>ing the sheep, and the eonsignee or other per-
son receiving or keeping it knowing it to have been moved in
contravention as aforesaid, and the occupier of the place from
which the sheep is moved, s'!all, each according to and in re-•s.
pect of his own acts and defaults, be decinecl guilty of an of-
fence against the Act of 1891.
80
(2.) If the arrival Of a sheep is not notified as required by
any Regula tion made by a Local Authority nncler this Order,
the owner of the sheep, and the person in charge thereof, ancl
the occupier of the place or premises at which the sheep has ar-
rived, shall, each according to and in respect of his own acts
defaults, be deemed guilty of an offence against the Act
of 1894.
(3.) If anytihing is otherwise done or omitted to be done in
contravention of any Regulation made by Local Authority
under this Order, the owner and the lessee and the occupier and
the person in charge of any place, sheep, carcase or thing in or
in respect of which the same is done or omitted to be done,
shall, each according to and in respect of his own acts and de-
faults be deemed guilty of an offence against the Act of 1894.
INERPRETATION.
G. In this Order, unless the context otherwise requires—
' 'Approved -sheep-dip" means a dip approved by the Depart-
ment for sheep scab and sheep dipping in Ireland or pur-
porting to be so approved.
' 'The Department" means the Department, of Agricultura
and Technical InstiTtetion for Ireland.
' 'The Aet of 1894" means the Diseases of Animals Act, 1894.
Other terms have the same meaning as in the Diseases of
Animals Act, 1894, and the Acts amending same.
COMMENCEMENT.
7. This Order Shal] come into operation on the twenty-sixth
SHORT TITLE.
9. This Order may be cited as the Sneep-Seab (Local Regula-
tions) (Ireland) Order of 1914 (No. 2).
In witness whereof the Department of Agriculture and
Technical Instruction for Ireland have hereunto set
their Official Seal this twenty-third day of January,
one Chousand nine hundred and fourteen.
(Signed),
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
SCHEDULE.
Order Revoked.
No.
250
Date.
14th Jan., 1914.
Short Title.
The Sheep Scab (Local Regula-
tions) of 1914.
day of January, one thousand nine hundred and
REVCCATIO.X OF ORDER.
8. The Order described in the SOhedule to
hereby revoked.
fourteen.
t,hås
Order IS
MOVEMENT OF ANIMALS ORDER.
The following Order was also submitted to the Committeo
and initialled by the Chairman
ORDER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE A-ND
TECHNICAL INSTR FOR IRELAND.
25th March, 1914).
THE MOVEMENT OF ANIMALS (SOUTHERN IRELAND)
TEMPORARY PROHIBITION ORDER.
The Department of Agriculture and Teehnical Instruction for
Ireland, by virtue and in •exercise of the powers vested in them
under tho Agriculture and Technical Instruction (Ireland) Act,
1899, the Diseases of Animals Acts, 1894 to 1911, and of every
82
other power enabling them in this behalf, do order, and it is
hereby ordered, as follows
PROHIBITION OF MOVEMENT OF ANIMALS.
1. Unless and ,until the Department otherwise order no cat-
tle, sheep, goats, .or swine, shall be moved either by land or by
water out of the area described in the Schedule to this Order.
OPERATION OF OTHER ORDERS.
2. Nothing in this Order shall be deemed to interfere with
the operation of the provisions of Orders of the Department re-
lacing to Foot and Mouth Disease in Ireland.
OFFENCES.
3. If an animal is moved in contravention of this Order, the
owner Of the animal, and the person for the time being in
charge thereof, ancl the person eausing, directing, or permit-
ting the movement, and the person moving or conveying tche
animal, aud the consignee or other person receiving or keeping
it, knowing it to have been moved in contravention as afore-
said, and the occupier of the place from which the animal is
moved, shall ench according to and in re.spcet of his own acts
and defaults, be deemed guilty of an offence against the Disu
eases of Animals Act, 1894.
COMMENCEMENT.
4. This Order shall come into operation. on the twenty-sev
venth day of March, nineteen hundred and fourteen.
SHORT TITLE.
5. This Order may be cited a.s The Movement of Animals
(Southern Ireland) Temporary Prohibition Order.
In witness whereof the Department Of Agricultllre and
Teehnictll Instruction for Ireland have, hereunto set
clay of March,
their Official Seal this twenty-fifth
nineteen hundred and fourteen.
(Signed),
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
83
SCHEDULE.
So much of Ireland as lies to the south of the following
boundary (roads and' railway lines mentioned as forming Che
boundary being regarded as outside the Scheduled Area) :
Commencing at the Maiden Tower, near the sea coast east of
Drogheda, thence along the river bank past Mornington to the
Great Northern Railway line at l)'rogheda, thence by that rail-
Way line via Navan to the terminus of the line at Oldcastle,
t'hence by the road leading from Oldcastle Railway Station to
Fore, as far as the junction of Chat road with the direct road
to Granard, thence by the Granard road by Finea Bridge and
north of Bracklagh Lough as far as the Midland Great Western
Railway, north of Ballywillan Station, thence southwards along
the IQilway line to Mullingar, thence westwards by that rail-
way line via Athlone and Ballinasloe to where the railway line
A thenry ,
crosses the road lendi ng from Moni vea through
thence along the road leading €0 Oranmore to the point where
it is crossed by the railway line, thence along the railway line
€0 Oranmore Station, thence in a, southerly direction by the
road leading to Oranmore as far as Oranmore, and thence in a
direct line to the sea at Oranmore Pier.
81
finance Committee.
11 IU
Minutes of proceedings of above Committee held in the
Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Wednesday, 15th
2 10
10
15 10
3 11
3 11
85
P Campbell
J Clarke
J Durnin
J Durnin
F M'l)ermott
P Hanlon
T Reilly
W Reilly
J O'Hare
A O'Hare
T Clarke
J Craven
H Connolly
T Murray
April, 1914, at one o'clock p m.
Present :—
In the Chair— William A Doran, Esq, J P.
Other Members preysent—Joseph Do] an, Michael Meade
Joseph H M'Ardle: J P; John F Murphy, J P; William Woods,
J p ; Peter Woods, J P ; and Patrick O'Connell, Esquires.
Messrs Thomas Walsh, Connty Surveyor ; John M C Lyons
a.nd James Dromgoole, Assistant Surveyors, were also present.
The Secretary submitted Fortns 22 for Ardee, Drogheda
(Louth), and Dundalk, setting out payments for road mainten-
ance for Quarter enrlOd 31st March, 1914, as recommended for
payment, by District Councils, which were signed by
the Chairman.
The following accounts for works in charge of the County
Surveyor, ancl the Secre€ary's office, were examined antl pay-
ment, ordered :—
SURVEYOR'S OFFICE.
SECRETARY'S OFFICE.
preparing Rate Books
M 'Gn inness,
J
Kindlan
J
C M'Carthy
P J Clarke
(Y Mahony
J
M Ardle
F
French
E
F
M onespenny
O' Gorman
T
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
19 16
6
0
5
o
0 13 10
8
1
8
8
1
1
2
2
9 10
1
7
4
0
3
o
4
O
8
8
9
0 12
16
9
C41
4
3
3
2
2
2
1
d
s
2
1
1
6
3
3 10
5
2
2 11
2
(i
M M 'Gahan, two weeks' salary
J Louden, two weeks' salary
Rose Dolan, per-J -AI'Parland, board and lodgings
L Branigan, Scholar, travelling expenses
FINANCIAL APPLICATIONS.
'2 19
o
3
15
1
5
o
5
o
(i
o
7
T
T
A
W illiamson
Groga.n
Burke
Callan
o
1
1
1
s
12
9
d
0
8
Application was read from Mr Lawence Branigan, Ijroghoda,
one of the County Council Univensity Students, stating that
86
owing to a change in the hour of lectures, he could •attend
them by taking the train each morning from Drogheda, and
asking the Committee to let him have the Bost of a three
months' Railhuny season ticket, €5.
The Secretary informed the Committee Chat Mr Branigan
had a sum of C9 IOS (jcl to his credit, ancl the Committee
unanimously decided €0 issue a paying order for Lf5 to be paid
to the student.
was read from Messrs H and J O'Hare,
An applica Lion
Dundalk, for the payment of C3 18s (jcl, amount of tl:eii'
account for preparing courts, etc.
The Secretary informed the Committee tlhat the paying
orders in this ease were made out, but as the house in which
Messrs Ö'llarc had been doing business was closed up, 11 .
not issu•d t Fern. He stated that the only known
tive of the firm v. ns Mr Hugh O'Hare, who was the principal
of the firm, and that the paying orqier:s might to him,
The Secretary undertook to toke the responsibility of
issuing the paying orders, and the Committee iu the circum-
stances directed .him to issue them.
COLLECI'ORS' ARREARS LISTS
lists of irrecoveyable arrears of flie secourl tnoioly of
poor rate from eight of the collectors were exatninecl and
payment was recommended, subject to the rulings of the Local
Government Board.
Mr P S Donegan sent a doctor's certificate, wliiclv stated Mr
Donegan was unable owing €0 il'!ness to attend €0 his arrears
list at present.
87
COUNTY-AT-LARGE PAYMENTS.
The list of County-at-large payments were exn mined by the
Committee and payments recommended.
REPORT OF INSPECTION COMMITTEE APPOINTED BY
FINANCE COMMITTEE FOR CARLINGFORD HARBOUR.
The following report was read :—
The Committee appointed by the Finance Committee to visit
and report on the recent burning accident to the Shed on
Carlingford Pier, and the proposed now Store, met at Carling-
ford on Thursday, the 2nd April, when the following attended :
—Messrs C A Duffy, J P; P O'Connell, M J H
J P; Peter woods, J P; J P Kearney, wm Woods,
J P ; and James Wynne, J P.
Mr J M C Lyons, acting County Surveyor, and Lhe Harbour
Master, John Fearon, were also present.
The Committee inspected the Pier and found that the shed,
as reported by the Harbour Constable, was completely de-
molished, and all the contents, including the balance of a cask
of petroleum oil, destroyed.
The Committee consulted as to the advisa bility of erecting
a proper store on the Quay, which would .serve thr purpos«s of
the Council as a storeroom, and be jointly used by merchants
and importers in connection with the trade of the port, and
increase the revenue by inducing imports of coal to the
harbour for distribution in Carlingford and vicinity.
After discussion of the whole matter, the Committee were
practically unanimous in deciding that the Finance Committee
88
should be asked to recommend the County Council €0 erect
suitable store on Carlingford Quay for the regular storage of
all imports and exports, with a partitioned portion for €1:e
usage of the Council for storage of lamps, oil and other
articles.
The Committee desire to point out Chat thore is a sum cf
over to the credit of Carlingford Harbour account.
The only matter about wllidh a difference o! opinion exists is
whether the store, when erected, would be let any individual
which would give him practically a monopoly of the trade, or
whether it should be let as required to any person requiring it,
on the payment of a fixed -seale of charges, graded according to
the length of time it would be used.
After discussion, the Committee recommended the, County
Council €0 have a proper store erected on the Quay at Carling-
ford, with a partitioned portion for a storeroom for lamps, oil,
ete, for usage solely by the Council's officers, and a proper
W.C. under the same roof. The Committee suggest that 1110
store be not let to any person solely, but that everyone
requiring it pay whatever scale of Oharges be fixed for the term
so used, either at a tonnage rate or on time, and that higher
scale would be desirable where a user of the store held it after
a specified time.
MOTOR LICENSE DUTY AND ROAD MAINTENANCE.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
jnan : —
Eastgate, Castlebellingham,
co Louth, 30-3-'14.
The Secretary, Louth County Council.
Si r.
In reply to your letter re Motor Tas, I beg 'eo inform yon
that do not intendto pay any further Tax in Co Louth (but
to follow the example of other motor owners in this district,
and to do so elsewhere) until there is some evidences of con-
sideration being shown to the requirements and convenience
of motorists by the roads beipg put into a satisfactory con-
Gi tion.
It rnyust not be forgotten that owners of 1110tor cars put a
Very considerable amount into circulation in the county in the
way of wages and other rpotoring expenses, ancl they are fully
justified in expecting that the roads of County Louth should
at least equal those of the adjoining counties of Armagh,
Meath and Down.
Last year, on the strength of an assurance tnat great im-
provement was to be made very shortly; I paid the tax locally.
Since then matters have gone from bad to worse, and I have
therefore, with great regret, come to the decision I have above
in€imatecl,
I am, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
J. St. C. MACMILLAN.
PATIENTS LN SANATORIUM.
following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man :—
Women's National Health Association (Incorporated).
Peamount, Hazlehateh,
Dublin, 1st April, 1914.
Dear Sir.
We have been sent a newspaper cutting with regard to
90
Richard H.oey, a patient who was at Peamnount, and 'in refere
ence thereto I am directed by the Managing Committee , to
enclose yon a copy of statement made by him before leaving
the Institution, for the information of your Council.
Yours very truly,
WILLIAM J. THOMPSON,
The Secretary, Louth County Council,
Courthouse, Dunda 1k.
COPY.
2nd March, 1914.
I, Richard Hoey, do leave Chis Institutiop to-clay Of my
free will and eon trary to the advice of the Medical Staff: who
have warned me that I am in a fit condition to travel
home.
Signed, RICHARD HOEY,
2nd day of March, 1914.
PATIENTS IS RICHMOND ASVI,V.VI CHARGED TO
COUNTY LOUTH.
Letter was read from the Richmond Asyliirrl enclosing
Return Of the admissions •to the Asylum of Patients charged
against County Louth, during 'the Quarter ended 31St Marely
1914. The number admitted was 15.
IRISH TUBERCULOSIS MEDICAL OFFICERS'
ASSOCIATION.
A resolution from this Association, regarding the positimx
of the present Medical Advisers as appointed by the Insurance
Commissioners, was marked ' 'read."
91
SPEED LIMIT OF MOTORS IN COUNTY LOUTH.
Tho' following letter from Mi• O'Connell, ,Solici€or, was read
but no order was made
Francis Street, Dundalk,
11th April, 1914.
Dear Sir.
I beg to report that I havé been in communication with the
Local Government Board on the matter of tbe request of the,
Council, with a view to the public safety, that the Board should
make regulations limiting the driving of motor cars and motor
bicycles to a speed of ten miles an hour in the Urban Districts
of Dundalk, and Drogheda, and in Ardee, Carlingford, Omeafh,
Dunleer and Castlebellingham.
The Board state that they cannot make general regulations
of the nature referred t,o. That the case of each town or
village a speed limit for mot r traffic is desired must be
considered on its merits, having regard to the extent •and
character of the traffic, the width of the road, and the
position and number of bye-roads leading to the main streets.
Again, that they require a statement as to Why Section I of
the Motor Car Act, 1903, will not suffice to ensure the safety"
Of the public without any ordor béing made uncler Section 9.
Section 1 referred €0 has reference to the fact that it is an
offence to drive amotor car recklessly or negligently, or at a
speed or in a manner which is dangerous to the public; and
that a police constable may apprehend without warrant the
driver of any ear who commits an offence, etc. Section 9
deals with the power to have Regulations made, as proposed.
Certain information as hereunder sei, out is required by the
Board in connection with any application for regulations with
92
regard to specified hikhways. It will also be necessary for the
Council to give public notice of .sueh application by the inser-
tion of advertisements in the newspapers circulating in the
County. The Board intomate they will be prepared to consi-
der atty application. submitted' by the Council uncler these con-
ditions.
Tho information required ,and which I suggest may be sub-
No. A. 7271114.
plied by the County Surveyor, is as follows
Sir,.
1.
An ordnance map of the area showing the streets to be
affected.
2. A statement specifying the streets included in the appli-
cation, giving the width of each street and of the carriage way
and the gradient thereof.
3. A precise statement of the grounds on which the applica-
tion with regard to each street is based, with particulars of any
accidents which have occurred from the driving of motor cars
therein, and infornjation as to the extent of motor ear trafhe in
each such street.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M •Aiester, Esq,
Secretary I-outh County Council, I)uutla.lk.
FORESTRY SCHEME.
The following letter:s were read, and the Secretary informed
the Committee that he had sent the maps of Park and
Willistown, to the Department.
The following Committee were appointed to meet the agent
of the Oinea€h park Estate, and the Forestry Inspector of the
Department P Hughes, J P; W A Doran, J P; M.
93
O'Mcm•a, J P; Wm Woods J P; P O'Connell, J P Kearney,
J H M'Ard1e, J P; P Woods, JP; and F Walsh, County Sur-
veyor.
Department of Agriculturv and Technical Instruction for
Ireland,
tipper Merrion Street, Dublin
1st April, 1914.
FORESTRY.
T have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter, dated
the 28th ultimo, and €0 state that the Department note that
Louth County Council have decided to proceed the pur-
chase of Omeath Park and of a small plantation af Willistown
with a view to preserving and maintaining these properties as
woodlands under a County Forestry Scheme.
The Department assume from your letter that the Conneil
have adopted a Forestry Scheme On the lines suggested in their
circular letter, dated the 23rd December, 1912, (copy enclosed),
and that the Council will strike for the purpose a special rate
under the Agriculture and Technical Instruction (I reland) Act,
1899. They will accordingly be glad if you will kindly submit
for their approval a copy of the Scheme adopted.
As already intimated to you the Department propose, on re-
eeipt from you of copies of the maps mentioned in their letter
Of the 21st ultimo, No. A. 5988/14, to have a further inspection
inade of ()meath Park as well as an inspection of the plantation
at Willistown and of the l;ends which, it is understood, the
Council propose to acquire on the Ardee House Estate.
I am, Sir,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County
Courthouse,
Your obedienf Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Council,
Dundalk.
ancl
94
Francis Street, Dundalk,
8th April,
PROPOSED PURCHASE OF OMEATH PARK.
Dear Sir,—
With further reference to your letter of 14th
05
following is the list ancl description of the land
vlantations referredto :—
RUXTON ESTATE.
ARDEE HOUSE DEMESNE.
1914.
ult., T
Estate Map
1.1). &
Mount Park
West
The portion about Stat. Acres,
have been in communication with the Solicitor having Carriage
of Stile in Land Judges Court and enclose herewith copy rental.
If would appear that some portion of the Demesne, as described
in the rental, has recently been sold. The •area of the unsold
portion the Demesne, with houses, offices and two gate lodges,
is about 83 statute acres. There is no VI cud Rent or Tithe Rent
Charges upon the lands, and the only outgoings are the. rates.
TIW income from the letting of grazing plots is 832 IOS for the
season to 1st November. The thinnings of the plantations were
sold some time ago for a large sum, and the remaining standing
timber is of considerable value. Colonel -A lexander, the Agent,
has expressed his readiness fo meet me on the grounds any day
T would appoint, but T would suggest that a small Committeo
with the County Surveyor be appointed to meet the Agent on
Che grounds that they may gain the necessary information of
the precise arca, standing timber, and property generally offered
for sale, that they may report to the Council to submit their
offer to the Court for consideration.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M 'Alester, Esq,
Secretary T 4011th County Council,
Dundalk.
RUXTON ESTATE PARK.
Mr Doran sulnnittecl the following list of portions of the land*
considered suitable for
on the Ruxton Estate, Ardep, which art'
acquisition by the County . Council under T'"orestry Scheme.
The Committee approved of the selection, and the following Cmn-
mittee were appointed fo meet flie Depa Tnspcetor and
report further to the Council W A Doran, J P; James
Tlalpeuny, Michael Meade, Jas J P: .J T Dolan, ;
R onclsfown.
Ardee House—
Lawn, wooded,
and some mea-
dow land,
Plantation or plea-
sure ground,
2 Plantations,
viz , I.P. along
in Mount Park,
Grazing Land,
with sca ttered
trees,
(of which Planto
tions, including
lawn,
grazing fields,
Grazing lands (golf
linksb
Plantations
cover wood,
2 little detached
woods,
Totals
Plantations, includ-
17.31*
ö.G9G
16.970
39
47
1,878
Stat. Acres.
52.666
86.038
83,859
109,897
61/80
ing lawn.
108.017
Grazing lands
169.897
Rent paid 1914. Eleven months letting foy 17 acres,
for 30 acres $3 ()s. Od. per acre ;
IOS. Od. per acre
Golf links 61 acres, €2 3s. ()d, per acre.
96
LOCOMOTIVE BYE-LAWS.
The following letter was read, and the Committee approved of
the alterations suggested by the Local Governme'lit Board, as they
were merely a difference in phraseology, and recommended tli('
County Council to adopt [Ive Bye-laws as amended
No. 16391: 1914.
Louth County.
Sir,—
Local Government Board, Dublin,
6th April. 1914,
With reference to your letter of the 2St11 ultimo, T am
directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland to inforni
you tha,t the bye-laws Of the Louth County Council with respect
to the use of locomotives Tlave been revised by the Board's
Legal Adviser, who has made some alterations in the drafting ;
and I am fo suggest that the County Council would do well to
adopt bye-laws in the amended form as shown in the accom-
panying draft.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Sevvmrit,
j. E. DEVLIN. Assistant
The Seerefary,
Loufli County Council,
Dundalk.
Secretary,
INSURANCE COMPANY AND RATE OONI)S.
The following letter was read, and the Secretary was direefecl
to send the Company the statemenl the collection of Poor Rate
as requesied :
London and l,ancasliil+ Vire Insurance C01iiijaiiY, T,fd,
18 and 19. College Green, Dublin.
7th April. 1914.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
97
Re Poor Rate Collectors' Bonds.
Dear Sir,—
We llåve been rcqucstetl by our Head ()ffiee fo obtain
every half-year a Statement AliOwing the dates upon WII ich the
Collectors guaranteed by thiÅ Company closed their Warrants,
and indicating any eases where payment of Poundage Fees has
been withheld.
It is the practice of some Councils to send us a Statement month
by month on Form 66, in order that we may be kept acquainted
with the progress of each Collector. This Form could, no doubt,
be utilised to furnish the information desired, and we should
be pleased, therefore, if you would kindly send us one of these
Forms, With the required particulars inserted, in respect of the
half-year just closed.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
SYDNEY L. FRY, Local
APPLICATION FROM OFFICER FOR
ADVANCE.
The following letter from Mr P J Roe, Solicitor, was read, and
the Committee unanimously decided to reconnneucl that he get
ZIC)O on account, and that the Solicitor of the Council be in-
structed to prepare the usual Bond to be executed by the Return-
ing Officer for the proper discharge of his duties
Francis Sti•eet, Dundalk,
14th April, 1914.
Dear Sir.
I beg to apply to your Council fqr an advance 'of One
Hundred pounds towards the expenses of the forthcoming Local
Government Elections.
Yours
Charles M'Alester, Esq,
Secretary Louth County
Dundalk.
faithfully.
P. J. ROE.
Council,
98
SITE OF ARDEE DISPENSARY.
The following letter from the Secretary Tuberculosis Committee
of Manageme,nt was read, and the Cha.irnmn stated that the
arrangement made was per annum.
The Conrmittee decided to recommend fhe County Council to
havo the agreement for letting prepared according to these
terms
I.outli County Council Tubereulosis Department,
Clerk's Office, Dui)dalk,
4th April, 1914.
To Charles M 'Alester, Esq,
Secretary County Council.
Dear Sir,—
Relative to your inquiry re terms of the Ardee Town
Commissioners for Site in the Fair Green for Dispensary, I find
a letter on the subject, dated the 16th May, 1913, was received
from the Town Clerk, Ardee, which was duly acknowledged on
the 19th May, 1913. At foot of Copy of my acknowledgment T
find a note thus; "Forwarded to Co. Council for meeting on the
29th May." Doubtless you are aware at that time there was
Committee of Management, but a Committee consisting of Messrs
W A Doran, James Halp€nny, J T Dolan, and Dr M 'Quillan was
appointecl to procure a Dispensary Site in' A t•dee. In any of the
reports of this Committee 1 fail to trace any reference, to the
question of rent for the Site. Dr M'Q11illun, however, assures
me that he was deputed to intmview the Ardee Town Commis-
sioners on the matter, and he distinctly recollects that their
terms for the Site on the Fair Green, Ardee, was rental of Z2
per annum.
Yours faithfully,
V. WARREN, Ch,rk.
99
ROAD TO DUNDALK RACE COURSE.
T wetter was read from Mr T Callan Marardle, J P, on behalf of
the Comtnittee of the Dundalk Raees, as follows :—
Dundalk, 14th April, 1914.
(Ili arles M'Alester, Esq,
Secretary Louth County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
Dear Sir,—
I have not yet had the pleasure of' meeting our new County
Surveyor, but I would like you to ask him if he would mind,
or, still better, if you can spare the time fo go out with him, to
inspect the road leading from fhe County Road over to the Raee
Comse. Mr Gradwell, of Drogheda, is now our Secretary, and
the members of the Race Committee all think it would be a great
improvement if the grass edge along the road could be cleaned
away. It would make file road wider and safer for passengers.
A good many ladies object coming to Dundalk Raees on account
of the trouble with cars, and particularly the risk with so many
1110tors, aud if the County Surveyor would undertake to make
the improvements we could put it in our advertisement.
I am sure Mr Walsh will be glad to help us in every way, as
the Raees mean a big eireulåbtion of money in the district.
Yours faithfully,
T. CALLAN MACARDIÆ.
The, County Surveyor stated Mr Lyons was making some
improvements to this road, and he would inspect same at once
and see what could be done.
1
Couth County Council.
Minut.e.s of Proceedings of Louth County Council at their
First Quarterly Meeting, held in the Ccujnei! Chamber,
house, Dundalk, on Thursday, the 23rd day of April, 1914; tit
one o'clock p m.
Present :
Tn tile Chair—William A Esq, J P.
Others present—Patrick Callan, J P; John Dolan, Jcseph
Dolan, Patrick Donegan, J P; Charles A Duffy, J P; Luke J
Eleoek, Edward Goodman, Joseph M Johnson, J P; Joseph P
Kearney, James S Kelly, Michael Meade, Joseph H M' AHIle,
J P; James WCarthy, J P; John F Munyhy, J P; N T
Murphy, Patrick O'Connell, Denis J Rath, Wm T Skeffington,
J P; William Woods J P; James Wynne, J P:
Messns Daniel OConnell, Solicitor; and Thomas Walsh, Co.
John M C Lyons, James Dromgoole, and Dr
Surveyor ;
M 'Quillan were in attendance.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MI-NUTES.
bs Mr Charles A Duffy, J P;
Seconded by Mr Joseph Dolan, and
Recolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth
County Council, at their Adjourned Quarterly Meeting held
on Thursday, the 26th day of February, 1914, and a eop.v of
which 'has been sent to each Member of the Council, be and
are hereby confirmed.
2
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE COMMITTEE MINVTES.
Proposed by Mr Charles A Duffy, J P ;
Seconded by Mr James Wynne, J P, ancl
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the 14 inanee
Committee, held on the undermentioned dates, copy of which
has been sent to each menibetr of the Council, be, and are hore-
by confirmed' : —
Monday, 2nd day of March, 1914.
Monday, 9th day of March, 1914.
Monday, 16th day of March, 1914.
Monday, 30th day of Mareh, 1914.
Wednesday, 15th day of April, 1914.
CONFIRMATION OF EXWCTIVE COMMITTEE MINUTES
Proposed by Mr John F Murphy, J P;
Seconded by Mr Patrick (YConnell, and
Resolved—That, the minutes of proceedings of the Executive
Committee, held on the 6th day of April, 1914, a printed copy
having been sent to each member of tho Council, be arnd are
hereby confirmed.
PROPOSAL COMMI'ITEF..
Proposed by Mr William Woods, J P;
Seconded by Mr Denis J Rat;h,
Resolved—That the propcxsals for payments formulated by the
Proposal Committee at their first quarterly meeting held on
Monday, the 6th day of April, 1914, amounting to C4,195 188
4(1, as set out on Form '22 furnished to Che County Council, bo
and aro hereby approved of.
3
ARDEE PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr,' Michael Meade ;
Seconded by Mr Patrick Callan, J P, and
Resolved—That the proposals for payments formulated' by
the Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council at their first quarterly
meeting, held on Tuesday, the 7t,h April, 1914, amounting to
2800 2s 3d, as set ont on Form 22, furnished to the County
Couneil, be and are hereby approved of.
DROGHEDA PAYMENTS.
Proposed Mr Patrick Donegan, J P ;
Seconded by Mr James S Kelly, and
Resolved—That the proposals for payments formulat»ed by
the Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union, at their first
quarterly meeting, held on Tuesday, the 14th April, 1914,
amounting to e,391 128 3d, as set out on Form 22, furnished to
the County Council, be and are hereby of.
DUNDALK PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr William Wocds, J P ;
Seconded by Mr John F Murphy, J P, and
Resolved—That the proposals for payments formulated by
the Dundalk Rural District Council, at their first quarterly
meeting, held on Monday, the 6th day of April, 1914, amountr
ing to CI,438 4s IJd, as set, out on Form 22, furnished to tho
County Council, be and are 'hereby approved of.
DATES QUARTERIN MEETINGS.
Proposed by Mr William Woods, J P ;
Seconded by Mr Joseph P Kearney, and
Resolved— That the County Council hereby dot;ermine that
the following shall be the dates for the holding of the second
quarterly meeting of the Rural District Councils
Arclee, Tuesclay, 7th July, 1914.
Drogheda, Tuesday, 14th July, 1914.
I)undalk, Monday, 6th July, 1914.
The Proposal Committee to meet on Nonclay, (ith July, 1914.
RESOLUTION MAKING RATES IN RESPECT OF THE
FINANCIAL YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH, 1915.
Proposed by Mr N T
Seconded by Mr William T Skeffington, J P, and
Resolved—That in accordance with Che Estimates of Rates
for general and separate c'harges, adopted by the County Coun-
cil at their meeting, held on the 26th day of Febru-
ary, 1914, we •hereby make fates to levied off the County of
Lox, hh for the Financial year ending 31st March, 1915, as as-
scsyed in the Rate Books, and as set out as follows, viz :—
The Rates in the e for General Charges :
land.
Ardee—29 pence.
Drogheda —33 pence.
Dundalk—42 pence.
Buildings.
45 pence.
54 pence.
63 pence.
And Further—That pat,es in the e in respect of separate
charges, as set out on Form 43, and adopted at the said moct-
ing of the 26th February: 1914, be a.lrso made by this Council,
and that the Secretary be directed in accordance with Article
78 of the Public Bodies Order, to publish t,he Statutory Notice
of said Rates for General and Separate Charges having been
nvade.
5
SITE OF PROPOSED TUBERCULOSIS DISPENSARY AT
CASTLETOWN ROAD, DUNDALK.
Tho following resolution was unantmou.sly passed after dis-
eussion, and after the Chairman . had obtained the opinion of
the Solicitor, that tho Council could sun-ender the site, not-
withstanding the fact that the Lease in duplicate was ready for
signature : —
Proposed 'by Mr Joseph Johnson, J P ;
Seconded by Mr Edward Gocclman, and
Resolved—That in accordance with the resolution of the
Cot:tnci'l at last meeting dealing wilh the Tuberculosis Scheme,
that we hereby release Lord Roden from his promise to lease
the plot of land in the Demesne for •building a Dispensary.
CLERKSHIPS IN SECRETARY'S OFFICE.
The question of the recommendations Of the Finance Com-
mittee respecting the appointing of Clerks in the Secretary's
offce was discussed at length, and the following resolution
unanimously passed
Proposed by Mr N T Murphy ;
Seconded by XTr James M 'Carthy, J ; and
Resolved—That we hevcby decide to adopt tho recommenda-
tions of the Finance Committee respecting the appointments
in the Secretary's office, with the addition that in the ease of
Mr Louden'é appointment, his salary will be progressiva elso.
To appoint Mr Joseph Louden at a salary of CI IOS (one pctmcl
ten shillings) per week, to be increased by annually until it
reaches Cl'2().
One Sonior Clerk at a salary of Eighty Pounds (€80) per an-
num, inelT»asing to One Hundred and Twenty Pounds (Cl'20)
per annum, by annual increments of C5.
6
One Junior Clerk at a salary of e,50, increasing to CSO
(Eighty Pounds) maximum, by annual increments of e.3.
That the two latter appointments be made by competitive ex-
amination, to be conducted by the Local Government Board.
and that in the case of the Junior Clerkship, proficiency in
shorthancl aud typewriting be compulsory.
RENTS OF ARDEE DISPENSARY SITE AND CARLING-
FORD TUBERCUI,CSIS DISPENSARY.
The following resolution was passed unenimously :—
Proposed by Mr Edward Goodnian ;
Seconded by Wr Joseph M Jchnson, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby agree that the ront be paid for
the Carlingford Il'ub?rculosis Dispensary be increased by 0110
pound per anunm for the providing of the necessary fire for
heating purposes, as recommended by the Tuberculosis Com-
mittee of Management.
Also that we agree to pay the urent of C'2 (Two Pounds) per
annum for the site of the Ardee Tuberculosis Dispensary, and
that the Council's Solicitor be instructed to complete thc agree-
ments for both Dispensaries on the terms set out above, with
Bornard It 'Kevitt, Carlingford, and the Ardee Town Commis-
sioners respectively.
STORE ON CARLINGFORD PIER.
The next item on the agenda was the consideration of the
proposal to erect a Store on Cariingford Pier.
The Finance Committee at their meeting held on the 15th
April, after consideration of the report of the Committee ap-
pointed to inspect the old shed, which had been burned, recom-
mcnded that the County Council should erect a Store on tho
7
at Carlingford for the accommodation of importers ana ex-
porters, and to increase the trade ot the port.
After a discussion the following resolution was passed unani-
m onsly
Proposed by M-r William Woods, J P;
Seconded Mr Joseph M Johnson, J P, and
Resolved—That we decide on erecting a Store at Carlingford
Pier, as reoommeiidcd by the Fina nee Committee.
DEATH OF MR. HENRY
The following resolution was vasod in silence, Mr Goodman
to be assoeiateci V.'itll tche vote Of condolence
Proposed by Mr Charles A Duffy, J P;
Seconded by ur Luke J Eleock, and
Resolved—That we beg to •tender our eolleague, Mr Ber-
•nard Hamill, j P, our sincere regret at the death of his bro-
Cher, and that outr Soerctary be directed to convey io him, and
the members of his family, our symr,athy In their affliction.
MOTOR TRAWLING.
'The notice Of motion Standing in the name Of Mr Rath WAS
•adopted as a substantive resolution, Mr Elcock suggesting that
the Department of Agriculture should make Che penalty one of
imprisonment, as being the most effective method of stopping
the illegal trawling.
The resolution was passed as follows
Proposed by Mr Denis J Rath ;
Seconded by Mr N T Murphy, and
s
Resolved—That the attention of the Fisheries Branch of the
Department of Agriculture and Technieal Jnstntction for IIV-
land be cliweted to the necessity of prohibiting Crawling by
molar boats within the limits prescribed for steam trawling.
SECOND READING OF THE HOME RULE BILL.
Tho following resolution, senich came up on no€ieo of motion,
in the name of Mr Luke J Eleock, was passed unanimously,
and was supported •by the Chairman, Messrs Rat,h, J F Mur-
phy, J P ; Dolan, Goodman and Meade
Proposed by Mr L J Elcock ;
Seconded by Mr D J Rach, and
we congratulate Mr John Redmond and
tile Irish Parliamentary Party on the Second Reading Of the
Home Rule Bill Jb$' a stlbtstantial majority ; end that we en-
dorse to the fullest the declarations of the IriÅh Leeders
no further concessions can be granted to the advocates of civil
strife in Ulst€•r, who have spurned the .offors already lilacle for
a peaceful settlement, and that we believe the proper solution
cf the Irish question Will be found 'by placing the Home Rule
Bill as it stands on Clie Statute Book. That our Spcrot,ary be
directed to sc•ncl eopies of the Resolution to the Prime Minis-
tetr (Mr H H Asquith), Mr john E Redmond, M P; Messrs
Joseph Nolan, M P, and Auguctine Roche, M P.
CORRESPONDENCE.
DEATH OF MRS -NIURPHY, MRS WOODS, AND
MR. J. HALPENNY.
The following letters of acknowledgment were read, and or-
to be inserted on the minutes
A rdee,
2nd March, 1914.
Sir,
Please convey to the Council, and aeeept same yourself, my
sincere thanks for their kind vote of sympathy with me on the
death of my son
Charles M' Alestep, Esq.
Deair Sir,
Sours faithfully,
JAMES
Stonefown, Corereagh,
22nd April, 1914.
Kindly convey €0 the members Of the Ckynnty Council my thanks
ior the utioil of sympathy they passed on the death of Iny
in ot her.
The Secretary,
County Council.
I)e4it• Mr M 'Alestej•,
Yours truly,
JOHN F. MURPHY.
Carlingford,
3rd Marcll, 1914.
Would you kindly convey ft) your County Council my heartfelt
{Ivanks for their kindness and thoughtfil)ness in proposing a vote
T am very grateful to
of sympathy on the death of my mother.
all my colleagues on tile Council, and particularly to the proposer
and seconder of the resolution.
I am, yours faithfully,
WILLIAM WOODS.
Secretary,
Louth County Council.
OFEICER'S BOND.
Letter was 'read from Mr O'Connell, Solicitor to the Conncil,
stati ng that Mr Patrick J Roe, Solicitor, the Returning Officer
(or the Counts Fuleetions, had submitted as his sureties the names
of Doctor E F Flood and Mr Peter J Murphy, both of Dundalk,
wncl requesting instructions in 't)ie matter.
10
The Council unanimously decided to accept the gentlemen named
as Mr Roe's sureties, and the Solicitor was instructed to complete
bond accordingly,
WOTTONSTOWN DRAINAGE,
The followirjg letter from Mr O'Connell, Solicitor, was read, and
Messrs Michael Meade and Patrick Byrne were appointed to
confer with tile County Surveyor and the Solicitor on the matter
and report to the Council as early as possible
Francis Street, IJundaik,
23rd April, 1914,
Re Woff,onsfown Drainage District,
Dear Sir,—
Witli reference to the letter Of' Local Government Boarcf
011 tlif9 matter, and whiell has been referred to preliminary
to your Council expressing' their views to the Board as requested
relative to the question of transferring the business of the Board
of Trustees to the Council, I would point Otlt that in view of the
fact that no election Of Trustees has taken place since 1902, that
the proper maintenance of the drainage has been neglected to the
detriment of the farms of the district, and tlmt there is no ap•
parent likelihood of any election, it would appear to to be
expedient and necessary in the interests of the district €0 have
the transfer effected. The Local Government Board have power
under Section 20 of the Loeai Government (Treland) Aet, 1898, to
make provision for the transfer of the business of the Council.
I would suggest* however, iti order tfncf the matter be investi.•
gated in detail, that a Committee consisting of persons locallM
interested, witli some members of the Council, meet the County
Surveyor on the spot with the award and maps, when flie nature of
the work required to be clone can be reportecl on fully.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL, O'CONNELL,
Charles M 'A fester,
Secretary, Louth (.k»unty Council.
11
WAYLEAVE FOR ELECTRIC LIGHTING STANDARDS IN
ARDEE, DUNLEER, ETC.
The following letters from Mr John W M 'Keever, AeJare Lodge,
Ardee, in above matter, were read
A elare Lodge, Ardee,
16th 1914.
To the Presiding Chairman,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Dear Sir,—
beg to make an application to your Council for permis—
Sion fo place poles and overhead wires alongside the roads in the
Town of Ardee, Collon, and Dunleer, and to carry some of the
wires overhead across the roads for the purpose of supplying
Electrie Light in those places.
Tf you are good enough fo grant me the permission, I will un-
dertake to arrange the position of the poles, etc, to the satisfaction
of your County Surveyor.
T am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
JOHN WM. A1'KEEVEJt.
A clare Lodge, Ardee,
Co. Louth,
20th April, 1914.
To the Presiding Chairman,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Dear Sir,—
With further reference to my application of the 16th
instant, re wayleaves for Electric Lighting poles and wires, I
would be much obliged if your Council in granting my applica-
fion would kindly empower me to transfer my rights in same to
any Company or Companies which may be formed to take over the
working of the electric plants in the different towns, as it is my
12
intention to have the business carried on by 'I,oenl Companies after
the work is completed. Thenfore it will save any future appli-
cations having to be made to your Council 011 the subject.
'I'ljanking you in anticipation.
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
JOHN WM. M'KEEVER.
The Secretary also read resolutions from Che A rclee' District
Council approving of the granting of the wayleave, and
menxling same to the County Council
After consideration of the matter the Council, on the motion of
Mr Meade, seconded by ALr N T Murphy, (leeicled to grant the
wayleave asked for su.bjeet fo Mr M'Keever satisfying the County
Surveyor as to the position of the standards, and on his signing
an agreement in connect-ion witli the matter to be prepared by
the County Solicitor, Mr O'Connell, and to be paid for by Mr
M 'Keever.
ROAD BOARD GRANT
The following letter from the Road Board was read and referred
to the County Surveyor
Tile Road BoalXl,
Quern Anne's Chambers,
Broadway, Westminster,
Imdon, S. W.,
17th April, 1914
Dublin-Belfast Road.
Sir,—
letters
I am directed by the Road Botu•d to refer to your
of the 7th Moreh last and the 11th inst, €0 say that, as
stated in the Board's letter of the 23rd January last, in view of
the increase in the estimated expenditure in respect of works of
improvements on this Hjad from EIO,800 to C18,685, the Board are
prepared to increase the contemplated grant to E5,450, which sum,
13
having regard to the information at present in possession. they
regard as adequate,
If, however, the County Council are unable to finance the
scheme with the wid of this grant and loan of (say) EIO,800, the
would be ready to consider any suggestions that the County
Council might make with a view to the reduction of the 'initial
expenditure by omitting part of the proposed work.
am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
W. REES JEFFERYS,
Secretary.
'I'he Seci•e€ary of
Louth County Council,
Coutåhousey Dundalk
COLION COCR,TIIOVJSVÄ.
Letter read from Mr Gloster, Colton, Agent for Lord
Massareene, directing the attention of the Council to the danger
by reason of the usage of Colion Petty Sessions Ilouse by eon-
eert parties, and asking if the Council would be responsible iu
ease Of fii•e that might take on the oeeasious witen the house
was so Itsed.
The 'Secretary informed Coumil they were liable for the
Tent and instiranee of the building, but that the Council were not
consulted as to aiiY permission to use the building for enter-
taimnents. That the Poliey Of Insurance contained a clause that
the building insured could not be used for theatrical perform-
anees.
If was decided to refer the €0 Solicitor for his
opinions
ESTATE DEMESNE.
The following letter from Mr P J Kerley, Solicitor, was read,
and the Secretary Was directed to reply that the County Council
only wanted the woodlands on the Estate for theil'
and eare under a County Forestry Scheme
Offices, Market Square,
Dundalk,
*2nd
Seei•efary, Louth County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
Dear Sir,—
April, 1914,
I have been instructed by some Of the evicted tenants to
write you with reference to the acquisition by your Council of
the untenanted lands and Demesne, flie property of tire Reps. of
William Ruxton, at Ardee House. My clients desire that your
Council ought to take info consideration the faec tfxat i•epresenta•
Lion has been made to the Ektate Commissioners who acquired
the untenanted fands Otl the Estate for the purpose of providing
Zholdings for the evicted tenants and other fena,nfs on the Estate:
My in.strucfions are, Chaf af feast 260 neres Of the lands provided'
to be acquired by your Council were in the possession of tenants
who Wei•e evicted witliiii the past 50 years, and clients conu
sider Chat it would be very g+eat haiclsfiip, iiideed, if the landS
so acquired by your Council for the Uses and which you
desire witfi011t taking into eons'idérati01f tlie efaims of the evicted
tenants a trd small holders oil the Estate. The lands referred to
have already been inspeeted by the Estate Commissioneå•s with {i
• view to purchasing same for the benefit of these evicted tenantS
and small holders, and my clients submit that no definite steps
in the matter should be taken by your Council whicfi would dis-•
regard their interests. claims and rights.
fours
P. J. KERI.F,V.
ÄCTIOS AGAINST CotlNTf CoUNC1i,.
Letter was read from Mr P J Kerley, Solicitor. 011 behalf of Mr
Stephen Lennon, i, m•gankeel, Road (%ntraetm, tlneatehing to
issue Civil Bill agminst County Council for balGtnce allegea
€0 be due on foot of Road Contract.
15
The Secretary infonned the Council that this road was taken
up by Acting County Surveyor, Mr Lyons, on a ten days'
notice, and that no money was owing to Lennon.
The matter was referred to the Solicitor.
CEIÆBRATION 01.' BATTLE, OF CLONTARF.
Circular letter was read from the Town Clerk, Dublin, asking
County Council to send representatives €0 a Convention on
the 26th May next, to organise a proper celebration of the 900th
anniversary of the Battle of Clontarf.
Messrs Joseph Dolan alid Michael Meade were appointed fo ve-
present the Council on the occasion.
APPROVAL OF AMENDED BYE-LAWS WITH RESPECT To
LOCOMOTIVES IN COUNTY LOUTH.
The Bye-laws respect to the use of Locomotives in tho
County of Louth, as amended and approved by T.oeal Govern-
ment Board, were submitted to the C-k»uneil, and the following
resolution was passed
Proposed by Mr Edward Goodman,
Seconded by Mr John F Murphy, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby adopt the amended Bye-Laws with
respect to the use of Locomotives in the County of Louth, as ap-
proved hy the Local Government Board, •and we authorise our
Secretary fo affix seal of (he Council thereto.
COUNTY LOUTH TUBERCULOSIS SCHEME.
Mr J M Johnson, J P, gave notice that he would move at the
next meeting of the County Council that the scheme for the treat-
ment of Tuberculosis patients in County Louth be rescinded, and
also all subsequent resolutions thereon passed by the Council, and
that a new sehcnne be framed.
16
Finance Committee.
8 13
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
t,ing held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
Monday, 27th day of April, 1914, at one o'clock p m.
8 11
Present : —
In the Chair—Joseph M Johnson: E.sq, J P.
Other Members •present—Michael Meade, Joseph H M' Ardle,
J P; and John F Murphy, J P, Esquires.
56 11
Also present—ur Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor.
The Secretary submitted the following accounts for Works
in charge of the County Surveyor, and those of his own Office,
17
SECRETARYS OFFICE.
J A Carberry, D I, Conveya,gmce of Prisoners
H E Henderson, I) I : Conveyance of Prisoners
M Murray, per H Rqgal!, Student
S J Mcdea]f, per P Hanratty, Student
National University, per A Hanratty, Student
J O'Mahon.v, Preparing Rate Books
P J Clarke
J Kindlon
T O'Gorman
E French
A J Palmer
C M'Carthy
i" M' Ardle
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
M M 'Gallann, Two Weeks' Salary
J Louden, Two Weeks' Shlary
s
I
16
IO
o
4
1 11
8
19
O
2
C151 13 11
20
-1
2
2
3
'2
2
2
2
o
2
3
95
d
5
G
0
o
3
7
4
6
6
O
3
8
Total
whic!h on examination were passed and ordered for
by the Cornmitt,ee:—
SURVEYOR'S OFFICE.
C
1
1
83
1
1
1
s
5
9
8
9
9
4 14 10
6
2
pa y ment
8
6
8
0
COLLECTORS' POUNDAGE.
The question of t110 Rate Collectors' Poundage yas
under
E Manisty
J Durnin
Eddison Co (Steam
F M 'Dermott
P Hanlon
F Boyle
H Mathews
Rolling)
C9ö
discussion, and the Secretary was directed to request, tho
Local Government Bomrd's sanction for the payment Of
amounts (litre the Collectoes for the moieties of the Poor Rea.te.
BRANCH RAILWAY ACCOUNT.
The following Account was su'bmitted and initialled by t!he
Chairman, ana the Committee recommended the County
Council to have the Aecoünt advertised in the Drogheda and
Dundalk papers:—
1913.
Dec. 31st.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
ACCOUNT furnished to the Louth County Council by the Great
Northern Railway Company (Ireland), showing Financibl Workings
of Ardee Branch Railway.
Ardee Branch Line in Account with the Great Northern Railway
Company (Ireland).
35 11
192 19
611
10 15
64 14
2 13
.C
19
DUTIES OF VE'I'ERINARY INSPECTORS.
The following Letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man, and the Secretary was directed to send Copy to the
Drogheda Corporation and Dundalk Urban Council
Department of Agrieulbure and Technical Instruction
C
. '243
723
G
13
C,
10
5
70
.30
s.
o
18
12
g
o
2
3
o
3
3
d.
2
G
8
5
7
7
9
6
2
3
5
0
O
0
o
o
0
1913.
Dec. 31st.
By Traffic Earnings, H. Y.
To Cost of Maintenance cf
way Works .
Cogt of Loco Power Re•
pairs
Rents of Carriages and
Waggons — Proportion
of Traffic Wages Paid
Dromin
Traffic Wages Paid Ardee
Proportion of Cost of
Stores—Dromib
Cost of Stores supplied
Ardee
Proportion of Cost of Sta•
tionery supplied Dromin
Cost of Stationery sup-
plied Ardee
, Cost of Maintenance of
Telegraphs
Proportion of Petty I)ig•
bursements—-D r o m i n
Junction
Petty Disburgementg—Ar
dee
Cash Ardee Gas Co—Gas
to 30th Sept. V. 8129
Gas to 31st Dec. V, 9355
„ Cash. P. Yore, Borough
Rate, Ardee
., cash, P. Mil)onnell, Poor
Rate. 1st moiety
r, Cash, P. S. Donegan, do.
Premium on Insurance of
Dromin Junction and
Ardee Stations
Arbitrator's Fee (Sir John
Barton)
Charge for Superinten-
dence
To Balance brought down '206
Interest on Capital, H. Y.
maximum amount pay.
able (2i p c• on $.32.,099) 400
Balance brought down 606
Signed,
as per statement from
Audit Office
1,1S7
Messrs Eason & Son, ex•
hibiting Advertise-
ments at Dromin Junc
s.
4
1
13
3
2
3
3
d
3
5
6
0'
for Ireland (Vet€winary Branch,
50 and 51, Upper Mount St.,
Dublin, 16th April, 1914.
tion
, Grass Rents
Balance
By Balance
3
206
, 398
No. 1456/14.
Sir,
Witth reference to your -letter of 11th instant, and
its enclosure, on the subject, I have to stat,o that the Depart-
ment are advised that neither the Corporation of Drogheda nor
the Urban District Council of Dundalk has any power to call
on your Local Ant'hority's Veterinary Inspectors under the Dis-
ea.ses of Animals Aets, to act as Inspectors of animals or of
meat exposed for sale within: the Urban Districts.
I am, Sir,
Your •obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretia;ry.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
DIRECTION POSTS TO MELLIFONT AND MONASTER-
BOYCE.
Letter was read from the Board of Works, dated April,
(5037-14), requesting the County Council to erect six direction
posts to Mellifont and Monasterboice, and stating that the Au-
tomible Association would supply the arms.
J. SHANKS.
A moun+.nnf..
20
The matter Wiis referred the County Stirveyor.
APPOINTMENTS IN SECRETARY'S OFFICE.
The Secretary was directed to put on t,he agenda for tho
next Meeting of the Finance Committee, the busine«s of the
details of Appoiiitiitotlts to •bé rnade in tho Sccretary's
Office, as to the subjects for examination, etc.
COMMITTALS TO INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS.
Letter was read from the Clerk of Petty Sessions, Dundalk,
dated t}he 22nd April, notifying the County Council that an ap-
plieation would •he maclé at Durndadk Petty Sessions on the 24th
April, the c0mri1ittal of a Ohild natried Bridget M 'Don-
nell, River Lane, Dundalk, to Itidust,riul Séhool.
USAGE OF UNION FEVER HOSPITALS FOR PATIENTS
UNDER COUNTY TUBERCULOSIS SCHEME.
'Ille following letter from the Local Government Board wats
read and referred to tho Tuberculosis Committee of Manage-
mont for their consideration and : —
No. 71: M.
1914.
Miscellftneous.
Local Goveå•hment Board,
Dublin; 24th April, 1914.
Sir,
I am directed by [he Local Government Board for
fi•olåncl Ståité that théir attention has been frequently drawn
to the urgent nece—ity of iliaking ifroviS10n for the prSdpéi• iSO-
Iåtioji (Yf ffdvaneed eases of luberculOSiS so as to bi•event the
spread of i'nfee€ion from sueh eases.
21
it is generally recognised that no scheme of administrative
h etion which aims at the prevention and abolition of tuberculo-
sis can be Oompletely effective unless active steps are taken to
remove from small and crowded houses patients in an advanced
stagg of the disease. These patients are a constant source of
danger to the other inmates of the dwelling, and their rernoval
to a hospital, they eould receive medical attenclanee and
nursing, Would be in the best interests of the patients, their
friends Aiicl the public.
At the same time it is well known that patients in an ad-
Vanceci stage of Che disease will not, willingly go a hcspital
ni any eonsider:vble distanee from t!heir home, as their friends
and relatives could not have ready access to them. This, in
itself, constitutes one of the greatest difficulties in dealing with
the problem. To suggest the setting up of new institutions
for the purpose all over the country would, at least in some
counties, jmeet with opposition on finanmal and administrative
The fever hospitals in England, Wales and Scotland aro
usually called isolation hospitals, and many Of them provi-
Shon has been made for the treatment Of patients sufferi21g
from tuberculosis. These hospitals are administered by the
sanitary authorities, ancl as they are not poor law institutions
there is no barrier to their being titijised for the treatment of
insured persons suffering from tubercu104s.
The Board have given this question most caretul considera-
tion with a view to making a recommendation which they trust
will solve the difficulty without creating new institutions. They
are of opinion that a number of the present Union fever hos-
Ditals might be transferred to the District Councils where the
latter body are the sanitary authority for the entire Union acrea
served by the hospital,
22
The name, District, Isolation Ilospital, might •be substituted
for that of Union Fever Hospital. The hospital would also bg
available for the reception and treatment of patientß suffering
from tuberculosis •by adding two pavilions or chalefg for
purpose, one for male and one for female patients.
If this recommendation meets witih the approval of the bo-
dies concerned it will have the advantage of economy in t}he
capitol cost and in the cost of administration. It would solve
the innumerable difficulties connected with the acquisition of
sites for hospitals for tuberculous patients.
Tho hospitals might also be co-ordinated with the County
scheme for the treatment of tuberculosis 'by arrangement . be.
tween the County Council and the District Council concerned
on the basis of a contribution to be fixed between those bodies.
By these means a considerable relief of tho poor rate might be
effected, seeing that whreas tho cost of institutional treatment,
of poor persons suffering from tuberculosis is now borno in full
by the Union rates, the corresponding charge under the ar-
rangements above indicated would rank for recoupment from
the Exchequer Grant in aid of tuberculosis. It will thus 'be ob-
vious that an arrangement on the lines suggested will be to the
advantage of the local and County ratepayers, and, at the same
tine, will have a important and far-reaching effect upon
tho eradication of tuberculosis.
I am, Sira
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Seeretnrv,
The Secretary
of each County Councål.
23
LOANS UNDER LABOURERS' ACTS.
fellowing schedule was read and initialled by the
Cha :—
'I'HE PURCHASE OF LAND (IRELAND) ACT, 1891, AND THE
LABOURERS (IRELAND) ACT, 1906.
LOCAL TAXATION (IRELAND) ACCOUNT
Financial Year ended 31St of March, 1914.
COUNTY OF LOUTH.
Selledul€, showing: particulars of amounts remitted to tho
Commissioners of Public Works in Ireland out of the Exchquer
Contribution, to be applied by them towards the repayment of
outstanding loans under the Labourers Acts charged on the under-
mentioned Rural IYistricts.
Rural District
Dundalk
Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union
Amount
a 167 17 4
8245 6 11
C185 1 8
The amounts of the half-yearly annuities due to Che
Commissioners by the above-named Rural District Councils ill
respect of such loans 'vvill be reduced accordingly.
M. O'SULLIVAN,
Assistant Secretary.
La,bomers' Department,
Local Government Board,
Dublin,
24th April, 1914.
SIR CHARLES CAMERON'S REPORT FOR QUARTER ENDED
31st MARCH, 1914.
The following Report. was read and initialled by the
Chairman
Chathhxn Row, Dublin,
25th April, 1914.
Report of Sir Charles Cameron, C. B. , M. I). , Public Analyst for
the County Louth, on articles submitted to him for analysis
during the quarter ended 31st March, 1914.
were no articles received from the Food Inspectors, R.T.C.
For the Guardians of Drogheda Union one spocimen of milk and
one of water were analysed.
average quality of pure milk.
following composition
The milk was slightly under
The speeirnen of wa,ter had
the
the
One Imperial gallon contained
Total solid matter
Ineludiugt—
Albuminoid Ammonia
Sa,line Ammonia
Nitric Acid
Colour
A good water.
One specimen of water analysed for the
Council had tLe following composition
One Tmperial gallon contained
Total solid matter
Including——
Albuminoid Ammonia
Saline Ammonia
Nitric Acid
Ch lorine
Colour
A good wafer.
in grains :
7.700
0.005
0.003
Trace
0.790
light yellow.
Ardee Rural Distriet
in grains
56.000
0.008
0.0025
5.000
5.070
very light yellow.
One specimen of water analysed for Major O'ReiIIy, Knock-
abbey, Dundalk, bad the following composition:—
One Imperial gallon contained in grains :
25
In thc/ original reports on the waters above referred to, full
details, chemical and microscopical, were given, but in the fore-
•roing only the more important points are given.
Total analyses—Six.
C. A. CAMERON.
MALICIOUS, INJURY CLAIMS.
Tho Secretary informed the Committee that two Malicious Tn-
jury Claims harl been lodged by the Earl Of Arrau in respect of
burning of grouse mountain at Ravensdale and Jenkinstown for
42100 a,nd C300, respectively.
PROPOSED SITE OF DUNDALK TUBERCULOSIS
DISPENSARY.
The following letter from Lord Roden's Agent was read and
initialled by the Chainnan
Dundalk Estafe Office,
Dundalk,
24th April, 1914.
Re Proposed Site for Tuberculosis Dispensary.
Dear Sir.—
T am in recei pt of yours of H 1is date. T from th e
Louth Count:y Council their release of Lord Roden from his
promise to lease the plot of land above to.
Total solid matter
Ineluding•—
A Ibuminoid Ammonia
Suline Ammonia
Nitric Acid
lorine
Colour
A very good water.
33.600
0.005
0.0005
3.120
1.690
light yellow.
Yours faithfully,
JOHN WM. TURNER.
Charles M' Ales€er, Esq.
One specimen of feeding stuff was analysed for the Secretary,
Louth Council.
One specimen of milk analysed for Mrs J M 'Keever, Syddwn
Finnse, Ardee, was deprived of at least 36 per cwt of its fats.
CARETAKING OF WILLISTOWN PLANTATION.
Mr Meade informed the Committee that damage was being done
by trespassers at the Willistown Plantation fo the trees, and that
the Local Committee recommended the appointment of a capable
man named William M'Callum, Drumcar, who was always on tho
26
spot, and Wimo would protect the Council's ptoperfy as
pending the final arrangements of the Forestry Scheme,
The Committee unanimously approved of the appointment of
William MCCaIIum, Drumcar, as caretaker for Willistown Plan-
Cation at the salary of Z3 per annum, as recommended by the
nycal Committee,
27
Finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held ill the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 11th day Of May, 1914, at one o'clock p m.
Present :—
I In the Chair—C A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members present—William Woods, J P; Joseph H
M'Ardle, J P; Bernard Hamill, J P; Wm A Doran, J P; James
Wynne, J P; Patrick O'Connell, and Joseph M Johnson, J P,
Esquires.
Also present—Mr Thomas Walsh, co. Surveyor.
The Secretary submitted the following accounts for works in
charge of the County Surveyor, and those of his own office, which
on examination were passed and ordered for payment by tho
Corn m ittee :—
SURVEYOR'S OFFICE
J Cumiskey
T Gallager
L Conlon
J M'Ard1e
L Mathews
M Ferguson
J •Durnin
C Dougherty and Co
J Durnin
F M'l)ermof€
C Dougherty and Co
P Curtis
Bellew
P Kinahan
P WKevitt
0 12
1
01410
158
0 14 10
4
1
1
1
1 11
2317 0
3
7
15 0
0
4 10
28
P Bell y
P Rlee
T
Berry
P
Berry
H
Connolly
M
Cann
G
Patterson
SECRETARY'S OFFICE.
M Murray, per 11 Rogan, Student
S J Medculfe, per P A Hanratty, Student
J AL Dolan, per J M'l)arlaud, Student
0 410
015 IJ
013 5
122
0 1510
0 910
0 410
Z54 6 7
29
naerwooa Typewriter Coy. , Ltd., Duplicator Supplied
Steretary's Office
Reilly, Caretaker Ardee Dispensary
Richard Q O'Neill. rent to 1st May, 1914
E F Flood, Medical Hall, -Modicul Appliancrs
'I' li01nas O'Farrell, Tuberculosis Analysis
urs NI Gogarty, alteration and rent Drogheda Dispen-
0 19
7 10
2 14
O
23
20
Charles M' Ale.ster. Petty Cash Account
Ltd, Balance on Account, fencing Ardee
[I u mph re.ys.
4
l) is pensary
Z181
RATE COLLECTORS' ARREARS ICISTS.
6
o
o
6
10
3
o
o
o
4
4
Irish Land Commission, Willistown Plantation, 1st
stalment
P Tierney, Sla.ughter of Ileifer under Tuberculosis
Order
P Donega,n, Refund of Arreals for 31/3/1914
P M'Cu110ugh
J J Kelly
P Hughes
P Cluskey
P M'Donnefi
John Woods
J V Johnston
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
do
1 16
2 13
9
3
27 011
25 4
8
33 2
3
2 13
9
19 14
2
70 15
42 19 11
J Kindfon, Proparing Rafe Books
P J Clarke, Preparing Rate Books
French, Preparing Rate Books
M M'Gahan, Weeks' Salary
J Louden, Two Weeks' Salary
Total
COUNTY-AT-LARGE PAYMENTS.
57 4
16 9
3 14
19
315 9
54 6
€369 16
6
9
3
6
6
0
6
7
1
The Secretary submitted the following aeecjijnts, which
examined recommended for payment
C
Artane Industrial Selrooi, d months' maintenance €0 31st
March, 1914
116
St. Dominick School. 6 months/ maintenance €0 31st
3
Marci), 1914
w ore
S
3
5
d
3
following letter from the Local Government Board was
•read and initialled by the Chairman, and the Secretary stated Ite
bad •written Collector Kelly to furnish a fuller exp)anation of the
two items in question
Local Government Board,
Dublin.
5th Mwy,
No. 21,999: 1014.
Louth County,
Witli refereneé fo the •lists of arvears of rate in Counts
Of Lout•ii for fire period ended the 31st of March, 1914, recently
forwarded by you to this Department, am directed by the Local
Government Board for Ireland to return the lists, herewith, and
to state that tile rulings of the Board are duly stamped thereon,
except as regards the two amounts opposite item 2378 on the fist
of • Collector J j Kelly ill respect to wilicii fuller explanation
should be furnisile«l.
I am, at the same time, to point out tilat the rulings of the
board have been given on the assumption that the information
eontaiiié(l in the several lists is in all respects ueeurate, and must
not, thorefore, be regarded as interfering with the jurisdiction
of the Auditor in case for any cause he should at audit find it
necessary to deal otherwise with any item or ,ifems.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARTAS, Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
CLERKSHIPS IN SECRETARY 'S OFFICE.
The follouång letter from the Local Government Board was
read : —
No. 22.223: 1911.
Louth County.
Sir,
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 29th April, 1914.
The Local Government Board for Ireland have had be-
fore them your 'letter of the 24th instant, in reference to the
appointment by the Louth County Council of three clerks in
the office of the County Secreüxry, and the Board direct me to
stole that they will raise no objection to the proposed appoint-
ment,s on t'he berms set out in your letter.
As requested the Board will be prepared Vo a,rran.ge for hold-
ing an examination at Dundalk on a convenient date of can-
didates •nominated by the County Council for the Senior antl
Junior Clerkships.
At a similar examination for Clerkships recently held under
91
direction of the Board in a, neighbouring county, the can-
dicla€es were examined in the following subjects
1. Arithmetic (including long tots).
2. English Composition.
3. Precis.
I. Elementary knowledge of local government systems with
special reference to road administration.
5. Book-keepin g.
6. Dictation.
The Board consider that the eandida,tes for the vaoaneies in
County Louth might be examined in Chese subjects, and also in
Shorthand and Typewriting, as suggested by the County Coun-
oil, ancl the Board will 'be glad to have the views of the Ccnineil
in the matter.
A statement showing the names and addresses of the candi-
dates nominated to attend the examination should be forwar-
ded to this Department as soon as possible.
I am, Sid,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
Secretary ,
Louth County Council.
Letter was read from the North and South Louth Gaelic
Loagues, signed by the Rev Father M J Quin, P P, Carling-
ford; Rev Father .Jmmes Quinn, C C, Haggardsbown ; Messrs
A G O' Lodhjan, Castlebellingham, and J T Dolan, Ardee, re-
questing the County Council to make Irish a, subject of the ex-
aminations for the clerkships, but not a compulsory one. Tho
letter pointed out that the adoption of Irish as a subject would
help to secure that young men in charge of the administration
of local affairs would have some knowledge of National History
and resources, and would have wide in their country and
county.
Letter was read from the Secretary of the Dundalk Gaelic
League, Mr P O' Duffy, stating that the Committee of tho
Dundalk Branch of the League requested the Council to bave
Irish made a subject of the examination iri filling Che clenical
vacancies in the County Office; Chat several public Boards had
adopted the competitive system, and in each case that Iri'h was
made a subject, •but not a compulsory one, for the examination
and giving details of the County Monaghmn %eherne.
Letter was also read from Mr Denis Carolan Rushe, B A,
Secretary of the Monaghan County Council, giving the subjects
and marks allotted for the examination in County Monaghan
for junior Clerkship. The following were the figures •.—Xrit11-
metic, 100; English Composition, 100; Irish, 100; Shordhand,
100; Public Bodies and Procedure Orders, 50; Precis, 50 ; Book-
keeping, 50 ! Dictation, 50. Total, 600,
After discussion the Conlmittee unanimously decided to re-
commend the County Council to fix the following subjects with
the mmrkings for each, for the two Clerkships, and the Secre-
Cary was directed to have advertisements issued after the
County Council meeting to be held on the '28th May
Irish
Book-keeping
Dictation
Shortha nd
Typewriting
100
100
50
50
50
650
100
50
50
50
50
(joo
LIST OF' SUBJECTS:
Sen Clerk
Arithmetic (including long and
Cross Tots)
English Cornposition
Precis
Elementary Knowledge Of Local
Government System, with spe-
Cial reference to Road Ad-
ministration
100
7
100
50
50
Jun Clerk
100
100
50
50
In the case of the Junior Clerkship a ptss in Shorthand and
Typewriting to be obligatory.
DREDGING AT ANNAGASSAN HARBOUR.
The following letter, in connection with the Council's appli-
cation to have the dredged material at Annagassan Harbour
dumped alongshore, was read
Board of Trade (Harbour Department),
Whitehall London, S. W,
27th April, 1914.
H. 6034.
Sir,
I am directed by the Board of Trade to refer Lo
your letter of the 11th April (addressed to the Boa •d Of Trade
Office in Dublin) transmitting a chart, showing certain tidal
lands in Dundalk Bay to the North of Annagassa,n upon which
the Louth County Council desire permission to deposit the ma-
terial excavated in, connection with dredging operations at An-
nagassan.
The Board desire me to inquire (l) what steps Che Council
propose to take to retain the dredging material upon the area
selected for deposit, and (2) what, is the exact nature of the ma-
terial to be deposited.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
L. F. MARWOOD.
The Secretary to the Louth Co. Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
The Secretary informed the Committee that he had written to
Mr Oliver, Engineer to the Department, for a description of t:hc
dredged mat.enial, and had his reply that, the 'bulk of the ma-
ferial to be dealt with will be stiff clay and the residue Largely
heavy stone; that any sand found can 'be clumped at the baek
Of the breakwater as already sanctioned, or Where the tendency
is to accumulate and not €0 waste or send to sea, but that the
amount of it would be so small as to be
The Secretary was directed to reply accordingly to Che Board
of Trade, and to again request their consent.
LOCOMOTIVE BYE-LAWS.
The following from the Local Government Board was
read, and the Secretary was dircctecl to have the necessary ad-
vertisement inselfed in the Drogheda and Dundalk papers, and
after the expiration of a month to have the confirmation of ap-
plication brought before the Council Council
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 28th 1913.
No. 22531: 1914.
Louth County.
Sir,
T am directed by the Local Goveu•nment Board for
Ireland to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 25th
instant, relative to the proposed code of bye-laws with respect,
to the use of locomotives in County Louth ; and T nm to state
that, if not already issued, the preliminary newspaper notice
may now be published of the Council's intention to apply to the
Board at the expiration of the statutory period of one month
fax the confirmation of the code.
35
The Board will awa;it the receipt of a eopy cf a formal resolu-
tion of the Council, passed at the end of that time, making ap-
Plication for such confirm ba lion, together with a copy of the
newspaper containing the notice above referred
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Seeretat•y.
"I'll.e Secretary Lout,h Co. Council
Courtilouse, Dundalk.
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL COMMITTAL.
Letter was read from Inspector Whelenan, dated 27th April,
-stating that application would ibe rnmle at Dundalk Petty Ses-
sions for the eommittal to an Industrial School cf a child named
John Finegan, aged three years.
The letter was initialled! by Chairmagm,
COLLECTORS' POUNDAGE FF,ES.
following letter from the Local Government Board was
read, and after discussion the Secretary was directed to wtrito
ngain to the Board for permission to pay the Collec€01$, and to
point out that it was the Council -that gave the Colleetors the
extension of one month a.ft,er Che 30th September, 1913, and
that they had all closed their collections for the financial year
on the 31st 1914 —
Local Government Board,
Dublin; 5th May, 1914.
so. '23,853:
Louth County.
Sir,
"With reference to your letter of the ist instant, rela-
tilte €0 tho eollection of the poor rate in Louth Cottnfy foil Cho
yea;r ended the 31st March last, I am directed by the Local
Government Board for Ireland to draw attention to their let-
ters of the 7th and 16th October last, and to state Ehat, having
regard to the guarantees given by the Poor Rate Collectors in
1911, that they would in future close their eolleetions by Che
end •of September, the marc-I see no reason why they Should
to the payment of poundage fees to those Collectors who
failed to close Elmeir collections for the first moiety for the past
year on the prescribed date,
am, Sir,
Your obedient ,SerVa1iC,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary,
The Secreiaxy,
Louth Cofinty Council,
FORESTRY' ,
The following letter Was read
Department of Agriculture and Tils€rUetå011
for freland,
tipper Merrion Street, Dublin,
6th May, 1914,
So. A. 10239-14,
Forestry ,
Sir,
nave €0 acknowfeclge the reee{pf of' your fettei• of the
5th instant, and to acquaint yoti that the Department hope to
be able to arrange for a visa by thefr Chief Forestry Inspector,
A C FoA)es, to County Louth on Tuesday next, {Ime 12th
instant, iii connection with tho proposed purchase of for«str.y
lands by Louth County Council.
37
Mr Forbes has •been insta•uéted to communicate direct with
you in the matter.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
Charies M 'Alostejr, Fusq,
Secretary Louth CO. Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
The Secretary informed the Committee that tis Imo was anxious
to advise the Local Committees of the visit of the Forestry 1m-
specfor, and as Mr Forbes had not coinrnuilicated with him as
advised, he (the Secretary) had written to the Department to
know the exact dates when the various woodlands would be visited
by Mr Forbes; aud had received a telegram in reply that lye
would v Üsit Ardee on the 12th. instant. The Secretary informed
Committee that he advised the Ardee Committee—Messrs W
A Doran, J P, and J T Dolan, M A—-of the Inspector's visit, a,nd
the matter was approved.
No fixture had been ma,cle by the Department for the further
inspection of Chneafh Park.
COLLON PET'IT SESSIONS HOUSE.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man
Francis Street, Dundalk.
6th May, 1914.
Re CoiiÅ)1i Petty Sessions nonse.
Dear Sir,—
I have Sour letter of 2i1d inst enclosing copy letter ro-
eeivéql from Thomas E Glosfer, Loi•d Masgerene's Agent, for
my opinion.
It is obvious [Ime terms of the Policy Of Fire Insurance
that the Insurance Company would not be bound to indemnify
the County Council the amount of damage occasioned by a fire
38
occurring on the premises which, •at tlre time of the outbreak, were
being used for the purposes of a Living Picture Show or a
T am looking into the further matter
Theatrical Entertainment.
of how far the Cotmty Cotincil would be liable to make good
damage resulting from a user of the premises occasioned by licence
given to other parties for such user by the local magistrates.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M'Alester, Esq,
Secretary, Louth County Couneii,
Dundalk.
NITENDANCES AT COUNTY COMMITTEE MEETINGS.
Tho following circular letter was read and initialled by the
(„"hairman :—
Department of Agricnllfure and Teclm,ieal I histruetion for Ireland,
Upper Merrion Street,
Dublin,
8th May, 1914.
No. 12332—14.
Sir,—
T have to acquaint you, for Che inforniation of your
Gouncil, that the Department have had before them returns of the
number of attendances of members of County Committees of
Agriculture at meetings held during the past year
Reviewing the figtnos for the county as a. whole, it is observed
that the average attendance per mesoting slightly exceeds twenty
per cent of the total n umber of members. This very low average
suggests the inference that persons are appointed on these Com-
mittees who either do not take sv.fficient interest in or are unable
to devote the necessary time to the businc» of the Committees ;
and Chis inference is borne out by the fact that. in the case of
several Committees a considerable number of the members did
not. attend a single meeting during the six months ended March
last.
Save in very exceptional circumstances the retention on a Com-
iii\ttee of members who take no rctive participation in the work
of the Committee is, in the view of the Department, undesirable.
'It a ecrtain amount of expense €0 the Committee
considerable trouble to its Seeretary, which might be avoided.
Moreover, even though if does not; always interfere with the
efficiency of the Committee's work, it cannot but convey an un-
favourable impression w11iclJ is unfair to those members who {Vt-
tend the meetings i•egolarly.
'The existing County Committee will go out of office at the same
•time •as the County Councils which appointed them, and, there-
fore, when the new County Councils are elected in June next,
•one of timeir duties will be to appoint Committees for the
purposes of the Agriculture and Technical Instruction (Irelmnd)
Act, 1899. Accordingly, viellV of whaf has been stated above,
"the Department would strongly urge upon County Councils when
appointing the new Committeexs the desirability of making the
appointment subject to the condition that any member of the
Committee who is absent from meetings of the Committee during
period of six consecutive months shall, ipso facto, cease to be
member of the Committee, and his office shall thereupon be-
•come vaeants
1 am, Sir,
Your obedient
T. P GILL,
SeeretaVS
Of each County
RICHMOND ASYLUM LOANS
The following eommvuni•eation from the Treasury Solicitor
Ireland was read, and the letter a-nd notices of intention fo ad-
sauce the Loans were initialled by the Chairmmn
•Office Of PubJie Works,
-Loan Of fo the Joint
District Lunatic Asylum under
laud) 189B.
8th May,
Committee of the Richmond
the Local Government (Ire-
40
Sir,—
Enclosed herewith I beg to send you in duplicate
Of Ibe intention Of the Commissioners of Public Works in Ireland
to advance the above-mentioned Loans.
Kindly transmit one Of the copies to your Council's Treasurer,
and acknowledge receipt at your convenience.
Yours truly,
J. DONNELLY.
The Secretary,
The Louth County Council,
Courthouse, Dun,dalk.
SYSTEM OF ROAD ROILING TN CO. LOUTH.
Mr P O'Connell brought under notice of the Committee the
objectionable system of rolling that: is in operation on the County
roads. He stated that on the road €0 Che Annies if. was impos-
Sible to travel with safety on vehicles owing to fhO way the stones
were spread for rolling.
The matter was referred to the Co. Surveyor,
41
executioe Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of above Committee held in tho
Council Cha,mbor, Ihndalk, on Monday, 18th
May, 1911, at one o'clock m.
P roseat : —
In t,he Chair—Joseph M Johnson, Esq, J p.
Other Members—John F Murphy, J P; Michael Meade
Patrick O'Connell, and James Wynne, J P, Esquires.
The question of •arrangements in connection with the Sheep
Dipping for the present season was discussed at lengthi and
the following Local Committees were appointed in connection
with t?le respective Dipping Tanks
For Wm Woods, J P;
Kearney. and Michael O'Meara, J P.
Dipping Superintendent—TIugh M 'Kevitt, whose rate of
remuneration of one penny per sheep and one halfpenny per
Iamb was approved, subject to Local Committee.
RAVENSDALE and J H M'Ard1e,
J P; James Connolly, J P; Peter Woods, J P, and Bernard
Finegan.
Dipping Superintendents—J for Ravensdale and Owen
Keenan for Agha,meen, at the rate of one penny per sheep
and one halfpenny per Iamb, was approved. The Committee
also approved of tibe payment of Cl for the season for rent of
sits of Aghameetl and Ravensdale tanks respectively, subject
to Local Committee.
42
W A J P, and James Halpeuny.
Dipping Superintendent— Leonard, at, the rate cf
16s per week, and the Local Committjee to avrange for
water supply for the tank. The rent of site, Cl, payable to
SITIee Rural District Council, was approv bject, thc
confirmation by the Local Committee.
Peter Hughes, J P, and J F
Dipping Superintendent—Thomas M 'Ardle, at the rabe of
16s por week. The rent of site as last year, C2 per clipping
period, payable to Miss Byrne, was approved, subject to Local
Committee.
P Donegan, J P; P Callan,
J P; J Dolan, and Denis Rath.
Dipping Superintendent—Michael M •Quillan, at the head
rate of one penny for sheep and one halfpenny for lambs, was
approved, and payrnent of the usual rent of site for tank, CI
for the season, to Mr H Norris, was also approved. subject €0
Local Committee.
TANKS.
It was unanimously decided to continue the arra ngements
witih Messrs Cooper and Nephews, Limited: as to the hire of
the tanks at Cl 5s Od per tank per annurn.
SHEEP DIP.
After discussion as to the supply of Sheep Dip for the
Council's tanks, the Secretary was directed to invite tenders
for the supply of Dip for the year from Chemists in Drogheda,
rdce and Dundalk, for the respective tanks in these disiricfs.
SHEEP SCAB ORDER or' 1914.
mile above Order, issued by the Department of Agriculture
for the year 1914, was again under discussion, and the Corn-
mittee decided to asQk the three Veterinary Inspectors, Messrs
Clinton, Donnelly and Maxwell, to meet in t'he Council
Chamber, Cotm•thouse, Dundalk, on Friday next, the 22nd
instant, at one o' clock, to decide whether any special regula-
tions were ncéessary, and the Secretary was directed to arrange
the conference accordingly.
REPORTS FROM VETERINARY INSPECTORS.
The following Rept)1G from the Veterinary Inspectors were
read ancl initialled by the Chairman
Drogheda,
2nd May, 1914.
Gentlemen.
During the month last, no fresh eases of Sheev Seåb
in this district.
I dealt widia $he two outbreaks of this disease mentioned in
my previous report, and expect to be able to withdraw the
Yestrictions in one of the cases in the course of a few class.
One suspected ease Che was re.
+orte•d, but after of the nnimal, I am of the
opinion it is not one to be dealt with under the Order.
I furnished ycui• Secretary with fuller information on
official Forms prescribed tho Department in eofineetion with
the different cases reported.
respectfully,
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
'To Che Louth County Counc•iL
(FÄeOutive Committee).
44
Ardee, 3rd 1914,
The Chairman, Louth County Council.
Sir.
I have visited the usuml Fairs cnd Markets held in the Arcloe
No. 1 District.
I held a post—mortem on a Sow, the property of Patrick
Malone, Cappogsgreen, said to be suffering from Swine Fever,
sent the viscera to Dublin for examination, and found disease
did not exist.
I am removing Messrs Caraher's detention notice tas from
the 29th re Sheep Scab. cannot at present remove Mr
Arthur M.aca,n's, as disinfection has not even been attempted,
Outside of Sheep Scab, this district is clear of disease,
I am, Sir,
Faithfully yours,
WILLIAM MAXWELL.
VETERINARY INSPECTORS' SALARIES.
As the period for which the increased to tile
Inspectors had been sanctioned by the Department
of Agriculture would expire Oji the 1st June, as the De-
partment had requested that the work under the Tuberculosis
Order Of 1913 be revieWed, the matter was discussed by'
the Committee, and it was unanimously decided to refer thc
whole question of the salaries of the Inspectors to the County
Council.
MOVEMENT OF ANIMALS.
The following Order of the Department of Agrieul€ure was
read, RS also a Notice from the West Sussex County Council :
(No. 355.)
ORDER OF TELE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND
TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION FOR IRELAND.
(Datcd 21st April, 1914.)
THE MOVEMENT OF ANIMALS (SOUTHERN IRELAND)
TEMPORARY PROHIBITION ORDER (No. 3).
The Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction
for Ireland, by virtue and in exercise of the powers vested in
them under the Agriculture and Technical Instruction (Ireland)
Act, 1899, the Diseases of Animals Acts, 1894 to 1911, and of
every other power enabling them in this behalf, do order, ancl
it is hereby ordered, as follows
Alteration of Scheduled Area.
1. On and after the twenty-second day of April, nineteen
hundred and fourteen, 11%e Movement of Animals (Southern
Ireland) Temporary Prohibition Order shall be read as if the
Area described in the Schedule to that Order were the Area
described in the First Schedule to this Order.
Order Revoked.
2. The Order described in the Second Schedule to this
Order is hereby revoked from the twenty-second day of April,
nineteen hundred and fourteen, inclusive.
Short Title.
3. This Order may be cited as The Movement of Animals
46
(Southern Ireland) Temporary Prohibition Order (No. 3).
In witness whereof the Department of
and Technical Instruction for Ireland have hero-
unto set their Official Seal this twenty-first day of
April, nineteen hundred and fourteen.
(Signed) T. P. GILL,
Secretary
FIRST SCHEDULE.
Scheduled Area.
So much of Ireland as lies to the south of the following
boundary (roads and railway lines mentioned as forming the
boundary, except the Great Southern and Western Railway
Line from Clara to Banagher, Ining as outside the
Scheduled Area) :—
Commencing at the Maiden Tower, 011 tho sea coast at
Mornington, thence by the course of the River Boyne to the
Railway Fridge at Drogheda, thence by tfhe Great Northern
Railway Line €0 its junction at Navan with the Midland
Western Line, thence southwards by the Midland Great,
Western Line to Kilmessan Station, thence westwards 'by the
Athboy Branch of that Line as far as the point where it
crosses the load from Navan to Trim at Peterstown, thence
southwards by the road via Newtown to the junction with the
road from Scurlockstown Bridge to Trim, thence by that road
through Trim to Roristown as far us the iunction with Che
bye-road over Derringdaly Bridge, thence by that road to tho
junction with the road from Ballivor to Trim, thence by that
road to Ballivor, thence by the direct road via Raharney to
Killucan, thence by the direct road from Killucan via Kil-
47
iuean Railway Station to the junction uGth the main road
loading from Kinnegacl to Mullingar, thence by the main road
via Rochforibriclge, Tyrrellspa.ss and Kilbeggan to the Mid-
land Great Western *Railway Line at Clara, thence by that
Line to its junetion w it'll the Great Southern and Western
Line south of Clara, thence by that Line to Banagher Station,
thence by the direct road to the River Shannon, and thence
by the course of that river to t,he sea.
SECOND SCHEDULE.
No. of
Order
Date of Order.
7th April, WII
Order Revoked,
(Article 2.)
Short Title,
The Movement of Animals (Southern Ire-
land) Temporary Prohibition Order
WEST SUSSEX.
DISEASES OF' ANIMALS ACTS.
FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE ORDER OF 1895.
Sotioe is hereby given that tile Executive Committee of
Local Authority of tho County of West Sussex, in exercise
of the powers vested in them under Article 12 of the, Foot and
Mouth Disease Order of 1895, and of every other power
enabling them in this behalf, have made the following
Regula Gons : —
I.
2.
3.
4,
The movement from the District of airy •other Local
Authority in England or Wales or Scotland into
District of the Local Autthority of the County of West,
Sussex of animals landed in Great Britain from Ireland
since the 21st day of April, 1914, or animals whicll
have been in contact with any such animals lanclcd ill
Great Britain as aforesaid, is prohibited.
Movement thronÉh the County of West Sitsses by rail
without, untrucking is excepted.
The expression ' 'animals' f cattle, sheep arid goats,
and all uoi,her ruminating animals and swine,
These Regulations shall come into force on 8th day
of May, 1914.
S. THORSELV,
Clerk of the West Sussex County Council,
49
I.uke J Eleock, a respected member of • Ghe County Council,
and the following resolution was passed in silence :—
Proposed by Mr Patrick O'Connell,
Seconded by Mr John F Murphy, J P, and
Resolved—That we learn with regret of the death of Mr
Michael Eleoek, brother of our colleague, Mr Luko
J Eleock, and we direct our Secretary to convey €0 Mr Elcoek
our sincere sympathy in his brälvemnent.
County Council Offices, Horsham,
8th May, 1914.
CAUTION—Every person acting iri contravention of Che fore*
going Regulations will be liable to a fine not exceeding
C'20, or if the offence is eonunitted with respect €0 more
than four animals, to a fine not exceeding C5 for eacli
animal.
DEATH OF MR. M. DROGHEDA.
Mr O'Connell broimg%t under the notice of Committee the
lamented death of Mr M Eleock, Drogheda, brother of Mf
50
County Offices Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of above Committee held in the
Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Monday, 11th day
of May, 1914, af 1.30 0'clock p lil,
Present : —
In A Dopan, FAI, J P.
Other Members—Charles A Duffy, J P; Joseph M Johnson,
J P; Bernard Hamill, J P ; and James »€yune, J P, Esquir«s.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Strrveyor, was also present.
The following Report on the matter of the accommodation
be provided in the new County Offices from the County
Surveyor was read, and ground plan of the site was also
submitted : —
REPORT.
To tfie Chairman and Gentlemen Of New Cotiilfy Offiecs Committee:
assembled at Meeting, 11th Mays 1-914,
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,—•
Tn accordance with your directions of 9tf1 last
Of the Old Jilil premises adjacent to tire Courthouse fias been
prepared for your consideration.
T had Tiot the advantage Of being af your discussion Oli
9th Mareh and am not quite certain Of what is intended exactly'
by the "additional accomodafion to be provided flie
Committee proposed that the Cottnty Couueif should continue to
• use some existing offices in the Courthouse, and also the Grand
Jury Room as a Council Chamber; or wlretJlieYI' they snould erect
a complete IjeW suite of offices, witli Council Chatilber, on the
Old Jail premises.
51
Assuming the latter proposition to be correef, [lie aeeomodation
1'. quired would be:—
(a) Council Chamber 40 ft x 25 ft, say.
(b) I Committee Room about 16 ft square.
(c) 1 Spare ditto 16 feet square, to serve as office in busy timo
for Rate Clerks, etc.
(d) 1 Single Office about 16 feet
(e) 3 Double Offices about 16 ft squ re for Secretary and Staff
avd County Surveyor and Staff.
(f) 1 Single Office somewhat larger for Secretary Ins ra
Com m i t tee.
(g) The necessary la vatorits iiftaebed to County Council
Chanrber and Offices and Cloak-room.
(h) Stationery Store Room for Secretary, 80 to 100 sq feet area,
say.
(i) Strong Room for Secretary, 80 sq feet area, say.
(j) Store at baek for coal and sundries. With regard to this
latter, and having also regard to the fact that the Council may
purchase road-rollers, it may not be amiss to consider the
advisability and possibility of acquiring entrance through tho
Urban Council premises adjoining.
No mention lmas been made above of a Store Room and Strong
Room for the Clerk of the Crown and Peace. The bedroom and
kitchen occupied at, present by the Courtkeeper could, without
clifficulty, so far as I can see, be eonverted into Store Room and
Strong Room respectively, and would be convenient €0 Mr
Sheridan's office, provided, of course, that aeeomodation could be
provided for the Courtkeeper in the part, of the Courthouse
vacated by the Council.
The question also presents itself as to whether a resident
Caretaker should be appointed in charge of the offices. If so, a
residence, of course, would have to be provided for him.
It should be remembered when considering the proposed site
that the drain from the Courthouse to the Crowe Street sewer
runs through the centre of the garden in front, if T am rightly
informed. Tn any plan for a building on Che plot provision would
have to be made for changing the course of the drain.
52
Should the Committee decide to advertise for competitive plans
and specifications, an order should be made to procure two dozen
(say) eopies of site plan to be supplied to architects. It would
be advisable also, if possible, to have photographs of the adjacent
buildings—east side of Courthouse and the Exchange—to
accompany plan of site. 1Yhe attention of •architects competing
should be called to the question of providing for reflected light
for east side of Courthouse (if necessary).
Tlre terms for competition would be a matter to be settled by
the Committee after discussion.
It would be desirable also if the Committee would define on the
plun submitted the limits of the site to be built on.
I am, Mr Chairman arvd Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signed) THOMAS WALSH.
After discussion the report was approved and ordered to be sent
forward to the County Council for consideration.
REPORT OF LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL TUBERCULOSIS
COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT.
Meeting héld in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
on Monday, the 4th day of May, 1914.
Present
Presiding—James Wynne, Esq, J P.
Other Members—William Woods, J P; Patrick O'Connell,
Edward Goodman, Esquires.
Also Present—Dr J A M'Qui118U1, T M O.
Letter No. 71 AI, 24th April, 1914, fronj T, G B, was
submitted, suggesting the use of existing Vevet• Hospitals
treating chronic advanced of Tuberculosis.
After very careful consideration and discussion, it
unanimously derided €0 strongly recommend and urge on
and
first
f or
was
the
53
County Council to aet as far as possible on the suggestions con-
tairrvcl in this letter from the I, G B, as we are satisfied, if carried
out and co-ordinated with the Council's Scheme for the treatment
of Tuberculosis, will be found to be to the general advantage and
tend towards :—
1st Economy—As the cost of erecting male and female pavilions
in the vicinity of the District TTospitals (as it is suggested to namo
them) will be a. comparatively small outlay of Capital Expenditure,
which will be. borne by T"reasury Grant.
2nd Efficiency—As stated in the letter in question, no scheme
is complete. until proper provision is made to treat. chronic cases
of Tubereulosis, reducing the dangers of infection to a, minimum
by isolation. Experience already teaches there are no institutions
available for such eases, and that providing Shelters for such pur-
poses is not practicable, espeeially in urban areas, while, under tho
suggested arrangement, it is obvious there is a possibility of
having, for small outlay, three centres in Louth for advanced
eases, namely, Dundalk, Drogheda and Ardee.
The (hnmittee desive to add that they are confident that. Poor
Law Authorities, close examination of the suggested arrange-
ntents, will lurve little hesitation to facilitate the Council fo carry
through, especially as destitute persons will be treated under
the Council's Scheme, and half the cost will be borne by tho
Imperial Fund, of considerable advantage fo tho
•ratepayers.
Letter 48 M, 1914, dated 6th Mayell, 1914, from the L G B, was
also submitted and considered.
Tt was decided to draw particular attention to the last threo
paragraphs, and to state, it is the unanimous opinion of this
Committee that the suggestions contained in this letter, if found
practicable, decides the contentious question of the erection of
costly Dispensaries.
We therefore desire to recommend the County Council fo direct
that, negotiations be opened with the Managing Body of the Louth
County Infirmary, with a view to having a wing added to the
Institution, or pavilions erected in the grounds attached, or both,
where beds for observation purp«ses migh,t be erected. We also
approve of and recommend tho suggestion to provide a ward for
children suffering flom non-pulmonary tubtn•eulosis.
Ln these cases also the cost will be defrayed by the Treasury
Grant.
The TuWrcuI<Bis Medical Officer submitted a list of articles
required for Dispensarie±i, comprised Of educative literature and
medical appliances; approximate cost Z8.
It was d@ided to recommend that an order for the articles
be given.
Applications from non-insured persons for Sanatorium Treat-
ment were submitted and considered, viz—Maggie Ki Ilen,
Willville, (hrlingford; Patrick Kelly, Rockta.te, Cot-creagh ; Mary
M'(hbe, Ardee,• John Conlon, ('Iannomock, Dundalk.
It was decided to adopt the recommendation of the Tuberculosis
Nodical Officer, and recommend each patitnf for 12 weeks' treat-
ment at Pea.mount at a cost of ZI per week.
Modicul Reports from Pearnout re Drogheda pat iont lately
returned home from Pemnount were submitf€d and considered
satisfactory.
Letter submitted from the Sanitary Su )fficer, Drogheda,
intimating he would have two disused Shelters in Drogheda
if the Council would undertake to defluy the eost—12s.
The Clerk stated Mr Dromgoole had Sheltets disinfected in
Ardee without any question of payment.
It was decided to leave the matter in the hands of the
Tuberculosis Medical Officer.
The question of Storage for Shelters not in use was again
referred to, and a letter from the Town Clerk, Dundalk, stating
the U D C had no aeeomodation.
The matter was deferred.
Accounts, as annexed Schedule (Aceounfs attached), were
submitted and payment recommended.
55
An Account for Gs from St. V incept's Elospit.al, Dublin, for
special reports, was referred to Che Local Government
Board for sanction of payment.
The Clerk was directed to convene, and attend with the
Tub«reulosis Medical Officer. a meeting of the Drogheda
Representatives of the Tuberculosis Committoe of Management,
to consider the letters already referred to from the Local
Government Board.
The meeting was duly convened for Thursday, the 7th day Of
May, 1914, , when there were present—Messrs Patrick Donegan,
M C C, and John Dolan, M C C. Also present—Dr M 'Quilla.n,
T M O. and the Clerk.
A quorum not being available, no business was transacted; but
the members present conferred on Letter 71 u, 1914, relative to the
use Of Un ion Fever Hospitals for advanced eases of tho disease,
and cordially apptoved of the recommendations eontainod therein.
V. WARREN,
Clark.
8/5/'14.
1
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
finance Committee.
Minutes Of Proceedings of the Finance Committee held in
the Council Chamber on Monday, t'he 25th day May, 1914.
Present : —
In the A Duffy, Fsq, .J P.
Other Members—B Hamill, J P ; J Wynne, J P P O'Connell
and J M Johnson, J P, Esquires.
The Secretary subniitted Clie following paymen "s, which were
duly examined and ordered for payment :—
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S OETICE.
B Harmon, Road Rolling, Ardee District
J Durnin, Road Rolling, Drogheda District
B Harmon, Road Rolling, Drogheda District
Murdock and Sons, Sundries, Clogherhead Pier
P Hanlon, Road Rolling, Dundalk District
F M •l)ermott, Road Rolling, Dundalk District
W Howe, Coal, Road Rolling, Dunelalk District
J Rice, No. 22, April, 1914, Dundalk I)istrict
J Connor, No. 41, APIiI, 1914, Dundalk District
J Treanor, April, 1914, Dundalk District
P Treanor, April, 1914, Dundalk District
O Treanor, April, 1914, Dundalk District
1
o
1
0
1
5
1
e14
4
2
2
16
7
7
13
0
0 12 10
0 12 10
0 12 10
IO
2
9
6
2
0
9
0
0
1 10
2
SCHOLARSHIPS.
M Murray; for Mr Rogan
1 16
S J Aledcalfe, for Mr Hanratty
2
R Dolan, for Mr M•Par1am1
1 15
e5 16
SECRETARY'S OFFICE.
s
7
o
J Kindlon, Rate Books
O
5
Moneypenny, ' Rate Books
2 19
3
o
J Louden
E13
14
Total,
0
d
o
1
6
o
7
2 11
DUNDALK RURAL DISTRICT SCHOOL ATTENDANCE
OOMMI'ITEE.
Repo,rt from the above Committee containing extract of
Minuteg of Meeting held on the 'Ith day of May, 1914, was
read, containing the following resolution passed at tho Meeting
on Notice of Motion
Proposed by C A Duffy, Lsq, J P ;
Seconded by J H MCArd1e, J P, and
Recommended—That the Salary of tho Ass'tant School
Attendance Officer (Mr P J Campbell) be incused from C5
to CIO per annum, and that we respectfully request the
sanction of the County Council to this recommendation.
DANIEL O'MEARA,
Secretary to t}je Committee.
On the motion of Mr Hamill, J P, seconded by Mr O'Connell,
the Finance Committee approved of the increase.
3
CLERKSHIPS IN THE COUNTY OFFICE.
Arising out of the Minutes Of the Finance Committee of
the 11th May, 1914, the Committee, after diseu•sron, ma,de
following regulations in connection With th6 Examination för
the Clerkships in the County Ofhce, : —
(a) That those who were eligible for the Exa.m nation should
be natives of County Louth,- or •residenty• Cherei for a period
of not less than twelve months.
(b) • That all applicants shall produce • certificates of good
character from their clergyman, or t,he County Councillors' of
their division, or other respectable neighbour.
(c) That in the case of the Senior Clerkship candidate.
should be not less than twenty-one years of age on the 1st
day of June, 1914, and for the Junior Clerkship not less than
sixteen years of age on the said 1st day of Jcnv:, 1914.
REGULATIONS UNDER SHEEP-SCAB ORDER, 1914.
The Secretary informed the Committee that, in accordance
with instructions given by the Executive Committee at t,boir
Meeting held on the 18th instant, the Veterin Inspectors
mat on Fridåiy last at the County Offices, and, witer consulta-
tion, had recommended that the following regulations under
the Sheep-Seab Order of 1914 should be made v the County
Council, and that the Solicitor should draft the Peg-ulations :
(a)
SHEEP DIPPING ORDER.
COUNTY LOUTH, 1914.
That the owner or person tooving Sheep from outsido
County Louth into said County be required to notify
forthwith the arrival of the Sheep to Constable or
other member of the Police Foree at the nearest Pcliee
Station, who shall forthwith transmit t'he information
to the Secretary of the Louth County Council.
4
(b) All such Sheep moved , into tho County Lout.)) shall
be isolated until inspection and dippi •g has been
completed to €110 satisfaction of the Local Authority,
and IWIieh dipping must be carried out within Séven
(7) days from the date on which the Sheep have been
moved into the County.
Nothing in this Order shali apply to. Sheep ved into the
County Louth for immediate shipment or slaughter.
DEATHS CATTLE AT MULLATrCE
The following telegram was read. and the Secretary informed
the Committee that he had selit copy to Mr CF )ton V S,
bad not yet received his report, on the matter : -
Copy of Telegram received from Sergeant Croke,
on 20th May, 1914.
George Patterson, Farmer, N[ullntee, reports two cattle dead.
Ono died 28th ult and one yesterday. Cause
death
known. —Sergeant Croke, Greonoro.
TENDERS FOR SHEEP DIP FOR 1914
The follou6ng Tenders for the supply of Cooner',' Sheep Dip
for Che Council's tanks in tho various districts,
the present
year, were read : —
A ROEE DISTRICT.
T NI'Iver, Ardee, Ils per dozen packets.
P M 'Gee, Ardee, IOS per dozen packets.
Mr M 'Gee's tender was accepted.
5
DROGHEDA DISTRICT.
Luke J Healy, Drogheda, Ils per dozen.
Accepted.
DUNDALK DISTRICT.
T R Connolly, Dundalk, 12.s •per dozen.
Patrick Ward, Dundalk, Ils per clown.
Messrs Backhouse and -co, Dundalk, IOS ('d dozen.
Meers Backhouse and Co's tender was accepted.
DR. M'QUILLAN'S SALARY.
The following letter from the Local Governm nt Board was
read tynd initialled by the Chairman :
Loen) Government, Board, Lu blin,
14th May, 1914.
No. 14710: 1913.
Louth Count v.
Sir,
With referenee to your letter of tho 14th November last,
a.m directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland to
stato that they have extended, for a further pnriod of six
months, their provisional approval of the appo nttnent of Dr
J A M 'Quilla.n as Medical Superintendent of the Tuberculosis
Dispensary to be established by the Louth Cou•tfy Council.
I am to that if the Dispensary is completed before the
expiration of that time the Board will give their final approval
fuo Dr M 'Quillan's appointment.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
(Signed) J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistqnt Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
Du ndalk.
6
REMUNERATION AS AC'i'1Sd
ASSISTANT SURVEYORS'
COUNTY SURVEYORS.
The following letter was
read and initialled by the Cha:.r»
I,ucal Government Boardy
Dublin, May, 1914.
No. '25869: 1914'
Lotl€h County,
Sir ,
With reference to your letter of 8th instant, ani
dircoted 'by the Local Government Board for -1. p and t.o
that they will raise no objection to the propos or the Louth
County Council to pay cx€rti remunera to Messrs Lyons
and Dromgoo]e, Assistant Surveyors, while -ing as sp€K,viaI
Assistants to the County Surveyor for period three month*
from the • 1st, ultimo.
am, Sir,
four Servan€s
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assisi,atit
The Secretary,
Louth Coanty Council.
GUARDIANS is URBAN TS.
Secretary
An Order was rexd from the Local Govern nent Board,.
dated the 20th day of May, 1914, setting o It that witli
reference to the Election of Guardians in Urban bistric•ts in
Ireland, that any appointments of Polling Agent, paid or'
7
unpaid, shall be dolivered at the Office of the Ret,tvrning Officer
not less than two clear days before the day of t,he Poll.
Except as aforesaid, no Polling or Personation f' gents whether
paid or unpaid. shall bo appointed for the purposes of the
Election.
DROGHEDA CNIONASD DROGHEDA (LO RURAL
DISTRICT COUNCIL'S ACCOUNTS
Council for tho Half-year endod 3rd Septemb 1913,
submitted by tho Local Government Board. In the case of
the District Council, the Auditor reported that Solicitor
håd not yet furnished the Abstract of Title for certain
Labourers' Cottage schemes under the Cbuncil.
The accounts were initialled by the Chairman.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL'S ACCOUNTS FOR SEPTEM-
BER, 1913, ANI) SURCHARGES ON S ME.
Letter wus read from the Local Gov€umme:lt Board, No.
27321, dated 20th May, 1914, enclosing the ted accounts
of the Lout;h County Council for the period en ed 30th sep-
t,ember, 1913, and enclosing the Auditor's Report surchm•ging
the sum of C408 3s Od against Messrs Poter Hughes, Bernard
Hamill, and Goodman, for a payment to the Rate
Collectors for irrecoverable arrears, made in Jul 1913 .
The following is a copy of the surcharge and Auditor's
reasons for same :—
Copy of Surcharge and reasons for same made ecrainst Petor
•s, J P ; Bernard Hamill, J P, and Edwm•l Goodman,
Esquires.
s
Paying Orders Nos. 805 to 816.
disallow and strike out of bhis acco ' nt as illegai
the payments made by P twing Orders Nos. 816, in-
elusive, amounting in all to the snm of 3s 0:, and I
charge the said sum of C408 3s Od upon Peter H 'l ghes Bernard
Hamill and Edward Goodman, thc persons who bs their signa-
tures Lo the Treasurer's Advice Note dated 24th July, 1913,
authorised the making of this illegal payment, and I certify
the said sum of 3s Od to be due from ' , ne said Pete
Bernord Hamill and Edward Goodm x m, jointly and
severally.
Dated this 12th day of May, 1914.
R. J. NEWELL,
Local Governm '{It'
My reasons for the foregoing disallowance d
are that, the payments in question were made
Auditor.
surcharge
Collectors,
in respect of rates, which had been declared to bs i• recoverable,
without. the approval of the Local Government Board having.
been obtained as required by Article 92 of the Pu blic Bodies
order, 1904.
(Signed) R. J. NEWELL,
Local Govern ny tit Auditor,
The Letter and Accounts were initialled by t,Yv Chairman.
The Secretary informed the Committee that he had appealeö/
i.o the Local Government Board against the surcharge
behalf of the three members of the Council.
9
worrr0NSTOWN DRAINAGE.
'fhe following letter on this subject was read and initialled
by bhe Chairman
Francis Street, Durdalk,
15th Slay, 1914.
Re Wottorrstown Drainage District
Dear Sir,
I beg to Feport that I attended at Dellin Ci•oss to-day with
the Co. Surveyor, and we were met by Messrs Michael Meade,
Thomas J Byrne and Patrick Byrne. With th assist,ance of
i,he maps, Award and other papers we were abl ascertain
muckh
working
information
the
very
on
of
the Scheme under the old Board'.
would appear the Pane Drainage District is .'inked up with
the interests of the ratepayers of the district, to inquiries
into the condition of both systems at the same ti Lie. Accord'
ingly I am procuring copy of t,he Award made in the Fame
District from the Board of Works, and your Sur;yeyoi' proposes
to make a. further appointment on the spot for purbose of
going over the areas affected dhat we may m 'k a detailed
report to the Connoil•
Charles M 'Alester,
Secretary, Louth
Yours fai{hfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL
Esqs
County Council.
Dundalk.
COULON SESSIONS HOUSE.
The L followiijg letter was read, and the S..
direetOd to write accordingly to Mi' Glost,er, 146±1 Massareene's
Agent :
Francis Street, Dundalk,
18th May, 1914.
Ro Collon Sessions House.
Thar Sir,—
With further . refere.nee to your letter of
inst, a,nd
copy letter enclosed from Mi' Thomas E Close dated 21st.
April, 1914, 1 would suggest that the following reply be sent,
Referring to your letter of 21st ult, on ' e subject of
the Collon Se,.ions House, hold by the Couv from Inrd
Massereene under Agreement dated 5th J lily 1900, I am
directed by the Louth County Council to strate that in
view of the clause for Insurance, on t:he cerent'S
embodied in the Agreement referred to, auld the fact that
the Insurance Oompany expressly set out in their Policy
that they will not be responsible in the ev hit, of damage
resulting from fire whilst the premises are used for
theatrical and other similar performances, not as a
Sessions House, my Council are not prepøreml : , make good
any damage so ensuing under such circurneanees.
Tours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
(harles M' Al€*öter, Esq,
Secretary louth Co. Council,
11
LEASE OF TUBERCULOSIS DISPENSARY A1' DUNDALK.
Letter was read from Mi' O'Connell, Solicvor, enclosing
aecotint he had received from Messrs Crookshaak, Leech p.nd
Davies, Lord Rodents solicitors, amoupting to 19s 9d, for
costs of Lease prepared by them for the of the pro-
posed Observation Dispensary at Dundalk,
The accoupt was referred to Mr O'Connell advise the
Council whether they were liable to pay the •ogds of a Lease
that had not, been completed, and which Lord Eoden had now
eancellod.
UNIVERSITY SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME 1914.
The following letter was read and referred t,o 'she Scholarship
Committee of the County Council :—
Dominican College, Eeeles
Oublin, 19th May, 1914.
hoar SlaeAleSter,
I thank you for your le•€tfrl' and enclosed of the County
Louth Üniversity Scholarship Scheme.
notice in gne Scheme that the Scholaa-ships 9 confineå to
students who pass the Senior Grade intermediate !ßsam. 1914.
This has not been the case in other years—the Senior Grade
of the year previous to the award of the Scholarship being
•accepted as well as that of the cnrrent year.
If tho rule as it stands is carried into eff€ef t). year, we
know of mofe than ohe promising student vviho will affect,
vd versely.
12
J may mention tlhat one of our past pupils; Miss C. Maca
Pulana, was .awarcl€d a Scholarship on tm exa of the year
prior to the rd. and she has proved highly satisfacto:s
University Student.
If 'the Council Ili0(lfiecl the rule so as to read Test Exam.
will be the Intermediate Examinations of 1913 and 1914,' etc,
we be!ieve it would prove satisfactory to all interested and ten,d
to secure n hig'her standard of efficiency among candidates.
I am sure, if you are kincl enough to bring the atter to the
notice of the Cc.uneil,
it will receive their
fa v ourable eon-
sideration.
With apologies for troubling you so much.
I am,
Yours sincerely in J.U..
(Signed) sm M. REGIN ALI).
ROAD BOARD GRANT.
The following application was oread from the County Sur-
veyor, and, on the motion of Mr Hamill, J i', seconded by
Mr O'Connell, the request to expend CIO was leeomnjended
County Snrveyor's Office,
Courthouse, Dundalk, 22nd May, 1914.
Koa rd board Grant.
Dear Sir—
I have been in communication with Road Board re above,
and find that a dharge is made for testing mater 11 Recently
13
also the regulations regarding the samples of m; terials to be
sent have been altered, so that instead of about '12 lbs. of stone
for a sample Board require now 56 lbs. in strong boxes.
Would you kindly bring the matter before your Finance
Committee on Monday next, and request them authorise
me to expend the necessary money, not exceeding CIO, in
procuring ancl forwarding proper samples, and also payment for
test. An application for Lhe money would be bought forward
Jater at Proposals at Large Charge.
I take this course as I am anxious to get a; .g with the
mailer of the Grant.
Yours faithfully,
THOM WALSH.
Esq.
Secretary,
CARLINGFORD PIER.
Application was mode by Ehe County Sorveyor f" apply a sum
of CIOO, to be placed in his charge out of the balance now
standing to the credit of Carlingford Pier, to cefray the ex-
penses of providing and erecting a Lamp on the Pier and Other
urgent repairs, already executed, and the balance €0 Ibe ex-
pended from time to time on any necessary repairs that may
be required to keep the Pier in proper working order
After discussion, the Committee recommended the
amount of CIOO be lilaced in charge of the 'ty Surveyor
for expenditure on Carlingford Pier.
14
DREDGING AT ANNAGASSAN.
letter was read from the Department, of Agriculture that,
according to present, arrangements, dredging ceerations at
Annagassan Harbour will be resumed about : he end of the
present month.
The Secretary was directed to inform the County Councillor
for the district, Mr Meade, of this arrangement, he to inform
tho Harbour (hmmisioners.
Tho Socretary was also directed to again write the Board
of Trade for immediate reply as to consent for G umping of the
dredged material on the foreshore at Annagassa
1
Couth County Council.
Minutes of proceedings of Louth County Council at their first
Adjourned Quarterly Meeting held in the Council Chamber*
Courthouse, Dundalk, on Thursday, Ohe 28th day of May, 1914
at one o'clock, m.
Present
In Chair—William A Doran, Esq, J P.
Others present—Patrick Donegan: J P; Edward Goodman»
John Dolan, Joseph P Kearney, Joseph H M ' Ardle, J P ;
Patrick O'Connell, Michael O'Meara, J P; Michael Meade and
James Wynne, J P, Esquires.
Messrs Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor JOImn M Lyons and'
James Dromgoole, Assistant Surveyors; Daniel O'Connell: SR.F
licitor, and Dr M 'Quillan, T M O, were in attendance.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
Proposed by Mr Edward Goodman,
Seeonded by Mr John Dolan, and
Resolved—That the minutes of proceedings of the Louth
County Council at their quarterly meeting held on Thursday,
23rd day of April, 1914, a printed copy of which has been sent
to each member of the Council, be, and are hereby confirmed.
2
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE COMMITTEE MINUTES.
Proposed by Mr James Wynne, J P ;
Seconded by Mr Edwa1Tl Goodr»an, and
Resolved—That the minutes of proceedings of the Finance
Committee, held on the undermentioned dates, a printed copy
of wilieh has been sent to each member of the Council be, and
•are hereby confirmed.
27th April, 1914.
11th May, 1914.
25th May, 1914.
CONFIRMATION OF EXECUTIVE COMMIEITEE
MINUTES.
Proposed by Mr Michael Meade;
Seconded by Mr Patrick Donegan, J P, and
Resolved—That the minutes of proceedings of the Executive
Committee, held on the 18th day of May, 1914, a printed copy
having been sent to each member of the Council, be and are
hereby confirmed.
ACTING COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT—ARDEE ANI)
DROGHEDA.
Proposed by Mr Patrick Donegan,' J P;
Seconded by Mr Michael Steade, and
Resolved—That, the report of the Aeting County Surveyor
. for Ardee and Drogheda Rural Districts: as appearing on page 1
Of the Schedule of proposals furnished to each member of tho
Council, be and is hereby adopted by this Council.
3
ACTING COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT—DUNDALK.
Proposed by Mr James Wyne, J P ;
Seconded by Mr Joseph H M' Ardle, J P, and
Resolved—That Che report of the Acting County Surveyor
for Dundalk Rural District, as appearing on page T of the Sche-
of proposals furnished to each member of tihe Council, be
and is hereby adopted.
ARDEE WORKS.
Proposed by Mr Michael Meade ;
Seconded by Mr Patrick Donegan, J p, and
Resolved—That the proposals for works formulated by the
.Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council at their quarterly. Meeting,
held on the 7th day of April, 1914, and set out on Form 20,
furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby approved
by this Council.
DROGHEDA WORKS.
Proposed by Mr John Dolan;
Seconded by Mr Patrick l)önezan, J P, and
Resolved—That the proposals for works formulated by the
Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union, at their quarterly
meeting hold on Tuesday, the 14th day of Amil, 1.914, and set
out on Form 20, furnished to the County Council, be and aro
hereby approved by this Council.
DUNDALK WORKS.
Proposed by Mr James Wynne, J P;
Seconded by Mr Edward Gocdman, and
Resolved—That the proposals for works formulated by tho
Dundalk Rural District Council, at their quarterly meeting:
held on Monday, the 6th day of April, 1914, and set out on
Form 20, furnished €0 tho County Council, be and are hereby
approved of by this Council.
AUTHORITY SEAL CONTRACTS.
Proposed by Mr Patrick Donegan, J P ;
Secvonded by Mr Joseph P Kearney, and
Resolved—That we hereby authorise our Secretary to affix:
the Common Seal of the Council on all contracts now approved
of by this Council.
TENDERS FOR, NORKS NOT SET BY CONTRACT AT
JOURNED MEETINGS OF RURAL DISTRICT
COUNC11,s.
The only tender received was for No. I in Dundalk Rural
District, to ,repair 312 perches of the road from Dundalk to.
Newry, from the Ardaghey National School, passing close tho.
village of UpperArdaghey, and joining the main road near Jas.
Kane's house. Cost not to exceed CIOO.
Tender for this work was received from Owen M 'Quaid,
Baven, Omeath, and this being the only tender was accepted.
Amount, CIOO.
WORKS PLACED IN CHARGE OF COUNTY SURVEYOR..
Proposed by Mr Joseph H J P;
Seconded by Mr p Kearney, and
Resolved—That all works not taken by contract be placed irr
the hands of the County Surveyor.
I
5
VETERINARY INSPECTORS' SALARIES.
By consent of the Council this matter was taken out of its
•order on the agenda. The Secretary read the letters from the
Department sanctioning the increases in the salaries of the
three Veterinary Inspectors, Messrs Clinton, Donnelly, and
Maxwell, and as tlhe term of these increases expired on the
1st June, 1914, they now came up for consideration by the
•County Council.
After hearing Mr Clinton, V S, and Mr Maxwell, V S, in
connection with the work under the Tuberculosis Order (Ire-
land) of 1913, and after discussion on the whole matter, the
following resolution was unanimously passed
by Mr Michael O'Meara, J P,
Seconded by Mr Joseph P Kearney, and
Resolved—That, the increased remuneration payable to the
Veterinary Inspectors, Messrs Clinton, Donnelly, and Max-
well, in respect of the e«tra work under the Tuberculosis (Ire—
land) Order of 1913, be reduced by the sum of CIO (ten pounds)
in eacqh ease, and that at the end of one year from the 1st day
of June, 1914, tho rates of salary be reviewed in the light of
the work under tho Tuberculosis Order that may have been
•earried out during the year by the Inspectors.
This makes the salaries as follows T Clinton, C120, A A
Donnelly, C80, and W E Maxwell, C80 per annum respectively.
NEW COUNTY OFFICES.
Report of the new County Offices Committee was the
next item on the agenda, but the Council decided to •defer the
consideration of same, and tie following resolution was passed :
6
Proposed by Mr Patrick Donegan, J P ;
Secondéd by Mr Michael Meade, and
Resolved—That the question of the new County Offices be
ferred to the new Council, and that a Committee be appointed
at the annual meeting to deal with the matter.
REPORT OF THE TUBERCULOSIS COMMITVITE OF
MANAGEMENT.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Mr Fkhvard Goodman ;
Seconded by Mr John Dolan, and
Resolved—That we hereby confirm and approve of
Of the Tuberculosis Committee of Management as
pages 52 to 55 of the printed minutes.
CO. LOUTH TUBERCULOSIS SCHEME
the report
printed
With reference to the notice of motion standing in the name
of Mr Joseph M Johnson, Mr Patk. O'Connell stated had
been requested by Mr Johnson to take charge of same, but as.
he considered the rescinding of all tho resolutions would be too
far-reaching and entail hardships on a number of people, he do-
elined to move in the matter.
The Chairman thereupon declared that, tho motion fell
through.
ACCOUNTS OF ARDEE BRANCH RAILWAY.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Mr Michael ;
Seconded by Mr John Dolan, and
7
Resolved—That wo liereby decide to advertise the accounts OE
the Ardee Branch Railway, as submitted by the Great Northernv
Railway Company, and direct our Secretary accordingly.
VOTES OF CONDOLENCE.
The following resolutions were passed in silence. Mr Johm
Dolan desiring to be associated with them :—
Proposed by Mr Edward Goodman ;
Seconded by Mr Patrick Donegan, J P, and
Resolved—That we learn with regret of the death of
Thomas Woods, of Carlingford', father of our esteemed collea—
gue, Mr Peter Woods, and we beg to tender €0 Mr Woods ancr
family our sincere sympathy in their bereavement.
Proposed by Mr Patrick Donegan, J P ;
Secondedby Mr Edward Goodman, and
Resolved—That we learn with regret of the death of Mr.
Michael Eleock, brother of our esteemed colleague, Mr Luke J
Elcock, and we direct our Secretary to convey to Mr Elcoclc
and family our sincere sympathy in their bereavement.
THIRD READING HOME RULE BILI,
The following resolution was passed with acclamation
Proposed by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That we beg to tender to Mr John E Redmond'
and the Irish Parliamentary Party our sincere and hearty con-
gratulations on the Third Reading of the Home Rule Bill, and
we desire to place on record our appreciation of their patrioticy
and successful efforts in the cause of Ireland's Freedom.
8
IRISH VOLUNTEERS.
Tho following resolution submitted by the
Council, was adopted :—
Proposed by Mr Edward Goodman ;
Seconded by Mr Miehåel Meade, and
Limerick County
Resolved—That owing to recent political events, and parti-
eularly to the attitude of the army on the Ulstei• question, we,
the members of the Louth County Council, consider that the
time has come when effort should be made to organise the Irish
Volunteer Force in every parish in Ireland. We are convinced
that such a force, wisely led by men in wilorn our indomitab.te
leader, Mr J E Redmond, would have confidence, would prove
to the world that the manhood of Ireland are ready to do their
part, in defence of their homes and their liberties, and if need
to protect, our fellow-Nationalists in tjlster from insult and
attack.
APPOINTMENT OF FOOD AND DRUGS INSPECTOR.
Letter was read from the County Inspector of the R I (X
County Louth, requesting the County Council to pass a resolu-
tion appointing Acting-Sergeant John I-I Levinge, of Green-
ore, to carry out the provisions of tlhe Food and Drugs Act in
the Petty Sessions Districts of Carlingford and Ravensdale.
The following resolution was then passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Mr James Wynnew J P ;
Seconded •by Mr Michael Meade, and
Resolved—That we hereby authorise Acting-Sergeant John H
Levinge, of the Royal Irish Constabulary, to carry out Che pr(Y
visions of the Sale of Food and Drugs Acts, 38 and 39 Vic. ,
9
•tap. 63, and ($3 Vie, Cap. 51, in the Petty Sessions Districts of
vCarlingford and Ravensdale; and we direct our Secretary to
. affix the Seal of tile Council thereto, and aut{horise the Presid—
ing Chairman of this day's meeting to sign said authority on
Ik?half of the Council.
BLACKROCK PICTURE THEATRE.
Letter, dated 23rd May, was read from Mr James Murphy,
-Manager of Blackrock Picture Theatre Company, requesting a
License for a Cinematograph Theatre at Blackrock, Dundalk.
The Councii unanimously decided to grant the License, and
•the following resolution was passed
Proposed by Mr John Dolan;
Seconded by Mr Edward Goodman, and
Resolved—That we decide to grant a license under trne Cine-
matograph Act of 1909, €0 the Blackrock Picture Theatre Com-
pany, when the County Surveyor certifies that the building in
which the cinematograph displays are to begiven satisfies all
• conditions set out in the regulations issued under above Act,
•the annual fee for such license to be one pound (El).
CORRESPONDENCE.
The following letters were read and ordered to be inserted on
zthe minutes
Dear M
98, Park Street,
Dundalk. 4„3-'14.
•Alester,
I a.m €lecpiy grateful to my colleagues on
10
Louth County Council for their kind vote of sympathy which
they have passed to me on the death of my late brother. Kindly
convey to them my sincerest thanks. I also feel very grateful
to you for your kind expression of sympathy conveyed with the
resolution.
Yours very Sincerely,
BERNARD HAMILL.
Charles M'A1ester, Esq,
Downing St.,
Whitehall, S. W.
May, 1914.
Mr ,
I am directed by the Prime Minister to
the receipt of the Resolution which you have forwarded on they„
subject of passing the Home Rule Bill without further conces—-
sions.
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
MAURICE BONHAM CARTER.
Charles M'Alester, Esq,
Secretary Louth Co. Council,
IMPORTATION OF HAY A-ND STRAW.
The following resolution submitted by the Wicklow County
Council, was adopted unanimously
Proposed by Mr Michael Meade ;
Seconded by Mr Patrick Donegan, J P, and
Resolved—That this Council protests against the revocation
of tome Order prohibiting the importation of Hay and Straw
into this country from Great Britain, and we strongly rurge„
11
that suitable measures should be adopted to prevent the impor—
tation of Hay and Straw, either when used as packing, or in
any other form: as we beiieve the Foot and Mouth Disease has
been introduced into this country by this means.
ATTENDANCE OF JEY{ORS AT ASSIZES.
A circular letter from the Belfast Corporation was read p
pointing out the very inconvenience caused to Jurors
summohed to- Asusizes, by being delayed from day to day, and
asking if the Louth County Council would co-operate with tiherrv
with a view to having such an alteration in the law made as
would have the conditions at all Assizes in Ireland the same as
applies to County Cork, where the attendance of Jurors is ar-
ranged for separate days.
It was unanimously decided to co-operate with the Belfast
Corporation in any action taken to make the ehanges sugges-
ted.
POUNDAGE FEES TO RATE COLLECTORS.
ne following application was read from the Rate Collec—
tors : —
Dundalk, 28th May,
Gentlemen,
We, the undersigned Collectors, beg to apply
for our respective Salaries for year ending 31st March last.
12
Trusting that an order for payment of same shall be passed
at your meeting to-day.
We remain,
Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servants
PATRICK HUGHES.
PATRICK CLCSKEY.
PETER M'DOSNELL.
PATRICK M'DONALD
J. J. KELLY.
JOHN WOODS.
J. V. JOHNSTON.
The Chairman and Members,
Louth County Council.
• The following letter -on the same subject was also read
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 27th May, 1914.
No. 27988/1914.
Louth County.
Sir,
13
In order, however: to meet the wishes of the County
the Local Government Board will be prepared to reconsider
their decision provided that the Collectors give a written un—-
dertaking (a lodge not less than one-fourth of their war-
rants before the 1st August and 1st Ja-nuary in each half-year
and (b) to close tihe collection of the first moiety on or before
the 30th September.
I am: Sir;
Your obedient Servant,
(Sgd.) A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
After discussion the Secretary was directed €0 send copies of
the Local Government Board's letter to the rate collectors for
their consideration and decision.
COUNTY LOUTH INSURANCE COMMITTEE.
Letter was read from Che County Louth Insurance Committee
requesting a conference with the County COuneil on the subject
of the proposed financial scheme 'between the Insurance Com-
mittee and the County Council.
It was deeided to refer the matter to the new Council.
The Local Government, for Ireland have had before
•them tlhe further resolution of the Finance Committee of the
Louth County Council relating to the payment of poundage
fees to the poor rate collectors for the past financial year ; and
reply the Board desire to state that, as the County Council
-are aware, the Collectors failed last Autumn to carry out the
nunderstaking which they had given Vo close their collections on
-the appointed date, althouglh duly warned of the result of
such default.
Coutb County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
Annual Meeting held in DroÅheda, on Tuesday, the 16th day
of June, 1914, at the hour of Eleven o'clock, a m.
Present—Thos J Byrne, J P; John Dolan, A Doran,
J P ; Chas A Duffy, J P ; Betimard Finegan, Bernard Hamill,
J P; J H M'Ardle, J P; Thomas B M'Comf, Patlick M'Gee,
T V M'Qui11an, Michael Meade Peter B John Morgan,
John F Murphy, J P; Nicholas T Mucphy, Thos O'Rourke,
Denis J Rath, T Skeffington, J P; Woods, J P;
William Woods, J P; James Wynne, J P , Esquires; and Sir
Augustus Vere Foster, Bart.
The several Councillors present having signed the Statutory
Declaration of acceptance of office, it was proposed by Mr J F
Murphy, J P, and seconded by Mr Michael Meade, that' the
ehair be taken by Mr William A Doran, J P.
The Secretary read the official list, of Roturning Officer
giving the names of the 28 County Councillors elected, and also
leters from the Clerks of the Rural District Councils of Ardee
(No. I), Drogheda (Louth), and Dundalk, notifying the election
by their respective Councils of the follöwing gentlemen as Chair
mon for the ensuing year, as follows :—
Ardee (No. I) District Couvncil—Sir Augustus Vere Foster, D L.
Drogheda (Louth) Dist,ric€ Council—Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P.
Dundalk District Council—Wm Woods, Esq, J P.
15
DECISION TO CO-OPT 'PAVO ADDITIONAL COUNCILLORS.
On the motion of Mr J F' Murphy, J P, seconded by Mr
Michael Meade, the following resolution was passed :—
Resolved—That we now proceed to co-opt two gentlemen to
be additional mrnernbers of the County Council for the ensuing
three years.
CO.OPTION OF TWO ADDITIONAL COUNCILLORS.
The Secretary read a letter received from the Dundalk
Trades Council dated the 15th June, enclosing copy oi a resolu-
• tion pas.sed by that body, requesting the County Council to eo-
opt the President of the Dundalk Trades Council, and the Pre-
-sident of tho Drogheda Trades Council on the Louth County
•Council.
The names of the following gentlemen were submitted for the
uposition of additional Councillors :—
Peter Toner, Dundalk—Proposed by Mr Thomas O'Rourke,
zancl seconded by Mr Thomas B M 'Court.
Mr M 'Gowan, by Mr Thomas O'Rourke,
and soconded by Mr D J Rat]).
Joseph H M' Ardle, Rampark—Proposed by Mr J F Murphy,
J P, and seconded by Mr C A Duffy, J P.
Mr Laurence M 'Keown, Termonfeckin—ProposecI by Mr J F
Murphy, J P, and seconded 'by Mr C A Duffy, J P.
James Kelly, Dundalk, was proposed by Mr Bernard Hamill,
but as there was no seconder the name was not put to the meet-
ing.
The Chairman then took a vote of the Council on the four
names, with the following result
For Joseph H M'Ardle—Messrs T J Byrne, John Dolan,
Wm A Doran, C A Duffy, Bernard Finegan, Michael Meade, P •
M'Gee, T v M'Qui11an, J F Murphy, N T Mumphy, J Morgan,.
W T Skeffington, Wm Woods, James Wynne, and Sir A Vere
Foster—15.
For Laurence, M 'Keown—Messrs T J Byrne, J Dolan, W A
Doran, C A Duffy, B Finegan, M Meade, P M'Gee, T
M'Qui11an, J F MtllVhy, N T Murphy, P B Moore, J
Wm Woods, and Sir A V Foster—ll.
For Mr M'Gowan—Messrs B Hamill, T B M'Court, P
Moore, T O'Rourke, D J Rath, W T Skeffington, and Peter
wo€x1s—7.
For Peter Toner—Messrs B Hamill, T B M 'Court, Thomas.
O'Rourke, D J Rath, Peter Woods ,and .James Wynne—6.
The Chairman declared Messrs J H M' Ardle and Laurence
M 'Keown elected, and the following resolution, proposed 'by Mr-
J F Mltrphy, and seconded by Mr Patrick M 'Gee, was passed—
Resolved—That the following gentlemen be, and are hereby,
co-opted members of the Council for the ensuing three years
Messrs Joseph H M' Ardle, J P, Of Rampark, zancl Laurence.
M 'Keown, of Miltown, Termonfeckin.
ELECTION OF CHAIRMAN.
Proposed by Thos J Byrne, Esq, J P, seconded by Wrn T.
Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That Peter Hughes, E.sq, of Castlering be and
hereby elected Chairman of this Council {'or the ensuing year.
17
ELECTION OF VICE-CHAIRMAN.
Proposed by John Francis Murphy, Esq, J P, seconded by
Denis J. Rath, Esq, and
Resolved—That William A Doran, Esq, of Harristown, Ardee,.
be and is hereby elected Vice-Chairman of this Council for the•
ensuing year.
APPOINTMENT OF COMMIITEES.
FIN ANCE COMMITTEE.
Eernard Hamill, Esq, J P, seconded by
Proposed by
W T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the entire members of the County Council bee
hereby constituted the Finance Committee of this Counicl foe
the ensuing three years, and we hereby delegate to this Corn—
mittee all powers to deal withcorrespondence, or any other
gent business of importance that may iye brought before them,
and that three members form a quorum of the Committee.
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE.
Proposed by Michael Meade, ESq, seconded by Peter B Moore
Esq, and
Resolved—That the entire members of the Council do consti—
tuto the Proposal Committee of this 'Council for the ensuing
three years.
ROADS, PIERS ANI) HARBOURS COMMITTEE.
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, seconded by W. T-
Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
iS
Resolved—That the entire members of [he Council do hereby
constitute the Roads, Piers and Harbours Committee for the
ensuing three years, and we hereby delegate to the Committee
any powers which this Council might exercise for the purpose
-for which the Committee are appointed.
EXECUTIVE UNDER THE DISEASES OF
ANIMALS ACTS.
Proposed by Denis J Rath, Esq, seconded by Peter B Moore,
Esq, and
Resolved—That the entire members of the Council do hereby
constitute the Executive Committee under the Diseases of Ani-
mals Acts for the ensuing three years, and we delegate to said
Committee any powers of the County Council unclev these Acts,
Nhich the Committee may doom necessary to exercise.
JOINT CO-MMWIYEE OF LOUTH COUNTY INFIRMARY.
Proposed 'by John F Murphy, Esq, J P, seconded by Patrick
-M'Gee, EMI, and
Resolved—That the following members of the County Coun-
vil are hereby elected to represent the Council an the Joint,
Committee of the Louth County Infirmary for the ensuing three
years, viz :—Messrs Joseph Dolan, ; Chas A Duffy,
.J P, Dundalk ; Edward Goodman, I)unclalk ; Bernard, Hamill,
'J P, Dundalk ; Patk M 'Gee, Charleville; Peter B Moore, Drog-
heda; John F Murphy, J P, Stonetown ; Michael O'Meara, J P,
Omeath; Wm Woods, J P, Carlingford, and James Wynne,
J P, Dundalk.
19
RICHMOND DISTRICT ASYLUM COMMITTEE.
Proposed by N T Murphy, Esq, seconded by Pairiek M 'Gee,
Esq, and
Resolved—That the following gentlemen are hereby elected
to represent this Council on the Joint Crmrnittee of tho Rich-
mond District Lunatic Asylum for the ensuing three years:—
Messrs Thos,J Byrne, J P; Chas A Duffy, J P; J Ribton
Garstin, D L, and Jas M 'Carthy, J P.
COUNTY COMMITTEE OF AGRICULTURE.
Proposed by Patrick M 'Gee, 'Esq: seeonded by momas V.
A1'Qui11an, FAI, and
Resolved—That the entire members of the County Council
•onstltute the County Committee of Agriculture under the Ag-
riculture and Technical Acts, 1889 to 1899, for the ensuing
three years, together wit'h the fol lowing gentlemen who are not
members of the County Council Wm Brennan, Bawn,
Mansfieldstown ; Thomas Conachys Mullin.scross; Stephen Fee-
han, Mansfiehlstown•, Patrick Hoey, Marshes South, Dundalk ;
Albert Jeffers, Drumleck; Patk Kearney, Ratll(luff ; John C.
Kieran, jitm, Ashville, Dunlectr ; Richard Kieran, Drumcar, Dun
leer ; James Markey, Ardballon ; James Marmion, Carrieeked-
mond, Kileuvry; Philip M 'Ardle, Rampark; Thos F M 'Gallon,
Dundalk ; hseph A'I'Goe, Richardstown; Peter M 'Guire, Mar-
shallrath ; Joseph M 'Loughlin, Roes€own,Ardee ; Jasepll M' Ma-
hon„ Mayne, Castlebellingharn ; Pat;rick North,
Dundalk; P J Neary, Monvalle€, Louth; Thomas O'Connell,
Plaistcr, Dundalk; G•oorge Taaffe,' Smag•more Castle, Ardee ;
James Tiernan, Glebe, Dunleer, and Peter Woods, Muchgrange,
Greenore.
And it is also resolved that any member who does not attend
20
a meeting for a period of six months, shall ipso facto cease to
a member.
TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION COMMITTEE OF MANAGE-
AWNT.
Proposed by Denis J Rath, Esq, seconded by Thomas V.
M'Qui11an, Esq, and
Resolved—That the following members of this Council be and
are hereby appointed to represent the County Council on the,
Committee of Technical Instruction under the Acts of 1889,
1891, and 1899, for the ensuing three years Peter
Hughes, J P; T J BYIme, J P; W A Doran, J P; C A Duffy,
J P; Michael Meade, Tho SB IWCourt, Nicholas T Murphy,_
and wm Woods, J P.
ANN AGASSAN PIER COMMISSION.
Proposed by Micheal Meade, Esq, seconded by N T Murphy,
Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby nominate the following persons
as members of the Annagassan Pier Commvssion, under Section
8 of the Annagassan Pier Order (2nd and 3rd George 5th, 1912).
for the ensuing three years ;—
Council Commissioners Michael Meade, Castle-.
bellingham ; Patrick M 'Gee, Charleville, and John Morgan,
Dromiskin.
Local Commissioners Chas Doherty King, Anna-
gassmn ; John Hoey, Annagasan ; and Mathew Clinton, Anna-
gassan.
Cuunty Commissioners J J Russell, Ballynagassau.
and Joseph M 'Mahon, Mayne.
21
COUNTY LOUTH INSURANCE COMMITI?EE.
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq, seconded by W T Skeffng-
fton, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby appoint the following as members
.•of the County Louth Insurance Committee for the ensuing
three years E A Duffy, P L G, and M M 'Kitter-
ick, P •L G; and W A Doran, J P; Luke J Elcock,
Edward Goodman, Bernard Hamill, J P; Peter Hughes, J P ;
Patrick M 'Gee, T Skeffington, J P, and James Wynne, J P.
TUBERCULOSIS COMMITTE OF MANAGEMENT.
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq, seconded by John Dolan,
Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby appoint the following gentlemen to
.act as the County Louth Tuberculosis Committee of Manage-
ment for the ensuing three years, three members of said Com-
mittee to form a quorum Peter Hughes, J P (Chair-
man) ; Patrick Donegan, J P ; John Dolan, J P ; Chas A Duffy,
J P; Luke J Elcock, Edward Goodman, Bernard Hamill, J P;
Joseph M Johnson, J P; James M'Carthy, J P; Patk O'Con-
nell, Thos O'Rourke, Denis J Rath, W T Skeffington, J P ; Wm
Woods, J P, and James Wynne, J P.
UNIVERSITY SCHOLARSHIPS COMMITTEE.
Proposed •by John Dolan, Esq, seconded by T V M 'Quillan,
Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby appoint +01me fallowing gentlemen
to act as Scholarships Committee in connection with the County
Louth Scholarships 'Scheme for the ensuing three years—Messrs
•James Connolly, J P, Ravensdale; Joseph T Dolan, M A, Ar-
22
dee ; James M'Carthy: J P, Newfounclwell ; Thos Mtunhy,
Durw
dalk; Patrick O'Connell, Dundalk; Michael O' Meara,
Omeath; Denis J Rath, Cloghefhear; Wm T Skeffington, J P
Drogheda.
GENERAL COUNCIL OF COUNTY COUNCILS,
Proposed 'by D J Rath, Esq, seconded by p B Moore,
Esq,
and
Resolved—That we hereby appoint, Che following gentlemen
to represent the Coünty Council on the General Council of
County Councils, for the ensuing three years T J
Byrne, J P; J T Dolan, M A, and W T Skeffington, J P.
COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURE.
Proposed by N T Murphy, Esq, seconded by D J Rath, Esq,
and
Resolved—That we hereby appoint the following two gentle-.
men to represent the Council on the Council of Agriculture un-
der the Agriculture and Technical Instruction (Ireland) Act,
1899, for the ensuing three years :—Messrs Joseph Dolan, Gauls-.
town, and James M 'Corthy, J P, Drogheda.
OLD AGE PENSION COMMITTEES.
Proposed by P B Moore, Esq, seconded by Wm Woods, Esqv
J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby appoint the following gentlemen
as the Old Age Pension Committees in the several districts as.
set out hereunder, for the ensuing three years:—
ARDEE.—Messrs Wm Brennan, Loughanmore, Castlebelling--
9.
'23
ham; Richard Stokes, ArdOe; A I.)ontn, J P, Harristown ;
James Ilalpenny, Ardee; Gerald Brophy, Ardee; Patrick Mo—
han, Nicholastown; J C Kieran, Ashville, Dunleer ; James
M 'Keever, Rathgeonan; Very Rev Canon Rogers, P P Ardee.
Patrick Daly, Thos J
mon, Johnstown; Mathew Lundy, Peter Mae
guire, Marshallrath; Richard Mathews, Knock-dinnen; Patk-
M 'Gee, Charleville; Joseph M 'Gee, •Richardstmv-n; nomas
M 'Conacby, Mullinsoross, and Joseph M 'Mahon, J P, Mayne..
DROGHEDA.—Messrs Collier, Tho Dales, Clogher-
head ; Jcseph Dolan, Gaulstown; Patk I)onegan, J P, Monas—
terboiee; Laurence M 'Keown, Milltown; James Moore, Gan.
denstown ; Nicholas T Murphy, Hilt of llath; Den:s J Rath,
Clogherhead ; James M 'Carthy, Newfoundwoll, Drogheda ;
La urence Murphy, 'Painstown, Togher, Dun)€ft•.
•DUNDALK (North)—Messrs James Connolly, J P, Dalargy
Charles A Duffy, J p, Dundalk; Bernard Finegan, Dundalk
Joseph' P Kearney, Wilville; Joseph H M 'Ardie, J P, Ram—
park ; James M'C0111t, jun, Dundalk; • Michael O'Meara, J P
Omeath; Peter Woods, J P, Piedmon€; William Woods, J P,
Carlingford.
DCNDALK T J J P,
Patrick Byrne, J P, Milltown; James Byrne
Tullydrum; Peter
Hughes, J P, Castiering; James Kelly, Grey Acre; N. B.
King, Knoekdillon; Thomas Larnes, Killen; P. M'Namee,
Knoekbride, and Joh nF Murphy, J P, Stonetown
24
LOCAV GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS, 1914.
DEATH OF CANDIDATE FOR ELECTORAL DIVISION or
DRUMCAR.
following letter from Mr Patr?ck J. Roe, Ret.orning
Officer, was read, also letter on the same subject from the Lo-
eal Government Board :—
Fvancis Street,
Dundalk, 11th June, 1914.
Local Government Elections, 1914.
Co. Louth Ardee No. I Rural District.
Dear Sir,—
The two retiring Rural District Councillors for
the District Electoral Division of Drumcar, whiOh elects two
Councillors, were John Carroll Harmon, of •Salterstown, and
Joseph Sy!vestor Harmon, of Salterstown. Both these men
were duly nominated for re-election, and no otihem• nomination
avas received for the division. •On the 7th May I issued a no-
tice of No Poll, stating that these two eonåida.tes would 'be de-
clared to be elected as Rüral District Councillors for the divi-
Sion of Drumcar. On the 15th May John Carroll Harmon
died. The day of election was the 4th June. John 'Carroll
Harmon being the retiring councillor there was one Whom I
could declare elected to his seat, and I issued notice of the re-
sult of elections, declaring Joseph Sylvester Harmon duly elec-
ted. The notice is silent as to the other seat.
T wrote Che Local Government Board for directions, and they
referred me to Article 7 (1) of the Schedule to the Local Go-
•vernment (Application of Enactments) Order, 1898, which pro-
sides if any difficulty arises as respects thc election of any in-
dividual Councillor, Alderman, Guardian or Town Commis-
25
•ioner, and there is 110 provision for 'holding another election
then, in the case of a County Councillor or of an Alderman of
. a County Borough, Che Local Government Board, and in any
other case the County Council may order a new election €0 be
held, and may give such directions as may be necessary for the
purpose of holding the election.
In their reply to my letter Local Government Board state
the matter is one for the County Council and not for the Board
to determine.
T would be glad if you would bring Chis matter under the no-
tice of your Council at the earliest opportunity, and I await
their directions.
Yours faithfully,
PATRICK J. ROE.
•Charles M' Alester, Esq,
Secretary Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
•a
No. 30,823: 1914.
Sir,
Local Government Boald,
Dublin, 10t hJune, 1914.
Ardee No. I RIIT&I •District.
The Local Government Board for Ireland have had
before them your letter of the 7th inst, relative €0 the decease
of Mr John Carroll Harmon, an unobposed candidate in Drum-
ear district electoral division for membership of the Ardee No.
1 Rural District Council, after the issue of the notiec of No
Poll, but before the day of election ; and with reference thereto
they desire me to inEorrn you that Article 7 (1) of the Schedule
•to the Local Government (Application of Enactments) Order,
1898, applies as regards the filling of the vacancy so created. I
am to state, however, that the rna,€ter is one for
Council, and not for the Board, to determine.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
the County
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
Patrick J. Roe, Esq: Soliciaor,
Returning 'Officer for County Louth.
The Council's Solicitor gave his cpinion that in the civeunw
stances a new election was necessary.
After discussion, the following resolution was unani--
mously
Proposed 'by P Moore, Esq, seconded by Patrick M 'Gee,
Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby decide to hold a new election for
a District Councillor for the Electoral Division of
owing to the death of John Carroll Harmon, and we. decide.
that the dale for holding said eleetion 'hall "be the 18th day of
August, 1914.
TILLAGE RETURNS.
Mr Patrick M 'Gee broubht under the notice of the Council
the question of the action of the Department of Agriculture in
publishing the tillage returns of the various counties in Ireland
i nthe early part of the Autumn, which gave the brewers and
distillers an opportunity of making a basis of Ehe price of grain,
which was prejudicial €0 the farmers of the County Louth, and
suggested that the Department be solicited to withhold the re-
turns until the 1st of November in each year.
3
After •discussion the following resolution was passed
mously : —
Proposed by Patrick M •Gee, Esq. seconded by Michael Moade
Esq, and
Resolved—That in view of the fact that the early publica-.
lion of the tillage returns by the Department of Agriculture, is..
prejudicial to t.he farmers •by enabling brewers and distillers
fix a standard price for grain, before the actual yield is defini-
tely known, we request the Department to withhold the publi-
cation of the tillage returns until the 1st Novem bev in each
year.
VOTES OF COND01jNCE.
The following resolutions were passed in silenee :—
Proposed by N T Murphy, Esq, seconded by C A Duffy, Esq,.
J P, and
ResÜlved—That we learn with regret of the death of the
mother of our esteemed colleague, Mr James M 'Carthy, and we
beg to tender to him and the members of his family our sincere
sympathy in their bereavement.
Propcsod 'by N T Murpll.v, Esq, seconded by C' A Duffy, Esq„
J P: and
Resolved—That we beg to tender to our esteemed colleague„
Mr Joseph Dolan, our sincere sympathy on the death of 'his
sister.
IRISH VOLUNTEERS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by T V M 'Quillan, Esq, seconded by J F Murphys
Esq, J p, and
28
Resolved—That this Council request the Provisional Com-
unitiee of the Irish Volunteers to conform to the suggestion of
tho Irish Leader, Mr John E Redmond, as to the control of the
Volunteer movement.
WITHDRAWAL OF THE ARMS ACT PROCLAMATION.
A resolution submitted by the Limerick City Council request-
ing the sithdrawalof the Proclamation under the Arms Act,
prohibiting the importation of arms into Ireland, was, on tlh@.
motion of Mr T V M 'Quillan, seconded by Mr M Meade, un-
.animously adopted.
OMEATH IRISH COLLEGE.
The following letter was read :—
Ardee, 15th June, 1914.
To the Members df the Louth County Council.
Gentlemen.
On behalf of the Committee of the Orneath Irish
College, to Which you kindly subscribed' last year, I enclose list,
of last year's subscriptions, and ask your support for the Col-
It had a very successful
lege by a moderate subscription.
course last year, and promises to be well availed of this year
also, but its expenses are heavy, and i t is dependent on pub-
lie support foi• its continuance.
Yours faithfully,
JOSEPH T. DOLAN,
Treasurer.
The members of the Council decided to support the appeal by
vrivate contributions, and Messrs Michael O'Meara, J p,
•Omeath, and William Woods, J P, Carlingford, were appointed
to receive subscriptions for the Fnnd.
29
Finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee at their •
Meeting held in Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 22nd day of June, 1914, at Oiie o'clock p
Present :—
In the chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members present—Michael Meade, Thomas Murphy, Jos
H M'Ard1e, J P; John F IVLurphy, J P; Bernard Hamill, J P;
Wm Woods, J P ; P Woods, J P ; and James Wynne, J P, Esquires.
Also present—Mr Thomas Walsh, Co. Surveyor.
The Secretary submitted the following accounts for works in
charge of the Go. Surveyor, and those of his own office, which on
examination were passed and ordered for payment by the Com- -
mittee :—
Michael
Patrick
Michael
Michael
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S OFFICE.
Devine, sample of stones
M'Cooey,
Jameson ,
do.
do.
Mathews, Road No. 411,
to Road Board
do.
do.
Dundalk
SECRETARY'S OFFICE.
Margaret Murray, for H Rogan, Student
S Medealfe, for P A Hanratty, Student
Rose Dolan, for J M'Parland, Student
M De Ricci, for Miss Callan
Peter M'Namee, Bill Posting
0 11
5 15
13
C3 12
3 11
21 16
2 10
3
3
8
30
do.
Peter M 'Namee,
Patrick M 'Cullougli, half year's remuneration
Mathew M'Gahan, 23 days' wages
Joseph Louden, 4 weeks' salary
Jose>ll Cotter, 9': days' wages •
Patrick Donegan, Poundage Fees
o
1
7
5 15
o
6
... 130 5
... 114 17 11
38 15
67 3
71 10 11
65 16 7
68 9 3
40 13 3
2710 13 8
o
6
o
6
2
2
4
Patrick M'l)onuell,
•John J Kelly
Patrick Vlnghes,
Patrick Cluskey,
Poter NI'DohneIl,
-John Woods,
-James V Johnston
do
do.
do.
do.
do.
do.
410.
do.
do.
do.
do.
do.
Total,
Pending the appointment of the permanent Clerks . in the
'County Office, the Secretary was directed to ernploy any necessary
clerical help that was required.
PAYMENT OF POUNDAGE FEES TO RATE COLLECTORS.
The followi ng letter from the Local Government Board was
read :—
Local Government Board, Dublin,
19th June, 1914.
No. 31483/1914.
Louth County.
Sir ,
The Local Government Board for Ireland have had before
them your letter of the 10th instant, and previous correspondeneo
relative to the payment of poundage fees to the Poor Rate Col-
lectors in County Louth for the past financial year; and with
reference thereto, T am to state that the replies received from
the Collectors are not satisfactory, ancl in the circumstances, the
Board can only feel justified in consenting to the payment of
31
remuneration to them as follows in respect of last year's collec-
tion :—
(a) Tn respect of the first moie«ty, poundage fees on amount
. aetually lodged to the credit of the Council on 30th September,
and in the case of Collectors who aro paid by salary, a propor-
fion of half year's salary on amount corresponding to amount
lodged on that date.
(b) Full remuneration in resper•t of second moiety, of which
•enfire amount was lodged on 31st March.
The Board will •be prepared to consider the payment of poundage
fees of the 1st moiety at close of thet current half year's collec-
-tion„ but only so in the ease Of those Collectors who make sub-
stantial lodgment during early parf of half year, as indicated
by the Board's letter of the 27th ultima, and lodge full amount
Of 1st moiety by 30th September.
The Board will now object to Collector 11 uglies being paid
his poundage fees in reyspe,et of the year endca March, 1913, as in
the case of the other Collectors.
1 am, Sir,
Your obedient Sérvaut,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
The Secretary Louth Co. Council
Courthouse, Dundalk.
After discussion on, the subject matter of this letter, the Com-
mittee unanimously cleeidcd €0 pay the Collectors- in accordance
with the terms of same; and that the Secretary call a meeting
-of the Collectors interested, to the Council Chamber, on Wednes-
day, the 24th instant, and to explain its contents and discuss the
t€mns of [Ime letter and have their views on tho matter.
MR PATRICK MCCULLOUGH'S POUNDAGE FEES.
T.efier was read from tlle Local Government Board dated 8th
June, Nc. 30372: 1914, enclosing copy of a letter they had re-
32
eeived from Patrick M'CuIIough, Rate Collector, In which he
stated that as he had closed his eollectiou on the 31st March he
was entitled to be paid his poundage fees. The in their
reply to stated that he was entitled to be paid his fees.
The Committee decided to pay Ilim his rtmuneration on, his
eolloction to the 31st March, 1914, amount C55 7s 6d.
ANNAGASSAN PIER.
The following letter from the Board of Trade was read :—
Board of Trade (Harbour Department),
7, Whitehall Gardens,
London, S.W
25th May, 1914.
H. 7630.
Sir,
Referring to your lotter of the 16th May, relative to your
application on behalf Of the Louth County Council for the consent •
of this Department to the deposit of excavated material upon
certain tidal lands in Dundalk Bay, I am directed by the Board
of Trade to inquire if they tu•e to assume that the County
Council do not consider it necessary that a retaining wall
should be erectod in order to keep the deposited material from
being washed
I am at the same time to requcyst that you will furnish tho
Board with a statement of the amount Of material (in tons) pro- -
posed to be deposited.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant.
GARNHAM ROPER.
Charles M'A1esfer, Esq,
Secretary, Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
33
The Secretary informed the Committee that he had written
the Engineer of the Department, and read hiy reply us f,ollowsc—
Engineer's Office,
2, Kildare Place, Dublin.
mth May, 1914-
Ann!lgassan Harbour.
Dear Sir,—
Tn reply fo yours of the 26th. A retaining wall would
be of use whatever. The idea is to depösit the material in such
a position that it WII form part of the foreshore protecting the
walls or cliff. The total amount of material to be so deposited
is 10,000 cubic yards.
The Secretary
Louth County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
Your9 faithfully,
C. D. OLIVER.
The Secretary further informed the Committee that he had
sent copy of the Engineers reply to the Board of Trade, and tlw
Committee approved, and the letters wero initialled by the
Chairman.
COSTS OF LEASE OF SITE OF TUBERCULOSIS
DJSPENSARY.
The following letter from Mr O'Connell, Solicitor, was read,.
and after discussion tho Committee Ieeommencled that the ac—
count for the costs be paid:—
Fraricis Street, Duudalk,
28th May, 1914.
Earl of Roden with County Council.
Re Lease of Site on Castleföwn Road, Dundalk.
Dear Sir,—
I have your letter of 26th inst, enclosing costs of pro-
of Lease as received from the Lessor's Solicitors.
34
The costs of a Lease are always borne by Che Lessee, and in
instance this draft Lease was prepared at our request and
ordinarily the Council would remain liable whether the Lease
was sealed and completed or cancelled befimy completion.
The only point that arises is as to the cancellation. 1 fear we
would have much difficulty in, proving before a Court that the
Lessor had, after draft Lease had been approved of and en-
grossed and awaited completion, contracted with the Urban Dis-
trict Council for the granting of a Lease of a plot of ground
which included some portion of the plot included in our draft
In all the circumstances I considtr the Council would be held
liable, and I advise payment. 1 return costs heerwith.
Yours fai{hfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M 'Alester, Esq,
Secretary, Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
FORESTRY SCHEME.
OMEATFI PARK, RUXTON DEMESNE, AND WILLISTOWN
PLANTATIONS.
The following letter from the Department of Agriculture was
read, also report on Omeath Park, the Ruxton Demesne, and
Nillistown Plantations:—
Department of Agrieultur€x and Technical Instruction for
J reland,
Upper Merrion Street, Dublin,
27th May, 1914.
No. A. 11827-14.
FORESTRY.
Sir,—
Adverting to pl+vious correspondence, T have now to
transmit, for the, information of Louth County Council, copy
•of the report furnished to the Department by their Forestry
Inspector, Mr John Crozier, on his inspectic;n of the lands and
*timber offcu•ed for sale to the Council a € Omeatll Park. If; is
•observed that the area. available for purchase on this Estate has
now been reduced €0 about eighty-four acres. If this property,
including the timber now standing thereon, can be secured by
•the Council under the Land Purchase Acts at a price not ex-
•eeeding 81,000, the Department will be prepared to sanction its
.aequisition, under the conditions of a, County Forestry Scheme
adopted by the Council on the lines already suggested by the
Department.
A copy Of the report of the Department's Chief Forestry In-
spector, regarding the plantation on the Ruxon Estate at Ardoe,
and on the Rathdonnell Estate at Willistown, which the Council
propose to purchase, is also sent herewith.
The Department note from your letter of Che 4th ultimo, that
no definite steps have yet been taken by the Council in regard
to the purchase of the Woodlands at Ardee. The Department
will be prepared to consider favourably the question of the ac-
equisition of this property at a reasonable price under au ap-
proved County Forestry Scheme, in the event of the Council de-
eiding to proceed with the purchase.
In regard to the Willistov.'ll plantation, I have to state that,
while the Department do not regard this property as suitable for
.oequisition by the Council, they will not, jn view of the special
«:ircumstances, object to its purchase' under the Land Aets at a
•cost not exceeding Z75.
With reference to" your letter of the 23rd instant, I have to
state that the Department do not. consider it necessary to have
-a further inspection of Omeath Park made by their Chief Fores-
try Inspector.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signed), T. P. GILL,
Secretary, Louth County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
Secretary,
36
No. A. 11827-14.
REPORT AND VALUATION OF TIMBER ON LAND OFFERED*
FOR SALE AT OMEATH PARK, COUNTY LOUTH.
The total area of land offered for sale on the above property
extends to 84 acres O roods 24 perches, but of that total not morep
than fifty acres are stocked or partially stocked with timber,-
the remainder consisting of grass land, ground Of plarv
tation, bare patches within the woods, etc.
The plantations have been laid out with a view to creating
ornament and shelter around the mansion house ruther than
for the purpose Of utility, and, although occupying a fairly come.
pact block of land and sheltered by the contour of the ground
from their prevailing winds, their composition, and the methods..
Of thinning practised ha.ve largely robbed tllé area Of any
sibility of acquiring a value wheh, under better seloction Ofl
economical timber trees and moro approved methods of thnningv_
it: would undoubtedly have' attained. The land is well adapted'
for the• cultivation of coniferous trees, and good examples are too
be seen of Scots pine, larch, Douglas fir, Pinus insignis, and
certain spocies of Silver fir, but the soil, with the exception of
a small area on the low ground, is too dry and light for the»•
growth of hardwoods, and the extensive planting of these which
has taken place within the last fifty years must inevitably lead?
to financial failure.
A considerable amount of clearing and thinning out has taken,
place within the last few years, and is at present, or has latelyu
been, proceeding; whilst the best . of the pitwood, larch, and a
certain amount of Scots pine wnd hardwoods. have also been
marked for sale.
The growing stock now consist of about thirty-five acres of
timber of from thirty-five to fifty years of age, largely consist-
ing of a mixture of hardwoods and conifers, with two smalV
groups Of pure Iwrch, covering au area of about three acr€s, and
a larger area on the noth-west side of practically pure hardwoods..
together with about fifteen acres partiall} stocked with matured
Scots pine, throughout which a few larches of equal age are to
37
-seen. Both young and old woods have been. depleted to a large
•extent of the Iapch with which they were originally plantod in
mixture, the steady demand and satisfactory prices offered for
pitwood apparently contributing to this end. Larch suitable
for pitwood locally fetches from 14s to 15s per ton, ash 18s to
6d, alder 7s 6d to IOS; while Scots pine and spruce are in
little demand, and average from 5s to 7s per ton, all these timbers
being sold standing.
Tn the event' Of purchase by t.hé County Council taking place,
-sum of about 2150 might be realised by the sale of the clumps
•of pitwood larch, • and the old Scots pines on the higher ground
' towards the south-west boundary, and in the subsequent workinÅ
of the area it would be necessary, in order to make full use of
tho land, to clear Off a considerable amount Of immature timber.
With the exception of the larch clumps above referred to, and
•an area of seven acres or so in the centre of the main block, the
remainder of the area. is much under-stocked, and the hope Of
future profit still further lessened by the fact that most of tho
trees left are not suitable for the soil, or of u kind likely to
yield satisfactory financial results.
In computing the value, the present. worth of the under-
"stocked areas must be taken as a basis of calculation, and, making
due allowance for the cost of planting and maintenance of
fully stocked areas, I estimate that sum of from Æ400 to 8425
represents the full value of the timber offered for sale on, the
property•
(Signed), JOHN CROZIER.
24th April, 1914.
No. A. 11827-14.
REPORT ON WOODS ON THE ARDEE DEMESNE, COUNTY
LOUTH.
These Woods were inspected on the 11th and 12th May. They
«jnsist of about sixty aeres on. the north and south sides of the
Ardee Demesne—thirty-eight acres lying in the Lawn and Mount
Woods, and about twenty acres in the Foxcover.
38
'The Lawn Wood contains a considerable quantity of very OIN
arul ornamental timber, with a lurge stock of seedlings and young-
trees coming up between. This Wood is bouded on the Southy
East, and West sides by a wall, while the North side is more,
or less open to the demesne, and could be fenced off without'
great difficulty.
The Foxcover contains younger wood, chiefly beech, sycamore,-
ash, and a few conifers, and has been planted at two different
periods. The younger portion of this wood earries a very
promising erop which should be left entirely alone for some
years, but tho older portion could be cleared out an,d replanted.
at any time.
The fences round the Foxcover are fairly good,
although a few gaps occur along the roadside. There are various.
signs of pilfering having taken place lately.
The total area of thesa Woods, amounting to sixty acres, would
qualify them for an advance from the Development Fund, and
their position near the town of Arcleo gives them considerable-
importance in the dstriet.
The older wood on the south side of the Demesno is extremely
picturesque, and it would be difficult to treat it on economic
lines without spoiling its pr«sent appearance; and robbing it of
one of its most attractive feutures. Tn the event of its acquisi-„
tion by the County Council, special treatment might be prcv
vided for with regard to this wood. The woods to the u.ortll,.
on the other hand, could be dealt with in the ordinary way by
clearing and replanting the older portion and leaving thev younger,
wood to mature. ground on which both woods stand is
exceptionally good, and capable of producing first-class timber,
and many of the specimens now present ns good as any existing
in Ireland.
On the whole, these woods appear particularly suitable for a.
County Council Scheme, owing to their well-fenced condition,
their position as regards the district generally, and their
proximity to the town and railway of Ardee. The value of the
standing timber was not ascertained with any degree of accuracy y.
but would probably be worth from E6C0 to 8800 if sold standing,
39
WILLISTOWN.
Two small plantations in Willistown consist of a mixod crop
of larch, Scots pine, spruce, silver fir, sycamore, ash, and oak
of about twenty years of •age. These woods are in very promis-
ing condition, and should • produce good timber in tho course
of thirty or forty years. At the present moment nothing re—
quires doing, except a few repairs to ff'nces on the west side of
one of the woods, the fences generally being in a good con-
dition.
Owing to their distance from any large centre, and their small
size, I do not consider these woods suitable for a County Council
Scheme, although exceptional ciscumstanees might render their
purchase desirable, such as the possibility of additional woods
being acquired within a short distance. They are, however, well
worth the 275 paid for them, and I recommend that the sanction
of tho Department be given to this transaction.
(Signed), A. C. FORBES.
18th May, 1914.
The Secretary stated that the Committee appointed in con.
nection with Orneath Park had been summoned to meet at
Ome.ath, and a oopy Of the report on the plantation had been
sent to each of them. reason for urgency in the matter
was that the Agent of the Estate, Colonel Alexander, had ap-.
pointed Friday, the 12th June, to meet the Committee, the Solici-
tor and the Surveyor, with a view to arranging a price. Tho.
following report of the interview from Mr O'Connell was read
Francis Street, Dundalk,
20th June, 1914.
Dear Sir,—
1 beg to report that the deputation appointed for the
purpose duly attended at Omeath Park 011 Friday, the 12th inst,
and went over the grounds with Colonel F. S. G. Alexander, the
Agent, and subsequently inspected the house and outbuildings.
There attended Messrs William Woods, Michael O'Meara, and
Joseph P Kearney, with the County Surveyor and myself. Rev
40
Quin, P P; Rev Jas Quinn. C C; and Mr Joseph T Dolan.
M A, also were in attendance on behalf of the Gaelic League.
It Was consideréd that the value of the 'tanding timber on the
62 acres put at from C400 to 2425 by the Forestry Inspector of
the Department was a fair and proper amount. The members
of the Council referred to above will be in: a position to suggest
a. proper figure as value for the land under timber together with
the remainder•of the 84 acres which is armble.
Mr Walsh will give the probable estimate to make the build-
ings habitable with a view to their being let if a, tenant may be
had.
Colonol Alexandei• could suggest nothing in, regard to the
-probable priee at which the property would sell. It is for the
'Council to submit their best offer for consideration of the Land
Judge.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M'A1ester,
Secretary, Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
After discussion it was decided to réfer the question of the
price to be offered for Omeath Park to the County Council, and
in the case of the Ruxton Demesne €0 send a copy of the report
to Messrs Dolan and Doran, the Local Committee, for their re-
port on same.
CRIMINAL INJURY CLAIMS.
following letter was read and initialled by the .
Francis Street, Dundalk,
8th' June, 1914'.
Re Criminal Injury Applications.
Dear Sir,—
1 beg to formally report on the following claims for
41
-«•ompensation against the Council heard at Dundalk Quarter
Sessions on the 6th inst
Earl of Arrcn, Applicant—Alleged burning of henther and
game on Rockmarshall Mountains—Z300. Claim dismissed.
Earl of Arran, Abpiicant—A Ileged burning of heather and
1 game on Annaverna Mountain—CIOO. Claim dismissetl.
Annie Johnston. Applicant—Alleged burning of dwelling-house
-and outofhces at RockmarShaIl—E60. Decree for Z41 and 25s
witnesses' expenses, to be levied off E. D. of Jenkinstown. J do
not advise an appeal in this case.
Michael Louth, Applicant—Alleged damage to portion of roof
-A)f dwelling-house at Ballymageragh—Æ20. Claim dismissed.
yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL
•cCharIes M'Alester, Esq,
Secretary,' Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
COMMITTAL TO INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS.
Tho following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
Courthouse, Dundalk,
2nd June, 1914.
Dear Sir,—
Please take notice that at next Dundalk petty Sessions
•application will be made by the Rev Father Kerr, C C, for
the committal to an Industrial School of a child named Sullivan,
.•ged about years, and who at present resides at Kincora
Terrace, Dundalk.
eCharIes M'AIester,
Secretary, Louth
Yours faithfully,
Esq,
Co. Council,
OSWALD HARDY, C. P. S.
Dundalk.
42
UNIVERSITY SCHOLARSHIPS.
STUDENT'S APPLICATION FOR FOURTH YEAR'S COURSE'E
Letter dated the 10th June was read from Miss Ursula
land asking to have her Scholarship extoncled for a fourth year.
The matter was referred to the Scholarship Committee.
CARLINGFORD PIER REPAIRS.
The following lettetr from the County Surveyor was read, and
the Committee unanimously recommended the expenditure Of
C5, and instructed the Co. Surveyor to have the work done.
County Surveyor's Office,
Courthouse, I)'ucndalk,
19th June, 1914.
Charles M 'Alester, Esq,
Sycretary, Louth co. Council, Dundalk.
Deur Sir,—
There are some small repairs necessary to Carlingfor&
Pier, viz, erecting guard on Pierhead, as required by B. T.
speetor, to replace broken guard.
Some small repairs are necessary to tirnbc»r curbing also.
The total cost. of repairs proposed not to exceed C5.
I beg you would bring the mattor before Finance Committee orv-
Monday next, so that I may have instructions to have the work
done.
Yours faithfully,
THOMAS WALSH.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL CI,EIUCSHIPS.
The Secretary read the following list of entries for the eom-
petitive examinations for the two Clerkships ill the County
Office. Each candidate submitted testimonial as to character
from either a County Councillor, his clergyman, or well-known
respectable inhabitant of Co. Louth, and the names of all the •
43
candidates wero unanimously approved for nomination to come
In the case of Michael
pete at their respective examinations.
Hanlon, Bellurgan, and Joseph Cotter, Ballybarraek, who made
application, to compete for Senior and Junior Examinations, this
permission was unanimously granted
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL CIÆRKSHIPS.
LIST OF CANDIDATES.
SENIOR.
Joseph Cotter, Ballybarraek, Dundalk.
James P. Farrell, 80, Chord Street, Drogheda.
Patrick Gilmore, Jocelyn Street, Dundalk.
Michael Hanlon, Bellurgan, Ballymascanlon.
Edward G. Kieran, 5, North Mary Street, Dundalk.
Ellwaltl Morgan, Chapel Street, Dundalk.
Francis M' Ardle, 11, 11 wong Avenue, Dundalk.
Alfred J M'Dona1d, Mill Street, Dundalk.
Peter Quigley, Kilconnor, Inniskeem.
John Reilly, 58, Clanbrassil Street, Dundalk.
Bernard Rice, 50, Broughton Street, Dundalk,
Patrick Rooney, 4, Chapel Street, Dundalk.
JUNIOR.
Patrick J Casey, 3, Dublin Street, Dundalk.
Joseph Cotter, Ballybarrack, Dundalk.
Michael Hanlon, Bellurgau, Ballymaseanlon.
J. Hughes. 11, Castle Road, Dundalk.
John Logan, 9, Seatown, Dundalk.
In connection with the examinations, letter was read from Peter
Coyle, Monaghan, requesting permission to . sit for the Senior
Clerkship. Tho Committee decided as Mr Coyle was not a nativev
he was not eligible to compete, and the
of County Louth,
Secretary was directed to reply accordingly.
44
APPLICATIONS IN CONSECTION WITH NEW BUILDINGS
IN COUNTY LOUTH.
Tho following letters were read and referred to the County
Surveyor and the County Councillors for the respective dis-
triets :—
Louth, Dundalk,
17th June, 1914.
'Charles M'AIester, Esq,
Secretary, Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
Sir,—
1 beg to make application to your Council for permission
-to build a wall in front of my house, and along the public road
from Louth to Mullaerew.
I spoke to Mr Walsh, County Surveyor, about the matter, and
he promised to bring it forward at the next meeting of the
council.
Hoping this application will receive your kind attention.
1 remain, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
HUGH JENNETTE.
13, Eurl Street, Dundalk,
18th June, 1914.
Dear Sir,—
1 would be glad if you placed before your Council the
facts in connection with two houses which T am about to have
erected in Carlingford for Mr Patk M'Shane, with a view to
having an expression of opinion from them. (I enclose rough
•skoteh of [he position).
The old gable removed stood about 18 inches at front and about
5 or 6 inches at rere, inside of whoro we propose to erect new
gable, our reason for _ claiming the right of which is that there
.are corner stones as shown on sketch forming part of our old
front wall buried in the ground, and apparently as long there
us the houses. The project about 3ft out from the old gable
'(twieo thc distance we propose to build on) and are so high over
surface as to prohibit traffice over them. Tlrere is also a,
small break in the boundary wall {It rere of about 5 inches, and
the Iino of our proposed gable would have the effect Of straight,
ening this line aud leaving two presentable houses in place of
tho Old thatched ones just removed. Further, it is our inten-.
tion to remove the remainder of these projecting stones, and
thereby leave the roadway at corner 18 inches wider for traffic
than at present. As my client does not wish to do anything
except that to which he is entitled, he would be grateful to your-
Council for a direction on the matter.
Yours faithfully,
V. F. O'CONNELL.
(mrles M'Alester, Esq.
Secretary, Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
RETURNING OFFICER'S ACCOUNT.
The following application was read from Mr p. J. Roe, but
the Committee decided to ha.ve the account dealt with at once;
and it was ordered that when the account was furnished the
Secretary would call a meeting of the Finance Committee to eon-
sider it:—
Francis Street, Dundalk,
13th June, 1914.
Re Local Government Elections, 1914.
Dear Sir,—
I beg to apply to your Council for a. further advance of
one hundred and fifty pounds on account of expenses incurred
in connection with those Elections.
Charles M'Alester, Esq,
Secretary, Louth Co.
Yours faithfully,
PATRICK J. ROE.
Council, Dundalk.
CARPET FOR CROWN SOLICITOR'S OFFICE.
'Tho following letter was read, and after discussion the Com-
mittee recommended the County Surveyor to have the necessary
floor carpet provided, the cost of same not to exceed Z4:—
The Courthouse, Dundalk,
17th June, 1914.
Dear Sir,—
I beg to report that the carpet in the little office along the
passage used by the Crown Solicitor Assizes and Quarter Ses-
•sions is quite worn out and requires to be replaced.
The Assizes open on 6th prox.
Your obedient Servant,
T. MURRAY,
Charles M'A1ester, Esq,
Secretary, Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Courtkeeper.
GENERAL COUNCIL OF COUNTY COUNCILS.
Letter was read from the Secretary of the .above Council re-
•questing payment of the affiliation fee of CIO from the Louth
County (%uncil for the year 1914-15.
The Committee decided that they would only pay an affiliation
fee of 25, and as this amount had been sent in January of tho
present year, the Secretary was directed to acquaint the General
Councils Secretary of this fact.
47
executive Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of above Committoe held in the Council
<Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Monday, the 29th day of June,
-1914, at one o'clock p m.
Present
In the Chai—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Thomas J Byrne, J P; Thomas Murphy, Patk
M 'Gee, Thomas O'Rourke, Peter Woods, J P; Michael O'Meara,
.J P; and James Wynne, J P, Esquires.
The minutes of the previous Executive Committee meeting
having neen sent to each member were taken as read and eon-
firmed by the Chairman.
VETERINARY INSPECTORS' SALARIES.
The following letter from the Department was read and
initialled by the Chairnran
Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch),
50 and 51, Tipper Mount Street, Dublin,
No. 2281114.
Sir,
With reference to your letter of 6th instant, respecting
the decision of your Local Authority af a recent meeting to reduce
by ÆIO per annum in each case, as from 1st instant, inclusive, the
salaries of their Veterinary Inspectors, Messrs Clinton, Don-
nelly, and Maxwell, T have to state that in all the circumstances
48
the Department approve Of the Local Authority's decision in this-
matter. The Department note that your Local Auhority propose
to review these rates of payment after a period of tweave months.
from the latter date in the light of the experience gained as to-
the work under Tuberculosis (Ireland) Order discharged mean-
while by these Inspectors.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
T. P. GILL,
The Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Secretary.
EXPENSES UNDER SHEEP SCAB (LOCAL REGULATIONS)
IRELAND ORDER OF 1914.
'Ilhe following letter from the County Inspeetor, R 1 C, was-
read :—
Royal Irish Constabulary, Dundalk,
3rd June, 1914.
The Sheep Scab Local Regulations (Ireland) Order of 1914 (No. 2).
Sir,—
I am in receipt of your letter of 30th ultimo, together
with 50 copies of Regulations for County of Louth made under •
above Order. Expenses for postage and stationery will have
to bo incurred in transmitting a copy of the Regula.tions to each
Police Station in the County, and subsequent in forwording the
information required by Part One of the Order to the Secretary
to the County Council.
T am, therefore, to request if you will pay expenses necessarily
incurred, as above, in giving effect to the Order.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
R. J MAUNSELL,
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Co.
Inspector.
The Secretary informed the Committoe that he had sent a copy-
Of this letter to the Department for their direction in the mat-.
ter, and the following letter in reply was read :—
Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland,
(Veterinary • Branch),
50 and 51, Upper Mount Street, Dublin,
9th June, 1914.
No. 2244/14.
Sir,—
With reference to your letter of 5th instant, and its en—
closure, 1 have to state that the Department will offer no ob-
jection to the payment by your Local Authority of expenses in-
currod by the police with Article I of the Council's Regulations.
under the Sheep Scab (Local Regulations) Ireland) Order of 1914
(No. 2), and that the expenditure of the Local Authority under,
this head will be regarded as ranking for recoupment from tho.
General Cattle Diseases Fund in the ordinary course.
I am, Sir,
Your Obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL, Secretaryz
The Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
The Committee approved of the arrangement, and the letters
were initialled by the Chairman.
SHEEP DIPPING UNDER THE LOCAL REGULATIONS
ORDER.
The following letters from the Depatünent of Agricultur« was
Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch),
50 and 51, Upper Mount Street, Dublin,
3rd June, 1914.
.No. 2158,14.
Sir,—
1 have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of 30th
(ultimo. and its enclosed copies of Alterations recently adopted by
.sour Local Authority under the Sheep Scab (Local Regulations)
'(Ireland) Order of 1914 (No. 2).
It is observed that under these Regulations Sheep moved into
County Louth are required fo be dippöd within seven days after
•such movement, and the Department will be glad to be informed
vas to what arrangements your Local Authority propose to make
with a viow of securing that the Dipping shall be effectually ear-
mied out.
I am, Sir,
Your Obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL, Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
Courthouse, Dundalk.
Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch),
50 and 51, Upper Mount Street, Dublin,
13th June, 1914.
No. 2263,14.
Sir,—
With reference €0 the final paragraph of your letter of 5th
inst, I have to stato that the Local Authority should utilise tho
51
æervices of their Veterinary Insvcctors in connection with the
working of the Regulations adopted under the Sheep Scab (Local
Regulations) (Ireland) Order, but they might in the first instance
consult with the Inspectors as to the bast means for dealing with
•the matter. Owing to pressure of work at these offices the Depart-
do not anticipate that they can render assistance such as
was afforded last year under the Sheep Dipping Order in relation
to a portion of County Louth. but they will be happy to advise
the Local Authority on matters presenting difficulty tlva€ may
raise from time to time, and perhaps occasionally can spare one
of their Veterinary Inspectirs to inquire locally into the working
4f the Regulations.
The Depaffment will be glad to learn the result of any final
arrangements made on this •subject.
T am, Sir,
Your Obedient Servant,
T. P. GTIJ„ Secretary.
'The Secl'etary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Department of Agriculture and Teehnieal Instruction. for
Ireland,
50 and 51, Upper Mount Street,' Dublin,
(Veterinary Branch),
25th June, 1914.
No.. 2263,14.
Sir.
With reference to previous eon•espondence on the subject,
J have fo inquire whether you are yet in a position to furnish the
Department with particulars as to the nature of any. arrange-
Inents that mhy have been made regarding the working of your
52
Local Authority Regulations under the Sheep Scab (Local Regula—
tions) Ireland Order.
I am , Sir,
Your Obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL, Secretary.
The Seoretary
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
After a protracted discussion on the subject matter Of these"
letters, tho Committee decided that in the case of sheep moved'
into the county, that the compulsory dipping within the seven
days should be carried out in the presence of the Council's Dip-
ping Superintendent. who should notify the Council that the dip-.
ping been properly carried out, the Secretary was directed
to notify the various Dipping Superintendents €0 see that this.
was carried out, and to advise the Department that the Conw
mitteo had made this arrangement.
SHEEP MOVED TNTO COUNTY LOUTH AFTER THE
ADOPTION OF THE REGULATIONS.
The following letter from Mr Maxwell, V S' Ardee, was read,
and the Secretary was directed to write Mr Maxwelt that the.
dipping of the sheep in tho presence of the Dipping Super-
intendent would satisfy the Local Authority
Ardee, 24th June, 1914.
'IVhe Secretary,
Louth County Council.
Sir,—
T beg to report that man named P Rooney exposed'
sheep for sale to-day in the Ardee fair.
These sheep carrfé last night, the owner states, by the 8.15 p m
train from Bessbrook. He also stated that he had these sheep
dipped in the public tank and produced a e€wtifieate to that effect
signed by W. Leonard.
53
Leonard received these sheep and failed to A10tify the police. and
certainly he should not, owing to the appearance Of these animals,
have taken them to public tank. Whilst the animals are ap-
.oarently healthy now, they, in my opinion, showed signs of having
had scab within a comparatively recent, period.
The police say that on, the whole it was a merely technical
offence ancl allowed the sheep €0 be moved from the fair, and I
am unaware at present where they have been removed to. I
would also desire to know from your Council do the words in the
recent Order "TO be isolated and dipped to the satisfaction of
the Local Authority," apply to your Veterinary Inspectors or to
any servant of the Council employed for sheep dipping purposes.
These sheep were not dipped in my presence, nor did their ap-
pearanre to-day satisfy me that they had been dipped in a
satisfactory manner.
The police have the names and addresses of the parties con-
cerned.
I am , Sir,
Faithfully yours,
W. E. MAXWELL.
In with the same matter the following letter was
read from the Dipping Superintendent at Ardee, ad the Secretary
was directed to write Mr Rooney, Newry. the owner of the sheep
in question, that in future he must notify tbe police of the
arrival of any sheep from outside County Louth, or a prosecu-
'tion would result:—
Ardee, 29th June, 1914.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Dear Sir,—
I beg to advise you that 48 sheep and 48 lambs, the pro-
perty of Mr P Rooney, Newry, were moved from County Down
to Ardee on the 23rd instant, of whoso arrival I was notified by-
the owner.
All the sheep was dipped in the Council's tank ait Ardee, and!,
have been put on the golf links.
Yours faithfully.
WILLIAM LEONARD, Dipping Superintendent.
REPORTS FROM VETERINARY INSPECTORS.
The following reports from Messrs Clinton, I)onnelly, and'
Maxwell were read and by the Chairman
Dundalk, 29th June, 1914.
Monthly Report.
Sir,—
I beg to report that a case of suspected swine fever oc--
curred on the premises of Mr P Murphy, Blackrock. I visited
the place in company with au Inspector from the Department,
and the necessary steps have been taken ill the matter. A case
of bovine tuberculosis occurred in a cow the property of P-
M 'Gorman, Thornfield. The animal was slaughtered in accord-.
ance with the Tuberculosis (Ireland) Order and the carcase,
buried.
With reference to your communication re sheep dipping in
Ravensdale, Carlingford, ancl adjoining areas, I would respectfully
point out that as matters are at present the Order is practically
useless. There is no supervision, and most of the owners goe
througli a form of dipping at their own. premises which is littl&
short of a farce.
Your Obedient Servant,
J. CLINTON.
Ardee, 2nd June, 1914.
The Chairman,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Sir,—
I beg to report that I visited the usual fairs and markets
held in the No. I Ardee Rural District Council.
55
On the 25th inst it was reported to me that sheep scab oxistedi
on a portion of Coole farm, held by John Crawley, Artnalivery.
On visiting there 1 found the report to be correct, and I
them dipped to my satisfaction on the 27th inst.
During the month T withdrew the restrictions on Arthur•
Macan's, Esq, premises at Drumeashel, re sheep scab.
I am Sir,
Faithfully yours,
W. E. MAXWELL
On the 25th inst I issued an isolation notiee Messrs J and
Caraher, Coole, Ardee, as a precautionary measure against sheep.
scab at present existing on another portion of Coole farm.
REPORT FOR MAY, 1914.
Veterinary Establishment, Drogheda,
June 6th, 1914.
Gentlemen,—
1 inspeefed the fains and markets Imeld in my district:
during the month.
I have withdrawn the restrictions in tho two outbreaks of •
sheep seap, tund no fresli eases of this diseuse has occurred during.
1 made inspections n cne or two castes where animals wer(Y•
suspected to have contagious disease, found the animals not so.
•ffeeted.
Yours respectfully,
ANDREW A. DONNELLE
To Louth County Council
Executive Committee.
56
13th June, 1914.
Dear Sir,—
With reference to the suspected case of tuberculosis in a cow
the property of Edward Henry, Oldbridge, Drogheda (a prelimin-
.ary report being sent you on the 10th inst), 1 have to state that
on the miscroscopical examination of the discharge taken from
the diseased udder no acid fast bacilli were found, and therefore
I do not consider it a. case under the Order.
Yours truly,
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
To the Secretary,
Louth County Council.
SUSPECTED CASE OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE.
The following letter from the police was read, and the SOeretary
informed the Committee that the animal suspected was examined
by Mr Clinton, V S; Mr Chambers. the Portal Veterinary Jn-
spector, and an Inspector from the Department, and they were
unanimous that it was not a case of foot and mouth disease:—
I C, Quay Street, Dundalk,
30th May, 1914.
I beg to report that a bullock, ptoperty of Thomas Duffy,
Ramparts, Dundalk. appears to be suffering from foot and mouth
disease. The animal is grazing in a field adjoining Long
Avenue road. This suspected disease was detected this eevning.
J. H. LEVINGE, Acting-sergeant.
To the Secretary,
Local Authority, Co. Louth.
HIRE OF TANKS.
'I'be Secretary informed the Committee that he had
eated with Messrs Cooper and Nephew, Berkhamsteod,
communi—
with re-
57
to the reduction of the hirage for the six sheep dipping
tanks in use by the County Council and had an interview with
the firm's traveller on the subject, and the following letter from
him was read
Royal Hotel, Galway,
Ith June, 1914.
To Mr M'A1ester,
Secretary, Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
Dear Sir,—
1 am sorry there has been delay in confirming my offer
xe swim baths, but my firm's letter accepting missed me and
• •only came to hand this morning.
They aro quite prepared to let the rental Of all baths stand at
5s per annum, out of eonsideration Of the number of years your
' Committee have passed us the dip contract.
I am also advised that you have paid C35 rental on Imths (4),
the cost of which would have been C44, so that C9 would make
these four the property of the Council. The other two which
you got last year no rental has yet been paid, the cost of which
is ZII each. If your Committee thought well of clearing off the
first four by a payment of C9, they might wish to continue the
rental Of the last two at
5s each per annum.
'I'hanking you again for
past favours, assuring you of my best
-attention at all times.
I am
Yours faithfully,
E. R. PHILLIPS.
It was unanimously decided to aeee•pt the offer of 5s per annum
per tanik for the 6 tanks used by the Council, and the Secretary
was directed to write Messrs Cooper accordingly.
58
RAVENSDALE, AGHAMEEN, AND CARLINGFORD TANKS.
'l'he Secretary informed the Committee that the Local Come-
mittee in charge of the Council's tanks at Ravensdale, Aghameen
and Carlingford had met twice at the Council Chmnber, Court-w
house, Dundalk, when the following members attended—Messrs,
Joseph Tl J P; Bernard Finnegan, Jas Connolly, J P;
William Woods, J P; and Peter Woods, J P.
Tho Committee made the following arrangements in connee- .
tion with the dipping for the present year :—
To continue the usage of the three tanks for the year, viz—
Aglynmc•en, Ravensdale, ancl Carlingford ; that the Aghallieen tank
should be kept all the season. at Aghmneen. with Owen Keenan
as Dipping Superintendent, who will receive as remuneration one
penny per sheep and one halfpenny per larnb for the animals
dippal, and be paid the sum of E2 for the rent of site for the
tank.
That the Ravensdale tank be started to work at Ravensdale, awl
then removéd to Annaghloughilll for one for the convenience
of the sheep owners in that district, and subsequently to be re-
to Ravensdale. That James White, Jenkinstown, and
John M'ArdIe be employed as dippers at the rate of 16s per week
each.
That the Carlingford tank be startocl on the 1st July for two
weeks, and then to be removed to Omeatll for the last two weeks
of July.
It was ITeommended that James M 'Gee, of Carlingford, be em.
ployed as assistant at the rate of 16.8 per week.
The Executive Committee unanimously approved of all the fore-
going arrangements, and in addition to the approval of the rent
of $1 for the site of the Carlingford tank and ZI for the Orneath
tank.
59
Finance Committee.
(SPECIAL MEETING.)
Minutes of proceedings of above Committee at their Special
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, orv
Monday, the '29th day of June, 1914, at one o'clock, p m,
Present the Chair : Chas A Duffy, J P.
Other Members J Byrne, J P; T Murphy, p M 'Gee
T P Woods, J P; M O'Mem, J P; and Jas Wynne,
J P, Esquires.
Mr D O'Connell, Solicitor to the Council: ancl Mr P J Roe„
Solicitor, Returning Officer, were in attendance.
An aeeottnt amounting €0 the sum of 18s 2d, submitted!
by the Returning Officer, Mr Patrick J Roe, for the Local Go—
vernment Elections in June, 1914, was considered by the Corn—
mittee.
A protracted discussion took place as to certain charges made
by the Printing Contractor, Messrs M 'Dougall and Co, in their
account, which were not considered strictly in accordance with
the contract, and also an item for care hire in connection with
the Castlebellingham Polling Station, and it was ultimately
unanimously decided to have the aeeount taxed by the County
Court Judge, and that Mr O'Connell should represent the
County Council at the taxation.
It was also recommended that Should the taxation not be
'finished in time to have it discharged at the next meeting of
the County Council, that an advance of on account be
made Mr Roe.
MR. CONNOLLY'S ACCOUNT FOR THE ELECTIONS OF
1911.
An account was submitted from Mr J B Conolly, Town Clerk,
Drogheda, amounting to C39 1,9s lcl, for various accounts and
fees in connection with the Elections in the Drogheda Urban
Polling District, incurred by him as Deputy Returning Officer.
ne account was referred to the Solicitor of the County
Council for his opinion as to the liability of the Council in eon-
nection therewith, and to advise the Council thereon.
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE.
Minutes of proceedings of the second Quarterly Meeting of
the Proposal Committee, held in the Borough Court, Court
House, Dundalk, on Monday, 6th July, 1914, at one o'clock,
In the Chair —T J Byrne, J P.
Other Members present J Rat,h, T Murphy, N T Mur-
phy, J F Mtuvhy, J P; T O'Rourke, J Halpenny, J P; W T
Skeffington, J P; B Finegan, J Morgwn, J H M'Ardle, J P; M
-Meade, J Wynne, J P; J P Kearney, Wm Woods, J P; P.
Noods, J P; C A Duffy, J P, Esquires, and Sir A Vere Foster,
Rart, D L.
The following applications by the County Surveyor were sub-
61
mitted and approved by the Committee :—
N 7—To erect six sign-posts indicating routes to Mellifont
and Monasterboice. Standards to be angle-iron. Arms,
to be supplied by the AutomObile Association and Mo—
tor Union. C•st not to exceed C(j. To be a County-.
at-Large charge. —Approved.
9—To defray cost of procuring and forwarding samples of
No.
road metal to Road Board Laboratories for test, and
payfor tests (as approved by Finance Commitee). C(LSt
not to exceed El(). To be a County-at-Large charge.
Approved.
IO—To provide set of new ordnance sheets (6 inches to the.
No.
mile) of County Louth, with portfolio to hold same.
Cost not to exceed C5. To be a County-at-Large
charge.—Approved.
11—To erect shed •on Carlingforr Pier, as recommended by
No.
County Council. Cost not to exceed C 200. To be
charged to Carlinkford Pier Revenue Account.—Ap-
proved provisionally.
An application was made by the County Surveyor that per-
mission be given to the Rev Canon Lockett Forde to erect a
fence on the roadside at Glack, to fence in a piece of bog—tho
fence to be of posts and wire, and was not an encrachment
The Committee unanimously granted the permission.
PURCHASE OF ROAD MAKING MACHINERY.
The following application was also considered by the Come
62
mittee, on the application of the County Surveyor :—
No. 8—To purchase road-making machinery and plant as fol-
road rollers, 3 scarifiers, 4 water carts,
2 compound 6 h. p. traction engines, 5 sleeping vans,
2 stone-breaking machines, 2 large rock drills, 2 small
ditto, 2 shot-firing dynamo outfits. Cost not to ex-
ceed C4,095. Money to raised on loan by County
Council and repaid in ten years from 1st October,
1914. To be a County-at-Large charge (ex Urban).
After a protracted discussion the Committee decided €0 ad-
. journ the consideration of this application to a meeting to be
held on Monday, the 13th July, and the Secretary was directed
to have the details of the Financial Scheme submited by the
Road Board, sent to each member with the notice convening
the adjourned meeting. The consideration of the County-at-
luarge payments to be submitted by the Secretary, was also re-
ferred to the adjouraed meeting.
63
Finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the above Cornmitee held in the
Borough Court, Courthouse, Dundalk on Monday , the 6th day
of July, 1914.
Present : —
In the Chair—T J Byrne,- Esq, J P.
Other J Rach, T Murphy, T O'Rourke, J Hal-
penny, J P; N T Murphy, W T Skeffington: J P ; P, Finnegan,
J H M'AH11e, J P; M Meade, J Wynne, J P; J F Murphy,
P; W Woods, JP; c A Duffy, J P; J Morgan, P Woods, J P,
J P Kearney, Esquires, and Sir A Vere Foster, Bart, D L.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was also in attendance.
The following Accounts were examined and ordered for pay-
ment :—
Works in the hands (if the County Surveyor
Expenses Education Act, 1892
Burial of Carcases
Compensation under the Tuberculosis Order, 1913
Office
Wages, Sheep Dipping Superintendents
Total
27
39
0
2
5
3
C78
s
5
8
9
o
13
5
1
4
o
6
o
MALICIOUS INJURY CLAIM—ANNIE JOHNSTON.
The following letter from Mr Moynagh, Solicitor, was read,
and the Committee decided that as the account was not yet, on
the levy payment could not be made, and the Secretary was dim
recced to reply assordingly :—
Roden Place, Dundalk,
'24th June, 1914.
Annie Johnston, Applicant.
The County Council of Louth, Respondents.
Dear Sir,
I have now received from the Clerk of the Peace .
the Decree herein, which amounts to C44 17s 6d. Please let me
have cheque for amount of same at your convenience, and
Oblige.
Faithfully yours,
STEPHEN H. MOYNAGH.
Charles M' Alester, Lsq,
Secretary Louth County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
ST. JOSEPH'S ORPHANAE LOAN.
Letter was read from the Manager of St Joseph's Orphanage
that payment had been made through tho Council's Treasurer
of the instalment of Loan herein, viz—CIOO.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
TRANSFER FROM INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.
The following letter from the Manauer of SC Joseph's Indus-
trial School, Dundalk, was read, and the Committee recom-
65
mended that no objection be made 'by the County Council :—
July '2nd, 1914.
St. Joseph's Orphanage and Industrial School, Dundalk
I beg to inform the Louth County Council that;
with the consent and approval of the Chief Inspector of Refor-
matory and Industrial Schools, I purpose transferring Edith
Haverty, No. 342, from this school to St Joseph's Reformatory
School, Clare Street, Limerick. The manager of this latter
school has, in a letter of 1st instant, signified her willingness to
accept the child, and I should be much obliged if you bring the
fact to the knowledge of your Council, in accordance with Sec—
tion 74 (10) of the Childrens Act.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
(Sgd.) SR. MARY PATRICK KEEGAN,
Manager..
Charles M 'Alester, Esq.
ACCOUNT FOR 1911 ELECTIONS.
The following letter was read from Mr O'Connell, Solicitor,
on the account furnished by Mr J B Connolly for the 1911 Elec-
tions.
After discussion the Secretary was directed to write the Low
cal overnment Board as to how the County Council should deal
-with the matter :—
Francis Street, Dundnlk,
2nd July, 1914.
Dear Sir,
I have your letter of 1st instant, enclosing ac-
count now furnished by the Town Clerk of Drogheda of fees for
work done and payments made with respect' to the election of
County Councillors and Guardians for the Borough of Drogheda
in the year 1911.
The account should have been furnished to the then Return-
ing Officer "within fotllteen days after the day on which the
return is made of the person or persons elected at the election."
It is Obvious this has not been done, and the then returning
officer was freed' from liability for payment. I am of opinion
that the Council cannot pay the amount without being liable
to a surcharge. If it is desired to effect settlement, then the
consent of the Loead Government, Board must first be had, and
the account be approved in detail 'by Che County as being in
with the scale of expenses applicable.
Yours faithfully,
(Sgd.) DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M 'Alester, E.sq,
Secretary, Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
RETURN OF PATIENTS ADMITTED TO RICHMOND
ASYLUM.
The return showing the admission of Patients to the Rich-
Änond District Ass-lum for the quarter ended 30th June, 1914,
uvas laid before the Committee. TU showed that 12 patients had
been admitted during the period, one of whom was since dis-
•charged, and one died.
The return was initialled by the Chairman.
BYE-LAWS WITH RESPECT TO INDECENT EXPRES-
SIONS, Etc.
The following letter enclosing the acompanying bye-laws, was
read, and the Secretary was directed €0 send copy to the Lord
Lieutenani when ready :—
Francis Street, Dundalk,
2nd July, 1914.
Re Bye-Laws with Respect to the Use of Indecent
Expressions and Conduct.
Dear Sir,
I enclose clraft of Bye-Laws as approved and set-
•led by Counsel. It is considered that the clause giving power
io a Constable to arrest should not be inserted as the law is
somewhat unsettled in the case of misdemeanors. There can be
no arrest withoutwanrant, made, unless the abusive language or
•eonduet constitutes a. •breach of the peace, and, in the latter
event, the arrest can be made without a warrant at Common
Law.
The Bye-Laws hould come into •operation on the espiration of
forty days after a copy has bee nsen€ to the Lord Lieutonant,
,and if they are not, within t;hat time, disallowed by him with
the advice of the Privy Council.
I would direct your attention €0 the notes in Vanston's
-eal Government, Vol. 1, page 19, to Section 16 of the Local
Government (Ireland) Act, 1898, as to procedure as regards tho
attendance of at least two-thirds of the whole number of the
68
Council at the making of the bye-law,
a copy in some public place.
Yours faithfully,
the sealing, and affixing
69
RATE COLLECTORS' POUNDAE FEES.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man :—
so. 34,878: 1914.
Louth County.
Sir,
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 3rd July, 1914.
(Sgd.) DANIEL O'CONNELL n
Charles M 'Alester, Esq,
Secretary Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
61 and 62 Vic., C. 37, Sec. 16.
Bye-Laws with Respect to the Use of Indecent Expressions
and Conduct.
I.—No person shall in any street or public place or on land
adjoining or near to such street, make use of any abusive, prcv
fane, blasphemous, indecent, or obscene language, behaviour or
conduct , to the annoyance or disturbance of any person in.
such street or place.
2.—Any person acting contrary to the foregoing Bye-Law
shall be liable for every such offence to a fine of Forty Shillings
provided, nevertheless, that the Justices or Court before whom
any complaint may be made, or any proceedings may be taken
in respect of any such offence, may, if they think fit, adjudge
bho payment of a fine of any sum less than the full amount: of
the fine imposed by this Bye-Law.
Made and Sealed with the Common Seal of the
day of
Louth County Council, this
One thousand nine hundred and fourteen, in the
presence of
Council.
Secretary of the County
The Local Government, Board for Ireland have had
"before them your further letter of the 27th ultimo relative to
the payment by the Louth County Council of the balance of
poundage fees to the Poor Rate Collectons in respect of the half
.year ended the 30th September, 1913. With reference thereto,
am to draw your attention to the second last paragraph of
the Board's letter of the 19th ultimo, and to point out that the
Board can only consider the question of tho payment, of these
poundage fees in the case of those Colletcors who make sub-
stantial lodgments in the earlier Tortion of the half year, and
•close the collection of the current moiety by the 3rd September.
T am, Sir,
Your obedient, Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant
The Secretary ,
Louth County Council.
DUTIES ON LAND VALUES.
SITE OF COUNTY COURTHOUSE.
A circular letter •dated the 3rd 7uy1, 1914, from the General
Valuation Office, Dublin, was read, enclosing the provisional
valuation made by the
the County Courthouse,
lows :—
Original Gross Value,
Less deductions, being
7)
Official District Valuer, of the site of
Dundalk. The figures given are as fol-.
the difference between the
Grcxss Value and the value of the Fee Simple of the
land divested of Buildings, etc.
Original Assessable Site Value
40,000,
After discussion the matter was referred to the Solicitor and.
th eCounty Surveyor for their report.
APPLICATION FROM CO. COUNCIL SCHOLAR.
Letter was read from Mr p A Hanratty, Collon, one of the
County Council University Scholars, requesting payment of thc
balance due him on foot of his scholarship.
The matter was referred to the Seholarship Committee.
FANE DRAINAE DISTRICT.
The following correspondence was read and referred to the
71
and others, respecting the Fane Drainage District in the
County. A copy of a letter received on the subject from the
Commissioners of Public Works is also enclosed.
By Order of the Board,
(Signed),
S. WATT.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
No. 31,076: 1914.
Inuth tunty.
FANE DRAINAGE DISTRICT.
To the Local Government Board.
On behalf of the land' owners or the Fane Drainage District,
we respectfully ask your Board to take sleys to place the above
drainage under the Louth County Council, with a view of hav—
ing the works carried out.
The Drainage was dope under the Board of Works in 1851
but nothing was ever done to keep them in proper cyder since,
that date.
County Council : —
No. 33,429: 1914.
Louth County.
Sir,
Local Government Boa rd,
Dublin, 25th June, 1914.
No. 33429: 1914.
8559 :
I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Ireland to forward ,for the consideration of the Louth County
Council, the accompanying copy of a letter which they have
received from Mr P Byrne, Milltown, Castlebellingham, ancr
Sir,
(Signed),
PATRICK BYRNE, Milltown, Castlebellingharm
WILLIAM BOYLE, Dromiskin, Commons.
T J BYRNE, J P, Rosmakea.
(Copy).
14.
Office of Public Works,
Dublin, 17th June, 1914.
In reply* to your letter of the 11th inst (31076-14)
relative to a proposal to hand over the management of the Fano
72
Drainage District to the Louth •County Council, I am directed
by the Commissioners of Public Works to state that the district,
was formed under the 5 and (j Vie. , cap. 89, at a cost of
0,155 15s (Sd, and was brought to award on the 20th Septem-
ber, 1851. The area of lands drained or improved was 1,522
acres. In accordance with Section 120 of the Act of 1842 men-
tioned above, the management of the District is vested in trus—
tees, who shall be elected triennially by the proprietors in the
District, but in; consequence of action taken by the Board, 15
trustees were appointed in July, 1900. Early in that year the
district was reported to be in need of maintenance, but from
a return appended to the Minutes of Evidence of the Arterial
Drainage Commission, 1905 (pp. 416-7) it appears that no ex-
was incurred in the maintenance of the Fane Drain-
age District from 1901 to 1905 inclusive, and since 1908 the
Board, in spite of repeated efforts, have been unable to ensure
the triennial election of trustes contemplated by Section 120 of
the 5 and G Vic. , cap. 89 (eopy enclosed).
The Board have no knowledge as €0 the present condition of
the district but presumably there is no systematic maintenance,
there are no acting trustees, and the former Secretary has cea-
sed to act as such. It appears, therefore, to the Board to 'be
desirable that the business of the district should be transferred
to the County Council.
am ,Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
H. WILLIAMS,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
Local overnment Board, Dublin.
73
WEEDS ANI) SEEDS ACTS.
Circular letter from the Department of Agriculture was read
requesting the County Council to as.sist the Department as far
as possible in the inspection under the above Act, and to 'have
all roads and lands in their control kept cleared of noxious
weeds during the coming season.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACT.
Tho following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man
Department of Agriculture, 27-6-'14.
No. G. 2323-14.
Sir,
With reference €0 previous correspondence relative
to the enforcement of the above-mentioned Acts, I have to
state, for the information of sour Local Mthority. that an
, officer of the Department, acting on instructions under Section
2 of the Act of 1899, obtained on the 3hd instant at T)'tmleer,
County Louth, three samples of butter for analysis. The
samples were duly submitt,edf €0 the Public Analyst for tho
• County, who certifies that they proved to be pure.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
(Sgd.) T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
Proposal Committee.
(ADJOURNED MEETING.)
Minutes of proceedings of the adjourned Proposal Committee-
Meeting, held in Council Chamber on Monday, the 13th day
of July, 1914.
Presont :—
Chair—C A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Othor Members present—T J Byrne, J P; B Finnegan, Peter
Woods, J P; Patrick M'Gee, James Halpenny, J P; Denis J
Roth, H M'Ard1e, J P; James M'Carthy, J P; Jarnes .
Wynne, J P; • John F Murphy, J P; William Woods, J P;
P J Kearney, B Hamill, J P.
Mr Walsh, County Surveyor, was also in attendance.
Application No. 8—To purchase road-making machinery and
plant, as follows road rollers, 3 scarifiers, 4 water carts,
2 compound (j-•h.p. traction engines, 5 sleeping vans, 2 stone-
breaking machines, 2 large rock drills, 2 small ditto, 2 shot-
firing dynamo outfits. Cost not to exceed C4,095. Money to .
'be raised on loan by County Council and repaid in ten years
from 1st October, 1914. To be a County at large. charge
(ex Uurban), was again under consideration.
The County Surveyor read reports from adjoining counties
showing the quantities of road-making machinery in use
therein, which in eevry ease was very considerable. He also
75
gave details of the annual cost on foot of the proposed loan»
and answered various queries as to the plant,
After considerable discussion, it was proposed by Mr T J
Byrne, J P, and seconded by Mr J F Murphy, J P, Chat the
application No. 8 be approved and sent -on to the County
Council for confirmation.
The Secretary submitted County at large payments as set out
on Form 22, which included taxed 'bill of costs from Messrs
P J Roe, Returning 'Officer, and O'Connell, Solicitor, whielt
were examined and initialled by the Chairman.
Coutb County Council.
SPECIAL MEETING.
Mnutes of proceedings of the Louth County Council, held in
•the Council Cham bey, Courthouse, on Monday, tho
13th day of July, 1914, at one o'clock p m.
Presc•nt
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Others present—Thomas J Byrne, J P; James M 'Carthy, J P;
-Joseph H WArdle, J P; John T Murphy, J P; Bernard Hamill,
J P ; Joseph P Kemmey, James Halpenny, J P; B Finnegan,
Patrick M'Gee, Peter Woods, J P; Denis J Rath, William
Woods, J P; and James Wynne, J P, Esquires.
Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was also in attendance.
The meeting was called by direction of the Chairman of the
•County Council to consider special invitation to attend the
•opening of the Civic Exhibition in Dublin on Wednesday, the
15th July.
The Secretary read the invitation to tho County Council to
attend the opening of the Exhibition, and the following tele-
gram addressed to the Chairman wasi also read :—
PTO Peter Hughes, Castlering, Channonrock, Louth.
May we hope that you, accompanied 'by other County Council-
hrs, will attend the opening of the Civic Exhibition on July
15th, in accordance with invitation sent, and if necessary could
you call special meeting of your Council to consider invitation
Exhibition promised to me most successful.—Lady Aberdeen.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
by J F Murphy, Esq, J P; seconded by Patrick M 'Gee, Esq,.
and
Resolved—That at this Meeting, specially convened for the.
purpose, it is hereby decided to accept the invitation given
by her Excellency the Countess of Aberdeen to attnd the
opening of the Civic Exhibition in Dublin on Wednesday, the
15th instant, and it is hereby decided that the entire Members
of the County Council, with the County Surveyor and the Sec-
retary, iorm the deputation to attend the opening of the Ex--
hibi tion.
78
Scbolarsbip Commitiee.
Minutes of Proceedings of 'Scholarship Committee at their
Aleeting held on Monday, the 13th July, 1914, in the Council
Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk.
In the Chair—Denis J Ratll, Esq.
Also present—Jam€hs M 'Carthy, J P, and Patrick O'Connell,
Esquires.
APPLICATION FRO-MI DOMINICAN COLLEGE.
Letter was read from Sister Mary Reginald, Dominican Col-
lege, Dublin, asking that the rule as to t'he test examination
for Senior Grade Intermediate Examination, 1914, should Ibe
altered to enable students who had passed the Senior Grade Ex-
amination, 1913, €0 be eligible.
The Committee decided that as the scheme for the 1914
Scholarships made a pass in the 1914 Intermediate Senior Grade
a necessary condition, no change could be made.
APPLICATION FOR FOURTH YEAR'S COURSE.
The folowing letter was read, and! the Committee recommen-
(led that tho County Council should award Miss M 'Parland a
fourth year's scholarship on the express condition that she fol-
lows a course in Industrial or Commercial Science :—
Dominican Hall, Stephen's Green,
Dublin, 10th June, 1914.
Tho Secretary Louth County Council.
Dear Mr M' Alester,
This is the third year of my tenure
•of the County Scholarship, and I have now completed my
79
eeourse for the B. A. Degree. If successful at the examination
in September. I shall have graduated this year. But-T am
also following a course in Industrial and Commercial Science.
I havo only completed 'two years of the course for the Degree
-of Bachelor Of Commerce. r have still to attend the College
for another year before I can take out my degree in Commerce.
I understand that there is provision made for the extension of
the Scholarship for a fourth year, if the student wishes to fol-
low a course in Industrial and Commercial Science. On this ac-
count I would like to bring my case before the County Council.
I am anxious to finish my commerce course and take out the de-
gree of B. Comm. ; but my ability to do so depends entirely on
the decision of the County Council. I 'had hoped to do both cle-
grees the same year, but .0Ming to the extent of t'he commerce
eourse it was impossible to do so.
I would be very grateful to you to bring the matter 'before
the Council. It may be premature, •but I would like to know if
it is possible to have my Seholarsllip extended ohe year.
You will undeÄand that cs this is my third year it will bo
A degree in Commerce is, I
time for me to form some plans.
believe, a useful asset, in looking for a position. So I am anxious
to complete the course.
I hope the County Council will be able to follow their inten-
tion of extending the Seüolarship for a fourth year to students
of Commerce.
Yours sincerely,
CRSULA MAcPARLA.ND.
UNEXPENDED BALANCES OF SCHOLARSHIPS.
Applications were read from the following students asking for
payment of the unexpended balances of their respective Scholar-
ships, to cover necessary expenses incurred by them
80
M 'Parland, Messrs H Rogan, P A Hanratty, J M 'Parland and
L F Brannigan.
After discussion the Committee directed the Secretary to get
reports from the College authorities of the progress of the Stu—
dents, and if these were satisfactory, that the County Council
be recommended to pay the scholars the unexpended balances
standing to the credit of their accounts.
81
REPORT OF LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
TUBERCULOSIS
COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMEMT.
Meeting held in the Courthouse, Dundalk, on Friday, the
3rd day of July, 1914.
Present
Presiding—C A Dllffyl Esq, J P, M C C.
Other Hamill, .J P; Wynne, J P,
and Thomas O'Rourke, Esquires, M C C's.
Also present—Dr J A M 'Quillan, T M O.
Itf was unanimously decided to appoint C A Duffy, Esq. J P,
Chairman of the Committee.
It was also unanimously decided that regular meetings of the
Committee be held in the offices of the Insurance Conjmit€ee at
11 0'clook, a m, on Che second and last Wednesday of each
month, until the Council Scheme is in opration.
It was decided that the Drogheda members of the Committee
form a Sub-Committee to arrange for the provision of a 'I'llbor-
eulosis Dispensary at Drogheda.
The question of providing treatment, for chronic advanced
cases of Tuebculosis was then very fully considered.
82
It was decided to aet in acccmlanee wit.lJ the previous report
on the subject adopted by the County Council, and direct the
Clerk to eonimunieate with the Authorities of the Union Fever
Hospi tads, and at the same time to enclose a copy of letter
71. M. 24th April, 1914, from •the L G B on the subject
(olready referred to), requesting the Hospital Authorities to re-
ceive a deputation from the Committee consisting of four mem-
bers present, with Messrs Edward' Goodman, M C C, and Patk.
O'Connell, to confer with them on the sulyeet, with a viwe to
arriving at a suitable arrangement.
The questijon of providing a. suitable •Dispensary at Dundalk,
was again i'so uncl(T consideration, with letter 48 M, (ith March
1914, from L G E on the subject (referred to in previous re-
port,).
It, was decided in this case also to direct the Clerk to eom-
ntunicate with the Secretary of the Louth County Infirmary
requesting him to arrange wit,h the Governing l}ocl.v to nteet tho
deputation above mentioned, in order to ascetrain if it, would
'be possible to arrange to have a suitable (iiNensary erected in
thc grounds attached to the Infirmary ; estinjaied cost, C300.
It was decided that the necessaries and appliances for Dis-
pensaries contained in list subtnittod by the Tuberculosis Me-
dical Officer be procured.
Accounts (as already furnished and were scheduled) suhrnitte€l
and nx•ornmended for payment amounting to 54 14s 9d.
L: tters submitted from Che Sanitary )fficer. Drogheda,
stating that shelters would be disinfeeed if the Council undertake
to defra.y the cost estimated at 6s each.
Communication on tho same subject from the Clerk Of "Uniov
Ardeo, stating that the Council was resmynsible for tho disinfe•
ing of
83
It was decided to direct the Tuberculosis Medical Officer to
rnake the best arrangement for the disinfecting of shelters.
Lotters were submitted from fhe District Nursing
of Drogheda, Ardee, and Castlebellingham, requesting
of grant as set out in, Council's Scheme for services of nurses.
After some discussion, if was decided fo defer further oon-
sideration to next meeting. It was also to defer con-
sideration of the question of appointment of Part Time Nurs€s
in consequence Of the Insurance Commissioners failing to reply
or acknowledge the account, passed for payment to tho County
Council by the Insurance Committee.
V. WARREN, Clerk.
7th July, 1914.
tv
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings
OF THE
FINANCE COMMITTEE
HELD
on monbag, 20tb July, 1914,
At One o'clock p.m.
Finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Com-
mittee at their Meeting held in the Council Chamber,
Courthouse, Dundalk, on Monday, the 20th July,
1914, at 1 0'clock p m.
Present •
In the Chair—W. A. Doran, Esq.. J. P,
Other Members present—E. Goodman, J. P.
Kearney, P. M'(Gee, M. Meade, J. F. Murphy, J.P. ;
T. Murphy, Esquires„ and Sir A. V. Foster, Bart.
Mr. Walsh, County Surveyor, was also in at-
tendance.
The Secretary submitted payments to road
contractors for quarter ended 30th June, 1914, as
furnished by the Rural District Councils, viz :—
945 15
Payments ordered through the Subsidiary
Account, as follows :—
County Surveyor's Office, ...
Conveyance of Prisoners,
Insurance Premiums,
Secretary's Office,
Balance Scholarships, being
amounts remaining after
paymentof Board, College
18
27
9
9
19
4
16
9
24 2
Fees, etc.,
Lt508 11
2
9
6
o
5
3
8
Ardee No. l,
Drogheda (Louth),
Dund Ilk,
$746
535
2,227
18 11
3
17
3
2
The Sect etary's Petty Cash Account was ex-
amined. This included the Insurance Stamp and
Postage Account, and a cheque for was ordered
to reinstate that amount.
The Committee ordered a transfer of EIOOO to
be drawn to be credited to the subsidiary account.
Deatb of Mr. Peter Hughes, J.P.,
Chairman of County Council.
Mr. Joseph P: Kearney, brought under the
notice of the Committee the lamented death of Mr.
Hughes, who had been Chairman of the Louth
County Council since its inception, and moved that
the Committee adjourn as a mark of respect to his
memory. The Chairinan (Mr. Doran) seconded, and
Mr. Goodman supported the motion, which was
unanimously agreed to, and the Committee adjourned.
It was suggested that the Members of the
County Council and the Officials of the Council
should take part processionally at the funeral.
1
Couth County eouncil.
Minutes of Proceedings of Louth County Council at their se—
ocnd Qumrterly Meeting, held in the Council Chamber, Court—
house, Dundalk, on Thursday, the 23rd clay of July, 1914, at,
one o'clock, p m.
Present
In the Chair A Doran, Esq, J P.
Other members present A Duffy, J P; B Finnegan, E)
Goodman, B Hamill, J P; J P Kearney, J H M'Ardle, J P;
T B WCourt, P M'Gce, M Meat!e, J F Murphy, J P; T Mur-.
phy. T O'Rourke, D' J Rath, Wm Woods, J p; and James.
Wynne, J P, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, '13 E, County Surveyor, and Dr M 'Quillau
T M O, were also in attendance.
Owing to the death of the Chairman of the Council it was
unanimously decided Chat only the urgent boasiness of the pay:
ments formulated by the District Councils and Proposal Corn—
mittee would be dealt with at the meeting.
PAYIMEN'I'S TO ROAD CONTRACTORS.
The following resolutions were passed unanimously :—
ARDEE PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Michael Meade, Esq ;
Seconded by Patrick M 'Gee, Esq, and
Resolved—That the proposal for payments formulated by tho
Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council, at their second quarterly
2
rneeting held on the 7th day of July, 1914, and set out on
Form 22, furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby
approved of.
These payments amount to the sum of C74G 18s Ild.
DROGHEDA PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Denis J Rath, Esq ;
Seconded by John F Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the proposal foi• payments formulated by the
-Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union, at their seOond quar-
• terly meeting, held on the 14th day of July, 1914, and set out
on Form 22, furni@hed to the County Counicl, be and are here-
'by approved of.
These payments amount to the, sum of Cö35 3s 3d
DUNDALK PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Joseph P Kearney, Esq, and
Resolved—That the proposals fo rpayments formulated by
the Dundalk Rural District Council, at their second quarterly
meetin gheld on the 6th day of July, 1914, and set out on
Form 22, furniShed to the County Council, be and aro hereby
approved of.
These payments amount to tihe sum of C945 15s 2d
COUNTY-AT-LARGE PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Edward Goodman, Esq ;
Seconded by Thomas B M 'Court, Esq, and
Resolved—That the proposals for payments for
3
at-Large, formulated by the Proposal Committee at their
meeting held on the 6th day of July, 1914, and adjourned to
the 13th July, 1914, and set out on Form 22, furnished to the
County Council, and amounting Io the sum of C4,722 Is 7d, be
and are hereby approved of by Che Council.
DEATH OF MR. PETER HUGHES, CHAIRMAN OF THE
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCL.
The following correspondence was read :—
Rosmakea,
Dundalk, 23rd July, 1914.
To the Presiding Chairman Of the Louth County C 'cuncil,
County Council Offices, Courthouse, Dundalk
Dear Sir,—
I regret that owing to indisposition I will be unable
to be present at the meeting to-day, but I assume that beyond
the transaction of the imperative business, the Council will ad-
journ for at least a week„ indeed I should suggest their doing
so until our meeting in August.
I cannot say how sorry I am to be .unable to join publiely to-day
in tho general regret of the passing away of Peter Hughes, rny
old friend and faithful colleague. He is gone indeed from am-
ongsb us, "gone where road boards cease from troubling and
A•ouneils are at rest." May God have mercy on his soul.
Yours faithfully,
THOMAS J. BYRNE.
the County-
4
Viceregal Lodge. Dublin.
Secretary Louth County Council, Courthouse, Dundalk.
Please convey to your Council the expresion of most sincere
sympathy in the loss of your Chairman, from the Lord Lieuten-
ant and myself, and also from the Peamount Committee of
Management.
LADY ABERDEEN.
House of Commons.
To M' Alester, Secretary County Council, Dundalk.
Have learned with deepest regret of death of Mr Peter
Hughes. Pray convey to his family tho expression of my sin--
cero sympathy.
JOHN TIEDMOND.
The Chairman then referred in feeling terms to the lamented'
death of Mr Hughes, whose connection with the County Coun-
eil dated from its establishment, and whose ability and know-
ledge had been its guiding influence to the present time. He
proposed the resolution as set out below, and this was seconded'
by Mr Edward Goodman and supported by Messrs IRath, Harn-
ill, J P, and T Murphy
Proposed by VCiIiam A Doran, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Edward Goodman, Esq, and
Resolved—That we learn witih heartfelt SOITOW of the death or
onr respcw•ted Chairman, Peter Hughes, E.sq, J P. Associated
a.s he was with the Louth County Council as Chairman since its
establishment in 1899, his lamented death has caused a void
which will not be easily filled. His thorough grasp of the in-.
tricate details of the work of the Council, his administrativ€y
ability, his taet and unfailing courtesy as Chairman, and,.
5
above all, his devotion to the interests of our county, and of
Ireland generally, has won our respect and admiration. We beg
to tender to 'his relatives our sincere condolence in the great
and irreparable loss they have sustained, and we adjourn this
meeting until Thursday next, the 30th day of July, as a mark
.of respect to his memory.
'Tho resolution• was passed in silence, all the members standing
as a mark of respect.
The Council cleeided that the co-option of a member to fill
the vaeancy, and the election of a Chairman of the Council,
should not be made until the second Quarterly Adjourned
Meeting on the 20th August.
6
Coutb County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings of Louth County Council at their se—
cond quarterly meeting, (adjourned from 23rd July, 1914) held
in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Thursday,
the 30th day of July, 1914, at one o'clock, p m.
Present :—
In the Chair—William A Doran, Esq, J P.
Others present Callan, J P; John Dolan, Joseph
Dolan, Patrick Donegan, J P; Charles A Duffy, J P • Edward
Goodman, Bernard Hamill, J P ; Jose»h P Kearney, Joseph El
M'Ard1e, J P; James WCarthy, J P; Thomas B M'Court,
Patrick M'Gee, Thomas V WQui11an, John F Murphy, J P;
N T Murphy, Thomas Murphy, Peter B Moore, John Morgan,
Michael (Y Meara, J P; Thomas O'Rourke, William T Skeffing-
ton, J P; Peter Woods, J P; William Woods, J P; and James
Wynne, J P, Esquires.
Mr Daniel O'Connell, Solicitor, and Messrs Thomas Walsh,
County Surveyor; John M C Lyons, James Dromgoole, Assis-
tant Surveyors, and Dr M 'Quillan, T M O, were in attend-
anee.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
Proposed by Wm T Skeffington, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Peter Moore, Esq, and
Resolved—That the minutes of the proceedings of the Louth
County Council at their meeting held on the 28th May, 1914,
their annual •meeting on 16th June, 1914, and their speciaE
meeting on the 13th July, 1914, and a copy of which has beelY
sent to each member of the Council be, and are hereby eon—
firmed.
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE COMMITTEE
The following resolution was passed :—
mposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by wrn Woods, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the' m inutes of the proceedings of the Finw
ance Committee held on the undermentioned dates, a copy of'
which has been sent to each member of the Council, be and are.
hereby confirmed : —
Monday, the 22nd day of June, 1914.
Monday, the 29th day of June, 1914.
Monday, the 6th day of July, 1914.
Monday, the 20th day of July, 1914.
CONFIRMATION OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq ;
Seconded by John Dolan, Esq, and
IResolved—That the minutes of the proceedings of the Exe—
outive Committee, held on the 29th day of June, 1914, a prin—
ted copy having been sent to each member of the Council, b.
and are hereby confirmed.
8
CONFIRMATION OF PROPCSAL COMMITTEE MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed :—
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by John F Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the minutes of proceedings of the Proposal
Committee at their meeting, held on the 6th July, and ad-
journed to Che 13th July, 1914, and a copy of which has been
sent to each member of the Council, be and are hereby confir-
rned.
CONFIRMATION OF SCHOLARSHIPS COMMITTEE
MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed
Proposed by N T Murphy, Esq ;
Seconded by P B Moore, Esq, and
Resolved—That the minutes of proceedings of the Scholar-
Ships •Committee, held on the 13th .July, 1914, and a copy of
which has been sent to each member •of tho Council, be and are
hereby confirmed.
DATES OF MEETINGS OF DISTRICT
COUNCILS.
'I'ho following resolution was passed
Proposed by J E Murphy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by J M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the County Council hereby determine that
the following shall be the dates for the holding of Che third
Quarterly Meetings of the Rural District Councils
9
ARDEE—Tuesdny, the 6th day of October, 1914.
DROGHEDA—Tuesday, the 13th day of Octobör, 1914.
DUNDALK—Monday, the 5th day of October. 1914;
and that the Proposal Committee meet on Monday, the 12th
day of October, 1914.
PROPOSED PURCHASE OF OMEATH PARK.
The next item on the agenda was the consideration of the•
proposed purchase of Omeath Park.
After a protracted discussion on the matter, and when tho•
question of the report from tihe Deptirtment and the price was,
gone into, the following resolution was passed :—
Proposed by P M 'Gee, Esq ;
Seconded by P Woods, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the consideration of the purchase of '()meatTÄ'
Park be adjourned to the Meeting of the Council, to be held on
the 20th August, and that a committee of the whole Council.
visit Omeath and report to the County Council.
REPORT OF THE TUBERCULOSIS COMMWI'EE OF
MANAGEMENT.
A discussion took place on the Report of the Tuberculosis
Committee of Management. Mr Goodman brought under the,
notice of the Council that the committee 'had arranged that,
thei rmeetings would be held in the offices of the Insuarnccv
Committee, instead of in the Council Chamber as heretofore,
and held that this change was undesirable.
Mr Duffy and Mr Wm Woods stated that this arrangement
was made as the of the meetings in the Insurance Com-
mittee's Offices was more convenient„ as all the papers were
10
at hand there, and that the arangement was merely temporary,
pending the provision of increased accommodation for the
County Offices.
Ultimately the following resolution was passed :—
Proposed by C A Duffy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by wm Woods, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby confirm and approve of the Re-
,port of the Tuberculosis Commitee of Management, as printed
at pages 81 to 83 of the printed minutes.
FANE AND DRAINAGE msnucrs.
The following report from Mr Walsh, County Surveyor, was
tread : —
Wottonstown and Fane Drainage Districts
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,
I have made a preliminary inspection of the
•above-named drainage districts, and beg to report as follows
The Wottonstown District includee; approximately 7 miles of
•drains in the townlands of Cullenstown, Milltown Grange, Mill-
town, Dellin, Newtown Darver, Milltown Old, Whiterath,
Newrath, Babeswood, Mansfields;town, Wottonstown and Drom-
iskin. Part of the drainage goes to the river Glyde, and part
to the river Fane. The Glyde drainage system is, I under-
stand, attended to by Trustees.
The greater part of the water of Che Wottonstown District'
however, flou%S to the Fane river via one of its tributaries flow-
ing through Milltown and Commons, and included amongst
•the works of the Fane Drainage Districts, as shown by tho
•award maps.
11
The drainage works in this Wottonstown district were car-
Tied out in 1851, and have had little, if any, attention since. A
rough estimate of the expenditure now required would be C'25()
to C300, to out the drains in order and maintain for one
. year.
The total area of land improved and drained as Shown by
maps and award is 31Ca Ir 17 p. The total area of lands char-
ged and chargeable with the maintenance is 2473a. 3r 1 Ip.
The money expended on the drainage in 1851 amounted to
El 102 13s Ocl, of which C8() 17s 7d was presented by Che Grand
Jury of C.Ounty Louth, in of certain works in the dis-
.trict chargeable to the county.
The Fane Drainage M'orks include
(1)—The Tidal Embankment at Mooretown (or Marsh Farm)
.about 1} miles in length.
5} miles of river Fane (with embankments) from
the sea. to the western boundary of Stephenstown Demesne,
i.e., a noint cn the river about a mile above Stephenstown
Blidge.
Cb miles of important, tributaries with tidal
•sluices.
This drainage scheme was carried out, in 1851, also with Cho
•aid of a Board of Works Loan. The area of tho land drained
and improved is, according to the awwrcl, 1521a, 3r 2Sp. The
area charged with the works is 4736a 1 r 2p in the various town-
lands ,as shown in the award (which I beg to lay before you).
As jn the case of the Wotfonstown District, very little, if
•any, attention has 'been given €0 the drains since the works
Were first carried out. The main Fane river as far as its old
12
course forming the eastern boundary of Rossmakea, appears to,
be in fairly clean condition, with the exception of a sharp at
the Green Road Bridge after the river crosses the railway. The.
Rossmalwa and Stephenstown portion is more or less obstruc-
ted by weeds growing on the bottom of the course. Opposite
Mr Craig's house in Walterstown there are stepping stones and
a cattle watering place obstructing the flow. A hove Stephens-
town to the south-east of Stephenstown House, two weirs have
been erected some two years ago, I was told; by Major Fortes-
cue. His men were engaged in constructing a by-pass along-
the upper weir on the occasion of my inspection His fore-
man informed me that the weir is constructed on the site of an
old weir. There is Ito meation of a weir on the maps of
drai•nage district.
All the tributary drains whiéh are of rather large size are.
choked, some badly, and the tidal sluices 111 bad condition.
One tributary requires particular mention, viz—that from
the river Fane through the townland of Commons, through Mr-
A. Murdock's land, and continued for a short distance along.
what is known as the ' 'Canal." Water from Drorniskin is eon-.
veyed by a drain along the publie road and is disc'harged into
the Fane tributary at a culvert on the public road to the south-
west of Commons three roads. The Fane tributary is badly
choked with weeds, etc, and by six 'badly constructed pass cul-
verts on Mr Murdock's land. Mr M urdock contends that the
wåter from Dromiskin should not be sent along this drain, but
should rather discharge through the (Marsh Farm, via the
• ' 'Canal." This latter ' 'Canal" is not included amongst the
Fane Drainage Works.
A rough estimate of the cost of cleaning, etc, would be about
C650-e700.
13
When the drainage work of the districts in question was
coriginally carried out in 1851, certain owners and proprietors
held the lands charged as shown by the awards. Most of the
lands have sice changed owners, I understand, having been
sold to the tenants under the Land Acts, so that the maps and
awards herewith clo not now show the owners, and the maps
are incomp!ete for assessment purposes.
The re-assessmen€ would be a difficult and troublesome
dertaking. A new survey of the lands involved will be re-
quider, showing area and valuation of each holding. Before
(Iceiding to take over the drainage schemes the Council should
ascertain if the Board of Works is willing to undertake this
survey and assessment. Tile original expenditure in 1851 am-
ounted to CS, 155 15s (Sd, of which C92(j 3s ld was presented by
the Grand Jury of Louth in respect of certain works chargeable
to the County in this District.
As to the liabilities and powers of the Council in ease they
take over the drainage districts, as well as the incidence of tho
necessary expenditure including legal expenditure, stationery,
etc, as well as the actual cost of the works, I would suggest,
that this is a matter for your solicitor, Mr O'Connell,
Your obedient Servant,
THOMAS WALSH.
After discus.sion Che following resolution was passed
Proposed by Patrick M 'Gee, Esq ;
Seconded by Thomas Murphy, Esq, and
Resolved—That the matter of the Fane Drainage District
and the Wottonstown Drainage District be refered to the next
meeting of the County Council, and that a copy of the report,
of Mr Walsh be sent to each member of the Council.
14
NOTICES OF MOTION.
Tho following Notices of Motion, Which appeared on the
agenda, were adopted as substantive resolutions :—
SIGN-POSTS IN COUNTY LOUTH.
Proposed by Thomas Murphy, Esq ;
Seconded by E Goodman, E.sq, and
Resolved—That it be taken as a direction that a scheme be
prepared by the Surveyor giving in detail the cost of erecting
bi-lingnal sign-posts with mileage thereon throughout the
county, or on its main roads at least, so as to facilitate pedes-
trian, equestrian, motor, and vehicular traffic.
ROAD AT DUNA-NV FORESHORE.
I) Ioposed by Thomas Murphy, Esq ;
Seconded by Patrick M 'Gee, Esq, and
Resolved—That an economic and beneficial work such as the
reconstruction of the foreshore at Dunany Point should be nn-
dcrtaken by the County Council in the interest of the residents
of the adjacent districts, and for the facilitation of the local
farmers who use it for the gathering of wrack for manurial
purposes, and that the matter be referred to the Ardee Dis-
trict Council.
The Notice of Motion standing in the name of Mr Thomas
Murrhy with reference to Sanatorium treatment, was, by eon-
sent of the Council, withdrawn.
CORRESPONDENCE.
The following letter was read, and t'he Council
name Thursday, the 20th August, the day of the
15
Meeting of the County Council, to meet the representatives of
the Insurance Comnlttee
ISSCRASCE COMMITTEE FOR THE COUNTY OF
LOUTH.
Clerk's Office,
Dundalk, '28th May. 1914.
Dear Sir,—
r have been requested by the Insurance Corn—
mission (Ireland), to ascertain from the Louth County Council
the earliest and most convenient date for the Council to meet,
representatives of the Insurance Committee for the purpose of
taking into consideration the form of Agreement to bo entered
into between both bodies in connection with the administration
of Sanatorium benefit under tho National Insurance Acts, 1911—
1913.
I am, Sir,
Your Obedient Servant.
V. WARREN,
Clerk.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
ISSURA.NCES.
Letter was read from the Catholic and General Insurance As—
sociation for a share of the Council's business in Insurances,
and the Secretary was directed to say in reply that the CounciE'
was already fully insured.
LETTERS OF THANKS.
The following letters were read and initialled by the Chair—
man
Newfoundwell,
Drogheda, 20th June: 1914.
decided to
Adjourned
Dear
Mr
M 'A lester—
I am extremely grateful to my esteemed
16
colleagues of the Louth County Council for their kind vote of
sympathy in the sorrow that has unhappily fallen on my family,
and to you for the courtesy and friendly manner in which you
have conveyed their and your regrets.
Sincerely yours,
JAS. M'CARTHY.
Charles M' Alester, Esq.
23 Laurence Street,
Drogheda, 1st June, 1914.
Dear Mr M' Alester—
I will ask you to convey to the members
Off the County Council my very sincere thanks for their very
kind sympathy on the occasion of the death of my brother
Michael.
I am, sincerely yours,
LUKE J. ELCOCK.
Piedmont, Riverstown,
Dundalk. 5-6-'14.
Dear Mr M'Alester,
Kindly convey to my cnlleagues at the County
Council my deep appreciation of the vote of condolence they
so kindly passed at their meeting, in my recent bereavement.
I am also deeply grateful to you for the kindly way in which
. you conveyed same.
Yours Sincerely,
PETER WOODS.
Charles M' Alester, Esq,
Secretary County Council.
17
Ardee, 20th July; 1914.
Dear Sir,
I wish to thank the members of tho Counci!
very sincerely in naming me as one of its representatives on
the General Council of County Councils.
I am very grateful to have the opportunity they give me or
attending the General Council meetings.
Yours truly,
JOSEPH T. DOLAN.
ARDEE W. H. ASSOCIATION.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chairv-
Ardee, May 28th, 1914.
Dear Sir,—
I am desired by the Ardee Branch of the Women's:
National National Health Association to ask the County Coun—
cil's consideration of the enclosed resolution.
Yours truly,
(Miss) G. TAAFFE,
Secretary.
Resolution passed at meeting of Ardee Branch Women's Na—
tional Health Association, held 24th April, 1914 :—
That we earnestly request the County Council of Louth to
take steps to provide accommodation for persons in an advan-
ced stage of tuberculosis, as the existing Sanatorium treatment.
is not available for themu
18
TAAFFE'S CASTLE, CARLINGFORD.
The following letter was read and referred to the Finance
Committee : —
20th July, 1914.
The Members of Louth County Council.
Dear Sirs,
May I be allowed, on behalf of the Co. Louth
Archaeological Society, to respectfully suggest to the County
Council the desirability of its acquiring "Taaffe's Castle" in
'Carlingford, which I understand could be obtained at a very
small sum by application to the owner (Lord de V esci OT Mrs
Stewart).
It was offered to the Council in 1901 or 1902, but it
still remains in the owner's hands, and he will probably be as
anxious now as then to get it disposed of.
castle is a very interesting one, in unusually good pre-
•servation, and is a fine historical monument, which would be
unost, fittingly in the ownership of the Public Body that repre-
:sents the County as a whole.
We are confident that the members of the Council will feel
that, this generation owes it to the past and to the future, and
to the national spirit of the country to preserve all public
monuments and prevent the danger of their falling into the
hands of private persons, who might demolish them or let them
fall into decay.
Yours truly,
JOSEPH DOLAN,
One of the Vice-Presidents of the Louth
Archaeological Society.
19
INSURANCE COMMITTEE.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
anan :—
National Health. Insurance Commission,
Dublin, 20th 1914.
No. 7211/1914.
Sir,
Adverting to previous corresponde lee on the sub-
.jeet, I am directed by Che National Health Insurance Com-
mission (Ireland) to inform you that Regulations have now
been made by them prescribing Che term of office of the per-
sows appointed members of an Insurance Committee under
paragraph (b) of sub-section (8) of Section 81 of the National
Insurance Act, 1911, by the Council of the County or County
Borough in place of the members who went out of office on the
15th instant. Under the Regulations in question it is provi-
•ded that the persons referred to shall hold office until the 15th
July, 1917, and shall go out of office on that day.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servants
PIERCE KENT.
The Secretary of the County Council.
APPOINTMENT OF CLERKS IN COUNTY OFFICE.
The following letter from the Local Government Board was
read :—
Local Government Board,
18th July, 1914.
No. 37161/1914.
Louth County.
Sir,
I am directed by the Local Government Board for Ire-
land to state that, in compliance with the request of the Louth
20
County Council, competitive examinations of candidates nonv
inatjed for the pcxsitions of Senior Clerk and Junior Clerk irr
the County •Secretary's Offce were held under the Board's.
directions at Dundalk on the 30th ultimo and following days,
and I am now to forward the accompanying statements Show-
ing, in order of merit, the marks obtained in the. several
subjects by the candidates who attended the respective examin-
ations.
It will be seen from the results tables that under the condi-
tions governing the examinations Mr Gilmore has qualified.
for the position of Senior Clerk and Mr Cotter for the Junior-
Clerkship under the Council.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARI AS,
Secretary..
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
O
After discussion, the following resolution was unanimously
Proposed by B Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by M O'Meara, Esq, J P, and
Resolved— That in aeoordance with the results of the corn—
petitive examination held by the Local Government Board at,
the request of the County Council, as per advertisement issued,
we hereby appoint Patrick Gilmore as Senior Clerk . in the.
Secretary's Office at a salary of per annum, increasing by
annual increments of to Sho sum of C120; and we also
appoint Joseph Cotter as Junior Clerk •at a salary of C50 per
annum, increasing by annual Increments of to the sum
of ego.
REVISION OF STANDING ORDERS.
The next item on the Agenda was the question of appointing
a Ccmmittee to revise the Standing Orders of the Council.
The Secretary stated the inclusion of this item on the
Agenda was according a direction from the Annual Meeting
held on the 16th June last.
After discussion, the matter was referred to the next meev
ing of the County Council.
NEW COUNTY OFFICES COMMITITEE.
Tho item on t'he Agenda to appoint the Co omittee in corv
neetion with tho new County Offices gave rise to a discussion,.
after which the following Committee were appointed :—
Proposed by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P;
Seconded by J P KearÅey, E.sq, and
4
Resolved—That we hereby appoint the following to act as
committee in connection with the new County Offices: Messrs J
Murphy, J P; Wm A J P; wm T Skeffington, J P;
James M'Carthy, J P; Denis J Rath, James Wynne, J P;
Thomas Murphy, B Hamill, J P; C A Duffy, J P; Wm Woods,
J P; and N T Murphy.
LOCOMOTIVE BYE-LAWS.
The Secretary read letter from the Local Government Board,
No. 22531 : 1914, stating they required the County Council to
pass a resolution making application for confirmation of the
'Code of Bye-Laws with respect to Locomotives in County
Iuoyutll, and requesting copy of the newspaper with pt eliminary
Notice of the Council's intention to apply for sucly confirma-
dion.
[Ille following resolution was passed
Proposed by Wm Woods, Esq, J P;
Seconded by James M'Carthy, F.sq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby apply to the Local Government
Board for confirmation of the Code of Bye-laws with respect
to tho use of Locomotives inj the County of Louth, which Bye-
laws were duly adopted by the County Council on the 23rd
day of April, 1914.
NYE-LAWS WITH RESPECT TO INDECENT EXPRSSIONS.
The following resolution was passed
Proposed by E Goodman, Esq ;
Seconded by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, and
Alesolved—That we hereby adoi)t the following Bye-laws and
25
santhori.se our Secrettrry to affix the Seal of the Council
-thereto :—
'BYE-LAWS WITH RESPECT TO THE USE OF INDECENT
EXPRESSIONS AND CONDUCT.
1. No person shall, in any street or public place or on land
•adjoining or near Co sue'.l street, make •use of any abusive,
•profane, blasphemous, indecent or obscene language, be-
haviour or conduct, to the annoyance or disturbance of any
person in such street or place.
2. Any person acting contrary to the foregoing Bye-law
' shall be liable for every such offence to a fine of Forty
Shillings ; provided, nevertheless, that the Justices or Court
•before whom any complaint may be made, or any proceedings
may be taken in respect of any such offence, may, if they think
' fit, adjudge the payment of a fine of any sum less than the full
: amount of the fine imposed by this Bye-law.
SHOOTING BY MILITY.RY IS DUBLIN.
The foliowing resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J ;
Seconded by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we condemn in the mcst emphatic manner
•the brutal and cowardly action of the military on Sunday last,
in Dublin, in murderously firing on a crowd of defenceless
•children, women and unarmed men, and against the partisan
.:aetion of the Authorities in differentiating between the Volun-
teers of Ulster and the Volunteers of Irish Ireland we offer
•our heartfelt sympathy to the victims of the dastardly outrage,
.:and eall upon the Government to at once repeal the Arms Act,
Proclamation.
26
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of Che Finance Committee am, theiip-
MÖeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,w
on Tuesday, the 4th day of August, 1914, at one o'clock p m.
Present
In the Chair—Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P.
'Other Members present—Thomas B M'Court, Micloae! Meade,
J F Murphy, J P; Thomas Murphy, and Thomas O'Rourke,
Esquires.
Mr Walsh, County Surveyor, was also in attendance.
The Secretary submitted the following accounts, which were .
examined and payments ordered
County Surveyor's Office
Sheep Dipping Superintendents' Wages, ete
Secretary's Office
25 0
4.
1
5.
27
SITE VALUE OF THE COUNTY COURTHOUSE, DUNDALK
The following letter from Mr O'Connell, Solicitor was read,
and, after a discussion, it was decided that Mr O'Connell be,
instructed to submit, case to Counsel for his advice to åle
Council on the matter.
E.2.
Francis Street, Dundalk,
13{11 July 1914.
Dear Sir,—
I have your letter of the 11th instant, enclosing circular
letter from the General Valuation Office with provisional
valuation of the County Courthouse and premises. I consider •
that the matter is one for the opinion of Counsel in view of the
very technical and complicated provisions as to valuations
included in the Finance (1909-10) Act, 1.910, and amending
Statutes. Tho County Surveyor is in agreement with me in
this view of the matter, and on receiving instructions from tho-
Council T would be prepared to submit ease ' for Counsel's-
opinion, after full consultation with the Surveyor and perusal
EXPENDITURE UNDER. TUBERCULOSIS SCHEME IN
COUNTY LOUTH.
Letter from the Local Government, Board dated 7th July,
1914, No. 18271; 1914, was read enclosing Paying Order for -
C135 on account of the estimated expenditure of the Louth.
County Council on the treatment of Tuberculosis for the half-
year ended 31st Mareh last.
The •letter was initialled by theChairman.
of his figures.
I return papers.
Charles M'A1ester, Esq,
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Secretary, Louth co. Council, Dundalk.
TAAFFE'S CASTLE, CARLINGFORD.
The following letters from Mr O'Connell, Solicitor,
in
28
connection with above matter were read and initialled by the
Chairman : —
Francis Street, Dundalk,
2nd July,
Ro Taaffe's Castle: Carlingford.
Dear Sir,—
1914.
I have your letter of 1st inst. herein, and beg to state in
reply that I wrote the Agent, Mr A V Fitzherbert, Millbrook,
Abbeyleix, on the 21st April lmst €0 ascertain if the premises
in question were for sale, and if he would be mepared to
entertain an offer for purchase. His reply, (laced the 30th
April last, is as follows:—
"In reply to your letter of the 21st, I am open to an
offer for puréhase of Taaffe's Castle, but it must be subject
to purchaser paying cost of proving title, etc; also bear
irr mind that the lower portion (vaults) are not in occupa-
tion of the estate."
I am now writing Fitzherbert to ascelfain on what
terms the Landlord will sell his interest.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Olarles M'Alester, Esq.
Secretary, Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
Francis Street, Dundalk,
29
now received a reply from Mr A V Fitzherbert, the agent for
this property, stp„ting that he would refer me to his letter of
30th April last. I embodied a copy of this letter in my letter
of 2nd inst, as referred to.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'OOSNETA,.
Charles M'AIester, Esq,
Secretary, Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
RATE COLLECTORS' LODGMENTS.
Letter was read from t'he Local Government Board, dated
the 14th July, 1914, No. 36019 :1914, stating that in the
return furnished by the County Council up to the 30th June
only three Collectors had then made any lodgment in respect,
of this half-year's collection, and requesting a return up to
the 18th July.
The Secretary informed the Committee that he had sent
the necessary return, and the letter was initialleo by the
Chairman.
GOVERNMENT GRANTS IN AID OF LOCAL TAXATION.
Circular letters from the Local Government Board were read,
enclosing Paying Orders for Grants in aid of Local Taxation
for the year ending 30th September next a I'd initialled by
the Chairman.
Thé Grants are as follows
In Aid of Salaries of Sanitary Officers in Rural Districts.
Re Taaffe's
-O)ear Sir,
-Adverting to my letter
Castle,
to you
15th July,
Carlingford.
of the 2nd Instant,
1914.
I have
Ardee No. I
Drogheda (Louth)
Dundalk
32 17 G
19 19 2
35 17. 6
30
Medical and Educational Expenditure—Boards of
Ardee
Drogheda
Dundalk
152 17
129 3
Guardians.
1
5
247 8 10
COUNTY LOUTH UNIVERSITY SCHOLARS
The following report from the Registrar, University College,
-.Dublin, was read and initialled by Che Chairman :—
University College, Dublin,
Registrar's Office,
86 St. Stephen's Green,
Dublin, July 15th, 1914.
ear Sir,
I beg to send herewith a Report on the Louth County
Council Scholarship holders for the Session 1913-14
Margaret Callan—Passed Second Year College. Examination
with Honours.
eUrsula MacParland=Presenting herself for B.A. Honours
Degree Examination in September.
Laurence Brannigan—Ditto.
Henry Rogan—Obtained the B. Sc. Degree in June; presenting
himself for B.E. Degree in the Autumn.
Joseph MacParland—Passed 1st University Examination in
Arts with Honours.
Patrick Hanratty—Ditto.
31
All the above Students are very satisfactory in all respects,
sand the renewal of their Scholarships is recommended
yours faithfully,
ARTHUR W. CONWAY,
Registrar.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
ST. MARX'S SCHOOL OF DOMESTIC SCIENCE,
COUNTY WEXFORD.
Letter was read from the Reverend Mother of above Convent
: asking the County Council if they are granting anv Scholar-
• ships in Domestic Economy to make some of them tenable at,
their Convent. Prospectus and copy of Summary of Inspector's
report were also submitted.
'Ille Committee referred the matter €0 the consideration of
• the Scholarship Committee.
SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACTS.
Letter was read from the Department of Agriculture dated
% 0th July, 1914, No. (2746 stating their Inspector had
purchased on the 20th June, 1914, a sample of butter on the
' premises occupied by Edward Gargan, in Collon, which on
. analysis was found to contain 22.2 per cent of water—16 per
cent being the maximum proportion of water allowable in a
sample of genuine butter. They stated that it was desirous
that proceedings should, on behalf of the Local Authority, be
-instituted.
32
Tho Committee rccommcnded that the Solicitor
County Council institute a prosecution in the case.
to
the„
ABSTRACT OF ACCOUNTS OF DROGHEDA RURAL
TRICE COUNCIL ANI) DROGHEDA BOARD OF
GUARDIANS.
Letters were read from the Local Government Board erv
closing the Accounts of above two bodies for the period ended
the 31st March, 1914, and they were initialled by the .
Chairman.
LOUTH COUNTY INFIRMARY.
A list of the indoor patients of the Louth County Infirmary-
during the three months ended the last day of June, 1914,.
was laid before the Committee. The number of patients in the.
Infirmary for the period was. 77, and the list was initialled by-
the Chairman.
SHEEP DIPPING AT ARDEE TANK.
A Letter was read from Mr R E Maunsell, Dublin, agent
for the Urquhart Estate, stating Chat a Mrs Smith, of Irish
Street, Ardee, a tenant on the estate, complains of damage
done by sheep which are herded in the adjoining enclosure for
the purpose of dipping by the County Council; and asking to
have the pen removed a considerable distance from the house.
No action was taken by the Committee, and the letter was
initialled.
33
TIXSHING OF DROGHEDA COURTHOUSE SEWERS.
The following letter on above matter was read, and the
'Committee recommended that no change be made in the
present system, as payment by meter arrangement was con-
- sidered more satisfactory than by a fixed rate per annum :—
Town Clerk's Office,
Drogheda, 27th July, 1914.
The Secretary,
Coun€y Council of Louth, Dundalk.
Dear Sir,
The County Council pay to the Corporation a fixed charge of
2s (id per quarter for flushing Drogheda Courthouse Sewers,
and by Meter for the water supply in such Courthouse. The
Meter consumption is small, the average for the past two years
being 7,600 gallons, the average sum paid per quarter being
Ils Gd. Through an oversight, Che usual Meter Rent of 2s Gd
per quarter has not been charged.
Alay I suggest that there should be one fixed charge of, say,
per annum, payable half-yearly? This would obviate the
necessity for meter readings and quarterly payments, and
•would be more in accord v;ith our system 'here, as we do not
on Meters except where the consumption is large.
Yours faithfully,
J. B. CONNOLLY.
ACCOUNT FROM TUBERCULOSIS COMMITTEE.
'The following letter from the above Committee was ready
and the Finance Committee recommend' payment of
account : —
Louth County Council Tuberculosis Committee of Manggement,—
Dundalk, 29th Julv, 1914,
Dear Sir,
I am directed by the Tuberculosis Committee of Management
to inform you they have had before them, at their Meeting held
to-day, your communication dated the '25th inst, with accounts.
from the W.N.H.A. for educative literabure supplied to order;
and with reference thereto I am to request you to refer the
Council to the Committee's Report. of their meeting furnished.
to the Council on the 8th May, at which the recommendation
was made to provide these goods at the request of the Tuber-.
culos:s Medical Officer. The Committee also desire to refer tow
the meeting of Che Council held on the '28th May. at which
their recommendation was adopted anci ratified.
Yours faithfully,
V. WARREN.
Clerk.
Charles M' Alester, Esq,
Secretary, County Council.
P.S.—Aceounts herewith returned.
DROGHEDA INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.
The following application from above. School was read, and}'
the Committee recommended the transfer asked for
We propose sending John Coyle to the Industrial School
Limerick, as 'he is now of an age for a senior school. We Cruse
your Council will agree to this transfer.
35
Industrial School, Drogheda,
18th July 1914.
DEFAULTING CONTRACTORS.
The following a.pplication by the County Surveyor was ready.
and the authority to serve the Ten-days' Notices was unani-
mously granted :—
County Surveyor's Office,
Dundalk, August 4 1914.
Report to Finance Committee.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,
I beg to report the following roads in Dundalk Rural District
as neglected. I therefore ask for authority to serve ten days'
notieo on contractors in respect of neglect on same. and to,
take over the roads if notice is not complied with
Index No.
9—428 perches, Dundalk to Castlebellingbam.
O'Brien contractor.
24—259 perches, Castlebellingham to Tallansbown.
Lee contractor.
Patrick
Michael '
68—661 perches, Dundalk to Inniskeen, by Killaconnor. Patk
Casey contractor.
71 —13ö perches, Dundalk to Forkhill. John Clarke, contractor
84—801 perches, Dundalk to Newtownharnilton. John Holly-
wood contractor.
128—550 perches, Drumsinnot to Shanmullagh. Thos M 'Kevitt
contractor.
48—697 perches, Louth to Essexford. Patk Markey contractor
36
—2,34 perches, Carrickmacross road to Corcreagll road at
Stonetown School. Patk Markey contractor.
36—432 perches, Louth to Tallanstown. Patrick Kane
contractor.
I am,
Your obedient. Servant,
THOMAS WALSH,
County Surveyor.
ROAD BOARD GRANT.
The following Report from the County Surveyor was read,
and, after discus.sion, the Committee recommended that he get
permission to communicate with the Road Board in connection
with the proposed Grant for County Louth
REPORT FOR FINANCT COMMITTEE, 4th
ROAD.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,
AUGUST,
1914.
With a view to arriving at some definite decision in regard to
the improvement of the above road, I beg you would be good
• enough to consider the following report :—
The total length of road in the Rural Distxicts is as follows
perches statute
Dundalk Rural District
Ardee No. 1 Rural District
Drogheda Rural District
Total
i.e., about 271 miles
The length in Dundalk Rural District
'two sections, viz :
4339
2238
2145
8722 perches
statute.
naturaly divides
info
37
I. "The Newry Carrickarnoll to the Dundalk
Vrban Boundary- at Mrs. Daly's—length 2404 perches.
11. "The Dublin Road"—from the Vrban Boundary at Prior-
land to Rural District Boundary at Spa (near Castlebellingham)—
length 1935 perches.
Section 1. 'Hle northern section is favourably situated with
regard to quarries—Mrs O'Neill's, Carrick-arnon; Ballymakellet
quarry, and M' A Ilisfer's quarry, Faughart, though for certain
reasons this latter may not be available. My -estimate for this
section, including the strengthening of flie portion from the
urban boundary to Ballymaseanlon turn and surface tarring of
Dowdallshill road, is E3,631.
Section VI. There is no quarry convenient fo this section.
1
propose supplying Curlingford stone on this for sulfacing, railed
to Dundalk and hauled to the roadside. For strengthening the
weak portion of the road froni Lurgangreen to the turn at the
old coast road, T propose u.sink local stone from Clennont Park
and neighbouring quurries.
The amount of material necessary for strengthening would be
1,605 cubic yards of rough stone, 4-inch guage. The amount for
surfacing would be 7,800 tons of Carlingford stone.
I propose
Carlingford stone for this stretch in order (I) to avoid hauling
this large quantity from Faughart or Ballymakelletf.
(2) It will
take over 9,000 cubie yards of stone for the northern section
"Newry Road"), WII ich the Cipuneil can well understand Wi l!
take some time to prepare and lay on road.side; further, I may
say, wherever possi ble, I prefer to employ horse haulage ag
against traction engine.
My estimate for this section is C4,283. Total for Dundalk
Rural District, C7,914 (which includes an allowance of IO per
cent for contingencies).
Ardee Rural District—The length of road in Ardee Rural
District I propose supplying with materials from local quarries—
Dunleer and Mansfieldstown. My estimate for this length,
including tar painting Of Casflebellingham and Dunleer streets
and a sum of 10 per cent for contingencies, is E2,453.
38
Drogheda Rural District—The stretch in this Rural District I
:-propose supplying with materials from Roxborough and
Tullyeseur. My estimate for this length, including a sum Of
10 per cent for contingencies, is C2,184.
The total estimates for the Rural Disfriets would be:—
••ease may be,
-I consider I
be agreeable to
should appro@ll
I am,
39
the cancellation of the contracts
them in this respect.
Your obedient Servant,
THOMAS WALSH.
Dundalk
Ardee
Drogheda
The estimate for the
Dundalk
Drogheda
Total
Urban Districts
Total
The grand total would be therefore:
Urban Districts
Rural Districts
Grand total
The original estimate laid béfore the
Æ7,914
E2,453
Æ2,184
E12,551
is:
El ,969
Æ2,350
Æ4,319
Æ4,319
C12,551
C16,870
Road Board was
which was revised by the Board and cut down to C18,685.
The estimate (E16,87C) provides for rolling 18 feet Wide of road
in Rural Districts and full width of streets in Urban Districts.
T beg to ask the Committee for authority to lay before the
Road Board my estimate and proposals and fo approach thera
with a view to arriving at a decision in the matter.
I would further add that the lengths into which the road is
divided for contract purposes are in the hands of contractors—
on some, indeed, contracts expire only in April, 1917. To set
these free for the commencement of work next April it would be
necessary to enter into some arrangenient with the contractors
whereby eon€racts may be concelled, subject, of course, to the
approval of the Local Government Board. The contractors
would, I am sure, in consideration of a contract to supply or
Aluarry stones of equal value with their original contract or as the
ARRANGEMENTS.
Letters were read from Messrs Gilmore and Coffer, the Clerks
.:appointed by the County Council in the Secretary's Office, in
reply to the official notice of their appointment, stating when
they could fake up their duties—Mr Gilmore cm the 17th August
. and Mr Cotter immediately.
The Committee instructed the Seerefary to permit Mr. Cotter
to take up his duties at once, and Mr Gilmore by the 17th
August.
INSPECTION OF OMF,ATII PARK.
The Secretary informed the C0!nmittee that Mr. James Wynne,
•J.P., who was unable to be present, had requested him to brivg
under their notice that some members of thc County Council had
•explessed a desire €0 make the occasion of the inspection of
orneath Park fhe opportunity of reviving the Annual Reunion
Of the County Council by arranging for a general excursion in
-on that day.
The Committee decided to form a. Commiffee of the membe-:s
present, with the addition of Messrs Wynne and Duffy, to arrange
to hold the Annual Excursion on the oéeasion, and directed the
Secretary to notify the fact to each member of the Council and
request a reply.
MOTOR LTCENCE DVTY.
A circular letter from the Local Government Board dated the
.1st August, enclosing paying order value E28 15s 9d in respect ot
the Motor Licence Duty under the Finance Act.
The letter was initialled by the (Ijairman.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Excteutive Committee af their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, onr
Tuesday, the 4th day Of August, 1914.
Present :—
In the Tlamill, Esq, J P.
Other Members present—T B M 'Court, M Meade, J F
J P; Thomas Murphy, and Thos O'Rourke.
The minutes of flie previous Executive Meeting, a
which had been sent to each Member, were taken as
confirmed.
Murphy,_.
copy of
read and'
MONTHLY REPORT OF VETERINARY INSPECTORS
JULY, 1914.
The following reports were read and initialled by the
man :—
Mr Clinton's Report.
Sir,—
FOR
Chaiw
During the month mn outbreak of Sheep Scab oeeurred•
in a number of sheep at Dundalk Port. The animals were eon-
signed from Sligo fo England and seab was deteefed in them at
Dundalk Port. All the sheep (33) were slaughtered and (lisirv
fection carried out. On the 29th instant I received a wire from
the police at Castlebellingham stating that three cattle were-
found dead on that day on a farm at Seabank, and an outbreak
of anthrax was feared. Though the place is not in my district
T went immediately to the farm and made' an inspection of tluy
carcases, when T found that death in each ca'se was due to black
quarter and not to anthrax.
Your obedient, Servant,
J. T. CLINTON, M R C V S.
41
Donnelly's Report.
f'Genfie1i1€m;—
T)uring time month of J Oly 1 1'ftd to deal with tlvree out.
1 breaks of sheep seal), and also one stuspet'fed ease. . The latter,
which was reported at the I jocal Port, provöd not to be a case
•of the
All slitep irl the three eases of sheep scab have been treated,
-and I have been able to withdraw the restrictions. Under the
Tuberculosis Order T have had t.wo cases not notified and dealt
I furnished your Secretary
•with them according fo the Order.
-with ropies of all the Official Forms served on the different
'"owners of repoltecl anililals.
I reinain,
Yours respectfully,
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
Mr Maxwell's Roport.
Sir,
I beg fo report that visited and examined the usual
held in tye Ardee No. I District, for the
fairs, Inarkets, etc.,
month or July.
I visitccl on the 3rd and 9th the farm on which sheep are de-
stained at Rathnesfin for sheep scab. These sheep were efficiently
•dipp«l for the second time.
I am unable as yet fo issue a withdrawal notice, as disinfec-
tion has not been carried out.
On the 15th July it was reported by the police that swine
fever was supposed to have broken Olif on the premicss of Wm
Taaffe, Ardee, in my opinion, wliich was also fhe opinion of an
Inspector of the Department of Agriculture, the disease was not
"swine fever.
During the last week of this month T examined a bullock the
42
property of Captain Taaffe, Smarm01QJ Casne, Ardee» suspecteO'
of tuberculosis with emaciation. On making the usual exanw
ination and tests, the animal, in my opinion, was not suffering.
from this disease, and also exhibited no sign of etnaciation.
I am, Sir,
Faithfully yours,
W. E. MAXWELL, M R C V S, Ardee.
TUBERCULOSIS (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1913.
The Secretary informed the Committee that two cases under •
this Order were reported to the County Council as the Local
Authority—two eases from Drogheda and one from Ardee, but
on investigation it was found that the animals reported were.
not cases under the Order.
SHEEP SCAB AT RATHNESTTN FARM.
A refurn was submitted by Mr Maxwell, V S, showing that
the farm of Mr R A B Henry, at Rathnestin, where an outbreak
of Sheep Scab has occurred, has not yet been disinfected and that
the restrictions could not be removed until disinfection was.
carried out.
AUTUMN SHEEP DIPPING
ORDER OF
The following circular letter
Agriculture was read
(IRELAND) TEMPORARY
1914.
from the Department of-
Department of Agriculture {Old Technical Instruction for
Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch),
50 and 51,
No. 294814.
Sir,
With further
Upper Mount Street, Dublin,
28th July, 1914.
to the special efforts for eradicatin'k
43
Sheep Scab in Ireland, I have to transmit, for the information
of your Local Authority, the accompanying supply of copies of-
an Order made by the Department on 27th instant and entitled
the "Autumn Sheep Dipping (Irland) Temporary Order of 1914."
This Order, as will bé observed, is designed to secure that during
the autumn period of the present year, i.e., between the 1st
proximo and 15th November next, sheep throughout Ireland
shall be dipped twice (instead of once as in other years), with an
interval of not less than seven days and not more than fourteen
days between the dippings.
Tt is very advisable that steps should at once bc taken on behalf
of your Local Authority to draw the attention of their Inspectors
to this new Order, and to have a notice as to the scope of the
Order inserted in a news.paper circulating iu their district.
Some copies of a form of notice suitable for this purpose will be
found enclosed.
The police are also being a•pprised regarding the Order, and
supplies of Forms for use thereunder will be sent to the Poliee•
Stations for the convenience of sheep owners.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
The Clerk
of each Local Authority.
The provisions of the Order were examined and it was set out
therein that all sheep in the Dipping Area during any part of'
the Autumn Dipping period shall be caused, by the owner or
person in charge thereof, to be dipped within. fhe Dipping Area.
on two occasions, separated by an interval of not less than seven
days or more than fourteen days, during that period.
It was decided to issue posters, fo be posted throughout
County, giving the terms of the Order, and also to insert an,
advertisement in the "Dundalk Democrat" and "Droghedu:
44
Argus" to the 11Ke effect, so fliat all sheep owners should oe made
. aware of [he necessity for compliance with its provisions.
the Di ppi ng
It was also unanimously decided that
Superintendents of the Council's tanks should carry out the
regulations regal«ling the Dipping as set out ill the Order.
CESSATION OF PR0111B1'1'iON AGAINST REMOVAL 0b
ANIMALS.
read
The following Memorandum from the Department was
ond initialled by the Clvairman :—
Department of Agriculture and Technical
Instruction for Ireland.
M €unorandttm.
T Ile Department. of Agriculture and Technical Tn.sfruction for
Ireland desire to intimate fliat their Order' (No. 412) prohibiting
the movement of ruminants and swine out of the area comprised
within the following boundary will cease: to operate on and after
midnight on 30th instant, viz boundary eomrneneing at the
Maiden Tower on the sea coast near Drogheda and proceeding
thence by Navan, Trim, Killuean, Kilboggan, and Clara €0 the
Shannon Banagher; thence by the railway line to Kilronan
Junction outside Limerick; f hence by the railwo,y to COrrick-
•on-Suir, and thence by road to a point on the railway south-west
-of Kilmacthomas•, thence by railway and road to the sea, coast
west of Eallyvoyle Head, Co. Wa terford; thence eastwards and
northwards by thecoast line to the point of eonjrneneelnent at
the Maiden Tower.
29th July, 1914.
POLICE FOR VIOLATION OF SHEEP DIPPING
ORDER.
A rtvort was read from the Police Authorities notifying that
large nurnber of persons had exposed for sale at Ardee
Tair wit Itouu
bring accompanied by t Ije necessary declaration
as to the sheep having been, dipped in the Summer Dipping-
Period. A list of the ownetys was submitted, a nd it was decided
that the Solicitor be •instructed to institute proceedings against
the parties named by flie Police.
WAGES OF DIPPING SUPERINTENDENTS.
The following b4ters were read, and, after discussion, it was
unanimously reeotnmended that those Dipping Superintendents
of the Council's tanks who were paid by weekly wage should
get their wages increased from sixteen shillings to eighteen
shillings per week for the autumn dipping period, as the work
would be much increased owing to the two compulsory dippings.
under the Order.
Knockbridge,
3rd August, 1914.
Secretary,
Louth County Council.
Dear Sir,
T beg to apply for increase in my wages owing to the extra
Sheeping Dipping in Autumn Period.
T am Superintendent at the Knockbridge Sheep Dipping Tank
for the past eight years; and, •hoping to give every satisfaction
in the future, as I did in the past, T now leave it to the kind
consideration Of your Council to place me on equal terms witil
as I am informed their-
the migh bouring counties,
Superintendents have one pound per week.
I am,
Your obedient Servant,
THOMAS WARDLE,
Sheep Dipping Superintendent.
Mullenstown,
Ardee,
3rd August, 1914.
Dear Sir,
T beg to apply for an increase in wages owing to the increase tn
number of sheep dipped in, the summer period, as my books will
. show you. 1 also note that there are two compulsory dippings
in the coming autumn.
Leaving all to your kind consideration, and trusting to give you
revery satisfaction, as I have given you heretofore.
1 remain,
Your obedient Servant,
Wm. LEONARD.
P.S.—T understand that the County Monaghan men are patd
. ÆI per week.
ACCOUNTS FOR, CARLINGFORD TANK.
An account was submitted by Hugh M' Kevitt, the Dipping
Superintendent of the Carlingford Tunk, for wages for the helper
•employed at the tank for the summer period. The wages were
. computed at 4s per day, and the Committee ref«rred back the
4wcount to the Local Committee for Carlingford Tank, to be
.41rranged on the basis of 16s per week for the period employed.
1
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proeeedings of the Finance, Committee, at
their Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court-
house, ot) 1M011(lay, the 17th Angust, 1914, at
1 0'clock p.m.
Present :
In the, Chair- wm woods, Esq, J P.
)fher Members present—Al Meade, Peter Woods.
J P; T O'Rourke P, llamiil, J P; J P Kearney, and
Jas AV ynne, J P, Esquires.
Mr AValsh, Count,y Surveyor, was also in attendance.
"l)he Seeret,aey subm itted the following Is,
which, examination, were ordered for payment. : —
(1
Works in hands of the County Surveyor
Sheep Dipping Accounts
Secretary's ()ffice
Total
19
The Secretary informed the Commiittnpe that Mr Patk
Gilmore had entered on his duties in connection with
tho County Council on this date.
2
MR. J. B. )LLYS ACCOUNT FOR 1911
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS.
The followiug letter from' the Local Government
Board, dated 15th July, 1914, No. 36,874/1914,
•subject matter of the aLove account, was read and
initialled by the Chairman :-
Local Government Board, Dublin,
15th July, 1914.
No. (6,8741914.
Louth County.
Sir,
AV itll reference to your letter of {die 8th instant
relative to an account furnished to the Louth County
Council by Mr J 13 Connolly, Town Clerk, Drogheda,
for the sum of 19s ld, being expenses incun•ed, awl
fees, as I)cputy Returning ( )ffåcer for the 'Urban
l)istriet of l)roihetla ill connection with the County
Louth Local Government Elections of 1911, I am
directed by the Local Government Board for Ivel•antl
to state that Chis claim would appear to be iliåUl-
missable, inasnxueh as the items should have been
ineltuded ill the Returning ()fficer's Areount for the
elections in question, and should have been furnished
by that ()fficer fo the Louth
County Council within
twenty-one days after the return Was made of persons
elected illi accordance with Article G (4) and (5) of the
Schedule to the Local Government (Application of
Enactments) Order, 1898.
I am Io add that in any ease the limitation imposed
3
by Section 51 (i) of [he Loral' Government (Irelaml)
Act, 1898, as amended by Section 4 of the Local
Government. (Ireland) Act, 1902, would apply and that
the power of the Board to extend the time for payment
can no longer be exercised.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
(Sgd) A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
The Secretaw,
Louth County Council.
CLERKS COUNTY OFFICE.
The following letter was read and initialled by the
Chairman :
Local Government Board,
7th August, 1914.
No. 41764/1914.'
Louth County.
Sir,
I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Ireland to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
4th ' instant in reference to the appointment of Senior
aud Junior Clerks in Che Office of the Louth County
Council consequent upon the examinations recently
held of candidates for these positions, and I am to state
that the Board will raise no objection to the appoint-
ment of Mr Patrick Gilmore as Senior Clerk and Mr
4
Joseph Cotter as Junior Clerk, on the terms specified
in your letter.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
for Assistant SecretaiY-
Secreta} y,
Louth County Council.
PATIENTS IS COUNTY
The following letter was read :
Louth County Infirmary,
l)umfalk, August 7th, 1914.
Charles Esq,
l)car Sir,
At a recent meeting of the Joi ut Commiffee of
Ilanagemcnt it was mentioned that a report was
(turrent that there is a falling off in the number GI'
oat,ients treateyl in the Infirmary. Consequently I was
instructed to send you a list of the number of patients
treated annually since the passing of the Local
Government Set.
Yours faithfully,
W. TURNER,
5
A discussion took place regarding the treatment of
patients in the Infirmary who did not, contribute +0
uheir supporå. aud also to eerta,ill restrictions imposed
patients; and the Conuni€tee requested Mr Bernard
llamill, one of Joint Committee of Management,
to bring the matter up at t,he next meeting of the
Infirmary Committee.
Mr Turner's letter was Dihen
initialled by lhe
Chailman.
COMMITTALS 'LS.
'l'he following letter was read and initialled by the
Chairman ; n
of Cruelty to Children,
North Louth aud Monaghan Braneh,
2 Castle Dundalk,
11 ill August, 1914.
Sir.
I beg to inform you that application will be macle at
Ardee Petty Sessions A,Vetlnesday, the 19th instant,
foi• the eomnlit.tal to •an Industrial School of a boy
named Tlionxas M 'Quillan, of Ilay street, Ardee.
1898
1899
1900
1901
1902
1903
1904
1905
'2.39
2.39
280
299
1906
1907
1908
1909
1910
1911
'256
268
295
Seeretary.
and 122 externs
124 extern'*
Yours faithfully,
C. W. WIIELEIIAS,
In speeior.
The Secretary.
Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
ELECTRIC' LIGHTING IN AIU)EE.
The following letter was •read ;
ailÅl the County
Stuxeyor informed the Committee thå€ he had written
All' M 'Keever that he was aeting in etilifruvent,ion oi
Che arrangement to sign agreement indemnifying
the Council against any (Iaanü.ge by reason of the
crection Uf the lighting stuudards.
letter was referretl to the Solicitor,
41 Laurence Street, I)rogheda,
7th August, 1914.
l)ear Sir,
street„ Avdee, that on Che 31'(1 instant a wooden. pole was
ercctecl the kerb of the footpath his pre-
mises in Bridge street ill with Mr john
AI' Keover's Scheme for the electric lighting of the town
nf Ardee. The pole erected, it, appears, i s to support
the span of wire thc poles on the liridge ant!
the Chapel corner.
Our eliellt states that he informed the foreman of the
workmen, when everting the polei, that lae objected
sanje Leilig erected on the ground ; that where the pole
was being plaeetl is the narrowest part of the street, aud
{hat the traffic would bc interfered with, and thus cause
him (Yr Gannon) serious loss in his [Itule and business,
and considerably (lepreeiafrh the sel l'ing value of his
prenrises, but notwithstanding: his objection the pole
was erected.
We are by this post writing to Mr John W M' Keever
requiring the removal of said pole forilvwith, or In
default that our client will init,iklte proceedings to com-
pel its removal and for an' in.) tinction and damages. In
such proceedings your Council will} be joined as
defendants for having given authority to Mr M' Keever
to erect. said pole in the position inent,ionecl above.
VCe shall be glad if yoti will let us hear from you
about the nmtbtter by return.
Yours faithfully,
SMYTH and SON.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Courthouse,
OF CIIXIILL'S CAMERON.
The following report was read and initialled by the
huirman : - -
City Laboratory,
Chatham Row, Dublin,
(ith August, 1914.
Repoli of Sir Charles Cameron, C B. AI 1), Public
Analyst for the County Louth, 011 articles submitted
to him for analysis (luring the quarter ended 30th June,
1914.
47 articles were received from the Food Inspectors,
It J.c., as follows
Artielé
Bu tter
Milk
Buttermilk
Whiskey
Number
23
10
2
2
8
One certificate .was sent to Sergeant Connor,
Dundalk, for specimen of buttermilk with
at least 25 per cent, of a,dded water, exclusive of 2ö per
cent allowed for churning purposes.
There were twenty-two specimens of butter analysed
by directions from the I)epaxtment of Agriculture and
Technical Instruction for Ireland, VUpper Merrion
street, Dublin, were taken up in the County
One contained an jexeess , of water, namely,
Louth.
22.2 per cent.
For the Guardians ('f Dundalk Ulli011 two specimens
of milk were analysed. One was of very poor and
doubtful qualitv. mmd the other specimen was under the
average quality of pure milk.
For the Riehmond District Lunatic Asylum two
specimens of butter were analysed and were pure.
Total analyses
CIL\IILL'S A. nx.
SHEEP PROSECUTIONS.
A report was read from the Sergeant in charge of
11.1.C. sub-district of Collon, giving list of sheep owners
who failed to give notice to the police of their intention
to dip during the Summer Dipping Period ill the Dis-
trict.
Committee recommended that prosecutions
instituted against the offending parties by the Council's
Solicitor.
9
MOTOR CAR LICENCE DUTIES.
Circular letter from Local Governmellt Board dated
(ith August, 1914, was read, enclosing
return of Motor Licence Duties levied during year
ended 31st March. 1914, by each County and County
The return showed a sum of ±575 lbs Gd
Borough.
for the County of Louth which. was proportionatk*lv
much greater than counties of similar size.
initialled by the, Chairman.
BY cotiNTY SURVEYOR.
"l'he following applications by County Surveyor were
read, and the authority was given in each case as
requested.
NEGLECTED ROADS.
County Surveyor's (Office,
Courthouse, Dundalk,
15th August, 1914.
To the Chairman and Gellitlenmell of Finance Committee
Meeting, 17th August, 1914.
Gentlemen,
I beg to report {hej following roads as neglected. Ask
for authority to take over same ten days' notice, if
necessary.
Index so. 122, Dundalk Rural' District—993
perches.
10
Carlingford to Carroll, Con-
tractor.
Index No. 94, Dundalk Rural Districts 74
perches.
Dundalk to Newry—P Carroll, Contractor.
No. 72, Dundalk
perches.
to Crossmaghen..J ames Molloy, Tavana2
more, Contractor.
Also Index No. 41, Drogheda Rural
perches.
Drogheda to Kells by Daly.
Contractor.
Your obedient Servant,
THOMAS WALSH-
CARLINGFORD PIER- LA-MP SHEI).
County Surveyor's (iffiee,
Courthouse, Dundalk,
15th August, 1914.
To, thO Chairman and Gentlemen of Finance Committee
at Meeting, 17th August, 1914.
Gentlemen,
It would be advisable Olid néeessai•y to erect, at once
a, l!amp and oil shed 011 Carlingford Pier to replace that
Gurned down. Owing to the requirements of lighting
Pier this work cannot be held over till largo Goods
Store is being erected.
Your obedient Servant,
TIIOMAS WALSH.
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
AT 'I'llE11t
SECOND (Adjourned) QUARTERLY NEETING
Heid on 20th August, 1914;
SPECIAL MEETING
Held on 24th September, 1914.
FINANCE COMMITTEE
A'I' MEETINGS
On the 31st August; 14th September; 28th Sept.
ember: 12th October; and 26th October, 1914.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
At their Meeting held on 21st September, 1914.
SCHOLARSHIP COMMITTEE
At their Meeting held on 16th September, 1914. •
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE
A : their Meeting held on 12th October, 1914.
REPORTS from
NEW COUNTY OFFICES COMMITTEE.
STANDING ORDERS COMMITTEE, and
TUBERCULOSIS COMMITTEE OF
MANAGEMENT.
1
Couth County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings of Louth County Council at ther
Adjournecl Quarterly Meeting held in the Council Chamber
Courthouse, Dundalk, on Thursday, August 20th 1914, at, one,
o'clock, p m.
Present : —
In tho Chair—Wm A Doran, Esq, J P.
Also present :—T J Byrne, J P; Patrick Callan, B Finnegan,.
Sir A Vere Foster, Bart; James Halpenny, J P;B Hamill,.
J P; J P Kearney, J H M'Ard1e, J F; Thomas B M'Court,.
Patrick M 'Gee, J P; Laurence M 'Keown, Michael Meade, J F'
Murphy, J P ; Thomas Murphy, Peter B Moore, John Morgan,.
M O'Meara, J P; Thomas O'Rourke, Wm T Skeffington, J P;
Wm Woods, J P; and James Wynne, J P, Esquires.
Messrs T Walsh, County Surveyor ;J M C Lyons, Assistant
County Surveyor ; Daniel O'Connell, Solicitor, and Dr M 'Quil—
Ian, T M O, were also in attendance.
DEATH OF THE POPE.
The following resolution was
Proposed by Thomas Murphy, E.sq, and
Seconded by Peter B Moore, Esq,
That we, the members of the Louth County Council join in
2
the universal sorrow now prevailing, and not confined to any
,elime or country, in proclaiming the loss sustained by tille world
through the lamented cleatll of his Holiness Pius X. , whose
.airn was to renew all things in Christ, and whose work for man-
kind earned for him the title of "People's Pope," while extend-
ing onr respectful syanpathy to His Eminence Cardinal Logue in
the sad circumstances surrounding the bereavement of the Ca-
t•holic Church.
In putting the resolution to the meeting the Chairman said
that though differing from the majority of the Cijuncil in creed,
..he wished to associate himself most heartily with the expression
Of sorrow that Mr Murphy 'had voiced on 'behalf of the Council.
Sir Vere Foster al.so as-sociated himself with the resolution,
The resolution was passed in silence.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
Tile frilowing was passed unanilnously :
iaoposed by Peter 13 Mcore, Esq ;
Seconded by W T Skeffington, usq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth
County Council at their second quarterly meeting, held on
Thursday, the 23rd day of July, 1914, and at their adjourned
meeting held on the 30th day of July, 1914, a printed copy of
which has been sent to each member of €'he Council, be and are
hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE COMMITTEE
M IN UTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Thomas B M 'Court, Esq;
Seconded by Peter B Moore, Esq, and
Resolved—That, the Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance
Committee, held on the undermentioned dates, a printed copy
•of which has been sent to each member of the Council, be and
are hereby confirmed :—
4th day of A ligust, 1914.
17th day of August, 1914.
CONFIRMATION OF EXECUTIVE COMMITI*EE
MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by P B Esq ;
Seconded by Woods, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the Executive
Committee at their Meeting helcl on the 4th day of August,
1914, a plinted copy having been sent to each member of the
Couneil, be and are hereby confirmed.
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
mposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Secondecl by Wm Woods, Esq, J P; and
Resolved—That the report of the County Surveyor, as appear-
ing on Page I of the Schedule of Proposals for the 20th August,
1914, furnished €0 each member of the Council, be and is hereby
adopted by this Council.
ARDEE WORKS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Patrick Callan, Esq ;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That t'he proposals for works formulated by they
Ardee No I Rural District, Council, at their quarterly meetink
held on the 7th day of July, 1914, and set out on Form 20, furv
nished to the County Council, be and areA1ereby approved by
this Council.
DUNDALK WORKS.
The following resolution was passed :—
Proposed by Wm woods, Esq, J P;
Seonded by J P Kearney, Esq, and
Resolved—That the proposals for works formulated by the•
Dundalk Rural District Council at their quarterly meeting held"
on Monday, the 6th day of July, 1914, and set out, on Form 20,
furnished to t'he County Council, be and are hereby approved of
by this Council.
Yr T J Byrne criticised the work for tho repair of the old
road from Bush to Carlingford, passed by the Dundalk Rural!
District Council, and dissented from the foregoing resolution,.
but did not propose any amendment.
COUNTY AT LARGE.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by J P Kearney, Esq, and
5
Resolved—That the proposals for works formulated by tho
Proposal Committee, at their quarterly meeting held on the 6th
day of July, 1914, and set out on Form 20, furnished to the
County Council, be and are hereby approved by this Council.
WORKS PLACED IN CHARGE OF COUNTY SURVEYOR.
No tenders were received for any of the works not set by
econtmct, at adjourned meetings of the Rural District Councils
'Of Ardee and Dundalk, and
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Wm Woods, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by James Wynne, E.sq, J P, and
Resolved—That all works not taken by contract be placed in
the hands of the County Surveyor.
AUTHORITY TO .SEAL CONTRACTS.
'The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by James Wynne, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Patrick M 'Gee, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That, we hereby authorise our Secretary to affix
the Common Seal of the Council on all contracts now approved
•of by bhis Council.
LOUTH COUNTY INFIRMARY MEETINGS.
Arising out of the Minutes of the Finance Committee, which
included a report submitted by the Joint Committee of Man-
agement, the question of the hour at which the meetings of the
Committee were held was discussed, which hour, viz, 11 0'clc;ce
a m, it was stated, was an unsuitable one for the County Coun-
cil representatives Aliho lived in the south end of the county.
The following resolution on the subject was passed qnani-
mously : —
Proposed by Patrick M 'Gee, E.sq, J P ;
Seconded by Peter B Moore, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Secretary be instructed to inform
Secretary of the Joint Commitee of the Louth County Infirmary
that it is the opinion of the members of the Louth County.
Council that the convenience of the members of the Infirmary
Committee from Sout'h Louth should be taken into considera-
tion, and that a suitable day and hour for all members should
be fixed.
TAAFFE'S CASHÄE, CARLINGFORD.
Arising out of the Finance Committee Minutes, the letters
received from the agent of the property were discussed. It was
considered that a local Committee appointed by the County
Council would deal more satisfactorily with the matter of acv
quiring the Castle for the Council, ancl after discussion,
Tho following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by M O'Meara, Esq, P ;
Seconded by Patrick M'Gee, nsq, J P, and
Resolved—T11åi a Committee consisting of Rev Father Quinp
P P; Messrs Wm Woods, J H M'Ard1e, and J P Kearney, bo
appointed to interview the owners of Taaffe's Castle, Carling-
ford, witih a view Io acquiring possession of said Castle for the
Louth County Council.
CO-OPTION OF COUNTY COUNCILLOR.
The pext business on the agenda was the co-option of a Coun—
cillor in the room of Mr Peter Hughes, deceased, and
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by John F M lill)hy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq: J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby co-opt Mr Michael M' Ardle, of
Ash Big, Knock-bridge, as County Councillor for the Elec-
toral Division of Barronstown, vice Mr Peter Hughes, decea-
ELECTION OF CHAIRMAN OF COUNTY COUNCIL.
The Election of Chairman of the County Council, vice ME
Peter Hughes, deceased, was next considered, and
The following resolution was
Proposed by wrn Woods, Esq, J P;
Seconded by M O'Meara, J P,
Supported by Sir A V Foster, Mr Patrick WGee, and Mr W
Skeffington, and unanimously passed :—
Resolved—That we hereby elect Mr Wm A Doran to act as
Chairman of the Louth County Couneil for the ensuing term,
vice Mr Peter Hughes, deceased.
AGREEMENT BETWEEN INSURANCE COMXIITITEE AND
COUNTY COUNCIL.
I,etter was read from the Secretary of the Insurance Commit-
tee giving the names cf the deputation from the Insurance
Committee to consult with the County Council as to the agree-
ment between them. The Secretary of the County Council sub—
mitted the proposed Agreement, but after discussion it was de-
cided to refer the matter to the Tuberculosis Committee of
Management, and
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Thomas O'Rourke, Esq, and
Resolved--That we hereby refer tho consideration of the agree-
ment between the Insurance Committee and the County Coun2
cil to the County Louth Tuberculosis Committee of Manage-
ment, with Mr Thomas Murphy as added member: for their re-
port to the County Council.
PROPOSED PURCHASE OF OME.\TH PARK.
The following report submitted by the Committee of the
Council appointed to visit and report' on the proposed purchase
of Omeath Park, and the price to be offered therefor,
was
read
-IRE PROPOSED OFFER OF PURCHASE OF OMEATH
PARK.
REPORT OF COMMITTEE.
As desired by the Council the following members attended at
Orneath Park on yesterday, and made inspection of the Man-
Sion House and grounds and the growing timber on Ohe lands
Messrs Nicholas T Murphy, Peter B Moore,
Ber-
nard Finnegan, James Wynne, W T Skeffington, Bernard Ha-
mill, John Dolan, Patrick Donegan, Thos Murphy, . Michael
Meade, Michael O'Meara, William Woods, Denis J Rath, and
Joseph P Kearney, with Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, and
Charles M' Alester, Secretary.
9
A meeting was subsequently held. at Carlingford, Mith Mr
Patrick Donegan in t'he chair. The Secretary having read the
Department's letter and Report of the Forestry Inspector, the
matter was discussed at some lenth. Tt was proposed by Mr.
N T Murphy, and seconded by Mr P B Moore :—"That we re-
-commend that a sum of CI,OOO 'be offered for the purchase of
Omeath Park through the Land Judge's Court, provided the
puréhase can be effected under the Land Purchase Acts."
Tt was proposed as an amendment 'by -Mr Denis J Rabh, and
seconded by Mr Michael Meade—"That we recommend that a
sum of CI,OOO be offered for the purchase of ()mcath Park, and
that the Council's Solicitor have power in his discretion to in-
crease the offer to El "
The amendment was Plitt to the rv&ting with the following
result
For—Messrs Rath, Meade, Finnegan, Hamill, Wynne, and
Kearney—6.
Against—Messrs Moore, Dolan, T Murphy, Skeffington, N T
Murphy, and Donegan—G.
The Chairman gave his casting vote against the amendment,
which was lost. The resolution was carried accordingly.
DANIEL O'CONNELL,
Secretary.
• 19th August, 1914.
After discussion, the following resolution was
Proposed by Wm T Skeffington, Esq, J P;
Seconded by M O'Meara, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby confirm the report of the Com-
10
mittee of the Council appointed to inspect Omeath Park, and?
approve of the proposal to offer a sum of through thesa
Land Judges' Court for the purchase of Orneath Park under the
Land Purchase Acts, and in connection with the Connty Louth
Forestry Scheme, and we hereby instrllet our Solicitor to make
this offer.
To this the following amendment was
by Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Seconded by Michael Meade, :
That we recommend that a sum of be offered for
Omeath Park, and that our Solicitor be empowered to increase.
the offer to at his discretion.
The Chairman took a vote of the Council on the
and the voting •was as follows
Against the Amendment—Messrs T J Byrne, Patrick C•tllnn,
Wrn A Doran, James Ha'penny, Thomas B M 'Court, Pat!ick
M 'Gee, Laurence M 'Keown, Thomas Murphy, Peter l! M core,
Jolm Morgan, Thomas O'Rourke, Wm T Skeffington, and Sir A
V. Foster—13.
For the Amendinent—Mes.srs Eernard Finnegan, Bernard
Hamill, Joseph P Kearney, Michael Meade, John F
Wm Woods, and James Wynne—7.
The Chairman declared tlle amendment lcxst, and
The criginal resolution was declared carried by the
Chair-
man.
REPORT OF THE TUBERCULOSIS COMMITTEE OF
MANAGEMENT.
which appeared on the printed minutesv
The following report,
11
was not considered by the Council, and no action was taken
Special meeting of the Drogheda Sub-Committee of the.
Tuberculosis Committee of Management, helc/ in the Court-
hou.se, Drogheda, on Monday, the 27th day of July, 1914.
Members present—John Dolan, Esq, J P, M C C.
Also present—Dr J A M 'Quillan, T M O: ancl the Clerk.
A quorum not being available, no business was transacted.
Usual fortnightly meeting of the Tuberculosis Committee of
Management, 'held in Dundalk, on Wednesday, the 12th day of
July, 1914.
Members present—C A Dnffy, J P, M C C.
Also present—Dr J A M'Quillan, T M O.
A quorum not being available, no business was transacted.
V. WARREN, Clak
13th August, 1914.
FANE ANI) WOTTONSTOAV.N DRAINAGE DISTRICTS.
The report of the County Surveyor, which had been referred
from 'the last meeting of the County Council, was under dis-
cussion. The Council considered that no definite action should
be taken to undertake t!he management of these Drainage Dis-
tricts until the legal aspect and the liability of the 'Council:
should be definitely known. Lt was decided to refer the mat—
ter to the Solicitor, and
12
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Wm T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby instruct our Solicitor to com-
municate with the Board of Works regarding the proposal to
take over the business of the Wotton,stown Drainage District,
. and tho Fano Drainage District, and to request information
regarding the re-assessment of the Districts, and Vae other
matters affecting the drainage systems which require adjust-
. ment.
APPOINTMENT OF COMMITI'EE TO REVISE
STANDING ORDERS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by T J Byrne, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Thomas Murphy, Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby appoint the following Committeo
to revise the Standing Orders of the Louth County Council,
•and submit revised orders to a future meeting of the Council
Mes.srs W A Doran, T Murphy, T J Byrne, SV T Skeffington,
M O'Meara, E Goodman, and B Hamill.
CORRESPONDENCE.
WAR DISTRESS COMMITTEE.
The following letter, together wit'h letters on same subject,
13
dated August 12th and 14th, were read: and were refered to the.
Finance Committee :—
((Copy).
No. 42142/1914.
Miscellaneous.
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 10th August, 1914.
Sir,
I am directed by the Local Government Eoard for
Ireland to inform you that the Government have constituted a
Committee, of which the President of tho English Local Go-
vernment Board is acting as Chairman, to advise on the mea-
sures necessary to deal witih any distress that may arise in
consequence of the war.
It is proposed that there should be a local Committee in
each Borough, or large Urban District, and in each County ex—
elusive of those areas.
The Board do not apprehend that in the Rural Districts of
Ireland there will be any immediate danger of distress arising
from a shortage of the faad supply, as the harvest promises .
well; but the working population in the Urban Districts will
be in the same position as those in the cities and towns of
England in the event of the war continuing for a long period.
The interests of town and country are, however, to a great ex-
tent bound up together, and on these grounds it is desirable .
that in the counties, as well as in tho cities and town.s, there
should be an organisation in existence to meet any emergency
which may arise.
The Board, accordingly, suggest that you should take im-
mediate steps to establish such a Committee, of which you will
bo Chairman. The Committee should comprise representatives .
14
•of local authorities, trades unions and philanthropic organisa-
tions. It is illiportallt that some of the mellibers should be
women.
The Eaard consider it would be desirable, 'especially in the
C rhan Districts, that sellerne:s for employment should be pre-
pared in aclvauee which could be info execution in the
• event of a serious lack of employment arising.
The Loral Government Board will be happy to facilitate tho
local authorities in the matter, and they understand that the
Road Eoard and the Development Commissioners will be pre-
pared to aid suitable schemes within the scope of their powers.
A national relief fund is about to be organised, and it is in-
tended, should distress •arise, that the local distribution of the
•sums thus made available shall be entrusted to the Commit-
tees, over which the Mayors and Chairmen of Councils will pre-
side.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Seeretary.
To the Chairman of each
Countv Council.
DEATH OF MR. PETER HUGHES.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man :—
Castlering, Channonrock,
August 4th, 1914.
C. M'.\les€er, Esq,
Secretary Louth County Council.
Dear Sir,
I beg to acknowledge with sincere thanks the
15
receipt of vote of condolence so kindly passed by your Board on
t110 death of my lace brother
Yours •faithfully,
MARY HUGHES.
APPOINT-ME-VT OF ME-MBER OF ISSURANCE COM-
MITTEL" VICE Alit. PETER HUGHES, DECEASED.
A letter was read from the National Health Insurance Com-
tnßsionevs, Dublin, dated 30th Jilly, No. 44041/1914, requesting
that the Commissioners might be informed of the name ancl
arid rcss cf the person whom the Council desired to fill the va-
canc.v on the Insurance Committee, caused by the -death cf Mi'
Poter Hughes. It was then
by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Set'.oncle€l by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Carried nnanilnonsly that Mr Michael M 'Ardle, of Ash 13ig,
be appointed.
APPOINTMENT OF MEMBER OF TUBERCULOSIS
COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT.
bv B Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Wm Woods, Esq, J P, and
Resolved —That we here'l).y appoint Mr Thomas Murphy a
mernb:yr of the County Louth Tuberculosis Committee of Man-
•acrement, vice Mr Peter Hughes, deceased.
ALI-IRELAND CONFERENCE.
A circular letter from tile Newry Industrial Development As-
sociation, stating that the 10th All-Ireland Industrial Confer-
ence would be held in the Town Hall, Newry, on 15th, 16th, and"
17th September, and requesting the Council to appoint six
legates to attend same, was read, and the following gentlemen
were appointed :—Messrs W T Skeffington, J P; Peter B Mcore,
Michael Meade, Thomas Murphy, James Wynne, J P, and Denis.
J Rath.
APPLICATION FOR SHARE OF ADVERTISING.
A letter from the Advertisement Department ' 'Irish Volun-.
teer," requesting share of the Council's advertising, was read,
and it was
Proposed by Wm A Doran, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Miéhael Meade, Esq,
That any of the Louth County Council advertisements sent
to the Dublin papers, be also inserted in the ' 'Irish Volunteer."
CONSERVATION OF FOOD SUPPLIES DURING WAR.
A resolution submitted by the Limerick County Borough
Council regarding above, was read, and initialled by the Chair-
man.
HOLIDAYS.
The following letter from Mr Charles M 'Alester, Secretary to,
the Council, was read :—
Secretary's Office,
Courthouse, Dundalk,
20th August, 1914.
To the Chairman and Members of the Louth County Council.
Gentlemen,
I beg respectfully to make application for a
short holiday. It is exactly twelve months since I had tho.
17
honour of being elected to •serve the Council, and a brief spell of
rest from active duty would be thoroughly appreciated.
Thanking you in anticipation,
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
CHARLES WALESTER,
Secr
On the motion of Peter B Moore, Esq,
Seconded by Wm T Skeffington, Esq, J P,
It was unanimously agreed to grant the application, duration
of holiday to be left to the Secretary's discretion.
The following letter from Mr Walsh, County Surveyor, was
read :—
County Surveyor's Offce,
Courthouse, Dundalk,
August 19th, 191k
To the Presiding Chairman Louth County Council.
Dear Sir,
I beg to apply through you to County Council for
a few days' leave of absence from duty, for which I should bo
grateful.
Your obedient Servant,
THOMAS WALSHe
on the motion of T J Byrne, Esq, J P,
Seconded by w T Skeffington, Esq, J P,
the application was granted.
LOCOMOTIVE BYE-LAWS.
A letter was read from the Local Government Board, No.
18
43,101/1914, enclosing Che Bye-Laws made by the Louth County
Council with respect to tho use of Locomotives in the County,
duly Sealed by the Board, and requesting to be furnished wit,h
two printed copies of the Bye-Laws.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
ELECTION OF VICE-CHAIRMAN.
The Secretary was directed to place on the agenda for the
third Quarterly Meeting in November, the business of the elee-
tion of Vice-Chairman, in the room of W A Doran, Esq, now
eloctod Chairman of the Council.
19
Finance meeting.
Minutes Of proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Alonday, the 31st August, at one o'clock p m.
Present
In the Choir—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members present—Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and 'Ithos
Murphy, Esq.
Mr J AI C Lyons, Assistant to the County Surveyor, was also
in attendance.
Minutes of the proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held on August 17th, copies of which had been forwarded
to each Member of the County Council, were signed by the
'Chainnan.
The following aecounfs were submitted and on examination were
ordered for payment :—
Works ill hands of County Surveyor
Sheep Dipping Aeeounts
Secretary's Office
Total,
WAR DISTRESS COMMITTEE.
6
12
E21
o
6
2
8
o
5
5
The Local Govennnent Board Circulars, dated August 10th, 12th,
•and 14th, with reference to the formation of War Distros,s Com-
mittces, which had been before the Adjourned Quarterly Meeting
Of the County Council held on August 20tli, and had been refevt•ed
to the Finance Committee: and further circulars jn eonneetion
20
with the same matter, dated August 21st and 24th, were broughh
forward, and consideration of tho subject was adjourned till nex€
Meeting of the Finance Committee.
STEAM ROLLING.
Letter from Eddison Steam Rolling Company, Ltd, giving term*.
for hire Of Rollers, etc, was read, and consideration of the subject
adjourned till County Surveyor was in attendance.
CENTRAL TUBERCULOSIS DISPENSARY.
The following letter from the Local Government Board was.
read, and payment of the amount was recommended :—
Local Government Board,
20th August,
No. 43,429: 1914.
1011th County.
1914.
Tn reply fo your letter of the 13th instant, T am. directed'
by the TA»caI Government Board for Ireland to state that they
seo no objection to the payment of 85 19s 9d, Solicitor's costs for-
tho preparation of tho lease of the site of the proposal Central
Tuberculosis Dispensary at Castletown Road, Dundalk, now•
abandoned.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN, Assistant Secretary„
Secretary,
Louth County Council.
21
SHEEP DIPPING SUPERINTENDENTS' REMUNERATION
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chairman
Department Of Agricuiture and Technical Instruction for Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch)
50 and 51, Upper Mount Street, Dublin,
11th August, 1914.
Sir,
With reference to your letter of 8th instant, I have hereby
•to express the Department's approval of your Local Authority's
,proposal to increase the weekly rate of remuneration of the County
Louth Sheep Dipping Superintendents from 16s to lbs.
1 am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL, SeclTåary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
SHEEP DIPPING PROSECUTIONS.
The following letters from the Council's Solicitor were rea.d and
initialled by the Chairman :—
Francis Street, Dundalk,
19th August, 1914.
Sheep Dipping Prosecutions.
Dear Sir,
I beg fo report that T @ttended on behalf of the
•Council at Ardee Petty Sessions to-day, when the offence was
proven against the following five defendants of having exposed
sheep for sale at Ardee Fair on the 28th ultimo, without having
the declaration that the sheep were dipped in accordance with the
orovisions of the Sheep Dipping (Ireland) Order, 1912. The de-
22
fendan€s were fined :—
James M'Gorisk, Newstone, Drumeonrafll, Is and 5s costs.
Laurence M'Quail, Tleronstown, Lobinstovvn, Is and 5s costs-.
James J. M 'Gough, Ileronstown, Lobinstown, Is and 5s 006tse
James M'Cann, Charlestown, AITIee, Ls and IOS costs.
Kate Ruddy, Lowrath, Tallanstown, IOS and IOS costs.
faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M 'Alester, Esq,
Secretary, Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
Francis Street, Dundalk,
Wth August,
Sheep Dipping Prosecutions.
Dear Sir,—
1914.
1 beg to report that I aftendcd a.t Collon Petty Sessiorw
tc»day on behalf of the County Council on hearing of summons.
for failure to give notice of intention to dip sheep in breach Ot
Article 5 (4) of the Sheep Dipping (Ireland) Order, 1912, against
the following persons:—
Peter Kearney, Belpatriok. Fined 2s 6d and 5s costs.
Bridget Lynch, Dunleer. Sumrnons withdrawn as Sergeant of
Police had iuscevtained that the sheep in question were not in tho
ownership of Mrs Lynch.
Christopher Carolan, Belpatrick. Dismissed, the
being of the opinion the offence was technical.
Mr Carolan
stated ho always gave notice when the sheep were to be dipped'
at home, but thought notice unnecessary when dipping took place,
at the Council's public tank.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL„
Charles M' Ales€er, Esq,
Secretary IA)uth Co. Council, Dundalk.
23
PROSECUTION UNDER SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACTS
The following letter from the Council's Solicitor was read and
initialled by the Chairman
Francis Street, Dundalk,
27th August, 1914..
Sale of Food and Drugs Acts.
Dear Sir,
T beg to report that T attended Collon Petty Sessions
to-day on behalf of the County Council on hearing of summons
against Edward Garg-an, Collon, that defendant "did sell to the
prejudice of the purchaser an article of food, €0 wit, butter,
which was not Of the nature, substance and quality of the article.
demanded."
The Department's Inspector proved the ease, and Certificato of
the Council's Analyst showed the sample of butter contained 22.2
per cent of water, the maximum being 16 per cent. Defendant.
appeared and was represented by Mr P Tallan, Solicitor,.
Drogheda.
The Magistrates convicted defendant xnd fined him IOS and IOS.
costs.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL
OFFER OF PURCHASE OF OMEATH PARK.
The following letter from the Council's Solicitor re above was
read and initialled by the Chairman :—
Francis Street, Dundalk,
28th August, 1914..
Re Offer of Purehase of ()meath Vark.
Dear Sir,—
T have received the following letter from the Solicitor
having Carriage of the Sale in the Land Judge's Court in reply to,
tuv offer of C 1,000 on behalf Of the Council
24
' 'Your letter of 26th inst duly received. Thc offer you make is not
an attractive one and I don't think tlre Vacation Judge would
take the responsibility of accepting if.
I, therefore, propose to
let the matter lie over for Mr Justice Ross' next term.
It might be well if you reconsidered before then the amount of
your offer."
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M' Alester, Esq,
Secretary, Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
CIVIL BILL—DAMAGE TO WALL AT DOWDALLSHILL
RACE-COURSE.
Elizabeth Coulter, of Seatown Place, Dundalk, v. the Louth
County Council and James Rice, Road Contractor.
Civil bill herein was l@ferred to the Council's Solicitor. The
plaintiff's claim is for the sum of C15, loss and damage sustained
by reason of the alleged injuring of a. wall and foundations thereof
in the townland of Dowdallshill, Dundalk.
RETURNING OFFICER'S SUPPLEMENTAL ACCOUNT.
Mr Patrick J. Roes account amounting to C9 16s 6d, as Refurn-
ing Officer in connection with Suppletnental Election for Drumear
D. E. was submitted; the items were examined by the Commit-
tee, and payment rcconunendcd. The Cormnittee did not consider
it necessary to fax the account.
APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION PROM RATES.
The following letter from Rev John Byrne, P.P., Dunleer, was
road, and exemption was recommended
Dunleer,
August 25th, 1914.
tlemen,—
As one of the Trustees for Dunleer Total Abstinence
Hall, I wish to claim exemption from rates for same.
25
This Hall was built about nine years ago by tho subscriptions
«of some people in favour of the Temperance Movement,
the ptnnies of the mem beys themselves, but principally by tho
proceeds of a Bazaar on a small scale, organised by myself, and is
kept going since by the little contributions of the Society.
It is held for the eommunity by three Trustees—Archdeacon
. Segrave, myself, and Rev A. Donnell, C.C., and, needless to say,
was erected for the sole benefit and protection of the working
men and boys Of Dunleer who would become Total Abstainers.
We are making every effort to keep the Society alive at all, and
its funds at the present time are so limited as to be quite inade-
-quato for such a tax as rates.
Trusting, for these reasons, that my claim for exemption will
receive your favourable consideration.
I am, Gentlemen,
Faithfully yours,
JOHN BYRNE, P.P.
The Members of'
Louth County Council.
DEATTT OF THE POPE.
In reply €0 a circular sent by the Seer: tar.y to the Members of
the County Council, stating fhaf the Parochial Clergy invited the
attendance of the Council at Requiem Mass for the late Pope in
St. Patrick's Cathedral on August 25th, Sir A V Foster wrote
regretting his inability to be present. The letter was initialled
by the Chairman.
ALL INDUSTRIAL CONFERENCE.
Circular letter fitom the Secretaries Newry Industrial Develop-
ment Association, stating thaf thet All-Ireland Industrial (kyn-
ferenco which was to have been held in Newry on 15th, 16th and
17th September, had bern postponed fill next .ycar owing to the
Unsettled conditions prevailing on aceount of the war.
26
T Ire Secretary was instructed to send a copy of fhe circular
each of the delegates appointed to attend the Conference.
POOR RATE COLLECTION.
TIE following letter from the Local Government Board
reference to the state of the collection of Poor Rate to the
August, was read
J nc•al Government Board,
with
17th
27
The Secretary stated that on receipt of this letter he had written
each Collector with reference thereto, and that COIIeetor Ilughes•
had called to cheek his collection, and explained that he had over-
lodged last time, and was waiting to collect rates representing
that amount.
On the motion of Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P,
Seconded by Thomas Murphy, Esq,
The Secretary was instrueted €0 fonvard Collector Hughes' ex-.
planation to the Local Government Board, and at the samo timo
to inform the Board, that while the Committee thought the Col-
lectors should make every effort to close their Collections at tho
proper time, they did not think it advisable, in view of the present
et•isis, to urge tho Collectors to unduly press for payment ofr
Rates.
27th August, 1914.
No. 44,1C1: 1914.
Louth County.
Sir,
With reference to the return showing the condition to {lie
17th instant of the Collection Of the Poor Rate for the current
half-your in Louth County, T am directed by the I m•al Governs
ment Board for to draw attention to the large amour.t
outstanding although only six weeks remain for the completion of
the Collection.
The Board desire to direct attention to previous corrcspondence.
and to state that as the Collectors have had their warrants since
thc 1st June they will not be prepared to grant an extension of
time to any officer who fails to elCise his Collection by the 30th
proximo.
The Board have had on many occasions to call attention to tho.
unsatisfactory manner in which Collector 11 uglies has discharged
his duties, and he should now be called upon to furnish an imme—
diate explanation of his failure to attend for the checking Of his.
accounts.
I am, Sir',
Your obedient Servant.
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Speretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
28
Finance meeting.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
- Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
. Monday, 14th September, 1914, at one o'clock.
Present :—
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Also present—Thomas Murphy, Esq, and Thomas O'Rourke,
. Esq.
Mr Walsh, County Surveyor, was also in attendance.
MINUTES.
Minutes of the proceedings of the Finance Committee af their
Meeting held on August 31st, 1914, were faken as read, and signed
by the Chairman.
ACCOUNTS.
The following accounts were submitted, and
• were ordered for payment :—
Works in charge of County Surveyor
Sheep Dipping Accounts
Secretary's Office
Total,
on exanlination
Æ24
8
3
Z35
4
2
o
6
6
o
6
FOOD AND DRUGS ACTS PROSECUTION.
The following letter from the Department's Inspector in eon-
-nection with the prosecution under above Acts against Edward
•Gargan, Collon, was read, and the Seeretary was directed to refer
29
Mr Watchorn to the Clerk of the Petty Sessions, Collon, for hist
expenses :—
Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction,
4, rpper Merrion Street, Dublin,
29th August, 1914.
Tho Louth County Council v. Edward Gargan, Collon.
Sir,—
I am directed to apply to you for the sum of eight-
shillings, being for' ear fare for my conveyance from Drogheda to
Collon and back on 27th instant, which was awarded to me by
the Presiding Magistrates at Collon Petty Sessions on 27th instant,
when aftending the Court as a witness for the prosecution for an
offence under the Sale of Food ancl Drugs Acts.
Tho fine and costs, which included my claim, was paid by Mr
Gargan to the Clerk of Petty Sessions in the Court on that date.
T will thank you for reply at your convenience coneerning this
matter.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
ROBERT WATCHORN, T. F. and D.
Charles M'A1ester, Esq,
Secretary, Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
RATE COLLECTION.
The following letter from Government Board was read,
and the Secretary was directed to send copy of same to each of the
Rate Collectors
Local Government Board, Dublin,
4th September, 1914.
No. 46,830: 1914.
Louth County.
Sir,—
With reference to the return showing the condition to tho.
30
-31st ultimo of the Collection of the Poor Rate in Louth County
for the current half-year, I am directed by the Local Govermnent
Board for Ireland to draw attention to their lef€errs of the 19th
June last and 27th ultimo.
The Board further desire to point out that the Collectors have
failed to comply with the undertaking given in your letter of the
27th June last that they would ll.ave substantial lodgments made
during the early portion of the half-year.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient, Servant,
J. E DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County (huncil.
SHEEP DIPPING PROSECUTION.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chairman :—
Francis Street, Dundalk,
8th September, 1914.
Sheep Dipping Prosecution.
Dear Sir,
I beg to report that T attended at Dunleer Petty Ses-
sions to-day on behalf of the Council 011 hearing: of sunnnons
against Patrick Stokes, Knockatober, Dromin, for failure to notify
the Police of his intention to dip sheep. Sergeant M. Quirk,
R I C, Col Ion, proved the offence.
Defendant was fined One Shilling without costs.
Yours filifhfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
31
•and on the motion of Mr Murphy, seconded by Mr O'Rourke, it
was recommended that the (%unty COuneil p pprove of the
transfer :—
We purpose sending George 'Little and John Coyle to the Indus-
trial School, Baltimore, Co. Cork, as they are now of an age' for
transfer.
men t.
We trust your Council will agree to this arrange-
INDCSTIUAI, SCHOOL, DROGHEDA.
Cliarles M' Alester, Esq.
Secretary, Louth Co. Couneil, Dundalk.
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL PUPILS.
'The following letter from Drogheda Industrial School
9th Septetnber, 1914.
J.outh County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
DISTRESS, COMMITTEE.
of appointment of the Distress Committee
was again adjourned fill next Meeting of the Finance Committee.
INSURANCE OF COUNTY COUNCIL CLERKS.
The question Of the payment Of Insurance under the National
Health Insurance Act by the Clerks in the County Office was under
•onsideration, and the Secretary was directed to apply €0 the
National Ilcalth Commission for a dirtetion in the matter.
ASSISTANCE TO WIVES AND OTHER RELATIVES OF
SOLDIERS AND SAIJÅ)R.s.
Circular letter was read from fhe I .ocal Government Board,
dated 21st August, No. 44,816, •1914, setting out the manners in
Ävhich assistance to wives and other raativos of soldiers and
sailors of' the mobilised forces of the Crown was to be given, and
initialled by the Chairman.
PAYMENTS TO EMPIJ)YEES OF LOCAL AVTHORITIES WHO
JOIN Ills MA,) ESTY'S FORCES.
The following lefter from the Local Gova•nment Board dated
was read,
9th September, No. 150 'M 1914, and Treasury regulations wet
read and initialled by the Chairman
Local Government Board, Dublin,
9th September, 1914.
Circular.
J,ocal Authorities.
No. 150/M/1914.
Sir,—
I am (lil ected by the Local Government Board for Ireland'
to state that inquiries continue to be addressed €0 them by Loeul
Authorifi€s asking what arrangements they may adopt in the ea.s€»
Of any of their employees who join his Majesty's
The Board are aware that some Local Authorities have already
decided to give half-pay towards the support of dependants of
their employ€es who have been summoned for Naval or Military
Service.
The Board wish it €0 be understood that not alone in the case.
Of employees who have previously joinod His Majesty's Forces,
but also in the case Of those who now wish to do so, they will
raiS@ no objection to leave of absence boing given to such em-
ployees and to the Local Authorities making a reasonable pay-
ment in respect of wages or salaries to persons authorised by suclv
Further, the Board will assent
employees receive money.
where nteessary to l.ccal Authorities employing and paying tem-
porary substitutes for officers who are summom«l or volunteer for
Naval and for Military Service.
Appended to this letter will be found the arrangements mado.
in the case of Civil Servants on Naval or Military Service.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARI AS,
Secretary.
To the Secretary of each Co. Council.
TREASURY REGULATIONS FOR CIVIL SERVANTS.
The Treasury Regula tions and Instructions of the 11th and
20th August, 1914, dealing with thc ease of Civil Servants on Navar
or Military Sa•vice, provide for the payment to them or to their
reprcsentativcs during their absence from Civil duty of their full
civil pay, less a deduction on account of Navy or Army pay and
allowances. For all ranks below Commissioned Officer this dew
duetion will be at the rate of seven shillings a week, together
with the actual amount of any Army separation allowance paid
to the family of a married man. As 1 egards a Commissioned
Officer the deduction will be equal to his active service pay
(allowances being neglected). The civil posts of these officers and
men will not be permanently filled during their absence on Naval
or Military Service, and that service will count for Civil Pension
and for increments of Civil Salary.
TRADE BOARDS ACT, 1909.
CONTRACTS OF LOCAL ACTHORITIES.
Circular letter from the Government Boar-a, dated 8th
September, stating that the Board of Trade have made orders
making obligatory in cases in which they are applicable, on all
persons employing labour and on all persons employed, the
minimum rates of wages as varied by the Chain Trade Board and
the minimum rates of wages fixed by the Tailoring Trade Board
(Ireland). The effect of the obligatory orders is to make it illegal
for wages to be paid at less than the minimum rates fixed, except
in the ease of timo workers who huve obtained spt•cinl permits from
the Trade Board exeqnpting their employment. It will not now be
necessary for an employer to give notice to the Trade Board that he
is willing that the minimum rate should be obligatory on him in
order to be eligible to roceive from a Government Department
or Authority a contract involving employment to which
the minimum rates are applicable.
NEGLECTED ROADS.
The following report from the County Surveyor was read, and
tho Committee approved of the serving of ten days' notices :—
County Surveyor's Office,
Courthouse, Dundalk,
12th September, 1914.
To the Chairman and Gentlemen Finance Commiffee Meeting,
14th September, 1914.
Gentlemen,—
I beg to report the following roads neglected :—
Index No. 6—Ardee R.D., 1339 perches, Dundalk to Kingscourt
by Reagh.stown. Contractor—John Mathews, G reafwood,
Ardee.
Index Nos. 16 and R .1)., 670 perches, ('ollon to the
sea (Index No. 16), and 463 perches, Drogheda to Kells
(Index No. 41), the Contractors being respectively P.
Powderly, Knockaleva, Collon, and Nicholas Daly, Monk-
newtown, Slane.
Ten days' notices are being sr.rved, and I ask your approval to
this eotnse.
Your obedient Servant,
THOMAS WALSU.
35
Scholarship Committee.
Minutes of tho proceedings of the Scholarship Committ:e at
their Meeting held in the Council Chaniber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
•on Wednesday, 16th of September, 1914, at one o'clock p m.
Ihesent :—
In the Chair—Wm. A. Doran, Esq, J P.
Also present—J AL'CaHhy, J P; J T Dolan, M A; T Murphy,
Patrick ()'Connell, and W T Skcflington, J P, Esquires.
Minutes of the Scholarship Conunittee held on Monday, 13th
July, 1914, a copy of which was sent to each Member of the
•Council, were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The Com rniffee had under consideration the granting of
Scholarships under the Lotifh County Council for the year 1914-15,
and the continuation of the existing Scholarships.
An application was inade by Miss Margaret V. Lyons, Trinity
Drogheda, for Scholarship under the County Council
Scheme. Miss Lyons had passed the Senior Grade Examination
and encloscd a list of her markings in the various subjects. She
also stated that she had passed. the Matriculation Exaujination in
June. 1914; ancl that her father being clead, her mother would not
be able to 'sff(jrcl her the opportunity of following a University
Course without the of a Scholarship.
An application was also made by Mr Henry Rogan (one of the
•Council's University Scholars, who hacl completed his three years'
for an extension of his Scholalship for a fourth year to
enable hini to take out his degree in Engineering.
A report was read from the Registrar,
T 'niversity College,
36
Doblin, on the Louth County Council Scholarship holders for the-
Session 1913-14, certifying that all the Students of the Louth
County Council were very satisfactory in all respects; and that
renewal Of the Scholarships was recommended.
The Secretary read a letter from Mr John Lait, Mountjoy School,
Dublin, enquiring if there was a County Council Scholarship in
Trinity College, Dublin, or any other University in Ireland for
candidates born in Louth County, to whiell he had replied that
two Scholarships would be awarded, and that applications for same
must by made by 15th September.
After discussion it was
Proposed by Mr M'Carthy,
Seconded by Mr Skeffington,
and unanimously recommended that the following Scholarships be
awarded, viz
MARGARET V. LYONS, Trinity Street, Drogheda—A new
Scholarship of Z50 per annum.
HENRY ROGAN—An extension for the fourth
year of Ili,+
Scholarship of Z50.
And a continuation of Che Scholarships of C50 for the pre-
sent year to
MARGARET CALLAN ,
PATRICK A. HANRATTY, and
JOSEPH M'PARLAND.
Miss Ursula
At the last Meefing of the Scholarship Committee
M'Parland's application for an extension of her Scholarship for
the fourth year to enable her to follow a course in Commercial
Science, was recommended by the Committee and. confirmed by the
County Council; and the Committee recommend the renewal ot
hor Scholarship for the fourth year.
37
executive Committee.
Minutes of the Proceedings of the Executive Committee at'
•their Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dun-
«lalk, on Monday, 21st September, 1914, at one o'clock, p m.
Present : —
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Also present Meade, Thomas Murphy, Thomas
•O'Rourke, Peter Woods, J P; James Wynne, J P, and Bernard
Hamill, J P, Esquires.
Mr Maxwell, V S, was also in attendance.
Minutes of tho Executive Committee Meeting held on the
4th of August, 1914, were taken as read, and signed by the
•Chairman.
MONTHLY REPORTS OF VETERINARY INSPECTORS
FOR AUGUST, 1914.
The following reports were read and initialled by the Chair-
man
Sir,—
CLINTON'S REPORT.
I beg to report that during the month of August
two outbreaks of Sheep Seab occurred at Dundalk Port, one in
:sheep the property of Mr T Malone, Drumsharnbo, and the
•other in sheep the property of Mr Thomas Clos.sy, of Navan.
38
The necessary steps have 'been taken in both cases and! the av
fected sheep slaughtered.
Two cases also occurred under the Tuberculosis Order in
cows the property of J Duddy, Limavady. They were sent
forward for shipment at Dundalk, and were detained under the.
provisions of the Order. Both cows were slaughtered by order
of the owner, and your Council is not liable for any compensa-
tion in the matter.
Your Obedient Servant,
J. T. CLINTON.
MR. DONNELLY'S REPORT.
Drogheda, Sept. 6th, 1914.
Veterinary Report for August, 1914 (Drogheda Union).
Gentlemen,
During the month of August I inspected the fairs.
and markets in this district.
Two suspected cases were notified to me under the Tuberculo-
sis Order, and I dealt with same, and sent reports to your Se-
cretary.
The district at present is free from any outbreak of conta-
gious disease in animals. One or two suspected cases of conta-
gious diseases reported to me, proved on inspection not to bee
notifiable diseases.
Yours respectfully,
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
To the Louth Co. Council.
(Executive Committee).
39
MR. MAXWELL'S REPORT.
Ardee, 1st Sept., 1914.
The Secretary,
IA)uth County Council, Dundalk.
Sir,—
I beg to report that I visited the usual fairs, markets,
etc, held in the Ardee No. I District for the month of Au-
gust.
Though the sheep detained on the farm of R A 13 Henry,
at Rathnestin, Tallanstown, are free from disease this last
month, I cannot issue a withdrawal notice as the premises havo•
not yet been disinfected. I am reporting this to the Deparv
ment of Agriculture who deal with such cases.
In reply to your communication of the '26th ult, I went to.
the Ardee Fair Green and examined sheep, which were healthy.
In conjunction with Sergeant Kenny, T made inquiries and'
learned that these sheep had been on Mr Rooney's land at
Derrycamma for some time, and as the man in charge
a Louth declaration of dipping I let them go.
I am, Sir,
Faithfully yours,
W. E. MAXWELL.
With reference to the outbreak of Sheer Scab at Lisrenny, at'
the farm of Mr R A B Henry, referred to in Mr Maxwell's re-
port, a notice, dated 8th of November, was read from Mr:
Maxwell, withdrawing the Detention Notice, as the owner of
the sheep had now complied with all the conditions ordered by-
the Inspector.
SHEEP OMZXERS HAVE NOT COMPLIED WITH
SHEEP DIPPING ORDER.
The Secretary submitted a list of sheep owners who had not
complied with the Sheep Dipping Order in the Summer Dipping
period. This list comprised over 100 owners who had not, ser-
ved the notices required by the order. In connection with this
matter the following letter from Mr Patrick M 'Gee, J P,
M C C, Charleville, was retid :—
Charleville, Dunlcer, 20-9-'14.
Dear Mr M'Alester,
Sorry I cannot attend Executive Meeting, I
would like to mcve—perhaps some gentleman would be so kind
as to do so—' •That in future no sheep owner be prosecuted who
has got his sheep dipped in a public tank, because he has failed
to notify the police of his intention to do or has done so, but
that it be the. duty of the dipping superintendenc €0 notify the
police at their respective stations in the following or similar
form supplied to the County Cou'nc•il—'
I certify that Mr———
has got 100 sheep dipped at the public tank,
on the
18th Septem ber, 1914.
Signed,
tendent.' "
Dipping Superin-
I consider it a harassing and vexatious proceeding to prose-
ecute any sheep owner who has got his or her sheep dipped at
public tank simply because they fail to notify the police, who
have admitted at the last Dunleeu• Sessions that they never at-
tend any dipping. Mr O'Connell would be able to throw some
light on the subject. Of course I would not interfere with the
arrangements with regard to private dipping.
Kindly let me know the result and Oblige.
Faithfully yours,
P. S.—Perhaps I should have said that when
P. M'GEE.
the police are
41
'furnished with the returns from the Dipping Superintendent,
-the police could then prosecute t.ie defaulters in their respec-
tive districts.—P. M.
After discussion as to whether the defaulting owners should
be proceeded against for non-compliance with the Order, it was
proposed by Mr Meade, seconded by Mr Woods, and unani-
mously decided that a notice should (be sent to each of the ow-
ners who had not returned their declarations of having clipped
their sheep; and that if these declarations did not reach the
County 'Office by Monday, 28th inst, proceedings would be
-taken against them.
GLENMORE DIPPING TASK.
A letter was read from nev Father Mu:vhy, P P, Ccoley,
stating he would give with pleasure for the period required for
tho Autumn, Dipping a site for the Council's Tank on his pre-
mises at Mullabuoy chapel.
The Secretary was directed to convey to Father Murphy the
best thanks of the Council for his kindness in granting the site,
which would very much facilitate the sheep owners of the
mountain.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
SHEEP DIPPING—LOCAL REGULATIONS.
Notices in eonnection with sheep imported into the county by
Mes.srs T F Donegan, Newtown; Patrick Callan, of Tymullen ;
Thomas M 'Donnell, Priestown, and James Moore, Ganders-
town, were submitted to the Committee, and Vhe Secretary in-
formed them that the Veterinary Sitrgeon had been notified,
•Alnd the clipping ordered by the Regulations complied with,
CASES USI)ER TUBERCULOSIS (IRELAND) ORDER, 1913,
The Secretary submitted notices Chat had been received un—
der the above Order. These included two cases in Drogheda,
one at Dundalk, and one at Greenore, where the animals had
been detained by the respective portal Inspectors, and informed
the Commitee that all copies of the Forms Ihad been furnished
to the Department, and that in none of the cases would there
be any claim for compensation.
Coutb County Council.
SPECIAL MEETING.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at their-
Special Meeting held on Thursday, 24th day of September,.
1914, , in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, at one„
o'clock, •t) m.
Presßnt : —
In the Chair—Wm A Doran, Esq, J P.
Also present :—John Dolan, B 'Finnegan, B Hamill, J P;
T B M•Court, T V M'Qni11an, T Murphy, T O'Rourke, W T
Skeffington, J and Peter Woods, J P, Esquires.
Mr T Walsh, County Surveyor; Dr M'Quillan, T M O,
Mr V Warren, Clerk T C M, were also in attendance.
Mr J T Dolan, M A, member of the Scholarship Committee,
was also present.
The Secretary read the ?ilinutes of the Scholarship Commit-
tee at their Meeting held on Wednesday, 16th September,.
which were confirmed by the Chairman.
The following resolution was adopted 'tinanimously :—
Proposed by Wm T Skeffington, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the recommendations contained in the Minu--
-tes of Prcceedings of the Scholarship Committee at their Meet-
ing held on the 16th September, 1914, and now submitted to a
Special Meeting of the County Council, 'be and are hereby ap-
proved of by this Council.
DREDGING AT ANNAGASSAX.
The following letter from the Department of Agriculture was
read
Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction,
(Fisheries Branch),
3, Kildare Place, Dublin,
18th September, 1914.
,929-'14-F.B.
Sir,
In reference to the harbour works at Annagnssan,
which are now being carried out by the Department under
.agreement with the Louth County Council, J have to state, for
i he information of the Council, that the Department have de-
Tided to suspend dredging operations for the present season,
:since the days are becoming too short to permit of the economic
,use of the dredging plant on tidal work.
I have further to state that the Department are of opinion
that it would be unwise, at the present time, to make the pro-
posed cut from the basin at the new quay to the upper part of
•the river, for the following reasons :
The bank, which it was proposed to cut through, and which
was assumed to be composed of the same stiff material as the
rest of the ground excavated, has proved to be loose shingle.
The effect of diverting the current of the river through a out
made in this material might not improbably be to fill up the
basin with shingle washed from the sides and bottom of the
45
eut which would have a considerable fall from its upper end to»
the basin. Moreover, the course of a cut made through such'
material would be liable to change, and the stability cf the.
quay might be thus endangered.
After observation •of the effect of winter floods and gales on
the part of the bank adjoining the basin, the Department's
gineer will .be in a better position to advise on the question or
making the ent.
I am, Sir,
The Secretary,
Your Obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL, Secretary.
Louth County Council.
Courthouse, Dundalk.
A discussion arose on this matter, Mr Hamill suggesting thac
the letter be referred to the Annagassan Harbour Commission—
ers.
Mr Murphy stated he wished to propose a resolution on, the
subject requesting the Department to proceed with the work
at once, and not postpone it till next year.
The Chairman asked the County Surveyor his opinion on the
matter, and he (Mr Walsh) stated that it would be desirable to
let the dredging remain till next Spring, and see the effect of
the winter floods, and suggested the possibility of obtaining a
grant from the Development Commissioners.
Mr Murphy withdrew his motion, and the following resolution
was unanimously passed :—
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Wm T Skeffington, E.sq, J P, and
Resolved—That the letter of the Department of Agriculture
•ith reference to the dredging at Annagassan, 'be referred to
•thc Harbour Commissioners of Annagassall for their considera-
•tien.
TUBERCULOSIS COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT AND
DROGHEDA TUBERCU%OSIS DISPENSARY.
A deputation from the Tuberculosis Committee of Manago-
rnent consisting of Dr M 'Quillan, T M O, and Mr V Warren,
•Clerk, was heard 'by the Council in reference to the Drogheda
Tuberculosis Dispensary.
Dr M 'Quillan stated he wished to bring under the notice
of the Council the great difficulty that was experienced in pro-
perly attending to tuberculosis patients in Drogheda, owing
to the want of a Dispensary where they could be properly
treated; that it was difficult to get the Drogheda, Sub-Commit-
tee to meet to make arrangements about the provision of a dis-
pensary, and that the failure to provide same was 'holding up
the contributions from the Insurance Commissioners.
A protracted discussion ensued on this matter, and other
matters pertaining to the Co. Louth scheme for the treatment,
of Tuberculosis, in which Messrs Skeffington, Hamill, M 'Quil-
Ian and Murphy took part, and ultimately tile following reso-
lution was passed •
Proposed Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded bv T V M'Qui11an, Esq, and
Resolved—That we -hereby request the Drogheda Members of
the Tuberculosis Committee of Management to take the neces-
sary steps provide a Dispensary in Drogheda for the accom-
modation of tuberculosis patients—the cost of same not to ex
cgoo.
47
PASSING, OF THE HOME RULE BILL.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Preposed Wm A Doran, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Thomas M 'Court, Esq, and
Resolved—That we desire to express our unbounded satisfac-
tion at the passing of the Home Rule Bill, and to express a wish
that Irishmen will now sink every difference of creed and elars,
and work loyally together for the uplifting and advancement
of cur be!cved country.
T.iat we congratulate Mr John E Redmond and the Irish
Party on the triumphant issue of their protracted labours and
-sacrifices, and assure them of our sincere appreciation of their
great work in recovering our Native Parliament.
PAINTING OF DROGHEDA COURT HOUSE.
The Chairman stated he had received, a letter from the
Painters' Society, Drogheda, requesting the County Council to
have Drogheda Courthouse painted, to afford employment to
the painters in Drogheda where work was very slack.
The matter was referred to the F inance Committee.
49
last, plan, specifications, efe, were submitted fo Road Board in
accordance with terms of report laid before you, on that date,
-relative to above main road.
If you again refer to that report it will be seen that the total
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings Of the Finance Committee at t l!eir
Mating held in the Council Chamhar, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 28th of Septeniber, 1914, at one o'clock p m.
Present
In the Chai—Wm A Doran, Esq, J P.
Also present—C A Duffy, J P; Bernard Tlamill, J P; Thos
O'Rourke, T Murphy, M Meade, W Woods, J P; and J F Murphy,
J P, Esquires.
Mr Walsh, County Surveyor, was also in attendance.
Minutes of Finance Committee Meeting held on September 14th,_
were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted and on examination
•expenditure proposed is:—
Tirhan Disfriefs
Rural Districts
Total,
C4,319
12,551
C16,870
The Road Board have approved of the specifications submitted
•(including the use of' local stone in Ardee and Drogheda Dis-
tricts) and have in a letter dated 14th instant offered to assist
'towards the work of improvement as follows
(I) To give a, grant of C5,450.
(2) TO lend the County Council Z6,530 free of intc•resf for five
years ; and, further, to lend free of interest for 5 years C4,C95 for
thc purchase of machinery by thc Co. Council.
In dividing the grant the Board have alloeuted it between the
Districts concerned in the ratio of the estimated expenditure as
were ordered for payment
Works in hands of co. Surveyor
Dipping Aeeou nts
Secretary's Office (including Monthly Salaries)
Total,
ROAD BOARD GRANT.
follows
Rural Disfricts
Drogheda Urban
Dundalk Urban
C4,060
760
630
62 13
E75 11
5
7
Road
The following report from the County Surveyor on the
Board offer of Grant was read
DUBLIN-BELFAST ROAD.
To the Chairman and Gentlemen of the Finance Committee.
Mecting, 28th Septem her, 1914.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,—
As instructed by you at your Meeting held on 4th August
The Urban Districts are prepared to finance their undertakings
•out of Revenue and require no loan therefore. sum to be
puf up by them would be;—
C4,319, less the grant of 81,309, i.e., 2,929.
As regerds the Rural Disfriefs Che Board submit a financial
scheme which I lay before you. From this if will be seen that
the total cost to the County spread over seven years from 1914
to 1921 is 88, 491, that is of course for the work of improve-
Tn ofhtr Countics, e.g., Dublin, Meath, Armagh, and Down. tho
Road Board have given grants amounting to 50 per cent of the
total cost on this particular road.
The Counties mentioned,
50
however, did not get loans free of interest from the Board for
the work or for purchasing machinery—they provided theij• own.
contributions and machinery.
If you were to provide your own contribution towards the•
work by way of loan, on tho basis of getting half the total cost
by way of grant, the cost to the Rural Districts would work out:
a.s follows :—
Total estimated on road.
Loan for 5 years at 3 per
The repayments on this loan would be from 1st April next.
51
as follows, assuming yeorly instalments with interest on out—
standing balances as above
1915-16
1916-17
1917-13
1918-19
1919-20
1920-21
1921-22
1922-23
1923-24
1924-25
E409 10 0
409 10 0
409 10 0
409 10 0
409 10 0
409 10 0
409 10 0
409 10 0
409 10 0
409 10 0
9.4095 0 0
E122 17
110 11
98 5
86 0
73 14
61 8
49 3
36 17
24 11
12 5
4
8
4
8
4
8
8
C675 14 8
1915-16
1916-17
1917-18
1918-19
1919-20
Total
Instalment.
1255 4 0
1255 4 0
1255 4 0
1255 4 0
1255 4 0
C6276 0 0
Interest at 3 per cent..
188 5
150 12
112 19
75 6
37 13
E564 17
7
6
5
4
2
or Z6842 say (assuming loan to be repaid in yearly instalments:
with intercst on balance outstanding) as against C8491 to be
provided by Rural Districts if present offer of Road Board is ac-.
cepted.
Against this now it must be remembered that the Road Board
offer 84095 loan free Of interest for five years for the purchase Of
machinery. My application approved by the Co. Council was to.
purchase on a ten years' loan.
The repayments of lou for 5 years to Road Board would be.
annually Z819.
The repayments if borrowed for IO years at, 3 per cent would be•
or E4771 as against Æ4095 if Road Board offer is accepted.
To sum up, if County Council (so far as the Rural Districts are•
- concerned) got half cost as grant towa.l\ds Road work and bor-
rowed from sources other than Road Board to provide the re--
maining half cost of road work on five years' loan and for ma-
chinery on 10 years' loan it would gain on road work Æ8491—
5841 or Æ1650. lose on Machinery, Æ4771—C4095 or E680.
Tn addition if tjrban Districts get half estimated cost as grants.
i.e., half C4319, the total sum to be provided by them would be
Æ2160 as against 2929 if present Offer is accepted.
I make no further remarks, but leave the matter to be dis—
cussed at your meeting.
Your obedient Servant,
TIIONIAS WALSH.
The County Surveyor read replies from Counties that had ro—
ceived grants from the Road Board for road improvements in
their various counties. These were Counties of Armagh, Dublin,
Meath, Monaghan, Fermanagh, and Down, oncl in every case tho
proportion given by the Road Board was 50 per cent of the entire
cost. The Secretary submitted the return of Licence Duties
collected in Co. Louth, by which it was proven tha.t the amount
collected in the County was grenf?T proportionately
than that collected in other Counties in Ireland, and the Chair-
52
man expressed the opinion that co. Lout-h should at least get the
•same terms as to grants given to other Counties, considering tho
amount of Licence Duty collected.
Mr Hamill stated that the Chairman of the Road Board at
•Conference with the co. Louth representatives in the Council
Chamber, Dundalk, had stated that [lye Road Board would be
mrerpau•ed to give ZI for ZI of the money expended in road im-
provement.
was suggested that the Co. Surveyor, accompanied by the
•Chairman and the Secretary, should wait upon the Road Board
•in London and discuss the terms of tho grant.
Ultimately, on the motion of Mr Hamill, seconded by Mr T
it was decided that the CO. Surveyor should communi-
• cafe with the Road Board, and ask a grant on the same feuns
as other Counties, namely, 50 per ecnt of the cost of [he im-
provement, the co. Council purchasing their own machimxy on
loa.n and borrowing the necessary money for the extra expendi-
ture.
WAR DISTRESS COMMITTEE.
The appointment of a Committee to deal with Distress arising
-out of the War, which had been adjourned from previous Meet-
jngs of the Finance Committee, wus again postponed till nexe
Meeting of the Committee; and the Secretary was instructed to
-prepare a list of names in accordance with the official Form
.supplied.
GRANT TOWARDS TECHNICAL INSTRUCTTON.
The following Iet€crr from the Secretary. Of the Louth County
Committee of Agriculture was read:—
Louth Co. Conmpittee of Agriculture,
September 19th, 1914.
Dear Mr M'Alester,—
At the Annual Meeting of the above Committee, held
•on the 7th inst, it was (leeided €0 renew the Grant of C150 towards
Teehnieal Instruction, such amount to be deducted from the
53
County Council contributions of Æ800 towards Agriculturar
Scheme.
1 shall be glad if the arrangement hitherto observed in connec—
tion with this matter be continued, viz, to lodge the amount of the,
Grant direct to the credit of the Technical Committee.
Mr Charles M'Alester,
Sincerely yours,
JAMES HUGHES.
Secretary Louth Co. Council.
The Seeretary informed the Committee that the amount lodged
by the County Council to the credit of the Technical Instruction
Committee heretofore was ZICO.
Mr Thomas Murphy suggested that the amount should be in—
creased to C150, but after discussion on the matter the Commit-
tee unanimously decided that the Grant should as at pre—
sent, viz, 8100 per annum.
ARDEE COURTKEEPER'S RESIDENCE.
The following letter from Mr T T Reilly, Caretaker of Ardee
Courthouse, was read and referred to Co. Surveyor :—
Courthouse, Ardee,
23rd September,
Dear Sir,—
I would respectfully ask you to bring before your next
Financial Meeting that two rooms in Courtkeeper's house require
papering badly.
Mr Walsh, County Surveyor, has been looking at both rooms,-
and he considers that they require papering badly.
Charles M'AIester, Esq,
Secretary, Louth Co.
Council,
Yours truly,
THOMAS REILLY,
Courtkeeper, Ardee-
Dundalk.
54
IRATE COLLECTORS' APPLICATION.
following letter 8 of the Rate Collectors was read
Dundalk,
28th September, 1914.
Gentlemeu,—
At the request of a large number of small holders and
some large Ratepayers who have not as yet disposed of their corn
crop, we, the undersigned, beg to apply for an extension of at
least 21 days from the 1st proximo, to enable us to complete our
respective collections.
Trusting the above application shall receive your favourable
consideration.
We remain, Gentlemen,
Your obedient servants,
(Signed),
P. CLUSKEY,
J. WOODS,
P. S. DONEGAN,
VATRICK M'DONNELL,
J. JOHNSTON,
VATIUCK TIVGHES,
PETER M'DONNF.TX,
J. KELLY.
To the Chairman and
Finance Committee.
The submitted a return of state of
Collection up to 26th September, which showed that out of
amount of the warrant for the first moiety amounting to E17,053
138 3d, a sum of E6,62 6s Cd had only been collected, leaving
balance due of CIO,431 6s 9d.
After a discussion the Committee recommended that
the Rate Collectors get the extension of time requested Btibject
to the consent of the Local Government Board.
55
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS.
A circular letter from the Local Government Board dated 23rd
September, 1914, No. 143, M/1914, was read, enclosing a General
'Order under the Seal of the T/.»cal Government Board, framed
so as to conform to the ruling of the Court of King's Benell Divi-
-Sion in re Pembroke Election Petition, 1908. The Amended Order
is as follows
"Each candidate may, in writing, appoint a Polling Agenc for
•each Polling Station, who may be paid or unpaid. Any such.
.appointment shall be delivered at the Office of the Returning
Officer not less than two clear days before the day of the poll.
.Excep€, as aforesaid, no polling or personation agent, whether
paid or unpaid, shall be appointed for the purposes Of tho
Election."
COMPENSATION FOR DESTRUCTION OF FRUIT TREES.
The following circular letter from the Department of Agricul-
•ture was read, and referred to the County Council
Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland,
Upper Merrion Street, Dublin,
10th August, 1914.
Sir,—
I have to transmit herewith, for the information of the
•Co. (huncil of Louth, a copy of an Order made by the Depart-
ment under the Destructive Insects and Pests Acts, 1877 and 1907,
for the purpose of preventing the spreading in Ireland of American
Gooseberry Mildew and Black Currant Mite. The injurious re-
sults of these diseases and their highly infectious nature are ex-
plained in the Department's leaflets Nos. 47 and 70, eopies of
Nhich are enclosed.
It will be observed that, under the Order, fruit growers may be
required to destroy gooseberry bushes affected with American
'Gooseberry Mildew, as well as Black Currant bushes affected
Black Currant Mite. When the disea.se known as American
'Gooseberry Mildew was first dealt. with by the Department, the
56
spraying and pruning of diseos:xl bushes was in some instances;
permitted as an experiment to ascertain whether sueh treatment
would succeed in controlling the disease.
Tlaving rcgnrcl to the.
results of the experiments so far carried out, and to the infor-
mation at the disposal of their Plant Disease Division, the De-
partment are of opinion that the only effective method of pre-
venting the spread of the disease in Ireland is fo have the bushes
destroyed. Similarly, the destruction of infected bushes has also.
been found to be the only satisfactory means of duding with
Black Currant Mite. Consequently, the usual procedure is to,
serve a notice on the occupier of €110 premises on which diseased
bushes are found, requiring him to have the bushes and
bilined. As the spores of American Gooseberry Mildew are-
borne not only on. the leaves and stems of gooseberry bushes, but
also on the fruit, it is necessary to prohibit the Inarketing of any
berries from diseas:d bushes.
Applications for compensation have recently been received
from fruit growers whose bushes or fruit hove had to be de-.
stroyed in pursuance of noticas under the Order. A memorandum
referring fo the Sections in the Aet dealing with payment Of
compensation is enclosed, from which if will be observed that the
Acts provide for tho payment of compensation of the local
rate. The Department are advised that these payments are to be,
borne on the general county rates and not on the special rate
struck för the purposes of the Agriculture and Technical ln-
struction Act of 1899. It will be noted that while the order•
directing payment-of compensation is to be made by the Depart-
menf, Seetion 1 (1) of the Destructive Insects and Pests Act of 1907
declares in effect that such Order shall not be made without tho•
consent of the County Council, who are now Che local authority
for the purposes of the Acl.
Should the County Council be
willing that an Order Of the nature referred to should be made
by the Department, it is suggested that a resolution to that effect
should be adopted by the County Cou•ncil, and that a. sealed copy
should be forwarded to the Department.
Should there be any additional information which the Depart-
ment may be able to afford and which would assiSt the Council'
57
in coming to a decision on this matter, the Department will bc.
glad to furnish it if so requested.
I am, Sir,
Your Obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL, Secretary.
PAINTING DROGHEDA COURTHOUSE.
An application from the Drogheda Painters' Society to the
Chairman of the COunty Council requesting the County Couneil
to have the interior "Of the Drogheda Courthouse painted, was.
under discussion, and the matter was referred to the County•
Surveyor for his report.
TIEATING OF COUNTY COURTHOUSE.
A letter was read from the Sub-Sheriff of County Louth drawing
the attention of the Committee to the defective condition of the.
leating apparatus in the County Courthouse at Dundalk, and re-
questing that something should be done to remedy same before the,
winter.
The matter was referred to the County Surveyor.
NEW BUILDINGS AT GIBSTOWN.
The following letter was read and referred to the County
Surveyr—the Committee giving the necessary permission subject
to his approval :—
Prospect, Dundalk,
September 28th, 1914.
Mr Chairman and Members Of County Council :—
T have built a new house a.t Gibstown and T intend to put
up a new entrance gate. I wish to notify you about same.
I am,
Respectfully yours,
THOMAS SORAGIIAN
58
BELGIAN REFUGEES.
Tho Chairman informed the Committee that he was in receipt
letter from the Local Government Board requesting informa-
tion as to what accommodation could be provided by residents in
Co. Louth for any of the Belgian Refugees who came to Ireland.
It was suggested that advertisements be issued in connection with
the matter. If was eventually decided that the Secretary should
compile a list of people who would make pmx»vision for any of the
Refug .•es.
COMMITTEE FOR REVISION OF STANDING ORDERS.
Minutes of Proccedings of above Committee af their Meeting
held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, at one o'clock
p m on Monday, 5th October, 1914.
Present :—
In the Chair—Wm A Doran, Esq, J P.
Also present—T Murphy and Bernard Hamill, J P, Esquires.
The Committee had before them the printed Standing Orders of
the Council and discussed various amendments. It was found
that alterations had been made heretofore in the printed Orders
by rcsolutions of the County Council. These alterations were
, as follows :—
Standing Order No. IO to read—"The Quarterly Meetings of tho
•Council shall be held on Thursday next succeeding 17th January,
17th April, 22nd July, and 10th November. The Adjourned
Quarterly Meetings of the Council shall be held on the last
Thursday in May, November, and February, and the third
'Thursday in August."
Standing Order No. 16 to hour of meeting of tho
•Council shmll be I o'clock, excepting the Annual Meeting, which
•hall be held at 11 0'clock."
Standing Order No. 17 to all Meetings of tho
•Council, with the exception of the Annual Meeting (which shall
59
held in Drogheda), shall be held in the Courthouse, Dundalk,
unless it be otherwise provided for by a resolution of the
•vCouneil."
Standing Order No. 61 to Committee of the whole
Council is composed of all the Members of the Council, five con-
• stituting a quorum (save and except u Finance Committee, three
Members of which shall form a quorum), and it transacts such
business as is from time to time committed to it by order of the
' Council."
The Committee unanimously decided fliat. Standing Older No. 5
. should be altered to read as follows a Councillor is absent
from Meetings of the Council for more than six months, except
in the case of illncsss, or for some reasons approved of by the
• Council, his office shall, on the expiration of these months, be-
come vacant."
This alters the term of "Twelve Months," as it stood in the
printed Orders, to "Six Months."
The Cotnmittee also decided to delete Standing Older 18, which
Chair is to be taken at a Meeting of the Council with-
in a quarter of an hour afto• the time appointed for such Meeting
by the Chairman, or, in his absence, by the or
otherwise by any Member called thereto by motion."
• as it is covered by Standing Order No. 19, which at
the expiration Of thirty minutes after the hour at which any
Meeting of the Council be appointed to be held, a quorum shall
not be present, no Meeting shall take place."
Tho (hmmittce ordered that the Standing Orders as now re-
vised be recommended for adoption by the Co. Council.
Proposal Committee.
Minutts of Pl"oceeclings of the Proposal Committee at their••
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
Monday, 12th of October, 1914, at one o'clock p m.
In the Chait—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Also present—13 Hamill, J P; M Meade, T Mumjy, T O'Rourkev
wm Woods, J P; Woods, J P; and B Finnegan, Esquiies.
Mr Walsh, County Surveyor, was also in attendance.
TIW Minutes of the previous Proposal Committee were taken as.
read and signed by the Chairman.
The Committee considered the following Applications by the
County Surveyor :—
No. re-paper, paint, etc., rooms in Courtkeep€r'.s re-
sidence, Ardee Courthouse. Cost not to exceed CIO. To be a
County-at-large charge."
No. provide Drawing Board and T. square for County
Surveyor's Office. Cost not to exceed C2. To b? a County-at—
large charge."
on the motion of Mr wrn Woods, J P,
Seconded by Mr T O'Rourke,
Committee unanimously passed the foregoing Proposals,
Nos. 12 and 13.
ADJOURNED PROVISIONAL PROPOSAL.
No. 11—"To erect shed on Carlingford Pier as recommendcd by
County Council. Cost not to exceed C200. To be charged to
Carling:ord Pier Revenue Account."
Considerable discussion took place on this proposal, MI" Walsh,
the COunty Surveyor, stating that two of the local County Coun-
cillors—Mcssrs Kearney and Wm Woods—had suggested that twcr.
61
—hecls should be erected each measuring 35ft. by 20ft., instead of
-the one suggested, which was to b? EOft. by 20ft.
The Co. Stllxeyor informed the Committee that two sheds 35ft.
by 20ft. could not, be, erected for 200.
Eventually, on the motion of Mr Wm Woods, seconded by Mr
T O'Rourke, the Cknnmittee passed the proposal set out above,
Mr Peter Woods then proposed, and Mr' M Al?ade secondcd,
and it was recommended, that only one shed 35ft. by 20ft. be
erected at present, the cost not to exceed Z125.
The Seer. tary submitted County-at-large payments including the
following :—
Balance due for Watering Cårf supplied to Ardoe—C5 5s.
11—s7s Craokshank, Leech and Davies aecoun€ for costs Of lease
oi Tuberculosis Dispensary at Dundalk—C5 19s 9d.
Mr Patrick J. Roe's aeeounf as Returning Officer for the Sup-
plenuntal District Council Election for the Electoral Division of
.Drumcar—-E9 16s 6d.
Tlie Committee adjourned till Monday, 9th November.
62
financc Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the above Committee at. their••
meeting held in the Council Chamber Courthouse, Dundalk, orv_
the 12th October, 1914, at one o'clock, p m.
In the Chair—Chas A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members Hamill, J P; M Meade, Thos.
Murphy, T O'Rourke, wm Woods, J P; Peter Woods, J P, and
B Finnegan, Esquires.
Mr Walsh, County Surveyor, was also in attendance.
The minutes of the previous Finance Committee Meeting•
were taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted, and on examination
were ordered for payment :—
Works in charge of County Surevyor
Sheep Dipping Accounts
Secretary's Office (including half-yearly remunera-
tion to Rate Olleetors)
Total
5-3 .3
8 18 0
385 17 ICY
63
dence relative to the collection of poor rate in the County of
Louth in respect of the 'half-year ended on the 30th ultimo, and'
the Board desire me to inform the County Council that they
will raise no objection to the payment of poundage fees too
those rate collectors who lodged the full amount of the first
moiety by the 30th ultimo, and to Collector Cluskey who closed
his half-year'S collection on the 1st inst.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. 11. BARLAS,
Secretary.
Secretary, IA.»uth Co. Council, Dundalk.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
The Seeretary informed the Committee that all the Rate.
Collectors had closed the collection of the first moiety with the.
exception of Collector Hughes.
GRANT UNDER TUBERCULOSIS SCHEME.
The following letter from the Local Government Board was •
read and initialled by the Chairman, and the Secretary was
directed to send a copy of the letter to Mr Warren, Clerk to .
the Tuberculosis Committee of Management, and direct his at-
tention to the item of C9 15s 8d for educative literature refer-
With reference to the remuneration of the Rate Collectors
included in the above statement under "Secretary's Office,"
the Secretary read the following letter from the Local Govern-
red to :—
No. 50,075: 1914.
Louth County.
Sir,—
Local Govern ment Board,
Dublin, 6th October, 1914.
ment Board :—
No. 52,292, 1914.
Louth County.
Sir,—
Local Government Board,
Dublin, Gin October, 1914.
Adverting to your letter of the 18th ultimo, relative-
to the estimated expenditure of the Louth County Council in
respect of the treatment of Tuberculosis for the half year en-
The Local Government Board for Ireland have had be-
fore them your letter of the 1st instant and previous corespon—
•ded the 30th ultimo, I am directed by the Local Government
Board for Ireland to inform you that directions have 'been given
for the issue of a Paying Order for C149 8s Sd from the Ex-
•chequer Maintenance Grant in respect of the half year in ques-
tion ; and I am to explain that the item of C9 lös 8d ror edu-
cative literature has been excluded, as it does not appear to
relate to treatment. It is to •be observed that, having regard
to the provisions of Section 14 of the Tuberculosis Prevention
(Ireland) Act, 1908, the supply of literature relating Lo Tuber-
eculosis is a function of the Sanitary Authority.
The payment is made subject to Che Auditor's examination
•of the Council's accounts and relevant vouéhers.
T am to add that t-.e Board have addressed the Insurance
Commissioners with regard to the contribution to be paid by
the Insurance Committee to the County Council on account of
the services rendered to insured persons under the County
:scheme for the treatment of Tuberculosis.
I am Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
BANK ACCOUNT.
The Committee inspected the Bank Books for the Subsidiary
•and General Accounts, and the Chairman initialled them.
65
WILLISTOWN PLANTATION.
"The following letter was read
Drumcar, Dunleer: Co. Louth,
October 2nd, 1914.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
Sir,—
On my inspection of Willistown Plantation on Sep-
tember 30th, I find there has been four Syruce Trees cut down
and removed, and up to the present I have not been able to
trace them.
If I had permission €0 inform the Ca.stleLellingham police,
and got them to make some inquiry, it might prevent same
from taking place again.
I remain Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
WILLIAM MCALLUM.
The Seeretnry informed the Committee that, he had advised
-the Sergeant in charge of the police at Castlebellingham of the
matter, and read reply from him that he would endeavour to
bring the offending parties to justice.
MALICIOUS INJURY CLAIMS—MRS. CARPENTER v.
MEATH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Letter was read from Mr O'Connell, Solicitor, reporting that
this claim (which was for tho alleged burning of 'hay, straw,
airl mangolds, of the value of CITI, and which, if any eom-
pensa tion were n Ivarciecl,
it would be sought to have part
thereof levied off the County of Louth) had been heard
Kells Quarter Sessions, and that the County Court Judge dis-
missed the claim.
66
THOMPSON v. LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Letter was read from Messrs Hunter Moore and Boyley
Newry requesting payment of decree awarded in this malicious.
injury claim.
The Committee instructed the Secretary to reply that the
claim could not be paid until the amount was levied and collec
ted.
RATE COLLECTOR'S IIEMUNERATIOX.
Leter was read from Mr •Patrick M 'Donell, requesting pay-
ment of balance of remuneration due for the half year
30th Seotern ber, 1913.
The Secretary was directed to write to the L G B to request
their sanction to the payment of the remuneration to ali i he.
collectors interested.
SHEEP DIPPING DEFAULTERS.
Report was read from the Sergeant R I C, Dunleer, giving
list of persons who exposed sheep for sale at Dunleer fair on 7th
inst, without being accompanied by dclarations.
In these cases nearly all the defaulters had subsequently pro-
duced their declarations to the police, and the Committee were
of opinion that as prosecutions would not be sustainable nuder
the circumstances they would not recommend that summ nses
be issued.
ROAD BOMU) GRANT.
in
The following letter from the Engineer to the Road Boal A
reply to the letter addressed to him by the County Surveyor, as
requested by the Finance Committee, was read
67
The Road Board,
Manager and Engineer's Office,
Queen Anne's Chambers,
Broadway, London, S.W.,
7th Octobr, 1914.
Dear Sir,
Dublin-Belfast Road.
I beg to refer to your letter of the 28th ultimo: and to say
that the Road Board regret, having regard to the funds avail-
able, that they are not prepared to make the grants applied for
by your Council, especially when, on your own statement„
there are other roads in the county calling for improvement, in
respect of which the Board assume your Council will apply for
advances.
If, however, your Council decide to borrow the balance of the
cost of the works and the money required for the plant propo—
sed to be purchased, from outside the Board would
prepared, in lieu of tho loans indicated in my letter of the 14th
ultimo, to contribute, in addition to the grants indicated in
that letter, such sums as shall be equal to the interest on such
loans borrowed in the ordinary way and repayable by five equal
annual instalments.
The Board realise that even allowing for these additional
grants the proportion of Che eosi which the Council would have
to bear will represent more than per celit of the cost of the
works, and if your Council decide not to proceed with the pro-
posal with the assistance of the advances indicated by the
Board, it will be open to them to reduce the estimated cost of
the works to be undertaken.
On the other hand if your Council decide to proceed with the
works with the assistance indicated in my letter of the 14th
68
Riltimo, and will return t'he draft statements accompanying Che
same, the matter will be in order; or if they decide to carry
out the works with the assistance indicated above, revised draft,
Statements of the proposed grants will be forwarded as soon as
you let me know the terms on which your Council propose to
69
County Surveyor's hands to have any necessary repairs
painting carried out :—
County Surveyor's Office,
Courthouse,
or
raise the loans required.
Yours faithfully,
The County Snrveyor,
Louth County Council.
Court House, Dundalk.
J. P. MAYBURY.
A discussion took place on the contents of this letter, tho
Committee being of the opinion that the Road Board had not
given the reasons asked for why Louth was getting differential
treatment to other Irish counties.
Mr VI unill stated that the only way that, a satisfactory con-
•elusion could be arrived at was by a personal interview with tho
Road Board in London.
Mr Murphy was rather opposed €0 this view, Tjut ultimately
the following resolution was passed unanimously
by B Hamill, Esq, J P;
by M Meade, Esq,
That a deputation from the County Council consisting of the
'Chairman of the Council, the County Surveyor, and the Secre-
tary proceed to London and intewiew the Road Board with a
view to obtaining better terms from them.
DROGHEDA COU RT HOUSE.
REPORT FROM COUNTY SURVEYOR.
The following report was read, and the matter was left in tho
Dundalk, 10-10-1914.
To the Chairman and Gentlemen Finance Committee of Louth
County Council Meeting, 12-10-'14.
Drogheda Courthouse.
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,
As instructed by you at your last Meeting,
inspected Drogheda Courthouse re painting of same.
The windows and doors in rear portion of Courthouse require
painting; also belfry would be in the better of painting.
Windows to courts require some new cord, and pulleys freed„
As regards painting walls of courts, I do not think this is,
advisable. The plaster is coming off in sheets, or inclined to,
come off, owing I believe to settlements taking place in walls.
The exterior of the Courthouse to rear was originally plas—
tered or dashed with poor mortar which is falling off gradually.
Some cracks are apparent in the walls ,and it may be advisable,
not to do anything to this portion till winter frosts have helped.
to remove Old plastering, and during next summer to eem•ent.
stucco the walls afterm aking good the cracks.
Your Obedient Servant,
THOMAS WAISTE
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD'S SURCHARGE.
The Secretary was directed to write the Local Government
Boård and request their reply as to the remission of the surcharge
made against Messrs Hughes, Hamill, and Goodman.
70
Tlew County Offices' Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the above C%rnmittee held in the
Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk, on Thursday, 15th
day of ()ctdber, 1914, at one o'clock, p m.
Present
In the Chair—B Hamill, Esq, J P, and subsequently Wm
A Doran, Esq, J P.
Other Members :—James Wynne, J P; T Murphy, Esquires.
Also present—Mr Walsh, County Surveyor.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Corimittee were
read and signed.
The following Report from the County Surveyor, which had
-already been before the Committee, was read :—
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,
In accordance with your directions of 9th Mareh last a plan
of the Old Jail premises adjacent to the Courthouse has been
prepared for your consideration.
I had not' the advantage -of boing present at your discussion
on 9th March, and am not quite certain of what is intended ex-
actly by the ' 'additional -accommodation to be provided for"
whether the Committee proposed that the County Council
should continue to use some existing offices in the Courthouse,
and also the Grand Jury Room as a Council Chamber ; or whe-
71
•ther they should erect a complete new suite of offces, with
•Council Chamber, on the 'Old Jail premises.
Assuming *the latter proposition to be correct, the accommo-
qlation required would be:—
(a) Council Chamber, 40 ft x 25 ft, say.
(b) 1 Committee Room, about 16 ft square.
(c) 1 Spare ditto, IG feet, square, to serve as office in busy
times for Rate Clerks, etc.
(d) 1 Single Office about IG feet square—Accountant.
(e) 3 Double Offices about 16 feet square for •Secretary and
Staff and County Surveyor and Staff, and County Committee
'Of Agriculture.
(f) I Single Office somewhat larger, for Secretary Insurance
•Committee.
(g) The necessary Lavatories attached to County Council
Chamber and 'Offices and Cloak Room.
(h) Stationery Store Room for Secretary, 80 to 100 sq. feet
area, say.
(i) Strong Room for Secretary, 80 sq. feet area, say.
(j) Store at baek for coal and sundries. With regard to this
latter, and having also regard to the fact that the Council may
purchase road-rollers, it may not be amiss to consider the ad-
visability and possibility of acquiring an entrance through the
(irban Council premises adjoining.
No mention has been made above of a Store Room and
Strong Room for the Clerk of the Crown and Peace. The bed-
room and kitchen occupied at present by the Courtkeeper could,
without difficulty, so far as I can see, be converted into a Store
Room and Strong Room respectively, and would be convenient
to Mr Sheridan's office, provided, of course, that accommoration
72
could be provided for the Courtkeeper in the part of the Court—
house vacated by the Council.
The question also presents itself as to whether a resident
Caretaker should be appointed in charge of the offices. If so,
a residence, of course, would have to be provided for him.
It should be remembered when considering the proposed site•
that the drain from the Courthouse to the Street sewer•
runs through the centre of the garden in front, if I am rightly
informed. Tn any plan for a building on the plot provision
would have to be made for changing the course of the drain.
Should the (%mmittee decide to advertise for competitive,
plans and specifications, an order should be made to procure
two dozen (say) copies Of site plan to be Supplied Vo architects.
1b would be advisable also, if possible, to have photographs of
the adjacent buildings—east side of C%urthouse and the Ex—
change—to accompany plan of site. The attention of architects.
competing should be called to the question of providing for re—
fleeted light for east side of Courthouse (if necessary).
The terms for competition would 'be a matter to be settled'
by tho Committee after discussion.
It would be desirable also if the Committee would define on_
the plan submitted the limits of the site to be built on.
I am, Mr Chairman and Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signed) THOMAS WALSH.
The ground plan of site, as prepared by the County Surveyor,.
was also before the Committee, and a discussion en•
sued as to the various accommodation to be provided in the,
offices.
Mr Bernard Hamill then proposed, and
Mr Thomas Murphy seconded, and
It was Unanimously eårried :
That we recommend Chat the County Council proceed witlv
the erection of new Offices at a cost not to exceed C6,000, ow
73
the site on the east of the County Court House; that prizes be-
offered for plans for same, for best plan, and C'25
for second best plan; and that Professor W. A. Scott, of the,
National University, be appointed Assessor, and that they
County Surveyor confer with him on the various details as too
accommodation, etc.
74
Couth County Council Tubercnlosis Committee
of managemeut.
REPORTS.
Meeting held on Wednesday, 'he 9th day of September, 1914.
Present : —
In the Chair —C A Duffy, Esq, J P, M C C.
Other Members —W A Doran, J P; Hamill, J P;
Wynne, J P; Thos Murphy, and P O'Connell, Esquires.
Also present—Dr J A M'Qui11an, T M O.
Minutes confirmed.
James
The report of the deputation to the Dundalk Guardians re a
Scheme for the treatment and isolation of advanced cases of tu-
berculosis, was submitted (eopy attached). After a lengthy dis-
cussion it was unanimously clecided to defer further considera-
tion of the subject, and to fix a date to hold a Special Meeting
to which Mr Doran (Chairman) would request the Drogheda re-
presentatives of the Committee to attend, to take into consider-
ation the Report in question, and also to consider the question
of formulating a Scheme for establishifig an Institution to suit
the needs of the entire County, and situate in a central portion
«jf the county.
The following Report was also submitted from the deputation
•110 waited on the Authorities of the Louth County Infirmary
'to acquire a site in the Grounds of the Infirmary for a Dispen-
sary. There attended :—Messrs James Wynne' J P; William
Woods, J P; Edward Goodman, P O'Connell, and Dr M'Quil-
Ian, with the Clerk :—
The members of the deputation inspected the Grounds and
-chose a Site at the rear of the Infirmary, and situated so that
an entrance can be made from the road opposite the Gaol pre-
mises.
The Authorities eventually informed the members that the
necessary ground may be acquired at an annual rental cf C2
(Two Pounds), provided the plans, eve, of the proposed building
. be satisfactory to t'he Governing Body.
It was proposed by Mr Hamill ;
Seconded by Mr Murphy, and resolved :
That we adapt the Report of the deputation to Clie Author-
ities of the Louth County Infirmary, and instruct the 'Clerk to
communicate with the Local Government Board requesting an
early inspection of the Site with a view to receiving their ap-
proval.
That Vincent O'Connell, Areilitcet, be instructed to pre-
pare plan, etc, of the building in accordance with require-
ments.
The following non-insured perso ns were recommended for
treatment at Peamount Sanatorium fof' 12 weeks each
Laurenee Lcvins, Dunany, Dunle»r.
Henry Carpenter, Churchtown, Dunleer.
Charles M 'Ardle, Chapel Lane, Dundalk.
John Bradshaw, Shortstone,l Hackballscross, who agrees to
contribute 7s Gd per week towards the cost of his main-
tenanee.
It was decided to recommend payment of 13s 3d €0 the Drog-
'heda Corporation for disinfecting two shelters as previously di--
rected.
It was derided to recommend payment of C40 to Mr V.
O'Connell, Architect's Fees for preparing Plans, Specification,
etc, of the Dispensary proposed to be erected at Castletown
Road, Dundalk ; and to request Mr O'Connell to prepare thew
plans of the Dispensary preposed to erected at the Louth In-
firmary, the CIO now recommended to cover the cost also.
Application from Mr John Woods, Carlingford, for payment
of 32s 6d, rates due on Carlingford Dispensary, which the land-
lord refuses to pay.
It was decided to refer the matter to the Council's Solicitor.
Communication from Mr Joseph Dolan, Ardee, requesting
payment of a Grant to the Ardee Nursing Association
Nurse Stockwin's services at Ardee Dispensary, and inquiring
if it was intended to continue her services for the current year.
It was decided to recommend payment OE a Grant of CIO
the Ardee Nursing Association for their Nurse's services at tho
Dispensary as from its opening 1st October, 1913, and to eon—
tinue the services for the current year at the same remunera-
tion.
It was decided to approve of the arrangements made for the
removal of a Shelter from Drogheda to Ballymakenny, by
Messrs Gogarty, Drogheda ; and from the Green, Ardee, to Mr
M 'Cutchecn's, Ardee, which he landly consented to store, by
arrangement with Thomas Mathews, Ardee.
Dr M 'Quillan was authorised to procure certain Medical Ap-
pliances and boiling Utensils for Dispensaries. Estimated cost,
Communication from the Secretary of Che •County Council re-
questing the Committee to arrange a conference with tho In—.
9
•surance Committee to consider the Form of Agreement to be
4»ntered into with both bodies.
It was decided to defer action until the Committee's definite
Scheme could be placed before the Insurance Committee.
Meeting held on Weclnesday, the 23rd day of September,
1914.
In the A Duffy, Esq, J P, M C C.
Other Members —B Hamill, J P, M C C; James Wynne,
P, M CC ; wm Woods, J P; M C C; Thomas Murphy,
M C C, and P O'Connell, Esquires.
Also Present —Dr M'Quillan, T M O.
Minutes confirmed.
The Sehome for the treatment of advanced cases of tubercu-
lcsis already submitted, was again 'under consideration. In
eonnection wi€h which there attended from the Dundalk Guar-
dians P Muekian, Michael Deane, and P R Finignn,
The latter having given a synopsis of a letter from tho
Cletk
Local Government Board on the subject, a long discussion en-
sued, when it was eventually dee:.ded to again defer considera-
tion of the Scheme.
It was also decided to defer consideration of the General
Scheme in the absence of the Drogheda Representatives.
It was dceided to recommend Mrs Mary Gallagher, Charles-
town, Ardee, a non-insured person. for 12 weeks' treatment at
Pea mount Sanatorium. Cost, Cl per week.
I wetter dated 17th ill.sf, from Mr O'Connell, Solicitor, relative
to the d€nnancl of Mr Woods, Rate Collector, for ?aytnent of
Rates clue on Carlingford Dispensary, stating that the CouneiV.
as occupiers of the premises, are lia ble for payment.
It was decided to recommend payment of the amount cluey.
viz, 32s (id.
Dr M 'Quillan was directed to procure Medical Appliances for,
Dispensaries. Estimated cost, 23s.
It, was decided to direct Dr M 'Quillan and the Clerk to av
tend the Special Meeting of the County Council on follow-
ing day, Thursday, 24th inst, to place before them the difficul-
ties experienced to procure a Dispensary in Drogheda, ancl ob-
tain the Council's directions on the matter.
Drogheda Sub-Committee Meeting held in the Courthouse,.
Drogheda, on Wednesday, the 30th day of September, 1914.
In the Chair —W T Skeffington, Esq, J P, M C C.
Other Members John Dolan, J P, M C C, ancl Pat,k.
Donegan, J P M C C.
Also present J Callaghan (Mayor), J B Connolly, Town•
Clerk; Dr J A M'Qui11an, 0, and the Clerk.
The question of a Site for a Dispensary available from George-
De bell Ball, E.sq, situate between John Street and Dominick's.
Bridge, at an annual rental of C2, was considered.
It was decided to adjourn the Meeling to five o'clock, p m, on
Monday, the 5th October, in crder that the Mayor might cone
sider the matter in tho meantime, Dr M 'Quillan to ascertain
from Mr Ball if he would lease the whole 910t for a number Of
years and on what terms.
79
At, the adjourned Meeting held in the Courthouse, Drogheda, ,
on Monday, the 5th October there were present John,
Dolan, J P, and Patrick Donegan, J P.
Also Present John Callaghan (Mayor), J B Con-
noily, Town Clerk ; DrJ A M'Qui11an, T M O, and the Clerk.
A quorum not being available no business was transacted.
Meeting of the General Committee held on Wednesday, the.
28th day of October, 1914, at Dundalk.
Present
In the Chair —C A Duffy, Esq, J P, M CC.
Other Members —Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, M C C, and P,
O'Connell, Esq.
Also Present—Dr J A M'Qui11an, T M O.
Minutes of previous Meeting confirmed.
Report of Drogheda Sub-Committee Meeting held on the
30th September submitted, and reference macle to subsequent
meetings •of the same Committee held on the 5th October, 16th
October, and 26th October, which proved abortive OMGng to the .
absence of a quorum.
The question of the Site for a Dispensary at Drogheda was
then considered, Dr M 'Quillan, intimating that the Drogheda
Representatives approved of acquiring the ,Site at John Street
from George De Bell Ball, Esq,
Tt was proposed by Mr Hamill ;
Seconded by Mr O'Connell, and unanimously resolved :
That subject to the approval of the Local Government Board,
wo acquire the whole plot of ground situate between John St.
80
Land Dominick's Bridge, fronl George De bell Ball, Esq, for a
period of 99 years, at an annual rental of ea. That we agree
to the conditions laid down by Mr 'Ball. That Che County
Council shall fence the plot on the road side, plant and main-
tain it; and that it shall not used for any commercial pur-
poses.
That Mr Turley, Laurence Street, Drogheda, Architect, bo
appointed to prepare plan, etc, of the building at the usual pro-
fessional fees.
The Scheme with the Union Authorities for the treatment
and isolation of advanced cases -of tuberculosis was again under
consideration.
It was proposed by Mr Hamill ;
Seconded by Mr O'Connell, and unanimously resolved :
To adjourn consideration of the question for six months, ow-
ing to the expenditure involved.
It was decided to again communicate with the Local Govern-
ment Board re the Dispensary at the Louth Infirmary.
Dr M 'Quillan was directed to procure Medical Appliances for
Dispensaries. Estimated cost, 21s.
The Clerk stated Chat since last meeting it was ascertained
that Carlingford Dispensary was exempt from rating, and he
again communicated with Mr O'Connell, Solicitor, on the mat-
ter, whose reply was submitted to the Meeting, stating that in
Law the I landlord was liable for payrnent, on the whole it,
was a matter for re-arrangernent of rent paid uncler the Agree-
ment, for if the Committee insist on the Landlord paying, he•
may notify termination of the tenancy,
It was proposed by Mr Hann ill ;
Seeonded by Mr O'Connell, and resolved :
To payment of amount clue, viz, 32K Cid.
Letter (lated '24th
inst, from Mr V o'Connell, Architect,
stating that, he will prepare the plan etc, of the proposed Dis-
81
pensary at the Louth Infirmary on the terms already indicated
by the Committee. —Noted.
Copy of lettel' from the Local Government Board, 52,300-14
approving of payment of Grant of CIO to the Ardee Nursing
Association. —Noted.
Letter 52 ,690-14, 10th October, from Local Government,
Board sanctioning payment of C40 to Mr V •O'Connell, Archi-
tect, fees for preparing plans, etc, of Dispensary at Castletown
Road. —Noted.
Letter from the Secretary County Council enclosing copy ot?
Letter 50,075-14, 6th October, from the Local Government.
Board, taking exception to the payment of the sum of 158.
8d for educative literature supplied for dispensaries by tho
It was decided to acknowledge receipt, and communicate.
with the L G B on the subject, drawing their attention to
their own suggestions as contained in Eheir Cir. Letter 411m.
1913, dated 17th January, 1913.
V. WARREN, Clerk.
30-10-'14.
DRAFT SCHEME FOR THE TREATMENT OF ADVANCED
CASES OF TUBEIOCULOSIS APPROVED r.Y THE
AUTHORITIES OF THE DUNDALK UNION.
1. The County Council shall be permitted to erect in the
Grounds of the Dundalk Union two chalets, one for male and
one for female patients, €0 accommodate in all 12 beds. A kit-
chen to be erected in conj unction with one •or other of the chal-
ets. Cost of erection and equipment to be defrayed by tixo
82
County Council out of the Treasury Grant available for the..
purpose.
2. A nominal rent to 'be paid for the ground provided.
3. Chalets and equipment to be the property of the County
Council, and shall controlled by the County Council, or such
Representative Body as they may appoint.
4. Council shall be permitted to connect sewerage with main
sewer.
5. That the County Council shall guarantee an annual con-
tribution of C21(j towards the estimated establishment charges
(as set out below), and 7s per week per patient under treat-
ment for maintenance.
ESTIMATED ESTABLISHMENT CHARGES.
83
Finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of Finance Committee at their Meeting
held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Monday,
26th October, 1914, at I o'clock p m.
Present
In the Chair—W A Doron, Esq, J P.
Other Members—C A Duffy, J P; Jas Wynne, J P; T Murphy,
T O'Rouike, J liaipenny, J P; and J F Murwhy, J P, Esquires.
ur Walsh, County Surveyor, and Mr Drumgoole, Assistant
Surveyor, were also present.
The Minutes of the povious Finance Committee Meeting were
taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted and on examination
Guardians appoint two Nurses at C4() per annum,
with 9s per week each Rations
Two Helpers, Salary C12 per annum with 5s 9d
per week Rations
nstimated Cost of Heating
126
54
36
C'21G
0
0
o
.1
0
0
o
•were ordered for payment,—
Conveyance of Prisoners
Sheep Dipping Account
Secretary's Office (including Monthly Salaries
Total,
COLLECTORS' ARREARS LIST.
818 5
10 0
22 6
13
8
9
8
1
The Collectors? Arrears Lists for the period ended 30th Septem-
ber, 1914, were examined by the Commiffee and payment of same
recommended to the County Council.
REPORT FROM ROAD BOARD DEPUTATION.
The following report from [Ime deputation sent by the Finance
'Committee to interview the Road Board in London on the subject
Of the Grant offet«l by the Road Board for the strengthening and
sulfacing Of the Dublin-Belfast Road, was read
ROAD BOARD GRANT.
REPORT OF DEPUTATION TO THE ROAD BOARD.
The Deputation appointed by the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held on Monday, the 12th October, 1914, to interview the
mad Board on the question Of the Grant for the Dublin-Belfast
road, proceeded to London on Monday evening. The Deputation
consisted of the Chairman of the County Council, tlle (hunty
Surveyor, and the Sceretary. The interview took place by ap-
pointrnent at the Road Board Offices, London, and was introduced
by Mr Nolan, M P for South Louth.
Tho Engineer to the Road Board, Mr Maybury and later Sir
George Gibb, the Chairman of the Road Board, discussed tlle
matter of the Grant with the Deputafion, and it was pointed out
that the amount offered by the Road Board did not lepresent the
pound for pound which harl been suggested as the basis of the
•Grant when the Road Board met the COuneil Representatives in
-Dundalk in November, 1913. Mr Maybury stated the Boa ld
would grant the. County of Louth the half of the amount ex-
pended on the work, but at present the Board were only able to
•offer the sum of C5,450. If. was then arranged that if work to
tho extent of EIO,900 would b? undertaken, the Road Board would
give the half of this amount, a granf of 5,450.
Your Daputation directed attention to the offer of a loan for the
purchase of the neecssary road making machinery, and the En-
.gineer stated the Board would be prepared to pay interest on this
loan of C4,C95 for five years at 3 per cent, the amount fo be bor-
rowed by the Council from outside sources.
A further request by the Deputation for the interest on the
amount of Z5,450 to be put by the C0uneil for their share Of
the work was assented to by the Engineer, and after discussion
Of the figures he agreed to give a grant of the amount of interest
85
.:at 3 per cent on necessary amount to be borrowed by
-the Council and repaid in 5 years.
The summing up Of the result of the interview is tha.t the
Board offer a grant of on a total expenditure of 810,900,
a grant of C368 fo pay interest on the machinery loan, and a
further grant of C436 fo pay interest on the loan to be raised by
the Council for the work.
We consider the offer highly satisfactory, and that it should be
accepted.
(Signed),
WILLIAM A. DORAN,
THOMAS WALSH,
CHARLES M'ALESTER.
23rd October, 1914.
A discussion took place on the Report, and the Committee ex-
pressed satisfaction that the Deputation had succeeded in arrang-
ing such favourable terms for 'the County, and on the motion of
ALr C A Duffy, seconded by Mr T Murphy, the Committee
unanimously dc eided to recommend the County Council to accept
the terms.
The question of the money to be borrowed by the County
Council for the purchase of road making machinery and for the
money to be put up by the County Council for their share of the
expenditure, was then diseussed, and the Seeretary was directed
to communicate with the County Treasurer (the Hibernian Bank)
and get a letter agreeing to advance the necessary money 011 the
terms for advances, namely, 3 per cent, as arranged when the
.aeeount of [he County Council was transferred €0 the Hibernian
Bank. The amount of this loan is as follows:—
For Machinery
For Work on Road in Rural Districts
Total,
C4,095
4,060
28,155
86
APPLICATION FROM DUNDALK UNION RE EXTERN
PATIENTS.
The following letter from the Clerk of the Dundalk Union was
read, and the Secretary was directed to send copy of same to the
secretary Of the Joint Committee, of Management of the Louth
'County Infirmary, and request their consideration of the appli-
cation :—
Dundalk Union,
16th October, 1914.
Dear Sir,
I am directed to forward you to be laid before the
County Council the following copy of a resolution which was
unanimously adopted by the Guardians Of this Union at their
Meeting on the 12th instant, viz :—
That having regard to the large and growing ex-
panditure of this Board in respect of the conveyance
and maintenance of patients in Extern Hospitals, we
req nest the Louth COunty Council to make such mr-
rangements as shall enable the (Louth County Infirmary
to receive ,and treat/ cases for ordinary operation, etc.,
from this Union, there.
'IXhat in our opinion the proposed arrangements
would materially convenience patints and their friends
and effect a substantial saving to the ratepayers.
Yours faithfully,
P. R. FINTGAN,
Clerk of the Union.
'Charles M 'Alester, Esq,
Secretary Louth County Council.
COULTER v. RICE AND CO. COUNCIL.
The' following letter was read and initialled by the Chairman
Francis Street, Dundhllk,
14th October, 1914.
Coulter v. Rice and Co. Council.
Dear Sir,
With reference €0 Civil Bill herein claiming C15 for loss
: and damage alleged to have been sustained by Plaintiff, by reason
of injuries to a wall and the foundation and the land and
mises of the Plaintiff af Dowdallshill, I beg to report that the
County Court Judge Qu.rter Sessions to-day dismissed the.
Civil Bill with costs.
T return herewith Proposal of the Road Contractor and SpecV
fication for tho work.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M'A1ester, Esq,
Secretary, Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
COUNTY COUNCIL PROSECUTIONS.
The following letter from the Solicitor was read and initialled
by the Chairman
Francis Street, Dundalk,
17th October, 1914.
County Council Prosecutions.
Dear Sir,—
Referring to my letters of 27th August last reporting on
resulf of hearing of siunmolises at Collon Petty Sessions on same
date, I now beg fo send herewith receipts of the Council's
Treasurers for moneys lodged to-day to credit of the Council,
being
1. Receipt for El, IOS fine and IOS costs, received from Clerk of
Petty Sessions mnd lodged in the matter Of the ease of "Sharp v.
of Food and Drugs Acts Summons.
2. Receipt for 5s in the ease of' the Council v. Peter Kearney—
Sheep Dipping Prosecution. The fine of 2s 6d being retained by
the Clerk for lodgment in pursuance of Section 75 (4) of the
Diseases of Animals Act, 1894.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
(harles M'AIester,
Secretary, Louth
Esq,
County Council, Dundalk.
88
PENTLAND v. LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Letter was read from Mr Tallan, Solicitor, Drogheda, dated 16th'
October, requesting payment of the amount of decree and costs, _
E7 as, for malicious injury claim in above case.
The Secretary was directed to reply that the amount could not
be paid till after the 31st March, 1915.
THOMPSON v. COUNTY COUNCIL.
was read from Messrs Hunter Moore and Boyle, Solicitors,
Newry, in above malicious injury claim, in which decree was ob-
tained, stating that unless payment of the amount of the decree
was received within a week they would be obliged to lodge same
for execution.
The Secretary was directed to send Cho letter to the Council's.
Solicitor €0 deal with same.
COMMITTAL TO INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chairman
Take notice that application will be made for the com-
mit€al of Teresa Grimes €0 St. Joseph's Industrial School, Dun-
dalk, on next Friday (23rd instant) af Dundalk Vetty Sessions.
(REV.) JAMES QUINN, C. C.,
Ballybarrack.
16th October, 1914.
SALE OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACTS.
Letters were read from the Department of Agriculture, dated
15th October and 20th Oefober, relative to one sample of jam and
throe samples of butter taken in Dundalk by an Officer Of
DC partruent for analysis. The letters stated that all the samp16S
89
had been submitted €0 the County Analyst and had been certified
pure by him. The letters were initialled by the Chairman.
INSURANCE OF CLERKS IN COUNTY OFFICE.
A letter was read from Mr Doyle, Inspector under the National
Health Insurance Aet relative to the exemption from Insurance
under the A ef of the Clerks in the County Council Office.
letter stated that under First Schedule, Part 11. , par. b of the
Act, the Insurance Commissioners would grant exemption to the
employees of a local or public authority where they were satisfied
that the terms of employment were such as to secure provision in
respect of sickness and disablement on the whole not less favour-
able than the corresponding benefits eonferred by Part I. Of the
Act.
On the motion of Mr Thomas Murphy,
Seconded by Mr Thomas O'Rourke,
It was unanimously recommended that the County Council
should give the guarantee necessary to secure exemption from.
Insurance of the two Assistants in the Secretary's Office.
NOTICE OF ERECTION OF TELEPHONE LINE.
The Surveyor submitted notice received from Post Office TelO—
graphs Department re erection of Telephone line to Ravensdalo
P. O. and Ballymascanlon House, and he was directed to see tho
Council's interest safeguarded in the matter.
COLLECTORS' GUARANTEE BONDS.
Letter was read from the London and Lancashire Fire Insur-
ance Company, Ltd., enclosing list of the Bonds guaranteeing
tho various Collect01%s under the Council, and stating that all
with the execvfion of four—which mature on 31st March—fall duo,
for renewal at various dates. The Company proposed to renew•
these as they came due, and in March next to issue new Bonds sco
90
that all would be due at the samo date. They desired to have
the approval of the Council to this course.
The Committee unanimously approved of this arrangement, as.
it enabled the renewals to be all perfected at th same time.
ARDEE ELECTRIC LIGHTING.
Letter was lead from the County Surveyor in i'erjning the Com-
mittee that the agreement with Mr M'Keever, the Contractor for
above, indemnifying [he County (%uneil against all actions, ae-
cident.s, etc., in eonneetion with the Sehenue was not yet eom-
pleted, as the accompanying map bad not been cheeked owing fto
Mr M'Keever's Engineer having failed to keep his appointment'.
A letter from Mr M 'Keever addressed to the Clutirman was also
read, requesting permission to appear before [he Committee,
which request was acceded to.
Mr M'Keever explained to the Committee that the cause of thc»
delay was Lowing to the fact that appointment made between
his Engineer, Mr Storey, and Mr Dromgoole, Assistant Surveyor,
had not taken place. Mr Dromgoole stated that he had gone•
specially to Ardee, but thiLt Mr Storey did not keep Che ap-
pointment. This was substantiated by the County Surveyor,
who stated that neither Mr M 'Keveer nor his Engineer had ear-
ried out the arrangements made for the cheeking of fhcy map. It:
wws eventually arranged that Mr M "Keever's Engineer would
attend at Ardee on Thursday, 29th insf, to meet the County Sur-
veyor and check the map. On the application of Ur M 'Keever,
the Committee recommended that any additional poles that niight
require to be erected under the Electric Lighting Scheme might
be done without the preparation of a separate agreement, but
that the County Solicitor should instert a Clause in the present
Agreement that any additional polos required could bo erected,
provided Mr M'Keever and his Conipany furnished a map showing
the position in which the additional poles would be erected, which
map would be furnished to the County Surveyor and his consent
obtained to the erection of the poles.
91
BOAT SLIP AT GILES' QUAY.
Tho Secretary brought under the notice of the Committee that
the Boat House and Slip at Giles' Quay were to be sold by public
auction on this day, Monday, the 26th October, and that some
members of the County Council considered that as the Slip was,
us€d in connection with Giles' Quay Harbour, and had been used
for a number of years for the landing of fish, that some, action
should be taken to notify the AuctionetT that, the Couneii (Iainjed
The Seercfary further informed
the Slip as County
the Committee thaf Mr O'Connell, fhe Council's Solicitor, was in
communication with the Board of Works to obtain title to the
Slip which had been claimed by MI' Mackay, who had obtained
possassion of the Boat House.
Mr Duffy considered that the right of the COuneiI to the Slip
should have been contested when this claim of Mr Mackay's to
the Slip had been set up by prosecuting those fishermen who had
landed fish at the Slip without paying the poundage fees, which.
had been the custom for thirty-five years.
The following resolution was
Proposed by Mr James Wynne,
Seconded by Mr Thomas Murphy:
"That we advise Mr O'Connell €0 appear at the sale of the.
Giles' Quay Boat House and Slip, and inform the Auctioneer that
the Louth County (fijuncil claim the Slip as County property, and
object to the sale of same."
For this resolution there voted —Messrs W A Doran, James .
Wynne, J F Murphy, T Murphy, J Halpenny, and T O'Rourke—6.
Against—Mr C A Duffy—I.
The resolution was declarcd carried, and WOI@I was sent to Mr
O'Connell accordingly.
Subsequently Mr O'Connell appeared before the Committee.
and informed them that he had warned the Auctioneer not to.
92
proceed with the sale, but notwithstanding his protest the sale
proceeded, and the Boat House and Slip were sold for 260.
After discussion, when Mr Duffy pointed out that something
should have been done to secure the Slip to the County Council,
having been under their control and that of the Grand Jury for
thirty-seven years, Mr CVCOnneII stated that he was in communi-
cation with the Board of Works and that they stated that they
could not clear up the title. Mr O'Connell a l,so read eounsel's
opinion which he had obtained, and in which hej held that
the Council had a good ease for claiming the Slip.
The Committee unanimously decided [hat Mr O'Connell should
serve notice on the purchaser that the (Avunty Council are claim-
ing the Slip and the right €0 collect fees, aud to take whateveru
action was necessary for securing the Council's property; and
report the matter fully to the next meeting of the County
Council.
focal Government (Irelanb) fict, 1898.
Coutb County Council.
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
OF 'I'llE
Proposal Committee
AT TIIEIR
Adjourned Quarterly Meeting,
held on 9th November, 1914,
AND
Finance Committee
AT T'IIL'IR
Meeting held on 9th November, 1914.
Proposal Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Committee at their
Adjourned Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council Chamber,
Court House, Dundalk, on Monday, 9th day of November, 1914,
at one o'clock, p m.
Present : —
in Che Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members O'Rourke, Patrick M 'Cee J P;
N T Murphy, Michael Meade, Esquires.
Minutes of the Proposal Committee Meeting 'held on October
12th, were taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The Com mittee were called for the purpose of considering
tenders for the undermentioned works in aeeordanee with acl-
vertisement issued by the Secretary, Viz
APPLICATIONS BY THE cotxTY SURVEYOR.
No. 11—To ereet shed on Carlingford Pier, as recommended by
so 12
For
County Council. Cost not €0 exceed C 125.
—To re-paper, pamt, etc, rooms in Court-keeper's resi-
denee, A I'dcé Cotili House. Cost not to exceed Lfl().
No. 11 no tenders were received: and it was arranged
2
place the work in the Irands of the County Surveyor.
but as one of these
For No. 12 two tenders were received,
Venders was not handed in uptil 10.15 a m on t',lis dhy (Monday)
the Committee decided not to open sanje. The other tender
was from Thomas O'Neill, Ardee, for the sum of C9 18s (jd, and
the Commitee unanimously decided to accept same.
Finance Committee.
Mint'.tee Gf Plü:eeédings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 9th day of November, 1914, at one o'clock, m.
Present :—
In the Chair—C A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Otha. Members —Al Meade. N T Muro:w, T O'Rourke, Patk
M•Gee, J P; J Wynne, J P; J F Murphy, J P, and Thcs Mur-
pity, E quires.
Minutes of the Finance Committee Meeting held on 26th
Oetober, were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted, and on exarnination
were ordered fc;r payment :—
C13 0 0
Works in eharge of County Surveyor
Secretary's Office (including baiance of remunera-
tion ancl poundage fees to Collectors for collec-
tion of poor rate to September 30th, 1913)
Total
132 17 0
17 0
kl'he Bank Books for the General and Subsidiary Accounts
were exatninecl and initialled.
The Corntnittee 1'(Totnmended that a Paying Order for
from the General to the Subsidiary Aeeonnt should be drawp.
The Seeretnr.v snbmitted County-ot-Large payments, whicl•.
4
were examined and recommended for payment by the County
Council.
The payments for Road Contractors to the Rural Districts ef
AITIee No. 1, Drogheda and Dundalk, were also examined
payment recommended.
RATE COLLECTORS' POUNDAGE.
The following letter from the Local Government Bcartl M•as
read and initialled by the Chairma•n
Local Government Board, Dublin,
26th October, 1911,
55987/14.
Louth County.
Sir,
I am directed by the Local Government Beard for
land to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of ehe 19th in•
slant, relative to the collection of the poor rate in Louti-
Cottnty, and I am to state that, in the eireumstanec.s, tl!e mard
will raise no objection to the paynent of flie balance of re-
numeration and poundage in respect of their collections for the
balf-year ended on the September, 1913, to those Colle &
tors who have eomp!etecl their collections cf the first moiety o
the current year's rate on the 30111 September, 1914, and to
Collector Cluskey Who closed his eollecdion on the 1st instant.
i am, Sir,
Your, obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Seeretary,
The secretary,
Louth County Council.
5
ROAD BOARD GRANT.
Tho following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man.
Dear S?r,
The Road Boald,
Ma nager Engineer's Office,
Queen -&nne's Caamb•ers, Broadwh.y,
Westminster,' London, S. W, ,
28th Octobcr, 1914.
Dublin-Belfast Road.
I bog €0' refer to our interview on the 21st instant, and to
say that if your Council will submit a scheme, estilnated to cost,
C the Board will be prepared, subject €0 the details of
the works proposed 'being approved by them, €0 make the fol-
lowing grants in respect thereof :
(1) representing 50 per cent of the estimaotl expendi-
ture.
(2) C436, rcpresenCing a grant equal to the interest cn a loan
of borrowed from outside sources with the
interest {it the rate of 3 per cent per annum,
and repayable by 5 equal annual instalments.
PURCHASE, OF PLANT.
The Board are further prepavccl to make a grant of C3Ci8. re-
presenting a sum cqual to the interesf on a loan of tbor-
rowed from outside sources and repayable, with interest at the
rate of g per cent per annum, by five equal annual instalments.
I enclose herewith draft statement of the proposed gran±
of C3tiS, which please return Io tllis otiice after verify:ng
particulars.
Yours' faithfully,
11. P. MAYBURY.
The County Surveyor,
L(Æth County Council,
Court House, Dundalk.
ROAD MAKING M.VC11iNERY LOAN.
Letters were read from the Manager Elihu •rnian 11k, I)un-
dalk, stating that Bank would be plea to advance the
Council cn loan the sunl of CS, 135.
IM'ing for
of Road Making Machinery, for work, af the
of 3 per cent (three per cent) per on the usual security
of the Rates.
The Secretary was dileeted to apply to the Local Government
1%ard for sanction of the loan of for the purchase of
machinery was approved by [he County Council.
RATES ON TUBERCULOSIS DISPENSARY AT
CARLINGFORD.
Lotter was read from Mr V Warren, Seerotary of the Tuber-
eulosis Committee of Management, wi€l reference to the pay-
lncnt of the ratcs on the above Dispensary, amounting €0 tho
sum of Cl 12s (id.
Tho arrangement w".len the letting was macle was that the
Council were to pay the rates, but since entering into oeeupa-
tion of the Dispensary the assessment for netting purpcsts had
been changed, and in view of the use of the preniiscs as for
Pitblic purposes the liability was changed from the occupier to
the landlord, who is a gsessed on the half annual •ront.
The pay-
trent or this was objccted •to by Mr M 'Kevitt, the landlord
the and the Tuberculosis Committee of
unanimously recommend that the County Council .s11('ll.Vl
pay on the as agreantent.
tho !
the county Council the rates, as the
Cmnmittee of Manage:nent.
COUNTY INFIRMARY MEETINGS.
Let Sir John G Barton, the Ari)ifiator,
stating day and hour of Meeting of the Joint
of Management had been
in Month at one lil. This day being Fair Day
in was a one for all
MOTOR ACT.
the Ihu•d, No. 170M,
1914, dated 27th October, was read, stating, for the
of council, that by the Expiring Laws Continuance Act, 191@,
the Motor car Act, 1903, was continut€l until the 31st
1915. 'l'he letter was initiall:d by the Chairman.
WINTER ASSIZES, 1914.
letter frolii the Under SeelT.fary, Dublin castle,
Eth Nove,nber, 1914, was read, stating that under Section 19
Winter ordo- in Council, the usual Certifi«tte for
nses wili only be issued to the 'Iheasurer who attend
Winter to pay for ancl
tho
Expenses, and such is Bank the Coe.
issutÅI in favour of such Bank.
to the Bank, Dundalk, the county
8
.ARDF,E RI,'ANCII LINE ANI) RAILWAY (NUARANTF,E.
Let ter was v: ad fro:n the Ac(onntaut, Great Northern Itailway,
T I vl:tnd, dated 3rd Noveniber, ( no-losing eopy of the Ardee Branch
-Aerzunf, ',vliieli showed a fieit for th. half-yar ended 30th J u Ile,
1914, of C415 17s Gd.
Letter was frcytii Sir John G Baron,
the ArLitrafor, en-
closing Certifi( ate that the fatal a mount required to lye' contri-
Illit'd i).y the rateable district in the Ba rony of Ardre to supply
the (I: fiewney was the of C400 for the six months to 30th
June, 1914.
ARDEE UNION AND ARDEE No. 1
AB.S'IVRA('I'S OF A(VOUNTS.
I.ettot— from thc I.oeal Governtnenf Board, dated 30ili (October,
1914, and numb. wspectively 57806 and 57810, wo•e read, en-
closing the Audited Accounts of the Aldre No. 1 Rural
Council and Ardee Union for the period cuded 31st March, 1914.
'The lett rs vare initiallcd by the Chairinan.
INSURANCE OF' CLERKS IN OFFICE.
The salnnitt:d a niinnfe froni f Ije Insurance Conl-
mission, J raand, dated 23rd C)etoba•, 1914, in if was now
stated t nat ption under Schedule 1, Parf 2 (B) is out of flie
question owing to difficulties about the Council's powers to sequre
the benefits to the employe:s•, this being the tnost lu•ent decision
of the It:sunanc€ Conunissiou on the question of exonption of
Under the ances the
c let ie:il emplo.v€<s of pulilie s.
Insurancr of the Clerks in the County Office must he carried out'
and the SecretaiY was directed accoldingly.
The
inan
SIR CIL\RI.ES CA REPORT.
followin•r
report was initialled
by the Chair-
City Labnt:atorv.
Chatllülil Row, Dublin.
6th 1914.
the County Louth, on subhiitted to for Analysis
ing the quarter ended 30th Septeniba•, 1914.
i.'iv€ art iris from the Food R 1 C,
follows
Drogheda, of
and two of lililk were analysed and were pure.
the of Drogheda Union one specimen of whiskey
analysed and was pure.
three of butter and one of jam analysed
by the of Agriculture
Instruction for Ireland, Street, Dublin,
were taken up in the County Louth and were pure.
Four specitnens of water analysed for {he Town
Dundalk, had the following compositions
One ill) perial gallon eontainc«l in grains.
Total solid Matter,
Including
Albuminoid Ammonia,
Saline Ammonia,
Nitric Acid,
Chlorine,
Colour,
All fit for u,st•.
No. 1.
11.200
0.013
Trace
1 290
0.011
0 00.33
Trace
1 290
Yellow
No. 3.
11.1B)0
ooe
Trace
290
Very
I,ight
Yellow
Surveyor,
11900
0.00",
0.002
Trace
1.190
Ligi t
Yellow
10
One of water analysed for C' MitcAJahan.
tor, hud [lie following composition
injperii\l containtßl in grain,s.
solici-
Total solid matter
I neluding :
Ajbmninoid A tiimoniiL
Nitric Acid
Chlorine
Colour
Not tnueli Leiter than sewag€;,
ss .505
1.120
0.034
Trae.
2.790
One specimen of feeding stuff was analysd for Mr C P
Oundalk.
In the 01iginal r:vorfs on wafer r Äcrrecl to, full
but in the fore-
( Ails, and microscopical, were given,
gt>ing only the more important points are given.
Total analyses—-16,
C. A. CAMERON.
MULLINGAR ANI) KELIS RAILWAY.
Mr Wort hington, thc promoter of the Mullingqvr n.ml Kelis
I.'tLiliVay, before the Committee to reque«t thac T.onth
County Council would pass a resolution in favour of the Bill pro-•
[Y used to oe subhiitttd to Pavlinmant to eonstruef Railway from
M tillinxar to Kells entitled the ' 'Mullingar and Kells Railway
'*ill, 1914." for compulsory purchase of land for flie consfrtlt•tion
and authorising
Railway Works by that Bill authoris:ql,
the Corn pany to insa•f a Clause in said ,BiIl enabling tilt, Counci
to give a guarante. if they so think fit, on a portion of tlL? Share
Capital of the said Mullingar and Ketls Railway.
Worthington subliiitted copy of the opinion of coun•el.
11 Brownt', K C, in which Counsel stated that the
11
approval of ' the Bill •by the County Council will not ' lilake such
Approving Authority liable vin any way wifh regard to Guar-
antee, and that no liability can be incurred by those Authorities
fit" to take the steps ncetsssary under the 10th
unless they
Clause of the Bill.
The Committee directed the cretary to submit the corres-
pondt nee to the County Council at flitir Meeting on T hursday,
12th inst.
ENCROACHMENT AT BLACKROCK.
LYONS v. WAIL.
Led ter was read from Mi' O'Connell, Solicitor fo {he Council,
stating
that in the above ease it would be net essary for Mr M C
Lyons, who is complainant, as being tho
then Acting County
Surveyor, must now enter into recognisances, with sureties, to
proceed •witli the case stated before the docunjent as signed will
be handed out to the Council •s Solicitor by the CI(Tk of Petty
Scssions, and also stating that Mr Lyons had informed him that
(Mr Lyons) should not be called upon to so enter info seeurify
to proceed further with the matter, and riquesting the Council •s
instructions in the circumstances.
After discussion, the Secretary was directed fo bring this letter
before the County Council at Thursday's Meeting, and in tho
meantime to enquire from Mr O'Connell how otherwise the ques-
tion of sureties should be adjusted.
WO'IVI'ONSTOWN AND FANE DRAINAGE Di.snucrrs.
Letter was rend from Mr O'Connell with refcunee €0 the abovo
ter, and giving coopy of letter written by him €0 the Secreta] y
Board of Works as instructed by the Council, and giving copy of
reply.
The Secretary was dii'€cfe€l to lay the whole
before the County Council at Thursday •s Meeting.
12
UPKEEP OF DROGHEDA COURTHOUSE.
the consideration of the Accounts for the supply of Gas and
W ator for Drogheda Courthouse, Mr N T Murphy raised the
Cttestion of the liability of the County. Council for these charges,
and also the question Of the repairs, painting, efe., for the buildJ
.in€v, and requested information os fo tho extent fo which thc
Courfhottse is used by the Corporation of Drogheda.
After discussion, the Seerofary was directed to peepare a stafe•
ment of the monies eon fribu,ted Ly the county at large for the
'Ittiilding and maintenwnce of the Courthouse since the passing of
the Local Government Act.
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings
OF THE
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
AT TIIEIR
Third Quarterly Meeting
Held on Thursday, 12th November, 1914.
1
Couth County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
third Quarterly Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court
House, Dundalk, on 'Illursday, 12th November, 1914, at one
•o'clock, p m.
Present : —
In the Chair A Doran, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Michael Meade, J H M'Ard1e, J P; Michael
M 'Ardle, John Morgan, J P Kearney, Wm Woods J P; Chas.
A Duffy, J P; T Murphy, Thomas O'Rourke, rnomas B.
McCourt, James Wynne, J P; Peter Woods, J P; Betmard
Hamill, J P; Patrick M'Gee, J P; N T Mun»hy, Patk. Done-
gan, J P; T V M'Qui11an, P Callan, J P; W T Skeffington,
J P; Peter B Moore, J P; John F Murbhy, J P; Jas M'Car-
thy, J P, Esquires.
Also present Thomas Walsh: County Surveyor ;
.J M C Lyons, Assistant Surveyor ; J Dromgoolé, Assistant Sur-
veyor; Daniel O'Connell, Solicitor to the Council; DC J A
M'Qui11an, T M O, and Mr V Clerk T C M.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
The following resolution was
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Lsq, J P ;
Seconded by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That •dhe minutes of Proceedings of the Louth
2
County Council, at their second Adjourned Quarterly Meeting;
held on the 20th August, 1914, and their Special Meeting ont
tho 24th September, 1914, and a copy of which has been sent
to each member of the Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE COMMITTEE MINUTES.
The following resolution was
Proposed by Peter B Moore, J P;
Seconded by Wm T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance•
Committee held on the undermentioned dates, a copy of which
has been sent to each member of the Council, be and are hero-.
by confirmed :—
Monday, the 31st day of August, 1914.
Monday, tTie 14th day of September, 1914.
Monday, the 28th day of September, 1914.
Monday, the 12th day of October, 1914.
Monday, the 26th day of October, 1914.
Monday, the 9th day of November, 1914.
CONFIRMATION OF EXECUTIVE COMMI'ITEE MINUTES'
The following resolution was
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by wm Woods, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That tho Minutes of Proceedings of tho Execu-
tive Committee held on the 21st day of September, 1914,
printed copy of which has •been sent to each member of the•
Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
3
CONFIRMATION OF PROPOSAL COMMITTEE MINUTES.
The following resolution was
Proposed •by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by rmomas O'Rourke, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal
Committee at their Meeting held on the 12th October, 1914
and adjourned to the 9th November, 1914, and a copy of which:
has been sent to each member of the Council, be and are,
hereby confirmed.
ARDEE PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was
Proposed by Pat)ick M'Gee, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Patrick Callan, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposal for Payments formulated by
the Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council at their third Quar.
terly Meeting, held on the 6th day of October, 1914, and seb
out on Form 22, furnished to County Council, be and are
hereby approved of. These payments amount to the sum of
7s 9d.
DROGHEDA PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was
Proposed by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P;
Seconded by N T Murphy, Esq. and
Resolved—That the Proposal for Payments formulated by
the Loutål Rural District, of Drogheda Union at their third
4
'Quarterly Meeting, held on the 20th day of October, 1914,
rand set out on Form 22, furnished to tho County Council, be
and are hereby approved of. These payments amount to the
-sum of CG64 4s 4d.
DUNDALK PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was
Proposed by Wm Woods, E.sq, J P ;
Seconded by Thomas B M 'Court, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Proposal for Payments formulated by
'the Dundalk Rural District Council at their third Quarterly
Meeting held on the 5th day of October, 1914, and set out on
Form 22, furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby
approved of. These payments amount to the sum of Cl,583 7s
COUNTY-AT-LARGE PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was
Proposed by James Wynne, Esq, J P;
Seconded by J p Kearney, Lsq, and
Resolved—That the Proposal for Payment' formulated by
the Proposal Committee at their Meeting held on the 12th
Octyober, 1914, and adjourned to the 9th November, 1914, and
set out on Form 22, furnished to the Ckyunty Council, and am-
ounting to he sum of C6,201 15s Ild, 'be and are hereby appro-
ved of by the Council.
5
DATES OIF QUARTERLY MEETLNCS.
The following resolution was
Proposed •by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Thomas M 'Court, Esq, and
Resolved—That the County Council h€»eby determine that
the following shall be the dates for the holding of the fourth
Quarterly Meetings of tihe Rural District Councils
Ardee—Tuesday, 5th January, 1915.
Drogheda—Tuesday, 12th January, 1915.
Dundalk-—Monday, 4th January, 1915; and
that the Proposal Committee meet on Monday, 4th January, ,
1915.
TRANSFERS TO BOARDS OF GUARDIANS AND
DISTRICT COUNCILS.
Treasurer's Authority for the following Instalments OE
Demands were duly signed
Ardee Board of Guardians
Drogheda Board of Guardians
Dundalk Board of Guardians
Ardee No. 1 R. D. Council
Drogheda (Louth) do.
Dundalk R. D. Council
Gross Total
Cl,024
1,268
'2,833
C5,125
ccj12
367
1,012
Cl,992
C7,118
7
1
10
19
10
10
10
10
9
8
9
5,
0,
o,
5.
COLLECTORS' ARREARS.
The Arrears Lists in respect of the period ended 30tih Sep-
tember, 1914, were examined and duly signed by the (Imir-
man.
DISTRESS COMMITTEE.
The formation of a Committee to deal with possible distress
arising out of the war, was referred to the next meeting of the
Finance Committee, and the Secretary was directed to prepare
a list of names for the Committee.
SHEEP DIPPING NOTICES.
Mr Patrick M •Gee referred to prosecutions under the Sheep
Dipping Order, and stated that he tj.lought it was unfair that
persons wt10 had dipped their sheep at the Council's tanks
•should be prosecuted for not serving the notice of having dip-
ped on the police. He thought it should be the duty of the
Dipping Superintendent to serve the necessary nctices.
The Secretary submitted copy of the Order. but after dis-
cussion, the following resolution was
Proposed by Patrick M 'Gee, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Thomas Murphy, Esq, and
Resolved—Tha€ it b? the duty of the Dipping Superinten-
dents nt the Council's tanks to notify the police when a sheep
owner dips his sheep at the Council's tanks.
7
ELECTION or VICECHAIRMAN.
The following resolution was
Proposed by Wm Woods, Lsq, J P;
Seconded by James Wynne, Esq, J P ;
'Supported by N T Murphy, Peter Woods P; W T Skeffing-
ton, J P; James M'Carthy, J P; Thos Murphy, Joseph H.
M' Ardle, J P ; W A Doran, J P' Esquires, and unanimously
Resolved—That we •hereby elect Mr Charles A Duffy, J P, as
Nice-Chairman of the Louth County Council for the balance of
the ensuing term.
CHAIRMAN'S RESIGNATION NOT ACCEPTED.
The Chairman, in an eloquent, speech, in which he outlined
-the reasons for his action, te!ndered his resignation as Chair-
man of the County Council. He informed the Council that,
the dictates of his conscience, and the call of his Leader, Mr
-John E Redmond, to stand by the British Empire, now that,
she had granted Home Rule to Ireland, had compelled him as a
matter of duty to offer his services as a private soldier €0 fight
against the grinding militarism which aimed at the domination
of all the nationalities of Eum•ope.
Mr M 'Carfhy moved that) the Chairman's resignation be not
•accepted, and stated fiat, he thought that the Chairman had
•acted logically according to his views, and that what was done
for the humblest member of the community on active service
should bo done for their Chairman, namely, to keep his posi-
fion open.
Mr Skeffington seconded the resolution, and stated that
8
they had all listened with pleasure to the Chairman's spirited'
address.
A number of the Councillors supported Mr M 'Cårthy's mo—
tion, and eventually
The Chairman withdrew his resignation, and thanked the•
Council for their kindly feelings towards him in the circum-
stances.
ROAD BOARD GRANT.
The next item on the agenda was the consideration of trne•
offer of grant from the Road Board, which was as follows :—
(I) Cö,4öO, representing 50 per cent of the estimated expendi-
Cure.
(2) C436, representing a grant equal to Che interest on a loan
of C4,850, borrowed from outkicle sources Mith tho
interest at the rate of 31 per cent per annum, and'
repayable by 5 equal annual instalments.
The Board are further prepared to make a grant of C3G8, re-
presenting a sum equal to the interest on a. loan of bor-
rowed from outside sou:rces and repayable, with interest at thes
rate of 3 per cent per annum, by five equal annual instal-
ments.
After discussion, in which Messns Moore, M 'Carthy, Duffy,.
Meade and N T Murphy took part, the following resolution
was unanimously passed :—
Proposed by Wm Woods, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
9
Resolved—That we hereby decide to accept the grant offered"
by the Road Board (C3(i8) in lieu of the interest on money to
be borrowed for the purchase of Road Making Machinery, and
we recommend to the vari ous District Councils, Rural and
Urban, the acceptance of the further grant dffered by the
Road Ecard for the strengt;'aening and surfacing or the Dub-
lin-Belfast Road, namely: on an expenditure of
CIO,900 ; and a granf, •of ±436 in lieu of interest on the amount
to be borrowed by the County Council for the work in the Ruw
ral Districts.
THANKS TO DEPUTATION.
The follmsing resolution was also passed :—
Proposed 'by N T MlllVhy,
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, E.gq, J P, and
Resolved—That the best thanks of the Council be tendered'
to the Chairman of the Council, the County Surveyor, and t.ihe
Secretary for the succecssfiul issue of their visit to the Road •
Board in London in connection with the Grant for the Dublin-
Belfast Road.
The Chairmqn, Surveyor, and Secretary returned suitable.
thanks.
REPORT OF TUBERCULOSIS COMMITTEE OF
MANAGEM%XT.
The report of the Tubeqrculosis Committee of Management,
as printed on pages 74 to 82 of the printed minutes, was next
under discussion.
10
Mr Thomas Murphy moved the adoption of the Report, and
-this was seconded 'by Mr T V M'Quillan.
Mr Peter B Moore moved that the Report of the Tubercu-
losis Committee of Management be referred 'back to them, and
to the Drogheda Sub-Committee for the re-consideration of the
question of the site for the Drogheda Tuberculosis Dispensary.
Mr James M 'Carthy seconded the amendment.
Considerable• discussion took place on this matter, Messrs
Moore and M 'Carthy objecting to tho site selected for the Dis-
pensary, as it was alleged neither central nor sanitary, being
reclaimed slob-land. Mr T V M 'Quillan and the Chairman
•contested this view, and held that the site was more central
than any that could be procured, and was most suitable.
Dr M 'Quillan, T M O, in reply to the Chairman, stated tho
'Site was very suitable, and t\nat, the Local Government Board
would not sanction the site if they considered it undesir-
able.
Tho amendment was Ehen put to tho meeting with Che fol-
lowing result:—
For the Amendment—Messrs M 'Carthy, M 'Gee, Moore and
Peter Woods—4.
Against, the Amendment—Messrs Doran, Hamill, Kearney,
M 'Quillan, J F Murphy, N T Murphy, T Murphy, Skeffington,
Wm Woods and James Wynne—IO.
The following did not vote—Messrs Callan, Donegan, Ditiffy,
Michael M 'Ardle, J H M' Ardle, M 'Court, Meade and Morgan.
The Chairman declared the amendment lost, and the original
11
resolution, that the Report be adopted, was then put with the
following result :—
For the adoption of the Doran: Hamill,
Kearney, M 'Quillan, J F Murphy, N T Murphy, T Murphy,
Skeffington, Wm Woods and James
Against the Resolution—Messrs M 'Carthy, Mcore, and Peter
Woods—3.
The following Councillors did not vote—Messrs Callan, Do-
negan, Duffy, M M'Ardle, J 11 M'Ard1e, M'Court, M'Gee,
. Meado and Morgan.
The Chairman then declared the resolution carried, and the
Report was formally adopted.
NEW COUNTY OFFICES.
The Report of the New County Cilices Committee, as printed
-at pages 70 to 73 of the printed minutes, was the next item on
the agenda.
The following resolution was
Proposed by Chairman (W A Doran, Esq, J P ;)
Seeonded bs Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby adopt report of the, Sew County
Offces Committee, as set out on pages 70 to 73 of the printed
minutes, and that we proceed with the erection of new offecs
for the County Council on the site of the Old Jail Premises, at
za cost not to exceed ; and that we decide to offer prizes
for plans for tihe new Building, namely, for the best plan,
'Aind C25 for second best plan ; and that Professor W. A. Scott,
12
of the National University, •be appointed Assessor, and that
the County Surveyor confer with him on the various details
as to accommodation, etc.
The following amendment was
Proposed by wm T Skefhngtcn, J P;
Seconded by T V M'Qui11an, Esq,
the Report recommending the erection of
That
New Offiecs be deleted, and that, the County Surveyor be asked
to inspect the Court House, and report whether such altera-
tions and additions could be made as to meet the requirements
of the •County Council.
The Chairman put Che Amendment with the following re-
sult :—
For the Amendment—Messrs Callan, Donegan, J H M 'Ardle.
M'Carthy, M'Gee, M'Qtli11an, N '1' Moore, Skeffing-
ton, and Peter
Against the Amendment—The Chairman, Messrs Duffy,
Hamill, Michael M'Ard1e, Kcuu•ney, Meade, J F Murphy, T.
Murphy, Morgan, Wm Woods, and James. Wynne—ll.
The Chairman declared tho amendment lost, and the ori—
ginal resolution, to adopt the Report of the Committee,
put as a substantive motion, and carried without a division.
ADOPTION OF STANDING ORDERS AS REVISED BY
STANDING ORDERS COMMI'ITEE.
The following resolution was auopted :—
Proposed by N T Murphy, Fmsq;
Seconded by Midhael Meade, E.sq, and
13
Resolved—That we hereby adopt the Standing Orders, as re-
Vised by the Standing Orders Committee, a printed copy of
Which has been sent to each mernber of the Council ; and we
direct our Secreta.ry to have the necessary number of copies
printed, and that lhe send a copy of tho Standing Orders, as
now adopted, to each mem'ber of the County Council.
MR MURPHY'S NOTICE OF MOTION.
The Notice Of Motion standing in the name of Mr Thomas
Murphy, with reference to the neglected condition of the Grave-
yards and Cemeteries throughout the County, was ruled out of
Ajrder by the (liairman, as it was a matter for the Rural District
Councils to deal with.
COMPENSATION FOR DESTRUCTION OF FRUIT TREES.
The consideration of the correspondence from the Department
•of Agriculture with reference to compensation for fruit trees de-
•stroyed under the Destructive Insects and Pests Acts, 1897
-and 1907, next under discussion, and the following resolution
was unanimously adopted
Proposed by Thomas Murphy, Esq,
Seconded by N T Murphy, Esq, and
we request the Department of Agriculture and
*Iechnical Instruction for Ireland to make an order granting
compensation to owners of fruit trees destroyed in the County
Louth under the Destructive Insects and Pests Acts, 1897 and
1907."
14
MR. J. J. FLYNN'S DEPARTURE FROM DUNDALK.
The following resolution was unanimously adopted :—
Proposed by Bernard Tlamill, Esq, J P,
Seconded by Wm T Skeffington, Esq, J P; and
we learn with regmt of the departure fronv
Dundalk of Mr J J Flynn, Manager, Hibernian Bank, Dundalk,.
who has acted as Treasurer of the Louth County Council for so,
long a time. We desire to place on record our appreeiation of the
courtesy and business capacity which Mr Flynn has always dis-
played in his connection with the affairs of the County Council,
and we wish him long years of happiness to enjoy his well-
earned rest."
Mr J P Kearney desired to be associated specially with the
foregoing resolution.
FANE AND WOTTONSTOWN DRAINAGE DISTRICTS.
The following letters with reference to the above matter were'
read, and the Secretary was directed to have them inserted on the
Minutes and to place the consideration of the whole matter before.
the Adjourned Quarterly Meeting on 26th November:—
Francis Street, Dundalk,
26th August, 1914.
Re Wottonstown and Fane Drainage Districts.
Dear Sir,—
Adverting to previous correspondence, I am instructed
by the Louth County Council to inquire from your Board to what
extent they may rely on your Board dealing with the matters set
out héreunder before finally coming to a decision as to taking
over the business of åbove-mentioned districts
The re-assessment of the respective districts in view of the-
change of ownership under the Land Purchase Acts.
15
The adjusting of contentious questions that have arisen byr
reason of the failure Of the Trustees to carry out their trust.
Such as, the erection of two weirs by Major Fortescue, the ob-
struction by Murdock at Commons and Craig at Walterstown,.
and similar questions of right claimed by tenant purchasers to
have been acquired by prescription.
Generally, any information by your Board will bé welcomed on
the subject of how far the Council will be protected in the event;
of deciding to take over the works, that they may be in posi-
tion to measure the extent of their prospective liabilities.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL
The Secretary,
Office of Vuhlic Works, Dublin.
Office of Public Works, Dublin,
9th September, 1914.
12479/14.
Sirs—
I am directed by the Commissioners of Public Works to
refer to your letter of 26th ultimo, inquiring what would be tho,
position of the County Council if they took over the business of
the Wottonstown and Fane Drainage Districts under the pro-
visions of Section 20 of the Local Government (Ireland) Acts
1898, and I am to forward herewith copies Of the Awards made
by the Board on completion of the Works of the District which
will afford you information as to the cost and nature of the
works, the extent of the District, and the lands benefitted by tho,
Drainage. Speaking generally, the business Of the Trustees
consists in seeing that the Drainage works are properly main-
tained, and in levying annually on the lands improved by the
operation of the works a sum sufficient for the maintenance
works and other expenses incident thereto. The duties of the-
Trustees are more particularly set forth in Section CXXT. of the
Act, 5 and 6 Vic., Cap. 89. Copy of Section enclosed. Tho
16
County Council of Kildare have taken over the business of eight
Drainage Districts under the provisions of Section 20 of the Local
Government (Ireland) Act, 1898, and tne Secretary or the County
Surveyor would probably on inquiry furnish you with details of
the working of the business of these Districts by the County
Council.
As regards the two points specially mentioned in your letter of
the 26th ultimo, namely, the assessment of new proprietors and
the settlement of outstanding contentious questions, there is no
difficulty in regard to the former. All that is necessary for the
person acting as Superintendent or Secretary to do is to forward
a map showing the boundaries of the new proprietors' holdings,
with Schedule of the names of the new proprietors to the
Board, when a. Deed apportioning the liability for the charge for
maintenance over the lands of the new proprietors will be
execu ted.
As regards the question of the removal of obstructions to the
flow of the water, the Board are aware of one recent ease in
which the Trustees after legal action succeeded in compelling the
removal of weirs which had been illegally placed in the channels
causing an obstruction to the flow of the water in the District.
If the County Council take over the duties of the Trustees in the
Wottonsfovvn and Fane Districts, and if in either of these Dis-
tricts weirs have been illegally placed obstructing the flow of the
wafer, if. will be the duty of the County Coeneil to take what-
ever steps they may be advised €0 be necessary for the removal
of theso obstructions and to charge the cost of any such pro-
ceedings against the amount collected as maintenance rate
from the proprietoxs of lands within the District.
The Board have no information in respect to the v obstructions
mentioned by you, and they are, therefore, unable to offer any
advice in the matter.
1 am €0 add that any further information you may require the
Board will be happy to give you.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
H. WILLIAMS,
Secretary.
17
LYONS v. WALL.
The following letter was lead with refercnee to tho ease stated
in above matter in connection wit 11 encroaelnnent at 131aek-
rock, and the Sterefary was directed to place the (Tjnsideration
of same on the agenda. for the Adjourmtl ()uarterly Ale?ting
Francis Street, Dundalk,
7th November, 1914.
Lyons v. wall.
Dear Sir,
With referenee fo Pdåt.y Summons hew in for breach
Suction 9 of Summary Jurisdiction Aet in creetion of part of a
within 30 feet flom the cantre of the road, T beg to ro-
port that the Justices who adjudicated have now stated a ease
tilt' (It eision cf the King's 13tmc•h.
Mr Lyons, who is Conj-
Flainant as being the then acting County Surveyor, must: now
enter into Recognisa•vnce with Sureties to proceed with the Case
Stat:d before (loenmenf as signed will be handed out to me by the
Clexk of Petty Sessions, which is following the usual proctdure.
Lyons has informed me that he feels he should not be
called upon to so enter into security to proce:tcl further with the
matter, aud I would Ee gl:icl to have the Council's instructions
in the circumstances.
The matter of appealing from the (I@ision of the maiorify of
the Magistrates was before several Meetings of the ('Ouncil, •and
it was finally left with me to and have the ruling of the
King's Benell on the decision which is erloneous in point of law,
and for the purpose of vindicating the Council's authority should
similar eases occur in the future.
The case should have conie before the VI igh Court last term,
but delay was occasioned by the •faec that the Solicitor on the
other side was ill for three months and was not in a position to
go into the ,question of agreeing on draft ease submitted by me
18
to him, and consequently the matfcr was obliged to reniain over
for his return to business.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M'A1ester, Lsq,
S+cretary T nuth Co. Council, Dundalk.
AND KEI,T.S RAILWAY.
Letter was read from Mr Robert Wm thing€on, Dublin, the- pro-
mofer of flie Mullingar and Kells Railway, requesting the County
Council to pass a. resolution approving of fhe Bill for the eon-
struction of the above Railway. and for flie compulsory purchase
of land for thc: Railway and Works by that Bill authorised, and
authorising the Company to instit a Clmuse in the said Bill en-
abling the County Council to give a guarantee if they so think
fit on a portion of the Share Capital of the said Mullingar antl
Kelis Railway.
Copy of the opinion Of J 11 Balfour-Browne, K C, was also
read on a ease submitted to hiltl as to the liability incurred by
County Councils approving of the insertion in the Bill of a per-
missive Clause giving them power fo guarantee if they so
thought fit.
The Counsa's opinion was as follows
As I read the Bill the mere of the Bill by
No.
County Councils and Corporation will not make such approving
atlfhorities liable in any way with to the guarantee.
No liability can b:• incurred by those authorities unless [liey ' 'see
fit" to take the steps neeessary under the 10th of the Bill.
All that flie Bill does is to clothe them with the powers to give
the guarant€e, if they detennine to do so.
(S igncd),
J. 11. BALFOUR-BROWNE,
19
The following JOC solution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Miehael Meade, ESC/ ,
Seconded by N T Murphy, Esq, and
the Bill proposed to b? submitted to Parlia-
nient (o construct a Railway from Mullingar to Kells, entitled
'The Mullingar and Kells Railway Bill, 1915,'
for compulsory
purchase of land for the construction of the Railway and Works
by that Bill Authorised, be and flie saine is hereby approved by
us, and we authorise the Company to instr€ a Clause in said
Bill enabling this Council to give a guarantee, if they so think
fit, on a portion of the Share capital of the said Mullingar anci
The following letters wore ad and initialled by the Chair-
lilan
Private.
Dear Sir,
A ughavanagh, Aughrim,
co. Wicklow,
28th Stvtember, 1914.
I am directed by *110 Redinond to acknowledge reevipt
of your letter ot the 25th inst, with copy of resolution passed by
the Louth County Council, the contents of which he has duly
notal and which he js pleastcl to receive.
Yours very truly,
T. J. TIANNA.
Charles M'A1es€er, Esq.
Courthouse, Dundalk.
Trish County Councils' Geneltll Council,
Dear Sir.—
Cavendish Tlouse,
Rutland Square East, Dublin,
oetober, 1914.
I beg to inform you that the Annual Meeting of the
Irish County COuneils' GI meral (%uneil Hill be held on Friday,
11th December, 1914
20
Notice of any qtustions which your Council may desilV fo have
discussed at the Mocting should rtacli me not later than Thurs-
day, 26th Nov. mber, in order that they may be, included On the
A •rcnda.
Yours faithfully,
A. KEOGH NOLAN,
Secretary.
With referenc this letter, the Secretary was direefed fo have
if inserted on the Minu€s, and any Councillor wishing to have
any matter brought forward should notify Secretary or Mr
James M 'Cårthy.
COUNTS COUNCIL, SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME.
T,etfer was r: ul from Secl?tary, Railway Clerks' Association,
requesting an alti ration in the ferm of residence in the County
for candidates for the Scholal ships granted by the Co. Council,
and it was clvcidcd to refer the letter to the Scholarship Cont-
Jnittezv for tluir consideration.
"OIREACHTAS" COMMITTEE.
DELEGATES TO
Tile following letter was read
Dundalk,
November 9th, 1914.
A Chairde,
The Governing Body of the Gaelic l,engue having (Iceidcd that
their All-Ireland Convention and Festival flor 1915 should Ije
held at Dundalk, we have beten directed the Executive Com-
mitfee of the Oireachtas to invite your Council to appoint two
Delegates to attend Mf+ting of publie ltprcgentatives and
others, to held in the Town 11 all, Dundalk, on Thursday, 26th
inst, at 5 0'clock, in connection with the matter.
21
A reprtscnfative of flye Gaelic League from Dublin will be
present at the Meeting,
the object of wliiell is the establishment
of a County Commiftety to supervise tho organisation Of the
Festival, as has been done in other centres in which the Festival
has been held.
le meas,
(REV) J. QUINN, C.C.,
J. MARTIN, Hon.
On the rnotion of M. Meade, Esq,
Seconded B. Vlamill, Esq, J.P.,
W T Skeffington, J P, and Thomas
pointed to rcpresent the Co. Council.
CO-OPTION OF MEMBER OF ARDEE DISTRICT SCHOOL
ATTENDANCE COMMITTEE.
The ik)llowing letter was read
Ardee District School Committee.
Dun leer,
10th November, 1914.
Dear Sir,
There is a vacancy on above Commi€fee eonseqnen€ on
the disqualification of Mr J C Kieran through non-attendance.
The Committee suggosf the name Of Mr T P C)'CårroII, M.B.,
Rose
C.
Villa, Dunleer, as successor.
Yours faithfully,
T. P. IIAIOION.
M' Alesier, Esq,
Secretary Louth County Council.
On the motion of B Hamill, Esq, J P,
Seconded by T Murphy, Esq,
00
Mr T' P B, was to fill the vacancy.
The following port was read, and on the motion Of Wm Woods,
Esq, J P, seconded by T Murphy, Esq, was adopted
REPORT ON TAAFFE'S CASTLE, CARLINGFORD.
We, the members of the Sub-Committee appointed by the co.
Council to report the conditions on which Taaffeps Castle, Car-
lingford, could acquired by the County Cbuneil, bag fo sulnni€
to the Council that while it would be Inost desirable for the
COuneiI to undertake the contract of €110 entire building, we are
Of opinion an earnest effort ought to be made to obtain the por-
tiou of this Castle at present in the possession of the V esci
family. This consists of the. tower of the castle, and it is of
special historic interest.
We are strongly of opinion that this amount of purchase to Ije
paid to the local owners of the other portion of the eastle, even
in case were willing to sell, would prevent any further' ae-
fion on the part of the Council.
As the castle has both archaeological and historic interests for
the people of Louth, and as De Vesei made an offer to flie
County Council a few years ago, we hope the Council will re-open
m•gotiation.s with liis representative,s, with a view to acquire the
guardianship of a most intercsting relic of the past.
QUIN, V.P.,
J. P. KEARNEY,
W. WOODS.
Carlingf01d,
Novemba•, 1914.
SOLICITOR'S COSTS.
T wetter was read from Mr O'Connell enclosing bill of costs
atuounting to the sum of E131 lbs 5d for the half year ended 30th
September, 1914, and
on the motion B Hamill, Esq, J P
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq,
23
It was decided to appoint Mr L Macardle, Solicitor, Dundalk,
to rc present the Council at the taxation of bill, and the re-
quisitian fo tax was duly signed; and the Secretary was- author-
ised io affix the Seal of the Council to sanje.
AUDIT OF ACCOUNTS.
The Secretary read official notice from R J Newell, Esq, Local
Govcxnment Auditor, notifying that the Audit of the Council's
Accounts for the period ended 31st March, 1914, would be opæned
in the COurthou.se, Dundalk, on the 11th day of November, at 10
o•eloek, and for the period endul 30th September,
1914, at 10
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898.
Couth County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings
OF
THE FINANCE COMMITTEE
AT THEIR MEETING
Held on Monday, 23rd November, 1914.
1
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Prceee€lings of the Finance Committee at their
Cll Monday, 23rd day of Novem brr, 1914, at' 1 0'clock,
Present :
In Chair Woods, Esq, J P, and subsequently
A Duffy, Esq, J P.
other Woods, J P; Meade, John F.
J P; T Murphy, P M •Gee, J P; and T
. squ ires.
Messrs Thomas Walsh, Stn•veyor, and 1) ne)l,
Solicitor, were also in attendance.
Minntes of the Proeeedings of Financ•e Committee fit MITI-
ing held on 9th brr, Ivere taken as Juul , ancl signed by
the Chairman.
The f 01 lowing accounts were sulnnit ted, and on exa 111 ina-
fion were crderel for paynwnt
Works in haucls of County Survevor
37 IS
Sheep Dipping Aeeonnts (Wages, Rents, and Dip
supplied to Council's Tanks
148 13
Satiletar.v's (inelucliqg monthly Salaries,
Refunds of Arrears to Rate Collectors, and Re-
funds of half P reniiltrns Cuara,ntee Bonds
to graranteed officers of the Council)
Total
31S 7
19
1
1
2
.RATE COLLECTORS' ARREARS LIST.
The following letter from the Local Government Board
was
read, and initialled by the Chairman :
Local Government Board,
Dublin,
19th November,
so. 6'2,548: 1914,
Louth County.
Sir,
1914.
Witli refe1T•necy €0 the lists of cf rate in the
County of Louth for the period ended the 30th of SepternL,cr,
1911, recently forwarded by you to Glis Department, I ani
directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland to re-
turn the lists herewith, and to state that the Rulings of the
Iboarcl are duly stamped thereon.
1 am, at the same time, to point out that these Rulings have
'heen given on the assumption that the information contained
Jin the several lists is in all respects accurate, and must not,
therefore, be regarded as interfering with the jurisdieticn of
the Auditor in case for any eause he should at audit find it ne-
eessa;ry to deal otherwise with any item or items.
The Board desire me to draw your atbentiotl to their letter
of the 27th Novem ber, 1913, No. 61,938: 1913, ns regards
items in rcspeet of poverty occurring in the lists for ille first
half of Clie year.
As regards t"ne supplemental lists subnßttexl Ly Collector
P. S. Donegan, J am €0 point out that the J}card will not
3
in future be prepared to take _into eonsideration supplemental
lists of arrears except under very exceptional circumstances.
I am Sir,
Your Obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN.
Assistant Secretary.
The Secretary
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
COST OF SITE FOR KNOCKBRIDGE DIPPING TANK.
Letter was read from Miss M Byrne, Newtown, Knock-
bridge, landlady of the of the above tank, requesting an iu-
crease of LL'2 for the present season, owing to extra dipping.
As Byrne was a,lready .getting for the rent, which. was
in excess of the rent of other tank sites, and as the yeriod for
which the field was used was the same as in former years, the
Committee unanimously refused to increase the rent.
GYIÆS' QUAY BOAT SLIP.
'Pne following report from the Council's Solicitor in above
matter was read •
REPORT 01" COUNCIL'S SOLICITOR,
Witih Reference to Boat Slip at Gyles' Quay.
So far as can be ascertained after inquiry tho I lifeboat
House at, Gylecs' Quay was erected/ prior to the year 1877, en-
tirely at the expense of the Royal National Lifeboat Institu-
tion, on portion of tho Coastguard Station site, which was Ad-
miralty property.
4
The Boat Slip was built at the joint expense of the Crown
and the Lifeboat Institution in 1877, for use in the launch •of
the lifeboat. The amount contril»uiecl by the Crown was idl-
chided in Che Estimates tho Beard of Works for the year
1877-1878, 'which estimates were prepauul in accordance with
the v,rovi *ions of 1 and 2 Wm. J V. , C. 33, and the amending
Sta tutes.
'l'he Pier and Harbour IVorks, viz, a Pier consisting of a
what O', a storm parapet and sloping escarpment, etc, with ex-
cava of the Harbour, were executccl by the Board of I'VorIcs
u•nder the Sea Fisaeries Act, and transferred to the, Grand Jury
in 1879. The Bom•cl point out that the boat slip in question
was not included in the tramvqfe•r. They stated Chat, if the Coun-
eil it to be transferred Co them they, for their part,
be glad to facilitate the Council in the matter, and
tirat the ownership of the l,if€bcaC House was a matter qu:ite
distinct flom that of the V:oat Slip. When notified that the
C.juneil to have the suggested' transfer effected, they
repliul that having macle further inquiries regarding the ow-
nership of the site of tihe slip, they found they had no titlo
thereto, and were, therefore, nnable €0 interfere furtihcr
in the matter.
The Harbour Constable states that from the time of his ap-
poin€mcnt by the Grand Jury, about the year 1881, he collected
tho poundage on the fish brought up if boats the Boat Slip,
antl has! continued to do so to Che p.reseu€ date.
It wou:ld appear that the Gastguard Station was closed and
surrendered hy the Admiralty to the landlord in 1905, and as
the site inelnclecl €110 Lifebta,t House, it is uncltw;tood arrange-
menis were made with the landlord (St. Clair K. M. Stobart)
by the Royal -National Lifeboat Institution for the future oc-
5
enpaiicn by thom of tile Lifeboat Tleusc. The was
withdrawn a few ycars later, and it, is assy.mnc(l the landlord
tcok over possession of the Lifeboat House.
By Assignment of ötll May, 1913, the Isaacllcrd purpca•€ecl €0
assign che WITH SLIP ATTACHED
TO to Jchn Mackay, Solieifar. Mcxtgage was executed ancl
dated the 15th August, 1914, by said .Jchn in fa-
vaut• of tho Bank of Ireland, cf property including tlle said
l,ifeboat House and Slip. The Mcrtga gee:s the uprenliscs
np for sale by public auction •cn t'he '26th 1914. T Imcy
•were advertised as ' 'a large and substa»tially Intilf sto•re,
n.emsuring 21 feet 'by 48 feet, erected/ 'luv Admiralty Ilcard,
awl formerly usccl as the Lifebo:m€ Hc,use, together with the
A1 r Sa m uel
Slip attached, held in fee-simple.
was the highest bidder at ancl was the pur-
ell,nser. Cn behalf of the T notice served •on
prior to the sale, ancl pointing out that the Co;nrcil claimed
At the aucticn T appcarctl and en
ownership of Che Slip.
formal protest Co the proposed sale of Che Slip.
It is clear there is not any 'title to tf.le Slip by Granf, ancl
the cnly question is whether the cxerei.s,e by the Grand Jury
aml County Council of control over the Slip has created in the
Council a title by Ulvseript;.on. Counsel have Che maacr un-
(lowr ecusideration at the present tnomcnt. J have in at-
tendanee at the Ecard of Wcrks, and have several inter-
views with both Senior and Junior Ccunsel on the subject.
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
12th November, 1914.
A long ensuctl on Ille matter in which M T
Murphy, P Wcccls, M Aleacle and the Chairman •
took part.
c nga in scarehing the reccrdts with regnrcl to the transfer
from tho of Wcvks to the •Grandl Jury of the
eonsulting with nsel cürtain Statutes relai-
ing to the transfer of ptii;lie property and eotmi.y property, a,nd
suggcstul that, the matter be •adjourned until the
searell was completed.
The Comtnittce unanimcesly adopted this view, and
tccl the to further report to a future Incefing of the
I"iltanen Ctnnnlituce.
PURCHASE OF O-ME.VTII PARK.
rcatl from Mr O'Connell, "22rcI Novem hor,
stating that he rceeiv«l notice from the Sclieitor having
cavringe of sale, that would apoly to t.he Cauri on '26th No-
1914, that the Reycrt of the Receiver lodged in this
v€qnber,
tnattt':•, and dated 2nd Novem 1914, with regard to the
p: oposal fcr purchase of Omeatll Pa,rk, received from Mcss:s
Bentley, avd also the propcsol for like, from the
Louth •County Council dated 26th August, 1914, be consi-
dc•recl.
Tile Committee then considered that as this offer
Mess:s might possibly be in execss of the offer of
wade on behalf of the County Council, it was urgent
that some steps should be taken to give tho Caunty Council an
of re-considering their offer.
The minnto of tho County Council at their Meeting held on
the 20th August, in reference to this matter, was read 'by the
Seereü:ry, and set out that a sum of was to offered
€hrough the Land Judge's Court for the purchase of ()mea€h
7
Park, the I.,a nd Purchase Act; the amendment empower-
ing t}.e Solicitor in his discretion €0 increase the, offer to
being (Ie by 13 voters Lo 7.
discussica flie Committee deeicled, on motion of
A i icr
Mr Patrick M •Gee, seeundecl by Mr J F Murphy, that tho Soli-
ei bcr for the County Council instructrcl to appear before tho
In nd Judges' Court when the offers for purchase were to 'In
eonsi(lered, mnd in the event of Bentley's offer being i"
excess oi that of the County Council: to apply for an adjourn-
lilent to enable the Ccnvnty Council to re-eonsider their offer.
TJUTIES ON VALVES.
was tvacl from Mr (VConne!l on the subject of provisional,
v:iluation of the County Cotlithouse at Dundalk oiving
opinion of couns:l that although Section 35 of the Finance
au from the,
gives for land held by rating
four new Duties, still the calculation or valuafon be made,
and the incremt value Illust l)? arrived at, and that lite ('On-
illissione:s will malw an entry that the incremlmt value (Inty
e:ne€l to 1k' paid, but no paymenf need he made by the County
Council.
The I(ftter was initiallul by [he Chairman.
DR. PROVISIONAL APPROVAL.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man
No. 14,710: 1913.
I.outh County.
T.oeal Government Board, Dublin,
18th November, 1914.
Sir,
J arn direct(d by Local Government Board for Ireland
8
to advert fo th(ir letter of the 14th May last, and fo infotati
that they have extended, for a further period •of six months, their
provisional approval of the appointment of Dr. J. A. M'Quillan
as Mcclieal Superintendent of the Central Tuberculosis Dispen-
sary to be established by the Louth County Council.
I am to add that if the Dispensary is contploted
boforcy the
o.xpiration of that period, the Board will prepared to give
final approval to Dr M'Quillan's appointment.
I am Sir,
Your Obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant See
The Secretary,
.l,outh County Council.
CONTRIBUTION FROM INSURANCE COMMITTEE.
The following letter was read and initialled Ly the Chair-
man
No. 63,733: 1914.
Louth County.
I.oc•al Gover1iIiiCTif Dublin,
20111 Noveniijer, 1914.
Sir,
With further Hferenee fo your letfev of the 18th Sepi enp
last, relative to expenditure of [he Louth County Couneit
on the, treatment of Tuberculosis in the ended the 30th
idem, I am direeftcl by the Local Governnjenü for Irelalitl to
sfafe they arc infonned by [he. Tnsuratice Cornniissioners
[hat the Commissioners Il'tve now eonveyecl to fhe' Insurance
Conunittee for the Cotillty of Louth their sanction to paytnent by
that body fo the Louth County Council at the pafe of R250 per
annum iu consideration of the services rantlered {o Ly the
Tuberculosis Officer. It is also understood that the ('omni is-
sioners are in conamunication witli flie Insultinee Cotnmiftee in
gard fo other
to the COuneiI.
am,
The Secretary,
9
paytnents proposed to loe made by
Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
Louth COunfy Council.
ROAD BOARD GRANT.
was read from Mr J B Connolly, Town Clerk, Drogheda,
19th November, stating that the Corporation of Drogheda
accept the oflcm Of the Grant of Æ760 for the ro-surfaeing of the
EOI'tion of the Dublin-Belfast Road within their Disfrie[
the eonditicu tha,t an equal amount for the purpose is pro-
vided by the Corporation.
APPLICATION FROM CONSTABLE, GILES' QUAY.
Tl a rbour Constable,
tter was road from James Cumiskey,
Giles' Quay, dated 21st November, stating he was in failing
health and eotilcl not attend to his duties, anti requesting pey-
Illis.sion that his nephew, Laurence Ci»nlan, who had Beun assist-
ing him for number of years, be allowed to as his substitute,
and stating Ile would be responsible as usual for the accounts and
vay Ilim for so acting.
The CommittiQ, aft(f diseussion, refused to recommend the re-
qn:st to the County Council,
COLLECTORS.
was read from Mr John Woods, Rafe Collector, com-
plaining of the difficulty in bringing his books to I)ntndalk for
11 is fortnightly collection owing fo defcc•tive frain service,
stating that he ran great risk of losing his books by leaving them
10
af Grrenore or Bush, and that he would not accountable
aff$'l" this notice.
Tho Committee, after discussion, directed the Secretary {o
write to Mr Woods that he only was responsible for the safe
custody of his books, and that under the Public Bodies Order he
was to have them cheeked regularly in the County
( )ffice.
REPAIRS TO ARDEE COURTHOUSE.
Letter was read from Mr T T Reilly, Courtkeeper, Ardee Court-
house, ltquesting payment of an account for E3 7s 6d for repairs
alleged to have been done to Ardre Courthouse.
The County Surveyor stated that eertmin sum was set apart
for the repmirs to the Cottlthouse, and that Mr Reilly had got
all that was available.
'Che Secretary was fo write Mr Reilly that no further
payment made to him.
ACCOUNTS 01,' COMMITTEE OF AGRICUI,TURL'.
The Abs! raet of Accounts of [he County Conunittee of Agricul-
with
lialf-year cnded 31st March,
1914. togeåhcr
ture for the
A uditor's Report thca•con, and the I ,ocal Government Board's
letter enclosing, were laid lot fore Committee initialled by the
Chainnan.
1)1STuESS COMMITTEE.
The qut stion of sugg: stions for {he constitufion of above COO!-
names were approved
niitfee were consida•ed, and the followin€r
to be submitted to the County Couneil
W A Doran, J P; C A Duffy, J P;
Co. Councillors—Mtssrs
WAs, J P; Denis J Ruth, J H M'AIT11e, J P; .J
P'; Thomas Murphy,
wealthy, J P; J F Murphy, J
O'Rourke.
and Thmnas
11
Guardians—Messrs Patrick Byrne, J Pcfer P;
Sir V cye Foster, Bart.
Other Local Authorities—Patrick Donegan, J P; Mrs E A Duffy.
Insurance M 'Kit tcu•iek and Mr S Lockington.
En.ployers of T C Uncardle, J P; J M Carroll,
IF D Aelue.son, A P Swan.
Trades C)' Callaghan, Quinn, antl J J Maltin.
W. N. H. Association—Miss M 'Ginity and Mrs Whitworth.
Sol(lic rs' and Sailors' Assoeiafion—COloneI Jones.
Other Ageneics—NIessrs James YI ughcs, O H; Jaujes Kelly,
.1 N l"; and I aaurenee Cufii.s, l.abourers 'Society.
UET,GIAN REFUGEES.
Secretary submittcd correspondence from l, G 13 in this matter,
and subnjitted list of names of persons in Co. Louth who were
prepared to receive some of the Itufug:es, copy of which had been
sent to the I,oeal Government Board.
The Secretary was (lira•ted fo record any furtlitT offeus and
submit them to the L G B.
RATE
Secretary the Commiffe? that the Rafe Colleefors
had that a notice to Rafepay. •rs would be issued, that
ull were clue on Demand, the First Moiety, when Demand
Note was served, and the Second Moiety on 1st of October.
The request was unanimously granted by the (Bom lilittee, and
the Secretary was directed to have the Notieas prepared an:l
printed,
12
APPLICATION FOR BY COURTKEEPF.R,
COURTHOUSE.
Letter was read from Mr T Murray, Courtkeeper, County
Courthouse, requesting the usual allowance of for exfra work
performed by Ilim during the past twelve months.
The Committee unanirnously reeommcndecl the granting of
which was the amount allowed in formor years.
which was the amount allowed in fortnr;r ye ars, subjet•t
approval of the Local Govcrnrnent Board.
910,
the
LIABILITY OF COUNTY COI'NCIL FOR ACCIDENTS ON
ROADS IN CHARGE OF CONTRACTORS.
Mr Peter Woods Inought undiT flie nofiee of Comnjitlce
the question of liability of the (u"ounty Council for any aceidetits
that might take place on roads in the County during the periods
M' hen they were under the change of the various contractors.
The County Surveyor informed the Committee that any elaiuo•
for accidents would in the first instance be brought against
County Council, but the Contractor ancl his sureties were lia
to the Council under their Bonds for any damages might
take place,
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings
OF TIIE
Finance Committee
A] 'I'll EIR M I'.'E'I'ING JIEI,I)
On Monday, 18th January, 1915.
1
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finnnc•e Comtnittee at their
Aloeting 'held in the Council Chamber, Court Houge, Dunda 1k,
on Monday, 18th January, 1915, at one •o'clock, p m.
Prcnsent : —
In the A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Edward Goodman, Michael Meade, T. J.
J P; M'Ardle, 1, M'Kemvn, P woods, J P; Wm.
woods, J P; James Wynne, J P.
Mr Thotnas Walsh, County Surveyor, was also present.
Tho Minu tos of the previous Finance Conunittee Mt Tting
were taken as read, and signed by the Chairntan.
'l'he following Aeeoun€s were su bmit€€d, and on exa tnination
were ordered fca• paytnent :—
Works in the hands of the County Surveyor
Secretary's Office
Total
31 18 s
18 4
Bank Books for the Gc neral and Subsidiary
were e.xmninetl, ancl initialled by [file Chairman.
The atnounting to CJ,717 Is
Wore examined, and recommended for payment.
2
Before placing the ,order for Sleeping Vans and Water •Carts
with Messrs Porter, the County Surveyor was instructed to
write them for a reduced price in consideration of them got-
ting the full order.
TENDERS FOR Ito.\l) MAKI-NG MACHINERY.
The County Surveyor produced tenders received for the
pious machines required for use on the roads, and for which
Advertisements had -been published in the County Louth anci
lhb,lin papers. After a long discussion as to prices and quality,
tho Cotnmittee unanimously rocontmendecl that the 0Hlers be
placed with the following firms :—
Traction Engines Fowler Sons, Ltd, Leeds.
Searifiers and Scus, Malton, Yorkshire.
Water carts Potter and CD, 1,1d, North wall, Dublin.
Sleeping Vans Potter and Co, I.,ttl, Nctrth M'all, Dubini.
Aveling and Porter, Ltd, Roehester, Kent.
Stone-Breaking Machines (2)-- Steel Founclr.v CD,
Ltd, East Sheffield.
Rock Drill co. (Fleniing ca),
31 St., Glasgow.
Jack flam mer and Drills Complete, Will) Hose, etc
soll Rand Co (Fleming and Co) 31 Robt rtscn St, Glas-
Exploders, Complete Cables, Cable Reels, ete ('21
—Inger.scll 'lland Co (Fleming P.nd Co) 31 Robe.rl.soll
St, Glasgow.
3
FIRE IN COUNCIL
The following Report fro:n the Co•nnf.v Surveyor was read :
County Surveyor's Office,
Court House, Dundalk,
16th January, 1915.
To the Chairman and Gentlemtn, Finance Connnittce,
Louth County Council, Meeting 18th Jan uary, 1315.
.ÄLr CFIairman and Gentlernml,
T beg to rep that on the evening of
inst, a fire oeeurred in the Council Cliajllb?ff here, owing to the
.iois,t• fh Ilea: ill. ge€ting afire owing to their proximity
to the files an.(l healthstcnes.
T'he firo was extinguished bofore fltl_v serious (Ian-.age was
done; but, I have hail to have tiles and hearthstones
away, and new frcnrf and bock Jl•enrths €0 both fireplaces ,put
in.
Your obcdicnt Savant,
TIIOM.\S WALSH.
Tho, Secretary informed the Corn lllittee; that a claim 'haci
on the Hibernian Fire and General Insultinee Cam-
pans fcr the sum cf C3 Od, being the amcunt paid for the
re-setting of the hearths, and making good the damage cansect
I).v the fire. He read lotter from tile Insurance Company en-
closing a eheq.uo fo;r the amount claimed, had 'been re-
ceivetl this day. The Committee expi•essed satisfaction that
the mattQr had received such promyc attention, and the letters
were initiall-ecl by the Chairman.
4
GILES' QUAY PIER LIGHT.
The following letter was read
Irish Lights ()ffiee,
Carlisle Buildings,
Dublin, 14th Jan.,
1915.
No. 26.
Sir,
I am direetod by the Chun missioners of Irish
Lights to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the Cth inst,
on the subj€Tt of the proposal to have the light at Giles' Quay
pier (hitherto exhibited only during the months of Septenl'ber,
Oetohor, November and continued the entire
year, and I am to acquaint you,
for the infortr:t the
of the prcpo•al, and hereby accord their stat 'Itor.y
sa thoreto, the (553rd Section of the Merchant
Shipping .\eå, 1898.
I atil to re(luest that, before issuing Notice to M a riners
rcnpeeting the alteration in t:te period of exhibition of this
light, the County Ctntneil will good enough to have a draft,
of the Notice forwarrL<l to this ()ffice fV)l' approval,
I am, Sir,
The Secretary
J,outh County Council,
Court House,
Your obedient Sorvant,
H. G. COOK,
I) u ndaJk.
5
After discussion the County Surveyor was directed €0 have
the light continued during the entire year, and the Scereta.ry
was directed to send draft of the Notice regarding the altera-
tion of the period of lighting sent to the Irish Cmnruis-
sioners.
FROM INSURANCE COMMIT"IÆE UNDER
TUBERCULOSIS SCHEME.
Letter wus read -from Sceretar.y Co. Louth Insnrance Cotil-
mittee, dated 13th January, enclosing cheque value L'21ö IOS (kt
being in respect Of the sv•rviees of the Tuberculosis MedF.e,'11
Offices and Nurse, for the periccl ended 31st I)eeenlljer, 1.914.
The letter was initialled by Chairman.
TREASURY GRANT—I'!
The following l' u ter was read
the Chair-
a nd initialled by
man
No. 70,292: 1914.
Louth County.
Local Government Board,
I)nblin, 5th January, 1915.
Sir,
In reply to your lot fer of the 16th ulti1ii0, relative to the
est ima.ted expenditure of [he l,outh County Couneil in respect of
the tr6afment of Tuberculosis for the half-year ending 31st March
next, T am dirtu•ted by the I.oeal Govermnelii Board for Ireland
to inform you that directions have been' given for the issue of a
Paying Order for .E149 from the Exchequer Maintenance Granf
on account.
6
The final paylnen€ for the year Will
the Auditor's eerifieate.
I am, Sir,
Your
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
be Iliade in (lite course on
obedient Servant,
A. R. BARI,ASs
Secretary.
01,' POOR I{ATE.
Letter was read from the L G B, dated 6th January, 1915, No.
424/1915, directing attention of the County Council to the I-a rge
ft,mnouut; of Poor Rate outstanding on 31st I) eeember, and the
Secretary was directed to send a copy Of to Of the Ila,te
Collectors.
tho
Mr T J' Byrne, J P, suggesfcxl siatc»ltjent showintr
state the collection af the of euc•li shoulcl be laid
hei'ore the Finance (-'nmlllitlee, and ry was directed
ly.
APPLICATIONS.
SCHOOL
TTHS following letters were road the ( unanimously
that the requests contained tire:eili be eoclecl fo :—
I ndtl.sfrial School, T)rog heda,
14th January, 1915.
.Jantes and Peter Dougan fo the
We soul ing
Industrial School, Galway, a,nd Gem ge M' Ardle to
Will kindly
I ndustrial School, Ga I xvay.
f Ile Salthill
lef me know if your Council will agree! The boys n re now of an
age for tiansf'er.
'I'he Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
7
T he National Society fov (Ile, Prevention of Cruelty to Children,
32, Castle Road, Dundalk,
13th January, 1915.
I beg €0 inform you application will be Inade to the
Justices at Ardee Petty Sessions on Wednesday, {he 20th instant,
for the committal of two children—Patrick and Thomas Curran—
to an Industrial Sehool.
Yours faithfully,
C. AN,
DROGHEDA cot; IU'HOVSF,.
A letier from Alr O'Connell, Solicitor, was referred to the next
Meeting of the Gommit[ee.
I.YONS v. AT BLACKROCK.
The following let.tev was read and initialled by the Chair-
man :
Francis Street, l)nndalk,
15th January, 1915.
l,yons v. Wall.
boar Sir,
I beg to report t lint this Case Stated on argu-
on yesterday before the Divisional Court ot' Ille King's
Division, the judges sitting l;eing Mr Justice Gibson and
Mr Justice Ihddl.
the ease. reversed flie decision of
The Chyurt, after heaving
sitting af Petty Sessions and remitted the ease to the ma-
gist rates with a direction to convict the defentlatit with a nominal
They ordered the defendant to pay Seven Guineas
frenal t.v.
Oh the, terms Of no
M' Alesta•, Esq,
Seeretary, Lou ill Co.
fu I'ther proceedings being taken.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Council.
Dundalk,
8
CRIMINAL. INJURY jCASL'S.
Tlie follouing Report from Mr O'Connell was read,
Comtnittee directed t hat an, appeal be lodged in the
Patrick Mackin•, of Ta
Francis Street, Dundalk,
and
ease of
9
OFFICE novn,s.
The Chairman under the notice the Cinnmitfee fhaf
the Clerks in the County C)fiiee did not gef any half holiday, and
suggested that Saturday would be the most suitable clay for the
early closing of the public office.
recommended
After discussion, f lye (innmiftee unaninwously
that the County Office elo.se at) one o'clock on Saturdays in
futtue.
15th January, 1915.
Criminal Injury Applications.
Dear Sir,—
I Leg' to report oti the following four Claims heard at
Dundalk Quarter Sessions during the pr€xsent week:
Joseph VI amill, Dundalk. Claim CIO for breaking of plate
glass window. Decree for 27 -off the Urban District.
Joseph M Johnson, Dundalk. Sinjilar claim for IOS. Decree
for 9.7 IO off the Urban District.
Mathew Farrell. Dromin.
Claim C50 for burning of small
house Stabaunon. l)isrnissed.
Patrick Maekin, Tavanamore. Clainj CIOO IOS for hillftiing of
hay and straw pikes. for C50 to be levied off the l'.'leeforat
Division of Upper Citvgan, Batwonstown and Castlering.
Yours faithfully,
IJ.AN[EL O'CONN
Charles AI 'A lesfer, Esq,
Secretary, I.outll Co. Council,
Dunda 1k,
IBEI,GIXN REFUGEES,
I *'tier read from Private Secretary [o t lie Local Govern-
iiienf Boaltl requesting infortnation as fo what provision had Leen
Inade to house any Belgian Refugees in Counfy Louth, and after
discussion the Secretary was directed to convene a, Ileet ing Of
the Distress Cononittee aud lay the mailer before thern.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL,
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898.
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
OF
New County Offices Committee,
AT THEIR MEETINGS
HELI)
27th January and 8th February, 1915.
1
neo County Offices Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of tho New County Offices Committee
at their Meeting :held in the Council Chamber, Court Ilcuso,
on Wednesday, 27th January, 1915, at 11 0'clock,
Present the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members Hamill, J P, and Wm Woods,
J P, Esq
nires.
Professor AV A Scott was in attendance by appointment, and
Mr nonvas Walsh, Ccunty Surveyor, was also present
The Minutes of the Meeting of tho New County Offices Come
inittee, held cn 22nd December, 1914 were taken as read, and
signed by the Chairman.
Tlme Committee in company with, tile High Sheriff of County
Louth, Mr Macartney Filgate, and Mr A N Sheridan, Clerk of
the Crown and Peace, inspected the site of the proposed Offices,
and the Gerk of the Crown and Peace's Offices: which it was
proposed should be alterv•d to enable the new offeos to be, linked
up with the Court House.
The Sketch Plan of the proposed alterations prepared by Pro-
fessor Scott, was also inspected, and the High Sheriff expressed
himself satisfied with the proposed change, and with the link.
ing referred to