2
The„ Committee had then under consideration the question of
some additional frontxge at Crowe, Street, which Professor
Scott considered would be a great improvement for tho orchi-
teetural effect of the New Offices. The entire matter was dis-
cussed very fully, and the Chairman informed the Committee
that he understood that some additional frontage could be pro-
cured from the Dundalk Urban Council of the site of tho exist-
ing urinal adjoining the plot in the possession of the County
Council.
The question of a right of way tryrough the Urban Council
premises to the machinery depot at the back of the County
Coutncil's property, and Ille question of the lighting of the new
offices from the Town Hall side of the site, was also
It was finally decided, on •the
Motion of Mr B Hamill,
Seconded by Mr Wrn AVcods,
' 'Illat the Dundalk C rhan Council bo requested to reeeive a
deputation from the Sew Offices Committee, to eonsult witli
them as to the additional frontage required, the right of way to
the machinery depot, and the lighting of the new offices."
The rnembers of the Committee present, With Mr James
Wynne and the County Surveyor, were appointed as the depu-
tation, and the Secretary was directed to ask t;he Crban Conna
cil to fix a day for the consultation.
(Ille Committee unanimously decided to reeonunend the
County Council to approve of the jreoommendation to connect;
new offiees with the County Court House as proposed fry'
Professor Scott.
3
The question of some provision being made for accommodation
for the Hiring Fairs in May and November, as an auxiliary to
the space in the vestibule of the Court Ilcuse, was under dis-
enssion, and it was decided to let the matter come up again for
consideration.
4
neo County Offices Committee.
of Proceedin+,s of the New County (jffic;es Obinniittee
at their Meeting 'held, in the, Council Chaniber, Court House,
Dundalk, on Monday, 8th February, 191.3, at Mile. o'clock, p m.
Present—in Che Chair—Charles A Duffy, LA, J P.
Other Members :—James Wynne, J P, and Thomas Murphy,
Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surevyor, was also present.
The Minutes of Proeoedings of the New Offices Committee at'
their Meeting he!d on 27th January, 1915, were read and
signed by the Ohairman.
SUGGESTED AGREEMENT WITH DUNDALK URBAN
COUNCIL.
'Ille following Memorandum of tshe Conference between the
Committee and thc Dundalk Urban Council arranged for at the
last meeting of the Committee, relative to the acquisition of
increased frontage for the new offices, the, grant of a right Of
way to the machinery depot throu@h the Urban Council
miscys, and t(ho question of light from tho Town Hall side for the
new building, was read:—
County Surveyor's Office,
Punda,y,
3rd February, 1915.
Memorandum re Delegation from New •Offces Comynittee
to Urban Council.
from . uNew Offices Committe+ by appoint-
The. Deputatith
ment, last evening attended a Special Meeting of the buildålk
15 rban Council for tdlé purpose Of
(1) Increased Frontage for New Council Offices in Crowo
Street.
(2) Right of way through Town Hall premises to back gar-
den of Couft House intended as a machinery depot.
(3) Granting of light by Urban Council for the new offices on
Town Hall side.
These matters having been discussed, the Urban Council
offered—
(1) To give the County Council 13ft. Gin. extra frontage in
CIXHve Street, by 40ft. Oin. in depth from the proposed front of
new offices—the site of the urinal at present, and to shift back
into the recess the present urinal.
(2) To grant the light of way—details to be arranged by the
Surveyor of the Urban Council and County Surveyor.
(3) To grant right of light in Town Hall side subject to a,p-
proval of plans of new offices by the Urban Council, in consider-
ation of the County Council paying one guinea per annum for
the extra frontage, and a sum of C15() in hand to cover expen-
ses of removing urinal, etc.
CHARLES A. DUFFY.
BERNARD HAMILL.
THOMAS WALSH.
6
After discussion the following resolution was passed
mously : —
Proposed by James Wynne, Esq, P;
Seconded by Thomas Murphy, Esq,
unani-
'That we confirm the report of the deputation from this
Committee to the Dundalk Urban Council, and recommend to
tho County Council t:hO terms suggested" pay to
the Duntla.!k Urban Council tho sum of C150 to eover the cost
of removal and re-erection •of the urinal adjoining the plot on
which, it is proposed to ercc•t; the new Co. Offices' and to pay a
sum of Cl Is Od per annum as rent for the extra frontage of
13ft. (jih., with a depth of 40ft., and Che grant of a light of way
to the propesad machinery depot at the req•e, and sthe right of
light to the new Offices from the east side of Che new build-
ing."
LOAN FOR NEW OFFICES.
The f011011ång tter from the Manager Hibornian Bank,
dalk, was read ancl initialled by the Chairman :—
The Hibernian Bank, Ltd.,
Dun-
Dundalk, 8th February, 1915.
The Seeretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Dear Sir,
In reply to your favour of 4th inst, I beg to in-
form you that the Bank will be prepared to grant vae Loan of
(six thousand pounds) for the purpose of erecting the
new Council Offices at the rate of 3 p. c. (throe per cent). It
is presumed that the USUOI satisfactory arrangements as to col-
lateral security for the .1can,A1d conditions of re-paymenf, will
be made.
I am,
Yours fait%'fully,
CHAS. H. MAGNEVIN,
Ma nagor.
WEIGHTS ANI) MEASURES OFFICE.
The following letter
was road :
I. C. , Quay Street,
Dundalk, 7th Feb, 1913.
bear Sir,
With reference to Weights •and Measures Office
inentioned to you some time ago by my predoecssorv (H. Con.
O'Connor) I beg to give hereunder particulars regm ding di-
hiensions, eve, set out Board of Trade Regulation.s and pro-
Vided for in Weights and Measlit•es Aets:—
Floor Spaee—ö00 sq. ft.
Bench (wood).
Press.
Small Vic•é.
And an arrangement for suspending Seales.
are other a,rLielas, which I consider tan ncec€sary, inen-
tioned in the Board of Trade Regulations, bui instead of these
blight I suggest that a MTiting (lcsk be provided. The latter
Would be mcst useful.
As the repairing of weights, ete, neets»arily creates a good deal
Of noise, may I take the liberty to suggccst that the office, iF
erected, may be so situated that work Which may be Tarried
8
on therein not be a sotn•ee of annoyanee to in other
offices.
Thanking you in anticipation,
I remain, Sir,
Vottrs faithfully',
J. H. LEVINGE,
Charles M 'Alester, Esq,
Secretary Louth County Councii.
A discussion tcc.k place with reference to this matter.
County Surevyor informed the Committee that he considered
the spaee mentioned in Cowstable Levinge's letter was entirely
tco great, and that he 'had a,rranged with Professor Scott to in-
elude the erection of a Wei@hts and Measurers Office in the
scheme of accommodation at the rere of new offices. The
mittee approved of this arrangement.
The Chairman, in reply to Mr' Murphy, informed the Ccm-
mittee that the accommodation to be provided in Vhe new
ees was given detail in t/.re printed minutqms cf the County
Council in May, 1$14, -ancl al.so in October, 1911,
This accommodation is as follows
(a) Council Chamber, 40 ft x 25 ft, say,
(b) 1 Committee Room, about 16 ft square.
(e) 1 Spare, ditto, 16 feet square, to serve as office in -fill.sy
times for Rate Clerks, etc.
(d) 1 Single Office about 16 feet
(e) 3 Double Offices about IG feet square for Secretary
Staff and County Surveycr arcl Staff, and Coujxty Committees
of Agrieulture,
9
(f): Single Officcy somewhat larger, Tor Secretary. .lnsuranee
Committee.
(g) The necessary Lavatories: "attåAiéd Ccnifity; Council
Chamber and Offices and Clgak
(h) Stationöry for Secretary, 80 to 100 sq. feet,
(i) Strong Room for Secretary, 80 sq. fe€t sa_v.
(j) Store at back for coal and sundries.
Also Office för Inspector mof Weights and Measures, and Care-
taker's Residence.
SPECIAL MEETING.
As the Assessor, Professor Scott, was waiting instructions
as to the increased frontage for tho Ground Plan, which could
not be given until the arrangements for same were confirmed
by the County Council, it was arranged that the Chairman
would direct that a Special Meeting of the County Council be
called for Monday, 15th inst, to consider the Report of the
Offices Committee as appearing on the Minutes of their Pro-
ceedings, which the Secretary was directed to have printed and
circulated to the members of the Council.
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
AT TIIEIR
Fourth Quarterly Meeting held on January
21st, 1915.
Special Meeting held on 15th February, 1915.
Finance Committee
At their Meetings held on 1st February
and 15th February, 1915.
Scholarship Committee
At their Meeting held on 25th January,
1915.
Proposal Committee
At their Fourth Adjourned Quarterly
Meeting held on 1st February, 1915.
Executive Committee
At their Meeting held on 1st February,
1915.
Couth County Council.
Min of proceedings of the Louth County Council at
their rcurthi Quarterly Meeting held in the Council Chamber,
Courthouse, Dundalk, on "I'llt11Nlay, 21st Jan nary, 1915, at
one o'clock p.m.
Present
In tho Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
other Members—Thomas M•CourC, T V Peter
Moo„e, J P; W T Skeffington, J P; James M'Carthy, J P;
Ham,il, J P; Dolan, H M'Ardle, J P• Paik
M'Gve, J P; Thomas O' Itoutrke, J P Kearney, James Wynne,
J P; John F Murphy, J P; Bernard Finnegan, T J Byrne,
J P; Michael Meade. Michael O'Meara, J P; N T Munyhy,
J P, and T Murphy, Esquires.
Messrs Daniel O'Connell, Solicitor to the Council; Thomas
Walsh, County Surveyor ; James Dromgoole, Assistant Sur-
VO,yor; James Harney, Horticultural Expert of the County
Committee, wece in attendance; and Dr M 'Quillon, T.M.O.
and Mr V Warren, Clerk T.C.M., were also present.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
Tho following resolution was passed unanimously
by P B Esq, J P;
Seconded by N T Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—Thit the Minutes of the Proceedings of the
2
Louth County Council at their Third Adjourned Quarterly
Meeting held on the 26th November, 1914, and their Special
Meeting on the 3rd (lay of December, 1914, a copy of which
has bee 1 sent, to each: Member of the Council, be and are
hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE COMMVITEE MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed ujnanimously
P,roposed by Patrick M'Gee, Esq, J P;
Seconded by T V M 'Quillan, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance
'Committee at their Meetings held on the undermentioned dates
a copy of which has been sent to each Member of the Council,
be and are hereby confirmed :—
Monday, t{he 7th clay of December, 1914.
Monday, the 21st day of December, 1914.
Monday, the 4th day of January, 1915.
Monday, the 18th day of January. 1915.
the progress of the Meeting, but subsequent to tho
passing of the foregoing resolution, Mr T J Byrne requested
permission to refer to Che Minutes of the Finance Committee
Meeting held cn 18th January, when the Tenders for Road
Machinery were submitted 'by the County Surveyor He
suggested that as the details of the prices were not given on
the Minutes, and as some of the Temlea•s were not formally
before the Finance Committee, that it would be desirable
to postpone the giving of the orders, and if necessary obtain
the advice of mechanical expert.
A discussion ensued, in which the Chairman, Mr N T Murphy,
anci Mr 'Thomas M•urphy took part.
3
The County Surveyor explained that all the, Tenders weH2
before the Committee, and the details of Traction Engims,
Rollers, Water Carts and Sleeping Vans were carefully con-
sidered, and that the other Machinery, such as Ingersoll Drill
•and Hadfield's •Stone Breakers, harl been approved by the
Road Board and the Local Government Board, ancl were
'special things.
Mr N T Murphy stated that the entire question of the
purchase of Road Machinery was left in the County Surveyor's
hands by resolution of the County Council.
The Chairman ruled that as the Minutes were then passed,
tlheir discussion was not in order.
•CONFIRMATION OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MINUTES.
The following resolution was pagsecl mcusly :
Proposed by Peter B Esq, J P;
Seconded by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, anul
Resolved—That the, Minutes of tile Proceedings of the Exe-
Committee at their Weeting held on the 21st day of
December, 1914, a copy of which has been sent to each Member
th Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
'CONFIRMATION OF PROPOSAL COMMWI'EE MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Ilarnill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by T B M 'Court, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of tahe Proposal
ittee, at their meeting held on the 4th day of January,
4
1915, a copy of which has been sent to each member of
Counci's be and are hereby confirmed.
ARDEE PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Michael Meade, Esq ,
Seconded by Patrick M 'Gee, Esq, J P and
the
tho Proposal for Payments formulated the.
No I Rural District Council, at their Fourth
Meeting held on 5th day of January, 1915, and set out on Form
22, furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby appro-
ced of
These payments amount to the sum of C802 6s öd.
DROGHEDA PAYMENTS.
The illlowing resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by N T Murphy, usq, J P, and
Reselved—That the Proposal for Payments formulated by the
Lout-b. Rural District of Dro@heda Union, at their Fourth
Quarterly Meeting, held on the 12th day of January, 1915, set
otl,t 0-1 Form 22 furnished to the County Council, be and
hereby approved of.
These payments amount to the sum of CöGG 19s ld.
DUNDALK PAYMENTS.
The felaowing resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Thomas B M 'Court, Esq ;
Seconded by John F Murphy, Esq, J P, and
5
Resolved—That the Proposal for Payments formulated by
the Dundalk Rural District Council, at their Fourth Quarterly
Meeting held on the 4th January, 1915, ancl set out on Form
22 furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby appro-
ved of.
These payments amount to the sum of El ,333 17s Gd.
COUNTY-AT-LARGE PAYMENTS.
The fellowing resolution was passed nnanimously
Proposed by James Wynne: Esq, J P;
Seconded by Joseph P Keanmey, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Proposal for Payments formulated by
the Proposal Committee at their Meeting held on the 4th day
of January, 1915, and set out on Form 22 furni.4hed to the
Count Council, and amounting to the sum of CT, 717 Is 4d, be
.and are hereby approved of.
DATES OF QUARTERLY MEETINGS.
The following resolution was passed tana nimously
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Thomas 13 M 'Court, Esq, and
Resolved—That the County Council hereby detei•mine that
•the following shall 'be the dates for Che holding of the First
Quarterly Meetings of the Rural District Cotmeils :—
Ardee—Tuesday, 6th April, 1915.
13th April, 1915.
Dundalk—Monday, 12th April 1915,
And that the Proposal Committee meet on
Monday, 12th April, 1915.
6
TRANSFERS TO BOARDS OF GUARDIANS ANP
DISTRICT COUNCILS.
Thc Treasurer's Authority for the following Instalments
14
11 10.
Demands were duly signed :—
Ardee Board of Guardians
Drogheda Board of Guardians
Board of Guardians
Ardee So. 1 Rural District Council
Drogheda (Louth) Rural District Council
Dundalk Rural District Council
Total
El,017
1,227
2,725
O
L'4,970
10
19
0
187 10
C311
o
5,281
6
of
O
8
o
o,
EQUIPMENT OF BEDS I.N DUBLIN IRED CROSS
HOSPITAL.
The ioiiowing resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by James M 'Ca,rthy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by M ichael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby adopt the recommendations of tJhe
Finar.•ee Committee at their Meeüing held on the 21st Decem-
ber, 1914, and decide to equip five Ibeds in the Dublin Red Cross
Hospital for the accommodation of wounded soldiers returning
from the war, at a cost of CIO per 'bed, and that the said beds
be named the Lotter County Beds.
REPRESENTAMVES ON COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURE.
The following resolution was passed ananimo.us\.y :—
mposed by Peter B MOOIv, EMI, J P;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That in accordance with the letters from the De-
partmeillt of Agriculture dated 11th December, 1914, and the
Regulations under Section 24 of the Agriculture and Technical
Instruction (Ireland) Act, 1899, we •hereby appoint
Messrs James M 'Carthy, J P, Newfoundwell, Drogheda,
and Joseph Dola n, Gaulstown, l)ltnlcer,
the Louth County Council representatives to strve on the new
Counci of Agriculture for the term of three years from the 1st
April 1915.
Messrs M 'Carthy and Dolan returned thanks to the Conncit
for their re-electicn.
lh\YME.NT OF RAILWAY FARES TO ME-MI}EIIS
TENDING MEETINGS
The next itelll on the agenda was eonsicleration of letter-
from tho Lccal Government Board, dated 21st December, 1914,
No. 68679-1914, relative to the above, in which they stateli that
there is no Statutory Authority which would empower them to,
sanction the proposal that the second class railway fares of
members of the Council attending the Ccunty Ccuneil Meet-
ings, or Committee Meetings, ÅhcultI re-paid to them out of
the Cotinty Funds at the end of each half year.
•S
A (li.senwsion took place on this matter, and the following re-
solution was unanimously adopted
by T J BYIme, Esq, J P;
Seconded by M Esq, J P, and
tl:e resolution already adopted by tho County
Ccuneil regarding the payment of Railway Fares to members
attending meetings of the ancl its Committees, 'lie acl-
'here.o. to, aEcl that Socrcta,ry directed to pay same at
the times appointed.
Tbt- Secretary informed the Councii that any paymen\s made
in respcct of this expenditure would likely be surcharged, and
sevet'?i members stated that if any surcharges were made that
the arronnts so surcharged uoulcl be refunded by any members
who received payments for Railway Fa
ADOPTION OF REPORT' OF TUBERCULOSIS COMMIT-
TEE OF MANAGEMENT.
following resolution was unanimously adopted
Proposed by Rourke, ;
Seconded by Thomas M •Court, ENI, and
Resolved—That we i'neveby adept the Report of the Tuber-
culos:s Committee of Management, as printed on pages 55 to
oi the printed minutes, 'a copy of which has been sent to
each member of the County Council.
9
OF REPORT CONFERENCE BETWEEN
LOUTH COUNTY ,COUNCIIÄ TCBEROVLCSIS COAiMIT-
TEE OF. MANAGEMENT A-ND THE COUNTY LOUTH IN-
SCRANCE COMMITVEE.
fol lowing rcsolution was Jjnanimously adopted :
Esq, J P;
by H ES(I, J P,
Resolved—That .we ,heveby approve of the Report of the Con-
between County Council "l'ilbereulosis Cojmnitteo of
Management and the County Louth Insurance Com;nittee re-
.g,arci/ng the agreement 'between the two borles•, as set out on
pages 60 to 64 of the printed min ntes, a copy of which has been
• •ent each member of the County Council.
APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS ON COUNTY COMMITTEE
OF AGRICULTURE.
Tlh following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by M'Gee, Esq, J P;
Seconded by John F Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby co-opt the following gentlemen to
aet on the Louth County Committee of Agriculture for the hal-
•.ancr .01' the ensuing term :—
George Taaffe, D L, Srnarmore Castle, Ardee ; C J Neary
Monavallet, Louth ; Philip M' Ardle, Rajmpark, Bally-
mascanlon, Dundaik ;and James V M 'Granea Burren
House, Dunleer.
Mr M 'Gee's notice of motion to appoint the last-named gen-
tlemar
was merged in this resolution by the consent of the
Council.
When the foregoing resolution was being put to the meetirw
by tlp Chairman, Mr Thomas Murphy remarked that bhe ap-
pointl.uent of members on Committees who did not attend.
was most undesirable, but no counter proposition to the pass.
ing of the resolution was made.
MF,VHNGS OF THE VARIOUS COMMITITES OF THE
COUNTY COUNCIL.
Al ising out of the question of attemlanee at Committee .
Meet!ngs under the jurisdiction of the County Council, Mr.
James M 'Cartll.v suggested that all Committees should meet
ome fortnight, antl tho following resolution was
Proposed -by Thomas Murphy, Esq ;
Seconded by T V M'Qui11an, Esq,
That a Committee be appointed to investignte the administra--
tion system in eon nection with the Council, for the purpose of
its revision.
To this the following autendrnent was
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, E•q. J P;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq,
"That no such Committee be appointed
The Chairman took the voting 011 the a.mcndment
following lestllt :
For tihe AmentIntent—Mes.srs J Dolan, B Finnegan,
ill, J P; J P J H M'Ardle, J P; P JP; M
Mea€ie, J F J P;
J P—IO
the Amendment —
M O'Meara, J P, and J
Messrs T J Byrne, J P;
with the
B llam-
Wvnne,
James .
11
M'Carthy, J P; T' B M'C0tu•t, T V M'Quillan, N T Murphy„
J P; T Murphy, P B Moore, •J P; T O'Rourke, and W T
Skeft;ng€on, J P —9.
The Chairman declared' the amendment carried, aud the mo-
tion feli through.
In connection with the discussion on this matter, the Seere—
tory explained to the Council dhat he had always endeavoured
to cat! as many meetings as pcyssible on the same day, to ensure
full atlendance of the members.
CO-OPHO.N ON 0111) AGE PENSIONS
MITTEE.
In accordance with notice of motion, as appearing on the
agenda, Mr Patrick M'Gee, J p, moved :—
"That Mr James V M 'Gntne, of Burren Tlouse, Dunleer, be
co-opted a member of the Dunleer Old Age Pensions Committee
in tö.• room of Mr J Harmon, who had -failed to attend."
TIIV was seconded by Mr N T Murphy, J P.
' 'that, the Rev Father Woods,
MI Michael Meade moved,
C C, Toßher, 110 co-opted €0 fill the vacancy.
Mr Thomas Murphy seconded.
The Chairman took division with! tho following result
Ft., Father J Dolan, JB Hahill, J P; J P
Kearney, M Meade, T Murphy, B Moore, J P; M O'Meara,
J P, O'Rourke, W T Skeffington, J P--9.
For Mr J M'Cmåhy, J P; T M'Court,
P M•Gee, J P; T V M•Quillan, J F MlllVhy, J P, and N T
Murph>, J P—c.
12
T'IIG following gentlemen did not vote T J Byrne,
.J P, Finnegan, J H J P; and James Wynne, J P.
The Chairman declared Rev Father Woods co-opted as mem-
ber of the Dunleeu• Pensions Committee.
AIOOPTION OF REPORT OF SEW COUNTY OFFICES
COM.MIWIH.
The following resolution was
Proposed by N T Murvhy, Esq, J P;
by T B Esq,
That we adopt the report of the new County Offices Commit-
tee set eut in the •minutes of their Meeting held on 22nd De-
eember, 1914, as printed on pages 39 and 40 of the printed
minutes.
M.• T J Byrne, J P, proposed "that no plans, ground Oi•
otherwise, be passed 'by the New County Offices Committee,
until same were considered and approved of by the County
Couveil. ' '
Chairman explained that the plan Ghat was being pre-
pareu by Professor Scott was merely a sketch plan showing the
proposed linking of the Court House with the new offices,
and that this plan had Oilily •been received this morning, and
that nothing definite would be done until bhe County Council
had b full opportunity of considering plans, etc.
It was also explained by the County Surveyor, and Messrs
Wynne and T Milrphy that only the preliminaries were being
arranged to enable Professor Scott to draft the regulations for
the competition for plans for the new offices.
13
Patrick M 'Gee raised the question of the provision of•
acteon modation at the baek of the proposed new offices fcy the.
purposes Gf the Hiring Fairs in May and November, anu hsked
had anything been decided in this matter.
The Chairmafi said this matter had not been lost sight of,
and would be considered in clue course.
Mr Byrne then withdrew his proposition, and: the resolution
adopting the Report of the New County Offices Com-
mittee was passed unanimously.
COMPENSATION FOR GOOSEBERRY BUSHES
DESTROYED.
Letter was read from the Department of Agriculture, dated
24th December, 1914, No. A24377-14, enclosing copy of the fol-
lowing; Order made by the Department
DEI ARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND TECHNICAL
INSTRUCTION FOR IRELAND.
COMPENSATION FOR GOOSEBERRY IWSHES (CO.
LOUTH) ORDER, 1914.
The Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction
for Ireland, by virtue and in exercise of the powers conferred
upon them by the Destructive Insects and Pests Acts, 1877 and
1907, and with the consent of the County Council of Louth, do.
order. and it is hereby ordered, as follows :—
(1) The County Council of the County of Louth are hereby
authorised to pay out of the local rate compen.sation, as pres-
cribel by the Destructive Insects Act, 1877, Section 3, for
gooseberry bushes destroyed in County Louth in compliance
14
with Notices served 'tinder the American Gooseberry Mildew
and Biack Currant Mite (Ireland) Order, 1912.
TITLE.
(2) This Order may be cited as The Compensation for Goose-
berry Bushes (County Louth) Order, 1914.
In witness whereof the Department of Agriculture and
Technical Instruction for Ireland have hereunto affixed
their Seal this 12th day of December, 1914.
(Signed),
H. G. SMITH,
On behalf of Secretary.
Ar. accompanying was enclosed which stated
that before fixing the scale of compensation for any particular
year Che County Council should have before them all the claims
to be paid in that year.
As no claims had been lodged, although the owners had pro-
n:isec: to do so before Che present meeting, it was decided to
postpone the consideration •of the fixing of the price to be al-
lowed for bushes destroyed by the order of the Horticultural
Ir,spec tor.
Th.' Council decided to hear Mr Harney, the Inspecgor, with
reference to the rates of compensation ancl the quantity des-
troyed.
Mr Tlau•ney informed the Council that between 1911 and 1914
2.813 bushes had been destroyed, and that the price would
.average 3d or 401 each.
15
CORRESPONDENCE.
BEE PEST PREVENTION (IRELAND) ACT.
Letter was read from the Departinent of Agriculture dated
12th December, 1914, No A2(j162-14, directing the attention of
the Council to a resolution passed by i liem at their Meeting
held 25th November, 1909, in which there was some doubt
whether the consent to the payment of compensation to Bee-
keepers therein expressed, was intended to cover payments
of compensations generally or not, and enclosing form of reso-
lut.ion, with a request that the Council should pass same.
TIU. resolution, which was as follows, was passed unani-
rnously
Proposed •by B Moore, FAI, J P;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esa, J P, and
Resolved—That we, the Louth County Council, hereby consent
•generally to the payment of compensation to bee-keepens in ac-
E 'cordance wit'h the provision of Section (i of the Bee Pest Pre-
Vention (Ireland) Act, 1908.
CENTRAL OF COUNTY COUNCILS.
Letter was read from the Irish Councils' General Council,
•antel 21st December, 1914, as follows:—
Irish County Councils' General Council.
Cavendish House,
Rutland Square, East, Dublin,
21st December, 1914.
IMPORTANT.
The Secretary Louth Co. Council
i)ea, Sir,
I directed by the Irish County Councils' Ge-
16
neraj Council to forward you, for the consideration of your-
Council at its next meeting, the following resolution adopted'
by my Council at its Annual Meeting, held on the Iltli inst,
viz
' 'That a circular letter be addressed to each County Council
nd Co. Borough Council in Ireland. enquiring whether the
Council would be willing to to co-operate with the Irish County
Councils' General Council in the formntion of a Central u
of Enqui1T into all matters relating to Co. Council administra-
tion ili Treland, whereat Councils might obtain statistics and
in formation bearing 'tupon tho work (f their several depart-
rnenß and which would ttnclertake the compilation and issue of
a General Council Year Book, containing in tabulated form, de-
tails of the working and finance of 'he various branches of
County Council administration Ireland, presented
under separate heads for each department.
" the event of three-fourths or a larger proportion of the
Councils accepting tlhis propcksal in principle, the Sta nding
Comnittoe on Legislation to 'be charged with the framing cf a
detailed scheme, to be submitted for approval to a. special
meeting of the, Council."
advantages to members and officials of Co. Councils, of
the Central Bureau, outlined in the above proposal, where in-
forn•ation on all matters of County Council administration in
Ireland could be classified and' collected be apparent to the
members of your Council; and will, T am sure, commend the
scheme to you and other County Officials.
It. i • not proposed to ask County Councils to contribute fin-
ancially to the expenses of the Burt au, further than their
Affl,otion Fee to the General Council, nor, whilst the hearty
17
co-operation of County Officers is essential to the succes..ful
carrying out of the scheme, is it proposed to unduly tax their
time and energies. In fact, it should be sufficient for pur-
pose if the County Secretary would forward to the office of the
Gencu•a: Council, copies of the printed matter, circulated in the
Usua.' coutrse of business to the mem bers of his Council, and
would occasionally, witli regard to special opera.tioms arising,
fill in brief replies on Enquiry Forms forwarded from the
Genera! Council Office.
I shall be muc'h obliged if you will kindly bring this letter be-
fore the next meeting of your Council, •and inform me, •at your
earliest convenience, as to their view on the subject.
Yours faithfully,
A. KEOGH NOLAN,
Secretary.
After discussion. the following resolution was passed unani-
mously
Proposed by Thomas Murphy, Esq ;
Seconded by T V M'Quillall, Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby dec ide to co-operate with the Trish
County Councils' General Council in the formation of a Central
Bureau of Enquiry in all matters relating to County Cotuncil
administration in Ireland.
A further communication from the Irish Councils' General
Council dated 21st December, directing attention to the scheme
Of the Department for weekly classes in Irish for National
18
'Teachers was read, and the following resolution was passed
unarimously
Proposed by B Esq, J P,
Seconded by N T Murphy, nsq, J P, and
Resaved—That we hereby direct the attention of County
ancl Urban Technical Committees to the Scheme of the Depart-
ment. of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for weekly
classes in Irish for National Teachers.
A letter was also read from the Irish Councils' General Coun-
eil ip which was embodied a resolution urging every County
Council in Ireland to put idito operation in the most efficient
manne: possible the regulations and recommendations of the
Department of Agriculture, with a view €0 the complete stamp-
ing out of sheep scab in Ireland.
Tho Council considered they were doing all that was possible
in this direction, and the letter was initialled by the Chåir-
LOCAL AUTHORITIES (DISQUALIFICATION RELIEF)
ACT, 1914.
Tlte following circular letter from the Local Government
Boata was read aud initialled by the Chairman:
No. 560-1915.
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 15th Jannary, 1915.
Sir,
I am directed by the Local Governinent Board for
Troland to draw attention to tho provisions of tlié Local Au-
thorities (Disqualification Relief) Aet, 1914' (50 GOO. 5, cap. IO),
which received the Royal Assent on the 27th -NoVember last.
19
The Members of Local Authorities Relief Aet, 1900, provdes
7that, notwithstanding anything contained in the Munieilkll
Corporation Act, 1882, or in the Local Government Acts. 1888
and 1894, or in the Local Government (Ireland) Act, 18.98, or
.iR •any Order in Council thereunder, an oflieor or soldier of the
auxiliary forces or of tille reserve forces on active service, or on
service beyond the seas, shall not by reason only of his absence
service be disqualified oar vaea,te his office as a, member
'Of any' county •or •borough, or district council, or Iboarcl of guar-
• dians, or incur any fine or other liability.
Thc effect of the new Act is, during the present war, to ex-
tend the relief from disqualification for office granted by the
Act 1900, to all members of his Majesty's Naval and Alilitary
Forecs employed on any naval or military service, and to any
,ljerson whose employment in connection with naval or military
operations the Local Government Board consider may IJO 'trea-
ted foa the pu,rposes of the present Act in the same manner as
actua: naval or military service, and to provide Chat the Aet of
1900 above referred to shall have effect accordingly.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARI,AS,
Sc ('rotary.
To Secretary of each
County Council.
THE LATE MRS. WI)ON.NELL, DAUGH'I'ER MR. P.
DONEGAN, J P.
The following resolution was passed in silence :—
Proposed by Michael O'Meara, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
20
Resolved—Tliht we learn with regret of the Iamented death:
of Mcs M 'Donnell, daughter of our respected Inember, Me
Patricl Donegan, J P, Monasterboice, and we beg to tender to
him ancl the membe1S of his family our sincere gympathy in
their bereavement.
ABS'! pxctl' OF COUNCIL'S ACCOUNTS FOR HALF YEAR
ENDED 30th SEPTEMBER, 1914.
Letter was read from the Local Government Bcard enclosing•
the Atiditor's Report on the Accounts of the County Council
for tln-• year enclecl 30th September, 1914, which were duly
certifiecl by him.
Thc Chairman informed the Council that this was the fourth
audit within a period of twelve months: and that copies of tho.
of the period under review would be transmitted to.
the members of the Council immediately.
The Secretary was directed to have the usual Advertisement'
of Completion of the Audit issued.
COUNTY LOUTH PATIENTS IN RICHMOND ASYLUM.
Letter was road from the Chief Clerk, Richmond District
Asyluro, enclosing a return for the quarter ended 30th Decem-
ber, 1914, of the patients sent from Cotmty Louth, which nutlE
bered eleven for the period.
The letter was initialled by the Ohairman.
21
Scbolarsbip Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Scholarship Comr.nittee at their
Meeting hera in the Council Chamber, Court House; Drunclalk,
•on . Monday, 25th January, 1915, at 1.30 p m.
Present the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Othel Members—J T Dolan, M A; Janjes Connolly, J P, and
Patrick O'Connell, Esquires.
Thc. Committee had under consideration letter from Railway
'Clerks' Association, which had been referred back by the Co.
Council. This letter was a request that the period of residence
in the County of Loudh for prospective candidates for Univer-
sity Scholarshi1)Å in Chie gift of the Council, should be reduced
below the usual period of three years.
After discussion the Committee declined to recommend the
County Council to reduce, the qualifying period of residence.
Letter was read from the Irish County Councils' General
Council enclosing resolution passed at its Annual Meeting, in
which County Councils were urged to insert a provision in
their schemes compelling all students obtaining County Council
Scholarships to reside at properly constituted Hostels.
The Committee decided to recommend the County Council to
include in the Scheme for 1915-16 a provision to this effect,
with the reservation that the County Council might give their
22
apprcval to other residences where approved bv t".lé College•
Authorities.
Thc following conditions of the Louth County Council Scho-
larship Scheme for 1915-16, were approved, and recommended'
to the County Council
CONDITIONS OF LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
.SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME, 1915-16.
Tho Louth County Council offer two Scholarships of C50
year each, tenable at the Dublin or other College of the Na-
tionat University for the Session October, 1915, to June, 1916,
ancl renewable for tllk. two succeeding years, and for a fourth
year iC the Stitt;dent follows a Course in Agriculture, or in In-
dustl iat or Conunereial Science. The Scholarships will be open
for Cornpet,ition to male a,ncl fcunale Students who fulfil the fol-
lowing requirements :x
(I) M'hose parents or guardians are and have been resi-
dent in Co. Louth for the past three years.
(2) satisfy County Council that they are unable
of their means to obtain a University Education.
(3) Who have been educated in Ireland.
(4) Who are of good health and character and under 19
years •of age.
(5) Who pass in Trish and reach a standard of honours in
the aggregate of subjects in the Test Examination'
which gives proof of ability enough to put a Ur.iversity
Education to good use.
Th•• Test Examination will be the Intermediate Examination
of 191ö—the order of merit being determined by the printed
23
marks obtained by the applicants in Senior Grade Honours as
published in the Official Results List—a Pass in Irish being
sentio:.
The ScholaAlivs Shall be to the two candidates best
qualified in judgment of county Council on consider-
tion merit in this test examination, and of the fulfilment of
the other If either or both of the highest eli-
gible competitors will not they be
awarded to those next in merit, if qualified.
one or Scholarships may be altogether withheld if
eient meri€ or need of assistance is not shown.
'I'he Student accepting a Scholarship must, the Matricu-
of National (unless the University accept
his Intermediate Examination qualification) in 191-3. and at-
tend regularly first in some of the
Univ€TÅity, and reside in hostel -or, special of
the County Council, in any other residence the
,ollcue Autiåoritie.s.
The College shall be paid direct by the County Council
to the College Authorities and hostel the
onee if any, to be expended on books and other cxpenscs.
order to jiw•€ain a Scholarship for the second and third year
a Stuc,ent must pass the College Examination of that year at a.
standülTl of merit to be fixed by Council in consultation
with the College Authorities, and must also a satisfac-
ihe. College as to attendance at lectures and
general conduct during thO year.
The County Council shall have -discretion apply-
ing o• modifying these and in withholding or reducing
Scholarships.
24
for must apply to Secretary of
the county Council before the 15th September, 1915, and the
Council shall to and Scholar-
ships ai end of Sept€unhor, 1915.
On tho suggestion of Mr Dolan,
it was unanimously recom-
that College nthorities requested to furnish to
the of progress being
by county St„dtmts, for the information of
Proposal Committee.
Minutes Of Proeeo:lings of the Proposal Connnittee af
their
Vourth -Adjourned Quarterly Meeting 110141 in the Council Ch unt-
Ooey, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Monday, Isf I•'ebruary, 1915, at
one o'clock p m.
P resent :—
Tn the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Meili hers—A1 0'Meara, J P; Thos Woods,
•J P; John I" Mtuvhy, J P; Jas Wynne, J P; Edward Goodman,
and Peter Woods, J P, Esq uires.
The Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Committee at their
Meet ing held on 4th January, were taken as lead a;ud signed by
• the Cha,innan.
TENDERS FOR WORKS, ETC.
The Committee proceeded fo consider tenders received for
works, etc., passed at their Fourth Qualterly Meeting held on
4th January, 1915, in accordance with advertisen:enf issued.
APPLICATIONS BY TIW, COUNTY SURVEYOR.
NO. 14—To keep in repair Ardee Quarter Sessions Court House
with Court Keeper's residence, for one year from fhe 1st
APIil, 1915—C15 os Od.
No Tender received.
No. 15—To Supply on carts at Ardee, Droghedu and
Best Scotch Coal (screened),
per ton, for one-
year from 1st April, 1915, as required for use of Road
Rollers,
No Tender received.
APPLICATIONS BY THE SECRETARY.
No. 16—To supply Printing and Stationery for County Pur- .
poses, for one year from 1st April, 1915. including the
Printing to be (Ione, for the Clerk of the Crown and
Paree, tunder Jurors' and Registration Acts.
Tenders were received from Messrs Tempest, M'l)ougall, M •Cul-
lough, and MIS Mathews for various iterns of Vrinting and
Stationery, and in each ease the lowest tender was accepted, and
where the prices were the same, the last contractor wus given
the Ineference.
No. 17—To supply for one year from the 1st April, 1915, Ardee,
Drogheda,
and Dundalk Courthouse, with Best Wigan
delivered, Covutraetor to supply
coal, at
per ton,
Coke, Bog H a:od, Fire lighting ntatefials,
at Ma rket
Prices, as required.
The only fenders ITeeived were those of Messrs M urdot:k and
Sons, Drogheda, for the supply of coals to Court [louse
and Messrs F ill and Co, Dundalk, for the
at 30s per ton ;
supply of coals to Dundalk Cot:rt Ilouse at 30s per ton, and for
Ardee Court Ilouse at 40s per ton.
The tenders of Messrs Mnrdoek and Sons and I" O'Neill and
Co were accepted for the supplies to the respective Court Houses
as above.
No. 18—To Prepare the Court and Court Roonts for Assizes, Quare
ter Sessions and Revision Sessions, in County Court-
house, for one year from 1st April, 1915—Not to exceed
C15 Od.
27
The tender of Messrs B Patteson and Co., Dundalk for the sum
i ender re.
of C14 14s Ocl was accepted, this being the only
ceived.
No. 19—To insert the County Advertisements, etc., ill one Dun-
dalk and Drogheda Paper, for one year from 1st April,
1915—Not to exceed 3d per line.
Tenders were received froni Thomas Roe, "Dundalk Democrat" •
and Mrs Annie Mathews,
M a •Keown, ' 'Drogheda Argus,'
"Dundulk Examiner," at the rate of 3d per line. The tenders of
Thomas Roe and M M 'Keown, being the last Contractors, were
accepted.
28
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Comrnittee at their
Meeting held in the Council Cham bel% Court Tlouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 1st day of February, 1915, af one o'clock p m.
Preseni
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other O'MemtI, J P; William Woods, J P; Peter
Woods, J P; John F Murphy, J P; Wynne, J P; and
Edward Goodman, Esquires.
Messrs Thomas Walsh, County Stuxeyor, and Daniel O'Connell,
Solicitor to the Council, were also in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Finance Committee
were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
Tlie following accounts were submitted and on re-examination
were 01dered for payment
Works in hands of County Surveyor
Secretary's Office
Total,
167 19
38 9
2206 8
3
2
5
29
DROGHEDA corm IIC)VSE.
The following letter from thc Council's Solicitor was read
Francis Street, Dundalk,
18th January, 1915.
Re Drogheda COurt Ilouse.
Dear Sir,—
Tn reply to your letter of 6th instant on the sulliecf of
the Council's powers herein, j to state that ever since the
Local Government Act, 1898, and notwitllstanding Article 15 of
Schedule to Application of Enactrnents Order, the property
Of the Courthouse is vested in the County Council, but the legal
custody and control of the existing Sheriff is preserved.
The
County Council merely have an incorporate right to the custody
and confit)l, but the legal ptyssession remains with the Sheriff.
The County Council have certain rights under Section 72 of then
Act of 1898, but even if the Lord Lieutenant allocated certain
portion.é under this Section to the Council the right to possession,
thereof remains with the Sheriff.
I am inclined to think that the Corporation of Drogheda have u
no right fo use the Courthouse for their Offices, as under Section
72 of the Local Govermment Act, 1898, the County Council may
use same, except what is required by the Sheriff for the adminis-
tra.tion of justice.
1 cannot see how the County Council can •charge a rent on the
Drogheda Corporation.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Chas M 'Alester, Esq,
See. Louth County Council, Du•ndalk.
A long discussion ensued in which Messrs Goodman, O'Meara,
and the Chairman took part.
30
The Council's Solicitor, Mr O'Connell, on the request of the
Chairman, gave his opinion that the County Council were bound
to supply the Court House with the necessary coal, light, and
-water, but considered that the Council could refuse to supply
thern to the portion of the Court House used by the Corpora-
,tion.
It was decided to refer the whole quest ion of the usage of the
Court House by tliö Droghedib Corporation and the provision . of
supplies thereto to the next Meeting of the County Council.
WOTTONSTOWN AND FANE DRAINAGE DISTRICT.
The following letters were read, and affer discussion were re-
ferrod to the County C%uncil
WOTTON.STOWN DRAINAGE DISTRICT.
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 19th January, 1915.
No. 2,113: 1915.
Louth County.
Sir,—
With reference to your letter of the 1st ultimo,
relative
to the 'posed transfer of the business of the Wottonsfown
DDrainage District to the Louth County Council, I am directed
by the Government Board for Ireland to forward herewith,
for the infortnation of the Louth County Council, a copy of a
letter rceeivod from the Commissioners of Public Works on the
fogefher with a statement which, the Board prestnne,
matter,
eonfains the information desired by the County Council in their
resolution of the 26t 11 Noveni ber last.
am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARL.\S,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
31
ENCLOSURE IN ABOVE LETTER.
(Copy).
Office of Public Works,
Dublin, 9th January, 1915.
No. 2,113: 1915.
Sir,—
Tn reply to your letter of the 7th ultitno and enclosure
• (66,702-14) relative fo the transfer Of the business of Wottonstown
Drainage District to the Louth County Council, and in com-
pliance with the request of the County Council in their letter to
vou of the 1st ultimo, I am directed by the Commissioners of
Public Works to enclose Iverewith a Schedule compiled from the
records Of the Land Registry Department t nd General Valuation
Office, giving the nanus of the proprietors of land in
the district and the area of land held by each proprietor. The
decimal proportion of liability of each poi fion of land drained
or improved for payment of Maintenance Raff', with the anjounf
payable on the, basis of a levy of Æ50, is also shown.
I am to add that the Board have taken C50 as basis, for the
reason that the annual levy for maintenance purposes in ibis
Sinall district is always likely to be below this amount.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
H. WILLIAMS,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
Local Government Board, Dublill
FANE DRAINAGE DISTRICT.
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 29th January, 1915.
No. 5.030: 1915.
Louth County.
Sir,—
With reference to previous con•espondenee relative to the
transfer of the business of the Fane Drainage District to the
32
Louth County Council, I am directed by the Local Government
Board for Ireland to forward copy of a letter received from
the Commissioners of Public Works on the matter, together with
a schedule giving the natnes of the present proprietors of land
in the district and the area of land held by each proporietor.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistanf
The Seeretary,
Louth County Council.
ENCI/).SURE IN ABOVE LETTER.
(Copy).
Office of Public. vvmd,s,
Secreta ry
Dublin, 23rd January,
No. 17,342: 1914.
Sir,—
191%
Tn reply to your letter of the 7th utlitno and enclosure.
(66,698-14) relative to the transfer of the business of the Fane
Drainage District to the Louth County Council, and in eom-
pliance with the request of the County Council in their letter to
you of the 1st ultimo, T am directed by the Commissioners of
Public Works to enclose herewith a Schedule compiled from the
records of the Land Registry Department and General Valuation
Office, giving the names of the present proprietors of land in
the district and the areit of land held by each proprietor. The
decimal proportion of liability of each portion of land
or improved for payment of Maintenance Rate, with the
payable on the basis Of levy of 9-75, is also given.
I am to add that the Board have taken C75 as a basis
drained
amount
for tho
33
reason that the annual levy for maintenance purposes in this
small district is always likely to be below this amount.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
11. WILLIAMS,
Secretary-
The Secretary,
Local Government Board, Dublin.
GILES' QUAY PIER LIGHTING.
The following Report ironi the County Surveyor on the lighting
Of Giles' Quay Pier was read
County Surveyor's Office,
Courthouse, Dundalk,
30/1/1915.
LIGHTING GILES' PIER.
To the Chairman and Gentlemen,
Finance Committee, 1st February, 1915.
Gentlemen,
Re continuing the leading light on Giles' Quay Pier-head, the
Ilarbour Constable states that he would expect to be pmid extra
for lighting the lamp for the 12 months of the year instead of as
hithefto for four months of the year.
I referred him to the Minutes of the Piers and Harbours Com-
lighting of the Pier. His
rni€tee of October, 1907, on the
explanation is that the C2 allowed him then is for the pier lamps ;
that the period of lighting the leading light was not then extended
nor discussed.
I beg to ask for instructions in the matter so tha,f there may be
no hitch when the order for lighting comes into force.
larup got badly bruised in the storm
I may add that the leading
T have had if repaired so that it will hold
'Of 1st January last.
for a time, but it would be advisable to get a new lamp and have
•same in stock for emergencies.
Your obedient Servant,
THOMAS WALSH.
The Secretary informed the Committee that, as directed by the
he had given notice to the Irish Lights
•County Council,
Commissioners of the resolution of the Council to extend tho
period Of lighting of the Pier Light for the entire twelve months
instead of four months as heretofore, and the Commissionerts had
-approved of [Ike following Form of Notice to Mariners:
NOT [CE TO MARINERS.
EAST COAST OF IRELAND. DUNDAK BAY.
GILES' QUAY PIER J,IGHT.
Louth County Council Offiee,
Ijundalk, 23rd January, 1915.
The l,outh County Council hereby give notice that the T eight
the Giles' Quay Pier (hitherto exhibited only during the months
of September, October, Novelli her, and December) will be
exhibited during the entire year.
CITARI.ES M'AI,ESTER,
Secretary.
'Ile further informed the Conunittee. that the Commissione18 had
requested that 300 copies of the Notice should be senf to them fo
distribu,fed to the various local authorities round the coast Of
I reland, atld thal Ile had these ready to send; but owing to the
fact that the County Surveyor had infonned him that the Ilarbottr
Constable expected to receive additional remuneration for the
he had not sent these forward pend-
lighting for the entire year,
ing a decision by the Comrnitiee on this matter.
The Secretary produced the Minute of the Piers and Ilarbotll*
'Committee at their Meeting held on 14th October, 1907,
35
which it was understood that all the lighting Giles' Quay
m should be done by the ITarbour Constable for 9.2 per annum,
wllicll sum he was af present receiving.
The Finance Committee unanimously decided that the lighting
for the entire year of the lamps at the Pier should be done by the
Harbour Constable. for C2 per annum, and the County Surveyor
was instrucåecl [o direcf„ him accordingly, ancl, if necessary,
in tho case of his refusal, to employ a man to do the necessary
light7ng, aud generally to have full power to deal with the matter.
The Seere€ary was then direefecl to send the copies of the Notice
to Mariners to the Commissioners of Irish Lights, ancl request
them to advise the County Council when the lighting Illight
• conunence from.
EQUIPMENT OF BEDS TN RED CROSS HOSPITAL, IOVBI,TN.
The following letter from the Local Government Board was read,
and, after discussion, it was decided to rcfer same fo the County
'Council :—
No. 5,230/1915.
I .oufli County.
Sir,
I local Government Board, Dublin,
29th 1915.
In reply to your lefier of the 26th instant, relative to the
Proposal of the Louth County (J'ouncil to provide 5 hospital
in Dublin Castle, I am directed by the l,oeal Government Board
for Ireland to refer you to Section 47 (2) of the Local Govejwntent
'(ireland) Aet, 1898, and to state tllat the Boa,rd are aware of
•any statutory provisions vcliicll wotl!d enable tile Council to
make the payment suggested.
T am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
The Secretary,
louth County Council.
Courthouse, Dundalk
36
COMPENSATION FOR GOOSEBERRY BUSHES DESTROYEDE
The following elainjs for compensation for gooseberry bushes.
destroyed in Co. Louth were eonsidered by the Committee :—
Patrick Kelly, bushes.
Michael Tlynes; CordelTy—3600 bushe.s.
Julia Crinnion, Cappoeks Green—150 bushes.
Patrick M'Ardle, Ardee—500 bushes.
James Connolly, J P, RavansdaIe—100 bushes.
Affer discussion, it was decided that the Secretary would senct
a list fo Mr Ilarney, Horticultural Esperf to the County Com-,
miffee of Agriculture, for his remarks and report on
claims.
RATE COLLECTION.
The Secretary submitted as directed statement showing
the.
state of the Collection of Poor Rate up to 31st Januan•,
1915.
from which iC appeared that the following amounts were
ouv
standing. The statement was initialled by the Chairman :—
Patrick S. Donegan
Patrick M'l)onnell
Patrick M'Cu110ugh
J. J. Kelly
Pibtriek Hughes
Patrick Cluskey
Peter
John Woods
J. V. JOhnsfon
Total outstanding
2284 6
2035 6
1685 17
821 6
962 7
2046 7
1883 10
1560 2
730 10
C14009 14
8
1
2
4
6
3
6
1
3
NEW COUNTY OFFICES.
Letter was read from Town Clerk, Dundalk, stating that
his
Council had arranged Tuesday evening, 2nd inst, at seven o'clock'
to meet the deputation from the New Offices Committee with re-
37
Terence to the questions of frontage, right of way and lighting
for the New Building.
The Chairman informed the Committee that if was desirable
•to have a Special Meeting of the County Council to consider the
Report from the New Offices Commiffee as to the increased front-
age, to enable PIQ)fessor Scott to proceed with the drafting of the
•conditions for the competition for plans.
The Secretary was directed to apply to the County Treasurer,
the Hibernian Bank, for similar terms for the loan of 26000 re-
quired for the New Offices as [hose for the Machinery and Road
Tmprovement Loans, namely, 3 per cent interest on outstanding
balances.
ENCROACHMENT OF PORCH AT TANKARDSRO(K
The following report from the co. Surveyor was read, mnd the
matter was referred to the County Council :—
County Surveyo€s Office,
Courthouse, Dundalk,
30th January, 1915.
Porch at Tankardsrock.
TO the Chairman and Gentlemen Finance Committee, February
1st, 1915.
Gentlemen,—
My Assistant, Mr Lyons, reports tlle erection of a
porch within 20 feet (twenty feet) of the centre of the road be-
•tween C'ross Roads at Killen and Kileurley National School.
The porch is 7 feet 0 inches x 7 feet 6inehes on plan and is
•erected inside (i.e., not on road side) of road boundary wall.
Francis Mitchell is the occupier of the house. Mr John
'Trwin, Dundalk, is the owner.
Your obedient Servant,
THOMAS WALSH.
38
ROAD BOARD GRANTS.
Letter was read from the Road Board enclosing Draft State-.
ments of the Grants to the varioug districts in County I.outh as
arranged with the County Council. The amounts apportioned
by the Road Board are as follows
DROGHEDA 'URBAN OISTRICT.
Estimated east, Of improvemenf—E1520.
Grn,nt by Road Board—C821.
Payment of Grant—C410 on requisition when applicants are
ready fo e,onunence work; E411 on certificate of Co. Surveyor
approved by an Engineering Inspeeior of the Road Board that
the works have beon satisfactorily cmnpleted, and a detailed
statement actual expenditure.
DUNDALK URBAN DISTRICT.
Estinuvtocl cost of impHjvoment—C1260.
Grant by Road
Vayment of Grant—Æ340 OVI requisit ion when applicants are•
ready to commence work; C340 on eertifie.%fe of CO. Surveyor
approved by nn Engineering Inspector of the Road Board that
the works have bean satisfactorily completed, and a detailed
statenr•nt of actual expenditure.
DISTRICTS:
Ardee, Drogheda,
a nd Dundalk.
Estilna,fexl cost of improventent—Æ8120.
Grant by Road Board—E43b5.
Pa.vtnent Of Grant—C1460 when applicants are ready to com-
menee work; C1460 on certificate of County Surveyor that 50 per
eotlf of' the works have been completed; C1465 on certificate Of
County Surveyor approved by an Engineering' Inspector of the
Road Board, and a detailed statement of actual expenditure.
09
The County Surveyor stated he was verifying and returning
statements to the Road Board.
Tho Secretary was directed to advise the Drogheda Corporation
and flye Dundalk Urban' Council that in addition to the amounts
Of half their expenditure that the Road Board had apportioned
to them a grant for interest of flie stuns of Z61 and E50 re—
spectively.
The statements were initialled by the Chairman.
40
executive Committee.
Minutes of Procec«lings of the F,.xeeui ive Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council ('hanjl;er, Courthouse,
Monday, 1st February, 1915, af one (Veloek p m.
Present :—
In the A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Ofher Members—M O'Meara, .J P; wm Woods,
Woods, J P; Edward Goodman, John F Murphy,
Wynne, J P, Esquires.
Mr Maxwell, V S, was also pnssent.
Dundalk. on
J
P;
P;
refer
J a ines
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Executive Coni-
mittee were taken as read am signed by the Chairman.
The following reports from the Veterinary Inspectors were read
and initialled by the Cliairnjan :—
REPORT'S FROM VETERINARY iR.S.
January 31st, 1915.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Mr Clinton's Repo;t for January.
Si r,—
I beg to report that during the past month no case of
scheduled contagious disease has occurred in this district. TW'Y
•cases of suspected bovine tu herculosis were reported to me, one
Dromiskin and one at Bellurgan, but on examination of the
• Alimals I found that they did not suffer from tuberculosis.
Your obedient Servant,
J. T. CLINTON, V. S.
23rd January, 1915.
The Cliairman,
Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
Repor€ for Deemnbtur, 1914.
Mr Maxwell's
Sir,—
1 beg to report that 1 tine and
of the Ardee No. 1 District. P Crosby,
reported to me that lie had a sick pig which
: swine fever. The animal was suffering from indigestion.
Faithfully yopars,
Ardee, 1st February, 1915.
The Chairman,
Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
Ur Maxwell's Report for January, 1915.
Sir,—
1 beg to report that 1 visited the usual fairs, markets, etc.,
for.the month of January, held in the No. 1
the 13th outbreak of sheep occurred on the farm of
'l visited fliese pre-
Edm und O'Connor, Challeville, Dunleer.
mises on the 12th and 13th and issued the necessary regulations
in regard to same, and on the 19th and 29th "I personally super-
On the 14th another outbreak
place on (he fam at Carballis, owned by L A Lee-Normagn.
In 11 also issued necessary notices of and
their dipping on the 23rd of the month.
42
1 beg to draw your the fact that sheep were.
not the Sheep scali of 1914, made by
1 also beg draw a tfention to the fact that
in its present forJil fulfil the intention of the
Council, of the entry into this county of
animals. To so, in opinion, the should
or exposed for sale in any fair.
or saleyard"
—antl also. in opinior, be made include the
Agents, i.e.
panics in the Co. Louth to r6port the of any sheep at
Unless somethin'"
r, like this he done T
Order is of little value.
am afraid the present
I ani Sir
Faithfully yours,
W. E. MAXU El.L.
Drogheda, January 6th, 1915.
Mr Donnelly's for 1914.
Gentlemen, —
of 1914, I eight re-
ported to with under the OHIor.
r furnished your full relating to the
1 am pleased to is no outbreak
any of' the notifiable diseases.
Sh€ep Scull)
is not now at all prevalent in this part owing to.
the with the conditions laid down in the
Yours
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
To Luth co. Council.
(Executive (%mmittee).
43
Drogheda, February 1st,
Mr Donnelly's Report for January, 1915.
Gentlemen,—
flie Illonth of January I had six eases reported'
undop the Tuberculosis Order dealt with sanie and furnished
your Secretary with the necessary
reports on the prescri bect
forms.
I had one outbreak of sheep scab in my (list riet, but,
fortunately only one aninaal in the flock was found affected with
the disease. I had all the sheep at once dipped, and the diseased
has been dipped three tintes since the outbreak was first
notified, and I hope in tho course of ten days or so to be able to.
withdraw the restrictions in this case.
I am,
Yours lespeetfully,
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
CASES CNDER TUBERCUIÅ)SIS (IRELAND) ORDER, 1913.
The Secretary submitted that had been received under
the al;ove Order.
All the eases (six in number) had been de-
tained at Drogheda Port by the Portal Inspectors. The Secretary
informed the Conunit.tee that copies of tlie various, Fortns in each
case Iyad been furnished to the Department, and that in none of
the cases would there be any claim for compensation.
SHEEP SCAB.
The Secretary subnjitted notices received from two of the
Veterinary Inspectors of the outbreak of scab as follows
Farm of Edmund O'Connor, Charleville, and farm of I, A Lee-
Norman. Corbailis, both reported by Mr Maxwell, who stated
in his report that flie sheep had been purchased from Roberf
Skelly, Banbridge, and that all the sheep had been dipped since
the outbreak.
44
Farm of Mrs Maguire, of Sheet land, reported by Mr Donnelly,
who stated that all the sheep were dipped onee and the affected
-animals dipped on three occasions, and were progressing satis-
factorily.
TUBERCULOSIS (IRELAND) ORDER, 1914.
Cirenlar letter from the Department of Agriculture, dated 18th
January, 1915, was read, notifying that the Tuberculosis (Ireland)
Order, 1913, had bectn revoked, and that a new Order entitled the
Tuberculosis (I reland) Order of 1914, dated 31st I)ecelnber, 1914,
had been issued, in which the scope of the old Order had been
enlarged so as to include all obviously tuberculous cattle. The
new features of the presemt Order are as follows :—
(1) To enable the Local -Authority to give general direction to
their Officers €0 carry out the prescfibed slaughter and thus
avoid delay.
(2) That only one valuation has to be made, viz, the market value
of the animal.
(3) The omission of the provision whiell expressly allowed
slaughter of a suspected animal by the owner or person
in charge.
A sub-section fo prevent the movenient of a suspected aglimal
from premises where it came under suspicion except fo
premises which the Local Authority or an Inspector direct
its removwl.
Giving authority for payment of fees for notifiea,tion of sus-
pected animals to Veterinary Sul'geons other than the
Veterinary Inspectors of the Local Authority.
•46) The giving of power to the Local Authority to proceed imme-
diately with the slaugllter of anitnals found to be suffering
from one of the forms of tuberculosis specified in the
Order without waiting for specifie dileetions in the case.
It was notified that the Order would come into operation on
1st Februatw, 1915, and requesting that a copy of the following
45
The Secretary in—
advertisement be issued before that date.
formed the Committee that he had sent the advertisement to tlw
county newspapers as directed :—-
COUNTY COUNCIL OF T,OUT1i.
NOTICE.
The attentiori of persons owning or having charge of Cattle in
the County 14011th is directed to the above named Order of
and Technical Instruction for Ireland,
which eome« into operation on Isf February, 1915.
the Order is to bling within the stope of the existing provisions
with reg;trd to bovine tuberculosis all bovine animals suffering
from cough and showing definite clinical signs of fuber-
Local Authorities are empowered to slaughter any bull,
cow, ox, heifer or calf which they are satisfied is suffering from
this of the disease, and to pay compensation for animals so
slaughtered on the same conditions as apply to cows slaughtered
as suffering frotn tuberculosis of the udder, or as giving
tuberculous milk, and bovine animals slaughtered as suffering
from tuberculous emaciation. Vnder the Order the valuation of
an animal for the purposes of compeD€ation will be made on one
basis only, viz: the market value before slaughter.
Under the Order every person having in his possession or un-
der Itis charge
any cow which is or appears to be suffering flom tuberculosis,
of the udder, indurated udder, or 'other chronic disease of
the udder; or
(2) ajny bovine which is or appears to be suffering from
emaciation due to tuberculosis; or
(3) any bovine animal is suffering from a cough
and showing definite clinical signs of tuberculosis
is to notify the police of the fact without delay and to
keep the animal isolated other animals as far as
46
{Article 10) until the animal is slaughtered or €110 pertnission of
the Local Authority for its removal is obtained. He is also re-
quired, if the animal be cow, to fake certain precautions with
regard to milk and milk vessels (Article 9).
The Order forbids the movement to a Port for sliiprn€illt of any
•animal suffering or appearing to be suffering froin any of the
forms of disease specified in the preceding paragraph, and pre-
scribes steps which may be taken in the event of any such
animal being brought to a Port for shipntont or exposed for sale
in a market, fair ground, or sale yard.
Persons desiring fuller information as to the provisions of the
'Order cau obtain copies of the Order by applying to
The Secretary,
Department of Agriculture
Teehnieal Instruction for Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch), Dublin.
By Order,
(Signed),
C[IARI.ES MCALESTER,
Clerk to the Loca,l Authority under the Diseases of
Animals Act for the County of Louth.
Courthouse, Dundalk,
25th January, 1915.
The Secretary informed the Committee that eopi•s of the Forms
under the Order bad been forwarded to the Veterina1Y Inspectors
as directed by the Department, which was approved by the Com-
mittee.
REVOCATION OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE
REGULATIONS.
Notice was submitted from the Wesf Sussex County Council,
which stated that the Local Authority of West Sussex had revoked
the Regulations made by them on 8th May, 1914, dealing with the
movement into their County of animals from Ireland, and animals
which had been in contact with animals from Ireland.
47
Coutb County Council.
M:nutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
Spee,a! Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House,
Dundalk, on Monday, 15th February, 1915, at one o'clock,
Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Members—T Peter Woods, J P; T O'Rourke,
J P; .J Tl M'Ard1e, J P; Bernard llamill, J P;
Jarnes M 'Carthy, J P; Thomas B M 'Court, and James Wynne,
J P, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was also present
Chairman informed the Council that the Meeting was
' called to consider the Report of the New Offices Committee, as
set out in the minutes of their Meetings held on '27th January,
and 811, February, 1915, copies of sent to each
member of the County Council. He explained that it was ne-
to give Mr the assessor for plans
for the offices, the exaet instructions as to the space avail-
eble fen the new buildings, and also for the proposal to link up
the offic.:s the County Court House.
A di>cussion ensued as to the terms arranged with the Urban
•Council of Dundalk, Mith respect to the increased frontage,
right of way, etc, and some of the present, on
48
suggestion of the Chairman, inspected the site. On their re%-
turn the details of the recommendations contained in the minu—
tes were fully discussed.
Mr M'Cart'h,y suggested thart in view of the fact that greatly
increased expenditure owing to the war might be necessary in
the near future, the erection of the offices might be postponecL
He bore testimony to the care that had been exercised by the.
Committee in dealing with the project, but he would not vote
against the passing of the minutes.
The following resolution was then passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Hamnill, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Thomas Murphy, Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby approve of the recommenda tions.
oc New County Offices Committee, made at their Meetings,
held or: 27th January and 8th February, 1915, namely
The linking up of the New County Offices with the Court
House.
The arrangements made with the Dundalk Urban C'cuan-
eil to pay them a sum of Clö(), to cover the expenses
of the removal and re-erection of the existing urinal,
and a rent of CI Is Od per annum for :—
Extra frontage in Crowe Street of 13 feet G inches by 40
feet in depth.
The grant of right of way through the Urban Couhcil
property to the Machinery Depot at the back of the.
new offices, and
The grant of right of light to the new offices on the Town
Hall side.
49
The question of additional remesentation on the New County
Office, Committee was discussed, and it was decided to refer
same to the next meeting of the County Council.
ACCOMMODATION FOR HIRING FAIRS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Patrick M 'Gee, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Thomas C)' Rourke, Esq, and
Resolved—That tile contemplated machinery shed •about to
be erected at the rere of the new county offices, be used when
occasion demands it, for the purposes of tne Hiring Fairs 'at
M,ay and November.
Coutb County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings of the -Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Mcmday, 15th February, 1915, at one o'clock, m.
Present:—ln the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Murphy, Peter Woods; J P; T O'Rourke,
Patrick M'Gee, J P; Joseph H M'AuT11e, J P; Bernard Hamill,
J P. James M'Ctuåhy, J P; Thomas B M'Court: and James
Wynne, J P, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor. was also in attend-
ance.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Finance Com-
mittee were taken as rend and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted, and examination
were ordered for payment
Works in Charge of County Surveyor
Secretary's Office
Total
Tho Bank Ihoks for t\he General ancl
were examined and initialled.
13 11
210 0
"'27 3 11
Subsidiarv Accounts
51
It was clocicled €0 transfer from tho General to the Subsidiary
Account for the purpcse of paying Che Malicious Injury
01) levy, etc, sum •of
APPEALS AGAINST MAJ,TCIOTTS INJURY DECREES.
Bernard Tlamill brought under the notice of the Com-
mittee a B,'lalieious Injury Claitn for which a deeroe had been
granted at the last Dundalk Quarter Sessions, and in which an
appeo; had been lodged, althcng?l the amount of the decree was
only given for the amount of damage which had been proven
by the County Council witness, and suggested that in the cir-
enmstanees the appeal •should be withdrawn.
Mr Murphy stated that a resolution was on tho Minutes of
the County Council ar.peals should be lodged in every case,
advocated that each case should be considered separately,
and the Solicitor's advice as to the ehnnces of success on appeal
should taken.
Hamill stated he would hand in notice of motion to ras-
the resolution, and that each case be dealt with on its
merits.
ESTIMATE OF RATES.
The Soerotary submitted the Estimate of Rates for serviee of
the Financial Year, ending 31st March, 1916, which was dis-
at length, and the various items for County, Union and
District Charges examined and compared.
On the motion of Mr Bornard Hamill, J P,
'Seconded by Mr James M 'Ca.rthy, J P,
it unanimously decided to recommend the adoption o/ the
52
Estimate to t,he County Council, and the Secretary was direc-
ted te send a oopy of same with his explanatory statement, Vo
each member of the Council, ancl the Clerks of the Unions and
District Councils concerned,
WRITING OF RATE BOOKS.
The Chairman directed the attention of the Committee to
the necessity of making some proper arrangements for the
writing up of the Rate P»coks.
A discussion took place on this mottor, and the Secretary in-
forme i the Committee that the cheeking of the work had not
been done in a satisfactory manner heretofore. He stated that
it was absolutely necessary that the writing of the names from
the Vetluation Lists to the Rate Books nncl Che cheeking of the
copies for the Unions, should be done by trustworthy and corn-
T,etent cheekers who would be responsible for the accuracy of all
the work, including Demand Notes, etc.
The Committee unanimously decided to recommend the Co.
Conneil to place the en.Lire work in the charge of the Secre-
ta ry and that he should 'be authorised to employ two cheek
clerks, as well as the •ordinary extra clerks, for writing up the
Rat.p Books, who would be paid at the ordinary scale rates.
RECOUPMENT OF EXPENSES UNDER DTSEASES OF
ANIMAIS ACTS'.
Letter was read from the Department of Agriculture (Accounts
Thunell), dated 2nd Februa r.y, notifying that the sum of C257 Is 3d
had been lodged to the credit of the Louth County Council, being
half of the neft expenditure of the Council Ittnder the Provision•S
of the Diseases of Animals Acts for the period ended 31st Decenl•
ber, 1914.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman,
53
COSTS OF CRIMINAL INJURY msMTss.
The following letter from Mr O'Connell was read and initialled
by the Chairmam—
Francis Street, Dundalk,
11th Febrmary, 1915.
Criminal Injury Application—Mathew Farrell, Dronjin, 5250.
Dear Sir,—
With leferenee to this claim for alleged burning of a
small dwelling-house at Stalyannon, the property of the above-
nanted Applicant, aid which was distilissed by the County Court
Judge, at the January Quarter Sesions at Dundalk, I beg to report
that I have received eheque for 624 Is 6d «)its of dismiss from the
and have lodged same with the Council's
Applicant's Solicitor,
Treasu rer to-day.
L enclose rceeipt for lodgmnenf made.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M' Aloster, Esq,
Secretary Louth County Council.
COAL SUPPLIES TO COURT 110t-sE ANI) "1101.1,ERS.
The fellowing ecnmespondenc•e was read. and after discussion it
cleei(lecl to leave the matters in the hands of the County
Surveyor and Secretary fo make the very 'best ternjs possible for
the necessary coal supplies
Railway Quay, Dundalk,
February 3rd, 1915.
Dear Sir,—
We beg leave to inform your Council that we are unable
obtain our usual supply of coal from other side owing to t lae
War, and on the small stock we have we wei@ forced to pay
54
exorbitant prices, so we trust your Commiftee will allow us the
current prices during {his quarter as had been done on previous
occasions.
Yours truly,
F. O'NEILL CO.
County Surveyor's Office,
Court House, Dundalk,
13th February, 1915.
Coal for Steam Rollers.
Seerofary, County Council]
Tlerewifh 1 return you P. Curtis' letter re coal.
On 4th February T interviewed Mr Ci114is nud he agrood fo
supply Seofeh coal at 28s "for the present."
T aeeeptecl tlii*
pending the next Meeting of the Finanee Cmnmitfee on Monday,
15th instant.
On the 8th instant Mr Curtis wrote me tha,f he could gef no
Scotch coal, but would supply best English at 33s
T may say the roller drivers complain of the Scotch coal, and
T believe good Yorkshire coal, even af a higher price than the
Scotch. would he a saving.
Yours faithfully,
THOMAS WALSH.
Coal Yards, St. Helena Quay,
Dundalk, February 1st, 1915.
To Charles M'.Alesfer, Esq,
Secretary, T.outh County Council.
Sir,—
Owing to present circumstmnees and the exeessivo ad-
vanee in price of coal and freights, T am unable to supply at
price quoted I? months ago. I would be pleased if you could
say fhat T will be allowed the difference in prices, otherwise I
cannot deliver further.
Awaiting your reply.
Yours truly,
PATRICK CURTIS.
COMMITTALS TO INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS.
Letter was read from the Very Rev Canon Donnellan, P P,
Ruvensdale, stating he was making application to have two girls
named Isabella Irene Moore and Rose Moore, of Mountpleasant,
committed to St. Joseph's Industrial School, Dundalk.
The letter was inifialled by the CIK1irman.
Notice was received from Clerk of Petty Sessions, Carlingford,
that John 11. Hanlon, aged 11 years, of Ardtullymore, would
come up for trial at a Juvenile Court on Thursday, 18th insf, for
larceny, and that it was likely the Justices would send him to
au Industrial School, and requesting €0 know whether the
County Council would wish to be represented at this frial.
The Committee decided unanimously that it would not be neces-
sary for the Council to be represented at the trial, and dil@cted
the Secretary to reply accordingly.
COUNTY ANALYST'S REPORT.
The following Report from Sir Charles Cameron was read and
initialled by the Chairman :—
Report Of Sir Charles Cameron, dated 9th February, 1915,
Public Analyst for the County Louth, on articles submitted to
him for Analysis during the quarter ended 31st December, 1914.
G 64
Thirty-three articles were reeeived from the Food
Inspectors,
57
that the articles should
I would suggest
(he quarter.
unifonnly during
Total analsyses—36
forwarded
more
R 1 C, as follows —
A rticle.
lhlffer
Milk
Wh iskey
Cheese
They were all pure.
Number.
19
12
1
1
33
One specimen of wa,ter analysed for the Ardee Rural District
Council had the following composition
One imperial gallon contained in grains.
Total solid matter
Including :
Albuminoid Ammonia
Saline Ammonia
Nitric Acid
Chlorine
Colour
39/200
0.042
0.170
0.750
6.490
light yellow
FISHERY ENQUIRIES AT DROGHEDA.
Agriculture of
Notices were read from (Ite Depa of
Salmon Fishery Enquiries fo be held at Drogheda Court House
on the 3rd and 4th days Of March, 1915, with reference to the
mesli of nets and Che defining of the Estuary of the River Boyne
and tho Estuaries, Months and Tidal and Fiesll„ Wafer Boundaries
of the Rivers Nanny and Delvin in the Drogheda Disflået.
It was decided to request Messrs: James M'Carthy, J P; N T
Murphy, J P; B Moore, J P; and W T Skeffington, .J P, to re-
present the County Council at the Enquries.
GILES' QUAY IAGIITING.
Let fer was read from the County Surveyor stating fhaf Jaliies
Cumiskey, the Harbour Constable at Giles' Quays has agreed fo
lights at (Giles' Quay until
ean•y on t!je lighting of the leading
Quarterly Meeting of the ('Ouncil on the 25th irystant.
Immensely polluted and dangerous to use.
For the Richmond District Lunatic Asylum two specimens Of
soap, one of butter and ono of cocoa, were analysed and were
correct.
In the original report on the wafer above referred to, full
tails, chemical and microscopical, wero given, but -in the fore-
going, only the more important points are given.
During the months of October and November, 19 articles
received, -and during the month of December, 14 articles were
received.
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY: COUNCIL.
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
FOURTH (Adjourned) QUARTERLY MEETING,
Held on 25th February, 1015.
FINANCE COMMITTEE,
THEIR •tv.wÉTNGS
Held 1st March, 29th March„ and
NEW
12th: April, 1915.
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE,
Helå on 12th April, 1915,
REPORT Gom
COUNTY .t OFFICES COMMITTEE&
MACCULLOVGU; PAINTER,
1
Coutb County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings •of the Louth County Council at their
Fourth Adjourned Quarterly Meeting held in the Council Cham-
bor, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Thursday, 25th Febmmary, 1915,
one o'clock p m.
Present :—
In the Chai—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.,
Other Members—John Morgan, Peter Woods, J P ; Michael
Meade, Thomas .B M'Cour€, T V M Quillan, Peter 13 Mocwo,
J P; Bernard Finegan, Patrick Donegan, J P; P Callan, Patk.
J P; Joseph H M'.\rdle, J P; T W T Skeffing-
ton, J P; M O'Meara, J P; wm Woods, J P; Tiamill,
J P; James M'C„rthy, J P; J Wynne, J P; Michael M'Ardle,
and Thomas O'Rourke, Esquires.
Al(hssrs Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor; Daniel O'Connell,
Solicitor to the Council; James Dromgoole and J M C Lyons,
Assistant Surveyors and V Waru•n, Clerk T C M, were also
.Pre.sent.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MI-NCTES.
The following resolution passed unanimously :—
by W T Esq, J P;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
'Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth
County Council at their Fourth Quarterly Meeting, held on
2
21st January, 1915, and their Special Meeting held on the 15th'
February, 1915, a copy of which has been sent to each member
of the Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE MINUTES.
The foll(hling resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the Finanee•
Committee at their Meetings held on the undermentioned dates,.
a copy of which has been sent to each member of the County
Council, be and ore, hereby confirmed :—
Monday, 1st February, 1915.
Monday, 15th February, 1915.
CONFIRMATION OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P;
Seconded by T V M 'Quillan, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Minutexs of Proceedings of the Executive
Committee at their Meeting held on 1st February: 1915, a COPY
of which has been sent to each member of the County Council'
be and are hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF PROPOSAL COMMITTEE MINUTESE
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Thomas Murphy, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the proposal
Committee at their Fourth Adjourned Quarterly Meeting, held
on 1st February, 1915,
a ecp.v of which has been sent to each
member of the County
Council, be and are hereby confirmed-
CONFIRMATION OF SCHOLARSHIP COMMITTEE
MINUTES.
After a short discussion the following resolution was passed
unanimously
by Patrick M'Gee, Esq, J P;
Seconded by T V M 'Quillan, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the Scholar-
ship Committee at their meeting held on 25th January, 1915, a
copy of which has been sent to each member of the Council, be
and are hereby confirmed, and we hereby approve of the Louth
County Council Scholarship Scheme for 1915-16, as set cynt
therein.
CONFIRMATION OF COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Patrick Donegan, Æsq, J P;
Seconded by Peter B Mocre, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Report of the County Surveyor: as appea,r
ing on Pages 1 and 2 of the Schedule of Proposals for the 25th
day of February, 1915, a copy of which has been furnished to
each member of the, Council, be and is hereby adopted •by this
Council.
4
CANCELLATION OF CONTRACTS.
After di.seusision, the following resolution was passed unani-
:rnonsly
•by Poter Woods, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Patrick M 'Gee, E.sq, J P, and
Resolved—-That in accordance with Clause 21 of the Specifica-
lion, the following contracts are declared to be broken
A RDEE RURAL DISTRICT.
Index No, 14; "11 Perches; Dunleer-Louth—Thomas Nixon,
Contractor.
DUNDALK RURAL DISTRICT.
No. 115; 1,334 Perches; Dundalk-Carlingford—Thos Rice, Sen,
Contractor.
No. 34 ; 443 Perches; Kane,
Contractor.
So. 104; 42/5 Perches; Dundalk-Carlingford—Peter Rafferty,
Con tractor.
So. 2-3; 320 Perches; Dundalk-LouthL -Joseph M 'Kenna, Con-
tractor.
No. Ill ; 906 Perches; Corraki€-GyIes' Quay—John M 'Donald,
Contraotor.
No. 56; 144 Perches; Dundalk-Castleblayney—John Clarke,
Con tractor.
No. 48; G97 Perches; Louth-Essexford—-patrick Markey, Con-
tractor.
5
DEFAULTING CONTRACTORS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Jkunes• M 'Ca.rthy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Patrick Donegan, Esq: J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby direct that legal proceedings be in—
stituted against all defaulting contractors and their sureties in
every case where any loss {has been occasioned to the county
ing to neglected •contracts being re-set at increased prices.
ARDEE WORKS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P;
Seconded by M•Gee, 18>1, J P, and
Resolved—urat the proposals for works form u:la€ed by the
Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council, at their Fourtll Quarterly•
Meeting, held on Tuesday, 5th January, 1915, and set out on
Form 20, furnished to the County Council, and the contracts
entered into at their Adjourned Meeting held on Tuesday,.
26th January, 1915, be tund are hereby approved of, and we au-
thorise our Secretary to affix the Common Seal of the 'Council
to same.
DROGHEDA WORKS.
The question was raised by Mr Donegan as to Proposal No..
24, for repairs to IIIC road leading frem the Borough boundary
Twenties to thc Baliymakenn.v road at Listoke, and the So-
licitor, Mr O'Connell, having stated Ehat the proposal was not
tj
legal in the present form, suggested that it should be referred
baek to the Rural District Council for amendment, and tho
•Council agreed to this.
The following resolution was then passed unanimously :—
Proposed by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P ;
Soeondecl by Patrick Donegan, Esq P, and
Resolved—That the Prcpcsals for Works formulated bv the
Louth Rural Disirict of Drogheda Union, at their Fourth
Quarterly Meeting held on Tuesday, 12th January, 1915, and
set cut on Form 20, furnished to the County Council, and the
contracts entered into at their Adjourned Meeting held on 2nd
February, 1915, save and except So. 24, for repairs to the
road leading from the Borough Boundary at the Twenties to
tlle P,allymakenny road at Listoke, which is referred back to
"the Rural District Council, be and are hereby approved of, and
that the Secretary be now anthorised to affix the Common Seal
of the Council to same.
DUNDALK WORKS.
The following resolution was passccl unanimously :—
Proposed by T B M'Cout•t, ;
Seconded by Michael O'Meara, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works formulated bv the
I)undalk Rural District Council at their Fourth Qua rterly
Meeting, 'held on Monday, 4th January, 1915, and set out on
Form 20, furnished to the County Council, and the contractS
entered into at their Adjourned Meeting held on 25th January '
1915, be and are hereby approved •of, and that the Secretary 'be
:authorised to affix the Common Seal of the Council to same.
COUNTY-AT-LARGE.
The following resclution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Thornas Murphy, Esq ;
Seconded by Michael M 'Ardle, Esq, and
Resolved—-That, the Proposals for Works formulated by the
Proposal Committee at their Qu-arterly Meeting held on the
4th January, 1915, and sot, out on Form 20, furnished to the
County Council, and the contracts entered into at their Adjour-
ned Meeting held on Monday, 1st February: 1915, be and are
hereby approved of, and we authorise our Secretary to •affix tho
Common Seal of the Council to same.
TENDERS, FOR WORKS.
In accordance with the Secretary's advertisement, ühe Coun-
eil next proceeded to consider tenders for works not set by con-
tract. at the Adjourned Meeting of the Rural District Councils
and the Proposal Committee.
COUNTY-AT-LARGE.
NO. 14—0nly one tender was received and was accepted—Joseph
Kerr, Irish Street, Ardee, for the sum of Cl.5.
ARDEE DISTRICT.
The following tenders being the lowest were accepted
No. 235—Valentine Kerr, Ardee—C12
No. '243—Thomas Molloy, Statbannon—C63.
No. 253—James Toris, 19s 1 ld.
DROGHEDA DISTRICT.
No. 85—Henry Hughes, Callystown—C37 4s Ode
No. Fitzpatrick, Foxhall—C14 8s Oct.
No. 99—1)enis Gargan, Callystown—C3 5s ()d.
In this case the Bond was not completed, as neither the
contractor nor his sureties attended.
No. 103—Pa€rick Fitzpatrick, Foxhall—C47 IOS Od.
Another tender for this work was received from Denis Gargan
for the sum of C3Cj 14s but Gargan, who was present, stated)
he had madO a mislake in the amount in his tender, and refused.
to accept the work at C3(j 14s Od, and the Council decided
animously,
On the motion of W T Skeffington, Esq ,J P, seconded by P.
Donegan, Esq, J P, to declare Patrick Fitzpatrick, FoxHhall„
Contractor.
DUNDALK DISTRICT.
NO. 36—Peter Hanlon, Is (Sd.
In this case the Bond was not completed, as neither tho
Contractor nor his Sureties attended,
No. 39—Two tenders were received for this work as follows
J Woods. Toomes, C'2 3s Od, and Thomas M'Mahon,
Essexford, C2 as ld. As neither Woodk nor his Sure-
ties attended to complete the Bond, the Council deci-
dod unanimously to accept the tenrlbr• of Thoma•g
M'Mahon. Essexford, at 3s
No. 43—Peter Hanlon, Benag1—C21 Is Ode
No. GO--James Rice, Bellurgan—C29 Os Od.
9
No tenders were received for the following:—
Drogheda—No. 94.
Dund911—Nos. 32, and 66.
WORKS PLACED IN CHARGE OF COUNTY SURVEYOR.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
by M'Gee, Esq, J P;
Seconded by James Wynne, E.sq, J P, and
Resolved—That i he Proposals for Works passed by the Rural
D. Councils and Proposal. Committee at their last Quarterly
Meeting, and for which no contracts have •been entered into, be
placed in charge of the Counts Surveyor.
MEETING OF TUBERCULOSIS COMMITTEE OF
MANAGEMENT.
Mr Skeffington dil eeted the attention of the Council to the
fact that a Meeting of the Tuberculosis Committee of Manage-
ment had been called for Wednesday, 24t11 inst, but it would
have suited the convenience of the Councillors generally if the
meeting had been arranged for the 25th inst, at 11 0'clock.
The Chairinan stated they would endeavour to arrange that
in flit.ure a.n effort would be macle to have the meetings of the
Committee to suit the convenience of its members.
SIGN PCS'PS.
Mr Thomas Murphy requestad information with reference to
the sign posts for which an order was made some time ago, and
County Surveyor informed the Council that he would have
a report on the matter ready for next meeting of the Council.
10
SECRETARY'S ESTIMATE 07' RATES FOR THE FINAN-
CIAL YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH, 1916.
The estimate of rates for service oi the Financial Year to
the 31st March, 1916, copies of which had been sent to each
member of the County Council, and to the Clerks of the Rural
District Couneils and U/ban District Councils, was next consi-
dered, and after a short discussion the following resolution. was
passed unmnimously :
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq. J P;
SOconded by Wm T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the General Estimate of Rates and the Esti-
mate Of Rates for Separate Charges, as set out on Forms 45 and
46, with the various rates in the C as set out therein, and re-
commended for adoption by the Finance COmmittee at their
Meeting held on the 15th February, 1915, be and are hereby
adopted by the County Council.
DEMANDS ON URBAN COUNCILS.
The Chairman then signed the Demands on the Urban Coun-
cils of Drogheda and Dundalk, whioil. were as follows :—
IGs Ild
9s 7d.
WOTTONSTOWN ANI) FANE DRAINAGE DISTRICTS.
The next business on the agenda was the consideration of the
proposal to take over the Wottonstown and Fane Drainage Dis-
tricts.
The correspondence from the Local Government Board and
-the Board of Works, who enclosed the lists of the owners of land
11
•assessable in both Drtinage and which correspondence
was printed at Pages 30 to 33 of the Minutes of the Finance
The Secretary informed the Council
•Committee, was read.
that Mr Patrick Byrne, J P, Chairman of the Dundalk Board of
Guardians, had examined the lists of owners as submitted by
the Board of Works, and found there were some names tho
lists which he could not trace as being the owners of lands in
.the Drainage areas.
After further disenssion, the following resolution was pasted
unanimously :—
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That as the lists of occupiers or owners of land
liable for assessment under the Awards made for the Fane and
Wottonstown Drainage Districts, as furnished by the Board of
Works, require revision, we. .hereby refer the further considera-
tion of these lists tc the Finance Committee.
BEDS IN DUBLIN RED cross HOSPITAL.
The following letter from the Local Government Board, which
had been before the Finance Committee, and had been referred
to the County Council for their consideration, was read
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 29th January, 1915.
No. 5,230 1915.
Louth County.
Sir,
Tn reply to your letter of the 26th instant, relative
'to t!le proposal of the Louth County Council €0 provide five
hospital beds in Dublin Castle, I am directed by the Local Go-
vernment. Board for Ireland to refer you to Section 47 (2) off
the Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898, and to state Chat
the Board are not aware of any statutory provision which would
enable the Council to make the payment suggested.
I am, Sir.
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
The Seeretarv,
Louth County Council,
Courthouse: Dundalk.
It was unanimously decided not to proceed any further in the
matter.
APPOINTMENT OF FOOD AND DRUG'S INSPECTOR.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P, a.nd
Resolved—That Acting-Sergeant John H Levinge, 60335, be
authorised to carry out the provisions of the Sale of Food and
Drugs Acts in the three Petty Sessions Districts of Louth, Cas-
tlebellingham and Dundalk, and we instruet our Secretary
•affix the Common Seal of the Council to his appointment.
ENCROACHMENT OF PORCH AT TANKARDSROCK.
The following report in above matter was read. The map Of
the site was [aid Lefore the Council from whicih it appeared that
the porch was inside the boundary wall adjoining the County
Road,
der
•ter.
13
and after a short cliseussion it was unanimously decided
the circumstances not to take any action in the mat-
County Surveyor's Office,
Courthouse, Dundalk,
30th January, 1915.
Porch at Tankardsrock.
To the Chairman and Gentlemen Finance Committee, Feb.
Äst, 1915.
Gentlemen,
My Assistant, Mr Lyons, reports t,he erection of
a porch within 20 feet (twenty feet) of the centre of the road
between Cross Roads at Killen and Kilcurles National School.
ne porch is 7 feet O inches x 7 feet G inches on plan, and is
erected inside (i.e. not on road side) of road boundary wall.
Mr Francis Mitchell is the occupier of the house. Mr John
Irwin, Dundalk, is the owner.
Your obedient Servant,
THOMAS WALSH.
NOTICES OF MOTION.
following notice of motion standing in the name of Mr
Michael O'Meara, J P: was next considered :
"l beg to gwe notice that at next Meeting of the County
Council I shall move that the Rate Collectors be instructed,
When making out their next Annual Returns for the Valuation
Office, to furnish a list of all rated occupiers having two or
nore holdings for the purpose of having them consolidated!
into one rating."
After a lengthy discussion: in which Messrs O'Meara, Meade„
M 'Gee, Skeffington, M'Quillan, and Murphy took part, Mrn
O'Meara withdrew the motion.
ARDEE OLD AGE PENSIONS COMMITTEE.
The notice of motion in above Inatter standing in the name
of Mr Thomas Murphy was, by consent of the COuncil, with--
drawn by him.
APPEALS AGAINST MALICIOUS INJURY DECREES.
The following notice of motion standing in the name of ME
Bernard Hamill, J P, was unanimously adopted as a resolU-
tion : —
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Michael O'Meara, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the resolution on tihe Minutes of the councit
to lodge appeals in all cases where decrees are obtained for
licious injury claims heard before the County Court Judge, be
rescinded, and that in future appeals be lodged only in the
cases recommended for such by our Solicitor.
WITHDRAWAL OF APPEAL—MACKIN.
Mr Bernard Hamill, J P, then referred to the apfreal lodged
by the Council against the decree granted by the County Court
Judge to Mr Patrick Maekin, of Tavanamore, in the case Of
Mackin v. County Council. The Council's Solicitor, Mr O'Con-
uell, had advised that no appeal be lodged in this case, and Mr
Hamill suggested that as the Judge had assessed damages on
the evidence of the Assistant County Surveyor: Mr J M C"
Lyons, and as the decision was admittedly reasonable and fair,
t'he Solicitor should be instructed to withdraw the appeal, which
in aec•orclance with the resolution now rescinded he was bound
to lodge.
After a short discussion the following resolution was passed
unanimously :—
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Joseph H M'Ard1e, Elli, J P, and
Resolved-—That we hereby direct our Solicitor to withdm,w
the appeal lodged to the decree granted in the Malicious Injury
Claim of Patrick Mackin, of Tavanamore.
CORRESPONDENCE.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man
Dear Mr M' Alester,
Monasterboice, Drogheda,
27th January, 1915.
Kindly convey to the members of the County
Council my most sincere thanks for their kind vote of sympathy
with me and the members of my family in our sad bereavement
on the death of my daughter, Mrs M 'Donnell, and I also beg to.
thank you for your personal sympathy.
Yours faithfully,
PATRICK
16
BYE-LAWS WITH RESPECT TO ABCSIVE LANGUAGE.
The following letter was read and finitialled by the Chair•
tuan :—
3/15
Sir,
Dublin Castle,
ötth February, 1915.
Witli reference to your letter of the 12th ultimo,
17
-Authority of County Louth, requiring a roan cow, the property
of MT Luke Gibney, to be taken from Drogheda Port to the
•owner's premises at Navan, the Department observe that
Hare, V.S., reports What Mr Gibney disposed of the animal to
a dealer at Drogheda notwithstanding the terms of the notice.
In circumstances I have to request that you will please say
whether the Local Authority propose to institute legal proceed-
ings against Mr Gibney under the Tuberculosis (Ireland) Order
submitting under the Seal of the Louth County Council Bye-
laws as to the use of abusive language, etc, I am directed by
the Lord Lieutenant to inform you that tho Bye-laws were laid
before his Excellency and the Privy Council on the 4th inst
•nd were not disallowed.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
E. O'FARRELL.
TUBERCULOSIS (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1913.
The following letter from the Department of Agriculture and
'Technical Instruction for Ireland was read :
Department of Agriculture and Teehnieal Instruction for
Ireland;
Veterinary Branch,
50 and 51 rpper Mount Street, Dublin.
No. T. 79„15.
Sir,
Adverting to the Form T. 11 (eopy enclosed) which
was issued by Mr Donnelly, V.S., Inspector to the Local
sof 1913.
The Secretary,
I am: Sir,
Your obedient servant,
T. P. GILL, SecretadT,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
The Secretary submitted copy of Form T. 11: dated 18th
January, Which had been issued by Mr Andrew A. Donnelly,
V.S., in respect of the cow referred to in the Department's
letter. The Form was addressed to Mr Luke Gibney, Navan,
and ordered ihe removal forthwith of the animal in question
to Mr Gibney's pt ernises at Navan for examination under the
Tuberculosis Order of 1.013.
The Secretary informed the Council that on receipt of tho
above letter from the Department he had written Mr Donnelly,
V.S., for in tlhe matter, and had ret•eived the
following reply :—
Drogheda, 5/2/1915.
IRe Luke Gibney's Cow.
Dear Sir,
Tn reply to your letter of the 4th instant re above,
desire to point out that the animal in question was sent to
18
Navan on the 18th instant, and not disposed of at Droghedot
as stated by Mr Hare, V .S. The cow was sent by rail (goody
train, 12.30 p m) on the 18th instant, and loaded at Drogheda
1.
station by a, man named Mullan,) who works for Gibney.
have just made inquiries this morning at Che Gcccls ,Station,
Office at Drogheda railway station, and have been shown au
entry in the books of the G. N. R. Company where a, cow was.
sent to Navan to Gibney on the 18th instant. What became of.
the cow when she arrived at Navan of course I have no idea.
Yours faithfully,
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
To i}he Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
The following further Jetter from tho Department in
matter had been received : —
Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch),
50 and 51 Upper Mount Street, Dublin.
22nd February, 1915.
No. T. 79-15.
Luke Gibney's Cow.
With reference to your letter of 6th instant on
above subject, I have to transmit the accompanying copy Of a
police report now to hand indicating that Mr Gibney, instead
of detaining the cow at Navan for examinaton under
(Ireland) Order of 1913, sent it to Dublin and sold
19
In t}he circumstances the Depaytment will be glad of a
it
reply, in due course, to the inquiry in the latter part of their
letter of the 1st instant as to whether the Local Authority
propose instituting a prosecution under the Order against Mr
Gibney.
'l'he Secretary,
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
T. P. GILL, Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
COPY OF POLICE REPORT REFERRED TO IN
LETTER No. T. 79-15.
I beg to report that Luke Gibney informed me on this date
that ho took the cow referred to back from Drogheda, to his
premises at Navan on 18th January, where she was sold in the
market on 21st, but he does not know who she was sold to.
18th February: 1915.
After discussion, the Council unanimously decided not to
institute proceedings in the case, and the Secretary was
directed to inform the Department accordingly.
INCREASED COST OF LIVING.
The following resolution, submitted by the South Lout.h
Executive of the United Irish League, was adopted unani-
mously
Propased by T Murphy, Esq ;
Seconded by P B Moore, Esq: J P, and
Resolved—That we ask the employers of labour in town and
C0tmtry to take into consideration the enormous increase in
20
the price of food anci other necessaries of life, and to give their
employees a rise in wages equivalent to the increased cost, of
living.
DETENTION OF CATTLE.
The following resolution, submitted by the South of Ireland
Cattle Trade Association, was adopted unanimously :—
Proposed by Michael O'Meart1, Esq, J P;
Seconded by William Woods, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we respectfully request the Board of Agri-
•culture and Fisheries, and the Department of Agriculture and
Technical Instruction for Ireland, €0 revoke the regulation at
present in force, itoposing two hours' compulsory detention on
cattle in the inspection yard at the port of embarkation. This
detention hampers the trade to an enormous extelit. We are of
opin ion that there is no justification whatever for this two
bcurs' detention at present, seeing that the country is now
vertified to be free from disease for the past seven months. We'
of course, have no objection to a reasonable inspection before
shipment, but the present system entails great hardships and
stiffering to {he animals, besides severe pecuniary losses entailed
the owners.
APPEAL TO FARMERS TO INCREASE TILLAGE.
The following resolution, submitted by the Corporation Of
Drogheda, wns nnnnimously adopted :—
by Michael O'Meara, Fisq, J P;
Seconded by T V M'Quillan, Esq, and
Resolved—That owing to the enormous prices of cereals
throughout the world, prices not even reached during the
21
American Civil War, and to the probable shortage of fc,oclstufte
in the near future we deem it our duty to call upon the
farmers of Louth, Meath, the adjoining counties and the.
country generally, to imitate the tillage campaign inaugurated
throughout the United States of America, throughout the self-
governed Dominion of Canada and other countries, to put more
ground under cultivation; and that we believe that if the
extensive cattle ranches of Meath and Westmeath and other
grazing counties were broken up, tilled and cultivated, that
Ireland, instead o! having to obt.ain her food supplies from
abroad, would have a large surplus for exportation.
THANKS FOR, ROAD BOARD GRANT.
stn ting his
Letter was reaci from Town Clerk, Dundalk,
Council had directed him to thank the County Council for tlie
manner in whiéh the Grant had been obtained, and expressing
satisfaction that •their Grant had been increased from C(j30
to C68(). The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
LYONS v. WALL.
Letter was read from Mr O'Connell, Council's Solicitor,
stating that he had lodged to the credit of the Council the
sum of 7s Od, costs of the case stated awarded by the, King's
Bench in above case. The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
ROAD BOARD GRANTS.
Letter was read from flie Road Bonrcl, dated 24th February,
enclosing Grants made to the Louth County Council for the
hnprovement of the Dublin-Belfast Road as fonows•:—
.Xo. 3011—Grant to Drogheda terban District
C821
No. 3012—Grant to Dundalk tir•ban District
CG80.
No. 3013—-Grant to Rural Districts
C4,38ö.
short discussion reference to the Drogheda
Council Gitlnt, in queries were made by Messrs
Skeffington, M'Qui11an, and M'Cmthy, and the Chairman in-
them that thc Secretary the county Sutveyor would
give all the information to the Cl'ban Council officials to enable
to avail of the Grant the least possible delay. Tho
letter antl Grants M ere initialled by the Clairman.
NEW COUNTY OFFIa4,'S COMMITTEE.
was the question of appointing additional
metnbers on the New Countv Offices Committee, and after a
shcrt discussion the resolution was
adopted : —
Proposed by Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seronclecl by James M 'Cari hsv, Esq, J P: and
hereby appoint the following gentlemen as
additional members of the New County Offices Committee, viz:
—Messrs Peter wc«uls, J P, and J P, and
delegate to the said County Offices Committee full power
to deal with any matters that may arise in connection with the
County Offices, and report their proceedings as usual to
the County Council,
DROGHEDA COURT HOUSE.
The consideration of the use by tho Corporation of Drogheda
of Drogheda and supply of eoal, light and water
23
-thereto, was {he next, item on the agenda. The following letter
from the Council's Solicitor, Mr O'Connell, was read, and,
after a short discussion, the matter was referred to the next
ineeting of the Council.
Francis Street, Dundalk,
18th January, 1915.
Ile Drogheda Court House.
Dear Sir,
Tn reply to your letter of 6th instant on tho subject
of the Council's powers herein, 1 beg to state that ever sinee
•the Local Government Act, 1898, and notwithstanding Article
15 of the Schedule to Application of Enactments Order, the
Oroperty of the Court House is vested in the County Council,
but the legal custody and control of the existing Sheriff is
Dreserved. The County Council merely have an incorporeal
right to the custody and control, but the legal possession remains
With the Sheriff. The County Council have certain rights unden•
Section 72 of the Act of 1898, but even if the Lord Lieutenant
allocated certain portions under this Section to the Council,
the right to possession thereof remains wth the Sheriff.
am inclined to think that the Corporation of Drogheda
have no right to use the Court House for their offices, as under
Section 72 of the Local Government Act, 1898, the County
24
Council may use same, except what is required by the Sheriff
for the administration of justice.
I cannot see how the County Council enn charge a rent on:
the Drogheda Corporation.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL
Charles M' Alester, Esq, Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
25
finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their-
Meeting held in the Court House, Dundalk, on Monday, 1st
March, 1915, at one o'clock, p m.
Present—In the Chair: James Wynne, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Michael Meade, Peter Woods, J P, and
Thomas O'Rourke, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was also present.
The Minute's of the previous Meeting of the Finance Com-
mittee were taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The following nceount.s were submitted, and on examination,
Were ordered for payment
Works in charge of County Surveyor
Secretåry's Office
Total
COAL CONTRACTS.
39 13 10
8
30 4
18
The Secretary informed the Committee that he had arranged
With Messrs F O'Neill and Co, Dundalk, as directed by the
Inane. Committee. for the supply of Coal for the balance of
26
the year to tho 31st March for Dundalk
Houses: as follows :—
For Dundalk—32s per ton delivered.
For Ardee—40s per ton delivered.
a nd
Ardee
The Committee atpproved of this arrangement.
CATTLE DISEASES FUND.
Letter was read from the Local Government Board,
18th February, No. 4045/1915, enclosing copy of the
Court
dated
Order
assessing upon the County of Louth the sum of C'263 19s 9d as
the County's share of the general expenses •under tille Diseases
of Animals Act, 1894, as amended. Tlie letter was initialled by
the Chairman.
COMMITTALS TO INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS.
"The following notices of committals of children to Industrial
Schools were read and initialled by the Chairman:—
Ka;thleen Murphy, Dundalk, by the Rev Father Tohall, C C
E Huber, Drogheda, by of P S, Drogheda.
Mary and Bridget Finegan, Dundalk, by Clerk of P S, Dundalk•
ACCOUNTS or DROGHEDA 11.NION AND DISTRICT
COUNCIL.
Letters were read from the Local Government Board, dated
27th February, 1915, Nos. 10,921 and 10,919, enclosing certified
abstracts of the aecounts of the Drogheda Union and Drogheda
(Louth) Rural District for the half-year ended 30th September '
1914. The letters were initialled by the Chairman.
27
ISSUE OF M A1'S DURING WAR.
Circular letter was read from War Office, dated 19th Feb-
ruary, 1915, No. 811484 (M. (). 4): notifying that any new map
•or revised addition which the Council may propose to publish
in the future, as long as the war continues, must be submitted'
to the A rmy Council. The County Surveyor was directed to
comply with the circular in the ease of any maps he mignt,
issue.
COULTER v. COUNTY COUNCIL AND RICE.
Letter was read from Mr O'Connell, Solici€cr to the Council,
notifying that the appeal lodged the dismiss pronounced in
the above case had been withdrawn by Mr Dickie: tlme appel-
lant's solicitor, and informing the Committee that the costs of
the dismiss and fee on withdrawal—Cl 12s 9cVhad been lodged
with the Council's treasurer. The letter was initialled 'by the
Chairman.
GRANT TO COUNTY LOUTH DUNDALK JOINT
COMMITTEE FOR TECHNICAL INSHRUCTIOS.
The following correspondence was read :
Municipal Technical School,
Dundalk, February 25th, 1915.
Dear Mr M' Alester,
On making application to the Secretary of the
Countv Committee of Agriculture for payment of the sum of
C2Ö—the seeond half of the C3() voted by tfhe 'County Committee
as a contribution tewards the funds of the Technical Instruction
Committee—the first half payment having already been made.
to my Committee by Mr Hughes—I received a letter of which I
enclose a copy.
I shall be pleased to heav from you the contents.
of tihe letter as early as possible, as naturally 1 wi'll to know
definitely to wh011i musc look' for payment.
Yours faithfully,
A. E. EASTHOPE.
C. M 'Alester, Esq, Secretary,
Louth Counts Council, Dundalk.
Copy.
LOUTH COUNTY COMMITTEE OF AGRICULTURE.
Court House; Dundalk.
February 25th, 1915.
Dear Mr Easthope,
much regret my inability to accede to your-
request for payment of the balance of C25 due to your Cornw
mittee for tho present term. The matter is entirely in
hands of the Secretary to the County Council, ancl I would
suggest that you ask you,r Committee to approach the County
Council wibh a view €0 having the total amount of the grant paid
29
•direct in future, instead of having it passed on to me as at
u esent.
Yours faithfully,
(Sd.) JAMES HUGHES.
A E Easthope. Esq, Secretary,
Dundalk Teeli nieal Committee.
After a discussion, it was
Proposed bv Thoma:s O'Rourke, Esq ;
Seconded by Peter Woods, Esq, J P, and
rnanimously reecmmended that the full amount of the grant
to the County Louth and Dundalk Joint Committee for Tech-
hical Instruction, namely, C150, be paid direct to the Technical
Committee, being the Cö0 now being paid annually by tho
County Committee of Agriculture and the CIO() heretofore
lodged direct.
GYLES' QUAY BOAT SLIP.
The following leiter from Mr O'Connell, Che Council's
Solicitor, was read, and, after a discussion, it was decided to
a•PP0int the following sub-committee to meet Mr J P Kearney,
C C, with a view of arranging for the transfer of the Slip
the County Council, as the usage of the Slip by the fishermen
outside the eontrol of the County Council for the landing of figh
a loss to the revenue from the Pier C A Duffy,
30
J P; J H J P; Peter Woods, J P; Wm Woods, J
Che County Surveyor and the Secretary.
It was decided that the Commit,+oee should meet at Gylee
Quay, date and time to be arranged by the Secretary.
Francis Street, Dundalk,
18th February, 1915.
Re Boat Slip at Gyles' Quay.
Dear Sir,
Adverting my Report, of the 12th Novem bery
1914, I beg to state that I ,have now completed my investigation
After attending on three occasions at the
of this matter.
Board of Works by appointment, I have been enabled to peruse•
the very large correspondence between the Royal National Lifew
boat Institution, thc Admiralty, the Board of Works, and the
Agent of the Stobert Estate. It is clear from the correspond—
once that the County Council could not successfully sustain an
action at law 'by way of assertion of ownership of tille Boat'
Slip. It is a structure quite distinct 'from the Pier and
works, was erected by tho Board of Works with the joint
moneys of the Admi1Qlty and the Lifeboat Institution for the
use of tho latter •body, and was surrendered to the landlord
the Institution equally with the Lifeboat House on the diseOll-
tinuance of the Station.
Counsel advise the claim of title by prescription cannot
successfully sustained. That though the Harbour Constable
31
exercised authority over the Boat Slip and the Council repaired
it on occasion, yet, the Lifeboat Institution were in control until
the Lifeboat Station was relinquished.
It appears tilmac the highest bidder at the recent sale with-
drew from his purchase, and as a result Mr Joseph P Kearney
has now become purchaser of the Lifeboat House and Boat Slip.
Tn those circumstances I would suggest that Che Council ap-
proaeh Kearney with a view to acquiring his interest in the
Boat Slip, and thus reiain control over this structure.
I return 'herewith copy Award of the Commissioners of Public
Works having reference to the Pier and Harbour, and dated
the 7th day of February, 1879.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Garles M' Alester, Esq, Secretary:
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
ATE COLLECTION.
The return Showing the state of the Rate Collection to the
end of February was submitted by the Secretary. The amounts
outstanding were as follows
P S Donegan
Patrick
Patrick M 'Cullough
John J Kelly
Patrick Hughes
Patrick Cluskey
Peter M 'Donnell
John WG0ds
James V Johnston
Total outstanding
d
4
2,028 13
1,459 12 11
8
1,310 12
0
738 4
2
899 16
3
1,735 17
3
1,756 11
4
1,365 18
3
642 15
2
Cll,938 1
The Secretary was directed to write •all the Collectors, urging
them to increased efforts to complete their Warrants before the
eXPiration of the financial year ending 31st March.
32
QUARRIES FOR ROAD IMPROVEMENT.
Mr Miéhael Meade brought under the notice of the Surveyor
the urgency of starting work in the quarries prospected for
work in connection with Road Board Grant, and tote Surveyor
informed the C%mmittee that when the necessary formalities
had been complied with the work would be commenced forth-
.Nith.
33
finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of Vhe Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
•on Monday, 15th Mateh, 1915, at one o'clock p m.
.—in the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Present
Other Members—James Wyn*lf?, J P: J H J P;
• John F Murphy, J P, aud Thontas O'Rourke, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County .Surveyor, was also present.
The Minutes Of the previous Meeting of the Finance Com-
mittee were taken as read, and signed by the Chairman .
The following accounts were sublnitted, ancl on examination
Were ordered for payment:—
300 17 8
Works in hancis of County Surveyor
35 17 (i
Secretary's Office
L'336 15 '2
Total
The Bank Books for the General and Subsidiary Accounts
examined anci initialled by the Chairman.
PAYMENT OF MALICIOUS INJURY DECREES.
The Secretary submitbéd list of Malicious Inj ury Decrees on:
levy for year ending 31st March, 1915, and was instructed to
auUhorise the Cou»cil's treasurer, the Hibernian Bank, Ltd,.
Dundalk, to pay same. The list is as follows
Thomas Maguire
Patrick M 'Court
Peter Thompson
Joseph Neville
Selina. Robson
George Gray
19 16
17 9
12
900 12
119 '2
2
o
6
Of glass are broken in windows. and windows do not open or
close properly. Walls inside require paint or distemper. Door
of private entrance is defective. Altogether the building needs
a general overhauhng.
Thanking you in anticipation.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
OSWALD HARDY, C.P.S.
P.S.—I should also menGon that the trees and shrubs require
to be trimmed where they overhang roof and H.
The Secretary informed the Committee that on receipt of this
letter he had written the agent of the De Vesci estate, Mr
A J Fitzherbert, in the matter, and llacl received the following
RAVENSDALE PETTY SESSIONS HOUSE.
Tho following letter from Mr Oswald Hardy, C.P.S., was•
read
Court House, Dundalk,
March 9th, 1915.
'Charles M' Alester, Esq.
Secretary Louth County Council.
Dear Sir,
The Magistrates of Ravensdale P. S. District have
directed me to call the attention of the Louth County Council
to the defective state of Ravensdale Petty Sessions Courtlhouse'
with a view tc having the necessary repairs carried out (by
Landlord or his Agent.
The roof appears to need attention, as rain-water comes
through to inside. Eave-gutters need cleaning, several
reply : —
Dear Sirs
Millbrook, Abbeyleix,
10th March, 1915.
Lady de Vesci's Estate.
I have received your letters as to repairs to Ravens-
dale Court House. The rent thereof is CIO yearly, out of which
the Landlord pays C2 to the caretaker, which certainly leaves
no margin for repairs.
Broken glass, cleaning eave shoots, distempering walls, is
Ordinary maintenance that should be done by the occupiers.
If the roof requires repair and you send me an estimate as to
What is needed, I shall submit it to Che owners. Would the
36
County Council consider the -advisability of purchasing the
premises and submit an offer ?
Yours faithfully,
A. J. FITZHERBERT.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
After discussion, the Committee decided that any estimate of
repairs necessary would require to be made out by the owners
of the property, and. the Secretary was directed to write to Mr
Fitnherbelå and ascertain whether the Estate would sell the
Petty Sessions House to the County Council, and point out that'
i" view of the possible expenditure for •repairs that the price
should be a moderate one.
The letters were initialled by the Chairman.
GYLES' QUAY BOAT' SLIP.
The following letter from the Council's Solicitor was read'
'and the Committee directed the Secretary to certify for the
attendances necessary :—
Francis Street, Dundalk,
8th March, 1915.
Re Gyles' Quay.
Sir,
With reference €0 my several attendances on Counsel
this matter of the claim of the Council to the Boat Slip, it was
necessary for me to attend at the Office of Public Works for
the purpose of consulting fully with Mr Coll, the Assistant,
Solicitor, and perusing the files of correspondence as
between the Board of Works, Admiralty, and the Royal'
National Lifeboat Institution at the time of the construction of
the Boat Slio. I abtended on more than three occasions, but
I would ask you to have my attendances on the 30th January,
4th February and 13th February: 1915, certified by the Council
as special attendances, to enable me to vouch same before the
Taxing Master in my bill of costs.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL-
Charles M' Alester, E.sq, SeereCary,
Louth County Couneil, Dundalk.
DEATH DUTY GRANT.
Tho following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man : —
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 2nd March, 1915.
No. 5,903
Sir,
I am directed by the Local Government Board för
Ireland to acquaint you that they Irnve now received copies of
rtificates of the Irish Land Commission, and the Commis-
Sioners of National Debt, showing the actual arrears in purchase
annuities, etc, under the Irish Land Acts; and T am to state.
for the information of the County Council, that the amount
38
which will be deducted in respect of Land Purchase liability
from the Estate o? Death Duty Grant payable in the County
ir- the course of the month is a sum of C229 IOS Od
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
A. R. BARIAS,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
MALICIOUS INJURY CLAIMS.
Tho following letters from the• Solicitor were read and
initial"ec! by the Chairman
I"raneis Street, Dundalk,
2nd March, 1915.
Criminal Injury Dismisses.
J(jhn Barry (C7ö) and Vincent J Barry (Cö0), Conon.
Dear Sir,
I beg to report that in the matter of Appeals lodged
to Dismisses of above Claims at I)rogheda Quarter Sessions in
J antuary last, that same were withdrawn, and the Wit/hdrasval
Fee of CI lodged in each case; with mo. T have passed on the
fees to the Council's Treasurer and enclose receipt there for
herewith.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M' Alestor, Esq, Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
39
Francis Street, Dundalk,
2nd March, 1915.
Criminal Injury Decrees.
Elizabeth Farrell, Dunleer, CIS.
Duffy, Dunleer, 15s Od.
Dear Sir,
1 beg to report •with reference to Decrees awm«led
for above amounts a.t Drogheda Quarter Sessions in January
last, that same were reversed with costs at Spring Assizes at
Dundalk to-day by Mr Justice Molony.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M' Alester, Fnsq, Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
COUNTY INSURANCES.
The following letter from the County Surveyor was read :—
County Surveyor's Office,
Court House, Dundalk,
13th March, 1915.
C. McAlester, Fesq,
Secretary Louth County Council.
Secretary ,
Messrs Fowler, Lid, of Leeds, inform me that,
they hope to despatch traction engines about 1st proximo, so
that they will probably arrive about the middle of April.
40
It would be advisable to make arrangements for insuraneo or
same (and also of rollers) in all respects.
It will further b?' necessary to have your workmen's compen-
sation insurance revised in view of the proposed road' improve-•
ment works.
Would you kindly bring the matter before Finance Commit-
tee on Monday next, and get authority to take all necessary
steps.
Faithfully yours,
THOMAS WALSH.
After discussion on the whole matter of Insurance for t'he•
various risks in connection with the Council's work, when it
transpired Chat there was no policy in existence to cover Third
Party and Ptiblie Liability risks, the Secretary was directed in
conjunction with the County Surveyor, to Obtain quotations for
the Insurance of the Machinery Plant, and for Third party
risks and Employers' Liability, covering all the work unclOr
jurisdiction of t!he County Council.
LOUTH COUNTY INFIRMARY REPORT.
The annual Report of the Louth 'County Infirmary for 'the
year ended 31st December, 1914, and the Abstract of Account'S
for the same period, were laid before the Committee. The
port was initialled by the Chairman.
ARDEE RURAL DISTRICT AND UNION ACCOUNTS.
Letter wa.s read from the Local Government Board enclosing
the AbsCraet of Accounts of the Ardee No. 1 Rural District
Council and the Ardee Union for the half-year ended 30th
41
ternber, 1914, together with the A udi tor's Reports. Tn the re--
port of the auditor on the Riit•al District Council's Accounts ap-
pearecl a paragraph in which complaint was made that consider-
able inconvenience had been eati.secl during the half year by tlhe
dilatory mannot• in which the Louth County neil had paid
the District Council nd, thereby compelling the Rural
District Council to overdraw their account with Treasurer.
The Secretary informed the Committee that the first instal-
ment of their Demand was paid six •days after the meeting of
the Co. Council, and the second instalment twenty-one days
after the meeting. These dates were approximately the most
punctual times that the amounts had ever been paid in.
The Committee directed the Secretary to write the Local Go-
vernment Board accordingly.
MACHINERY ANI) ROAD IMPROVEMENT LOANS.
The Secretarv was directed bv Che Committee to arrange with
the Council's Treasorer for a transfer to the Loans Account of
the Loan for the purchase of Road Machinery and the Road
Improvement Loan when the money would be required.
RATE COLLECTOR'S ILLNESS.
A certificate was read from Dr E F Flood, dated 10th March,.
that Mr Peter M 'Donnell, Kilcurley, was suffering from influ-.
enza, and was confined to his bed, and would be .unflt for duty
for at least a week.
ST. PATRICK'S. DAY.
The Committee directed the Secretary 4.0 have the Office closed'
st Patrick's Day, being the National Holiday and a Bank
Holiday.
42
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Comntittee at their
Meeting held in the Council, Chamber, Court House, Du nclalk,
on Monday, 29th March, 1915, at one o'clock, p m.
Present
In the Chair—Wm Woods, J P.
Other Members —Thomas Mt11Vhy, Miohael M'Arc11e, Thomas
O'Rourke, John F Murphy, J P ; J Morgan, and Bernard Fine-
gane Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, and Mr Harney, Horti-
cultural Expert of the County Committee, were also in attend-
• ance.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Finance Commit-
tee were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted and, on examination'
were ordered for payment
Works in Charge of County Surveyor
16 4
Secretary's Office (including payments to Rate
COMPENSATION FOR GOOSEBERRY BCSHES
DESTROYED.
The next busine€s on the Agenda was the consideration of
V'laims made for Gooseberry Bushes destroyed in compliance
with the Amerieadl Millclew Order, and the fixing of a rate of
payment for bushes so destroyed.
The Secretary rend correspondence and instructions from the
Department, in the matter, and the following list of claims,
Which had been certified by the Department was read. Tho
informed the, Committee that the Department did
not certify for any claims for bushes destroyed prior to Septem-
ber, 1913:—
ame of
Claimant.
Pati•iek Kelly
Julia Crinnion
Mrs Ellen Kelly
Peter M' Alester
Patrick Kearnov
Captain R J Fi!gate
Total
No of Destroyed
by Dept. Orders.
72
'224
3
100
100
Inspector.
-Mt• Harney
do.
do.
do.
do.
do.
Clerks, Montchly Salaries, etc)
Total
99 0 5
16 9
The Bank Books for the General and Subsidiary Accounts
were examined and initialled by the Chairman.
The total number of bushes claimed for was 7,596, but only
the above 559 were certified for.
Mr Horney, the Horticultural Expert of County Com-
niittee, in reply to the Chairman, stated that it was a difficult,
qUestion to decide what would be a fair value to place on bushes
44
affected with this disease, but considered that the amount of'
compensation per bush ought not to exceed the average price of'
young bushes, which would be each.
After a long discussion the following resolution was passed
unanimously
by John F Murphy, Esq, J P;
Seeoncled by J P Kearney, Esq, and
Resolved—That in pursuance of the Compensation for Goosew
'berry Bushes (Co. Louth) ()rder, 1914, we recommend the co.
Council to fix the compensation to be paid to claimants for
Gooseberry Bashes destroyed in 'County Louth by order of the
Department's Officers, -uncler the American Gooseberry Mildew
and Black Currant Mite (Ireland) Order, 1912, at the rate of-
threepence per for the num ber certified by Depart-
ment, and that no claims b. entertained for bushes destroyed
prior to September, 1913.
PERMISSION TO PLANT THORN QUICKS.
The following letter, addressed to the County Surveyor, was
read
Sandpit House, 2±nd March, 1915.
Dear Sir,
Would you kindly give or get me permission. to plant'
some thorn quicks in a dangerous unsightly place, along tho
County Roacl leading from Black Hall Cross towards the sea ?
Thanking you in anticipation.
Faithfully yours,
P. L. M'KEOWS.
Mr Walsh,
County Surveyor.
the
The County Surveyor informed the Committee that
planting of the quicks would be beneficial, and the Committee
directed him to grant the necessary permission.
PAINTING OF COUNTY COURTHOUSE.
'The following letter was read
National Amalgamated Society of Operative House and Ship
Painters and Decorators.
Marell 24th, 1915.
To the Chairman of J,oufh County Council,—
Sir,—
the painters of this
The local Committee, representin-
town, beg to draw your attention to the fact that, owing to the
of trade caused by the present deplorable war, there
•are many painters in the district out of work. Furthermore, we
•know that as the various jobs now in progress become completed,
there will be many others out of work. We therefore respectfully
request that your Committee will receive a deputation from our
Committee, with a view to discussing the advisability of under-
taking at once the painting Of one or more of the following
buildings, viz:—
The Record Courf, Staircase and Corlidor.s of Courthouse, also
'Offices of County Council.
You will be aware, of course, that the present season of the
Fear is particularly well suited for the purpose of painting either
interior or exterior work. Therefore, puffing the two above
facts together, we believe that you will our desire to
Ot once come closely into touch with your Ckymmittee with a view
to having the work put into execution af an early date, our chief
Oldeet being the provision of work for painters, as we desire,
during the present unfortunate period, to see some method ad-
qjted which shall mutually benefit the town by having work done
effectively at the proper time, and also benefit those painters who
are engaged to do the work. We shall be pleased to hear fronx
you a.t an early date.
Thanking you in anticipation.
Yours truly,
PATRICK O'CALLAGHAN,
Branch Secretary,
Fair Green, Dundalk.
A discussion took place on this mutter, and the County Sur—
veyor informed the Committee that the Record Court had not
been painted for about thirty years, and that the doors and roof
required attention.
A diversity of opinion existed as to whether the work should be
ordered by the Committee, or a deputation from the Paintere
Society be received to discuss flie matter, and ultimately the•
Chairman ruled that the matter be referred €0 the County
Council.
LOANS FOR ROAD IMPROVEMENT.
The following letter from the Local Government Board was read
and initialled by the Chairman
The Secretary informed the Committee that he had applied to
the Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's Treasury for their con-
sent.
No. 14, 191/1915.
Louth County•
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 24th March, 1915.
Sir,—
The Local Government Board for Ireland have had before
them the applications of the County Council of Louth for sanctiOP
47
to loans of 2,559 IOS, 8793 IOS, and C7C7 for the purpose of steam-
rolling roads in the Dundalk, Ardee No. 1 and the Louth Rural
Districts, respectively, and the Board have expressed their sanction
to the loans in question, in pursuance of Article 22 of the
Schedule to the Local Government (Application of Enactments)
Order, 1898, and Section 60 of the Local Government (Ireland) Act,
1898, repayment to be spread over a period of five years in each
ease.
The Specifications and Estimates are returned The
Board at the same time desire fo inform the Cbuncil that it is
that the of tile lords Commissioners of his
Majesty's be obtained to the raising of these loans, their
Lordships having recently intimated that their approval is re-
quired to all future borrowing Imai Authorities in Ireland.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS, Secretary.
The Secretary,
Courgy Council of I,outh,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
GRANT FOR TUBERCULOSIS DISPENSARY.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chairman,._
and the Secretary was directed to send copy to the Tuberculosis
Committee Of Management
No. 16,687/1915.
louth County.
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 25th March, 1915.
Sir,—
1 am directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland
to inform you that they have received an intimation of the con-
48
sent Of the Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's Treasury to a
grant of 088 to fhe Louth Cou nty COuneil in respect of the
establishment of the proposed Central Tuberculosis Dispensary.
T am to add that the amount will be issued by instalments 011
the Architect's Certificate as the works proceed.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
The Secretary,
Louth County Council, DundalK.
GOVERNMENT GRANTS.
Secretary.
Letters were read from the Local Governinont Board enclosing
ttihe following grants, and were initialled by the Chairman
Estate Dufy—For Roads
Estate Duty—For Guardians
Sanitary Sala ries
Medical and Educational
Agricultural Grant
ROAD BOARD GRANT.
880 5 10
971 16
61 4
494 15
6391 15
7
Letter was read from the Dundalk Urban District Council
stating that they were ready to start with the work of Road
provement, and making application for the first Instalment Of
the Road Board Grant, namely, C340.
The Secretary was directed to apply to fhe Road Board for
Grant, and the letter was initialled by the Chairman.
49
COMMITTALS TO INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.
Letter was read from Mr Whelehan, Inspector N S P C C,
Stating that he was making application at Ravensdale Peffy Ses-
*ions on the 3rd April for Connnitial Of four children to Indus-
trial Schools.
The letter was initialled the Chairman.
FANE ANI) WOTTONSTOWN DRAINAGE.
The Seerefary brought under the notice of the Conuni[fee the
' question of [he Fane and Woftonstown Drainage Districts. This
matter had been referred by the County Council to the Finance
Committee in order that enquiries might be made as to the names
Of owners of land as sef ont on the lists furnished by the 130arcI
Of Works. The Secretary informed the Committee fhaf he had
sent copies of the lists to Mr T J Byrne, J P, and had shown
to Mr Patriek Byrne, .Y P, with a. request that would
make enquiries as to the accuracy of the lists. Ile not,
however, heard from them in {he nratfer yet.
The Secretary was instruefecl to write the gentlemen named
for a reply to the queries, and the nratfer was referred to next
eeting of the Finance Conunitfee.
GILES' QUAY BOAT SLIP.
The following report was read and referred to County Council :—
OF SUB-COMMITTEE APPOINTED TO INTERVIEW
MR J P KEARNEY RE PURCHASE OF BOAT SLIP AT
GILES' QUAY.
o the Finance Committee at Meeting held on 29th March, 1915.
Gentlemen, -—
The Sub-Connniftee appointed to inferview Mr J p
earney relative to the Boat Slip at Giles' Quay mef Mr Kearney
Giles' Quay by appointment on Tuesday,
the 16th Ma roll.
50
The following members attended :—Messrs C A Duffy (Chairman),.
Joseph H M'Ard1e, J P; Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, and
the Secretary.
The Sub-Committee, accompanied by Mr Kearney, inspected the •
Boat House and Slip purchased by him at the recent sale. The
Boat Slip runs from the house or store into the harbour, and haS•
been used by the fishermen for the landing of fish, on which the-
usual poundage had been paid to the County Council up to about
three years acro.
Mr Kearney staffed he would transfer his interest in the Boat
Slip to the County Council for the sum of
A fter a eon--
sultation the Sub-Committee were unanimous in the opinion"
fish
that as the income heretofore derived from the poundage on
landed at the Slip was so small, they could not recommend tbe•
Finance Committee to consider the offer, and the conferenee
ended without any result.
CHARTÆS A. DUFFY.
JOSEPH H. M'ARDI,E.
THOMAS WAISTI.
CHARLES M'ATÆSTER.
ENGINE DRIVERS FOR ROAD ROLLERS.
The County Surveyor submitted list of applicants for the post
of Engine Driver for the Rollers purchased by the Council'
After discussion, it was decided to postpone the
Of the matter till the next Meeting of the Finance Committee •
51
RATE COI,IÆCTOR'S ILLNESS.
The following certificate from Dr Clarke (for Dr Flood) was read'
and initialled by the Chairman
The Dundalk Medical Hall (Flood's),
89, Clanbrassil Street, Dundalk,
Mareh 27th, 1915.
This is to certify that Mr M 'Donnell, Kilkerley, Dundalk, is
suffering from influenza, and is unable to attend his duties.
JAMES J. CLARKE, L M, 1. R C S and P 1,
Acting for Dr E. l". Flood.
RATE
The Secretary submitted statement showing the state Of the
Collection of the Poor Rafe up to date, and stated he, expected
all the Collectors to close their Collections by the 31st inst, with
the exception of Mr Peter M'l)onnell, whose certificate of illness
has just been read.
The statement was initialled by the Chairman.
EASTER HOLIDAYS.
The Committee directed the Secretary to have the Office closed
On Good Friday and Easter Monday, being Bank Ilolidays.
52
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of €110 Finance Committee at their
Aleeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 12th April, 1915, at one o'clock, p m.
Present the A Duffy, E.sq, J P.
Other Members—John Morgan ,Thomas Murphy, J H M'Ar-
die, J P; Thomas O'Rourke, Bernard Hamill, J P; Joseph P.
Kearney, Michael M'.Ardle, Peter Woods, J P; Edward Good-
man, James Wyrgne, J P; J F Murphy, J P, ancl Bernard Fine—
E•quires.
The Minutes of the previous meeting of the Finance Com-
Olittee were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following oeeounts were submitted, and, on examination'
•were ordered for payment :—
Works in Charge o! County Surveyor
Secretary's Office (including half year's remunera-
Eon to Rate Collectors)
Total
C13 15. 10
397 10 1
Cill 11
The Bank Books for the General and Subsidiary Accounts
•were examined, ancl initialied by the Chairman.
53
RAILWAY FARES OF MEMBERS ATTE-XI)ING
MEETINGS.
The Secretary requested a direction from the Committeeha,s to
the payment of the Railway Fares to these members of the
Council travelling by rail, in accordance with the resolution of
the County Council. T:he Committee unanimously decided that
each Councillor should send in a claim for the railway fares so
incurred, and the Secretary was directed to table same for a
future meeting of the Committee.
110M) CA,' ANT.
The following letter from the Road Board was read and ini-
tialled by the Cliairman
The Road Board,
London, S. W.,
7th April, 1915.
Sir,
In reply €0 your letter of the 3rd inst, I am directed by
tho Road Board to send you cheque for C31(), being tihe First
installnent under No. 3012; also form of which
kindly sign and return.
J am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
W. REES JEFFREY,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Court Tlou.se, Dundalk.
The instalment being portion of the Grant fer the Dundalk
District, it was cleeided to issue Paying Order to the
Dundalk Urban Council for the
FAXE A-ND worroxsrrows DRAINAGE.
Tho Secretary informed the Committee that Mr Patrick
Byrne, J P: Chairman Dundalk Board of Guardians, 'had again
gone •over the •list of owners assessable under the Award in the
a lyove Drainage Districts, and was still unable to identify some
of the names thereon.
I wotter was read from Mr T J Byrne, J P, stating that as tho
matter now stands he considered tho Committee were not yet,
in a position to satisfactorily report, Vo the County Council as to
the caking over absolutely of the Drainage Districts, as many of
the names on the Sehedule could not be identified, and suggested
that a Sub-Cormnittee should be appointed, ancl requested to
Ilieet as often as required to put the matter through.
After discussion,
On the motion of Mr Bernard Hamill, J P;
Seconded by Mr E:lwarcl Goodman,
and unanimously agreed to, the following Sub-Committee was
appointed to investigate all matters in connection wit,h the
Fane and Wottonstown Drainage Districts—Messrs T J Byrne'
J P; P Byrne, J P; M Meade, M c C; J Morgan, MCC; Ro-
bert •Craig, Walterstown ; Archibald Murdock, Dromiskin; Geo•
Holmes, Dellon, and Bernard Mullen, Heynestmvn.
FOOD AND DRUGS ACTS.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man:
Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland,
50 and 51 tipper Mount Street, Dublin.
March, 1915.
Sir,
T have to state for the information of your Local Au-
thority, that an officer of the Department, acting on instruc-
55
tions under Section 2 of the Act of 1899, purchased a sample of
•butter at Dundalk on the 20th ultimo. The sample was sub-
mitted to the Publie Analyst for the County Louth, who certifies
.fthat it proved to be pure.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL, Secretary,
T'he Seere€arv,
Louth County Council,
Court House, Dundalk.
ADMISSIONS TO RICHMOND.
The SecretahY -submitted Return showing admissions €0 Rieh-
mond Asylum from County Louth during quarter ended 31st
Alareh, 1915. The Return was initialled by the Chairman.
DRIVERS FOR ROAD ROLLERS.
The consideration of this matter was again postponed in view
Of the refusal of the Treasury to sanction the Loans for Road
Improvement in the Rural Districts of Arclee, Drogheda and
Dundalk.
LOANS FOR ROAD IMPROVEMENT.
The following letter was read
c.2ö1G.
Treasury Chambers,
9th April: 1915.
Sir,
In reply to your letter of the 25th ultimo, I am cli-
• lected by the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury
56
to inform you that they cannot approve the proposed raising of
loans amounting to by the Louth County Council in ex-
isting circumstances. My Lords are of opinion that ea,pital ex-
penditure by Local Authorities should be eon fined at present to
purposes urgently necessary either for reasons of public health
cr in connection with tar requirements.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Secretary's Office, Court House, Dundalk.
HEATH.
This .le€ter was discussed at length, and the Chairman pointed
out that this refusal would be very far-reaching in its conse-
quenees, as all Che work contemplated on the Dublin-Belfast
main road was contingent on this loan being procured ; that the
Council 'had macle purchases of Road Machinery mn€l entered
into other engagements in connection with tho work which
be all affected, and that it was absolutely necessary that
a strong effort should be made to endeavour to overcome the op-
position of the Treasury to the Loan, especially ill view of tho
fact that the money was not being borrowed from the Public
Funds, but from tlhe Council's Treasurer.
After protracted discussion, in which the Committee were un-
animous as to the urgency of the matter, it was decided,
'On the motion Of Mr Hamill, J P ;
Seconded by Mr Goodman,
that the Chairman, Mr Duffy, the County Surveyor, and the
should wait upon the Local Government Board at the
earliest possible moment, and solicit tlieir aid in •endeavouring
57
to induce tth€; Treasury to sanction the Loan, and to take any
further steps they might consider desirable, ancl if necessary to
get the assistance of the County Members, •and Mr Redmond,
Chairman of the Irish Party, in the matter.
IRATE COLLECTION.
Secretary subniCted Return showing state of Poor Rate Col-
lection on 31st March, from which it appeared that all the Col-
lectors, witih the exception of Mr Peter M 'Donnell, whose eer-
tifieates of illness hacl been before the Finance Committee at last
two meetings, haa closed the collection of the Second Moiety
of the Poor Rate.
COAL CONTRACTS.
Application wtys made by Messrs Murdock and Ch, DroghOda,
for an increased price for coal supplied by them during quarter
ended' 31st March, owing to the very much increased price they
hall to pay during that period.
The Secretary informed the Committee that a similar request
had been acceded to in the ease of the Contractors for the
Dundalk and Ardee Court Houses, and after di.scussion tho
Com mitteo recommended that Messrs Murdock should 'bo al-
lowed the •price fixed for the Dundalk Contractors, namely, 32s
per ton.
COLLECTORS' ARREARS LISTS.
The Collectors' Arrears Lists for the period ended 31st March,
1915, were examined, and payment of same recommended to the
County Council.
58
Proposal Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Committee at taheir
First Quarterly Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court
House, Dundalk, on Monday, 12th April, 1915, at one o'clock,
Present the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—John Morgan; Thomas Murphy, Joseph H
M'Ardle, J P; Thomas O'Rourke, Bernard Hamill, J P; Jos. P.
Kearney, Michaei M' Ardle, P Woods, J p; Edward Goodman,
James Wynne, J P ; J F Murphy, J P, and Bernard Finegan,
Esq uires.
The Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Committee at
their Meeting held on 1st February, 1915, were taken as read,
and signed by the Chairman.
The following Proposals were considered by the Committee,
and each was approved
APPLICATIONS BY THE COUNTY SURVEYOR.
No. 20—To provide for the maintenance of t'he County Court
House, Dundalk, for t,he year ending 31st March, 1916.
Cost not to exceed C5(). County-at-Large Charge.
No. 21—To erect Direction Signs in the Rural Districts of Ar-
59
flee, Drogheda. antl Dundalk. Cost not to exceed C30.
County-at-Large Charge.
(Arms supplied by Automobile Association and Motor
Union. Stan clards proposed to be supplied and
fixed by the County Council).
The Secretary submitted County-at-Large Payments for the
guarter ended 31st March, 1913, which were examined and re-
•commended for payment.
The Committee adjourned to Monday, 10th May: 1915.
flew County Offices.
Minutes of Proceedings of the New County Offices Committeew
at their Meeting held in the Court House, Dundalk, on 1st
March, 1915, at one o'elcek, p In.
Present the Chair—James Wynne: Esq, J P.
Other Mentbers—Peter Woods, J P; Bernard Hamill, J P,
and Thomas Murphy, Lsquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was also present.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Committee were,
taken as read, ancl confirmed.
The following letter from the Local Government Board was
rear], and initialled by the Chairman
Local Government Board, Dublin,
2Gt11 February, 1915.
No. 8,858: 1915.
Louth County.
Sir,
With reference to your letter of the 12th instant re-
lative to the proptl*li of the Louth County Council to erect new
County Offices, I am directed by the Local Government Boatd
for Ireland to refer the Council to Section IO of the Local GO-
vernment (Ireland) Act, 1898, which empowers athom to erect'
such Halls, Buildings, and Offices as they may require for the
purpose of any of their powers or duties, and I am to state tfhat
inasmuch as the powers reserved to the Council uncler this See-
tion do not come within the scope of powers or duties tra,ns-
ferred to them from the Grand Jnry, it does not appear that it
will be necessary for the Council to observe the fortnalities ne-
cessary in the case of business so transferred.
I am to add that the Board's sanction would not appear to bo
necessary for tho proposal, unless it is proposed to defray the
•expense by borrowing, or in the event of Its being proposed to
acquire lands compulsorily for the purpose.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
'Ille Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
CONDITIONS OF COMPETITION FOR PLANS.
Tile C01iitnitfee then eonsi(lercd the Draft Conditions for the
•eompetition for Plans as submitted by Professor Scott, the As-
ses.sor.
Each paragraph of the conditions vvas carefully considered,
and after discussion unanimously approved by the Committee,
subject to one qne•ry as to the meaning of the term "Fnrniture
and Fitting," which the Assessor was to define.
It was also arranged that the Plans sent in by the Competitors
should be sent direct to Professor Scott. and when the winner
was declared that the Plants be exhi,bite€l in the Council Cham-
ber, Dundalk.
Local Government (Ireland) Act, (898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
or Tlin
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
AT 11 MEIR
FIRST QUARTERLY MEETING,
Held on 22nd April, 1915.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
AT "CHEIR MF%YI'INGS
Held on 26th April, and 10th May, 1915.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE,
AT MEETINGS
Held on 26th April, and 17th May, 1915.'
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE.
AT THEIR MEETING
Held on 10th May. 1915.
Couth County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Lcuth County Council at th•ei:••
First Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council Channber, Coart
House, Dundalk, on Thursday, 22nd April, 191.3, at one o'clct•k,
Present
—In the Chair: Chm A Duffy, J P.
Other Members—William Woods, J P; N T Murphy, J P;
Thos Mu,vhy, W T Skeffington, J P; T T V Mae-
Quillan, Denis J Rati), M O'Mealtl, J P;
Hamill, J P; John F Mutvll.v, J P;.J P Kearney,
Edward Goodman, T J Byrne, J P; Michael Meade, and Peter
woods, J P, Esquires.
Messrs T Walsh, County Surveyor; J l)romgcole antl J M C
Lyons, Assistant Daniel O'Connell, Solicitor to
the Co. Council, and V Warren, Clerk 'l' C M, were in attend-
anee.
CONFIRMATION OF' GENERAL MI.NUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanilnously :—
by W T Skeffington, E-q. J P;
Seconded by Bernard Hanlill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That tho Minutes of Proceedings of the Lt'ltth
County Council at their Fourth (Adjourned) Quarterly
2
ing, held on the 25th clay of February, 1915, a printed copy of
which has been sent to each member of the Council, be and are
hereby confirmed.
THE LATE CAPTAIN ROGER BELLINGHAM.
After the passing of the minutes the Chairman referred in
'feeling terms to the lamented death of Captain Roger Bellhlg-
ham, and the following resolution was passed in silence :—
Proposed by Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That we, the Louth County Council, desilT to placo
on record our sincere regret at the lamented death of Captain
Roger Bellingham, whose character and record has merited, our
warmest amm•obation, and, we direct Che Secretary of the Coun-
eil to convey to his wife ancl to Sir Henry Bellingham and re—
lafi,ves cur respectful sympathy in their untimely bereave-
ment.
The following gentlemen desired to be associated with Clie
asclution Gcodman, Skeffington, and Rath.
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Thomas O'Rourke, Esq ;
Ly John F Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of t'he Proceedings of the Fin-
•ance Committee at their Meetings held on the undermentioned
dates (a copy of which has been sent to each mernber of the
3
(Council) all payments and reeommendations contained
ftherein, be and are hereby confirmed :
Monday, 1st March, 1913.
Monday, 15th March, 1915.
Monday, 29th March, 1915.
Monday, 12t:h April, 1915.
•CONFIRMATION OF PROPOSAL CO-V MINUTES.
The followincr resolution was passed vuutnimctvsl\'
Proposed by T J Byrne, Esq, J P;
Seconded by S T Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the Propcysal
'Committee at their First Quarterly Meeting, held 12th
day of April, 1913, a printed copy sent
•each member of the Council, be and hereby ccnfirmed.
ARDEE PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :-
Proposed iw Mic'hael Meade, Esq ;
Seconded by S T Murphy, E.sq, J and
Resolved—That tho Proposal for Payments by Che
Ardee No. I Rural District Council at their Fir'. Qvarterly
Meeting, •held on the (ith day of April, 1913, and set out on
Form 22 furnished to the County Council, be, and are hcreby
Tlies;e payments amount the of_C778
approved of.
2cl.
DROGHEDA PAYMENTS:
The folloa•ing resolution was passed unanimcuslv
Proposed by Denis J Rach, Esq ;
Seeonded by wm Woods, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Propcxsal for Payments formulated by tlio•
Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union, at their First Quar-
ferly Meeting held on the 13th day of April, 1915, ancl set out
on Form 22 furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby
approved of. . These payments amount to the stun of IOS.
lid.
DUNDALK PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
by Ha,mill, Esq, J P;
Seonded by JOhn F Murphy, FAI, J P, and
Resolved—That t'he Proposal for Payments formulated 'by the.
Dundalk Rural District Council at their First Quarterly Meet-
ing held on the 12th day of April, 1915, and set out on Form 22 .
furnished to the County Council, be, and are hereby approved
of. These payments amount to the sum of C 1,237 Gs 5d.
COUNTY AT LARGE PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
P roposecl by Edward Goodman, Esq ;
Seconded by J P Kearney, Lsq, and
Resolved—That the Proposal for Payments formulated by tho
Proposal Committee at their First Quarterly Meeting, held on
the 12th clay of April, 1915, and set out on Form 22 furnished
to the Count,y Council, be and are hereby approved Of. These
payments amount to the sum of CG,739 Gs Gd.
5
DATES OF QUARTERLY MEETINGS.
Proposed by Thomas Murphy, Esq ;
Seconded by Peter Woods, E.sq, J P, and
Resolved—That the County Council hereby determine Chat the
Yfollowing shall be the dates for the holding of the Second
.Quarterly Meetings of the Rural District Councils :
Ardee—Tuesday, 6th July, 1915.
Drogheda—Tuesday, 13th July, 1915.
Dunclalk—Monday, 5th July, 1915.
-'And that, the Proposal Committee meet on Monday, 5th clay of
-July, 1915.
MAKING OF RATES IN RESPECT OF THE FINANCIAL
YEAR, ENDING 31st MARCH, 1916.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
by T J Byrne, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Denis J Rath, Esq, and
Resolved—That ih accordance with the estimate oi rates for
"General and SeparatÅ3 Charges adopted by the County Council
at their meeting held on the 25th day of February, 1915, we
•hereby make rates to be levied off the County •of I.mth for the
Financial Year ending 31st March, 1916, as assessed in tho Rate
Books, and as set out as follows, viz
The Rates in the C for General Charges are :—
Land.
Ardee—31 penee
Drogheda —34 pence
Dundalk—M pence
Bui] din gs.
47 pence
55 pence
65 pence
9
And the rates in the C in respect of Separate,
as set Form 43, and adopted at the said meet-.
ing of the 25th FeEnrary, 1915, be also macle by the Council,
and that be directed in
78 of the Public to publish the Statutory Notice of-
said for Sepai•ate Charge having been made.
CONFIRMATION oil REPORT OF NEW COUNTY OFFICE:
COMMITTEE.
The resolution was passed
by Peter woods, Esq, J P;
Seeomled by Michael Meade, Esq, and
of the new county Offices CAjm-.
mittee, as set out in the Minutes of their Meeting held on the
1st day of March, 155. appearing at pages CO and 61 of the
printed Ninnies, a copy of Which has been sent to each.
member of the Council, be and is hereby adopted.
DEDUCTIONS FROM ESTATE DUTY GRANT.
Arising out of the Finance Minutes a discussion arose
to the Duty Grant payable to the co.
council, the deductions in consequence of the.
non-payment of Land Purchase annuities by defaulting pur--
and the following resolution was passed unanimously
Py•oposecl by Thomas Murphy: Esq ;
by Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we, members of the Leuth County Coun-.
cil, request [he Irish Land Commission the
cal to supply particulars of the deficiå
in the Death Duty Grant consequent on the arrears which arose
through the non-paytnent cf annuities under the Land Pur—
chase Acts.
FAXE AND WOTTO.XSi'GW.X DRAINAGE DISTRICTS
Arising out of the Finance Committee Minutes the matters.
in connection 'With the above Drainage Districts were discussed
by the Council, and the Sub-Committee appointed' by the Fin-
ance Committee oi those land! owners affected by the drainage
system, was approved, with power to add to its membership,.
and the Secretary was directed to su:mmon a meeting of the.
Sub-Committee at an early date to investigate the list of names
submitted by the Ecard of Works as assessable under the
Award.
LOANS FOR ROAD IMPROVEMENT.
In a discussion as to the result of the interview of the depu•
tation appointed by the Finance Counnittee to meet the Local
Government rwoarcl relative to the refusal of the Treasury to,
sanction tho Loan for Road Improvement, the Chairman infor-
med the Council that himself and the Secretary had an inter--
view with the Chief Secretary to the Local Government Board,
and acting on the advice given a full statement of the facts
was transmitted to the Board in a very full letter which was.
subsequently read by the Secretary of the Council.
The Council approved of the steps which had been taken tc;•
secure the Treasury's approval to the Loan.
COLLECTORS' ARREARS.
The Secretary subrnitted Collectors' arrears lists whid•h liaoii
been recommended for payment by the Finance Committee, am!
payment.. of same was ordered subject to the sanction of
DEMANDS OF' c xross A-ND RURAL DISTRICT COUNCILS
The instalments of Demands ordered for ray-
r.ie,nt
Ardee Cnion
Drogheda Union
Dundalk Union
No. R.O.C.
Drogheda (Louth) R.D.C.
Dundalk R. D. C.
Gross total
1,073 4 G
1,279 14
2,915 10 0
8 10
671 10 0
375 lö O
1,292 10 0
'2,339 lö O
3 10
DROGHEDA COURT HOUSE.
The next business on the the consideration of the
question of the use by the Corporation of Drogheda of Drog-
court House, and the supply of
light, water, etc,
'thereto.
X T Murphy, Esq, proposed ; and
Edward Goodman, Esq, seconded :
That in future coal, Gas, and Water be for
maintenance of l)rogheda Court 1101t.se as a Court House, and
not for anv other nuroose.
A long discussion ensued on this matter. Mr N T Murphy
stated that cormnittees appointed by the County Council that
had the use of the Court House for tile holding of their meet-
ings were not afforded proper accommodation. This was eon-
firmed by Mr Rath. Messrs Skeffington, M 'Quillan, T J Byrne
T Murphy and 13 Hamill also took part in tho discussion, and
it was ultimately agreed that the matter should 'be deferred to
next meeting of the Council to enable the I)rcgheda members of
the Ccnncil to investigate the matters in connection with the
Courthouse, and in flie lil€hilltilile the Secretary of, the Council
was directed to write to the Caretaker of the Court Tlouse that
he in future provide proper accommodation for all Meet-
ings of Committees appointed by i'ile County Council,
which
are held in Drogheda Court House.
Mr N T Murphy then withdrew his resolution and the discus-
Sion ended.
PAINTING OF' COUNTY COURT HOUSE.
The letter from the Painters' Society, Dundalk, as printed
at page 45 of the nrinntes of the Finance Committee »•as next
considered, and
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed 'by Edward Goodman. Esq ;
Seconded by Bernard Hami!l, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby decide to proceed with the painting
Of the Record Court in the County Court House, Dundalk, and
'direct, the County Surveyor to prepare Specification and invite
tenders for the work.
10
GILES' QUAY .BO.VI'SLIP.
The. next l;u.sinoss was the consideration of the prcpcsal
purchase the Boat Slip at Giles' Quay, now in the
of J P Kearney, M C C, Wilville, and the Secretary react
the report of the Sub-Committee appointed to interview Mr.
Kearney on the matter. The report set out that Mr Kearney
required the sum of C 100 for his interest in the Ecat Slip,
which the Committee considered too much, and the matter was
referred to the County Council.
A discussion ensued on the terms the Council would pre-
varecl to arrange to pay him for the Slip, and subsequently
Kearney informed the Council that he would accept the sum of
for his interesc, ancl the consid ation of this offer was re--
ferred back to the Finance CommiLLce.
CORRESPONDENCE.
RESIGNATION OF MR. JAMES J P.
The following letter was read
Arclee, March 8th, 1915.
Dear Sir,
Fliitling myself unable to attend the Meetings.
regularly, and believing that a member should attend, I beg
most respectftll!y to resign my position as County Curncillor,
at the same time thanking you mnd all members for past
friendship.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours truly,
JAMES
Charles M 'Alester, Esq, Secretary,
11
On the motion of Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by W T Skeffington, ESC], J p,
It was cleeicl€ul to accept Mr Halpenn.v'.s resignation with re--
the was to put the of a.
Councillor in his stead on the agenda for next meeting.
GILES QUAY HARBOUR CONSTABLE'S RESIGNATION.
The following letter from the Giles' Qltay Constable.
was read, and it was decided to refer the question of superatw
nuation to the next Meeting of the Fina nce Committee :—
Giles' Quay,
April 15th, 1915.
Gentlemen,
1 beg to tender my as Harbour Con-.
stable at Giles' Quay. After a period of service to tine
Council, declining years make me feel it my duty to make room
As I ought and to the best of my ability I
have always clone my best to serve Council, on my pay 1
never had a. margin to save; 1 put myself on the kind
consideration of Council, and 1 feel the gentlemen will grant.
a pension in my advanced years.
Your obedient servant,
JAMES COMISKEY.
To the Members of the Louth County Council.
UNPURCHASED TENANTS OF IREI,AND.
The resolution submitted by the
District Council, was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Michael O'Meara, P;
Seconded by Peter Woods, Esa, J P, and
12
Resolved—That the •unpurchased Tenants of Ireland naturally
•resent more and more as time passes, the inequality between
their position and that of the purchased Tenants, and that, this
Council calls for the prompt compulsory settlement of the Irish
Land question, and if money is not now available to pay the
landlords IVIIO have refused to sell since 1903, we consider that
. justice demands that their rents should be graded down to Ehe
scale of the annuities payable in each district, and collected by
the Land Commission under a Government Guarantee for these
landlords until the war is over, and that the Government
should undertake at a fixed date, say in five years, to redeem
.the sealed down rents on an equitable basis of purchase.
MALICIOUS INJURY LAW.
A resolution submitted by Waterford County Council calling
ton Parliament to repeal the law as regards t'he imposition for
Malicious Injury, on the grounds that it works unjustly on the
Ratepayers macle liable, was, on the suggestion of Mr T J
Byrne, J P, marked "read."
DROGHEDA TUBERCULOSIS DISPENSARY.
A letter received from the Seerethry of the Drogheda Trad«s'
Council in connection with the proposed erection of a Tubercu-
Iosis Dispensary in Drogheda, and protesting against same as
being a danger to the community, was referred to the Drogheda
Tuberculosis Sub-Committee.
DEPOT FOR MiLITARY ANI) GOVERNMENT STORES IS
DUBLIN.
The following resolution submitted the Irish Cattle Tra-
13
der.s' Association Wits passed unanimously :—
Proposed by T J Byme, Esq, J P;
Seconded by John F Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That a pertnanent Depot fully equipped. for the.
reception of Military and Government Stores and Supplies be
established in Dublin, as Ireland is entitled to the same facilties.
for tenders and customers for Irish products and manufacturers.
as these afforded in Great Britain.
DIPPING 'I'SNKS FOR CATTLE.
A submitted by the Louth County Committee of
Agriculture, recommending the County Council €0 investigate
the effect of dipping as a remedy for Red Water in Cattle, and
if found feasible to construct at least one experimental Dipping
Tank in the county, was read, and referred to the Executive
Committee for investigation.
COUNCIL'S EMPLOYEES.
Circular letter was read from the Local Government Board
suggesting that the Council should grant leave of absence Io
any employees who enlist for the period of the war, and the re-
commendations were approved should any employee desire to
avail of the permi•sion.
WEEK ESD TICKETS TO
The submitted by the Dundalk Chamber.
of Commerce, was passed unanimously
by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That we request the Great Northern Railway Conv
ypany to give the sante facilities for week end tickets to Dundalk
•as are given at present from Dublin, Belfast' and Derry.
ORGANISATION OF LABOUR.
Circular lotter fronl the Local Government Board pointing
• out the desira bility of a, proper organisation of labour forces,
was referred Co the Finance Committee.
TOWN TENANTS' LEAGUE CONVENTION.
Letter was rend i'rotn the Executive Committee of the Town
Tenants' League, requesting the Council to appoint two dele-
gates to represent at t•ne forthcoming Convention of the
League, and
On the motion of W T SkeffingSon, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P,
Thomas O'Rourke and Tliomas Murphy, Ecq.uire.s, were ap-
pointed to represent I,otltll County Council at the Convention.
COMMITTAI,S TO i.NDUSTR1.\1, SCHOOLS.
Letter was read from the Clerk of Petty Sessions, l)roglroclfl'
intimating that, an application will be made to the Juvenile
Court, to .be held at Drogheda on Monday, 26th April, to coto-
mit Ellen, Edward, Bridget and .Jdnn Gi.bb, children under 14
years of age, to Industrial Schools, under Section 38 of the
Children Act, 190B. letter was initialled •by the Chair-
Rian.
15
NO'I'ICES OF MOTION.
CO-OPTION ON LOUTH COUNTY
COMM I'ITEE.
The following notice of moticn, standing in name of Mr
put as a substantive resol E ion, and passed
Michael Meade,
mtnanimously
Proposed by Michael Meade, Esq ;
Seconded by T J Byrne, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That Mr Bernard Hughes, of
bridge, be co-opted a member of the Louth County Committee
of Agriculture.
ADDITION TO ARDEE OLD AGE PENSIONS COMMITI*EE.
notice of motion, standing in the of Mr
Michael Meade, was put as a substantive resolution, and passed
unanimously :—
Proposed by Aliell,nel Meade, Esq ;
Seconded by Denis J Rati), Esq,
Resolved—That Mr M'l)onald, of be added to
the Old Age Pension Committee of Arclee.
CO-OPTION OS (NORTH) EDUCATION
Tho following was unanimously
Proposed by Thomas Murphy, Esq ;
Seconded John F Mun.hy, Esq, J P, and
16
Mr wm Woods, J P,
North Dundalk Education Committee.
Four notices of motion standing in the
Murphy, were, by consent of the Council,
quest, not proceeded with.
be appointed on
nanto of Mr T.101nas
at Mr re—
PROPOSED LIQUOR RESTIUUTIC.NS.
consent of the 'Council the following was
Prcpcsecl by T J Byrne, Esq, J P, and
Secondc«l by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P,
That we, the Lonth County Council, view with the mcst ser-
ions apprehension, and the strongest disapproval, any 'hastily
conceived legislation or administrative action tending to para-
lyse or even further hamper one of our remaining national in-
dustries and that we call 'tupon our Irish representatives to use
every means in their power to. frustrate any further attempt
in this direction."
Michael O'Meara, E.sq, J P, moved the following amendment,
which was seconded by D J Rath, Esq
That the resolution proposed bv Mr Byrne 'be not, passed.
On a division there voted :—
For the Amendment—Messrs Meade, John F Murphy,
O'Meara, O'Rourke, Rath and Wm Woods—G.
Against the Amendment—Messrs Byrne, Hamill, Kearney,
Skeffington, and Peter Woods—5.
Mr Thomas Murphy did not vote.
"IVne Chairman declared the amendment carried, and the meet-
ing concluded.
17
finance Committee.
Minutes of Proeeedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 26th April, 1913, at one o'clock, p m.
Present the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members -Murt»hv, Wm Woods, J P; Thos„
O' Rou:rke, Michael Meade, J P Kearney, J F Murphy, J P;
T J Byrne, J P, and John Morgan, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was also present.
The Minutes of the previoug Meeting of the Finance Com-
mittee were taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted, and on examination,
were ordered for payment
Works in the hands of County Surveyor
Secretary's Office
Total
E125 IG 2
66 11 G
C192 7 8
The Bank Books for the General and Subsidiary Aecounts
were examined and initialled by trne Chairman.
NEW COUNTY OFFICES—DEPOSITS FOR PLANS.
The Secretary informed the Committee that in accordance
with the conditions of competition, Architects applying for co-
18
-pies of p)ans in connection with the new County Offices , had to
Aleposit a sum of C2 2s ()d, which would be refunded to them on
receipt of a bona-fide design. He had now a number of these
deposits in his possession, and requested a direction from the
Committee as to the mod_e of dealing with them. The Commit—
tee decided that it was undesirable to lodge this money in the
Gener%ll County Account, and the Secretary was directed to
lodge the sums in a special account in his own name, so that,
when a competitor submitted a plan his deposit could be refun-
•ded without delay.
IRESIG.NATIOS OF GILES' QUAY HARBOUR CONSTABLE.
A letter (wihieh had been before the County Council, and had
been referred to the Finance. Committee) was read from James
'Comiskey, Harbour Cions€:vble, Giles' Quay, resigning tho post
"Of Harbour Constable, Giles' Quay, after 36 years' service, and
requesting that the Council would kinclly grant him a pen-
. sion.
The Secretary stated that Comiskey's remuneration was CIO
pp: •annum, with an allowance of C2 per annum for lighting the
lamps on the Pier. He did not think that properly speaking
Comiskey was a pensionable officer.
After discussion, it was unanimously resolved,
'On the motion of Mr J P Kearney,
Seconded by Mr Woods, J P,
That we recommend that a pension of C8 per year, being two-
thirds •of his total •annual remuneration of C12, be allowed to
James Comiskey, Harbour Constable, Giles' Quay, subject to
the approval of the Local Government Board.
19
It was decided that Comiskey continue to cli.scbmg•e the du-
. ties of Harbour Constable, until the appointment of his succes-
sor, the consideration of whicll subject was adjourned till next
Finance Meeting, when the Secretary was directed to table list,
of the duties in connection with the post.
PURCHASE OF GILES' QUAY BOAT SLIP.
The consideration of this matter harl been to the
Finance Committee by the County Council. -Mr J P Kearney,
M C C, Wilville, in whose ownership tho Boat Slip at Giles'
Quay now was, had offered the Slip to the County Council ror
the sum of C 100. The Silly-Committee appointed to interview
Mr Kearney on the matter had stated in their report to the
I/"inanee Committee that they could not, recommend the accept-
ance of this offer.
Mr
Kemme.y
informed the Comm
ttbat
he
was
now prepared to
dispose
of
his
interest in the Slip, ancl hand over same to the County Couueil
för the sum of C50 (fifty pounds). After discussion,
'On the motion of Mr 1!' J n.vrne, J P,
Seeoncled by Mr Miehael Meade,
it was unanintously decided to recommend the Chunty Council
to purchase from Mr J P Kearney, Miilville, the Boat Slip ot
Giles' Quay, for the snm of C5() (fifty pounds).
OF ROAD MACHINERY: Etc.
The County Surveyor stated that some of the machinery for
road work Juul been delivered. He was anxious to test same,
but before doing so he wished to have insurance against aeci-
'dents, explosions, and Third Party lisk effected.
20
In reply to a query the Surveyor stated that the makers had:
guaranteed the machinery for twelve months.
After discussion, the matter was left in the Surveyor's and
Secretary's hands -to see the Council safeguarded pending gene--
ral re-arrangement of Insurances.
FARRELL V. COUNTY COUNCIL.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man
Francis Street, Dundalk,
lüll April, 1915.
Dear Sir,
Elizabeth Farrell, Dunleer: Applicant; Louth County
Council, Respondents.
I received to-day Cheque for C7 0s Gd from the applicant,-
being costs of Reversal of Decree herein. T lodged the sum
to the credit of the Council with the Treasuret•: and send here-
with reeeipt.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M' Aleitor, Esq, Secretary,
Louth County Couneil, Dundalk.
REFUNDS FROM CO. LOUTH INSURANCE cxnnrrrrn.
The following letter was read and initialled by tho Ctnaiv-
Insurance Committee for the County of Louth,
90 Olanbrassil Sfreet,
Dundalk, 23rd April, 1915.
Dear Sir,
T am directed by the Insurance Committee for
the County of Louth to Sorward enclosed Paying Order for
21
:i.he sum of C73 (seventy-three pounds) in respect of the services
of the Tuberculosis Medical Officer and Nurse, for the period
•ending the 31st March, 191-3.
Faithfully yours,
V. WARREN,
Secretary.
'Charles M' Alester, Lsq, Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
PROVISIONAL VALUATION ARDEE cotiRT HOUSE.
The Official Provisional Valuation of the original assessable
site value on Ardee Court House of the sum of Cl'23, was stay.
mitted from tho General Valuation Office, and the matter was
referred €0 Che Solicitor to be dealt with as the valuation of tho
.other Court Houses in the county had been.
ARDEE RAILWAY GUARANTEE.
Letter was read from the Chief Commis.sioner of Valuation,
Sir John Barton, enclosing Certificate Showing the sum to be
contributed by the rateable district in the Barony of Ardee,
to make good the deficiency in the working of the
Ardee Branch Railway.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
ARDEE RAILWAY ACCOUNTS.
Letter was read from the Accountant G. N. R., enclosing
of the Ardee Branch Line account for the half-year ended
'31st December, 1914, showing a deficit of C130 8s 2d for tho
•half year.
The account was initialled by the Chairman.
22
PURCHASE OF LAND (IRELAND) Act, 1891,
and
THE LABOURERS' (IRELAND) ACT, 1906.
The Secretary submitted Schedule received from the Labour-.
ers' Department, Local Government Board, showing particulars
of amounts remitted to the Commissioners of Publie Works in
Ireland out of the Exchequer contribution to be applied by
t] •em towards the repayment of outstanding Loa ns under the ,
Labourers Acts charged on the following Rural Distlicts :—
Rural District.
Ardee No. I
Dundalk
Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union
A mount.
Cl(i7 17 4
'245 6 11
185 1 8
'I"he amount of the half yearly annuities due to the Commis-
' sicners by the above-named Rural Distlict Councils in respect of
such Loans will be roclueed accordingly.
DUNDALK UNION AND RURAL msnucr COUNCIL
ACCOUNTS.
Letters were read from the Local Government Board enclos- •
ing certified copies of the accounts of the Dundalk Union and
Vandalk Rural Distliet Council, together with the Auditor's
epopts thereon.
The accounts were initialled by the Chairman.
DISTRICT OF DUNDALK (LIGHTING POWERS).
Local Government Board Orders were read investing the Ru-
ral District Council of Dundalk with Urban Powcws for the pur-
pose of lighting the Rural District, and making the entire Ttura.l
District the area of Oharge on which all expenses which may be
23
incurred by the District Council for this purpose, shall
cha rgea ble.
LIGHTING OF ARDEE COURT HOUSE.
Letter was read from the Ardee Electric Company stating
that they would be pleased to give an estimate for the fitting
up •of the Court House Buildings in Ardee with Electric Light,
and requesting the Secretary to bring the matter under the no.
tice of the Council.
The Committee decided that as gas was already in use in the
Court Ilouse Buildings, the question of electric lighting could,
not be entertained.
When the above matter was under discussion, Mr Thos. M.ur-
phy requested information as to whether the agreement •between.
the County Council .and the Ardee Electric Lighting Company
was ITOW completed and in order. TIW County Surveyor said he
believed the matter was now perfected, but would, make exaet;.
inquilies.
CRIMINAL INJURY DECREE—R. & G. GRAY.
Tho following letter from the Manager Hibernian Bank, Dun—
dalk, was read
Hibernian Bank, Ltd.
Dundalk, 24th April, 1915.
Ile R and G Gray v. Louth County Council, and re do. to them
National Benefit Insuranee Co., Ltd.
Dear Sir,
I have received to-day from the Solicitor to the Na-
tional Benefit Insug•ånce Co., Ltd., a Certificate cf Decree and'
Affirmance in this case, together with assignment R and G Gray
24
•to the National Benefit Insurance Co. with a request to forward
to him the amount due on foot of the Decree.
In vieiV of the fact that I am only authorised to pay over the
amount on presentation of the original Decree, I have held over
.the matter pending further instructions from your Council.
There is a point which T would wish to bring under your no
tice, viz--if the money is paicl over without the production of
the Decree Chere arises tho danger of its presentation at some
future date. I think this is a case in which the Bank, acting
as Treasurer to your Council, be indemnified against
any loss, if, at some subsoquent date, the Decree should be pre-
sented. I tllink either Messrs R and G Gray or the National
Benefit Insurance Company, LtQI, should be asked to give such
ipdemnicy before the money should be paid.
Kindly let me have the views of your Council at your earliest
• convenience.
Yours faithfully,
CHAS. H. Mac-NEVIN,
Manager.
'C. M'A1es€er, Esq,
Secretary Louth County Council.
Tn connection wit.h this matter the following letter from the
Council's Solicitor was read :
Francis Street, Dundalk,
'26th April, 1915.
R and G Gray, Appellants; Co. Council, Respondents.
Same to National Benefit Insurance Co., Ltd.
Dear Sir,
With reference to your inquiry herein, and let-
ter received by you from the, Council's Treasurer, if we are to
:assume that the original affirmance of Decree in this ease is mis-
25
laid, I am satisfied to aeeept the Certificate of the entry in the
• Cierk of the Peace's book from the applicant's assignees as suffi-
eient evidence of tlle existence of the Decree. It has been held
In law • that, suell an entry in the book is conclusive evidence.
And if the original affirmance be afterwards discovered and
wrongfully presented to the Treasurers it is obvious that there
should be no second payment made.
If tho Treasurers for their own purposes require some evi-
deuce tibe Affirmance of Decree is lost, they can call for a
short affidavit to be made by the applicant's Solicitor.
I return herewith Mr -Wie-Nevin's letter.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles AI' Alester, Esq, Secretary,
Louth Couuty Council, Dundalk.
After a short discussion the Committee unanimously refused
to give any indemnity to the Treasurer against the risk of a
second payment of the amount of Affirmance and costs.
The Secretary was directed to forward to the Manager of the
Hibernian Bank copy of the Solicitor's letter, and at the same
time to inform him of the decision of the Committee on the
subject.
executive Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Executive Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk»
on Monday, 26tå1 Al)lil, 1915, at one o'clock, m.
Present the Chair : Charles A Duffy, E.sq, J P.
Other Members —T Murwhy, wm Woods: J P; T O'Rourke,
Michael Meade, J P Kemey, J F Murphy, J P; T J Byrne,
J P ; and John Morgan, Esquires.
Messrs Clinton, Donnelly .and Maxwell V S, were in attend-
ance.
The Minutes of ihe• previous Meeting of the Executive Com-
mittee were taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
REPORTS FROM VETERINARY INSPECTORS.
The following Reports were read and initialled by the Chair-
man :—
Mr. Clinton's Report.
Dundalk, 26th April, 1915.
Sir,—
On the 19th inst a ease of suspected Tuberculosis in a
cow was reported to me from Greenore port. I visited the pre—
mises and found the cow affected with unduration of the udder.
She was removed Io Mr White's, Dundalk, and slaughtered by
order of the owner. Mr Francis M 'Gee, Holyhead. No come
pensation is payable by your Council in the case.
27
No ot•her case of contagious disease occurred in the district:
during the month.
Your obedient Servant,
J. T. CLINTON,
M.R.C.V.S.
Mr. Donnelly's Report.
Veterinary Establishment,
Drogheda, 12th April, '15.
Gentlemen,
During the •month of March I had two reported;
cases under the Tuberculosis Order, and I dealt witli same, and!
furnished your Seeretary with t,he necessary Reports.
At present there are no animals in the district ltncler restric—
tions in connection with the Diseases of Animals Acts.
Yours Respectfully,
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
Mr. Maxwell's Report.
Ardee, 1st March, '15.
Sir,
I beg to report that I visited the usual fairs and'
markets held in the Ardee No. 1 District for the month of
January. I visited the detained sheep at Charleville on the.
8th, and tho sheep being healthy issued the necessary with-
drawal papers. I visited the sheep detained at Corbollis on the.
9th and 19th, and the animals being also healthy issued the.
usual withdrawal notices. In both cases I am pleased to say
the cleaning and antiseptic precautions were done in a most
efficient way.
During the month a ease under the Tuberculosis Act was re-.
ported to your Council, but the animal died before examinatiom
28
Details from the ' 'Knacker" showed Tuberculosis to have ex-
*stecl in the anirnnl.
I am, Sir,
Yours Faithfully '
W. E. MAXWELL.
SHEEP DIPPING ORDER OF 1915.
The following circular letter from the Department of Agri-
•culture, notifying the issue of the Sheep Dipping (Ireland) Or-
-der of 1915, recently made by the Department, was read
Department of Agriculture aml Teéhnical Instruction for
Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch),
50 and 51, Upper Mount
Dublin, 19th April, 1915.
No. 1399-14.
Sir,
I have to transmit herewith, for the information and
guidance of the Local Authority, copies of •an Order entitled
the Sheep Dipping (Ireland) Order of 1915, made recently by
this Department under the Diseases of Animals Acis.
The Orders previously existing, entitled respectively the
•Sheep Dipping (Ireland) •Order of 1912, and the Autumn Sheep
Dipping (Ireland) Temporary Order of 1918 are, in effect, re-
-enacted by this further Order, which comes into foreo on 1st
proximo ; that is to say, the new Order will continue the pro-
vision initiated last year, substituting a double for a single clip-
ping in the autumn period, in addition to the usual summer dip-
Ping,
From the representations made by the Department on former
•occasions t,he Local Authority are aware that it is essential in
the interests of the sheep•breeding industry, that effective ac-
„tion should be taken with the object of eradicating Sheep Scab.
The extent which this disease still prevails in Ireland (vide
29
the attmohed return as to its distribution in 1914) constitutes
grave menace to the sheep export trade. Already that
has severely felt the pressure of the regulations called for by
tho frequency of outbreaks, and should the landing of Irisli•
Sheep in Great Britain be further restricted t'he results might
very inimical to the prosperity of sheep farming in this
country. It will aceordingly be seen how necessary it is that
all concerned in dealing with Che disease should co-operate ef-
fectively for its suppression. The Department trust, there-
fore, t'hat tiiie active co-operation of your Local Authority may
be relied upon in so important matter.
As regards the present Order, the Local Authority should
take adequate steps to enforce it properly in the district. In
this connection I have to suggest that the Local Authority if the
have not yet exercised their powers of appointing Inspectors to.
see that dipping is effectively carried out, should now do so,
under Article 20 of the Order. Many Local Authorities have
already taken this course, and it would be distinctly for the
general advantage if similar useful action were taken in all dis-
tricts.
Witlh a view to the effective publication of the Order, the
Department, will forward at an early date, a supply of placard
Notices for posting throughout your Local Authority's district.
The customary arrangements are also being made for the supply
to sheep owners (through the Police or otherwise) of Forms for
use under the Order.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary..
The Clerk,
of each Local Authority.
30
Tn the return accompanying the circular, of outbreaks of Sheep
'Scab in Ireland during the year 1914, out of the total of 474
•outbreaks, 19 occurred ill the County of Louth.
The Sheep Dipping Order was also before the Meeting, and
the Committee decided that, all the necessary arrangements for
the dipping of Sheep in the county be discussed at a, further
Meeting of t'he Contmittee, and in the meantime that pos-
ters when received from the Department should be posted
through the county.
Tho next, business on the agenda was the revision of the sala-
ries paid to the three Veterinary Snrgeons, Messrs Clinton.
Dnnclalk ; Maxwell, Arclee, -and Donnelly, Drogheda.
The Secretary stated dhat their Salaries at present stood as
follows
Mr Clinton, C120.
Mr Maxwell, CSO.
Donnelly, ego.
Of these sums CCS, C5() ancl respectively, were paid in
respect of extra cluties imposed in connection with the Tuber-
culo.sis (Ireland) ()rder.
The standing snlaries for Ihe- ordinary
duties which the Veterinary Inspectors wore appointed to trans-
act, were U2, C30, and ego.
Tho Department 'had only sanctioned those salaries tempor-
arils, and the, period of sanction expired on the 1st June, 1915,
and were to be reviewed by direction oi the Department in view
of the work performed by the Veterinary Inepectors under tho
-nuberculosis Order.
The Secretary submitted return giving the number of cases
for the past twelve months dealt with under the Tuberculosis
• Order as follows
Mr Clinton—4 cases.
MT Donnelly—19 cases.
Maxwell—2 cases.
Tho greau bulk of these cases wore detentions of animals at
the Ports of Drogheda, Dundalk, and Greenore.
The Comn)ittee were of opinion that a scale of fees for cases
dealt with under the Order would be more satisfactory than
salaries, and Che Secretary submitted the scale of fees which had
'been transmitted by the Department in January of Che present
. year.
After discussion, the following resolution was passed unani-
mously :—
Proposed by F Mtuvhy, J P;
Seconded by J P Kearney, Esq, and
Resolved—That we recommend the County Council to adopt,
the scale of fees for work by the Veterinary Inspectons under
the Tuberculosis Order, as submitted by the Department in
their letter Of 22nd Jan,uanv, 1915, as follows, and that they
come into operation on 1st June, 1915
Tuberculosis (Ireland) Order of 1913.
Scale of Fees Prepared by the Veterinary Medical Association
of Ireland.
I. For clinical examination of the first animal
fee of
Each additional animal on the same premises
The maximum amoun't under this head not• to
exceed Cl.
eo 10 G
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
32
Wihen the premises are more than 15 miles dis-
tant a fee for the first animal of
For appiying the Tubercular TeÅt up to four
ani m tls
Each animal over four
Post Mortem Examinations
Microscopic Examination
Mileage at the rate o! Is per mile one way, or
railway fare.
No further charges to be made for reports or valuations.
DIPPING TANK FOR CATTLE.
1
5
1
0
0
(J
33
SHEEP SCAB AND SWINE FEVER.
Notices of Sheep Scab cases at Corbollis and Charleville, re—
ceived from Mr Maxwell, V S, and one case of Sviine Fever re-
ported by Police, were submitted and initialled by the Chair-
man.
The resolution on above subject submitted by the County
Committee of Agriculture •and referred to the Executive Com—
mittee, was next considered.
The resolution recommended the County Council to erect one
experimental tank in the county for the treatment of the dis-
ease known as Red Wwter in cattle by dipping.
After discussion the Secretary was directed to request the
obinion and advice of the Department on the matter: and if
possible information as to probable cost.
TUBERCULOSIS (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1914.
The Secretary submitted notices that, had been received un—
der the above Order. The Secretary informed the Committeo
that copies of the various forms had been furnished to tho
partment, and that in no case wa:s there any claim for compen—
sation.
35
(Arms supplied by Automobile Association and Motor Umon.
Standards proposed to be supplied and fixed 'by County Coun-
• cil).
No tenders were received for either of these works, and it was
decided that they be placed in the hands of the County Sur-
Proposal Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Committee at their
First (Adjourned) Quarterly Mooting held in the Council Charn-
ber, Court House, Dundalk, on Monday, 10th May, 1915, at ono
-o'clock, p m.
Present the Chair : Charles A Duffy, E.sq, J P.
:--N T J P; Lawrence M'Keon, J P
Kemmey, Patk WGee, J P; Thomas O'Rourke, John F Mur-
phy, J P; Murphy, Edward Goodman, Wm Woods,
LJ P, and Michael M'Ardle, Esquires.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Proposal Com-
Inittee v.ere taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The Committee were called to consider tenders for the un-
.dermentioned works :—
APPLICATIONS BY THE COUNTY SURVEYOR.
—To provide for the maintenance of ti"ne County Court
No. .20
House, Dundalk, for the year ending 31st March,
191 (i. Cost not to exceed C.30. Cottnt.y at Largo
Ch a rue.
—To Direction Signs in the Rural Districts of Ar-
No. 21
doe, Drogheda and Dundalk. Cost not to exceed
Cd(). • County at Large Charge.
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of tilte Finance Committee at their •
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 10th May, 1915, at one o'clock, m.
Present .
—In the Chair: Charles A Duffy, J P.
Other Members T Murphy, J P; M 'Keon, J P '
Kearney, Patk M 'Gee, J P; Thomas O'Rourke, John F Mur-
phy, J P; Murvhy, Edward Goodman, wm Woods, J P;
Miohael M' Ardle, and Bernard Hamill, J P, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at
their Oleeting held on 26th April, were taken as read, •and
signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted and, on examination,
were ordered for payment
Works in hands of County Surveyor
Secretary's Office
Total
C87 16 5,
75 12 10,
2163 9 3
The Bank Book; for the General and Subsidiary Accounts
were examined and initialled by the Chairman.
37
LOAN FOR ROAD MACHINERY.
Tllå Secretary stated that some of the Road Maehi.'ery for
• tho work of Improvement had arrived, and would require to bo
paid for at once. He requested a direction from the Commit-
, tee as to the mode of dealing with the Machinery Loan and
payments Nierefrom.
The Committee decided tov instruct bho Secretary to make ar-
rangements with the Treasurer €0 have the amount of the, Ma-
, chinery Loan transferred to an account to be called the
"Loan No. I Account," and that all payments for Machinery
be made direct, by paying order out of this account, subject to
the sanction of the Local Government Board.
DRIVERS POR STEAM ROLLERS.
The next business on Ohe agenda was the appointment of
Drivers for the Road Rollers, in accordance with Advertise-
ment issued.
County Surveyor stated he required five Engine Drivers,
and that, there were twenty-nine applicants. Two of these men
were required at once, as some of the Rollers had •arrived, and
he wished to test them. He suggested that before dealing
witlh the applications the Committee should fix the wages to be
paid, and after discussion,
On the motion of Mr Wm Woods, J P:
Seconded by Mr Thomas O'Rourke,
it was unanimously decided to recommend the County Council
to fix the wages of the Drivers of Steam Rollers to boemployed
in connection with the work of Road Improvement at, 30s per
week, rising by increments of 2s (id per week per annum to a,
r maximum of 35s.
38
The Committee then carefully considered the list of appliea-
tions, and ultimately, after considerable discussion, the follow-
ing were selected : —
Bernard ilarmon: Brownstown, Monasterboice—
P Rooney, Culleen, County Sligo.
James Murphy, Petestown.
Thomas Myrees, James' Street, Dundalk.
Daniel Hanlon, Ballymakellelt.
Michael Byrne, Sandpit, Termonfeckin.
J F .WArclle, Edenkell, Bailsmill.
A M 'Guinness, Walterstown, IReadypenny.
Henry Keliedy, Ballybarraek, Dundalk.
James Byrne, Corcreaghy.
And on the motion of Mr N T Murphy, J P,
Seconded by Mr Edward Goodman,
it was decided unanimously that •the final selection from these
be left in the hands of the Surveyor, and that he have
complete control over the men appoin ted, including power to
dismiss if unsatisfactory.
HARBOUR CONSTM3LE FOR GILES' QUAY.
The next business was the question of appointment of a
Ha•rbour Constable at Giles' Quay, in room of James Comiskey,
resigned.
The Secretary read the Section of tfe Act, empowering the
Council to appoint such officer. The Section stated tliat the •
person appointed to the post would have power to enforce the'
bye-laws, rules, orders and regulations made in connection wit,lÜ
the Harbour, and would have in addition, for snell purpose,
39
the same rig'hts, powers and authorities as a member of the•
Constabulary force.
The Secretary also sublilitfed draft list of the duties of the
flearbour Constable, ancl said the sa lurs of the former Constable •
was CIO per year, •with an of yer year for lighting.
Mr Thomas Murphy suggested that it would an incentive
to do the work of collecting dues, etc, properly, iT the new man
was paid a fixed scun, with additional remuneration on a Com-
mission basis. Mr J P Kem•ney did not tliink this would be a
suitable way, . and thought it would be difficult €0 get a good
man on these terms. Ultimately,
the motion of Mr Edward Goodman,
Seeonded by Mr N T Alurphy, J P,
to .adverti,se for a I-larbcnu• 1:10 for Giles' Quay at a salary
of CI'2 (twelve pounds) per annunl, the remuneration to cover all
the duties in connection with the yost, including lighting of
the leading and lights.
INSURANCES.
The Secretary submitted quodations received for to
cover Third Party ancl Public Liability risk, Insurance of
Machinery by accident thereto or thereby, and Boiler Insurance
and Tnspeetion, received from the four Companies who had
tendered, namely, the Ocean, the Atlas, London and I Lancashire
and tile Gresham. Ho informed the Committee that € he most
comprehensive cover for all these risks and the most advan-
tageotl.s was that of the first-nmnecl Company. In ecinnection
instil tumce, the Council was.
with the
covered up to the 1st August, 1913, in trneit• existing policy
40
•only for the ordinary working staff of the county: which
•includes clerical staff, Assistant Surveyors, Harbour Constables,
Sheep Dippers, Education Act Offieers, etc, and direct labour
employed under the charge of the County Surveyor; that work
mnder the ordinary maintenance contracts was not covered
although the Council was liable, and that all the contemplated
work of quarrying. road-rolling, etc, would also require to be
covered. He further informed the Committee that the holding
Company for Employers' Liability quoted for the additional
risk a rate of 35s per cent, which was the rate fixed by the
Tariff Companies. Tais was also the rate quoted for all the
Employer's Liability risk, and on a total wage roll of C 16,700
. represented a sum of C283 15s.
After a very long discussion, the Committee were of opinion
•that a quotation should be obtained from some good non-tariff
.offic•es for all the above-mentioned Insurances of the Council,
-and Che Secretary was directed t.o obtain quotations.
The Committee appointed the fol lowing sub-committee to
'deal with the matter and report to the next meeting
Chairman, C A Duffy, Esq; Bernard Hamill, Esq; and tho
'County Snrveyor and tJhe Secretary.
TREASURY S.\.NC'I'IO.X TO LOANS FOR ROAD
IMPROVEMENT.
The following letter from the Local Government Board en-
•closing the Treasury sanction to the Loan for Rcqd Improve-
41
to three loans amounting to sanctioned to the Louth
County Council for the purpose of steam-rolling certain roads
in the County, I am directed by the Local Government Board
for Ireland to forward, for the information of the Council, tho
accompanying copy of letter w'hiciL the Board have received
from the Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's Treasury on
the subject.
• The Secretary,
J am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
Louth County Council.
The accompanying letter, as follows: was also read
so. 21960/1915.
Louth County.
c.3178.
Treasury Chambers,
20th Amil, 1915.
ment, which they
No. 21,960/1915.
.Lout11 County.
Sir,
-With reference
had previously refused, was read:—
Local Government Board, Dublin,
26th April, 1915.
to your letter of the 14th instant, relative
Sir,
In reply to your letter of the 19th inst, T am directed by
the Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's Treasury to say that,
in view of the representations of the Local Government Board
for Ireland they Hise no further objections to the bdrrowing
by the Louth County Council of a sum of for the purpose
of steam-rolling certain roads in the County.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
T. L. HEATH.
The Vice-President,
Local Government Board:
Dublin.
42
The letters were initialled by the Chairman, Mr N T Murphy
remarking that lust thanks cf the Council were due to the
Chairman and to the Local Government Board for the prompt
and satisfactory way in which the matter had •been dealt with.
BY LOCAL AUTHORITIES,
Circular lettei• from the Local Government Board da ted 4th
May, 1915, was read, stating that the Lords Commissiohers of
his Majesty's Treasury had deeidNI to restrict ca?itnl issues
bf Local Authorities within the narrowest limits. To that end
labour should be econcmi.sed as far possible, and new works,
except snell as are of pressing neet: icy, either for reasons cf
public health or on account of war requirements, should be
avoided.
Where a consent of the Board to the raising of a
loan is dated earlier Elan '28th February last, and Chat no action
has yet been taken on same either wholly or in yart, a further
sanction from the Bunrcl is necessary before any action can be
The circular also pointed out that economies ancl
taken.
restrictions on borrowing are feasible not only as regards new
works, but also as regards works in progress; in the latter ease
by arranging with contractors fcr the postponement of works
or •by enlarging the period allowccl under contract for their
completion.
The circular was inilialled by ill?' CaaU•man.
IMPROVEMENT.
Letter was read frolil the County Surveyor stating
had written to the Road P,oa the work of Road
that 110
Surfac-
43
ing in the Dundalk Urban District had begun, and had receivedj;
in reply the following letter :
The Road Bomu,
Slanager and Engineer's Office,
Queen Anne's Clambers,
Broadway, NVestminster,
London, S.W., 6th May, 1915m
DUBLIN-EEI,FAST ROAD.
Grant So. 3012.
Dundalk Urban District Council.
Dear Sir.
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of Che 3rd
instant, which has been noted, ancl in reply, have to inform
you that the Road Board would be glad to know whether it
would be passible for your Counéil to arrange for the scheme
•bo be deferred until more normal conditions obtain.
At present, the demand for labour and materials •for urgent
national requirements is sucsll that it is extremely undesirable
for Highway Authm ities to press forward any scheme which
could well be postponed, even though such postponement causes.
some local inconvenience.
The poliey on which the Vt(tard are acting at the present
time is basecl on the need of eeonGiuising public expenditure,
and of deferring works of road-improvement except in cases
Where tho work is necessary to prevent serious deterioration.
From the information before the Board, it would appear that,
the proposal referred to—cr at least portions
conveniently be postponed, and I am directed €0 ask youv
44
Council to consider Che advisability of taking this course.
Yours faithfullv
H. P. MAYBURY.
The County Survieyor,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
After discussion, the County Surveyor was instructed to
inform the Road Board that tlhe preparations for the work of
Road Improvement were practically completed; that tho
machinery was on order and some of it already delivered* that
arrangements had been made for entry into quarries, and that
Drivers had been appointed for the Rollers, consequently it
would be impossible to postpone the work, but that it would
proceeded with judiciously.
ANNAGA,SSAN PIER.
The following letter from Khe Department vvas read, and was
referred to the Annagassan Pier Commissioners
Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction (Fi»herie«
Bra nell).
3 Kildare Place, Dublin,
30th April, 1915.
Sir,
With reference to previous correspondence on the subject,
of tho Harbour Works at Annagassan, J have to state, for tho
information of the Louth County Council, that it is considered
dhat the breakwater, although not completed to the full letter
of the specification, is now in a serviceable and permanently
vdurable condition.
With regard to the cut, shown on the plans, at the upper end
of the basin and connecting it with the river, it has been •found,
in process of excavation of the basin, that the material at this
place, instead of being (as in most of tihe works) a hard and
compact mass of boulders and clayey sand, consists largely of
very loose gravel and sand. It is accordingly feared that, if
this cut be made, its sides and bottom will be unable to resist
the effect Of the ebb current, and that the material from them
will be carried down and deposited in the basin, so that the
latter will rapidly fill up. Against this it has to be said that
serious siltage of mud is taking plaee in the basin, w'hich it is
thought might be checked by the making of this cut. How-
ever, of the two evils to feared, the mud appears to be tho
lesser, since it is not liable to form dangerous ridges such as-
would be caused by gravel moving under the action of tho
rapid current that would occui• when the river was in flood,
if the cut were opened. The mud, moreover, is the more easily
removed, and it is possible that the present siltage is largely
due to the disturbance of surrounding surfac€xs by the progress .
of the work, and it is not, therefore, likely to be continued.
For these reasons it appears undesirable that the cut should
be made at present, even if financial considerations did not
prodiibit it.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
Courthouse, Dundalk.
REMISSION OF SURCHARGE.
The following letter from the Local Government Board
•enclosing Order remitting the Surcharge of 3s Od made
against Messrs P Hughes, late Chairman; B flamill and E
Goodman, was read and initialled by the Chairman
No. 55,866/1914.
Louth County.
Local Government Poard, Dublin,
30th April, 1915.
Sir,
The Local Government Board for Ireland have had under
consideration the appeal to t'hem, from the persons aggrieved,
against the surcharge of 3s Od made by the Auditor at the
audit cf the accounts •of the County Council of Louth for the
half-year ended the 30th of September, 1913.
The Board have inquired into lawfulness of the reasons
stated by the Auditor fcr making the surcharge in question'
and have found that the surcharge was lawfully mac18, but
that tho subject-matter thereof was incurred in sucu circum-
stances as to make remission fair ancl equitable, and they have
mado an Order accordingly, ecpies of wliieh are enclosed for
the information of the applicants and of the C..)llnty Council.
I am. Sir,
Your obedient servant,
A. R. BARLAs
Secretary.
The Socretary,
County Council of Louth.
47
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.
Application was rend from Aeting Sergeant Levinge, Inspec-
tor of Weights and Measures, requesting tho County Ccuncil to
supply four sets of date stamps, and two, verification stamps,
for use at the Weights ancl Measures Offices at -Drogheda and
Dunda 1k.
The Committee linanimously agreed to supply tllese necessary
requiramentg, vand t.gae Secretary was directed to order same.
ACCOUNTS OF COUNTY LOUTH AND DUNDALK JOINT
COMMITTEE FOR TECHNICAL INSTRUCTION.
Letter was rend from. the Local Government Board dated
4th May, 1915, No. 228.36/1915, enci;ysing the audited accounts
for the half year to the 30th September, 1.914, of above
Committee, together with the Auditor's reporb thereon.
Tn the report complaint was made that •owing to the delay
in ilhe payment of tho" Grant payable by tho Coil nCy Louth
Committee of Agriculture, the Grants from the Department
were held back, which caused embarrassrnent to the Technical
Committee.
The Secretary informed the Committee that the instalment
payable by tho County Council was -transferred to tho credit
of the County Committee immediately after u.:te payment was
ordered, and that he had advised the Local Government Board
„t,o this effect.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
TECHNICAL INSTRUCTIOS GRANT.
The following letter was read, and, after discussion, it was
48
decided to reeotnmend to the County Council that the Grant
ordered for payment with tåhe Advances in future :—
County Louth and Dundalk Joint Committee for Techniea!
Instruction.
Municipal Technical School,
Dundalk, April 30th, 191ö..
Dear Sir.
I wikh to acknowledge with thanks the receipt of the sum ot
SO, the second half of the payment due to t4he County Louth
and Dundalk Joint Technical Instruction Committee for the.
year ending March 31st, 1915.
Could I be allowed to suggest that as soon as possible are
rangemen€s be made to pay over the amounts due to tho,
Technical Instruction Committee during the financial period
concerned, as the delay in payment prevents us receiving:
monies from the Department, and so causes severe financial.
stress to my Committee.
Thanking you in anticipation.
I am,
Yours faithfully,
A. E. EASTHOPE..
C. M' Alester, Esq, Secretary,
Loudh County Council, 'Dundalk.
ACCOUNTS OF COUNTY COMMITTEE OF AGRICULTURE..
Letter was read from the Local Government Board dated
4th May, 1915, No. 22855/1915, enclosing the audited accounts.
of the above Committee, and the Auditor's report thereon.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
49
DROGHEDA COURTHOUSE.
'Phe following letter was read, and the Secretary was direetc•ci
to instruct the Caretaker to give the use of the Council
Olmamber to all Connniåces appointed by the County Council
meeting at Drogheda Courthouse for the transaction of
busi ness :
Dear Sir.
Ccurt•honse, Drogheda,
May 3rd. 1915.
In reply to your letter of the '23rd inst.nnt, have always
given the different Committees rooms which I thought would
suit them, and when I got notico I had a fire lighted for them.
'The rooms in which they meet are capable of seating twelve
comfortably. In future if it is desired I shall put them into tho
Council Chamber upstairs. Tho Old Age Pensions Committee
do not, hold their meetings here.
Yours faithfully,
PATRICK GARVEY,
Court Keeper.
Charles M' Alester, Esq, Secretary,
Louth County Council,
FASE AND VCC)ffONSTOWN DRAINAGE DISTRICTS.
h'he following Report of the Sub-eommittce appointed in
eonnection with the above matter was read, and the Secretary
directed to the Local Government Board .as recom-
unended therein
To the Finance Committee cf the County Council at their
Meeting held 10th May, 1915.
Gentlemen.
The Sub-committee appointed to investigate all the matters
50
in connection with the Fane and Wottonstown Drainage
Districts beg to report that they held two meetings at the
Ccttncil Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on the 26th April and
3rd May respectively.
The following gentlemen a : —Messrs T J Byrne,
J P; M Meade, M C C; J Morgan, M C C; P P L G;
G Holmes, B Mullen, A Murdock, Robert and T Walsh,
County Surveyor.
The lists of owners of lands asscssal»le under the Awards as
furni.sfiecl by t,he Board cf Works, were carefully examined and
the maps inspected, with the resuit that the Sub-committee
aro unanimously of the opinion that quite a large number of
the names are not correct as present owners, and that the lists
requira to be revised and the present actual owners given
before they could recomrnencl the Council to accept the trans-
frrenee cf the business cf the Drainage Districts.
•The Committee recommend that the Finance Committee
should inform the Board of Works, through the Local Govern-
ment Beard, that thc list as furnished is not correct, ancl tb.<tt
the Board of Works should, if necessary, send down a Surveyor
to bring tite list of present owners exactly up to date, so that
all the owners of land assessable may be included in any
acsessments that may •be made, should the Council finally
decide to complete Che transfer.
Messrs Thomas M 'Guinness, Newrath; Peter M 'Guinness,
were added
Annagassan, and Thomas Mathew.s, Knoeka,
to the Sub-cornmittee.
Signed on behalf of the Sub-committee,
Your obedient servant,
CHARLES WALES'TER,
Secretary.
61
PETER M DONNELL'S REMUNERATION.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Caairman :
No. 22528/1915.
Lcjuth County.
Local Government Eoard, Dublin,
28th April, 1915.
Sir.
I am directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland
to acknowledge the .reecipt of your further letter of Ille 23rd
inst, relative to the collection of the poor rate for the past
hal,f-year in Louth County, and with reference traereto I am to
state that the Board have assented to the payment by the
County Council of remuneration to Collector Peter M 'Donnell
in respect of this collection.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
The Secretary 2
Louth County Council.
The Secretary stated that Mr M 'Donnell's remuneration was
included in to-day' payments..
52
executioe Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of tihe Exeentive Committee at the,if'
Meeting held in €1ye Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 17th May, 1915, at one o'clock, p m.
Present the Chair: Charles Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other M'Gee, J P; T J Byrne, J P;
Peter Woods: J P; John F Murphy, J P, and Michael Meade,
Esquires.
IN CONNECI'IOS WITH DIPPING
TANKS.
The Committee had under consideration the arrangements ili
connection with the Council's tanks for the summer and autumn
periods of the present year.
Owing to the great expenditure in connection with the tank
in use last year at Ravensdale and Annaloughan, and the
of support of its usage by sheep owners in the district, it
decidéd to discontinue the working of the tank.
The following Joeal committees were appointed to tnanagiY
the other tanks provided by the County Council :—
CARLINGFORD—Messrs Wm Woods, J P; J P
Michael O'Meara, J P, and Peter Woods, J P,
53
The Committee decided that the Superintendent to be ap-
pointed should be paid at the head rate of ld per sheep, and {d
per Iamb, for all sheep clipped at the tank, and the local com-
mittee were empowered to appoint the Superintendent and
make arrangements for tank site, etc.
AGTIAMEEN—Messrs J H M'Ard1e, J P; J Connolly, J P;
Peter Woods, J P, and B Finnegan.
Mr 'Owen Keenan appointed Superintendent, and to be paid
Id per sheep and lid per Iamb.
J F Murphy, J P; M M'Ardle,
T J Byrne: J P, and Bernard Hughes, Newtown, Knockbriclge.
Thomas M 'Ardle appointed Superintendent at' Ids per week.
ARDEE—Messrs Patrick M'Gee, J P; James M'Gee, Roods-
town; James M 'Donald, Mullacloe; R Stokes, Ardee; James
Tlalpenny, J P, ahul J C Kieran, J P, Ashville.
Wm Leonard appointed Superintendent at 18sver week, and
the local committee to arrange, if possible, for a site for the
tank more convenient to the water supply.
BSLLVMAKENNY—Messrs P Donegan, J P; P Callan,
J ; Joseph Dolan, and Denis J Rath.
Michael M 'Quillan appointed Superintendent, and to 'bo paid
at the head rate of Id per sheep and {d per Iamb.
The Secretary was directed to request quotations for the
supply of Dip to the various tanks from merchants in Ardee,
Drogheda, and Dundalk.
SHEEP SCAB.
Notices were received from Mr W E Maxwell, V S, of an
outbreak of Sheep Scab on the farm of Mrs I. Chester-Walsh,
54
Williamstown. (hvt of a total of 514 sheep 27 animals were af-
fected, and Detention notice had been served on the owner of
the farm.
TUBERCULOSIS (IRELAND) ORDER OF 1914.
Notices were tabled of two eases under the above Order, one
at Commons, Dromiskin, and the other at Pmghenstown, Ar-
doe. Both cases were still undOr supervision of the Veterinary
Inspectors.
6
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898.
LOUTH
COUNTY
COUNCIL.
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
Finance Committee
Held in the Council Chamber
On Monday, 24th May, 1915.
1
Finance Committee
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 24th May, 1915, at one o'clock, p m.
Present tho Chair: T J Byrne, Esq, J P.
Ot,her Members—Peter Woods, J P; Wynne, J P;
Michael Meade, Edward Goodman, John F Murphy, J P; P.
M 'Gee, J P, and B Finegan, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was also present.
The minutes of the previous Meeting of the Finance Commit-
tee wero taken as read, ancl signed 'by tho Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted, and, on examination,
Were ordered for payment :—
Works in hands of County Surveyor
Secretary's Office
Total
E195 7 4
39 16 8
SUPPLY OF SEIFÆP DIP.
tme Secretary submitted the tenders for the supply
DROGHEDA.
Mr L J Healy, at Ils per dozen packets.
Mr Healy's, bcing the only tender received
was accepted.
DUNDALK.
2
of Cooper's Sheep Dip to the various tanks
County
ARDEE.
MI' Patifiek M'Gee, at IOS per dozen packets
Mr J M 'Cutcheon, at Ils per dozen packets.
2 10
throughout
M' Ivor's Medical Hall, at IOS GCI per dozen packets.
M.r M 'Gee's tender, being the lowest, was accepted.
the
3
Board to saneticn the payment of the amount due:—
Park Street,
Dundalk, 24th May, 1915.
from
Aletssrs H Backhouse and Co, Ltcl, at IOS per dozen,
Drogheda,
and cases
To the Chairman,
Finance Committee,
Louth County Council.
Dear Sir,
be glad to receive cheque for balance fees due
for the periods ending 30th September, 1013, and 30th Sep-
tember, 1911, which are considerably overdue.
Yours
PATRICK HUGHES,
Poor Rate Collection
'CLAIMS Fon COOSEBERRY BÜSHES DESTROYED.
'The following claims, which had been certified by the Depart-
inent, Were vcyeommended for pay mont by the County Coun•
Claims for Gooseberry Blshes Destroyed in the County
Is each, and an average quantity of 85 dozen during tho
season to be guaranteed.
Patrick Ward, IOS per dozen, without reservation.
Mr Ward's tender was accepted.
MR. PATRICK HUGHES' APPLICATION FOR
REMUNERATION.
The following letter from Mr P Hughes, Rate Collector, was
read, and after discussion it was recommended that the County
Council should pass a resolution requesting the Local Govern-
of Lou.th.
Certified by Departme»t of Agriculture.
'Patrick Kelly: Mullaerew, Louth, GO at 3d
Julia Crinion, Cappogsgreen, Ardee, 72 at 3d
Captain J Filgate, 100 at, Sd
Wm J (Y Reilly, Knockabbey, Louth, 22 at 3d
Mrs Ellen Kelly, Müllaerew, 224 at 3d
Peter M 'A)ester, Mullacrew, 3 at 3d
Patrick Kearney, nat•hcor, Carlingford: 100 at 3d
0 15
0 18
0
0
1
5
0
5
0
o
o
9
0
Bernard Brannigan, Mullavally, Whitcercss, Louth,
28 at 3d
Joseph P Moonarr, Ardee, 26 at
Mrs Cranston, Kildernaek House, Ardee,
James Smyth, Junr, Gibsto:wn, Dundalk,
James Smyth, Senr, Gitxstown,
M'Ard1e, Faughtut, 55 at 3d
0 11
16
o
o
13
7
(i
7
(5
3
5
Inspectors accordingly. The letter was Gnitiallecl by thc, Chair-
man :
No. 1820-15.
Dennr[mcnt of Agriculture ancl Technical Instruction
at 3d
30 at
20 at dd.
Sir,
for IITdand,
Veletinary _Branch,
50 and 51, Upper Mount Street,
Dublin, 18th May, 1915.
Adverting to that of Article 4 of the Tuberculosis
LOANS' ACCOUNTS.
The Secretary in formed thc Committee that payments for the
Road Machinery, portion of which had now arrived, re-
quire to be made at onee so as to save the discounts allowed
for prompt payment, and that the Hibernian Bank, the Coun—
cil's 'Treasurer, had stiijmiüetl Draft Charge for the Machinery
Loans, which had been approved of by the Council's Solicitoy,
and that, the Local Government Board had written on the 19th
the
inst that it would be in order to make the payments for
Road Machinery and other works, direct out of the Loans' ae-
counts.
the
Tne Committee approved of the arrangements made by
Secretary.
VETERINARY INSPECTORS ANI) TUBERCULIN
'Ille following letter from tho Departnjent of *griculture was
read, and the Secretary stated he had advised the Veterinary
(Ireland) ()ldcr of 1914, bearing on the application of the tuber-
eulin test in cases in which such a test is contemplated by the
Order, t'he Dopartmont wish to make it clear that the fee al-
lowed by the Local Authority in respect of such test, or •the
special salary paid by them to the Inspector concerned for work
under the Order, must be regarded as including the cost of tu-
berculin for the purposes of the test.
Will yori kindly note this and have it pointed out, if neces-
sary, to Veterinary Inspectors acting on behalf of your Local
Authority in etu•rying out the Order.
I am, Sir
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
The Clerk
of each Local Authority.
ROAD BOARD GRANTS.
Letter was read from the Drogheda Corporation applying for
the first instalment of the Grant for the Drogheda Urban Dis-
trict, amounting to the sum of C410.
6
Tho Socretary infcrmod the Committee that, had mado
applicntion to the Road Board for this instalntent, and also for
the first instalment cf for the Rural Districts,
He read letter received from the Road Board, copy of whirli
addressed to the County Surveyor was already before the Fin-
ance Committee on 10th inst, and which had been •tnsswered
according to instructions from the Commit€ee,
Tho Road Board in their reply, dated 17th itlsl, had with'
drawn their objection to the work being proceeded with.
further letter from the noacl Board, dated 19th May, was
read, enclosing the first instalments of the Grants above refer-
Ted to.
The Committee recommended the payment of the Drogheda
Urban the County Council.
DR. M'QUILLAN'S (T. M. O.) PROVISIONAL APPROVAL,
The following letter from the Lceal Government Board wtas
macl and initialled by the Chairman
Local Government vnoard,
Dublin, 18th May: 1915.
No. 14,710-1913.
Louth County.
Sir,
I am directed by the Local Government iSoard
Ireland to advert their letter Of tho 18th November last,'
and, With reference thereto, I am to state that they have ex-
tended for a; further period of six months their provisional ap.
proval of the appointment of DI' J A M 'Quillan, as Medical Ste
7
Oryrintendent of the Central Tuberculosis Dispensary to be es-
tablisbed by the. Louth County Council.
1 am to add that if the Dispensary is completed before the
oxpiration of that period the Board will be prepared to give
4i1ial approval to the appointment,
T am Sir,
'iPho Seerel:ihT,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
AssistQ1t Secretary.
Louth Ccunty Connei),
Dundalk,
LORDSHIP FOOTPATH—CLAIM FOR WAGES.
The following eorre.spondonce in above matter was read, and
diseuss;on the Secretary was directed to writo Mr Kerlesy
asking for fuller particulars of the Olaim by Mr Rice
The Secretary,
Francis Street,
Dundalk, 17t,h May, 1915.
Louth. Cou nty Ceuneil)
Conrt House, Dundalk.
Dear Sir,
Mr Owen Rice, Beihagh, Riverstown, has
ted mo to apply to you for payment of the sum of CI 6s Od,
whereof the sum of' Cl is for four days' work of a horse at 5s
per •day, and Gs for three days' work by himself, at 2.3 per day.
I understand my client was "acting as Ganger under Mr Lyons,
on the direct labour scheme. I shall be glad to hoar from
with reference to same at your convenience.
Yours faithfully,
8
15 Castle Road,
Dundalk, May 19111, 1915.
Dear Sir,
I beg to acknowledge your letter of the 18th inst,
ene!cy€ing a copy of Mr Kerley's application, on of Mr
(b.vn Rice, of If:enagh, for payment of the sum of El 6s ()d.
In reply I have to state that I am not aware of Mr Rice
doing any work as Ganger under me for which he was not paid.
I note that Mr Kerley's application claims Cl for four days'
work of a horse and cart, and Cs for three days' work: 'by Mr
Rice. Would Mr Kerley kindly furnish dates for the •alleged
work ?
I am, faithfully yours,
J. M. C. I,YO.XS,
Assistant County Surveyor.
Charles M 'Alerster, Esq, Secretary
Louth County Council.
Francis Street,
Dundalk,
Chas A1'X1ester, Esq,
Secretary,
Lou,th County Council,
Court House, Dundalk.
Dear Sir,
21st May,
1915.
In reply to yours of yesterday's date tho claim of
my client arises in the month of February, 1914, being the
final days upon which he was engaged in Chat month under Mr
Lyons.
Yours :faithfully,
P. J. KERLEY.
9
PAYMENT OF RAILWAY FARES TO COUNCILLORS.
The Secretary su bmitted two accounts for Railway Fares,
wlliell had been senc in by Messrs M (Y Meara, J P, and N T
M ttrphy, J P, for anvi 20s respectively. He inforliled the
Conun:.ttee that as directed, he advised all the members of the
Connell that it would In necessa ry for any claims mado for
Railway Ik'arcts for a.ttendanees at Meetings tcvbe sent in before
pymeni, could be recommended, and that these were the only
two that had' been furnished.
He furf.her informed the Committee that the Local Govern-
ment Board had stated in their letter, when requested to sanc-
tion theye. payments, that there was no Statutory authority
giving them power to do so. He cautioned the Committee
that any payments made under this bead would be surcllarged.
Mr E Goodman proposed, and
Mr B Finnegan seconded,
tha,t payment of t'.hese fares be recommended to tho County
Council.
M Meade proposed, and
Mr P Woods, J P, seconded,
that payment of the Fares be not recommended to the County
Council.
For the Arnendment there voted Messrs Meade and Woods—2
Against the Amendment there voted Messrs Goodman and
Finnegan—2.
The Chairman gave his casting vote against the amendment,
which was then declared lost, and the original resolution, that
fkiynient, of the fares he recommended to the County
was declared curried.
OFFICE STAFF'S VACATION'.
The Secretary requested a direction as to the arrangements
for vacation for the office staff.
The Committee recommended that each member of the staff
be given fortnight's vacation, to be taken at times whieli
would best suit the office work. The Secretary to arrange ac-
cordi ngly
The Secretary submitted the Bill of Costs for half year end-
ing 31st March, 1915, of the Council's Solicitor, Mr O'Connell,
together with requisition to tax, and ft was recommended that,
Mr P L Macapdle, Solicitor, be appointed as usual to attend on
taxation of the Bill to represent the County Council.
CENTRAL TUBERCULOSIS DISPENSARY.
The following letter was read; and was referred to the rlhr—
berculosis Committee of Management
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 22nd May, 1915.
so. 16,687 :1915,
Louth County.
Sir,
am directed by the Loeal Government Board for
Ireland to draw your attention to their letter of the '25th March
last, notifying the County Council that the Lords Commission-
ers of flis Majesty's Treasttry had given their eonsent, uncler
Section GI of the Nati01ial Insurance Act, 1911, to the advance
11
to the Louth County Council of the sum of C288 for the pur-
pose of establishing a Central Tuberculosis Dispensary in Dun-
d'alk. The Board stated that the Grant would be issued by in-
stalrnents upon the Architect's Certificate, according as the
works proeeed.
I mnvaee€mlingly to request that you, will be good enough to
inform the Board what progress has been made in connection
the erection of the proposed Di.spensary.
I am, Sir,
Your Obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
SURRENDER OF CONTRACTS.
Letter was read from the County Surveyor enclosing Surren-
ders of Contracts held by Mr Thomas M 'Donald, Priestown,
Dunleer, t.he surrenders to take effect as and from 1st April,
1916.
The Contracts -are ms follows
No. 174—20-70—980 perehes from Dundalk to Dunleer, between
tho turn of the road to Williamstown and Coneyburrow
Bridge.
12
No. 24—12-200—1,365 perches of road from Drogheda to
dalk, between the Barony Boundary at Tullyesker,
the District Bounds at Castletown.
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
AT THEIR
First (Adjourned) Quarterly Meeting,
Held on 27th May, 1915.
Annual Meeting,
Held on 16th June, 1915.
Finance Committee
At their Meetings held on 7th June; 21st June ;
5th July and 19th July, 1915.
Proposal Committee
At their Meeting held on 5th July, 1915.
Executive Committee
At their Meeting held on 19th July, 1915.
Scholarship Committee
At their Meeting held on 21st June, 1915.
The County Offices Committee
At their Meeting held on 9th July, 1015.
1
Coutb County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
irst (Adjourned) Quårterly Meeting held in the Council Charn-
ber, Court House, Dundalk, on Thursday, 27th day of May,
191.5, atone o'clock p m.
Present the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Wm Woods, J P; P M'Gee, J P; Michael
McArdle, T V M'Qnillan, James .WCarthy, J P; N T Mtuvhy,
•T P; 'Ilhomas B M 'Cotllt, James Wynne, J P; P Callan, J P;
Patrick I)onogan, J P; W T Skeffington, J P ; Bernard Hamill,
J P; J F Muu»hy, J P; J H J P; M O'Meara, J P;
Bernard Finnegan, J P Kearney, Peter Woods, J P; Joseph
Dolan, Thomas O'Rourke, John Morgan, Edward Goodman,
T J Byrne, J P, and Michael Meade, Esquires.
Messrs Thomas Wmlsh, County Surveyor ; James Dromgoolo
and J M' C Lyons, Assistant Surveyors; Daniel (YConnell, So-
licitor to the Council, and Dr M 'Qnilla.n, T M O, and Mr V.
Warren, Clerk, T C M, were in attendance.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Patrick M 'Gee, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth
2
County Council at their First Quarterly Meeting, held on t'he
22nd day of April, 1915, a copy of which has been sent to each
member of the Council, be and are hereby eonflirrnod.
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Edward Goodman, Esq ;
Seconded by James M 'Carthy, Esq, J P, and
the Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance
ComtMttee at their meetings held on t]he undermentioned dates
(a copy of which has been sent to each member of the Council)
with all payments and recommendations—savo the appointment
of the Solicitor to the Council on costs taxation—eon-
therein, be and are hereby confirmed :—
Monday, 26th day of Aprit, 1915.
Monday, 10th day of May, 1915.
Mr T J Byrne, reforring to the minutß of the Finaneo Com-
r»ittee Meeting, held on the 24th day of May, at which meeting
he was Chairman, said that the minute referring to Lho Pay -
ment of Railway Fares to memboi•s was slightly inaccura!e•
The minute referred toe (Pago 9 cf the printed minutes)'
vote
easting
his
Cha i '*Ina n gave
read The
agnins€ titme anumdment, cite," Mr. Byrne said it was his
ordinary vote and not his casting vote whiéh deeicled the ques-
tion, and the word ' 'easting" should be deleted. The alteration
was mado aeeordinzly•
3
TAXATION OF SOLICITOR'S BILL OF COSTS.
Arising out of the Finance Minutes of 24th May, 1915,
Mr M Meade proposed ;
Mr T J Byrne seconded, ancl it was unanimously passed :
That Mr Patrick J Roe be Lappointed to represent the Council
on the Laxation of tho Council's Solicitor's bill of costs.
CONFIRMATION OF PROPOSAL MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Thomas B Esq ;
Seconded bv T V M'Qui11an, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the Pt•oposa.l
Committee at their First (Adjourned) Quarterly Meeting, held
on Che 10th/ May, 1915, a copy of whic!) has been sent to each
member of the Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
OOXFIRMATION OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
SfT.XCTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Edward Goodman, Esq ;
Soeonded by John F Murphy, ICs,q: J P, and
m.solvecl—'lYna.t, the Minutes of the Proceedings of the Exe—
eutive Committee, at their Meetings held on 26th AIY1il, 1915
and 17th May, 191-3, a. copy of which has been sent to each mem-
ber of tbe Cou.neÅl, be and are hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF COUNTY St'RVEYOR'S REPOI{T.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Michael Meade, ;
Seconded by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P, and
RasoIvod—That the Remirt, of the County Surveyor, as a.p—
pearing on Pages I and 2 of the Schedule of Proposals for
the 27th May, 1915, a copy of which has been sent to each meme.
ber of t;he Council, be and is hereby approved of.
ARDEE WORKS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Propcxsed by Michael Meade, Esq ;
Seconded by Patrick Callan, ESq, J p, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works formulated by the-
Ardee No. I Rural District Council, at their First Quarterly
Meeting, held on tihe 6th day of April, 1915, and set out on
Form 20 furnished to the County Council, and the
entered into at their adjourned quarterly meeting, hold on tho,
27th day of April, 1915, be and are hereby approved of, and wo
authorise our Secretary to affix the Common Seal of the Coun-
cil to same.
DROGHEDA WORKS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P;
Seconded by N T Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works formulaied by the
Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union, at their first quar-
terly meetingj held on the 1.3th day of April: 1915, and set out
on Form 20 furnished to the County Council, and the ContraotS
entered into at their adjourned quarterly meeting, held on the
11th day of May, 1915, be, and are hereby approved of, and
authorise, our Secretary to affix the Common Seal of the C%nncil
to same.
5
DUNDALK WORKS.
Tho following ræolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Wm Woods, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by James Wynne, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works formulated by the
I)nudalk Rural District at their first quarterly meeting, held on
the 12th day of April, 1915, and set out on Form 20 furnished
to the County Council, and the Contracts entered into at their
adjourned quarterly meeting, held on 3rd May 1915, be and are
hereby of, and we authorise our Secretary to affx the
•Common Seal of the Council to same.
COUNTY-AT-LARGE.
'The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Joseph H M 'Ardle, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Patrick M 'Gee, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works formulated by the
Proposal Committee, at their first quarterly meeting, held on
the 12th day of April, 1915, and set out on Form 20 furnished
io the County Council, be and are hereby approved of.
WORKS NOT SET BY CONTRACT.
following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by-James McCarthy, F.sq, J P;
Seconded by T V M 'Quillan•, Esq, and
Resolved—That all works not taken by contract at adjourned
meetings of the Rural District Councils and Proposal Commit-
tee, be placed in charge of the County Surveyor.
6
COLLECTOR P. HUGHES' REMUNERATION.
In accordance with the recommendation of the Finance Oom—
mittee at their meeting, held on 24th May, the following resolu
tion was passed unanimously
Proposed by T J Byrne, n.q, J P;
Seconded by Benard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby request the Local Government
Board to sanction the payment of all remuneration duo to Ool-
lector Patrick Hughes, inasmuch as this Collector has now lod-
ged the full amounts of all his warrants in respect of which tho
remuneration still remains unpaid.
GILES' QUAY HARBOUR CONSTABLEL
rm.e following resolution was passed unanimously
by N T Murphy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq ,J P, and
Rosolvod—That we hereby direct tillo Finance Committee to
advertise for a, Harbour Constable for Giles' Quay Pier at a
salary of CI'2 (twelvo pounds) per annum,• the remuneration to
cover all the duties in connection with the including tho.
lighting of the leading and Pier Lights, and we empower thO
Committee to make the appointment.
PURCHASE OF GILES' QUAY BOATSLIP.
Tho following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Wm T Skeffngton, Lsq, J P ;
Seconded by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby confirm the recommendation, of
7
Finance Committee to pulChase -the interest of Mr Joseph P
Kearney in the Boatslip at Giles' Quay Harbour for the sum of
(fifty pounds), and direct our Solicitor to prepare the ne-
cessa,ry assignment.
CHARGE FOR MACHINERY LOAN.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
.by wm T Skeffington, Esq, .J P;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, E.sq, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby approve of the charge on tho
Rates to the Treasurer of the County Council, the Hiberman
Bank, Ltd., Dundalk, for the sum of CI,095, with' interest on
all outstanding Balances at the rate of 3 per cent (three per
cent) per annum, and we authorise our Secretary to affix ohe
Common Seal of the Council to the said charge.
DR OGHEDX COURT HOUSE.
The question of the use of Drogheda Court House by tho
Corporation of Drogheda was next considered.
N T Murphy, E.sq, J P, proposed, and
Edward Goodman, Esq, seconded,
That in future Coal, Gas, and Water bo supplied for the
maintenanco of Drogheda Court House as a Court, House, and
•not for any other purpose.
A protracted discussion took place on this resolution, in
which Messrs Skeffington, Byrne, NT'Quillan, M 'Carthy, M 'Gee,
O'Meara, and Hamill, and tho proposer and seconder took
part.
Mr T J Byrne proposed tho following amendment, Which was
seconded by Mr James M 'Carthy
That we hereby appoint a; Committee to investigate and re-
port as to the original agreement as between the Corporation of
Drogheda and the (hand Jury, and the average cost of the up-
keep and maintenance of same, and the liability of this Council
for same.
At the request of the Chairman, the Secretary read tho fol-
lowing Clause from the Lease of the Court House given by the
Corporation of Drogheda to the Grand Jury :—
"'That the Grantors may at all times when the said (hurt
House Buildings a,nd Improvements shall not be in actual use
for the purposes of any of Her Majesty's Courts of Law, or for
Grand Jury purposes, use and occupy the said Court House
Buildings and Improvements for the purpose of holding Meet-
ings of the Grantors in their said Corpoltlte capacity, and for
all purposes incidental thereto."
By permission of the Council Mr N T Murphy amended his
resolution, Which was seconded 'by Mr Goodman, to read as
follows
"Tha,t in future Coal, Gas and Water be supplied for tho
maintenance of Drogheda Court House as a Court House, and
not for ony other purpose, unless the lease given by the Drog-
heda Corporation to tho Grand Jury of the County of the Town
of Drogheda provides otherwise."
The Chairman then took a division on the amendment, with
the following result
For the Amendment—Messrs Byrne, Callan, Joseph Dolan,
J H M'Ard1e, M'Cmthy, M'Qui11an, O'Meara and W T Skeffing-
ton—8
9
Against—Messrs Donegan, Finnegan, Goodman, Hamill,
M 'Ardle, Kearney, M 'Cotilt, M 'Gee, Meade, J F Murphy, N T
Murphy, Morgan, (Y Rourke, P Woods, W Woods, and Wynne—
16.
The Chairman declared the amendinent lost, and took a divi-
. Sion on Mr Murphy's amended resolution which the following
• Councillors voted for
Messrs Joseph Dolan, Donegan, Finnegan, Goodman, Hamill,
M M'Ard1e, Kearney, M'C0111t, M'Gee, Meade J F Murphy,
•N T Murphy, Morgan, O'Rourke, P Woods, W Woods, and
Wynne— 17.
The following gentlemen declined to record their votes : —
T J Byrne, Callan, J H M'Ard1e, M'Cmthy, M'Quillan,
"O'Meara and Skeffngton.
Tae Cha irman then declared the resolution earricd.
CO-OIYI'ION OF COUNTY COUNCILLOR FOR ARDEE.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Patrick M'Gee, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby co-opt Mr James T M 'Gee, of
Roodstown, as County Councillor for Vhe Electoral Division of
Ardee, vice Mr James Halpenny, J P, resigned.
VETERINARY INSPECTORS' REMUNERATION.
The sanction of the I)qpartrnent to the extra Salaries paid the
Veterinary Inspectors for work under Tuberculosis (Ireland)
Order being due to expire on the 1st June, the revision of these
. salaries had been before the Executive Committee, and in ac-
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
10
cordance with their •recommenda tion the resolution
setting out the fees to •be paid for this work on and after Che-
1st June, 1915, was passed unanimously':—
Proposed by John F Murphy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by J P Kearney, Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby adopt the recommendations of Che
Executive Committee at their Meeting held on the 26th day cf
April, 1915, and fix tihe scale of fees noted below, to bo paid
the Veterinary Inspectors for cases under tho Tuberculosis (Ire-
land) Order of 1914=-The scale to come into oporatåon on the
1st June, 1915
Scale of Fees Prepared by the Veterinary Medical
0 10
Association of Ireland.
For clinical examination of the first animal
a fee of
Each additional anima,l on the same pre-
mises
The maximum amount under this head not to
exceed 'Cl.
When the premises are more t'han 15 miles dis-
tant a fee for the first animal of
For applying the Tubercular Test up to four
animals
Each animal over four
Th(Ase fees to include the cost of Tuberculin for
the purposes of tho test.
Post Mortem Examinations
Microscopic Examinations
Mileago at the rate of Is per mile one way,
or railway fare.
o
1
2
o
1
s
IO
1
2
5
I
d
0
0
O
No further charges to be made for reports or valuations.
11
THE LATE CAPTAIN ROGER BELLINGHAM.
Tho following letter from Sir Henry Bellingham was
and ordered to be inserted on the Minutes
Castlebellinghmn,
Ireland,
April 24th, 1915.
Sir Henry Bellingham begs to acknowledge with many
thanks the very kind resolution of sympathy sent him from tho
Louth County Council on the death of his son, and to say how
ontirely he reciprocates what they say of him.
Mr Roger Beliingham and his entire family wish to associate
themselves with Sir Henry in tendering thanks to all the mem-
bers present who voted the resolution, and those who thouglu
absent. endorsed it,
DEDUCTIONS FROM LSTATE DUTY GRANT.
The following letter and statement were read from tkhe Loe
cal Government Board in reply to letter and resolution forwar-
ded by the Secretary in accordance instructions given at
last meeting of the County Council, and were initialled by tho
Chairman : —
Local Government Boa.rd,
Dublin, 17th May, 1915&
No. 25,634 :1915.
Louth County.
Sir,
With reference to your letter of the 7th instant, rela«
tive to tho deductions made from the share of the County Louth
in the second instalment of •the Estate or Death Duty Grant
for the year ended 31st of March last, in respect of land pur-
chase liability in the County, I am directed by the Local Go-
vernment Board for Ireland to enclose for the information of•
12
the County Council, copies of the certificates, so far as they re-
late to tlhe County of Louth, which have been furnished by the
Land Commission and National Debt Commissioners showing
the liability of the county in this matter.
Outside the information contained in these documents the
Board have no information on this subject, and they regret to
state that they cannot undertake to obtain any further informa-
13
12th day of February, 1915, and transferred to the Guarantee.
Fund.
County.
Louth
(Signed),
C. T. BEARD, Secretary.
Transferred to the Guarantee
Net Advances made Fuad in Repayment of Advances.
by tbe Guaranti e
Fund after deduct Out of current instal- Out Of
ing repayments out ments of Annuities in Arrear Addition.
of current Instal- excess of advances made Instal-
Mon for the Council.
The Secretary,
ments of Annuities. during the year.
224 17 9
nts.
225 2 7 0 4
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
Irish Land Acts, 1903 and 1909.
Certificate Under Rule 8 (2) in Respect of Arrears.
I hereby certify that for the year ending 31st January,
1915--1. the amount chargeable to each county of the sum •drawn
from the Guarantee Fund in respect of purchasers' half-yearly
paymen€s in arrear; and 11. theamounttvhieh •eac/h county Shall
have paid to the Guarantee 'Fund In respect of purchasers' half-
yearly payments in arrear which have been recovered are as.
County Louth County Council.
COUNTY OF LOUTH.
Purchase of Land (Ireland) Act, 1891.
Guarantee Fund—Year Ended 31st • Marcha 1915.
Certificate (I) of the amounts (if any) to be deducted from the
shares of the sov6ra.I counties in the Guarantee Fund in respect
of advances to meet deficiencies on the Land Purchase Account,
or to be distributed to any of them in respect of repayments by
'the land Purchase Account to the Guarantee Fund out of our-
rent instalments of annuities in excess of advances made diur-
ing t'he year ; and (2) of the amounts (if any) to be paid over to
any of the counties in respect of arrear instalments of annuities
received into the Land Purchase Account in the year ended the
under :
County •
Louth
(Signed),
Arrears drawn from
Guarante•e Fund.
13 4
W. G. TURPIN,
Comptroller-Gonerxl.
Repayments to Guarantee Fund'
of arrears recovered.
11.
Irish Land Acts, 1903 and 1909.
Certificato Under Rule 8 (2) in Respect of Insuffciency of
Tueome.
I hereby certify that for the year ending 91st, January, 1915,
the amount chargeable to each county of the sum drawn from
14
the Guarantee Fund under Section 29 of the Land Aet,
1903, is as under:
(Signed),
W. G. TURPIN,
Comptroller-General.
County
Louth
1.—Amount drawn from Guarantee Fund.
6 11
Net Deduction, 1229 IOS Od
BALLYMAKENXY TANK.
Letter was read from M. M 'Quillan, Superintendent of tho
Ballymakenny Sheep Dipping Tank, stating that some hurdles,
'buckets, etc, were required in connection with t,he Tank, and
the matter was referred to the local committee, Mr Joseph
Dolan undortaking to look after the matter.
ARDEE TANK.
The following report from the Honorary Secretary of the
Sheep Dipping Tank Conunittee, Mr J T M C C,
was read, and Che See. was directed to have advertisement in-
serted inviting tenders for tho water supply to the ta.nk for the
present season.
Roods town,
Ardee, 25th Mnv, 1915.
Ardeo Local Dipping.
Dear Sir,
The Committee met to-day. 'Brere were pre—
sent Messrs J C Kieran, James M 'Donnell, R Stokes, and J T
M'Gee.
They considered all other possible sites and umnimously ad-
15
hered to the existing one. Sites convenient to the river might
«•ause Fishery Authority to question the emptying of Council's
tank into the river, and yards are unsuitable.
They recommended Council to advertise for tenders for sup.
pliying water to •tank, as Is 3d per load is, they believe, exces-
Sive.
Faithfully yours,
JAMES T. MCGEE.
COMMITTALS TO INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS.
Let,t.er was read from Clerk of Petty Sessions, I)rogheda, in-
'forming ['he County Council that application would be made by
the IRev Arehdeaeon Segrave, P P, at Juvenile Court to
be held in Drogheda on June 7th, €0 hace the following children
committed to Industrial Schools, under Section 133 of the
Childrens Act, 1908 Patrick, Rose and Sophia James,
tof Ropewalk, Drogheda, aal under 14 years.
The leit(hl• was initialled by the Chairman.
MAIN'IEXANCE OF PATIENTS AT PEA-
MOUNT.
Letter was read from Tuberculosis Committee of Management
-enclosing lotter received by them from the, Pea mount, Sanator-
ium Committee embodying the following m
consequence of tho increased cost of provisions and general
maintenance, the Committee of Managernent regret having to
request the Insurance Committee and County Council to in-
crease the payment by 5s per week during the period of tho
war."
16
This resolution had reference to the cost of patients in Pea-
mount Sanatorium, for whose maintenance the Women's Na-
tional HealtC1. Association had agreed with the County Councir
at tihe rate of Cl per week per patient, ancl for whom they now-
ask an increase of 5s per week each.
A Eter discussion the following resolution was unanimously •
adopted : —
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we ask the Peamount Authorities to make no,
increase in the cost of maintenance of t,he twelve beds provided
by the County Council, and that we decide to pay the extra
ccxst, of 5s now asked for, for any additional beds over the.
twelve contracted for, that tille County Council may require•
during the period of the war.
GRANT FOR PEAMOUNT SANATORIUM.
Letter was read from Tuberculosis Committee of Manage-
ment enclosing Memorandum explaining the arrangements
made in connection with the Grant of made to the Wo-
men's National Health Association of Ireland from t,he special
Sanatorium Grant for the building of Sanatoria and Dispensar—
ies under the Insurance Act.
The Chairman informed the Council (he had received no-
tice of a meeting of the Peamount Sanatorium Committee as re-
of the County Council: which would be held on
Tuesday, 1st June, and suggested that Ehe consideration •of this
Memorandum be deferred until after this meeting. This course-
was adopted unanimously.
17
OMEATII-I IRISH COLLEGE.
A letter from Mr g h T Dolan, M A, Ardee, Treasurer of
the Omeath Irish College, addressed to the Chairman, was
read, in which the members of the Council were appealed to for
subscriptions towards the upkeep of the College.
The Council unanimously decided to mnke personal contribu-
tions to the fund, and Messrs M O'Meara, J P, and Wru Woods,
J P, made the collection, and the latter two gentlemen were ap-
pointed to represent the Council on the College Committee.
RECRUITING IN IRELAND.
Circular letter from the Honorary Secretary of the Central
Council for the organisation of Recruiting in Ireland, wihieh had
been forwarded by His Majesty's Lieutenant for County Louth
(Sir H Bellingham) wås read and approved.
PENSION TO HARBOUR 'CONSTABLE, GILES' QUAY.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by J P Kearney, Esq ;
Seconded by wm Woods, Esq', J P. and
Resolved—That a pension of CS (eight pounds) per year,
being two-thirds of his total annual remuneration of C12 (twelve
pounds) be allowed to James Cumiskey, Harbour Constable at
Giles' Quay, subject to the approval of the Local Government
Board.
18
finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 7th June, 1915, at one o'clock p m.
Present :—
In the Chait—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—William Woods, J P; N T Murphy, J P; J F
Murphy, J p; M O'Meara,.J P; Jas Wynne, J P; Patk M'Gee,
J P; J H M'Ard1e, J P. Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, Co. Surveyor, was in attendance.
19
PAYMENTS OUT OF NO. 1 LOANS ACCOUNT.
'The Secretary submitted Treasurer's Authority, which was duly
signed, for payments €0 John Fowler and Co for traction engines,
and [o J Potter and Co. for living vans, and read the following
letter from the T,ocal Government Board authorising the Finanee
Committee to order payments direct out of the Loans' Account
.a,t any fortnightly meeting :
Local Government Board, Dublin,
4th June, 1915.
No. 28, 908/1915.
Louth County.
Sir,—
With reference to your further letter of the 22nd ultimo,
relative to the loan of 24,095 sanctioned fo the County Council Of
Louth for the purpose of purchasing road-machinery, I am directod
by the Local Government for Ireland to state that they see no
•objection to the Finance Committee ordering payments direct out
Of the Loans' Account at any ,fortnightly meeting.
The üinutes of the previous Meeting
ILittee were taken as reasl and signed by
Tho following accounts were submitted,
were ordered for payment :—
Works in charge of County Surveyor
of the Finance Com-
the
and on examination
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
The Secretary,
Secretary's Office (including refund of Rate Collect01S'
arrears)
Total,
The Bank books for General and Subsidiary
examined, and initialled by the Chairman.
327
C507
Accoun ts
19
19
5
4
9
were
Louth County Council.
MACHINERY LOAN ANI) IIIBERNIAN BANK.
The following correspondence vvith reference to the Machinery
Loan for C4,095 was read :—
Local Government Board, Dublin,
31st May, 1915.
No. 27,784/1915.
Louth County.
Sir,—
J am dirocted by the I,ocal Govermnen[ Board för Iå•eland•
20
to forward for the information of the Louth County Council, the
accompanying copy of a letter which the Board have received
from Messrs D and T Fitzgerald, Solicitors, relative to the 'loan
Of E4,095 required by the Council for the purpose of purchasing.
road making machinery, together with a eopv of the Board's.
reply.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Socretary
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
(Copy).
20, St. Andrew Street, Dublin,
18th May, 1915„
No. 69,244/1914.
Louth County.
Tlibernian Bank, Ltd., re Louth County
Branch.—uorfgage for Z4,095.
mar Sir.
On the 24th December last you wrote to the Secretary •
of the Louth County Council sanctioning a loan of C4,095 for tho
purpose of purchasing road-making machinery. The Hibernian
Bank, Ltd., have agreed to make the advance, and the draft deed
charging the rates has now been prepared and sent on. It has
occurred to us that, even though this loan was sanctioned
to the recent Treasury regulaticms as to issue of capital, yet it
may be that such transaction might require the formal
sanction of the Treasury, as we presume the loan is such os
could be created by tho issue of stock if the Council decided to
stook. No doubt, the loan was sanctioned prior to tho
21
rnaking of the Treasury regulations, but the amount is only being
advanced now. Perhaps you will kindly favour us with your
view as to whether the Treasury regulations are applicable. We
•enclose a draft of the proposed deed of charge.
Yours faithfully,
D. & T. FITZGERALD.
The Secretary,
Local Government Board, Dublin.
(Copy).
Labourers' Department,
Local Government Board, Dublin,
31st May, 1915.
No. 27,784/1915.
J_outh County.
Gentlemen,—
I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Ireland to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 18th inst.,
.and enclosure, relative to a loan of Z4,095 required by the County
•ouncil of Louth¯for the ' purpose Of purchasing road-making
machinery.
Tn reference thereto, I am to state that under the arrang•ement
with tho Lords his Majesty's Treasury embodied
in the accompanying circular no further action can be taken by
ethe Council on sanction to the loan conveyed in the Board's
letter of tho 24th of December last without a further sanction
•Of the Board.
The enclosure to your letter is returned, herewith.
D.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
& T. Fitzgerald, Solicitors,
20, St. Andrew Street, Dublin.
22
The Secretary informed the Committee that on receipt of these
letterg he had written the Local Government Board and directed
their attention to the circular issued by the Board dealing with
borrowing by Local Authorities, in which it was set out that it
was only necessary again obtain sanction for Loans sanctioned
prior to February, 1915, where the Loans had not been acted
upon: that in the case of this Loan the County Council had
definitely acted upon it by tho purchase of the rood-making
machinery; and requesting confirmation of the sanction if this.
were necessary.
In reply, the Local Government Board sent the following letter,.
which was considered satisfactory by tho Committee and was
initialled by the Chairman
Loctvl Government Board, Dublin,
4th Juno, 1915.
No, 30,399/1916.
Louth County.
Sir,—
I am directed by the Local Government Board for
to acknowledgo the receipt of your letter of the 1st instant, relative
to the loan of C4,095 required by the County Council of Louth
for the purpose of purchasing road-making machinery.
In reply, am to state that the Board have authorised the
Council to act on the sanction to the loan conveyed in the Board's
letter of December last, No. 69,244/1914.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
Secretary,
Louth County Council.
Courthouse, Dundalk.
The Secretary was directed
Treasurer the Council.
23
COUNTY INSURANCES.
following Report from the Insurance Sub-Committee was
The
read :—
Third Party and Employers' Liability Insurances.
Report of Sub-Committee.
Sub-Committee appointed fo consider and report on the
The
quastion of Third Party and Employers' Liability Insurances met
in the, Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Thursday, 3rd
June, 1915, Messrs C A Duffy, J P, Chairman; Bernard Flam ill.
J P, and the County Surveyor were in attendance.
As instructed at last Meeting of the Finance Committee, the
Secretary had written some non-tariff companies for terms to
cover the Council's risks, and their quotations together with
those which had been before the Finance Committee, were now
fabled.
Affer very careful and full consideration of the terms of all the
Companies, the Sub—Committee were of opinion that those of the
Ocean Insurance Compa.ny for all Third Party risks, including
Defence of Proceedings, Boiler Insurance (including four Inspec-
tions annually) spark risks, repairs up to CIO, etc., at an inclusive
annual premium of 2131; and the terms of the Bell Motor Com—
pany for all Employers' Liability Risk a.t an annual premium of
C125 58, were the most comprehensive and advantageous, and the
Sub-Committee believed that the Council would be fully covered
under thcse policies.
In accordance with instructions received from the Chairman*
the Secretary had addressed to each County Secretary in Ireland
a list of queries as to the method by which insurances for each
Council's various risks were effected and to what extent they
insured against such risks.
to
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
send copy of this letter to thes
Twenty-three had sent in replies up to the time of Meeting.
Of this number four only were fully insured against all risks:
fourteen were insured partially.
Few Councils were insured
against Employers' Liability for contractors' employees, con—
sidering the ccntractor's bond sufficient indemnity. One Council
did not effect any insurance whatsoever, and four Councils set
aside yearly a sum approximate to the amount of premiums they
would pay au Insurnee Company for the risks, and thus established
a fund to meet any claims made on them.
The Committee considered that the last named method might
commend itself to the County Council, as, owing to the infrequency
of accidents, it was unlikely that there would be any great drain
on the fund, buf one Council which had applied to [he Imai
Government Board for authority to adopt this course had been
unable to secure the Board's sanction, and consequently had to
insure in the ordinary way.
It might be considered as an alternative to insure only for all
Third Party Risks and not to insure under the head of Employers?
Liability. Tn the latter case, as regards contractors' employees,
the contractors' bond might be accepted as sufficient indemnity
against the risk, and as regards the Council's employees it was
unlikely that there would be any big claim.
The Sub-Committee recommend the Finance Committee to con-
Sider the following three courses, and suggest that as the matter
is very urgent a special meeting of the County Council should be
convened as soon as possible to finally consider the Finance Com-
mittee's recommendations :—
I. •To insure against, all Third Party and Spark Risks and for
Employers' Liability Risks. The whole question of in-
suranees to be reconsidered after 12 months.
25
2. To insure all Third Party Risks only.
-3. To segregate annually a sum of say 2300, thus forming a fund
out of which all claims for all classes of accidents and
damage would be met by the Council themselves.
Tn any event if is recommended that the boilers shouid be in-
-surod against explosion and damage arising out of explosion.
One of the Companies quote a rate of 5s per cent, for General
•Third Party Risks on a wage roll of C16,7C0, which amounts to
. Æ41 15s, but they have not consented fo the special endorsement
of the assureds undertakings and risks, although the form was
sent them to sign and return.
After the foregoing report was read a telegram was received
- from the London and Lancashire Fire Insurance Company quoting
for Third Party Risks and Public T Jia.bilify, a sum which a.p-
prximated fo Æ74 Os 6d, buf eseepted the risk for damage to Road
Rollers and Horse Drivers employed by the Council on road work.
A discussion took place as to the advisilbilify of accepting the
•offer from this Company for the risks for mrd Party and Injury
to' Vehicles, and the Chairman having stated he was going to
Dublin on private business on the following day and considered
that a personal interview with the Local Manager in Dublin
would be more satisfactory with a view to getting the damage to
vehicles and horse driving risks included in the quotation, it was
decided that the Chairman and Secretary would interview the
Manager in Dublin mnd if possible arrange terms.
The Committee recommended, on the motion of Mr N T M.u•rphy,
.seconded by Mr James Wynne, and unanimously agreed to:
'Olhat provided the London and Inncashire Fire Insurance Com-
26
pany included the damage to vehicles and tho 25 horse drivers;
in tho risks covered tha,t. their quotation of Æ74 6d for • th€»•
comprehensive Third Party Policy, be accepted."
The Committee also recommended that the Employers' Liability
risk for road maintenance contracts and for which the contra.ctom
indemnified the County Council in their bonds might not be in-
;cluded in the Employeqs' Liability risk, and directed the
Secretary to obtain quotations for all the other risks under this
head from the Tariff Compani€s who had already quoted for tho
entire liability of the Council on a wage roll approximately of
E16,700.
DROGHEDA COURTHOUSE.
In connection with the resolution passed by the County Council
by which the Council decided "to supply coal, gas and water for'
the maintenance of Drogheda, Courthouse as a Courthouse and
not for any other purpose, unless the lease given by the Cor-
pora€ion of Drogheda to the Grand Jury of the County of tho
Town of Drogheda provides otherwise," the Secretary requested
a direction from the Committee to instruct the Council's Solicitor
to examine the lease referred to, and report on the liability of the
County Council under same.
The Secretary was directed to obtain the opinion of the Solicitor
on the liability of the Council as to the provision of fuel, light,
and water to the offices used by the Corporation of Drogheda in
Drogheda, Courthouse, and any other matter pertaining thereto.
GILES' QUAY HARBOUR CONSTABIÆ.
The Committee directed that the following' advertisement for
27
Harbour Constable for Giles' Quay be published in the usuar
manner
Louth. County Council.
Vacancy for I-larbour Constable at Giles' Quay Pier.
The Finance Committee of the Louth County Council are pre-.
pared to receive applications from suitable persons for the posi—
tion of Iltu•bour Constable at Gilas' Quay Pier ot a salary of E12,
a.nnum.
The duties in connection with the position are the management
of all the business of the Harbour and the lighting of the leading
and pier lights.
Applications, accompanied by Testimonials, will received by
the undersigned up to the hour of one o'clock p m on Saturday..
the 19th instant, and , the person appointed will be required to,
enter into a bond with two sureties in the sum of for tho du€»
Of the duties.
CHARLES WALESTER,
Secretary to the County CounciL
Coürthouse, Dundalk,
7th June, 1915.
IRRECOVERABLE ARREARS OF RAINS.
IAter was read from the Local Government Board, dated 27th
May, 1915, NO. 24,591/1915, authorising the refund to the Rat&
Collectors Of the amount of their irrecoverable arrears as per lists
and vouchers submitted to the Board, excluding an item of 2s 6d
on Collector M.'CuIIough's sheets for costs of warrant, which item
was to be paid by separate paying order.
Tho Secretary stated that these payments were included in t;c»
day's authority, and the letter was initialled by the Chairma.m
and tile payments ordered.
28
COUNTY SCHOLARSHIPS.
Letter was read from the Principal, Dominican Hall, Dublin,
stating that Miss Lyons, County Council Scholar, had been unable,
through ill health, to present herself for First Arts Examination,
-and that her claim to exemption therefrom was recognised by the
'College Authorities. The letter requested the continuance Of
Miss Lyons' Scholaaship in order to pursue the next Sos-
Sion.
Application from Miss U il'Parland for balance of her
Scholarship wag read.
Letter from Mr P A Hanratty asking for balance of Scholarship,
and stating that he had applied for a. commission in the Army,
Ävas read. He wished to know whether, if he got the commission,
Ithe Council would hold over the remaining year's Scholarship
.till after the war.
All the letters were referred to the Scholarship Committee.
COLLE('I'OR HUGHES' BOND.
The following letter from the London and Lancashire Assurance
Company was rea.d, and tho Secretary informed the Committoe
that Mr Hughes' collecting books were ready, but could not be
•taken up until the bond was oompleted. was
directed to write Mr Hughes to have his bond completed and his
•collecting books and warrant taken up at once:—
London and Lancashire Fire Insurance Company, Ltd,
18 and 19, College Green, Dublin,
1st June, 1915.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Dear Sir,—
F. G. Hughæ, Rate Colloctor.
With reference to the new bond for Æ900_ which
29
quired in this case, we have submitted the papers to our Yleacv
Office, who have informed us that they will require two solvent;
countemsureties to be furnished by Mr Hughes before the security
can be granted.
We have written on two occasions to Mr Hughes to thi6 effects.
but so far he has not furnished us witli the names and addrcsses.
Of two gentlemen willing to act in the required capacity.
As you will doubtless soon be issuing flie books in respect of the,
present half-year's • collection, if. is important that, the matter,
should bé attended to without delay.
We shall bo glad, therefore, if you will kindly communicato•
•with Mr Hughes requesting him to comply with our require-.
ments, and oblige.
Yours faithfully,
SYDNEY L. FRY,
Local Manager.
COLLECTOR P. HUGHES' REMUNERATION.
The following letter from the Local Government Board, in reply
to the resolution of the Council, copy of which had been for-
warded by tho Secretary, was read and initialled by the Chair-
Local Government Board, Dublin,
3rd June, 191.5.
No. 29,754/1915.
Louth County.
Sir,—
I am directed by the Local Gofernment Board for Irela.nd
to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 28th ultimo, rela-
tive to the payment by the Louth County Council fo Collector
Vatriék Hughes of the balance of poundage fees in r«spect of the.
30
Ilalf-year ended tho 30th September, 1913, and of full poundage
fees in respect of the half-year ended the 30th 1914.
With reference thereto, the Board desire to refer the County
'Council to the previous correspondence on the subj&'t, and the
.guarantee given by Mr Hughes in June, 1914, that he would close
hig collections on the prescribed clatß in future; and I am to
state that, in the circumstances, the Vycal Government Board
.are not prepared to approve of the payment of these fe€s.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
A.s9istant Secretary.
'The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
31
SIR CHARTÆS A. CAMERON'S REPORT.
The following IReport from Sir Charles A Cameron, County
Analyst, was read and initialled by the Chairman
City Laboratory,
Chatham Row, Dublin,
1st June, 1915.
Report of Sir Charles Cameron, C.B., M.D., Public A.nalyst for
the County Louth, on articles submitted during the quarter
ended 31st March, 1915.
There were no articles received from the Food Inspectors, R.I.C.
There was one specimen of buffer analysed by directions from
the Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland, Upper Merrion Street, Dublin, whiéll was taken up in
the County Louth, and was pure.
One specimen of water analysed for the Gumrdians of Ardee
DUNDALK TUBERCULOSIS DISPENSARY.
Letter was read from the Local Government Board, dated end
-June, 1915, No. 30,158/1915, enclosing Forms of Architect's Corfi-
ficate, which the Secretary was directed to have completed and
forwarded.
WATER FOR ARDEE SIIEEP DIPPING TANK.
In accordance with instructions, the Secretary had •advertised
for tenders for tho supply Of water to the above fank during the
-Summer and Autumn Dipping Periods, and had received the fol-
Union had the following composition.
One imperial gallon contained in grains.
Total solid matter
Including
Albuminoids Ammonia
Saline Ammonia
Nitric Acid
Chlorine
(>lour
36.400
0.018
0.004
5.620
2.390
light yellow
lowing tenderg:—
Thomas Martin, Ls per load.
J J Breen, Is per load.
L Callan, Ild per load.
J Byrne, IS Ed per load.
The fender of Laurence Callan at Ild per load
accepted.
being
the lowest,
This water is Of slightly inferior quality.
In the original report on the Above referred to, full
tails, chemical and microscopical, were given, but in the fore-
going only the more important points are given.
No specimens were received from the Food Inspectors.
CHARLES A. CAMERON.
32
SURPLUS FROM SALE OF DOG LICENCES.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chairman
Registrar of Petty Sessions Clerks' Office,
Dublin Castle, 2nd June, 1915.
Sir,—
I beg to acquaint you, for the information of the County
Council, that the proportion of Surplus Moneys arising from the•
sale of Licences under the "Dogs Regulation (Ireland) Act, 1865,"
amounts to Æ246 13s 2d for the County of Louth for the year 1914,
and to state Chat the Lord Lieutenant has directed that this surn
should be paid over to the County Treasurer, to be applied by him
in aid of County Rates, in such manner as the County Council'
Bhall direct.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
H. CADDELL.
To the Secretary to the County Council,
for the County Louth, at Dundalk.
AUDITED ACCY)UNTS.
Letters from the Local Government Board enclosing • ther
Ahstracts of Accounts of the Ardee Union, Ardee Rural District
Council, County Committee of Agriculture, mnd Joint Committee
of Technical Instruction, for half-year ended 31st March, 1915.
together with Auditors' Reports thereon, were submitted, and
initiallc€l by the Chairman.
MOTOR LICENCE DUTY DEFAULTERS.
The following letter from the Council's Solicitor was read, and
the Committee unanimously decided to withdraw the summons8
against
is;ue of
33
those persons who had paid the duty subscquent to tho
the summonses:—
Francis Street, Dundalk,
7th June, 1915.
Re Motor Licence Duty Prosecutions.
Doar Sir,—
As you are aware summonses have been issued for
hearing at Petty Sessions on Friday next for failure to pay thig
Duty against the 11 Clinton, Hugli. Casey, P J
Kerley, Michael V M'Kevitt, Patk Eardley, and R H Hunter-
The latter three persons have paid the Duty subsequently to
issue Of the summonses. Ordinarily the Council are entitled to
proceed for convictions and payment of penalty inflicted against
allmho have not paid the Duty prior to issue of the summonses.
I ask for the Council's instructions in the matter to know if
all the summonses are to be proceeded with, or whether sum-
monscs are to bo withdrawn against any defendant who may have
påid prior to the Court hearing.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charl«s M' Alester, FAI, Secretary,
Louth County Council, l)undalk.
LOANS FOR ROAD IMPROVEMENTS.
The Committee directed the Secretary to apply to the Council's
•Treasurer to transfer the Loans for Road ltnprovement in tho
Rural Districts of Ardee NO. 1. Drogheda and Dundalk of 2793 IOS,
8707 and 2,559 IOS, respectively, to the Loans' Accounts. These
loans amounting to 84,060 had been sanctioned by the Local
Government Board and the Treasury, and the C"unty Surveyor
would now require to make payments out of same in connection
with' the work under (he Road Board Grants.
34
Coutb County Council.
Minutes of proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
Annual Meeting held iJ1 the Courthouse, Drogheda, on Wednesd8Y'
16th June, 1915, at eleven o'clock a m.
Present : —
Patrick Callan, J P; Joseph Dolan, Patrick Donegan, J P;
A Duffy, J P; Joseph 11 M'Ard1e, J P; Jatnes M'CaaÖS'
J P; P M'Gee, J P; Laurence M'Keon, T V N'Qui11an, John F
Murphy, J P; N T Murphy, J P; Peter B Moore,
O'Rourke, Wm T Skeffington, J P, and James
Esquires.
On the motion of P B Moore, Esq, J P,
Seconded by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P,
The chair was taken by Charles A Duffy, Esq, J
ELECTION OF CHAIRMAN.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by James M'Carthy, Esq, J P,
J P; Thomas
WJmne, J V,
Seconded by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That Lieutenant William A Doran, J P, of
of €110
town House, Ardee, be and is hereby elected Chairman
Louth Conniff Council for the ensuing year.
35
ELECTION OF VICE-CHAIRMAN.
'The following resolution was passed unanimously
Propoö+d by N T Murphy, Esq, J P,
Seconded by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That Charles A Duffy, J P, of Seatown Place,
Dunda.lk, be and is hereby elected Vice-Chairman of the Louth
County Council for the ensuing year.
CHAIRMEN OF THE DISTRICT COUNCILS.
Letters were read from the Clerks of the District Councils
No. I, Drogheda, and Dundalk, notifying that their Councils had
-appointed the following gentlemen as Chairmen of their respective
Councils for the following year :—
Ardee No. I—Captain Sir Augustus Vere Foster, D L, Glyde Couvt.
Ardee.
Drogheda—Pa€rick Donegan, Esq, J P, Monasterboice.
Dundalk—William Woods, Esq, J P, Carlingford.
LICENCE FOR BLACKROCK PICTURE THEATRE.
Letter was read from the Secretary, Blackrock (Dundalk) Picture
Theatre Comoany, for renewal of Cinematograph Licence for the
.above Picture House, and the following resolution was passed
unanimously :—
Proposed by Joseph 11 M'Ard1e, Esq, J P,
Seconded by Thomas V M'QuilIan, Esq, and
Resolved—That we hereby grant a. renewal of the Cinematograph
Licence to the Blackrock Picture Theatre Company for the ensuing
.year.
36
THE OIREACHTAS FESTIVAL.
ADDRESS TO DR. DOUGLAS HYDE.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by James NL'Cart.hy, Esq, J P,
Seconded by T V M'Quillan, Esq, and
Resolved—Thmt we hereby decide to present an of
Welcome to Dr Douglas Vlyde, President of the Gaelic I,eague, on
the occasion of the opening of the first Oireachtas or All-Ireland
Festival to be held in County IÅ)uth on the 25th July, and
direct our Secretary to prepare a suitable Address for the occasion ;
and we appoint the following Committee to take charge of the-
arrangements therewith—Messrs C A Duffy, J P; W T Skeffingtonr
J P; T V M'Qui11an, Michael O'Meam, J P; N T Murphy, J P;
and William Woods, J P.
SPEED OF MOTORS IN URBAN DISTRICTS.
Mr Moore brought under the notice of the Council the question-
of the excessive speed at which motors were driven through tho
streets of. Drogheda _ to the danger of the public, .and suggest«i
that the County Council should obtain orders limiting the speed
in the Urban area.
A discussion took place on the matter in which Messrs N T
Murphy, M'Carthy, Skeffington, M'Gee, and the Chairman took
part. Af the request of the Chairman, the Solicitor informed
the Council that he had Chis matter in hands some time since'
and had been in communication with the Local Government
Board with reference to the speed of motors in the Urban Dis-
triets of Dundalk and Drogheda, and the towns of Ardeo,
leer, Castlebellingham and Carlingford, and that it might be
37
necessary for an enquiry to be held before the Local Government
Board would fix the speed limit.
It was suggested that the Corporation of Droghedo and the
Urban District Council of Dundalk should name a maximum
limit of speed for motors within their Districts, and subse-
quently the following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P,
Seconded by James M'Car€hy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we direct our Solicitor to obtain orders
Aimiting the speed of motors in the Urba.n Districts of Drogheda
-and Dundalk.
REPAIRS TO DROGHEDA COURTHOUSE.
'On the suggestion of Mr N T Murphy, the members of the Council
present inspected the Courthouse Buildings in company with the
'County Surveyor as to the necessary repairs which required im-
mediate attention, and the matter was left in the hands of the
LCounty Surveyor to prepare an estimate Of the cost and submit
same to Finance Committee.
The meeting adjournid.
38
Scbolarsbip Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Scholarship Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 21st June, 1915, at 12.30 p m.
Present
In the Chair—Michael O'Meara, Esq, J P.
Other Members—James Connolly, J P, and Patrick O'Connell'
Esquires.
The Minutes of Che previous Meeting of the Scholarship Com-
mittee were taken as read and signed by Chairman.
The Secretary submitted Report from the Registrar of the'
University College, Dublin, in which it was stated that tho coria
duct and attendance of all the Louth County Council ScholarshiP
holders has been most satisfactory. A report as to their progress
and studies cannot be furnished now as the Examinations
being held, and results will not be available until the end of
month.
The report was initialled by the Chairman.
Letter was read from Sister M de Ricci, Principal, Dominican
Hall, Stephen's Green, Dublin, informing the Council that
Margaret V Lyons, one of the Council's Scholars, had been unable'
through ill-health, €0 present herself for First Arts ExaminatiOfl'
and that the College Authorities recognised her claim to exemptiOD
39
therefrom. The continuance was requested of Miss Lyons*
Scholarship in order that she might pursue her First Arts Course
next Session.
The Committee unanimously recommended that under the cir-
cumsta.nces Miss Lyons' SC'holarship should be continued next
year.
Letter was read. from Mr A Hanratty stating that he had
applied for eomxpission in the Army, and requesting to know
whether, if he got it, tho County Council would hold over his
remaining year•s Scholarship until after the war.
The Committee were unanimous in recommending Chat if Mr
Hanratty obtains a. commission, his Scholarship be held over for
him until after the war.
Applications from two of the Council's Scholarship 1101ders for
balance of their Scholarships were read, and the Committee re-
commended that any balances remaining out of the Scholarships
of C50 each be handed to the Students, and the Secretary was.
directed to ensure that all their College and hostel expenses €0
the end of the scholastic year were paid before such balances bee
handed over.
40
Finance Committee.
"Minutes of Proceedings of the Fina rice Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dundalk•
ou Monday, 21st June, 1915, at one o'clock, p m.
Present the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other H M'Ardle, J P; B wcourt,
'Thornats O'Rourke, Peter Woods, J P; Bernard Finnegan, Wm
Woods, J P; Michael O'Mea,a, J P; P M'Gee, J P; John F
Murphy, J p ; John Morgan, J P Kearney and T J Byrne, J P'
Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh County Surveyor, was also in attendance-
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Finance Corn -
mittee were taken as read •and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted, and on
examination
were ordered for payment
Works in Charge of Co. Surveyor
Secretary's Office
Total
'The Bank Books for the General
were examined. and initialled: tho
e43 11
53
(j
17
o
0
0
ELECTION OF HARBOUR CONSTABLE FOR
GILES' QUAY.
The next business on the agenda was Che appointment of a
Harbour Constable for Giles' Quay Pier, in room of James
'Cumiskey, resigned, in accordance with the following advertise-
ment which had been published for two succeeding weeks in the
• ' 'Drogheda Argus" and "Dundalk Democrat"
Louth County Council.
Vacancy for Harbour Constable at Giles' Quay Pier.
The Finance Committee of the Louth County Council are pre-
pared to receive applications from suitable persons for the po-
sition of Harbour Constable at, Giles' Quay Pier, at a salary of
C12 per annum.
The duties in connection with the position are the manage-
ment of all the business Of the Harbour, and the lighting Of
the leading lights and pier lights.
Applications, accompanied by testimonials, will be received
by the undersigned •up to the hour of one o'clock, p m, on Sa-
turday, the 19th instant, and the person appointed will be re-
•quired to enter into a bond with two sureties in the sum of e,50
for the due performance of tho duties.
CHARLES WALESTER,
Secretary to the Co. Council.
Court House,
Dundalk, 7th June, 1915.
The only application received for the position was that of
Michael Ferguson, Maddoxland, who named as his sureties Ri-
• chard M 'Grath, Loughanmore, and Patrick Connor: Maddox-
and Sulbsidiary Accounts
Chairman.
42
land, and enclosed a reference from the Very Rev Canon Don—
nellan, P P, Ravensdale, who testified to the applicant's hone
sobriety, and excellent character.
It was then proposed by Mr J H M' Ardle, J P, who spoko
very highly of Ferguson, seconded by Mr Thomas O'Rourke,
and passed unanimously : —
That we hereby appoint Michael Ferguson, Mnddoxland, Har—
bour Constable at Giles' Quay Pier, at a salary of CI'2 per an-
nun, to carry out, all the business of the Harbour, including tbe
lighting of the leading and pier lights, in accordance with the •
advertisement issued by the Secretary ; and that, we approve of
the sureties named by him.
The Secretary was instructed to arrange to have Ferguson's
Bond completed at once, so tha.t he could take up the duties at
the Pier on 1st July,on which date the late Harbour Constable's
resignation takes effect.
PURCHASE OF GILES' QUAY BOAT SLIP.
The following letter was read and initialled by the
man
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 15th June,
No. 30,400: 1915.
Louth County.
Sir,
Chair-
1915.
With reference to your letter of the 1st instant, re-
lative to the proposed payment by the Louth County Council Of
a sum of for the purchase of a Boat Slip at the Giles' Quay
Harbour, I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Troland to state that they have your letter under consideration' •
but before giving a definite reply, they have thought it well
43
communicate with the Commissioners of public Works on the
matter.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
The Secretary;
Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
LOANS FOR MACHINERY AND ROAD IMPROVEMENTI
The folimVing letters were read and initialled by the Chair-
man :—
ThO Hibernian Bank Limited,
Dil,ndnlk, 7th June, 1915,
Thé Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
Dear Sir,
I beg to advise Sou that I have placed to credit of
the Council's Loan No. I Account the sum of four thousand and
ninety-five pounds, being proceeds of the loan grnnted by Cho,
Bank for the purchase of road-making maOhinery.
Yours faithfully,
CfiARLLS ft. MaeNEVIN,
Managem
44
The Hibernian Bank Limited,
Dundalk, 18th June,
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
Dear Sir,
1915.
I am in reciept of your letter of 17th insi, with
its enclosures. I note that your Council now require the ad-
vance for C4,060, for the purpose of road-making.
I am putting the matter before Head Office this evening, and
it shall have our immediate attention.
Yours faithfully,
CHAS. MacNEVIN,
Manager.
IMPROVEMENTS IN RURAL DISTRICTS ADJOINING
COUNTY ROADS.
The following applications were considered by the Commit-
From Bernard Sandys, Heynestown, for permission to erect
a wall at his farm at Heynestown. He encl«sed map showing
where the proposed wall was to built
From Philip M 'Cann, Edenkell, for permission to extend
round his farmyard. This was a continuation of wall which
the County Council had sanctioned some years ago.
From John Keelan, Tallanstown, for permission to plant
bushes and erect a wire fencing in a line with the existing
at his store in Tallanstown.
45
All three applications were granted subject to the approval
of the County Surveyor, condition to be made in the case of
Keelan that no barbed wire would be used.
THIRD PARTY INSURANCES.
The C.mairman informed the Committee of the result of tho
- interview he and the Secretary haa with the Manager of tho.
London and Inncashire Insurance Company at Dtiblin, on Tues...
day, 15th inst. The Manager had agreed to submit, to his
Head Office the inclusion of IO horse drivers and three trailers.
on road rollers to be covered in the Policy: and the Insurance
for damage to the engines by accidents, and submit quotations.
The Secretary then submitted these quotations, which were
the rate of C4 IOS Od cach fov road rollers and trailers, being
Cl IOS Od per cent extra; far traction engines the sum of C16.
each, being C4 Ils Od per cent extra, and horse drivers at 158
each. The entire quotation for all Third Party risks to and by
rollers, traction engines with trailers, ton horse drivers, spark
risks, boiler explosion and iwspection, amounting in all to thc
sum of C93 17s Gd, with all the extras covered in Schedule.
signed on behalf of the Company, including law ecsts incurred
cost of protection and removal following damage, repairs up to
CIO, representation at inquests and defence of police court pro-
ceedings, together with the special endorsement covering all
possible risks either by misfeasance or non-feasance on the part
Of the County Council by their workmen or vehicles.
A long discussion took place on the entire matter, and various
queries by Mr T J Byrne with reference to the various ri.,kS
covered by the quotation, were answered. The quotations of
the other Insurance Companies were also compared, by which it
was seen that that of the London and Lancashire was the cheap.
est.
•The Committee unanimously recommended,
On the motion P'trick .My'Gees Esq, J. P ;
Seconded by Bevnard Finnegan,
That the quotation of the London and Lancashire Fire Insur-
:ance Coy, Ltd. for the sum of C93 17s 6d, to cover all Third
Party risks, as set out ein the sehedule. signed by @herny be
'cepted subject, to the approval,by the. Solicitor to tho County
'Council of the Policy to, be prepared by the Company.
It was further unanimously decidéd to request tha InsuranCØ
Company to issue a protection note covering the County council
pending the completion of the Policy.
PERMISSION TO COUNTY SURVEYOR TO PROCEED
WITH WORK.
'The following letter was read
County Surveyor's Office,
Court House, Dundalk,
19th June, '1915.
Road Board Work.
Tn the Chairman and Gentlemen, Finance Committee,
Louth County Council.
Gentlemen,
There have been many serious delays in connectiOIl
with loans in the matter of the Road Board Work. These. na-
turally hold up the settling of the question of insurance' both
mrd Party and Workmen's Compensation. The matter Of the
loans is now settled: it is getting late in the year. I beg to
ask if it would be the wish of the Council that I should get a'
couple of gangs of men to work preparing quarries for drills
47
making passes, etc, pending the settlement u of the insurance
equestion which is now in hands.
Your obédienta Servant,
THOMAS WALSH.
A discussion took place on this matter, some of the members
•of the Committee considering that the work should be delayed
for a time, but it was ultimately unanimously decided to in-
struct, thO County Surveyor to proceed with the necessary
liminary work pending the completion of the insurance against
Employers Liability risks under the Workmen's Compensation
Acts.
The 'Secretary informed the Committee that the Atlas Assur-
anee Company were bringing the matter up for revision at tho
Associated Tariff Office Meeting during the present, week, and
would submit quotation as early as possible.
FEES UNDER TUBERCULOSIS (IRELAND) ORDER, 1914.
The following leiter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man :—
Department of Agriculture and
Technical Instruction for Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch),
50 and 51, Upper Mount Street,
Dublin, 7th. June, 1915.
1999-15.
Sir,
With reference to your letter of '28th ultimo, om-
bodying eopy of a resolution adopted at a recent meeting of
your Council on the subject of the special remuneration to vo—
terinary Inspectors for duties under the Tuberculosis (Ireihncl)
Order of 1914, T have hereby to express the Department's appro-
48
val of the proposal to substitute for the increased •salary rates.
hitherto applying, payment in accordance with the subjoined-
scale of fees during a period of twelve months from 1st inst.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary v
The Secretary,
I.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Scale of Fees Approved.
For clinical examination of the first animal
a fee of
Each additional animal on the same premises
The maximum amount under this head not to
exceed El.
When the premises are more than 15 miles
distant a fee for the first animal of
For applying the Tuberculin test up to four
animals
Each animal over four
These fees to include the cost of Tuberculin
for the purpose of the test.
Post Mortem Examinations
Microscopie Examination
Mileage at tho rate of Is per mile one way,
or railway fare.
.No further charges to be made for reports
of valuations.
TUBERCULOSIS (IRELAND) ORDER, 1914,
COMPENSATION.
The following letter was read and initialled by the
o
1
2
0
1
o
1
1
2
5
1
10
o
O.
0,
49
man. The Secretary stated that this compensation was inelu—
ded on to-day's: Treasurer's- Authority
Department of Agriculture and
Technical Instruction for Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch),
50 and 51, Upper Merrion Street,
Dublin, 17th June, 1915.
No. T. 969-15.
Sir,
In reply to your letter of 14th instant, have to
say that the net compensation due under the Tuberculosis (Ire-
land) Order to Mr D Clarke for his slaughtered cow, is 30s, and
the Department see no objection to the amount being paid by
the Local Authority.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
COUNTY COURT-CLEÅNEIVS APPLICATION.
The County Court-Cleaner, Christopher M 'Garrity, applied
for usual allowance for extra work incurred in connection with
tho extra staff at rate books. The Secretary informed the
Committee that no application was made last year, but in pre-
vious years CI was allowed for this work.
Mr T J Byrne, J P, proposed that M 'Garrity be not allowed
anything, as the work elaimed for was part of his ordinacy du-
ties and entailed nothing additional.
Chair
50
Mr J H M'Ardle, J P, seconded.
Messrs T B M 'Court and B Finnegan thought he should geb
the usual allowance, and Mr Peter Woods, J P, suggested
loving this year, but no amendment to Mr Byrne's rnot.ion
being proposed the application rejected.
CLAIMS FOR GOOSEBERRY BCSHES.
The Department of Agriculture wrote on 11th June, 1915'
No. A, 10862-15, enclosing copy of letter received from Michael
Hynes, Corderry, Knockbridge, in which Mr Hynes requested
inforrnation as to why the Department had not certified for
gooseberry bushes destroyed by him under the American Mil-
dew Order. The Department's stated that they were
not aware of having refused sanction to payment of compensa-
tion for his bu.hes, 00 Mr Hynes, but that their Inspector had
reported that his bushes, though cut down, had not been
burned in accordance with instructions. bushes, however'
had since been destroyed, and in the circumstances the
partment saw no objection to payment of compensation. The
Secretary informed the Committee that Mr Hynes had written
him in the matter requesting comper&ltion, but in the Depart-
ment's return, which was submitted, the bushes had not been
certified for, and consequently no compensation was paid under
the resolution of the County Council, which required a certifica-
lion by the Department.
The Committee unanimously agreed to accept the Deparv
ment's letter as a certificate of destruction of the bushes a
recommended payment of compensation for 3,600 bushes to
Hynes.
A claim from Miss A B Farrell, Carlingford, for 12 bushes
51
also certified for by the Department, and payment recom-
mended.
RECOUPMENT UNDER DISEASES OF ANIMALS ACIS.
Letter dated 14th June, 1915, was read from the Department
•of Agriculture informing the Council that the sum of C48 IOS Od
had been lodged to the credit of the County Council. This
amount is a refund of half the sum paid under the Diseases of
Animals Acts by the Council during quarter ended 31st Marchs
11915. The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
COMMI'ITAIS TO INDUSTRIAL SCTIOOIS.
Letter was read from the Inspector of the S S P C C, Dun-
'dalk, informing the Council that application will be made at
the Children's Court on Friday, 18th inst, for the committel of
three children to Industrial Schools. The letter was initialled
by the Chairman.
WEEK-END TICKETS.
The following letter from the Great Northern Railway Corn-
pany in reply to the letter of the Secretary, enclosing eopy of
the resolution pessed by the County Council at the request of
tho Dundalk Chamber of Commerce, was read and initiall«.l 'by
tho Chairman
Great Northern Railway Co., (Ireland),
Offee of Superintendent of the Line,
M. 15-12459.
Dear Sir,
Amiens Street Terminus,
Ihlblin, 11th June, : 915.
The resolution passed by the Louth County Ooun-.
62
oil, referred to in your letter Of the 27th April, has had consi—
deration, but I regret that this Company is not prepared to
tend the Week-End Ticket Arrangements to any place other
t.hån Dublin, Belfast and' Londonderry, to which they have
•p)iod for many years.
Yours faithfully,
R. J. MOORE„
Chas. M 'Alester, E.sq,
Secretary Louth Co. Council,
Court House, Dundalk.
rme Secretary was directed to send copy of this letter to
Secretary of the Chamber of Commerce.
WATER SUPPLY FOR ARDEE DIPPING TANK.
The Secretary informed the Council that in accordance witb
advertisement issued, the oontractor for the supply of water to
above tank should enter into an agreement with two suretieSr
for the due performance of the contract. Ho had forwarded
the agreement to Mr J T M 'Gee, Secretary to the Tmnk OOID*
mittee, that ho might get, the contractor, Mr Laurence Callan'
Tisdale Street, Ardee, and his sureties to complete it; but Mr
M 'Gee had written that there was no necessity for suretie$
this ease, and that the work would 'be properly oarried out'
Mr M 'Gee returned the agreement signed by tho contractor
only. The Secretary requested the sanction of tho committee
to this course, and it was unanimously agreed that sureties •
wore unnecessary for this contract.
REVISION OF VALUATION AND CHANGES OF' NAMES
The Secretory sub.nitted lists of changes of names and
rsions of valuation required to be made by the Valuation
-and the lists were examined and initialled by the Chai'1'11Bn.
CANADIAN FLOUR FOR RURAL Disrmucrs.
Mr. Bernard Finnegan asked, whether the suggestioii of, the
War Distress Committee to apply for the rural districts, for
rsome of the flour sent to Ireland the Canadian Government,
been carried out.
Ille Secretary informed the Committee that he had written
•tho Local Government Board in the matter, and 'had received a
•reply to the effect that it was not proposed to distribute any of
this flour in purely rural areas, as the agricultural industry had,
•if anything, benefitted by the war. The letter stated, however,
that the Board was prepmred to consider applications for flour
from towns, when it could be Shown that the industries or bu-
.sinosses had suffered by the war, and that in consequence
tress was caused among the poorer classes. He had shown this
letter to Mr Comerford, Town Clerk, and he understood that a
•onsignment of the flour had been received by the Dundolk
'Urban District Council for distribution in the urban area.
Mr Finnegan suggested writing the Board again as tbere
was considerable distress in the rural districts, and the Secre-
*ary was instructed accordingly.
54
Proposal Committee.
Minutes of the Proceedings of the Propusal Committee at
their Second Quarterly Meeting held in the Court Hou.se, Dun—
dalk, on Monday, 5th July, 1915, at I o'clock, p m.
Present : —In the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Patrick M 'Gee, J P; Wm Woods, J P;
J H M'Ard1e, J P; Laurence M'Keon, Meade, John
Morgan, N T Murphy, J P; John Dolan, Bernard Hamill, J P;
James M 'Carthy, J P, and Thomas O'Rourke, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Proposal Corn—
mittee were taken as read, and signed: by the Chairman.
The Committee considered the following Applications 'by the
County Surveyor :—
No. 22—To render and pebbledash in cement the exterior
of Drogheda Court House; to supply two new grates
in the Judges' Rooms, and two new grates in the
sembly Room, and to make new connection to w.e. ad-
joining Judges'Chamber. Cost not to exceed C131•
County-at-Large Charge.
No. 23—To provide 29 Sign Arms with Gaelic lettering, to
erected on same poles as signs provided 'by Auton10—
bile Association, the erection of which was approved
55
at last Quarterly Meeting. Cust not to exceed C33-
County-at-Large Charge.
In connection with the Application No. 22, a report was read
from the rCounty Surveyor in which he stated that the •plaster-
ing pebbledashing of the exterior walls of Drogheda Court
House were very necessary to preserve the building, and that
four new grates were required in the Judges' Rooms and the
Assembly Rooms, and that the w.e. was in a. very bad way and
would require a new connection.
After discussion the Committee unanimously decided,
On the motion of Mr N T MIMPhy, J P ;
Seconded by Mr Jas M'Carthy, J P,
That Che Proposal No. 22 be passed.
The Secretary was directed to instruct the Caretaker of Drog-
beda Court House to exercise care as to the usage of the lava-
tories by the general public.
With regard to Proposal No. 23, as to the provision of Sign
Arms, the Committee decided to reduce the amount to be ex-
pended on these to the sum of C2(), and subject to this amend-
mont, the proposal was passed unanimously,
On the motion of Mr N T Murphy, J P,
SecondOd by wrn Woods, J P.
The Secretary submitted County-at-Large Payments for
quarter ended 30th June, 1915, which were duly examined
by the Committee.
The meeting adjourned till 9th August, 1915.
56
finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance CommittOO at their
Meeting held in the Court House, Dundalk, on Monday, -5th
July, 1915, at one o'clock, m.
Present the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Patrick M'Gee, J P; wrn Woods, J P; J H
M'Ardle, J P; Laurence WKeon, Michael Meade, John Mor-
gan, N T Murphy, J P; John Dolan Bernard Hamill, J P; Jas
-M'Carthy, J P, a-nd Thomas O'Rourke,
Mr Thomas Wal.#ll, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of Proceedings of the previous Finance Meeting
were taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted, and on examinatiOn
were ordered for payment :—
Works in Charge of County Surveyor
Secretary's Office
C39
23
1 11
11 7
The County-at-Large Accounts for quarter ended 30th June'
1915, were examined and recommended for payment.
The Bank Books for the General and Subsidiary Accounts
were examined and initialled by the Chairman.
57
BALANCES OF SCHOLARSHIPS.
The •Secretary informed the Comrnittee that after- paying the
•college and hostel fees and boardlålnd lodging accounts of the
Louth County Soholarship holders for thé scholastic year just
ended, there were small balances remaining out of the scholar-
—ships of C5() each awarded to the students. In previous years
the 'balances had been paid over to the scholars When it was as-
-certained that all their fees had been ' paid, and the Secretary
read a letter from the College Authorities, in which it was sta-
that all fees incurred 'by County Lout;h students had'been
discharged.
The Committee unanimously decided to follow the course ad-
qpted in former years, and the Secretary was directed to pre-
-sent for payment at next Meeting of the Finance Committee
tho amount of the balance remaining out of each student's
ACCOUNTS OF TUBERCULOSIS COMMITTEE OF
MANAGEMENT.
The Secretary informed the Committee t'ha.t, the Clerk to tho
Tuberculosis Committee of Management, had been in communi-
•cation with the Local Government Board relative to the method
to be adopted by him of dealing with the Tuberculosis Commit-
tee's accounts. Up to the present all the accounts of the
Committee have been dealt with by the County Council, and
payments were made of the Cou n ty account. The Local
Government, Board had instructöd the Secretary of the T C M
to keep the accounts of tho Tuberculosis Committee in accord-
ance with the terms of the Tuberculosis (Ireland) Prevention
Act, 1908, and to prepare annually a statement of the estima-
ted receiptVs and expenditure of the Committee, and' furnish a
58
Demand accordingly to the County Council. The demand was••
not to exceed the produce of the rate of one penny in the•
pound struek by the Council under the Tuberculosis Preven lion
Act, and would be transferred to the account of the Tuberculo-•
Sis 'Committee of Management •by four equal quarterly instnl-
ments. In view, however, of the fact that some Of the ac-
counts of the Tuberculosis Committee for the first quarter Of
the current financial year ihad already been paid by the County
Council, the Loeål Government Board approved of a Demand
on the Council for the remaining three quarters, on the '
of the nett estirnated expenditure for the entire year. Ac-•
cordingly the Clerk had prepa.red a Demand on the Council'
and the Secretary submitted Mime. The net estimated amount
required to carry on the business of the Tuberculosis Commit-
tee for the present financial year, as set out in the Demand, is'
which would be transferable to the Tuberculosis Commit--
tee's •accounts by instalments of C'225 quarterly. As, howevefi•
the accounts for the first quarter—to 30th June—have been
paid by tho County Council, t'here remained orily three instal-
ments to be transferred to the Tuberculosis Committee to the •
end of the current year, namely, C(j7ö, to 31st March, 1916•
This arrangement was unanimously approved of 'by flue Fin--
ance Committee, and the Demand was initialled by the Chair-•
man, and the Secretary instructed to have the quarterly instal-
ments transferred to the Tuberculosis Committee of Manage-•
ment, stibject to the approval of the County Council.
•Ob!.g.
TUBERCULOSIS DISPENSARY—CONTRACTOR'S
ACCOUNT.
Letter was read from the Clerk, Tuberculosis Committee"
enclosing application from Mr Nicholas Haughey, ContractOf
for Uhe Tuibereulo.sis Dispensary at Dundalk, for instalment Of
account for work done. The Secretary informed the Commi&
tee that the first instalment of had been received from
the Local Government Board, and Paying Order for the amount
would be issued to Mr Haughoy after the County Council rneev
ing On 29th July.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
SITE FOR OMEATH SHEEP DIPPING TANK.
Letter was read from Mr John M 'Cann, •Omeatili, stating
that he could not accept less than C4 for the rent of the site
for above dipping tank for the present season. The Secretary
informed the Committee that this was the price charged last
year for this site, but other sites only ecxst, C'2, and the Execu—
five Committee last season were of opinion that' C4 was an ex-.
cessive charge.
The matter was referred to the local Tank Committee.
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO SHEEP.
Police report stating that Mrs Segrave, Dunany, had not.
complied with the Sheep Dipping Regillations 'by forwarding
the ' 'Notice of Intention to Dip" her sheep was read, but as
the Declaration of having dipped the sheep had been delivered
by her, the report was marked "read."
SPEED LIMIT OF MOTORS IN DISTRICTS.
The following letter from the Council's Solicitor, Mr O'Con-
nell, with reference to above matter, was read, and the Seerew
tary was directed to forward a copy of the letter to Mr Peter B
Moore, J P, M C C, who had moved in the matter at the an-
nua,l meeting of the Council ; to Mr J B Connolly, Town ClerkE
60
Drogheda, and fo Mr. Mathew Comerford, Town Clerk, Dun-
•dalk, and :ask the two latter gentlemen to inform their resm»c-
-tive Councils that it was the wish of the County Council that a
.speed limit should be fixed in the urban areas, and
•those bodies to make the necessary application :—
Francis Street,
Dundalk, 28th June,
Re Speed Limit for Motor Chrs.
Dear Sir,
req uest
1915.
With reference to the discussion at the -annual
meeting of the Council on this subject, it will be recalled •
reported on the 11th April, 1914, that I had been in, com-
munication with the Local Government Board on the matter: Of
the request of the Council, with a view to t:he public safety'
that •the Board should make regulations limiting the driving Of
motor cars and motor bicycles to. a speed of ten miles •an hour
in the urban districts of Dundalk and Drogheda, and in
Carlingford, Omeath, Dunleer and Castlebelfingham.
The Board stated that tihey could not moke general regula-
tions of the nature referred to. That the case of each town or
village where a speed limit for motor traffic is desired, must'
•considered on its merits, having regard to the extent and cha-
racier of the traffic, the width of the road and the position
number of bye-roads leading to bhe main streets.
I have ascertained that in Dublin City no speed limit exists•
An inquiry was held by a Local Government Board Inspect'Ot•
recently and as a result, no limit of speed was imposed•
•course the police have extensive powers under the Notor Car
-Act, 1903, to deal with reckless and negligent driving.
61
With regard to having regulations made. for limiting the:
speed in Drogheda and Dundalk, I am of opinion that this is,
a matter for the local autihority in each instance, it is for-
the Corporation of Drogheda and the Ijt'ban District Council
in Dundalk respectively to make the necessary application in.
each case to the Local Government Board.
The Motor Act, • 1903, •Section•, Siib-Seetion (1) sets.
' 'Section Four of the principal Act (which relates to the rate.
of speed of motor cars) is hereby repealed, but a person Shall
not, under any circumstances, drive a motor car on a public,
highway at a speed exceeding twenty miles per hour, and.
within any limits •or place referred to in regulations made by
the Local Government Board with a view to the safety of the.
ptiblic on the application of the local authority of thO area in.
which the limits or place are situate, a person shall not driv@
a motor car at a speed exceéding ten miles per hour."
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL._
Charles M'.\lester, nsq,
Secretary Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
FLOODING OF PUBLIC ROAD AT OMEATH.
The following correspondence was read, and after discussion
the Committee unanimously decided to recommend the County
Council f.o enter into the usual easement agreement with the
62
London and N. W. Railway Company, and pay them the nom-
•inal acknowledgement of 2s Gd per annum :—
County Surveyor's Office,
Court House, Dundalk,
June 24th, 1915.
'Charles M 'Alester, Esq,
Secretary Louth County Council.
Dear Sir,
Flooding of the public road from Carlingford to •
Newry takes place in wet weather beside Orneath Cemetery •
The Rural District Council of Dundalk have passed a, proposal
to lay a pipe to carry the surface water of the road through
the cemetery, discharging it into the sea tihrough a culvert un-
der the Newry and Greenore Railway. The permission of the
Railway Company is 'necessary to 'do this. I have a,ppked for
:same •and have met their representative one the ground.
I beg to trasmit to you, for the consideratim of the Finance
•Committee, the reply to my amlication for permission to dis-
•eharge the water as proposed.
Yours faithfully,
THOMAS WALSH,
County Surveyor.
London and North Western Railway.
District Estate C)ffce,
Eaton Street, Crewe,
June 961d, 1015.
JW/G219/9097.
Walsh, Esq,
County Surveyor,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
Flooding of Public Road af On.•eatll.
Dear S r,—
Ilaving reference to your letter of the 9th insf to our
Mr A M Thompson, which has been sent on to me asking for per-
63
mission to lay a drain on the Company's property to fake flood
water from the public road through a culvert under railway,
am prepared to recommend that this be allowed if you will let
me know that your Council are willing to enter into our usual
•easement agreement and pay a nominal acknowledgment of 2s 6d
per annum. Upon hearing from you as to this I will have the
form Of agreement drawn up for completion, and the work should
-not be commenced until this is done.
Yours faithfully,
J. M. WILLIAMS.
SLAINTENANCE OF PATIENTS IN PIMMOUNT.
Letter was read from Sir Wm J Thompson, Honorary Secretary
Veamount Sanatorium, with refererree to the proposal to increase
the charge for maintenance of 'the County Louth patients in the
Institution from 20s to 25s per week.
After discussion the matter was referred back to the Tuber-
•eulosis Committee of Management, who now have power to deal
with the matter direct.
WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION INSURANCES.
Letters were r€vl from the following Insurance Companies
stating that at the r•eeting of the Associated Tariff Committee
the rate of Insurance for Employers' Liability under the Work-
men's Com pensation Acts, be fixed for the T ,ouflv County
Council was reduced from 35s to per cent :—The Ocean, Atlas,
North British, and London and Lancashire. This rate covered
all risks incurred by the Council, including quarrying and work-
luen in charge Of the County Surveyor, sheep dipping inspectors,
rate . veterinary inspectors, school attendance officers,•
and office staff, etc, the sum to, be covered being; the estimated'
one of S5647.
After discussion the following resolution was passed unani-
mously .
Proposed by Mr N 'I' Murphy, J P,
Seconded by: 'Mr James M'Carthy, J P,
That we recommend the County Council• to effect Employer*
Liability Insurance against Workmen's Compensation risks for
estimated amount of wages of C5,647 at the rate of 23s per cent
with the Ocean and Accident Guarantee Association, and we direct
our Secretary to obtain covering note to protect the risk pending
completion of the policy.
COMMITTAL '10 INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL.
Letter was read from Rev Father Hurson notifying that
plication will be made at Dundalk Children's Court, to be held
on Friday, 9th day of July, for committal to an Industrial School
of Ignatius M'Kelvey, James' street, Dundalk, a child under 14
years of age.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
CANADIAN ELOUR FOR DISTRICTS.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chairman
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 3rd July, 1915.
No. 35,433/1915.
Louth County.
Si r,—
The Local Government Board for Ireland have had before
65
them your letter of the 25th ultimo, applying for a further grant
Of Canadian gift flour for distribution in the Rural Districts im-
mediately adjoining the towns of Drogheda and Dundalk; and
reply the Board direct me to state that they see no necessity for
making a, grant Of flour for distribution in the Rural Districts in
question.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary-
Charles M'Alester, Esq,
County Secretary's Office,
Cofrthouse, Dundalk,
MOTOR LICENCE DUTY.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chairman
Incal Government Board,
Dublin, 3rd July, 1915.
Sir,—
I am directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland
to' transmit to you herewith an order for payment; of the sum of
$.39 16s 9d, being the amount payable to the County Council
respect of duties on Licenses for Motor Cars under Section 89
the Finmhee (1909-10) Act, 1910, during the year ended the 31st
March, 1915.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS, Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
RATE COLLECTION.
The Return showing the state of the Rate Collection to 30th
66
June, 1915, was submitted by the Secretary and initialled by
Chairman.
The amounts outstanding are as follows:—
Pafriek S Donegan
Patrick M' Donnell
Patrick M'Cullough
John J Kelly
Hughes
Patrick Cluskey
Peter M'l)onnell
John Woods
James V Johnston
Total outstanding
9
2548 0 6
2096 13 6
865 6 11
1162 7 10
2688 8 4
2244 19
1967 13 10
1117 5 2
217566 1 2
67
Mrs Rachel Alderdiee, of Haggardstown, with the County
•Council, for 1800 cubie yards of stone frome quarry af Haggards-
town for the sum •of Z15, with right to use the quarry for three
.years from 1st. day of July, 1915.
The County Surveyor informed the Committee that the County
Solicitor stated that it would be necessary to have the agreements
approved by the Finance Committee and sealed with the common
-seal of the County Council.
The following resolution was unanimously adopted :—
Proposed by Mr James M'Carthy, J P,
Seconded by Mr Patrick M 'Gee, J P,
That we recommend the County Council [o approve of tho
Agreements for entry into quarries and the raising of stones
therefrom with Anne O'Neill, of Carrickarnan, and Mrs Rachel
Alderdice, and that the common •seal of the County Council be
naffixed to same.
DROGHEDA COURTHOUSE.
•The following letter was read :—
NOXIOUS WEEDS.
Circular lef€er from the Department of Agriculture dated
July, 1915, was read, req nesting the Council to assist the
rol
partment in the administration of the Weeds and AgriCUltU
Seeds (Ireland) Act, 1909, by taking all necessary steps to ensure
that all roads and lands .in the control of the Council shall be
kept cleared of noxious weeds throughout the :present season'
the County Surveyor was instructed to attend to the matter •
QUARRY AGREEMENTS.
Leifer was read from the County Surveyor requesting the
proval of the ' Finance Committee to the following agreements
for entry into quarries and s[ones taken therefrom, viz
for
Anne O'Neill, of Carriekarnan, with the County
flig
for
4000 cubie yards of stone from quarry af Carrickarnan
sum Of C50, with right to use the quarry for three years
1st day of July, 1915.
Francis Street, Dundalk,
5th July, 1915.
Dear Sir,—
Referring to yom letter of 12th ultimo and the en-
•elo.sures therewith, I beg €0 state that advising on the Council's
position under the Local Government Act, 1898, I wrote , on the
18th January, 1915, that the Council have an incorporate right
fo the custody and control of the Drogheda Courthouse. At the
Finance Committee meeting held on the Isf February,
1915, T
stated that I considered the Council could refuse fo supply coal,
light and water to the portion of the Courthouøe used by tho
Corporation.
68
have read the Lease, dated the 20th July, 1887, from • the•
Drogheda Corporation and Others to Trustees on behalf of the•
Grand Jury of the County of the Town of Drogheda, and which
is a grant in perpetuity subject to the annual rent of One•
Shilling of the plot OR ground on which the Courthouse is now
erected, and in which it sets forth
t 'And it is hereby agreed and declared by and between the'
Grantors and the said Commissioners on behalf of the Grand
Jury, . their successors and assigns, and these presents are made
upon the express condition that the Grantors may at all times
when the said Courthouse buildings and improvements shall not
be in actual use for the purposes Of any of her Majesty's Courts•
of Law or for Grand Jury purposes use and occupy the saiJ
Courthouse buildings and improvements for the purpose of hold--
ing meetings of the Grantors in their said corporate capacity ond
for all purposes incidental thereto."
Apart from the question of oonstruction of the said proviSO'
there is the larger question of how far this Lease operates iL
favour of the Corporation of Drogheda and is consistent with tho
terms of the Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898, and I would
recommend that the opinion of Counsel be obtained on the points•
involved.
I return herewi€h original Lease as also copy Presentments•
69
A discussion arose on this letter, and some members of the
'Committee were in accord with the Solicitor's views that the
•opinion of Counsel should be taken, but on the suggestion of Mr
•James M'Carthy, supported by ur N T Murphy, that the Cor-
poration would probably provide the fuel, light and water neces-
sary for the premises in the Courthouse used by them, the Come
mittee unanimously directed the Secretary to write to the Cor-
-porafion embodying the suggestions and requesting their con-
-sideration of same.
C. M' Alesfer, Esq,
Secretary, Louth Co.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL
Council.
70
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Couirt House, Dunda,lk,.
on Monday, 19th July, 1915, at one o'clock, p m.
Present the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Thomas O'Rourke, T J Byne, J P; Jas.
M'Carthy, J P; wm Woods, J P; and Michael O'Meara, J P,
Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous meeting of the Finance Come
mittee were taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
Tho following accounts were submitted and, on examination"
were ordered for payment
Works in Charge of County Surveyor
C131 17 8
Secretary's Office
e189 3 8
Form 22 with payments on foot of road maintenance contract'S :
for the Rural Districts of Ardee, Drogheda and Dundalk' for
the quarter ended 30th June, 1915, were submitted', and re-•
commended for payment by tho County Council.
The Bank Books for the General and Subsidiary
were examined au&initialled by Lhe Chairman.
71
RATE COLLECTION.
The following letter from the Local Government Board was
read :
No. 36664-1915.
Louth County.
Sir,
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 6th July, 1915.
With reference to the retu,rn showing the condi-
tion on the 30th ultimo of the collection of titme poor rate for
the current half year in Louth County, I am directed by the
Local Government Board for Ireland to draw attention to tho
very unsatisfactory state of the collection, and to -request that,
tho Collectors who ,have so far failed to makO any lodgment
may be warned as to the necessity of proeoecling wit'hi the col-
lection at •once, so that the Cautnty Council may be in a position
to meet any financial demand which may be made upon it.
I am to add that it is obligatory ou all- Collectors to attend
at tho appointed time and place for the •eheeking of their ac-
counts, even if they have no monies collected.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
Tho Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Tho Secretary informed the Committee that by direction of
the Chairman a copy of this letter had been sent to all tho
Collectors, and that since then seven of the Collectors had at-
tended at the office to Check their books, and that all with the
exception of two had made lodgments of the amounts collectecL
73
72
'Ille letter was initialled by tlhe Chairman.
After discussion it was unanimously decided' to request the
The Secretary submitted the following return of expenditure
Collectors to attend the meeting of the County CounciÆ on the
-for the supply of coal, gas and water and maintenance for the
29th inst, to explain why they had not prooeeded more energe-
Drogheda Court House, as directed by the Finance Committee,
tically with their collection, and their failure to attend to
'for the year ended 31st December, 1914. The Secretary was
checking of the books during the month of June.
•directed to have' the return inserted on the minutes for tho
information of the County Council
USE OF ARDEE COURT HOUSE.
Letter was read from Mr Arthur Macan, Drumeashel, Hon-
Expenditure on Drogheda Court House during year ended
orar•y Secretary Ardee Drainage Trustees, stating that
31st December: 1914.
meetings of Che Trustees under the Grand Jury were held in
that
the Court House, Ardee, free of charge, and complaining
Mr Reilly, the present court-keeper, was claiming payment for
11
the use OF the room in which the meetings were hel-., and re-
questing the County Council to consider the matter.
The Committee decided to recommend Che County Council t'O
continue the use of the room in tihe Ardee Court House to
Ardee Drainage Trustees free of charge, and directed the
Secretary to instruct the court-keeper that he was not to
charge any fee for the use of said room.
0 13
DROGHEDA COURT HOUSE.
0 11
Letter was read from the court-keeper Drogheda Court House '
in reply to a letter from the Finance Committee, that'
2 10
public did not !have access to the w.c. in the Court House
cept on days when the rooms to the rere of it are being
the
for meetings for County purposes, and that on other (lays
door is kept locked.
The County Surveyor informed the Committee that the ne-
cessary repairs to the Court House passed by the proposal CODY
mittee included work to put this w.c. in a proper sanitary
dition.
Coal
Ga'
Water
14
2
1
C18
s
5
IO
1
Upkeep and Maintenance.
Feb.
Feb.
Mar
Mar.
Mar
Mar
2—Michael M 'Guigan
IG—Droghedå Corporation
2 — Patrick Woga n
30—Michael M 'Guigan
30—Patriek Connor
Pa trick Garvey
30
Supplies
Maintenance
d
0
4
C
30
o
21
1
d
s
O
18
O
o
d
0
9
1
O
o
18
54
E72
s
1
4
2 10
2
EXCHEQUER MAINTENANCE GRANT—TUBERCVLOSIS-
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair—
man
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 15th July, 1915.
No. 26493-1915.
Louth County.
Sir,
Adverting to the return of the estimated expen-
diture of the Louth County Council on the treatment of Tu-
berculosis for the half year ending tho 30th September next,
I am directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland t'O
inform you that they have given directions for the issue of a
Paying Order for C'24() from the Exchequer Grant in respect of
the half year in question.
The payment is made subject to the Auditor's examination
of the Council's accounts and relevant vouchers.
I am, Sir,
'Your obedient Servant,
J. E DEVLIN,
Assistant Sect@oary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Court House, Dundalk.
CENTRAL TUBERCUTOSIS DISPENSARY—PAYMENT TO
CONTRACTOR.
The Secretary informed the Committee that in order to expedite
payment of the instalments to [he Contractor for the
Tuberculosis Dispensary, Mr Nicholas Ilaughey, he had written
the Local Government Board for forms of Ard•hitect's Certificates»
and eon receiving them he had got Mr Vineenf O'Connell, the
Architect of the Dispensary, to sign and complete the forms. Tlcy
had then forwarded them in duplicate to the Local Government
Board, who would in due course transmit to the Council
amount certified for—namely, CIOO.
Tho Committee approved of the Secretary's action in the matter„
GILES' QUAY HARBOUR CONSTABIN.'S PENSION.
The Seeretary informed the Committee thåt he had written
the Local Government Board for their sanction to flye pension of'
28 per annum granted by the County Council fo James Cumiskey,
late Harbour Constable at Giles' Quay Pier, and had received a
letter from them in reply stating that one month's notice
should be given to each member of the Council of the intention
to grant, such pension, and requesting fhe Secretary to give, such
notice €0 each Member of the Council for the Meeting to be held
on 19th August. The Secretary informed the Committee that 110
had sent out the necessary notice, and the lotter was initialled
by tho Chairman.
FANE ANI) WOHONSTOWN DRAINAGE DISTRICTS.
Letter was read from the Secretary, Office of Public Works,.
Dublin, enclosing revised schedule showing the names of the
proprietors and their proportionate liability for payment Of
Maintenance Rate in each of the above districts, and maps of
tho two districts.
The letter and enclosures were referred to the Special Committee.
appointed by the County Council to deal with the transfer.of the
business of these drainage districts to the County Council, and on
76
the suggestion of Mr T J Byrne, J P, the Secretary was directed
to call a Meeting of the Committee for Monday next, 26th ing.t, at
.12 0'clock.
QUARRY AGREEMENTS.
Letter was read from the County Surveyor enclosing the follO•v-
ing Agreements for entry into quarries and for stones taken
therefrom, for the approval of the Finance Committee:—
Henry Sloan, of Athclare Castle, with the County Council, for
1600 cubic yards of stone from quarry at Castletown for the
of Z2(), with right to use the quarry for three years from
day of July, 1915.
Rose Murphy, of Haggardstown, with the County Council, for
right of entry to the quarry of Mrs Rachel Alderdice, by pass
shown on sketch m,ap, for the sum of
The Commitjee unanimously approved of the Agreements,
recommended same for sealing with the common seal of
County Council.
ADDRESS TO DR DOUGLAS' HYDE.
The Secretary submitted draft Address to be presented to
Douglas Hyde on the occasion of his visit to Dundalk on sundoY'
25th July, to open the Oireachtas, in accordance with resoluti011
-of the County Council.
The Committee unanimously approved of the draft Address'
-and directed the Secretary to have same printed suitably for
presentation.
BANK HOLIDAY.
The Secretary informed the Chmmittee that the next Meeting
Of the Finance Committee would be due on 2nd August, which was.
a Bank Holiday.
The Committee unanimously decided fo postpone the Meeting•
due on 2nd August. to the following Monday, 9th day of August.
LOAN FOR NEW COUNTY OFFICES.
The Committee directed the Secretary to write the Local Govern-.
ment Board informing them that the County Council had decided'
on the plans for the proposed New County Offices, and requestiag•
the Board's sanction fo the borrowing from the Council's Treasurer-
Of the sum of C6,000, which sum had been fixed by the County
Council for the erection of the New Offices.
78
Executive Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Executive Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk' on
Monday, 19th July, 1915, at one o'clock p m.
Present :—
Tn the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Thomas C)' Roürke, T J Byrne, J P; James
M'Carthy, J P; William woods, J P, and Michael O'Meara, J 1"
Esquires.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Executive Committ8
were faken as read and signed by the Chairman
VETERINARY INSPECTORS' REPORTS.
file
The following reports from the Veterinary Inspectors f"
month of July were read and initialled by the ('hairman
Mr. J. T. Clinton's Repolt.
Dundalk, July Report.
Sir,—
T beg to report that during the month a ense of suspected
scab occurred amongst Mrs Dickie's .sheep at Fairhill.
Of wool were taken by the Department of Agriculture? s veterinary
Inspector, 'and the Board confirmed the existence of [he disease•
been
All the sheep have been restricted to the farm and have
ruo.1J tunpur.louratu pue 'OD!10d
perty of Mr John Long, of Grange, Carlingford. The
:anirnal
•dipped.
has been
79
slaugh fered by owner and the remaining sheep
Your obedient Servant,
J. T. CLINTON.
Donnelly's Report.
Veterinary Establishment,
Drogheda, July, 1915.
Gentlemen,—
During the month of June there was one outbreak of
Swine Fever in my disflic€. The disease was confined to the pigs
on one premises in Che town of Drogheda. The Veterinary Officers
Of the Department va lued the animals and had thém all
slaughtered, and the premises have since been thoroughly dis-
infected.
Yours respectfully,
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
Mr. W. E. Maxwell's Report.
Ardee, 5th July, 1915.
The Chairman,
Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
Dear Sir,-—
1 have inspected the usual fairs held in the Ardee No.
I Distrief for the month of June.
T supervised the dipping of
the sheep belonging fo Mrs Chester Walsh, Castlebellingham, on
Che 12th, 13th and 14th June. the 26th June I personally gave
notice to Mr It W Walsh re disinfection and subsequently also a
written notice.
Ile promised to have same carried out. The
wet weather is interfering so far.
1 am,
Faithfully yours,
W. E. MAXWELL.
80
SLAUGHTER OF AINÄAI,S (TRETAND) ORDER OF 1915.
Letter was read from the Department of Agriculture enclosing
copy of the above Order which came info operation on 24th June.
The provisions of the Order makes it illegal in Ireland
slaughter or for the owner to cause or permit to be slaughtered
(1) Any animal which is visibly or obviously in calf or in pig ; or
(2) Any calf under the age of twelve weeks (male calves of they
following dairy breeds excepted, viz : Channel Island"
Ayrshire, and Kerry breeds).
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
OMEATII SHEEP DIPPING TANK.
The- Secretary read correspondence in connection with the site
for the Omeath Sheeb Dipping Tank. Mr William Woods, ' 'Ii
behalf of the Local Committee, had obtained a site for the tank
at Knocknagoran, but a letter from the owner of the land stated
that the water for use at the tank would require to be carted'
Letter was alsoa•ead from the Dipping Superintendent that
site at Knocknagoran was not suitable owing to the insufficient
supply of water, and stating that he had arranged for a site at
Omeath, where the water was plentiful, for the sum Of C2.
The Committee approved of the faking Of this site for the tank'
and directed the Secretary to have the tank removed
Annaloughan to Omea[ll.
SHEEP SCAB NOTICES.
The notices served by the Veterinary Inspectors in the variOUS
of sheep scab were submitted and initialled by the Chairman •
The following are (he cases referred to:—
Mrs Chester Walsh, Williamstown—Sheep Ijave now been declared
free of disease and the detention notice withdrawn.
John Long, Grange—The animal affected was slaughtered.
K Dickie, FairhiIl—Sheep have now been declared free of
disease and the detention notice withdrawn.
loafriek M 'Shane, notice withdrawn.
SWINE FEVER.
Case of swine fever at 78, Trinity Street, Drogheda, wa,s notified
by police, and a menrorandum from the Department that on
exautination of the intestines by the Veterinary Officers of the
epar€ment discovered in their opinion swine fever did exist.
premises are now thoroughly disinfected.
82
new County Offices Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the New County Offices Committee
at their Meeting held in the Council Charnber, Courthouse,
dalk, on Friday, 9th day of July, 1915, at one o'clock p m.
Present :—
In the Chair—ChaAos A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other MemhelS—Bernard llamill, J P, and Thomas MurPhY'
Esqui res.
Professor W A Scott, Assessor, and. Mr Thomas Walsh, County
Surveyor, were in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the New County
Committee were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
Professor Scott then read his report on the competition for
plans for the New County Council Offices as follows:—
45, Mountjoy Square, Dublin,
8th July, 1915.
Louth Counfy Offices.
Gentlernen,—
I beg to report that I have examined the 19 Design*
submitted in Competition for the New County Offices for County
Louth, to be erected in Dundalk, and place the Designs as fol-
lows
(I) The Design Number 14.
(2) The Design N umber 12.
(3) The Design Number 15.
83
'l'be Design I place first is st raightforward and a good solution
of the problem, while the architectural treatment is the best of
the designs submitted, having regard to the conditions of mateh-
ing the old building and as to the eost.
The lighting Of the Judges' Room in the Courthouse is not un-
duly curtailed. A reconsideraiion of the arrangelnent of th2
staircase is and this Competitor shöuld submit a modi-
fierl plan aceordingly.
The I)e€ign Nam bor 12 is a good second.
1 commend his
arrangement cf Ihe Council Chamber, Committee Rooms and
and also the Staircase. The Ground Plan would have been
unproved by a direct entrance to the Staircase TlalJ.
The congested area at the public convenience is a defect, but
the width and lighting of the Courtyard is good.
The architectural treatment is not of Ille same quality as the
Planning.
The Design Number 15, which 1 place third, presents a goad
plan, hut the width and lighting of the Courtyard is not so good
as in the premiated designs. The Offices near the entrance are
not well proportioned, the Committee Rooms are rather remote
from the Council Chamber, if these apartments are to be userl
en suite.
The architect ural effect of this design would be better than
thaf of the second premiated design, but would not harmonise
so Well wilh the existing building.
I think it right to direct attention to the high standard
to whirl) the greater number of the designs have reached.
The sealed envelopes which accompanied the Competitive De-
signs I shall submit to your Committee, when they consider this
my award.
Yours faithfully,
W. A. SCOTT.
84
After diseussion, the Conlmittee exauiined the, plams numbered
14, 12 and 15, which had been placed first, seeond and third If'
spectively ; and
On the motion of Mr Bernard llamill, J V,
Seconded Ey Mr Thomas Murphy,
The following resolution was unanimously adopted
Resolved—That we hereby aceepf the Award of Professor W S
Scott, [he Assessor appointed by the County Council in the
petition for plans for New County' Offices, and decide that
first prize be awarded to the author of the design numbered
{fourteen), and that the second prize be awarded to the author o!
the design numb€recl 12 (twelve) submitted in the competition.
The Commi[tee then proceeded fo open the sealed envelopes
which the names of the authors of the various designs were
clcsed. Each envelope was numbered to correspond with the
numbers on the drawings.
It was found that the number of the
winning design—No. 14—was [he work of Messrs O'Callaghan and
Webb, 31 Soutll Frederick Street, Dublin ; that placed second—SO•
12—was Messrs Batchelor and Hicks, 86 Merrion Square, Dublin ;
and the third—ND. 15-—for Scheme No. 2, Mr Thomas J
25 Suffolk Street, Dublin,
The names of the other competitors who had sent in
were J V M'Gahon, Dundalk; V J O'Connell, l)undalla
M Butler, W G Clayton, Kaye, Parry and Ross,
Reid, Moore, Keefe and Robinson, Edwin Bradbury, Sir Thorna3
M Deane, and A W Reid, all of Du blin; Fennel and Clarkes
Belfast ; W J Doherty, Londonderry; Coghlan and TierneYf
Mitchelstown; P J Neary, Newry; and D O'Connor, of COI'k•
The Secretary was directed to send telegrams to the suece,ssfUl
eompe[itors, Messrs O'Callaghan and Webb, Batchelor and
and also to the author of the clesign placed third, Mr T J Chlllen•
It was also decided unanimously that the plans would
publicly exhibited in the Courthouse, Dundalk, until affer
Meeting of the County Council to be held on 29th July; and
85
Secretary was directed after that time to return the drawings,
carriage paid, to the owners thereof, and also fo return the
deposits made by the competitors according fo the conditions 'f
the competition.
Letter was read from Mr George P Sheridan, Dublin, one ef
the architects who had lodged his deposit of C2 2s for the cou-
ditions of competition, in which he stated that owing to an attack
Of influenza he was Itmable to complete his plans.
The Committee unanimously deeided to direct the Secretary •o
refund Mr Sheridan the amount of his deposit when he returned
the photographs and ground plans sent him.
The Secretary was further directed to send a report to the
local
Pavers in Dundalk and also to the Drogheda Press of the
result Of the competition.
On the motion of Mr Murphy,
Seconded by Mr Hamill,
Was unanimously decided to specially invite all visitors to
the Oireachtms to the exhibition of drawings submitted in the
competition.
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
AT THEIR
Second Quarterly Meeting,
Held on 29th July, 1915.
Finance Committee,
AT THEIR MEETING
Held on 9th August,
Proposal Committee,
AT MEETING.
Held on 9th August,
Executive Committee,
AT THEIR MEETING
Held on 9th August,
1915.
1915.
1915.
1
Coutb County Council.
Minutes of Proceeding; of the Inuth Cbunty Council at, their
Second Quarterly Meeting: held in the Council Chambor, Court
House, -Dundalk, on Thursday, 29th day of July, 1915, at one
o'clock; m.
Present the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—John Morgan, Bernard Finegan, Michael
O'Meara, J P; Peter Woods, J P; Hamill, J P; Patk M'Gee,
J P; Nichaol Meade, J VI M'Ard1e, J P; wm Woods, J P;
N T Murphy, J P; T V McQuillan, Patrick Donegan, J P;
John F Munxhy, J P; P Callan, T J Byrne, J P; and Thomas
O'Rourke, Esquires.
Messrs Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, James Dromgoolo
and John M C Lyons, Assistant Surveyors, Daniel O'Connell,
Solicitor to the Council, and Valentine Warren: Clerk T C M,
Were in attendance.
Before proooeding to tho business of the meeting, the Chair-
man road a letter which had been addressed to him by tho
Secretary of the Oireachtas Committee, inviting the membors
of tho County Council to visit the Industrial Section of tho
Oixmchtas Exhibition, and it was unanimously decided that
t]he Council should avail themselves of the invitation when the
business of the day was transacted.
2
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Michael O'Meara: E.sq, J P, and
Resolved—That the rilinutes of the proceedings of the Louth
County Council at, their first (Adjourned) Quarterly Meeting'
held on the 27th day of May, 1915, and their Annual Meeting'
been
hedd on the 16th day of June, 1915, a copy of each having
sent to each member of tho Council, be and arq hea•eby confir
med.
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE COMMITTEE MINUTES •
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Patrick M 'Gee, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Joseph H M' Ardle, Esq, J p, and
firr
Resolved—That tho minutes of the Proccedings of
ance Cammittce at their Meetings held on the undermention
(latus (a copy of w]licll bas been sent to each member Of
Council) with all payments and recommendations •contain
therein, lue and are hereby confirmed
Monchy, 7th day of June, 1915.
Monday, 21st day Of June, 1915.
Monday, 5th day of July, 1915.
Monday, 19th day of July, 16915.
Arising out of the Finance Minutes, Mr N T Murphy
there wore conflicting statements as 'to the repayment' Of
balance of the loan for Drogheda Court Houso outstanding
the passing of Clie Local Government Act, and he asked for
finite information on the point from the Secretary•
3
Secretary stated that, for three years after passing
of the Local Government Act the instalments of Ohe loan for
tho Court House were Blid by the (kyrporation. of Drogheda,
tho total repayments during that time being C842 2s ()d. In
1902, by direction of the Local Government Auditor, jho
Drogheda Corporaöion were credited with the repayments made
by t)hem, and the amount paid by them up to that time was
debited to the County at Large, and thereafter the instal-
ments of the loan, with interest, were repaid by tho County
Council, and charged to tkhe County at Large. Thus the total
amount of the loan outstanding at the pasjing of tåho Local
vernment Act had been repaid as a County at Largo charge.
CONFIRMATION OF PROPOSAL COMMITTEE
MINUTES.
Tho following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by T J Byrne: Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of tho Proceedings of 'tho Prcy
posal Committee at their meeting held on tine 5th day of July,
1915, a copy of which has been sent to each member. of the
Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Peter Woods, Esq, J P, and
RGoIvod—That the Minutes of Proceedings Of tho Executive
4
Committee at Khoit• meeting held ori the 19th day of Jul!' 1915'
a copy of which has been sent to each' member of the COUTI
be and aro hereby confirmed.
NEW COUNTY OFFICES COMMI'ITEE MTNUTFB
The following resolution was paswd unanimously
Proposed by John Murphy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Wm Woods, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of tho Proceedings Of the Sew
'County Offices Committee at their Meeting held on the 9th day
of July, 1915, a, copy of which has been sent. to cadh member
the Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
LOAN FOR ERECTION OF NEW COUNTY 0FFTCES•
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Bernard Finegan, Esq, and
of
Resolved—That we hereby decide to borrow tho
CG,OOO from tho Council's Treasurer, the Hibernian Bank'
Dundalk, to be repaid in 30 years, for the purpose of
t;he new Offices, subject to the sanction of the Local
ment Board.
CONFIRMATION OF SCHOLARSHIP coMMITITØ
MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Thomrs V M 'QillTan, Esq ;
Seconded by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J p, and
5
nesolved—That; the Minutes of tho Proceedings of tibe Schol-
arship Committee aå, their meeting held on the 21st. day of
June, 1915, a copy of whi€Ca has been sent, eo each membar of
the Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
ARDEE PAYMEN'IS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Michael Meade, Esq ;
Seconded by Patrick Callan, Esq, J and
Resolved—That the Proposals for payments formulated Gy
the Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council at their Second Quar-
terly Meeting held on the Cth of July, 1915, ancl set out on
orm 22 furnished Ghe County Council, be -and •are hereby
approved of. These payments amount to the sum of C827 3s
DROGHEDA PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P;
Seconded by N T Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—-That tho Proposals for Payments formulated by the
Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union at their Second Quar-
terly Meeting held on the 13th day of July, 1915, and set out on
Form 22, furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby
approved of. T•h€se payments amount to the sum of $„507 Ils 4d.
6
DUNDALK PAYMENTS.
Ihe following resolution was passed unanimously :—
by William Woods, Esq, J P;
Seconded by John F Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the P lx»posals for Payments formulated by the
Dundalk Rural District Council their Second Quarterly
ing held on [he 12th day Of July, 1915, and set out on Form 22' fur-
nished fo the County Council, be and are hereby apprOVOd of'
These payments amount to the sum Of El,104 5d.
COUN'I Y-AT-LARGE PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by N T Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formulated bY
Proposal Committee at their Meeting •held on the 5th day
July, 1915, and: set out on Form 22, furnished to tho County
Council and amounting to the sum of C6,281 ' 4d, be and are
hereby approved of.
DATES OF QUARTERIN MEETINGS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Michael Meade, F,Sq ;
Seconded by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P, and
the County Council hereby determine that tbø
following shall be the dates for the • holding of the Third
Quarterly M.eefings of the Rural District Councils
5th Octolm, 1915.
12th October, 1915.
Dundalk—Monday, 4th October, 1915.
and the Prop«al Committee meet on Monday, 18th of
October, 1915.
CHARGE FOR ROAD INPROVE-MENTS LOAN.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Propcsed by Bernard Tlamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by T V NL'QuilIan, Esq, and
Resolvod—-Thm€ we hereby approve of the charge on the rates
€0 the Of the County Council, tho Hibernian Bank,
Limited, Dundalk, for the sum of Z4,0G0 (four thousand and sixty
bounds) with interest on all outstanding balances at the rate of
3
per cent; (three cent) per annum, and wo authorise our
Secretary to affix the Common Seal of the Council to said
charge.
RATE COLLECTION.
The next businass on the agenda was tho consideration of
letter from the Local Government Board relative to tho State of
the Collection Of Poor Rafe in the County up to [Ile end of June.
This lotter appeared at page 71 Of the printed Minutes, and the
LGB
pointed out therein that the Colleet01S should be preesed
to
greater activity in their Collection to enable the Counfy
Council to rnee[ Cheir lia bilitie.s, vand conform fo the public
Bodies Order [o have [heir books checked at least once
fortnight.
Corn-
The following Collectors attended ag directed by [he Finance
mittee—Messrs P Donegan, Patk MacDonnell, P M'cullough'
John Kelly, 1? Ilughes, Peter M'l)onnell, John Woods, and
V Johnston, and an apology for non-attendance was sent by Mr
The Chairman informed the Council [hat a copy of the L G
Tle pointed out to ibe
letter had been sent. fo each Collector.
Collectors that it was necessary to conform with the
Bodies Order as to the cheeking of their books.
A discussion took place among €110 members of the Council'
and it was suggested that in the case of the Drogheda and Arda'
Collectors ono check in each month should suffice, but
the local Collectors in Dundalk district should check
fortnight.
The Secretary read the Article on the subject from tho
Bodies Order in which it was specifically set out that
Secretary must check the Collectors' receipts and abstractS at
least onco in every fortnight. Ile further stated that during
tbOt
the monfll of June none of the Collectoi•s had checked for
period.
One of €he Collectors made complaint his receipts were
tbJ•ougb
danger of being lost owing to the perforations cutting
bad
the leaves, and the Secretary informcd the Council that be
arranged with the Contractor who supplied the I»okB to
uld
vide gummed slips to secure the receipts, and that be
9
arrmnge to have these pasted on if Che books were left at the
Office.
CO-OPTION ON COUNTY COMMITTEE OF AGRICULTURE.
The following notiee Of motion standing in the name of Mr T J
Byrne, J P
, was put as a suhsfantive resolution and passed
unanimously
Proposed by Thomas J Byrne, Esq, J P,
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolvcd—That (Mr C S Whitworth, Blackrock, be co-opted a
member of the Louth County Committee of Agriculture.
THANKS FOR RE-ELECTION.
Ihe following letter was read from Lieutenant William A
ran, Chairman of €110 Council, and it was ordered that it be
inserted on the Minutes
Dear Mr M'A1ester,—
The Camp,
Ballyhooley,
Co. Cork.
I thank you for [he wire stating T was unanimously
eloetecl Chairman of the County Council for ensuing year. I
Would feel Chat it was unfair to accept this signal honour under
conditions were the chair of Vice and Acting Chairman
not' so ably filled as it is at present. Please thank my friends
for me until—if ever—I can thank them personally.
J hope to come back to fake my parf in New Troland, but
10
that is not for me to decide. Meanwhile we have all got our
work to do.
Very sincerely yours,
WILLIAM A. DORAN
APPLICATION FOR TNCREASE OF SALARY.
Letter from the Veterinary Inspectors as follows was read and
referred to the Executive Committee:—
July, 19th, 1915.
To the Presiding Chairman Louth County Council.
Sir,—
We, the Veterinary Tnspecfors to your Council, respec
Tn
fully ask you to grant us an increase in our salaries.
of our cases, when appointed, the salaries were considerably
d uced.
Owing to the ' 'Sheep Scab Order," the "Sheep Movement
(Louth) Order," and the many stringent regulations Of the
partment of Agriculture, our work has been very much
creased.
We therefore respectfully ask you fo favourably consider our
Your obedient Seri-ants,
W. E. MAXWELL, M.R.C.V.S.
J. T. CLINTON, M.R.C.V.S.
ANDREW A. DONNELLY, M.R.C.VS.
ADMISSIONS TO RICHMOND.
The return from Richmond District Asylum showing tho
11
admissions from County Louth during quarter ended 30th Juno
Was submitted and initialled by the Chairman.
LICENCE DUTY.
Letter Was read from the L G B enclosing return showing
amount of Motor Licence Dufy collected in the various counties
Of Ireland during the past financial year. The amount eol-
IOCted in r.outh County was C796 15s 3d, which compared most
favourably with the collection in other counties, and represented
a marked increase from former years.
The return was initialled by the Chairman.
FOOD AND DRUGS ACIS.
Circular letter from the TA)cal Government Board was road
urging on County Councils the necessity of seeing that the Inspec-
tors Of Food mnd Drugs carried out their duties more thoroughly
than they have been doing, and of taking samples for analysis
of all kinds of food and drugs intended for human use, and not
merely confining themselves to three or four. A list of Food
and Drugs suitable for analysis was set out.
Tho Secretary was direcfed to forward a copy zof this circular
to the Inspectors in County Inutll for their attention.
WAR LOAN.
Circular letter re Che War Loan, setting out the method by
Which employers of labour could assist the objects of the loan
by putting its advantages before their employees, accompanied
y explanatory leaflets for distribution, was read and initialled
by the Chairman.
12
ARDEE SCHOOL ATTENDANCE COMMITTED.
Leifer was read from the Secretary Ardee School AttendanCe
Committee stating that owing to the resignation of Mr P
of Mooremount, in consequence of ill-health, there was a vacancy
on the Committee.
It was decided to co-opt a member on the Committee in room
of Mr Byrne at next Meeting of the County Council, and the
Secretary was directed to place the matter on the agenda for
that Meeting.
GRANTS.
Letters were read from the Local Government Board,
27th July, enclosing the following Grants:—
In aid of expenditure for Medical and Educational
purposes by Guardians
In aid Of Sanitary Salaries in Rural Districts
The letters were initialled by the Chairman.
C529 12 10
C8814 2
13
Proposal Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of tho Proposal Committee at their
Second (Adjourned) Quarterly Meeting held in the Ouncil
Chamber, Court House, Dundalk, on Monday, 9th Augus% 1915
at one o'clock, p m.
the Chair: Charles A Duffy, FAI, J P.
other wcxxLs, J P; Michael Meade, N T
Mtußhy, J P; James MCarthy, J P; Patrick M'Gee, J
Murphy, J P, and Thos O'Rourke, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of Proceedings of tho previous Mooting wore
taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
Tho Committee were called to consider tenders for tho follow-
ing works
No. 22—To render and pebbledash in cement tho exterior walls
Of Drogheda Court House ; to supply two new grates in
t!he Judgesi Rooms, and two new grates in the As-.
sombly Room, and to make new connection to w.e. ad-
joining Judges' Chamber. (hst not to exceed C131.
County at Large Charge.
14
No. 23—To provide 26 Sign Arms with Gaelic lettering, to be
erected on same poles as signs provided by Aubonw•
bile Association, the erection of which was appro
at last Quarterly Meetin. Cost not to exceed C20•
Ounty at Large Charge.
For Work No. 22 only one tender was received, that Of
Fox, 3 Brayden Street, Drogheda, who proposed to
tho work in accordanco with tho County Surveyor's
tion for tihe sum of C122 IOS Od, and his tender was
mously accepted.
Ois
For Work No. 23 tho tender of Thomas Williamson, Fran
Street, Dundalk, for the sum of C12 9s IOd, was unaui1110USlS
accepted, his being the only tender received.
15
executive Committee.
Minutes of Proeeodings of the Exocu€ive Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court, House, Dundalk,
on Monday, 9th August, 1915, at one o'clock, p m.
Present tho Chair: Onarles A Duffy, FAI, J P.
other Woods, J P; Michael Meade, N T
J P; M'Carthy, J P; Patrick M'Gee, J P;
J F Murphy, J P ;and Thos O'Rourke, Esquir€*i.
r1110 minutes of the previous Meeting of the Exocutive Com•
rnitt,eo were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
VETERINARY INSPECTORS' SALAIUES.
next, businexs on the agenda was the consideration of an
application signed by the Veterinary Inspectors on the Council
for an increase in Choir salaries. This letter had been referred
to the Executive Committee by the County Council.
The Seeret.a,ry stated that the standing salaries of tho Ve-
terinary Inspecto+s (apart from fees under Tnberculosis (Ire-
land) Order) were as follows J T Clinton, Dundalk, C,5'2
per annum ; Mr Donnelly, Drogheda, C30 per annum, and Mr
Maxwell, Ardoe, C30 per annum, and that tcheir duties for this
salary included attevdanee at and inspection Of the various
fairs and markets held in each district; dealing with out-
10
breaks of sheep scab and swine fever, and issuing tho proper
notices in such cases; supplying tho County Cou:ncil and
Department with copies of all such notices served ; reporting to
the Executive Committee on their work monthly, and, gone-
rally, work Luiuler the Diseases of Animals Act, excluding work
under the Tuberculosis (Ireland) Order, 1914.
After disous;ion it was unanimously decided, on tho
Cion of t,ho Chairman, that in order that the C%uncil might'
in a pcxsition to see what fees would be INIyable for work under
tho Tulx»rculosis (Ireland) Order of 1914, for a peliod of six
rnontåhN from the 1st day of June, 1915, when the scale of fees
came into operation, that ahe matter stand adjourned for sis
months, and the. Secretary was directed to table the applica-
tion for consideration at the end of that period.
VETERINARY INSPECTOR'S REPORT.
Tho following was the only report received for the month Of
July, and it was read and initialled by the Qhairman
Veterinary Establishment„
Drogheda, July 31st, 1915.
Gentlemen ,
During the month of July there occurred no
outbreak of any of the notifiable diseases in my district.
but
made inspections in a few cases personally rem»rtod t.o me,
found tho animals were not suffering under the Contagious Dis-
eases of Animals Acts
Yours respectfully,
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
To tho Louth County Council.
(Executive Committee).
The Secretary was directed to direct, dho attention of the
other two Inspectors to their omission to supply the usual
monthly reports, angl to say that in future if they had nothing
to report they should notifya,hO Council to dhat effect.
SHEEP SCAB AT GRANGE.
Notice was read and initialled by the Chairman of removal cf
detention notice served by Mr Cinton on Mr John Long,
Grange, in above case.
18
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Guncil Chamber, Court House, Dundalk'
on Monday, 9th day of August, 1915, at 1 0'clock, p m.
Present the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members Woods, J P; Michael Meade, N T
Murphy, J P; James M'Car€hy, J P; M'Gee, J P;
J F Murphy, J P, and Thos O'Rourke, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
The minutes Of the previous Meeting of the Finance
mittee were taken as read and signed by the Ohairma,n.
The following accounts were submitted, and on examinaticn
were ordered for payment
Works in Charge of County Surveyor C210 13 11
19
Tho Bank Books for the General and Subsidiary Accounts
Wore examined and initialled by the Chairman, and the Com-
mittee recommended that a Paying OrdOr for CI,OOO from the
General to Ghe Subsidiary Account be made by the Council at
their adjourned quarterly meeting.
LOAN FOR NEW COUNTY OFFICES.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man :
No. 40,790/1915.
Louth County.
Sir,
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 31st July, 1915.
Secretary's Office
Total
83 '2 A1
+293 16 10
PAYMENTS OUT OF MACHINERY LOAN.
The following payments for Machinery were ordered
Aveling and Porter, Ltd.
Fleming and Co.
M'Dona1d Bros.
Oswald Hardy
Total
e149G
262
O
O
e1759
6
5
9
1
c;
o
6
4
I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Ireland to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 23rd
instant, relative to the proposal of the County C%uncil of
Louth to obtain a loan of for the purpose of erecting
new Council Offices at Dundalk ; and, with reference thereto, I
am to draw attention to the terms of the Board!s circular letter
of the 4th May last, and to state that the question of 'borrow-
ing for this purpose must be postponed for the present.
I am, Sir,
Your ol»dient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
20
CONTRIBUTION FOR FOOTPATH AT ARDEE.
LeCtei• was read from Ardee Town Commissioners enclosing
Paying Order for C(j, being moiety of amount paid for new footr
path at Ardee Court House, now completed. The letter was
initialled by the Chairman.
SPEED LIMIT OF MOTORS IN DROGHEDA URBAN
DISTRICT.
Letter was read from tho L G B dated 31st
40723-1915, enclosipg copy of letter from tho Drogheda Cor-
poration requesting the Board to make an Order limiting tho
speed of motors in their urban district to 10 miles per
The L G B stated that the Corporation were the local authority
upbn whose application regulations may be made by the
establishing the speed limit within The urban district. The letr
ter Was initialled by the Chairman.
DROGHEDA COURT HOUSE.
t.
The following letter from the Town Oerk, Drogheda, in
of
ply to a letter from the Secretary embodying tho suggestions
tme Council with regard to the supply of coal, light' and water
to Drogheda Court House,
Chairman : —
Dear SO',
was read and initialled by
Town Clerk's Office,
Drogheda, 31st July, 1915.
have brought your letter of 8th inst before
Finance Committee of the Corporation. It came on at' the
21
end of "a long agenda, and consideration Was adjourned until
next meeting.
Yours faithfullyv
J. B. CONNOLLY.
O. McAlester, Esq.
•THIRD PARTY INSURANCES.
Letter was read from Mr O'Connell, County Solicitor, en-
Olo.sing three polieies covering the 'Hlird Party Fisks of "he
Council, as arranged with the London and Lancashire Fire Tn-
suranee Company, with some additional clauses added by him,
and approving on behalf of the Council of the policies. The
Secretary was directed to transmit samo to Lhe Insurance
pans, and request that the policies would be completed as
early as possible.
DRAIN OVER RAILWAY AT OMEATH.
The following letter was read
IA)ndon and North Western Railway.
District Estate Office,
Eaton Street,
July 28th, 1915.
JW/G220. 509.
11090.
Chas. M'A1ester,
Louth County Council,
Secretary's Office, Court House: Dundalk, Treland.
boar Sir,
Flooding of Public Road at Omeath.
Referring to your letter of the 7th instant.
22
1 enclose herewith an agreement for permission to la.y draig
on Company's property near Omeath, and shall be glad if you
will have same sealed at next Council meeting. The witness t'O
the sealing should write his full name and address where
eated on the first page, sign the plan and t!ho schedule on pages
2 and 3, and write his initials where marked ' 'X" in the
gin on the first page. If Che next Council meeting is
time distant, perhaps you will send me a letter approving
the Agreement, and stating that it will be sealed at such meet'
ing, the work can theil be allowed to proceed.
Yours faithfully,
J. M. WILLIAMS.
A discussion took placo on the agreement, which specified
that it might be terminated by either party upon giving
days' notice to the other of them expiring at any time.
The Chairman pointed out that bhe sum of C2() was being
pended on this work, which under tho agreement mig4ht be
minated in 30 days after the work was finished. The County
to
Surveyor informed the (hmmi€tce that owing to object'iOnS
allow the road to be drained either through the cemetery
Omeath, or through a lane adjoining .same, he found it n
sary to convey the drainage by pipe through the cemetery an
across tho railway line to the sea.
Thé Secretary was directed to write the London a-nd
Western Railway Company tihat the termination of the agree -
ment on such short notice after the money had been expended
on the work, did not meet tho views of the County Council' a
that this clause should be deleted. The County SurveYOr
the meantime was to try and arrange for some other means
drawing water off the road, if posibel.
29
QUARRY AT FAUGHART.
The agreement, in duplicate, with Mr Telford M 'Neill, for a
Pass to M' Alister's quarry at Faughnrt, arranged for by the
County Surveyor, was submitted for approval. The agreement
set out that tho pass was to be vsed for a period not exceeding
ton yours, and the sum payable for such right was five shillings.
The Committee approved of the agreement, and recommended
its sealing by the County Council.
ROAD CONTRACTOR'S CLAIM.
The following letter was read and was referred to the Coe
Surveyor : —
Dear Sir,
Roden Place,
Dundalk, 9tIhl August, 1915.
I have been instructed by Mr Owen Mathews, of
Louth, to apply €0 you for tho stun of CIO 5s ()d, being the ajm-
deducted from his contract No. 17, and C2 5s Odl from his
contract No. 25. • Unless this amount is paid to me on or be-
fore Monday next, I will issue proces without further notice.
Yours faithfully,
ROBERT DICKIE.
Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
IMPROVEMENTS.
Letter was read horn Mr PeteFM'Donnell, Kilkerley, apply-
24
ing for permission to erect a paling at !his house at Kilkerley
along the County Road, and the matter was referred to the
Surveyor.
RATE COLLECTION.
Return showing the condition to the 31st July of tho Poor
Rate Collection was submitted, from which it appeared that the
following amounts were outstanding on that date:—
P S Donegan
Patrick
P M'Cu110ugh
John Kelly
Patrick Hughes
Patrick Closkey
Peter M 'Donnell
John Woods
Jas. V. Johnston
Total outstanding
2351
2111
1967
835
1090
2552 18
3 11
1 11
2188 11
1792 12
1005 15
C15,894 13
4
8
7
5
Local Government Ireland Act, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
Till%'llt
Second (Adj.) QUARTERLY MEETING,
Held on 26th August, 1915,
SPECIAL MEETING,
Held on 23rd September, 1915.
FINANCE COMMITTEE,
At their Meetings held on 23rd August ;
6th September; 20th September ; 4th
October; 18th October and 1st Novem-
ber, 1915.
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE,
At their Meeting held on 18th October,
1915.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE,
At their Meetings held on 20th September,
and 1st November, 1915.
NEW COUNTY OFFICES COMMITTEE,
At their Meeting held on 4th October, 1915.
SCHOLARSHIP COMMITTEE,
At their Meeting held on 16th September, 1915.
1
Coutb County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings of Vhe Louth County Council, at their
Second (Adjourned) Quarterly Meeting, specially convened, held
in the Council Chamber, Cowrt House, Dundalk, on Thursday,
26th August, 1915, at one o'clock, p m.
the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Eeq, J P.
other H M'Ardle, J P ;Michael Meade,
Wm woods, .J P ; Thomas O'Rourke, Peter Woods, J P; John F
Murphy, J P; James Wynne, J p; B Finnegan, and Bernard
J P, Esquires.
Messrs Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor ; J M C Lyons, and
James Dromgoole, As.sistant Surveyors, and Daniel O'Connell,
Solicitor to the Council, were in attendance.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed, unanimously
Proposed by Joseph 11 M'Ardle, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Thos O'Rourke, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of the Proceedings of the Louüh
County Conneih at [heir Seeoncl Quarterly Meeting, held on
29th July, 1915, a eopy of which has been sent to each member
of the Council, be and are 'hereby confirmed.
'2
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE MINUTES.
The following resolu [ion was passed, unanimously
Proposed by Michael Meade, Esq ;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of the Proceedings of the Fin-
ance Committee at their Meeting held on the 9th day Of
of
gust, 1915 ,a eopy of which has been sent to each member
Cho Council, with all payments ancl recomtnendn[ions eon faine
therein, be and are hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF PROPOSAL COMMITITEE MINUTES•
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by William Woods, Esq, J P;
S€eollded by Thomas O' Rou:rke, EMI, and
the Minut,ets of t;he Proceedings of tho
sal Cotnmittee at their Soeond Adjourned Quarterly Meeting
held on the 9th August, 1915, a copy of which has Jbeen sent to
and are hereby coil"
each member cf the County Council,
firmed.
CONVIRMATIO.N OF EXECUTIVE COMMWI'EE MINUTE*
The following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by John F Murphy, Esq, J P ;
Secortled by Bernard Finnegan, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of the Proceedings of the
3
eutive Committee at their Meeting held on the 9th Augusf,
1915, a, copy of which has boon sent to each member of the
County Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Thos O'Rourke, Esq ;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the report of tjhe County Surveyor, as ap-
pearing on Page I of the Schedule, of Proposals for the 19th day
Of August, 1915, a copy of which has been furnished to each
member of tho Council, be and is hereby adopted by this Coun-
eil.
r Bernard Fin negan directed the attention of the Council
and the County Surveyor the condition of the kerbing at
Ballymaseanlon footpath, and the County Surveyor was directed
to attend to the matter.
TENDERS FOR WORKSI
In accordance with tho Secretal"s advertisement the Coun—
eil next proceeded to consider tenders for works not set by eon-
tract at adjourned meetings Of the Rmrral District Councils
ARDEE DISTRICT.
For Work No. 257, only one tender was received—that of
Thomas M 'Cormack, Town Parks, A.rdeo, for the sum of CII
198 Od, but as neither tlho contractor nor his sureties attended
the nond was not entered into.
DROGHEDA DJSTRICI'.
No tenders were received for the work advertised.
DUNDALK DISTR.ICI'.
For Work No. 79 two t,endetrs wero received. Michael
thews proposed to clo Che work for the sum of C49 15s Od,
as neither Mathews nor his sureties wore present his t,endor was
rejected.
Michael Hanratty, of Belloran, tendered to do ['he work
the sum of C;30, and his tender was accepted and th6 Bond
duly completed.
No tenders were received for Works Nos. 80, 81, or 82.
ARDEE WORKS.
The following rcnsolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Michael Meade, Esq ;
Seconded by Bernard Finnegan, E,sq, and
Resolved--Tha€ the Proposals for Works formulated by
Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council at their Seeond Quarterly
Meeting held on Tuesday, 6th day of July, 1.915, and set
on Form 20, furnished to the • County 'Council, and the con-
tracts ontered into at their Adjourned Meeting 'held on Tues-
day, 27th July, 1915, be and are hereby approved of, and
authorise our Secretary to affix the Common Seal of the
cil to same.
DROGHEDA WORKS.
Tho following resolution was passed unanimously
by Jöhn F MurpTy, F,sq, J P;
Seconded by Wm Woods, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Works formulated by i,h.'
Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union, at their Second Quar-
torly Meeting 110111 on Tuesday, 13th July, 1915, ancl set out
Form 20, furnished to the County Council, and the contracts
entered into at their Adjourned Meeting held on 10th August,
1915, bo and are hereby approved of, and we authorise our Soo-
rotary to affix the Common Seal of the Council to same.
DUNDALK WORKS.
'Ille following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Wm Woods, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Thos O'Rourke, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Proposals for W(irks formulated by Lhe
l)undkllk Rural District Oouncil at their Second Quartærly
Meeting, held on Monday, 12th July, 1915, and set out on
Form 20, firrnished to the County Council, and the contracts
entered into at their Adjourned Meeting held on 215th July,
191ö be and are hereby approved of, ancl we authorise our Sew,
retars to affix the Common Seal of the Council to same.
OOUNTY-AT-LARGE.
following resolution was passed unanimously
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J •P ;
Seconded James Wynne, Esq, J p, and
Rosolved—That the Prowysals for Works formulated by
Proposal Committee at their Second Quarterly Meeting hedd
on the 5th July, and set out on Form 20 furnished €0
County Council, and the contracts entered into at their Ad-
journed Meeting held on Monday ,9th August, 1915, be and
are hereby.approved of, and we authorise our Secretary to afflS"
the Common Seal of the Council to same.
WORKS PLACED IN TILE HANDS OF COUNTY
SURVEYOR.
The following resolution was passed unanimously : —
Proposed by Peter Woods, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by John F Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Pmposals for Works passed by the Rural
District Councils and Proposal Committee at, their last Quar-
terly Meeting, and for which no contracts have (been entera
into, placod in charge of tilte County Surveyor.
BefoFe the foregoing rexsolution was passed the County Sure
veyår directed the attention of the Council to the work in
Drogheda district—so. I—for the construction of 250 perch(S
of new road in the townlands of Moneymore and Yellowbatter•
Ile stated that he had already informed the District Council
that tho money for the work was insufficient and that he could
not undertake to do the work by direct labour at the amount
set down, as it was understood that, local people would
the contractor. Ile Further stated that he would endeavour t'O
get a contractor for the work.
The Solicitor, Mr O'Connell, confirmed his fornier opinion
that the work was a legal one.
The resolution as set out above was then passed.
VOTES OF SYMPATHY.
The following resolutions were passed ill" silence, and the
Secretary was directed to forward copies to Che proper quar-
Proposed 'by Michael Meade, Esq ;
Seconded by Thos O'Rourke, Esq, and
Resolved—That, wo tender to Mr John Fitzgibbon, M P, our
sincere sympathy with him in the great loss he has sustained
by the death of his son.
Proposed by Michael Meade, Esq ,
Seconded by wm Woods, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That' we learn with extreme regret of the doa01
of Major W F C Garstin, 5th Royal Irish Fusiliers, who was
killed in aetion„ and we fender to his father, Mr J R, Garst,in,
D L, Braganstown, a former respected member Of this Council,
our sincere sympathy in his bereavement.
Proposed by John F Murphy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That. we tender to Mr P Byrne, J P, a former eg-
teemed niember of this Council, our sincere sytnpathy with him
on the death of his wife.
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P ,
Seeoonded by J F Murphy, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That wo beg to tender to Mr J N Armstrong, J P,
8
our deep sympa thy ui€h him on tho great loss he has sustained
by bhe death of his son.
Proposed by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Thomas O'Rourke, EIQI, and
msoIvcd—That we tender to Mr Michael M 'Ardle, an
teemed member Of this Council, our doer sympathy with him on
the death of his uncle.
CANON LYONS OONGRATULATED.
following resolution was passed unanimously, and the
Secretory was directed to send a copy to Cmnon Lyons :—
Proposed by Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by James Wynne, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we •l»g to congratulate tlho Very Rev Canon
Lyons on his recent appointment as Parish Priest of Ardee, and
on his woll deserved elevation to the Canonry. His groa
ability and energy in every work for the well-boing of his
country and Church, has earned our respect and admiratiOIl'
ancl we are plear•ed that stik:h a distinguished Louth man will be
enabled €0 contin,re Lis good work in €110 eonnty Co which he is
such an ornament.
PENSION TO JAMES CtAYISKEY, cossTA1}l'E
GIINS' QUAY.
In accordance uith special not'iee issued by the secjaarY
under the provisions of the Union ()flicors Stmerannuat'ion
land) Act, 1863, tho Council next proceeded to consider
question of granting a pension to James Curiliskey, late
9
bour Constable at Giles' Quay, and the following resolution was
passed unanimously
Proposed by J H M'Ald1e, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Bernard Finnegan, Esq, and
nesolved—That a pension of C8 (eight, pounds) per year,
being two-thirds of 'his total annual remuneration of C12
(twelve pounds) be allowed to James Curni<key, Harbour Cion--
stable at Giles' Quay, subject to the approval of the Local Go-
vernment Board.
ARDEE DISTRICT SCHOOL ATTENDANCE
COMMITTEE.
The next two items on the agenda—Nos. 9 and IO—were taken
together, and the fallowing notioe of motion standing in
nmrn€Hif Mr Patrick M 'Gee was, in the absence of Mr M.'Gee,
and by his written authority, moved by Mr J H M 'Ardle, and
passed unanimously
Proposed by Joseph 11 M'Ard1e, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Michael Meade, FAI, and
Resolved—That Mr Bartholomew Woods, of Mountainstown,
Dunleer, be co-opted a member of the Ardee District School
Attendance Committee.
ALL-IRELAND FARMERS' CONVENTION.
Circular letter from the Secretary of above was read, request-
ing the Council to send five representative farmer delegates to a
Convention to be held on Tuesday, 31st August next; in the
Mansion House, Dublin, as to the best methods for the produc-
Io
tion, marketing and distribution of agricultural produce, and
other matters relating to agricultural output, etc.
The
lowing gentlemen were unanimously delegated to represent the
Council at the Convention James M 'Carthy, J P;
N T Mutvhy, J P; Patk M'Gee, J P; M Meade, and John F
Murphy, J P.
FANE AND WO'ITONSTOWN DRAINAGE DISTRICTS.
The following letter was read and referred to t,he Drainage
Sub-Committee : —
Local Government Board,
Dublin, 5t.Jh August, 1915.
No. 39,005/1915.
Louth County.
Sir,
With reference to correspondence relative
60 tho transfer of the business of the Fane and Wottonstyown
Drainage Districts to the Loutt,h County Council, I am directed
by the Local Government Board for Ireland to slate that
the Board take any steps towards making Provisional Orders in
these cases under Section 20 or the Local Government (Ireland)
Act, 1898, they consider that the County Council would do
€0 put themselves in communication with the last, elected or
surviving or continuing trustees of the Fane and Wottonstovvn
Drminage Districts with a view to obtaining their consent iO
the proposed transfer, or, in tho alternative, f.o aseÅ'rtaårLing
definitely that there are no persons capable of acting as such
board or body.
I am Sir,
The
Lout'll County Council,
Your Servant,
J. E DEVLIN,
Asist„ant Socretary.
Dundalk.
11
SPEED OF' MOTORS LN URBAN AREAS.
Letter was read from the Local Government Board, and one
from Mr O'Connell, Council's Solicitor, informing the Council
that the Corporation of Drogheda was tile local authority [o
make application fixing the speed limit of motors in tho urban
(hstrict; of Drogheda, •but that, in the urban district of Dun-
dalk, which was not a Municipal Borough within the meaning
of tho Act, €110 County Council was the authority to mako the
application. The letters were initialled by tho Chairman.
COMMI'ITAIÅS TO INDUSTRIAL SCHOOLS.
Letter was read from Che Clerk of Petty Sessions, DroÉheda,
informing t,he Council that application would be made at
Drogheda Petty Sessions, to be held on Monday, 30th August,
for committal of the following children to Industrial Schools:—
Laurence, James, John, Eva and Rosella Carr, and Patrick J.
Plunkett, all under fourteen years of age. "1110 letter was ini-
tialled by the Chairman.
THE ELECTION AND REGISTRATION ACT, 1915.
Oireular letter was road from the Local Government, Board,
No 42453-1915, with reference to above Act, which provides Chat
the Parliamentary and Local Government Register of Electors,
or any register based on same, silall aremain in force until Par
liarnent provides for special register IK'ing made, but in no case
later than 31st December, 1916. The effect of the various pro-
visions of the Act is to arrest from and after the 31st July,
any further proceedings on the part of the officers concerned in
12
regard to the registration of voters for Parliamentary and LO-
cal Government putrposes. The circular was initialled by the
Chairman.
FORESTRY SCHEME.
The following lotter was read, and it was decided that before
submitting a scheme for approval, the Solicitor should inquire
further as to the pussibility of purchase by the Council Of
Omeath Park :—
Francis Streot, Dundalk,
16th August, 1915.
Estate of the Irish Land Commission, formerly Estate of Lord
Rat,hdonnell, County Louth, E.T.A. 7071.
Dear Sir,
I have received the following letter dated the
14th instant, from the Secretary, Estates Commissioners
"With reference to the undertaking executed by tho Louth
County Council for the purchase of va plantation on the above
Estate and to previous correspondence, I am directed by the
Estates Commissioners to inquire if the Council has yet sub-
mitted a scheme under Sections 4 and 20 of the Irish Land
19()3, for the approval of the Department of Agriculture and
Technical Instruction for Ireland."
In tho terms of the Undertaking referred to, and which is
dated the 23rd day of Janjuary, 1914, the Council agreed to 1101cl
the lands "with such rights and powers as may be specified in
a Scheme to be settled pursuant to the provisions of' Ste. 20 Of
the Irish Land Act, 1903, as amended by Section 18 of the Irish
land Act, 1909." You will see t!hat under Sections 4 and '20
13
of the Act of 1903, it, is nocessary to have a Seherne submitted
for approval.
have drafted the Schome but same A,vas held over in order
to ascertain if it were possible to purchase Omeath Park and
Ruxton Estate holdings with a view to inclusion in the draft
Scheme. I would be glad to have your instructions to submit
the draft Scheme for approval of the Department of Agriculture
and Technical Instruction for Ireland, and also of tho Estates
Commissioners.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Chas. M 'Al«ster, E.sq, Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
HOLIDAYS.
Applications wero read from the County Surveyor and Secre-
tary for annual holidays, and the Council unanimously granted
each officer threo weeks' leave of absence.
SUSPENSION OF TUBERCULOSIS (IRELAND) ORDER OF
1914
Letter was read from the Department of Agriculture dated
24th August, 1915, No. 2985-15, enclosing copy of an Order
mado by thom suspending as from 1st of • 1915,
until it is otherwise ordered, the operation of the Tuberculocis
(Ireland) Order of 1914, except Article 12 (1) (diseased animals
not to be sent for shipment). The letter was initialled by the
Chairman. The following is the Order referred to :—
(435.)
Order of the Department of Agriculture and Technical
Instruction for Ireland.
(Dated 19th August, 1915).
Tho Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for
Ireland, by virtue and in exercise of the powers veest«l in them
under tho Agriculture and Technical Instruction (Ireland) Act'
1899, the Diseases of Animals Acts, 1894, to 1914, and of every
other power enabling them in this behalf, do order, and it is
hereby ordered, as follows :—
From the first day of September, nineteen hundred and fif-
teen, and until it is otherwise ordered by the Department, the
operation of the Order described ill the Sehedule hereto shall be
suspended to the extent mentioned in the third column of
Schedule : Provided that such suspension shall not—
(i) affect the previous operation of such Order or anything
duly done or suffered under such Order ; or
(ii) affect any right, privileges, obligation or liability ac-
quired, accrued, or incurred under such Order; ar
(iii) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punighrnent incurred
in respect of any offence committed against, such Order ; or
remedy
(iv) affect any investigation, legal proceeding, or
in r«pect of any such right, lvivilege, obligation, liability'
penalty, forfeiture, or punishment as aforesaid ;
and any such investigation, legal proceeding ,or remedy may be
instituted, continued, or enforced, and any such penalty, for
15
feituro, or punishment may be imposed, as if this Order had not
been made.
In witn€. whereof tho Department of Agriculture
and Toehnieal Instruction for Ireland have hereunto
set their Official Seal this nineteenth day of August,
nineteen hundred and fifteen.
H. G. Smith,
On behalf of t,he Sooretat•y.
COLLECTOR P. HUGHES' RJCMUNERATION.
The Secretary was directed to write again to the Local Go-
v«rnrnont IBomrd requesting their sanction to the lvwment of all
pmtndage fees still duo to Mr Patrick Hughes.
finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Financo (%mmittee at Choir
Meeting held in the Council Chambor, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 23rd August, 1915, One o'clock p m.
Present
In [he Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Members—Bernard Tlamill, J P; Thomas O'Rourke, and
William Woods, J P, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, Co. Surveyor, was in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Finance Commit feø
were taken as read and signed by Che Chairman.
Tho following accounts were su bmiffod and on examinati011
17
FLOODING OF PUBLIC ROAD AT OMEATII.
As diru»tod by Che Finance the Secretary had written
the London and North Western Railway Company that the ter-
ruination on thirty days' notice of the Agreement between the
Company and Louth County Council whereby the Council wore
Permitted fo drain tho water off the public road at Omeath
through a pipe laid on the Railway Company's property did not
Süit the views of the Council, and asking for the deletion of tho
Clause, and had received the following reply :—
Juondon and North W«stern Railway,
District Estate Office,
Eaton Stregt, Crewe.
J W/11786/718
G 220.
were ordered for payment:—
LOANS ACCOUNT.
J Potter ond Ch., Dublin
SUBSIDIARY ACCOUNT.
Works in charge of Co. Sirrveyor
Secretary's Ofhco
The Bank Books for tho General and Subsidiary
examined and initialled by tho Chairman
Flooding of Public Road Omeath.
1)
ear Sir,•—
In reply to your letter of the 11th instant, if is our
usual practice to make such easements as that included in i he
enelosed form of Agreomenf subject to fermination by thirty days'
noiiee to njoet the eontingeney of any alteration to railway or
Works Which the Company may be called upon to carry out.
I havo no reason to think that you will be disturb«l, but regret
1
cannot alter tho l»riod of notice.
Yours faithfully,
C280
$.66
1
Charles McAlester, Esq,
Secretary Louth County Council.
J. M. WILLIAMS.
24 11
C90 12
4
4
Accounts were
If was decided Chat tho Chairman and Co. Surveyor should
Visit Omea€h and endeavour fo arrange for some method of drain-
ing the watQt• off the public road Other than through the Railway
Company's property.
18
ANALYST'S REPORT.
Tho following report from Sir Cht,rles A Cameron was read and
initialled by the C%lirrnan :—
19t;h August, 1915.
Report of Sir Charles Ca.meron, C B, M D, Public Analyst for
the County Loufh, on articles submitted €0 him for analysis dur-
ing tho quarter ended 30th June, 1915.
Forty-seven articl€* were received from Food Inspecåors, R C'
as followe—
A rticlo
B u tier
Milk
W hiskey
Bu t.termilk
Total
N umber
5
16
5
1
47
()ne eertifieate was s.mt to Acting Sergeant Levinge, Dundalk'
for specimen of milk deficient of at least 30 per cent of its fats•
One certificate was sent to Sergeant Sharpe, I)rogheda. for
spociinen of whiskey, which was 3e degrees under proof,
was therefore adulterated with 9.33 per cent of waft r.
For the Guardians of Drogheda Union one specimen of
was analysed and was pure.
ot
One specimen of water analysed for the Ardee Rural Distri
Council had the following composition:—
One imperilLl gallon cont4i,ined in grains.
19
Two specimens Of milk were analysed for Mrs Maxwell Boyle,
rospeet, Dundalk. One was adulterated with at least 4.9 per
cent of added water and was also deficient of at 36 per cent
Of its fats, and the other was adultorated with at least, 6.25 per
cent Of added water and was also deficient of at por cent
of its fats.
In the original report on the water above referred to, full details,
e,h.ernäcal and microscopical, were given, but in the foregoing only
the more important points are given.
Tota,l
CliARLES A. CAMERON.
LOST PAYING ORDER.
Tho Secretary reported to the Committee f haf a Paying Order
issued on æth July, 1915, for road maintenance to Peter Kelly,
Drumeah, Inniskeen, for [he sum of E3 19s 6d, had not been
livered to the payee up fo [he present. On hearing of this
from Mr Kelly he (the Secretary) had stopped payment of tho
Order at the Bank. Kelly had been with him again this morning
and had handed him a letter from the Ret•urned Letter Office
Branch which was read, and which stated Chat Che letter
taining the Paying ()rder had not been found.
Tho Committee directed the Secretary to issue a duplicato Puying
Order to the contractor, and to adviso the Council's Treasurer
to pay same on presentation.
Total solid matter
Including
Albutninoid A mnjonia
Saline Annnonia
Nitric Acid
Cholrine
Colour
A good water.
49.000
0.0075
0.0035
6.M)0
5.090
Almost Colourless
20
Finance Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 6tli September, 1915, at One o'clock p m.
Present
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Meru Meade and Thos O'Rourke, EsquireS•
Messsrs Januxs Dromgoole and John M. C Lyons, Assistant Sur-
veyors, were in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Finance Committee
wore taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted and on
'21
vious correspondence, relative to tho proposed payment by the
Louth County Council of a sum of Æ5() for [he purchase of a Boa.t
Slip at Giles' Quay Ilarbour, I a.m dirocted by tho Local Govern-
ment Board for Ireland to forwazxl to you a copy of a let.'ter dated
the 7th ultimo received from the Commissioners of Public Works
on t.he matter, and 1 nan to state [hat, as soon as the Board have
heard from the Commissioners, they will be in a position to reply
to your letter of the 1st June last.
The
Louth County
No. 43,596/1915.
8660-15.
Sir,—
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. D. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
Council, Dundalk.
copy.
Office of Public Works, Dublin,
7th August, 1915.
were ordered for payment
Works in charge of County Surveyor
C140 O
VI'he Bank Books for tho General and Subsidiary Accounts were
examined and initialled by the Chairman
PURCHASE OF GILES' QUAY BOAT SLIP.
Tho following letter and enclostuo therewith were read an
initialled by the Chairman
Government Board, Dublin,
2nd September, 1915.
No. 47,448A915.
Louth (%unty.
Sir,—
With referenee to your letter of the 28th ultimo and
In reply to Mr Devlin's letter of the 5th instant, No.
30,400, on the subject of Giles' Quay Ilarbour, the Board are ad-
vised by their Solicitor that there is some doubt as to whether
they have power to make Bye-Laws and a Schedulo of Tolls for
this Slip. A case has been sent to the Law Officers, and as soon
as their advice has been received the Board hope €0 be in a posi-
tio.n to reply definitely to your letter of tho 16th June last.
I a.m, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
GEORGE L' SHANAHAN,
Assistant Secretury.
Secretary,
Local Government Board, Dublin.
'2
COURTBANE WATER. SUPPLY—AREA OF CHARGE.
S(Niled Order of the Local Government Board making the
Rural District of Dundalk the area of chargo for any expenses
incurred or to be incurred for the purpose of improving tho supply
of water and maintaining same at Court-bane, was submitt«l und
initialled by the Chairman.
MAINTENANCT OF LIVE STOCK (IRELAND) ORDER, OF 1915•
The Secretary submitt«l Order of t;ho Depwrtmen€ of Agriculture
entitled ' 'Maintenance of Live Stock (Ireland) Order Of 1915'"
dated 24th August, 1915, setting out that for the purp«so of
faining a sufficient stock of animals any animal which is visibly
or obviously in-calf or in-pig shall not be slaughter«l nor moved
out of Ireland; provided that tho Order shall not apply €0 the
of
slaughter of an anirnnl under the provisions of the Disease
Animals Acts or the slaughter of an animal desirable on account
of injury to tho animal or its illness, or the slaughter Of
animal when considered desirable by tho Dopartanent. The
"'Slaughter of Animals (Ireland) Order of 1915" is revoked, and
the Maintenance of Live ötoek Order conjes into operation
on 1st September, 1915.
The Order was initialled by tho CIH1irman.
SIILEP REGULATIONS.—DEFAUL'IWRS.
list
Letter was read fmrn Sergeant Callan, Dunl«sr, enclosing
13t
of persons who exposed 811eep for sale a.t Dunleer fair on
September; and letters wero read from Constable Friel giving
names of persons who exp€m•d shoep for *110 at I)roghedu mar
on 4th September, without. being acoompanied by I.)eeIarotiOO
the sheep were dipped twice within the Autum Dipping
Period in accordance with tho Sheep Dipping (Ireland) Order of
1915.
The cases were referred to tho Executive Committee.
LOAN FOR ROAD MAKING MACHINERY—SOLICITOR'S
BILL or COSTS.
Letter was read from the Manager Hibernian Bank, Dundalk,
enclosing the Bank's Solicit0!'s Bill of Costs incurred on behalf
Of tho Bank for and incident to preparation of mortgage of
C4095 for the purpose of purchasing road making machinery, and
requesting payment of the amount—Z8 8d.
The Secretary was directed fo requost the sanction of the
Government Board to the Payment of the account.
ONLEATTI PARK.
As at the last meeting of the (i»unty Council. the
Secretary had instructed t.he Solicitor, Mr O'Connell, to enquire
from the Solicitor for the owner Of Orneath Park whether there
Was any possiibility of the Council's offer for Omeatll Park being
accepted, and the following letter in the matter from Mr O'Con-
hell was read and initialled by the Chairman
Francis Street, Dundalk,
3rd September, 1915.
Re Forestry Scheme—Sale of Omeatll park.
Dear Sir,—
The Solicitor for the owner replies io my enquiry as
to the pos«ibility of purchasing Ih»rk
"In reply to yours of 30th August, T don't tihink there is any
likelihood of the offer already maxle on behalf of the Council
being accepted by the judge. I think you should mako a
stantially increased offer."
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M 'Alester, Esq, Dundalk.
RATE COIA.ECI'ION.
Tho Secretary submitted the return of the condition of [he
Poor Rate Collection to the 31st August, 1915, from which it
appeared the following amounts were outstanding: —
P S Donegan
Patrick M •Donnell
M'Ch1110ugh
John J Kelly
11 ughes
Patrick Cluskey
Peter
John Woods
James V Johnston
Total outstanding
1926 9
1631 4
1597 14
692 19
905 6
2347 |
2125 9
1430 16
912 15
C13569 16
25
but if the Council desire to make a trial of efficacy of a dip they
might do so at small expense by obtaining a loan Of a machine
for applying the dip in the form Of a spray.
In this connection the attention of Che Council might be
directed to an Offer which has been made by Messrs William
Cooper and Nephews, Berkhamsted, England, viz: €0 lend the
necessary spraying apparatus and supply spraying materials and
the services of a fitter, on condition that the firm's out-of-pocket
expenses would be refunded to them.
I have to add that, if the Council are disposed to consider
Messrs Cooper's Offer, the Department would approve of the
spraying trials being undertaken by Che Louth County Commit-
tee Of Agriculture and expenditure referred to above being de-
frayed from tho Joint Fund of the Committee and the Depart,-
8
4
5
5
3
5
6
3
2
5
the County
ment.
The Secretary,
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL. Secretary.
REDWATER IN CATTLE.
The following letter was read and referred to
Council :—
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Department of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for Ireland'
Upper Merrion Street, Dublin,
4th September, 1915.
No. A. 9296/15.
Sir,— .
Adverting to your letter of Che 7th May last, relative
tho treatment for Redwater in cattle, I have to state, for the in-
formation of the Louth County Council, Chat tho I)oparfrnent
would not at present recommend [he erection of a dipping tank'
26
Scbolarsbip Committee.
Report of proceedings of above Committee at their Meeting hold
in the Council Chamber, Coui•thouse. Dundalk, on Thursday, 16th
day of September, 1915, at One o'clock p m.
Ihesen t
In the Chai—J T Dolan, Lsq, M A
Other Members—P O'Connell and James Connolly, J P, Eequires•
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Committee were
read by the Secretary and signed by the Chairman.
The Secretary read applications whic!l had been made, under tho
conditions of the Louth County Council Scholarship Scheme,'
1915-16, for [he Scholarships to be awarded by (he County Council
The following a.re Che names of the upplica.nts:—
Miss M C Murphy, 40, Church Sf,reet, Dundalk.
Miss Eileen Mary Teevan, Barronstown House, Dundalk.
John Vincent A Magrath, Clanbrassil Street. Dundalk.
Joseph Hardy, Newtownfane, Dundalk.
Certificates of character and suitability of Mr Magrath wore
read from Rov Father Hut-son. C C, Dundalk; Rov Bro Burke.
Principal; and Rev Bro J G Robinson, B A, Oiristian School*'
Dundalk; also certificaxte of Pass for the Matriculation Examina-
(ion of the National University.
27
Mr Hardy submitted testimonials from Rev Bro Burke and Rev
Bro Robinson, Christian Schools, Dundalk, in which tho suit-
abilify Of the candidate was testified, and Mr Hardy had also
passed the Matriculation Examination.
The Committee examined the Official Pass Lists of the Inter-
mediate Examinations and satisfied themselv€s that all of the
candida,tes had pass«i tho examination for the Senior Grade in
1915:
On reviewing the other conditions of the Seholarship Scheme,
especially as to merns, the Committee were unanimously of the
opinion t.ha.t only Mr Magra.th and Misses Teevan and Murphy
were strictly eligible.
After long discussion, the following recommendation
Pr6posed by James (hnnolly, Esq, J P,
Seconded by Patrick O'Connell, ESq,
was passed unanimously
on consideration of all the conditions of the Louth County
Council Scholarship Scheme, 1915-16, we recommend that a
Scholarship of C50 be awarded to John Vincent A Magrath, of
Clanbrassil Street, Dundalk; and that the remaining Scholarship
be divid«l between Miss Eileen Mary Ba.rrxmstown Ilouse,
Dundalk, and Miss M C Murphy, 40, (Ilurch Street, Dundalk,
giving to cqch student.
The consideration of the renewal of the to the
existing students was then discussed.
Reports were read from tho University Authority certifying that
the Council's student—Joseph M'Parland—whoso Scholarship was
renewable, had passed his 1st University Examination in Engineer-
ing with Second Class Honours. The other two scholars—Mr
Patrick A Hanratty and Miss Margaret, V Lyons—had not pre-
sented themselves for examination, both having been ill when
tho Examinations were on. Certificate of Miss Lyons' illness
had alr€vuly been considered by the County Council, and the con-
In Mr Hanratty's
tinuanee Of the Scholarship recommended.
case the Council had decided that if he obtained a Commission in
the Army his Scholarship would be held over for him until after
Letter was read from the Secretary University College
the war.
recommending the County Council to renow both these Scholar-
ships.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
That we recommend the County Council [o renew the Scholarship
of MargaFet V Lyons, Drogheda, for the second year; and that of
Joseph M'l'arland, Dundalk, for the third yeår. We also recom-
mend the renewal of the Scholarship of Patrick A Hanratty for
the third year, and should he obtain his Commission in the Army
that his Scholarship be held over him until after the war.
29
Finance Committee.
of proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Cliamber, (hurthouse, DundLlk, on
Monday, 20th September, 1915, at One o'clock p m.
Present
In the Chair—Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
other P Kearney, Michael Meade, Thoe O'Rourke,
T J Byrne, J P, and Bernard Finnegan,
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Finance CÅjmmitt«,
were taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted and on esamintvtion
were ordered for payment
Works in charge of Che County Surveyor
Secretary's Office
C39 15 1
39 1810
879 13 11
The Bank Books for the General and SubsidiarT Acoounts were
examined and initialled by Chairman
Letter was read from Mr J M C Lyons, A*istant Surveyor, who
was acting for the County Surveyor, stating that he was unable,
through illness, to attend the Meeting.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman,
APPLICATION FOR INCREASE OF WAGES.
Tho following application from the labourers engaged at
Jonesboro' quarry was read, and the matter was referred to the
County Surveyor; and the Secretary was directed to advise Mr
Feehan, who was in charge of the workmen, to inform them ae-
cordingly
September 17th, 1915.
Dear Sir,—
We wish to inform the Inuth County Council that we,
the workmen of Jonesborough quarry, will not work affer Wednes-
day, the 2nd September, under 18 shillings a week
Signed by
C Mathews, P M'Canna, 11 Thompson, J Hughes,
Mullan, P Murphy, J Ferron, Mullan,
M'Ginity, D Boyle, O M'Nu1ty.
PURCHASE OF GILES' QUAY BOAT SLIP.
s
Tho following letter from the Local Government Board was read,
and after discuseion the following resolution was passed unani-
mously
Proposed by T J Byrne, Esq, J P,
Seconded by Michael Meade:
That we refer the consideration of the Local Government Board's
letter with reference to the purchase of the Slip at Giles' Quay
Harbour to the County Council, with the reann.mendation that
the purchase of the Slip be proceeded with.
meal Government Board, Dublin,
17th Septembor, 1915,
31
No. 50,020/1915.
Louth County.
Sir,—
The Local Government Board for Ireland have had before
them the recent correspondence relative to the proposed purchase
by the County Council of a Boat Slip at Giles' Quay Ilar-
bour.
The Board presume that in connection with the acquisition Of
tho Boat Slip the County Council had in view the levying of tolls
or poundages for the use of the Boat Slip.as parf of the Quay,
•Any tolls to be levied under Section 7 of the Grand Jury (Ireland)
Act, 1853, as adapted, require to be fixed by the Commissioners
Of Public Works, and as already intimated f.he Board have been
in communication with that Department on the subject.
The Commissioners now state that they have been advised that
they have no power to frame bye-laws for the regulations of the
Quay or to fix a schedule of tolls for the use of this Boat Slip,
and in these circumstances the proposal would appear to require
further consideration by the County Council.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS, Secretory.
The Secretary,
Louth County (%uncil, Dundalk.
32
COLLECTOR HUGHES' POUNDAGE FEES.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chairman :—
Incal Government Board, Dublin,
7th September, 1916.
No. 47,194/1915.
Louth County.
Sir,—
With reference fo your further letter of the 27th ultimo,
relative to Che payment by the Louth County Council of poundage
fees to Collector Ilughes in respect of the half-years ended tho
30th September, 1913, and 30th September, 1914, | am directed by
the Local Government Board for Ireland to state that they can,
at present, only refer the County Council to the previous cor-
respondence on the subject.
I axn, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS, Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
ANCIENT MONUMENTS AT BARNAVEDDOGE.
Tho following letter was read and initialled by tho Chairman
17820/15.
Estates Commissioners Offices,
Irish Land Commission,
Upper Merrion Street, Dublin,
9th September, 191b.
Estate of Charles A Kingston and Others.
County Louth. E.c., 3773.
Sir,—
I am directed by tho Estates Comrnissioners to inform you
that the Ancient Monuments consisting of two Standing Stone9
situafe on the holding of James Stokes on [he lands of Barna-
Veddoge, in the Barony of Ardee, and County of have been
vested pursuant to Section 14 of the Irish Land Act, 1903, in the
Louth County Council, by Vesting Order dated the 14th July, 1915.
The Vesting Order has been transmitted to the Land Registry of
Ireland, Central Office, Four Courts, Dublin, where t]ie ownership
Of t.ho Council will be registered free of charge under the Local
Registration of Title Act, 1891.
A eopy Map Of the holding is sent: herewith.
Your Obedient Servanf,
JOHN T. L)RL'NNAN.
The Secretary,
I»uth County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
RELEASE OF ELIGIBLE MIN FOR. THE ARMY.
Circular letter wae rend the War Office requ($ting a return
Of the extent it had been possible fo release eligible men in Cho
Council's employment to join the Army, and the Secretary was
åirected to obtain the necessary information and furnish the ro-
turn as soon as possible.
APPOINTMENT OF BACTERIOLOGIST FOR COUNTY
LOUTH.
Tho Secretary reported that Dr Brian O'Brien, Medical Ins-
Pector of the Local Gove,rmnent Board, had called at the ()fheo
and • interviewed the Chairman wi€lL reference to the appoint-
ment of a bacteriologist, or the establishrnent, oi a pathologi.:al
laboratory in the County of Lauth for tille prevention, diagnosi.s
and treatment of •disease. A letter from the Local Government
Board to Dr O'Brien requesting him to endeavour to induce
the County Conuneils in his district to prepare such schemes,
was read, in which it was suggested Chat tho Treasury eont,em-
plated presenting estimates to Parliament for the defraying of
halit tho cost of these schemes. The Chairman Din formed the
Committee thai in his interview with Dr O'Brien 110 elicited the
information that the probable eost of such' a scheme in County
Louth would be about CIO().
Tho matter was discussed af length, and it was unanimously
deei(led to refer the matter to tho next quarterly meeting of
tho Council for their decision, with the recommendation that
tho present time was inopportune for the incurring of the ex-
ponses of such a scheme.
ELECTIONS AND REGISTRATIONS ACT, 1915.
Circular letter from the Local Government Board, dated Cth
September, 1915. So. was read, in which it was
out that the present registers were by Act of Parliament to re
main in force until Parliarnent provide for special registers
being made, but in no ease after the 31st December, 1916. It
was pointed out that no contracts for future Parliamentxry and
local registration work should be entered into, but that this (lid
not refer to tho preparation of the Jnrors Lists, ete,nnd that no
payment for any work clone by officers, et in connection with
the Aets relating to Che registration of electors, np fo 31st ,July
last, be made until they afe referred to the Local Government
Board. Tho lotter was initialled by the Chairman.
APPLICAHON FOR GRANT OUT' OF SCHOLARSHIP.
Letter was read from MT P A Hanratty, County Council
Scholar, Collon, infomipg the Committee that he was trying
to arrange for a Commission in tho Army, and had been pro-
mised that he might, obtain same, but that it was suggested bv
the Military Authorities that the Candidate should attend tho
Parade of applieanis for perfection in, drill, and requesting the
Committee to allot him a sum of CIO out of his remaining year's
scholarship to help to cover •the cost of the training.
After discussion the Secretary was directed to inform Mr.
Hanratty that his request could not be aecoded to.
RATE COLLECTORS' APPLICATION.
The following letter was read
Dundalk, 20th September, 1915.
Gon tlornon,
Owing to the harvest being over three weeks
later ['han last year, and at, the request of the majority of the
ratepayers, who depend entirely on corn crop in our
districts, we, the undersigned, beg to apply for an
e Xtension of at least 21 days to enable us Lo complete our res-
peetive collections.
We remain, Gentlemen,
Your obedient, Servanbs,
PETER M'DONNEIIL.
JOHN WOODS.
PATRICK -HUGHES.
PATRICK CLUSKEY.
JAMES V. JOHNS/IY)N.
TO the emairman and Members Finance
36
Tho Committee inspected the rate collection returns, from
which it transpired that of tho first moiety of the rate amount-
ing to the sum of El 7 ,878 only C6,ö31 had been collected to
date, and that one of the collectors, out of C2,244, had only
collected C238.
The Committee considered the application in all its bearings,
and it was pointed out that in September, 1013, when the Com-
Inittee granted a similar application, that the Local Govern-
ment Board had refused to entertain it, and the collectors had
to romain out of their fees until the following year.
It was unanimously decided {hat under all the circumstances
the Committee could not grant any extension of time for the
closing of the collection, and the Secretary was directed to ad-
vise each of the applicants accordingly.
VACANCY ON COUNCIL.
The Secretary informed the Committee that Mr James T.
M 'Gee, of Roodstown, who was co-opted to fill the vacancy
caused by the resignation of Mr Hal,penny, had not cornplied
with the Statutory obligation to make the necessary declara-
tion of acceptance of office within the required period. Tho
Committee declared the seat vacant, and the Secretary was di-
rected to place the co-option of a member to fill the vacancy on
the agenda for next Quarterly Meeting of the Council.
37
executive Committee.
Minutes of Proeeedings of the Executive Committee at, their
held in Council Chamber, cou,tå Tlouse, Dundalk,
on Monday, '20i11 September, 1915, at one o'clock, p m.
—In the Chair: Chas A Duffy; FAI, .J r.
Other Motnbers—J Kearney, Michael Meade, Thomas
0' Rourke, T J Byrne, J P; and Bernard Finnegan, Lsquires.
The Minutes of the previous meeting of [he Executive Con-
rnitteo were taken as read and signed by •the Chairman.
VETERINARY INSPECTORS' REPORTS—AUGUST, 1915.
The reports were read and initialled by the Chair-
man
MR. CLI.VIX)N'S REPORT.
Dundalk, September, 1915.
Dear Sir,
During the month of August 1 with file fol.
lowing outbreaks of sheep scab
P Goodntan, Crescent, Dundalk (15 sheep).
L Goodman, Park Street, Dundalk (34 sheep).
Thomas Malone, Drumshambo ('22 sheep).
Jos. Mun,hy, l)err.vbeg, at Greenore (41 sli@l)).
Patrick Rooney, Mou,ntmills, at Greenore sheep).
38
In all the cases the sheep were the
remainder isolated and dipped.
Yours truly,
J. T. CLINTON.
MR. DONNELLY'S REPORT.
Veterinary Eslablislnneut,
Drogheda, Septentber 4th, 1915.
Dear Sir,
r to report, of August,
1915, no of disease amongst,
Yours faithfully
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
To the Secretary,
Ve[erinary Inspector.
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
MR. MAXWELL'S .11EPORT
The Secretary,
Ardee, 8th Septetnber, 1915.
Louth County Council, Dundalk,
Sir,
1 have inspected usual and
in No. 1 District for the of
month 1 have seen the detained at Corbollis,
I)uring
dipped twice, and visited them at periods. A
at Dowdstoum, which 1
39
have had disinfected the premises of Green 's, John Street,
A '@lee.
The usual forms have been supplied.
Yours truly,
W. E MAXWELL,
NON-COMPLIANCE M'lT11 SHEEP DIPPING ORDER.
Reports were read from the police fronl Dunleer and West
Gate, Drogheda, giving lists of persons who had exposed their
sheep for sale witliout being acc•olnpanied by a declaration that
they were dipped within the Autumn period, as by
- the Sheep Dipping Order of 1915. In Dunleer fair on 1st Sep-
teni ber, the Sergeant reported that eleven owners had exposed
their sheep. In Drogheda market on 4th Septeniber [he Con-
stable reported that five doi'atllters had exposed their sheep,
and on 11th inst one owner had also failed to conll)ly u ith Clie
Order.
Mr T J Byrne, J P, suggested that the owners of the Shepp
should be written to to produce the dec•Jan1tions that the sheep
had been dipped, au€l if Che declarations were produced that no
prosecutions should ensue in these cases.
Ellie njatter was discussed at length, and it was ultinjately
Proposed by J P Kearney," Esq ;
And seconded •by Michael Meade, Esq,
That all the owners who had exposed their sheep for sale, as
reported by the police, and had failed [o produce the decla
tion when requested to €10 so, prosecuted ,under the Order,
40
and that Solicitor of the Conneil to sum
passed, T.J Byrne, EMI, dissenting.
SHEEP CASES.
Tito by the in
tho of b, by the Conunittee
initialled Ly [110 Chairman.
'l'ilö eases u•ero as follows
L A Leo-Norinan, Corbollis; Thos
M a Ione,
; Peter ; .J P Roonov,
Mount niilLs,
Lau Goodma n, Dou alstonm; Jos.
Al,trrphv•,
l)err.iLog; M"illiarn M'oocls, Ca rlingi'or(l
P.tr.tS1'l'1C MA.XG'E.
Mr of of Parasitic
• at .Jo;jn Street, da.
"1'110 linal report stated that
a ninjal had been slaughtered and the premiges
a Ijarness thoroughly disin iV•cted.
SWINE FEVER.
A ease of swine fever at Mn Ilonsioum,
t lie were in
the Mr
SHEEP DIPPING ULTERS.
The lists 01 owners i led
for dipping n g
A iWor (li.st•ussion tho Seei•etary was
to not if v t lie owners i Ila t
if the.v (lid not ret u rn
in seven ensue.
Couth County Council.
Minutes of pmeeedings of the Louth County Council af their
Special Meeting held in the Cotincil Chamber, Courthouse, Dun-
duik
, on Thursday, 23rd September, 1915, at One o'clock p m.
Present
In the Chair —Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Other Meniljers—Peter IVoods, J P;' Bernard Finnegan, Patrick
J P; John Morgan, John Dolan, Jian,ill, J P;
Amide. T V AI'Quillan, 11 .WArdle, J Thomas
J P Kearney, William Woods, J P; and T J Byrne,
.J P, Esquires.
The Seerefary read tho reeonunenclaåions of i he Scholarship
Conon it toe, which were as follows :—
' 'That a Scholarship of Æ50 per annunu be awarded to John
Vineenf A Magrath, Dundalk, and that the H•naaining Scholar-
ship of ,e.50 he dilided as follows to be awarded [o Miss
Eileen M Teovan, Barronstown, and C?' to be awarded {o Miss
argaref C Murphy, Dundalk; and that a Seholarship of Æ5() bo
-awarded to Miss Ma rgaref V Lyons, Drogheda, for her second
; and Scholarships of Æ50 each to Joseph M'Pa rland and
Patrick A Ilanratty for their third years, and that in the evenf
Of tho latter student obtainino a Conunis.sion in the Army that
Scholl 'Anil' he held over for Ilinj until affer the wax.'
A discussion took pla€+ on tveonnnendations, and tao Secre-
tar.y informed the Council four candidates had applied for the
Scholarships, buf that Mr Joseph 11 aHIy, one of the applicants,
was, in the view of the Scholarship Committee, not considered
enii[led, as if was alleged that his father was possessed of suffi-
cient means to give his son a University Education without [he
aid of a Sellolarship. This view was contested by several Mern-
bers of [he Council, who stated that Mr Ilardy's father was a
working blacksmith with a large family.
The following resolution was [hen passed unanimously
Proposed by T J Esq, J P;
Seconded by Joseph P Kearney, Esq, and
Resolved—'l'hat on consideration of the reconnnendaiions of Ille
Seholarsllip Connuittee now sublili[ted to a Special Meeting of the
Council, we hereby decide to the [wo Scholarships of C5()
oli'erecl by the Council equally between the four applicants whose
names are as follows
Miss Eileen Mary Teevan, Barronstown Illouse, Dundalk.
Miss Margarvf C Murphy, 40 Church Street, Dundalk.
J osepli Ilarcly, Newfownf•ane, • Dundalk; and
John Vincent A Magrath, Clanbrassil Street, Dundalk;
and in the event of one of Che applicants refusing -the Scholar-
ships, that a full Scholarship of C5() be awarded to Mr Magrath.
And we approve of (he C,'onnnittee's recommendation regarding
renewals of existing Scholarships, and hereby renew for Ille
second year Miss Margaret V I.yous' Scholarship of 250; and for
the third year Joseph and A Jlanrat[y's
Seholarships of Z50 each.
And in the event of the latter student obtaining a Commission
.13
in the Army, we agree fha[ this Schoiatsllip be held over for him
unfil after the War.
CO-OPTION ON LOCTIT COUNTY COMMITEE.
The following Notice of Motion standing in t he name of Mr
Michael Meade was puf as a. substantive resolution and passed
unanimously
Proposecl Ly Michael Meade, Esq ;
by T J Esq, J P; and
be co-opted
Resolved—Thai Mr 11 and, Castlebellinglnun,
Member of the Louth County Committee of Agriculture.
WORKMEN AT JONESBORO' QUARRY:
On the application of the County Surveyor the Members of the
Council decided to hear him in Contlilitfee with regard fo the
application for an increase of wages made by .the workers at:
Ile stated that flie present wages of i Ime
Jonesboro' Quarry.
labouring men was 15s per week and [Ijey had asked for an in-
Ile understood that the workmen in Co.
crease of 3s per week.
Armagh quarries only received per week. Ile asked for a
direction from the Council ill the matter.
If was suggested by Mr llanlill illat the County Surveyor
etnpowered io increase the wagws from to 16s per week at his
discretion, but this was opposed by Messrs M'Gee, Byrne, and
Meade on the ground that i Ilese had only been in the Coun-
a very time, and should not
through an aureemenf as to wages so recently jnade.
After discussion the following resolution was
by MiGee, L'sq, J P;
Seconded by T J Byrne, Esq, J r;
"That the application of the workmen af Jonesboro' quarry for
an increase of wages from 15s fo per week bo not acceded to."
To f his f he following Amendment, v was
Proposed by Bernard Tlamill, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Joseph P Kearney, Esq :
"Thaf the application of the workmen af Jonesboro' Quarry for
an inerease of wages be left in the hands of the County Surveyor,
and that he have power to increase their wages from 155 to
per week if he fhinks if advisable."
The Chairman took a division on the Amendment with the
following result:—
For the Amendrnent—Messrs John Dolan, IBornard Finnegan,
Bernard Hamill, Joseph P Kearney. Thomas V -MOQniIIan, Thos
O'Rourke, Peter woods, and William Woods—e.
Against—Messrs Thonjas J Byrne, Joseph 11 M'.A rdle, riek
M'Gee, Michael Meade, John Morgan—6.
The Chairtnan declared the Amendment carried, and the terms
or .samne accepted as a substantive resolution. and the County
Surveyor was instruet«l in accordance therewith.
FISHING TN DUNDALK BAY.
Petition addressed to the Chairman and signed by fhe fi*hermen
of Blaekroek was read, in which complaint. was mado iliac frawlers
and boats using ring-nets are constantly af work inside the
limit in Dundalk Bay, and that if something was not: done irn-
mediately fo put a stop to these breaches of the law, the fishing
in the Bay would be ruined.- As the interests of [he fisherrnon
Of Clogherhead, Giles' Quay, and Annagassan were affected,
as
well as those of the Blackrock men, Che petitioners reque9ted the
County Council to bring the mailer under the notice of the
Fishery Commissioners Wii h a view to having an inquiry held ;
and to take all necessary steps fo save the fishing in Dundalk Bay
from ruin.
The Council unanimously directed the Secretary to send a copy
of the petition fo the Fishery Branch of' the Department of
Agriculture, drawing attention to the «nnplaints made therein;
and also directed the Secretary to invite a deputation of the
Blackrock fishermen to [Ile next Meeting of the Finance Com-
mittee to discuss the matter.
in conipetition for plans for the Office.)
for the amount of the preniium, natnely, Æ25, and if; was unani-
mousl.v agreed that f his annjunl should also be paid
new County Offices Committee.
Minutes of proceedings of the New County Oflieos Connnitteo
af flceir Meeting held in f he Council Chanjljor, Court house, Dun-
dalk, on Monday, 4th October, 1915, at 1.30 0'clock p m.
I'ro.seni
Tn the Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J V.
Other •woods. J P; Bernard J P; wrn
Woods, J P; and Janjes Wynne, J P. Esquires.
The Minutes of f lie previous Meet ing of f 110 Conjlliitteo were
laken as read and signed by the Cha,irnnan.
The Secretary subliiitted Profes€or Scott's aceounf for work in
connection with tho proposed New County ()ffiees follov.s
To fee for Assessing 19 1)osigns for the New County
•831 10 0
12 0 0
()no-fiffll per cen€ of value of bililding
To Survey and tneasuring of Clerk of f Ile Crown and
Poace's ( and Iitaking (I 01', suggested
ali orations, etc.
To Traveiling Expenses
If was unanitnously agreed
l*'id Proi'egsor Scott.
Application was read frorn
Merrion Squa re, Dublin (t he
550
550
C54 0 0
that the :onounf of' his account Ije
11:11 ehrlor
designers of t 110 drawings placed
finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the I•änanee Committee at; their
Meeting held in the Council Cham ber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 4th October, 1915, at one o'clock p.m.
In the Chair—Chas. A. Duffy, Esq., J.P.
Other Wymne, J.P.; Michael O'Meara, J.P.;
Wm. Woods, J.P.; John r. Murphy, J.P.; Michael Meade,
Bornard Hamill, J.P.; and Peter Woods, J.P., Esquires.
Mr. Thomas Walsh, Co. Surveyor, was. in attendancg.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Finance Committee
wero taken as read and signed by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted and, on examination, were
ordered for payment :—
Works in charge of County Surveyor
Se?refary's Office (including remuneration to five Rate
Collectors who closed their collections on 30th
September, 1915)
'Tocal,
The Bank Books for the General and Subsidiary
examined and initialled by the Chairman.
066 10 10
2413 12 1
Accounts were
419
TRAWLING A1' BLACKROCK.
The follouing letter from [he T)epatünenf (Fisheries Branch),
in reply to the petition of the Blackrock Fisljernwn, which had
been forwaHled by (he Secretary in accordance wit IL illötruct ions
received at lassi meeting of i he Coun[.y Council, was
l)epartntenf of Agriculture and Technical Instruction,
(Fisheries 13ranch),
3 Place, Dublin,
29th S(Vtember, 1915.
No. 4263/'15. V.B.
I have to acknowledge t Ile receip[ of your leiier of €110
28th instant, and its accompanying copy of a petition from i 110
in reference to allegtd illegal
fishermen 'of Blackrock, Co. Louth,
trawling in Dundalk Bay; and to state, the infornmtion of the
Louth County Council,
t hat the Department have received no
Should such eom-
ft»ruplaini of illegal trawling in Dundalk Bay.
• be received, supported by inii)l'lnation which u•ould assi.st
the identification Of offenders, the question of instituting proce(€l-
ings would be considered.
The use of seines or ling nets is not illegal in Dundalk Bay.
1 am, Sir,
Your obedient Servanf,
T. V. GILL,
Seerefary.
The Secretary,
Louth Count-s Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
50
The C01nmitteo decided hear the deputation from fisher-
men, who had been invited fo aftend [his mooting, nnd the follow-
ing Inen appeared before the M 'Keown, Michael
llamilton and Peter Carroll—and it was [haf tho usage Of
ring nets by trawlers was working hayoc with Cho fishing in Che
Bay. and was even tnore dest ruetivo that sioarn tra.wling.
Tho Connjlitfee were unanitnon.sly of opinion thai ae tho use Of
ring nets, as ernbodied in Dopa lett+r, was not illegal
that tho only effective way to deal with the
in Dundalk Bay,
mat ter was for all the fishertnen of Blackrock. Gyms' Quay,
A nnagassan and Clogherhead to jointly petition the proper
ant Ilority to make [he use of ring nets illcvgal in f he Bay. and
that the County Council would give all tho posseible to
fishermen in the matter. This was ojnveyed to the deputa-
this
[ion, who thanked the Committee for affording
opportunity of ventilating their grievance.
A cotnplaint was also IP,ade by the deputation thai a wafer cut
t ho river near Lurgangroen requir«l attention owing to the
enjljanknjont being broken ; and it was arrang€€l that the County
Su rve.vor would inspect f he place and soo if anyt hing could be
done to remedy the defect.
STORE.
I .etter was read from tho County Surveyor requesting the
C".tnmittee to have transfertul f lie Carlingford Pier Revenue
sum of 860. to be (spended on any necessary repairs to
t lie Pier and of lier works in connection f horewith.
The Cotiiliiiftee unanimously reeornrnonded [hat tho request
acceded to, and the Soeretary was ditvcted accordingly.
51
I.F,fl1NG OF CARLINGFORD STORE.
The quastion of the letting of Che above store was considered
at length by the Connuiifee, and Secretan• was to
have consideration of the letting of the store plae«l on
agenda for next of the Finance Coruniittee, and
on the notice convening t hé Meeting.
ESTUARY OF BOYNE.
flue
Notice from the Department of -Auriculttm* defining
boundary of the mouth of the River Boyne was tabled by the
Secretary, who was fo send a of to the Town
Clerk. Drogheda.
GILES' QUAY BOAT SLIP.
The following letter ironi the Local Govetmnjent Board was
read
No. 51895/1915.
Louth County.
local Government Board. I)ublin,
27th Septeniber, 1915.
Sir,—
1 am directed by the Imai for
to refer to their letter of the 17th on the of
the purchase by the County Council of a Boat Slip at
Giles' Quay Harbour, and 1 am io the County Council
the Board have since a. the
(hmmissionet* of Public Works. in which the expre€sion of' th«ir
views, as previously conveyed to 1ÅÅ<i1 (Government Board, is
qualifi«l as follows:—
"The should that (of Works)
have no power to frame bye-laws for the rvgulation of the Quay
as proposcxl fo be enlarged by the addition of the Boat Slip. The
nmade, bye-Imws under t;he
Boa rd have power to rnake, and have
provisions of the Fisheries Acts for the regulation of the works
carried out under those -Vets and tu•nsferred the County of
I.oufh on the 7th February, 1879, consisting of a concrete pier, a
storm parapet, a sloping sea pavement and harbour excavation."
I am, Sir,
Your obedienc Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secret a ry.
The Secretary,
JÄrut11 County Council,
Tho Secretary was directed fo reply that, in Che opinion of f.he
Council, the Slip was not an extension of the Quay, but was part
of tho flarbour and Works.
PENSION 'l'o GILL'S' CONSTABLE.
Sealed Order from the Local Government Board sanct ioning the
proposal of the Council to grant a pension of C8 per annum to
Jarnes Cumiskey, late Ilarbour Constable at Giles' Quay, was
Hoad and initialled by the Chairmun.
AGRICULTtTA1, GRANT.
Letter was road from the Local Government Board enclosing
order for the sum of Æ6,39i 158 Od in respect of the
Agricultural (G mtnt. The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
PA IITY POLICIES.
Lotter was read from the London and Lancashire Fire Insurance
co., Ltd., enclosing Third Party Policies as approved by the
Council's Solicitor, and account for Premiumws on same. The
33
the
wero initialled by the Chairntan and rvaynuen[ of
account ordered.
The submitted of the to
30th Septeniber, 1915, from which if appeared all
collectors in the Ardee and l)rogheda districts, and one collector
Fonr collectors
in Dundalk district, had closed iheir collect ions.
in Dundalk diet rici had not elosed, outstanding
against them were as follows:—
Patrick 11 ughes
Patrick Cluskey
lieter M 'Donnell
John Woods
Æ557 4 6
719 6 5
1180 6 9
341 14 10
E2798 12 6
Letter addre«ed fo the Chairman, and signed by the above
four collectors, was read. in which their application for an
extension of time to close their collections, which had been before
was renewed. In
ille Committee at last Finance Meeting,
original application an extension of 21 days was asked for.
and woods appli-
eation. and the Secretary was directed to convey ion
to the Governtnent Board witli the opinion of the
faci hat, very
rniitee that owing to tho late harvest and
f he extension liiight bo
little grain had yef héon sold i hat
granted.
were read Joseph and C Murphy
thanking the Council for awarding Scholarships of
each, but staling thaf they were not intending fo avail themselves
of same.
The Secretary informed [he Connnitfee that under tho terms
of the resolution of the County Council Mr John V Magrath wae
now entitled fo a Scholarship of Z5() per annum.
Affer discussion, it wavs
by Mr llamill, J P;
Seconded by Mr Peter Woods, J P,
and unanimously ressolved:—
That we recommend the Counfy Council [o inereaso Miss Eiloen
Teevan 's Scholarship of E25 [0 9-50, this making t.wo Scholarships
for this year's award, namely Teevan and John
V incont Magrath, 850 per annum each.
BOOK FOR SHERIFF'S OITJCE.
Application was read from the Iligh Sheriff for Civil Bill book
for records of decrees and judgments.
The Secretary read tho Section of the Local Government. Act
from which it appeared that' the County Council should supply
this book, and the Committee unanimously instructed him to
order same.
MOTOR LICENCE DUTY DEFAULTERS.
The Secretary submitted list of motor owners in the County
who had not paid the l,icence as required by the Finance
Aef, and the Committee unanimously directed the Secretary
have prosecution issued against tbe defa ulters.
55
Proposal Committee.
Minutes of of the Proposal Connnittee at their
held in the Council Court
House, Dundalk. on Monday, 18th ()etober, 1915, at one o'clock
Present the Chair: Chas A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Woods, J 1';
Other Alembers—'l'hornas O'Rourke,
J P; Ila Illill,
James M 'Carthy, J P; Jatne.s Wynne,
J P; J P' Kearney, Peter Woods, J P, and T J Byrne,
Esq uires.
The Minutes of the previous njeeting of the Proposal Commit-
tee were taken as read, and signed by the Chairman.
The Secretary submitted County-at„La.rge aecoun[.s for quar.
ter 30th *.ptenlber, 1915, to the sum of
INIYJnent recommended.
finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Conunittee at their
mooting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, l)nndalk.
on Monday, 18th ()etober, 191.3, at one o'eloek p m.
Proqont :
In the Chair: A Duffy, Esq, .J P.
O'Rourke, William Woods, J P;
Ja M 'Cartli.v, •
J P; .J P; Hamill,
.J P; .J P Peter woods. .J P; and T .J Byrne, .J P,
Esq Ili res.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was also in attendance.
'l'ho Mintltos of tho previous Meeting of the Connnittee wore
as road, ancl signed by the Cha irrnan.
following accounts wero submitted and examinat,ion
wero ordered for pa.vrnont
LOANS ACCOUNT'.
M'. 'I'll:ockora.v and Sons for 3 Searifiers OornpIet4i C'21() 0 0
SUBSIDIARY ACCOUNT.
Works in charge of County Snrvoyor
.Seerotar.v's ()fliee
12 4
L"2G 9 9
C223 2 1
Tho Bank Books for the General, Subsidiary and Loan Ac-
counts were exanjined ancl initialled by Che Chainnan,
57
LEEI'T.XG OF CARLINGFORD PIER STORE.
The next business on the agenda Was the consider:ition of
tho lotting of above Store, which was now eompletecl and ready
for the storage of goods.
On the motion of Mr—J p Kearney,
Seconded by Mr Peter Woods, .J P,
The Committee unanimously recommended that the Store be
lot as required from time to time to all persons 'Wiltiiring same.
The Corn niittee then considered the question of the ware-
housing eharge for the use of the Store, and Che following scale
was unanimously agloptod :
A charge of 2d (twopence) per ton. per week, or any portion
Of a week for all goods stored.
Whore the Store is used for coal imported to the pier, the
rate of 2d per ton per week to be charged on the full tonnage
first .stored until the entire quantity is removed frotn flie Store.
The Harbour Constable €0 be responsible for the keeping of
tho accounts of all goods stored.
CRIMINAL INJURY APPLICATIONS.
The following loiter from the County Solicitor was ITacl, and
initialled by the Chairman :—
Francis Street,
Dundalk. 11th ()et.,• 1915.
l)oar Sir,
I beg to report on the result of claims heard af the
recent Quarter Sessions as follows
ISMAY CHESTER. WALSH, croo and Cö.—These are the
eases where cattle are alleged to have 'been poisoned and other-
wise killed. The larger claim was dismissed. In the second
claim the su.m of C'2 was awarded to be levied off the D. E. I).
o! Castlebellingham.
TRUSTEES ARDEE DRAINAGE BOARD, C20.
Injury Co
sluice gates. Decree was granted for CIO IOS to be levied
off D. E. Divisions of Ardee Urban and Ardee Rural jointly.
KILLA.NNY CO-OPERATIVE F. 1. SOCIETY, L'I'I), eo-
Damage to reaping and binding machines. This claim was dis-
missed.
JOHN M'ARI)LE, Monascriebe, C15.wBu,ning of hay. De-
cree was granted for C7 IOS Od, to be leviöd off the District, El.
Division of Ballynjascanlon.
Yours fai tllfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M' Alesfer, E.sq,
Sec. Louth County Council, Dundalk.
RATE COLLECTION.
The following letter from the Local Government Board was
read ancl initialled by the Chairnjan, who explained that a copy
had been sent to all the Collectors concerned, with the result
that all of Chern had now closed their collection of the First
...oiety, on the date mentioned 'by the Local Government
Board
50
Local Government Board, Dublin,
6th October, 1915.
No. 53089/1915.
Louth County.
Sir,—
The IA'caI Government Board for Ireland have had be-
fore then) the return showing the condition of the collection of
the rate on the 30th ultimo in Louth County for half-year
ended on that date, from which they regret to note that Col-
Paftfick Ilughes, Patrick Cluskey, Peter M'l)onnell, and
John have failed to close their collections within the half-
year, having outstailding the large amounts of C557, C719, E1180
and 2341 respectively.
The County Council will recollect that when these Collectors
failed to close on a similar oceasion previously, the Board were
to suspend the payment of their .on the
representation of fhe County Council and in view of a guarantee
given by each of the Collectors individually that they would eom-
ply with the requirements of the Board in future, Local
Government Board, though with considerable agreed
to modify this ruling.
Not only have the by their to
for past half-year forfeit«l all claim to tile payment of their
remuneration, but it is clear that the question of their fitness to
retain their office must now be considered.
In the meantime the Collectors or their should be
upon to lodge the amounts outstanding to the
eredit of the County Council, and the Board request that you
will notify them by 13th instant whether file outstanding
amounts have then been so lodged.
You should immediately inform of the coll«tors
of the eonients of this letter.
; I ani, Sir.
Your obedient Servant,
Tho Secrefar.v.
.r. E. DEVLIN,
Louth Connf.v Council.
At the of the Chair,nan. Committee
Seereiary fo apply to the Imai for their
sanction to the payment of the poundage to' Collectors
Cluskey. and Woods.
CARE'I'AKEII CENTIM 1, 'ft TERCCIÅ)S'IS
The following letter and the
recommended the of the appointinonf of
Annie _M•Parland caretaker at. C12 per annunj
conntv of Tn of
Doar Sir,—
( 'Ianbrassil Street. Dundalk,
7th 1915.
r by [he Tuberculosis of
to inform tho County they
appointed as Caretaker of the Central Dundalk.
14)dge, Dundalk. at a. salary of e12
Pounds, per the to ratify
Yours faithfully,
Esq.
V. WA ItitEX,
Secretary Louth Co. Council, Dundalk.
($1
AGREEMENT BETWEEN COUNTY COUNCIL AND
INSURANCE COMMITTEE.
The i"llowing circular letter from the l,oeal Government Board
was read, and the Comnjittee directed the Secretary to send copies
to the Secretary of the. Insurance Commit'tee and the Tuberculosis
(Annnjittee of Managernent and ask him to arrange for a Con-
ference of the two Committees to discuss the letter and the terms
of the agreement referred to therein ; the Conference to take place
in the Council Cham ber, Dundalk Court house.
Local Government Board, Dublin,
13th October:, 1915.
No. 53, 987: 1915.
Miscellaneous.
Sir,—
1 di reefed by Local (Govermnent Board for Ire-
land to state, for the informaiion of the Council,
that after
negot iations u it li the Jn.surance Commissioners they have ar-
ranged the terms of a standard form of agreement to be entered
into between County and County Borough (Aouncils and Insur-
ance (Annmittees, in regard to the treatment of tuberculous in-
sured and exetnpt persons reconnnended for Sanatorium Benefit.
Three copies of the Form are enclosed •herewith.
The objects which t,he Board have had in view have been to
effect eo-q»rdination between the administ ra [ion of Insur•ance
Connnittees and County arrangements for the treatment of
Tuberculosis, to secure for insu red and exenjpt persons a fair
equivalent for the contributions made from tJje Sanatorium
benefit Funds, and in all other respects to pteserve t]je inde-
62
pendenee of County and County Borough Councils in regard to
financial conii01 and to the management Of their institutions.
Under the conditions of Agreemenf as settled, [he services
Of the Tuberculosis ( Yfficer will be af the disposal of the ln-
suranee Committee for the examination of applieanfs for Sana-
tori Illii Benefit, for a,ttendanee af meetings the Committee, and
for advice on matters arising out of flie amninistra.tion of Sana-
torium Benefit.
Ine addition Che dispensary system and staff,
together with the provision of Ähelters. will be available for in-
sured and exempt persons for exarnination and for
trea f.rnenf,
where reeonnnended by the Tuberculosis ( )ffieer. In return for
these services, a contribution calculated on the basis of one-fifth
of the annual salary and travelling expenses Of flie Tuberculosis
Officer will be reeeived from the Sanatorium Benefit Funds.
In regard to instifutional treatrnent, the (Anxnfy Council will
undertake to provide aeeotnnjodat;ion for insured and exetnpf
patients recomnjended by [he Insurance (Aymmitfee on the ad-
viee of the Tu bereulosis iffieer, wit Olin limit of expenditure
hereafter explain«l. The form facilities for this upward
lin:if to be expressed in terms of Sanatorium and Ilo«pital beds
Ifo be reserved for insured and exempt patients, the number of
which can readily be deterrnined upon the basis of an
annual cost of maintenance.
If will eerfainly be of convenience
for the praet:ieal adnlinistration of the Insurranee Conunittee and
of the County or County Borough Council,
that either body
should be in a position €0 know the extent of the institutionwl
accommodation at their disposal from time to tirne.
Sitnilarly dotnieiliary treatnnent in a manner approved by the
Local Government Board will be undertaken by County or County
63
Borough Councils for insur(KI and exempf persone recommended
by the Insurance Conjmittee on the advice of the Tuberculosis
Officer, subject to a financial limit also hereafter specified.
The normal annual contribution of the Insurance Committee
towards the funds of flie Counfy or County Borough Councils
will be at the rate of Is 2d per insured person, oui of the
statutory yearly income of the Insurance Committee under the
Four-sevenths of this cont ribufion
National Insurance Acts.
(that is, at the pafe of 8d per annum per insured person) is ap-
Jjropriated to meeting the cost of institutional accommodation re-
served for insured and exempt persons under the Agreement. The
of insured and exempt persons for institutional
treatment will doubtless exceed this allowance; t!le surplus eases
will be dealt with by the Tuberculosis Commi(iee of the County
or County Council, who should consider the claims of
such patients equally with those of uninsur«l persons.
The of' the Insurance (that is, at the
of Gd per insured petson) is charged primarily with the eom-
for the services of' the Tuberculosis and
Dispensary systeltl, on€&fiftll of the salary and
travelling expenses of the Tuberculosis Officer, while the re-
is applicable to tho expenses of County or County
Council in domiciliary [reafrnenf of in-
surecl and exentpt persons, on the recomrnendation of the Insur-
anee Committee.
The form further inaudes for the supply of
eal reports. and other inforn,afion. as to insured and
patients undergoing under County or County
Borough Council, for the visitation of County Institutions by
Officers of the Insurance Commissioners, and for the settlement of
disputes by reference to the Local Govern Inent Board and Insur-
ance Conjmissioners, or by arbitration.
In reconnnending the standard forni of Agremnenf for accept-
ance County and County Borough Councils, the Board
no doubt that the Councils will recognise the condit ions as re-
rights and obligations of the Councils and of Insurance Corn-
tuitteos, and they trust t.hat agreements will be genelällly
eon -
eluded on the suggested lines at an early date, and
that a n
organised sehenye of efficient treatment. Of Tuberculosis will now
be put in operation in every County and County
Ireland.
1 am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
The Secretary of
the (fijunty Council.
OME.\TII r.UtK.
Borough in
Secretary •
The following letter was read, and, after discussion, the Com-
mittee recommended that t.he Council's Solicitor should appear
before the Land Judge's Court on 29th instant to represent- the
County Council, with authority to say that their offer for Onu•atli
Park of 81,500 would be adhered to, buf (ilat, no increase on that
sum would be made
l•'runeis Street, Dundalk,
WOODHOUSE, OWNER:
Dear Sir,
J would be glad to have the
5th oetober, 1915
ANNESLEY, 1'E'1'11'10NER.
Council's instructions on tho
65
following letter as received to-day from Mr. F. Chidley,
Solicitor, relative fo offer recently made for purchase of
(hneath Park :—
"Some parties are negotiating as regard* the purchase of
Orneath PaA-, and 1 to bling the matter bef01e
court on [he 29th inst. to should be
adopted.
"If your clients wish to make another offer you should be
If would be well
represented on that day before the Judge.
if you would lei know beforehand, of course, what they
would be prepared to do further."
Yours faithfully,
NIEL O'CONNELL.
M' Alester, Esq.,
Secy., Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
Letter was the upon Council
for the
00
the urgent injportance of sub<tituting notes for
purpose of paying wages and for generally.
The let ter was initialled by the (e'hairman.
OFFENCE pool) ANI) I)R.UG.S ACTS.
The following letter read. also Report from ihe Ofli(+C
Iteporf from
Of Dopa and the Analysis
biliter contained
Catneron, which cert ificd t.haf satnple of
21.8 per cent. of water. 16 cent. being the propor[ion
Of water allowable,—
Food and Drugs Act, 1899).
T ani, Sir,
Your obodionf Servant,
The Secretary,
I,otlth County Council,
Courthouse,
Dundalk.
COG
Deparfmonf of Agriculture and
Technical Instruefion for Treland,
•typper Merrion Street,
Dublin, 14th October, 1915.
No. (1.4361-15.
SATD OF FOOD AND DRUGS ACTS.
Sir,
T have to aequainf yon, for the information Of the I.onth COunty
Council, that an Officer of the James J. Nagle—
acting on instructions under Section 2 of Sale of Food and
Drugs Aet, 1899, purchased on the 27111 ultimo
occupied by Mr. P. Wafters, 11 Earl street, Dundalk, a sample
of buffer, which was subliiifted for analysis and was found fo
eonfain 21.8 per cent. Of water—16 per cent. being [he maximum
proportion of water allowa ble in sample of genuine butter under
the Sale of Buffer (Ireland) Rogulafions; 1902 (copy herewith). A
copy of the report received from Mr. Nagle in regard to this
Ina fier is enclosed, together Wii Al the Ana lyses certificate and
ropy thereof.
In this case an offence would appear to have been eomnlitied
against the provision of Section 6 of f Ire Sale of Food and Drugg
Act, 1875, and the Department are. therefore, desirous that pro-
ceedings should, on behalf of your 'Local Authority, be instituted
in respecff of the transaction within 28 days frona the date on
wlLieh Che sample was obtained (Vide Soetions 2 (2) and 19, Sale Of
T. P. GILL,
See refary.
67
and Mr. Bernard
A discussion took place on this maffer,
llamill, J.P., poinfed ouf that if was impossible for a trader
who purchased buffer to know the quantify of water contained
tlierein, and as there was no deleterious matter discovered on
analysis of the sample, he proposed no prokecufion be
instituted in the ease.
Mr. Poter Woods, J.P., seconded.
Mr. T. J. Byrne, J.P., staffed thaf the trader pürchasing [he
butter had his remedy against the seller if if contained foo
Water, and fhaf it was imperative fo prosegufe. Ile proposed an
{tinendment, that, as suggested by tlle Deparfinent, a prosecution
be instituted.
[he Chairman
There being no seconder to i Ile amendment,
declared Mr. llamill's motion, that fhe County Council do not
Prosecute in the ease, carried, Mr. T. J. Byrne dissenåing.
DROGHEDA COURTHOUSE.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chairman
Town Clerk's Office,
Drogheda, 15ih October, 1915.
The Secretary,
County Council of I ouflj,
Dundalk.
J)ear Sir,
•My Finance Committee have now considered your leffer, in
Which it is suggested t.hat t,he Corporation should in fuf ure pro-
vide fuel, light and water for the portions of Drogheda Courthouse
used by them and their officers,
The suggesi ion eornes upon with surprise, and they ean
only think [here mnst he soni0 misunderstanding to aeeounf for it.
Perhaps the County Council are nof fully aware of [he circum-
stances under which tlie Corporation carne to use the Court hones
for munieipiil purposes.
Fornjerly the ' 'Tholsel" premises were availed Of' by the Grand
Jury, with the permission of the Corporation, for the purposes
flie present Courthouse is used for until the erection of a new
Courthouse was decided upon. The Corporation thereupon agreed
with the Grand Jury to lease for ever at a nominal rent of Is,
portion of their principal Market and some of the Market build-
ings. upon the undetstanding fliaf fhey would be at liberty to use
flie Courtliouse for municipal puu»oses, and thereby be in a
position to lease the "Tholsel."
Tho Courthouse was erected, the
Market buildings being altered so as to form portion of if, and-
tho Corporation moved in. The Grand Jury provided [he entire
of nyaintenanee, ineluding fuel, light and water. On the
passing of tho Local Government Aef suell maintenance, of courses
passtcl on to the County Couneil, and unfil now no question
been raised.
The atnounf of coal, gas antl water used in the year anjounts
to but sniall sum.
Yours faithfully,
J. 13. CONNOLLY.
ELECTIONS ANI) ACT EXPENSES.
Circular letter was read front the L.G.B. with reference fo the
paynjenf io officials and (Olitraef01S (except Clerks , of the Crown
and Peace) for work in eon noction with the Voters' and Jurors'
Lists, in whic•li it was set out that, as all [he work in connection
69
with the Registration of Voters is discharged before the
A ugnst, payment on t.he usual seale might be made, but without
fees for attendance at Revision Sessions.
The letter was initialled by Che Chairman.
TUBERCULOSIS COMMITTEE OF ALANAGEMEN"I'
ACCOUNTS.
Letter Svas read from the L.G.U.—No. 159M/1915—informing the
County Council that Mr. J. A. Reddy had been to audit
the accounts of the above Committee for the half-year ended 30th
September.
COMMITTALS TO INDUS'I'IUAL SCHOOLS.
The following notices of for committal to Industrial
Schools were read and initiallc«l by the Chairman
Clerk of Petty Sessions, of James J.
and John Sexton, of l"air street, Drogheda.
Rev. Father Ilurson, C.C., Dundalk—ror of Kitty,
and Susan Sullivan, Lily Grimcs, all of
Dundalk.
Sergeant, R.I.C., Ardee—l'or of two children
Drogheda Industrial School.
COUNTY COURT-KEEPER'S APPLICATION.
The letter was and the Committee unanimously
that Mr. be as usual for extra
70
clui,ies, subject to the sanction of Local Govermnen[ Board :—
The Courthouse, Dundalk,
Mr. Clxairman and Gentlemen
of the County Council.
18th October, 1915.
supplied in the previous three quarters, and that the expenditure
The Secretary
under this head had increased in recent years•
was directed to write the Court Keeper that he would require fo
exercise economy in the use of the sundries in future.
T respectfully beg to apply for flie usual annual allowance for
the extra work performed by me during the past twelve mont,hs.
You very kindy granted me CIO per year for the pas[ five years
for this extra work, which consists principally in attending to
the Ileating Apparatus during the winter Ilionths, preparing the
two (ijurts for "Petty Sessions every Friday instead of one as
heretofore, keeping space in front of Courthouse clean, also Courts
and various other duties, including looking after gutters in roof
and cleaning them.
Thanking you, (Gentlemen, for past favours.
Your obedient Servant,
TIMOTHY MURRAY,
Court Keeper.
I[OS'I'L'LS FOR COUNTY COUNCIL SCHOLARS.
The Secretary was directed to write the Scholars who had been
awarded Scholarships under flie Council and ascertain whether
the hostels they had arranged to reside were approved by
the College Authorities.
SUNDRIES FOR AIU)L'E (Y)URTIIOUSE.
The Secretary submitted a requisition from the Court Keeper.
Ardee Courthouse, for stationery, ink, brush, etc., and informed
them that a similar quantity of tho same articles had been
72
executive Committee.
Minutes of of the Executive Cornmittee at their
Meeting held in Council Chan»ber, cotut House, Dundalk,
on Monday, rst November, 1915, at one o'clock p m.
Presen t
—In the Chair: Ohanes A Duff» Esq, J P.
other J J P; Ila,nill, J P; 1'
A1 'Gee, J P; John 1" Mtuvhy, J P;
The Minutes of the Meeting of the Executive
mitten, taken as read, and signed by the Chairtnan.
SALARY OF' CLERK '1'() LOCAL AC'J'IIORITY.
The letter was read and initialled by the
of and Instt,uetion for
Ireland (Veterinary Branch).
So. 3070/15.
Sir,
.30 and öl Upper Merrion Street,
Dublin, 10th October, 1015.
to the suspension of (Leland)
73
Order as frotn the 1st Illthno, Che Department find it necessary
to advert the question of bhe rate of renjuneration attached
tc your ofiiee of Clerk to the Local Authority under the
Diseases of Aninja.ls Acts, to direct attention to the terms
of their letter of 16th December, 1913, in which approval of the
present rate of retnuneration conveyed.
It will be observed that the Departnjent's approval of the
proposal to attach a .sa]ary of" CIO() per annum to the post was
given subject to revision in the event of a cessation of work
under the Tuberculosis Order. It became necessary, .therefore,
to consider the question of such revision now that the opera Lion
of the Order has been suspended for the time being, and that
bilere is, apparently,
no reported ease of bovine tuberculosis
remaining to be dealt witb in the county.
I have, accordingly, to request that, at the first' oppoltunity,
you will be so good as to place the matter before your Local
Authority with a view to their considering what rate of
remuneration should be attached to the office in question in
the aitered circumstances at present existing.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Court House, Dundalk.
The original letter from the Department, dated 18th Decern-
ber, 1913, So. 6147/13, in which the Departrnent approved of
the appointtnent of the Secretary to the County Council as
Clerk to the Local Authority under the Diseases of Animals
74
Acts„ was read, in which they expt.•essed approval of the
proposal to attach a salary of CIOO .per annunl to ' tlhe office,
but stipul'lted that, this approval rnight be subject to revision
in the event •of cessation of work under the Tuberculosis (Ire-
land) Order.
The • Committee, after considering the proportion of work
under the Tuberculosis Order, which was a very stnall propor-
Lion of the entire work under Che Diseases of Alliinal.s Acts,
unanimously decided to reduce the salary of the Clerk to Che
Local Authority by the sum of L'IO per anuutm, and directed the
Secretary to inform tho Department of Agriculture of their de-
cision.
VETERINARY ISSPECTORS' REPORTS.
The Reports of the Veterinary Inspectors as follows, for Cile
months of September and October, were read and initialled
by the Chairman :—
Mr Clinton's Report for September, 1915.
'On 1st September 41 Sheep; the broper[y of Joseph M urphy,
of' Derrybeg; were detained at Greenore Port for scab.
The
necessary steps were taken, the affected sheep being slaugh-
tered and the remainder dipped at Greenore and returned to
Ohe owner's farni by order of the Departnjent of Agriculture.
On the same date 48 sheep, the property of Mr P Rooney,
Mountrnills, were also detained- at Greenore for scab. The
affected sheep were slaughtered, The remainder were dipped
at Greenore aud returned to Mr Rooney's faun.
Your obedient servant,
J. T. CLINTON.
75
Mr Clinton's Report for October,/ 1915.
On October 7111 24 sheep were detained at Dundalk Port,
owing the 01 them. They were the
property of Thomas Malone, Dru,nßhambo, and consigned
to England. All of them were slaughtered on the premises
'by order of the owner. On October 30th 4 Iambs suffering from
scab were found in a consignment sent by Mr J Shevlin to
The necessary steps are
Dundalk Port front Carriekmacro.s.s.
being taken in the case.
Your obedient servant,
J. T. CLINTON
Mr. Donnelly's Report for September, 1915.
Ihiling the month of SOptember 1 had to deal with one
outbreak of (tile animals coming from co. Down).
was a ease of parasitic mange in a the animal
being destroyed, and 1 had one or two cases of susp€wted
fever. 1 also inspected a of hundred sheep imported
into the county from Dublin and Ballinasloe.
Your has furnished with particulars and
all the necessary reports relating to each ease.
Yours respectfully,
ANDREW A. DOSSELLY.
Mr Donnelly's Report for October, 1915.
There has been no outbreak of any of the notifiable diseases
amongst animals in my district during the month of October,
1915.
There arc no animals at present under restrictions. I made
inspections in one or two suspected cases reported to me, buc
found the anitnals free from any of the scheduled con tagious
diseases.
Yours respectfully,
ASDREW A. DONNELLY.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
Mr Maxwell's Report for Sept,etnber, 1915.
I beg report that I visited the usual fairs, markets, etc,
held in the Ardee No.l District during the 111011 [11 of Sep-
tern ber.
On the 5th, 12th, 21st and 30th of the month I visited the
detained sheep at Dowdstown, and issued a withdrawal notice
on the 30th September.
A fresh outbreak of scab occurred on the 30tih Septenlber
Ardee, and
on the lands of John Crawley; of Artnalivery,
issued the usual notices. Swine fever was reported on P
M 'Goggart's prenii.ses, at Debidee, Ardee, and at Mrs M 'Gee's,
77
of October. The outbreak of seab which occurred on the
farm of .John Crawley, Artnaliver.v, has been attended to, and
tho sheep were dipped in my presence on the 15th October.
Tile usual have been in all the eases
to me.
I am,
Faithfully yours,
W. E. MAXWEI,T,.
the Veterinary
The Seeretary su bmitted notiees from
Inspectors in the following eases :—
Swine Fever.
Mary M •Gee, Tallans€own.
-Patrick Byrne, Garveysiown.
I,ester Doran, Harristown.
Sheep Sea'b.
John Crawley, Artnalivery.
L Goodrnan, Dowdstown.
Mate:jeu• Skelly, Hammoncl.st0\vn.
Malone, Dundalk Steampacket Yani.
James Shevlin, Dundalk Ya,d.
Tallan.s€own.
I 'lyeg to
markets, etc,
In neither case was the disease swine fever.
I am,
Maxwell's Report
inform you that
held in the Ardee
Faithfully yours,
W. E. MAXWELL.
for October, 1915.
I inspected the usual fairs,
No. 1 District for Che tnonth
78
finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court I-louse, Dundalk,
on Monday, 1st November, 1915, at one o'clock p m.
In dhe Chair: Charles A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Present :—
Other Members—T J Byrne, J P; Hamill, J P; P
M 'Gee, J P; John F Murphy, J P; and Laurence M 'Keown,
Esqui res.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County -Snrveyor, was in attendance.
Before the Minutes of tihe last Meeting of the Finance
Committee were signed the Secretary informed the Committoo
that an officer from the Department of Agriculture had called
and informed him tilat the Depattment were taking steps with
a, view to tho institution of proceedings in the case under the
Sale of Food and Drugs Acts wlliåh had been considered at the
last meeting. The minute of Che last meeting was read, and
the Seeretary informed the Committee that if the County
Council, as the Local Authority under the Sale Of Food and
Drugs Acts, 1899, failed to prosecute the trader from whom
the sample of butter was taken tJhat Iliad 'been found on
analysis €0 contain 5.8 per ecmt of excessive moisturö, that un-
der Section 3 (3) of the said Aet the Council would be liable for
all expenses with costs if the prosecution were ta ken by the
l)epartlnent, and that in a recent ease the expenses had' run Lo
over $15,
79
It, was proposed by Mr J F Murphy, J P ;
Seconded by Mr I uaurenee M 'Keown,
That we hereby delete from tille JMinutes of the Finance
Committee of tho 18th October •the recommendation that no
prosecution be instituted, ancl that we recommend the County
council to proceed the under sale of
Food and Drugs Acts.
J F Murphy, J P; L and T J Byrne, J P,
voted for, and Mr 13 Hamill, J P, against this motion,
was declared carried bv the Chairman,
'1'110 Minutes as amended were then signed 'by the Chairman.
The following accounts were submitted •and, on examination,
were ordered for payment
Loans Aeeount
Subsidiary Aeeonnt.
C185 7 10
Works in charge of County Surveyor
136 7 G
Seeretary's Office
C321 15
by the
initialled
The Ba nk Books were examined and
Cha irman.
The Collectors' Arrears lists were sub-
mitted by Secretary and payment pf same
RATE COLLECTION.
The following letter from Government Board, in
reply to the request of the Comnliftoe for sanction to payment
of poundage fees Hughes, Cluskey,
80
M 'Donnell and Woods, was read, and payment was made
aeeording!y :—
Local Government Board, Dublin,
22nd October, 1915.
No. 56,052/1915.
Louth County.
Sir,
Tho Local Government Board for Ireland have had before
them your letter of the 18th instant and previous correspond-
enee With the Lontlå County Couneil, relative €0 the failure of
Collectors Hughes, Cluskey, Peter M 'Donnell and Woods to
lodge the full amount of their warrants for the past half' year
on the proscribed date.
With reference thereto, I am to state that, having regard
io the previouus records of these Collectors and t:heir failure to
fulfil the guarantees given by them, Che 130ard feel eonsiderable
hesitation in assenting to their retention in office.
Inasmuch as they lodged within one week of the Board's
letter of the 6th instant the full amount of t"he half year's
rates, the Board will not now take the extreme step 01'
removing them. The Board are, however, only prepared to
allow them a share of their remuneration calculated on the
proportion of the rates -actually lodged by them up to tille 30th
September €0 the Ootal amount of tJhe half-yearly warrant.
The Local Government Board wish the Cou nty Council
eloarly to understand that this decision is to be accepted as
final, and if the Collectors are not prepared to abide by it they
may resign their positions. The Board' cannot admit tl.hat
there is any reason why the Collectors of Rates in Louth
81
County should be placed upon a different footing from that of
the Collectors .of every other County in Ireland.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLINå
Assistant Secretary.
The Secretary;
Louth Cotwnty Council.
OBSTRUCTION AT I,URGA.NGREES ON RIVER.
A report was ré•ad fronl the County Surveyor on inquiries
Inade by Ilirn, as directed Jb.y the Filiance Conunitt,ee, on a
complaint Il'ade by the deputation from Ohe Blackrock fisher-
gnen. The County Surveyor reportecl that there was breach
in tho etnbiinkment along the Fane river south of Mr Murphy's
lands at Haggardstown. The enlbankrnent forni.s part 01 the
Fane Drainage Works, and the 'breach was -caused by Che illigh
tide of 1st January last. The fishermen state that the drain
north of and adjacent to the Coe of the eniballlanent is being
filled up with silt and seralV.s dug off the Iyanlanent and
thrown into the drain to grow. "Ple object in closing the drain
is alleged to be to prevent, the 'beaching of boats along the
banks, and advantage is taken of the breach in the enubank-
water which fonnerly went through
ment to drain the land
the drain. The tide now rises through [he breach and covers
the adjacent lands. The County Surveyor further stated that,
Ile did not think the County Council could expend money in
repairing the embanknment, which is part Of the drainage
Works.
The report was initialled by the (j'lhairnjan.
82
DEATH OF MR. CHARLES E. MCA.NS.
Letter was read from Mr T' F Ryan, Dublin, stating he was
directed by M 'Cann to inform the County Council that
Mr Cha rles E M 'Cann, of late rate
collector of the Drogheda Rural District, and a pensioner
under the County Ckyuncil, had died at Bettystown on the 13th
October, 1915.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
NOTICE RE ROAD CONTRACTOR.
Letter wa.s read from H J W Downey, solicitor, of Dublin,
rotifying that hi.s client, Mr Denis M 'Ardle, of Cunnicar, was
due a sum of L+27 Ils 3d by Thomas M 'Kevitt, jun, of Barrons-
town, road contractor, and that he intended to obtain an Order
for Garnishee of any n:onies payable to Mr M 'Kevitt 'by the
County Council in respect of road contracts.
The letter was initialled by tlhe Chairman.
COUNTY COUNCIL SCHOLARS.
Repolf was read from the University College of Autumn
Examinations on Scholarship Ilol(lets under the County
Council as follows
Margaret Callan —Passed B.A. (Honours) degree in Modern
Languages.
Ursula M •Parland—Passed the degree for Bachelor of Com-
merce.
Henry Rogan—Passed B.E. degree examination with '2nd class
Honours.
A further letter was from University
the following residences for Louth Council had been
approved of :—
Dublin.
Eileen Teevan—Lore€o Hall, 77 St. Stephen's Green,
Patrick A Hanratty and John V A M'Grath—12 Grantham
Street, Dublin.
COSTS OF MORTGAGE—ROAD MACHINERY
Lofter was read from L. G. 13. dated '27th Oelobor, so.
57235/1915, sanctioning payment of bill of costs, amounting to
CS os Sd, to the 170111th County Council by Messrs
1) and T Fitzgerald, solicitors €0 Hibernian Bank.
CIVIL BILL BOOK.
Letter was read from L. G. B. dated 18th October, so.
54768/15, sanctioning payment for a Civil Bill Book for re-
and judgments in the Sheriff's Office, Louth
County.
ACCOUNTS OF ASD DISTRICT
COUNCIL.
Loiters were read from the Local Board
t md 55292/15, 'enclosing
audited aeeonnts and reports thereon of the Dundalk Union
und Dundalk Rural District council respectively.
84
O.MEATH PARK.
The following letter was rend and initialled by the Chair-
naan :—
Fra ncis Street, Dundalk,
20th Oetober, 1915.
Woodhouse, Owner; Annesley, Petitioner.
Dear Sir,
I beg to rop01f, that. as instructed, I
represented the
Council in this tnatter before Judge Ross in the Land Judge's
Court in Dublin on yesterdav.
Mr Chidloy, as Solicitor having Carriage, entered it in the
Judge's list for directions on several matters, viz—The ap-
pointrnent of new caretaker ; whether the lands should be let
in tho usual way for the season, etc; and also to bring under
the notice of the.Judge two offers before the Court.
Ilis I wordsdiij) stated that since tho matter was last itl his
List Ije was in the district Cook the opportunity of in-
sporting Che house and grounds. He was disappointed in the
which he had thought was in bettor condition. The
property,
horse was art ugiy structure and tf.le timber was not good•
however, that there was some rich merchant
Ile had heard,
looking after it, and that he won IKI probably buy it.
Mt; Chidle.v stated that there was an offer made Iiirn Of
L' 1,750 eond:tional on 'his allowing the purchase fo remain Olit
for si.x month•. Then Chere was [he County Council offer Of
I mentioned to the Judge that tho Council would
not increase their offer, but won 181 adhere to tho offer made
provided the Department of Agriculture approved of the Land
Conunission making the advance for Fl'.lrclja,se 'Ilh(ler tlhe pro-
visions of the Land Act of 1903. The Judge replied that Che
85
Council's offer really giving for
the house.
Mr Harris, Solicitor, stated he represented one of
and if the Council's offer wore accepted his
elients would be cut out and would get nothing. Mr Killingley,
Solicitor, also appeared for a mortgagee, and the Judge asked
him if his clients' would be reached if the propetå.v
were sold for C2,ooo. He stated he thought they and
that the first mortgage was for Lil
His Lordship adjourned the matter for month, with
iii,olty for Mr Clli(lley to re-enter it if he felt justified at an
earlier dale. He asked the latter to try and get info com-
tnunieation this rich merchant that had been spoken of,
hut from whom no offer been received. Ile also
that the lands be not let for grazing as usual, as it would be
inconvenient to have them so let should it be thought ex-
pedient to any offer before the Court when the matter
appears again in the lists.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles M' Alesfer, Esq.,
Secretary Lonth County Council,
ROAD AT SEAPASK.
Lotter read the 1,. G. B. dated 27th October, so.
57989/15, enclosing copy of a letter from Mr P M 'Cartney
the condition of road in Louth County, and
illat the Board would be furnished with a -report
from the County Sun,eyor the subject,
86
The Seeretary informed the Committee that he had sub-
mitted' the letter to the County Stu•veyor, and obtained from
return Local
M 'Cartney•s copy
GOvernrnent Board communiea tion
letter attached.
Yours faithfully,
with
him the subjoined report, a eopy of which had been sent to
Local Government Board.
The Comnlittee approvecl of what had been (lone, ancl
lotter was initialled .b,v the Chairman
County Surveyor's Office,
Court House, l)'undalk,
the
the
29th ()etober, 1915.
Charles M'Alester, FAI.
Soerefar.v, Lou th County Council,
Court House, Dundalk.
Dear Sir,
I have your letter of tho 28%il instant enclosing lotter from
Loeal Government Board (No 57389/1915), asking for a report
on a letter of cojnplaint received by them from P M
relative to the condition of a joad in this County.
The road which M •Cartney eomplains of is a portion of tho
' 'Old Coast Road' '—A-B on enclosed map—i.e., from Lurgan
White House to his (M 'Cartney's) residence,
No portion of this old "Coast Road" is at present under
repair by the County; and, so far as I can learn, no money has
been expended on it during the last years at least, nor
probably for a rnueh longer period.
So far as I am aware no notice of motion in respoc•t of the
road has been lodged with the Dundalk Rural L)isCriet Council,
THOMAS WALSH,
County Surveyor.
SALE OF FOOD ANI) DRUGS scrs.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man
Departtnent of' Agriculture and Technie;rl Instruetion for
Ireland,
Upper Merrion Street, Duiblin.
No. G.1380/1ö.
Sir,
With reference to previous correspondence relative fo the
enforcement of 'the above-nrentioned Acts, I have to state, for
the iniOrrnation of your Local Authority, that an officer of Che
Department, acting on instructions under Section 2 of the ACC
oi 1899, Obtained on the 27th ultimo, at Dundalk, three
smnples of butter for analysis. TIN' sarnples were duly sub-
ntitted to the Public Analyst for the County Louth,
who
certifies that they proved to be pure.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
T. P. GILL,
Sectvtå11T.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Court House, Dundalk.
88
SHEEP DIPPING PROSECUTIONS.
The following letter wag read and initialled by tlhe Chair-
Summonses against odher
Dunleer Petty Sessions, 9th
Charles M' Alester, Esq.,
89
defendants are issued for•
proximo.
Yours faithfully,
next
man : —
Dear Sir,
Francis Street, Dundalk,
26th October, 1915.
DANIEL O'CONMOLL.
Secretary Louth County Council.
T beg to report that I attended at Drogheda Petty Sessions
on yesterday, the 25th instant, on the hearing of seven surn-
monses at the suit of the County Council against the several
defendants hereunder na tiled, for ' 'exposing for sale" sheep
at the Drogheda Market during the past 111011th unaccompanied
the Declaration that such sheep were dipped within Che
prescribed Autumn Dipping period. The Declarations of the
Alagistrates were as follows :—
Nichola.s Lyons, -Xynch, Co. Meath
Fined 6s and 5s costs.
Patrick Brangan, Ministown, Co. Meath.
Fined 7s 6d and 7s Gd costs.
Williatn M 'Donagh, Bettystown, Co. Meath
Fined C2 4s Od and 7s Gd costs.
James O'Hagan, Orneatll, Co. Louth
Fined C4 0s Od and IOS costs.
(i sheep.
41 sheep.
80 sheep.
The sunjmonses against Patrick Rooney, *Mountinills, Newry •
Robert Skelly, Ballywad, Banbridge, and Joseph Fitzpatliek,
Clanawhillan, Bryansfort, all in Co. Down, were adjourned for
a fortnight for argutnent on the point 01 the jurisdiction of
the magistrates.
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS
Couth County Council
A1' THEIR
Third Quarterly Meeting
Held on 11th November, 1915.
Finance Committee
AT THEIR
Meetings held on 11th November, and
15th November, 1915.
1
finance Committee.
Minutes of Pvoceedings of tile Fina nee Coin lilittee at flieir
Meeting held in [he Council Chaniber, Court House, Dilli(lalk,
on Thursday, 11th Noveniber, 1915, at 12.45 p.m.
Present .—
• In the Chair: wrn. woods, Esq, J P.
Other Members—13 J P; Meade, and Peter
Woods, J P.
The Secretary submitted pa.ynlents for road maintenance
contracts, as per Forms 2'2, for the Ardee, Drogheda, and
Dundalk Rural Districts, and payjnent of såme was reco!n-
111 ended.
Coutb County Council.
Minutes OT Proceedings of the Louth County Council at
their
'I'llird Quarterly Meeting held in the Council Chmnber,
Court House, Dundalk, on Thursday, 1 It'll Novernber, 1915,
at one o'clock L). 91.
Present :
In the Chair : Lieutenant Wm A Doran, J P.
Other Members—Bernard Hanjill, J P
Michael M eacle,
'Peter Woods, J P; William Woods, J P; Thos B m•coutt,
'l'homas Peter B Moore, J P; M'Gee, J P;
John Morgan, T V M •Quiilan, 11 M'.\rdle, .J P
Callan, J P; P Donegan, J P, and W T' Skeffington, J P,
Esquires.
Messrs 'I'hmnas Wylsh, Cotility Surveyor ; Jarnes Dromgoole,
and J 'M C Lyons, Assistant Surveyors; Daniel O'Connell,
Solicitor to the Council; Dr M'Quillan, T M O, and Mr V
Warren, Clerk, T C M, were in attendance
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
following resolution was passed unanimously :—
by Peter B F.sq, J P,
Seconded iyy Thotnas M •Court, Esq, and
Resolved. —Tha€ the Minutes of the Proceedings of the Louth
County Council at their Second (Adjourned) Quarterly Meet-
ing held on the '26th August, 1915, and their Special Meeting
3
held on the 23rd September, 1915, a copy of each having been
sent to each of the Council, be and are hereby eon-
firmed.
CONFIRMATION OF FIX ANCE COMMWITE MINUIT'S.
The following Resolution was passed unanirnously
Proposed by Thomas ;
Seconded by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of tho Proceedings of the
Finanee Committee at their Meetings held on tho u lifler-
mentioned dates (a eopy of which has been sent to each mena-
ber of the Council), Mith all payments ancl reeonjmeII(latinns
contained therein. ancl are hereby eonfirmed :
Monday, '23rd August, 191.3.
Monday, 6th Septenjber, 1915.
Monday, 20th September, 1915.
Monday, 4th October, 1915.
Monday, 18th October, 1915.
Monday, 1st November, 1915.
the Fina neo Committee
Arising out of the Minutes of
of 18th October, Mr Wm Wcods, .J P, to
the method of letting the now Store on Carlingford
(ieeided upon at that meeting, ancl stilted that he wished it to
bo understood that although he was present at Che beginning
of the Meeting referred to, and his name therefore appea red
or the Minutes as being in attendance, he had left the meet-
tng, before the letting of the Store was discussed. He was
not in favour of the decision arrived at by the Committee, os
he thought it would have been boffer io advertise for fenders
for the use of the Store.
The Secretary was directed to note Mt' Woods' statement,
4
POOR RATE COLLECTORS' FEES.
Arising out tho Finance Minutes, ancl with reference to the
Local Government Board letter regarding the payments sane-
tioned by the Board to the Rate Collectors for the period
ended 30th September, 1915, the following resolution was
passed and the Secretary was directed to eonvp.v
the of szme to the Local Government Board
Pioposed by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Bernard Hamill, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That we request the Local Government Board to
sanction payment of the balance of remuneration due €0 tho
Collectors who did not close their eollee[ions before the
September, as they have lodged the full amounts of their
y. arrants on 13th October.
CONFIRMATION OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
MINUTES.
The following resolution was passed unanimously
by M 'Gee, Esq, J P,
Seconded by Michael Meade, Fnsq, and
Resolved —That the Minutes of the Proceedings of the
Executive Committee at their Meetings held on the
September, 191.3, and 1st November, 1915, a. copy of each
having been sent to each rnember of the Council, be and are
hereby confirmed.
Prior to the passing of this resolution Mr Patrick M 'Gee,
.J P, referred to the prosecution oof Sheep ()wners who had
complied with the Sheep-I)ipping Order,
but had
rnerely
neglected fo carry their declara [ions wit,h them when exposing
5
their sheep for sale,
and eonsi(lered this was a great hard.
ship, but the Council dicl not take any action in the Illa tter,
ancl the resolution as passed.
CO.NHRMATION 01" PROPOSAL COMM M IN UTES.
by Peter B Moore, Esq, J P •
Seconded by 'I'llOS V Al •Quillail, FAI, and
Resolved— Thai the inutes of the Proceedings
of the
at t'heil' Third Quarte/•l.y Meeting held
Proposft! Cotntnittee
on the 18th October, 1,915, a copy or which has been sent to
each rnernber of the Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
-XE\V COUNTY OFFICES CO-M.MI'I"I'EE MINUTES.
Proposed by Thomas O'Rourke, Esq ;
by Peter Woods, Esq, J P: and
Resolved—That the Minutes of the Proceedings of the New
County Offices Committee at their Meeting on the 4th
October, 1915, a copy of which has been 'sent to each 1110m ber
of the Council, be and are hereby confirmed.
ARDEE PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :
by A1•Gee, Esq, J
by Esq. J P, and
Resol — That the Proposals for Payments forni ulated by
the Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council at their Third
Quarterly Meeting held on 5th October, 1915, and set out on
Form '22. iurnished to the County Council;
be and are hei•oi)"'
the sunt of
"l'hese payments a n;otllit to
approvod of.
1,-s 011.
DROGHEDA PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Patrick Donegan, Esq, J P;
by Callan, Lsq, J P, and
Resolved That the Proposals for Paytnents formulated by
i he Louti- Rural District of l)roghecla Union at, their Third
1915, and set out,
Quarterly Meeting helcl 011 the 12th October,
fill nishecl to the County Council, be alid •are
or Fort', 2:'
These pa.vjnents anjount to the of
hereby approved of.
L'.311 14s 3d.
DUNDALK PAYMENTS.
'I'll" following resolution was passed unaninjously •
by Willia,n Woods, Esq, .J P;
Seconded by Bernard Tlatnill, Esq, .
the Proposals Paynjents by
the Dundalk Rural l)istriet Council at their Third Quarterly
'Meeting held on the -lth Oetober, 1915, and set out on Form
a re hereby
be and
22, furnished to the County Council,
approved of. 7131ese payments a noount to Che sum of
Cl,018 12s rod.
COC *TY-AT-LA RGE PAYMENTS.
The following resolution was passed unanitnously :
by William Woods, Esq, J P;
SecondOd by M •Gee, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That the proposals for Payments formulated by
the Proposal Comrt.ittee at their Meeting held on the 18th
day of October, 1915, ancl sed out on Form 22, furnished to
the County Council, and arnonnting to tho sum of C5,469 7s -lcl,
be. and are hereby approved of.
t-.XJO.N ANI? RURAL COUNCIL DEMANDS.
The Treasurer's Authority -for the Unions and District
Councils of Ardee, Drogheda ancl Dundalk for the third instal-
Inents of dernancls, atnounting ill all to t.]e sum of 3s 7cI,
was signed.
.DATES OF MEETINGS.
'I'he following resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed by Peter B Esq, J P
Seconded by Patrick Donegan, E.sq, J P, and
Resolved—That the County Council hereby deterinine that
the following shal be the clafes i'or the holding Of the Fourth
Quarterly Meetings of the Rural District Councils
Ardee—ll'ue.s€la.v, '4th January, 1916.
Drogheda —Tuesday, 11th January, 1916.
Dundalk—Monday, 3rd January, 1916.
and that the Proposal Cotnmiltee lljeet 011 10th January, 1916
RATE COI,LECI'ORS' ARREARS' LISTS.
The Arrears' Lists in respect of •haliLyear to 30th Septelllbelß
were sub-
191.3, anvounting to the of L"28ö 3s Od net t,
ntitted by the Secretary and signed 'by the Chairrnan.
ANN AGASSA-X PIER.
Mr Michael Meade requested perrnission of the Council,
which was granted, to direct attention to the unsa tisfaetory
11 ad been
position in which the pier works at Annag%ssan
work had been
TIW
left by t.he of Agriculture.
suspen€led and u•a.s ine•omplete, but nevertheless irnporCs of
8
roal, etc., wore being landed at the pier, and no dues were
collectable as the Board of Trade had not given their eer-
tifiea€e. He pointecl Olit t haf Choro was a provision in the
Provisional Order that even though the works were incornplete,
that if the necessary certificate were given, the Harbour
Commissioners could insist on the (Ilies being paid, and re-
quested the Council to move in the matter.
The County Surveyor informed tho Council
that, in his
opinion, the Harbour was not yet in a condition to be taken
over, and that it would be desirable to see the effect of the
winter tides before anything definite was done. He stated
Chat, there were no mooring posts erected, although these were
specified for in the eon tract.
Mr Skeffington stated that he thought that it was the
Harbour Commissioners should move in the rnatter, as they
were tho properly constituted authonf.v under Che Provisional
()rder.
It was eventually cloci(led to direct the Soeretary to reques€
Harbour Commissioners to meet and report on the lijatter.
CO-OPTION OF COUNTY COUNCILLOR. FOR. DICE.
The following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Michael Mende, Esq ;
Seconded by Patrick M 'Gee, WI, J P, and
Resolved—That we hereby co-opt Mr James T M 'Gee, ot
Roodstown, as County Councillor
for tho Electoral Division
of Arcieo.
REDW.VI'ER. IN CA'IVI'I,E.
The consideration of tho letter
from the
Depart menf
of
9
Agriculture relative to the treatment for Redwater in Cattle,
which appeared on page '21 of the printed Minutes, was next
on the agenda. This lotter suggested that if the Council
decided to establish tanks for the purpose of expert menting
for the treatment of the disease the Departinent would approve
Of the trials being undertaken by the Louth County Committee
of Agriculture, and that the expenditure would be defrayed
from the joint fund of the Committee ancl the l)epartrnellt
The ma tter was discussed by the Council, blit no orcler was
made.
PURCHASE OF GYLF,S' QUAY BOAT SLIP.
The next item on the Agenda wais the consideration of two
whicll appeared on pages 30 ancl 51
letter frotn the L.G.B.,
respectively of the printed Minutes. In these letters it was
pointed out that in eonneetion with the acquisition of the
Boat Slip it was presumed that the County Council had in
view the levying of tolls or pounclage.s for the use of the Boat
Slip as part of the Quay. and that any tolls to be levied would
require to be fixed by the Comrnissioner.s of Public Works,
which latter body stated that they bacl no power to frame bye-
laws for the regulation of the Quay, or to fix a schedule of
tolls for the use of the Boat Slip. Il'he County Council Ivere
asked €0 further consider the proposal.
After discussion
Tho following resolution was passed unanimously :—
Proposed by Peter Woods, Esq, J P ;
Seconded by Michael Sleacle, Esq, and
Resolved —That, ,having considered the letters from the
Local Government _130ard of Che 17th September aml 22nd
Septetnber, 1945, we hereby decide to proeecul with the pur-
10
chase of the Boat Slip at Gyles' Quay Harbour, and request
the sanction of the Local Governnjent Board to the purchase.
BACI'ERIOLOGIST FOR COUNTY LOUTH.
The Council next considered the request conveyed to them
by Dr Brian O'Brien, Medical Inspector of the Local Govern-
rnent Board, suggesting the appointment of a Bacteriologist
fo aid in the prevention, diagnosis, and treatntent of disease in
the County of Louth.
A fter discussion the following resolution was unanimously
adopted :—
Proposed by Peter B Moorv, FAI, J P
Seconded by W T Skeffington, Esq, J P, and
Resolved—That having considered the request conveyed to the
Council Dr Brian O'Brien, late Medical Inspector of the
Local Governntent Board, for the appointinent of a bacteriolo-
gist for the County of Louth, we are of the opinion that the
incurring of expenditure for this purpose at the present abnor-
njal tillie is undesirable, and we postpone the consideration of
same for six rnonths.
PROPOSED AGREEMENT BETWEEN 'I'HE COUNTY
COUNCIL ANI) CO. LOUTH I.NStJR.\.NCf COMMITTEE
FOR TUBERCULOSIS TREATMENT.
The f0110iiGng report of the Conference between the Tubercu-
losis Corn mittee c. f Mat!agcunent and the Insurance Committee
was read •
Cou•nty of Louth Tuberculosis Conjmittee of Managetnent.
Report of Conference held on M'ednesdny, the 27th day of
11
Oe€obor, 1915, and resumed on Wednesday,
t,he day of
November, 1915, between Representatives of Che Tuberculosis
Committee of Management and the County Louth Insurance
Committee to consider the terms of the agreement proposal €0
be entered into between the County Council ancl the Insurance
Cornrnittoe for the treatrnen€ of Insured and Exempt Persons
suffering from Tuberculosis.
There were presen t '—Presi(ling: C A Duffy, Esq, J p,
M C C. Other Hamill, Esq, J P,
M CC; wm Woods, Esq, J P; M CC; O'RouAce, Esq,
M C C; P Fagan, P P; A G M •Kenna, Mrs M A I-Inm-
ill, P L G; James Hughes and James
-Dr .J A M•Quillan, T M O; D O'Connell, Esq,
Also present :-
Sclicitor; Charles M'Alestor, Esq, Seeretary County Council ;
Dr Browne, L G B Inspector, ancl V AVarren, -Soeretnry to Cono-
mittee.
A Model 'Form of Agreement furnis11A by t.ho Local Govern-
ynent Board, after eons111tati011 with the Insurance Commis.sion
(Ireland) sub;n ittecl and considered Clause by Cla use ,
which concisely the County Council shall render
eertain services to the Insurance in return for
a
sum calculated at the rate of Is 2d (one shilling and twopence)
resident in the county, which
pet• insured person per an n
estitnnted at insured persons realises L'SIG.
cos to b? rendered in return for this contribution :—
(1) The Tuboreulo.si.s Medical Officer shall act as eclieal
Adviser to the Insurance Committee.
('2) The use of the Council's Dispensaries and Staff for i me
examination and ilea tnaent of patients.
(3) The provision of Sloefring Shel [ers,
12
(4) Provide in a sanatorium for treatment of not more than
21 insured persons, and (a) surgical eases in the Louth
County Iniirtnary.
Provide treatntent other than that specified above in a
(5)
Inanner approved by the Local Government Board.
Tt is, Irnvever, specified that the Is 2cI (one shilling and two-
pence) shall be divided into Iwo parts, i.e. 8d and (id. The 8d
to he devoted solely to Institutional Treattnent, i.e. :
(n) A sum calculated at Sd, i.e. 4/7 of ESIG, or for Institutional
Treatment.
()ne-fifth of the Medical Oflicer's Salary and Travelling Expenses,
i.e. fifth of 2500, or E 100 for Dispensary system.
(c) Balance remaining, or E251 for Treatinent other than in Institu-
tions.—Total. ESIG.
PAR'I'ICULARS OF THE COUNCIL'S SCHEME.
as outlined,
of January,
which
1916,
13
we to operate from the 1st day
and remain in operation for t',vo years.
V. WARREN,
Secretary tl'ubereulosis Connnittee.
RECEIPTS.
E
Co. Council (rate ld) in
900
the C,
Insu rnnee Cornmittee,
14,000, nt Is 2d
SIG
Total, E171C,
EXPENDITURE.
o
o
0
d
O
o
0
Medical Officer,
Nurse.
. 500
84
12 Beds at Pemnount,
at 25s each per week, 780
Louth Infirmary—
Two Beds.
I)istrict Nurses,
I )ispensaries—
All heads,
Medicines, etc.,
Sec retary.
52
80
70
50
General Adlninistration IO
for other
Balance
30
Treatinent,
Total,
o
o
o
o
o
o
0
c
O
o
o
o
o
o
0
N. B. —The County Council Shail receive from the L. G.B. one-half of
their nett expenditure.
It was proposed by Mr B Ilmnill,
Secondecl by Mr Will Woods, ancl
Resolved—That we approve of the Agreeiljent and Schetne
5th November, 191ö.
The following letter from the Insuranee Contliliftee was also
read
Insurance Corn rnittee i'or the County of Louth.
9(), Clanbrassil Street,
Dundalk, 11th Nov., 1913.
Dear Sir,
I ani directed by the Insurance Comillittee for
the County of Louth to inforlji you they have had uncler their
consideration the I vport of the Conference 'between Represen-
tatives of Lhe Tuberculosis Conlillittee of Managenjenf and the
A greement in connection
Insurance Committee telative to the
with the Seherne for the tceattnent of Tuberculosis; and, witli
reference thereto, the Committee desire to draw attention to
the terms as set out in Clause 2 (d) and Co request the Coun-
eil's opinion as to the advisability of inserting the words six
beds in a sanatoriulll and one bed in the Louth Illfirnjary for
insured persons, instead of specifying and thereby eonlilling
treattnent in a sanatorium to '24 insured persons, and in the
Louth Infirtnary to 4 insured persons respectively.
Yours faithfuly,
V. WARREN,
Secretary.
Ila
On the motion of Mr Hamill, Che Council
agreed to accept the suggestion of the Insurance Conunittee.
and to recotnmend that the nutnber of beds (6) in a sanatorium,
and one for surgical eases in the County Infirmary for insured
and exempt persons, should be inserted in the Agreenwnt in-
stead of a specific number of persons,
The matter of the Agreement was discussed at length, and
Mr Skeffington suggested that a.s the matter was very ilnpor-
tant and roquired considera tion, thai the Report should be in
the hands of all the members of the County Council before
(Iocision was arrived at.
Tho Council tvnanimously (leei€lod to adopf Mr Skeffington's
view, and the Secretary was (liroeted to have the Report prin-
10€1' and circulated to tho nuember.s of the Council, and place
the consi(101'0tion of the agreement on the agenda for the acl-
journo{l quarterly meeting to bo held on the 25th November.
DROGHEDA TUBERCULOSIS DISPENSARY.
A lotter was road from the Tuberculosis Committee of Man-
:ogetnent referri ng to the County Coincil the question of the
Bra neh Dispensary for Drogheda. The letter stated that a,
site for the Dispensary had been approved by the L G B, who
had furn the Cotnnlittee with a model plan, and directing
that, tho cost of the building should not exceed
Tile
Cotiuni€tee referred the matter to the I)roglleda
representati-
ves, buf notwithstanding the fact that two nwetings had been
specially ea lied of these latter gentlentell it lind been irnpossil)le
'l'he Til bereulosis Corn-
to get a urn to €leeide the Inatter.
Illitteo now requested tho Coun ty Council to issue their
(l i ree-
tions on the tier.
After discussion it was cleei(led to refer the ntatter
back to
the Tuberculosis Cornmittee, who were fo endeavour to arrive
af some definite decision, and report flie result to the adjour-
quarterly tneeting of the Council,
15
DEATH OF MR. HENRY O'CONNELL, DC-XDALK.
The folowing resolution of sympa thy was passed in silence,
all members present stancling :
Proposed by W T Skeffington, Esq, .J P;
Seconded by Peter B Moore, E.sq, J P, and
Resolved—That we learn with regret of the death of Mr.
Henry O'Connell, who was formerly a respected member of this
Cdjuncil, and we beg to tender to Mrs O'Connell and family our
deep sympa thy in their bereavement.
COR R ESPO.XDENCE.
NOTICE OF AI'DIT.
Notice from R J Sewell, Esq•, Local Government Auditor,
dated the 9th Novotnber, was read, stating that 110 would at-
tend at, tile Courthouse, l)undalk, on Wednesday, 17th No-
vember, for the purpo.se of auditing the accoun[s of the Louth
County Council for the half years ended 31st Marell aml
September, 1915.
'I'he following letters were read and ordered to be inserted
on the minutes :
Parochial House,
Ardee, 4th Soptenibor, 1,915.
My Dear Mr M •Alester,
Alay I ask you to convey to the Louth
County Council my thanks for thOir very kind resolution of
I need hardly say
eongratulation on Iny recent appointment.
how much I value the approval of the IJi0St important public
It will encourage me to do anything I can
body in our county.
according to my opportunities for the public: weal, especially
in this little county of whose prosperity and
not without sonre reason proud.
I beg to thank you also for your personal
the sentiment of the resolution.
Yours very sincerely,
progress we are
association with
r. LYONS.
17
Dear Mr M 'Alester,
Big Ash, 2-9-15.
Braganstown, Castlebellingham,
30th August, 1915.
Dear Mr M' Ales€er,
Pray convey to the Loutll County Council
my deep sense of gratitude for the resolution of synipathy
passed by thelil on the death of my only son, Major Garstin,
killed in action against the Turks. His untiniely but heroic
fate cut short a noble ancl protnising life, but his bright exant-
ple will not have •been in vain.
Accept my thanks for the kindly way in which you convey
the resolution.
Faithfully yours,
JOHN It. GARSITS.
Dundalk, 28th August, 1,915.
Dear MSAlester,
I .have to thank you for forwarding the kind
rseolution of synjpathy on the death of my dear son, passed
by the Louth County Council at their meeting on the 26th.
Please assure your Council Chat I sli&ll always cherish the me-
rnory of their goodness to me on this sad occasion.
Faithfully yours,
J. N. ARMSTRONG.
Will you please convey my grateful thanks
to the tnembers of Louth County Council for their kind vote of
syrnpath.v on the death of my uncle.
Yours sincerely,
MICHAEL WARDLE.
MEE'H.NG OF GENERAL COUNCIL COUNTY COUNCILS.
Notice was read from the Secreta ry inforrning the County
Council tha€ the Annual Meeting would be held on Friday,
10th December, at the Office of the Dublin County Council, 11,
Rutland Square, and that any questions the Council would de-
sire to have discussed at the meeting should reach hilli on or
before 25th Noveniber.
OVERDUE ACCOUNTS.
Circular letter from the L G 13 dated 8th Sovern ber, was
read, pointing out that with reference to overdue accounts,
the date on which a claitn becomes legally due is that on which
the services for which payment is claimed are completed, and
not on any other date for which a certificate of the correctness
of the claim is made. The letter was initialled by the Chair-
inan.
RATE COLLECTION.
The following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man :
Local Governtnent Board,
Dublin, 8th -November, 1915.
No. 59238/1915.
Louth County.
Sir,
With reference to the return showing the condi-
18
lion on the 30th ultimo, of the eollection of the poor rate for
the current half year in Louth County, I am directed by the
Local Government Board for Ireland to state that they regret
to note that the Collectors generally have made no effort €0
eolleet the rates in the early portion of the half year ; and that
one of tho Collectors have made any lodgment in respect
of the second moiety, which is payable on the 1st October.
I am, Sir.
Your obedient Servant,
A. R, BARLAS,
See retary.
The following lotter submitted by the General Council
Cc.unty Councils was read and initialled by the Chairman
The Irish Land Commission,
21, Upper Merrion Street,
Dublin, 1st September,
Sir,
of
\Vith reference to the communication which has
boon received from your Council, asking that the names of
those persons who have not paid their Land Purchase Annui-
ties, with the result that the latter have become a. charge on
have reduced the
the Guarantee Fund, and, consequently,
etnounts payable annually to the different County Councils
from the Local Taxation Account, should be fitrnishecl fo those
Councils: I am directed by the Irish Land Commissioners to
in fortn you Cirat the matter has received very careful eonsi(lern-
with tho approval of His Majesty's
[ion, and they now
Govern njent, arranged to furnish ( •ou nty Councils with copies
of the lists of defaulting tenant-pureha•ser.s sent to their solici-
fors for legal proceedings itnnuuliatel.v after [he annual deduc-
These lists will contain the
tion from the Guarantee Fund.
19
names of the great majority of the chronic defaulters, and the
County Councils, with these lists before then), will have anjple
opportunity for taking whatever steps they rnay consider (Ie-
siral)le with the object of securing the protnpt payment of an-
nuities, and thereby avoiding a charge against the county
ra tepa vers.
The Comrnissioners trust Chat this arrangetnent will JneeC the
wishes of your Council.
I am Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
GEORGE H. GREEN.
The Secretary,
General Council of County Councils,
Cavendish House,Rutland Square, Dublin.
Letter was read from Mr T J Byrne, J P, regretting his
inability to attend the nweting of the Council, as he was at-
tending a Special Meeting of the Richmond Asylum Board, to
consider the establishment of a herd of pig breeding and feed-
ing.
SPEED LIMIT OF MOTORS IN DUNDALK URBAN AREA.
An application fronj the Urban Council requesting
the County Council to apply to the L G B to fix a speed limit
for motor traffic in at a rate of ten Illiles per hour
was read, hut as the necessary maps, etc, had not been lodged
with the application, the Secretary was directed to point out
the otnission to the Town Clerk, and say that when the njap.s,
had been lodged the ma tier would be considered by the
etc,
County Council at their next meeting.
SON-ACCEPTANCE 014' CHAIRMAN'S RESIGNATION.
The Chairrnan (.l,ieut. Doran) in very irnpres.sive language
20
tendered his resignation a.s Chairman of the County Conneil.
He pointed out that as he was immediately to proceed with his
division to the seat of war, that he considered it .his duty to
tender his resignation, his view being that the complex work
oi the Council required minute personal attention, ancl ex-
pressing grateful thanks for tho honour conferred upon him
by seleeting him for such a coveted position
On the motion of Mr Skeffington, J P
Seconded by Mr Hamill, J P,
IC was unanimously resolved as follows we, the
Louth County Conncil, do not accept the resignation of our
worthy Chairman, and press him in the strongest manner to
re-eonsider his decision.
21
finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at, their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Du ndalk,
on Monday, 15th November, 1915, at one o'clock, p m.
Present the Chair: James Wynne, E,sq, J P.
Other Woods, .J P; John F Murphy, .J P;
and Thomas O'Rourke, Esquires.
Mr Thomas Walsh, County Surveyor, was in attendance.
The minutes of the previous meeting of the Finance Com-
mittee wetT taken as read and signed by tlie Chairman.
The following accounts were stilj:nitted, and on examination
were ordered for payment :
Works in Charge of the County Surveyor
Secretary's Office
Tota I
C73 17 G
29 (i O
The Bank Books for [he General and Subsidiary Aeeou•nts
were examined and initialled by the Chairman.
COLLECTION.
The Seereia ry subrnitted the usual monthly report of the
state of the rate collection in the county, from which it ap-
22
peared that no money had been lodged by any of the collectors
during the month of October.
DUNDALK URBAN DISTRICT DEMAND.
Letter was read frotn Mr Cornet-ford, Town Clerk, Dundalk,
enclosing Paying ()rder C'2,ö36 14s 9(1, being the first instal-
tnent of the County Council's Demand on the Dundalk Urban
The letter was initialled by the Chairmarl.
I)istrict Council.
SHEEP DIPPING PROSECUTIONS.
Letters were read front the Council's Solicitor giving results
of prosecutions at Drogheda and Dunleer Petty Sessions of
sheep owners' for offences against the Sheep Dipping (Ireland)
Order of 1915, and were initialled by the Chairman. Follow-
ing are the results :—
PATRICK ROONEY, Mountmills, Newry, exposed for
150 sheep in Drogheda Market on tho 4th Septetnber, 1915,
without producing the Declaration of having twice dipped the
sheep within the Autumn Dipping period. Fined C8 lös Od
(Cid per sheep) and CI costs.
ROBERT SKELLY, Banbridge, exposed sale
11 sheep in same Iitaket, on the 11th Septenlber, 1915, without
producing l)eclaration referred to. l*'ined CI Is (Is (id per
sheep) and Cl costs.
against JOHN FI'I'ZPA ICK, Clanawhillan,
13r.vansford, was further adjourned as the Constable who proves
this case in Liverpool on official business.
THOM AS M A'I'HEWS, .Ne„Htll, Castlebellinghalil, 4 sheep.
Fined 5s and 7s (RI costs.
23
PATRICK MATHEWS, T'u[lyclonnell, 9
Fined 2s Gd and 7s Gd costs.
NICHOLAS COONEY, Ca„ieknashannagll, Dunleer,
7
lambs. Fined Is and 7s Gd costs.
OWE-N MORGAN, Brownstown, Monasterboiee, (j sheep and
5 laniixs. Fined ös and 7s (id eosts.
ined Is and
JAMES
(j rains.
7s (id costs.
NICHOLAS MAR KEY, Caniekbaggof, 2 sheep.
Fined '2s Gd and 7s (id costs.
.JOH.X PORI,I.X, Newtown, Colion, 3 Fined '2s fid
and 7s Gd costs.
JOHN HAIR -M ON, Salter.stown, Dunleer, 9 sheep. Fined
5s and 7s fid costs.
Fined 5s and 7s
PETER CA I,LAGHA.X, 14 sheep.
Gd costs.
Fined
JOSEPH M •GEE, Rieha rds€own, Dilli leer, '7 sheep.
5s and 7s (id costs.
In the case of JAMES O'HAGAN, ()rneatll, the service has
not yet been effeetecl by the police as this owner travels very
mneli around the eountry with sheep.
FOOD ANI) DRUGS ACTS.
Letter was read from [he Department of Agriculture dated
9th -Noveniber, 1915, No. G 4,383-1.3, informing the Council
that their officer obtained satnples of butter at Ardee, County
Louth, on 12th October, that the sanil)les were submitted to
the County Anal"t, who certifies that they proved to be pure.
The letter initialled by the Chairman.
24
SALARY OF CLERK TO LOCAL AUTHORITY.
'I'he following letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
man :
I)epartment of Agriculture,
Diiblin, 6th ber, 1915.
No. 4039-13.
Silo
With reference to your reply of 3rd instant to this
Department's letter, No. 3670-15, of I(jth ultimo, I have to
state that the Department are prepared, in all the eiretnnstan-
ee.s, to agree to the proposal of your Local Authority that the
deduction to be made from your salary of per annum as
Clerk to the Local Authority in respect of the fact that the
duties under the Tuberculosis (Ireland) Order have ceased for
the time being, should be at tho rate of CIO per annum.
The Department accordingly hereby sa netion the proposed
revised rate of salary as Clerk to the Local Authority in your
case of L'9() per annum, subject to Che eonsicleration that, in
the event of operations aga inst Tuberculosis being resumed in
future, the salary shall not be increased again 'by any larger
amount than CIO per annum.
I am, Sir,
Your
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
01 ion t,
Servant,
Gil,L, Secretary.
DROGHEDA DISTRICT COUNCIL
ACCOUNT'S.
Letters were read from the L G B dated 6th Novetnljer,
No. 57674-15, and 9th November, '1.3, No. 57675-1.3, enclosing
25
the audited aeeounts of the Drogheda Union and District Coun-
eil respectively, together with the Auditor's Reports, which
were initialled by the Chairman.
AGREEMENT BETWEEN COUNTY COUNCIL ANI)
INSURANCE COMM VITEE.
The following letter Ivas read and referred to the County
, Council
Local Govern ment Board,
Dublin, 12th Novetnber, 1915.
No. 58,326-15.
Sir:
I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Ireland to advert to their circular lettér of the 13th ultimo,
relative to Agreements between County and County Borough
Councils ancl Insurance Committees in regard to the treatment
of insured and exempt persons recommended for Sanatorium
Benefit; and I am to state that as the question of representa-
tion of the Insurance Committee on the Tuberculosis Corn-
mittee is likely to corne before the Councils in connection with
the completion of Agreements, the 130arcl desire €0 point out
that they have been advised that the Cotnmittee could enter
into no arrangement which would have the effect of fettering
their successors in the exercise of the discretion given in refer-
ence to the appointment of a Committee of Management by
Seetion 5 of the Tuberculosis Prevention (Ireland) Act, 1908.
I am, Sir,
Your cibedient Servant,
A. R. 13 AR LAS, Secretary,
To the Secrecary of each County Council.
for groining frotti Willistown plantation, which I
requires to be thinned.
Your obedient Servant,
FORESTRY SCHEME.
The following letter was rend and referred to
Council •
Francis Street, Dundalk,
26
SAI,TERSTOW.X ('OAST ROAD.
Tho following letter was read and referred to the
County
Council :—
County Surveyor's Office, l)undalk,
15th Noveniber,
1915.
To the Chairman and Gentlernen of the Fina nee Conunittee.
Gentlernen,
The Ardee R. I). Council approved a stun of
CGO for protection work to the Salterstown Road leading to
the Boat Slip.
I having the work etirriecl out, and beg to
ask if the Connty Cot:neil would be able to supply sotne trees
THOMAS WA 1ST].
understand
the
13th Novenjber,
Cou
1915.
Estate of the Irish I -and Commission, Fortnerly Estate Of
Lord Raihdonnell, County Louth, E.T.A.
Ihar Sir,
Adverting to my letter to you of the 16th August
last, requesting instructions to snbtnit the draft scheme pre-
pared by for approval of the Department of Agriculture
and 'l'eehnieal Instruction for Ireland, and also of the Esta fes
Conunissioners, when the Council decided that inquiries should
'27
be made as to the possibility of purchase by the Council of
(Dneath Park, that this property Illight yet be included in the
scherne, I u ould now ask for instructions in the matter as Che
Council's offer for purchase has not been accepted.
The property of the above-Ineniioned Estate which is the sub-
ject of the draft Forestry Schetne is, as you are aware, a plan-
talion at Willistown.
Yours faithfully,
DSSIEL O'CONNELL.
Sew•retary Louth County Council.
SOLICITOR'S BILL OF COSTS.
Letter was read from Mr Daniel O'Conne'I, enclosing Bill
of Costs for half year ended September, atnounting to the
surn of C87 1.7s Sd, together with requisition to tax. It was
unaninjously decided to reconnnend the affixing of the Seal of
the Council to the requisition, and to appoint Mr P L Ma-
cardle, Solicitor, to represent the Council at the taxation.
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S APPLICATION.
Letter was read from Mr Walsh, County Surveyor, request-
ing leave oi absence from Thursday, 18th instant, until Wed-
nesday, 24th instant. for the purpose of hav:ng a slight opera-
tion performed in Dublin by a Specialist. The Cotnmittee un-
aninjousl.v decided to grant the application.
DATE OF ARDEE QUARTERLY MEETING.
Letter was read from Mr l)rotngoole, Clerk of Ardee I)istrict
Council, dated 13th -Noventber, stating .his Council would be
glad if the date for the Fourth Quarterly Meeting of their
Council could be fixed for 11th January. The Secretary infor-
med the Committee that the 4th January had now been fixed
by the County Council for the holding of the meeting, and this
The Secretary was directed to inforlll
would require to stand.
Mr Dromgoole accordingly.
SIR CHARLES CAMERON'S REPORT.
The following Report was read and initialled by the Chair-
n;an :—
Report of Sir Charles Cameron, C B, Public Analyst for the
County Louth, on articles submitted to him for Analysis
during the quarter ended 30th Septelllber, 1915 :—
27 articles were received frorn the Food Inspectors, R, I C, as
follows —Butter 14 satnples, Milk 4, Cocoa 3, Whiskey 3, Mus-
tard 2, Cheese I. Total, 27. They were all pure. There were
four specimens of butter analysed by directions from the De-
partment of Agriculture, which were taken up in the County
Louth. One contained an excess of water, namely, 21.8 per
cent. One specilnen of water analysed for the Guardians of
Ardee Union had the following compositions imperial
gallon contained in grains. Total solid matter 39.200, inelud-
ing Albutninoid Ammonia Saline Amnjonia 0.001, Nitric
A good water.
Acid 2.500, Chlorine 3.090, Colour, colourless.
Ardee, was
One specimen of milk analysed for Mrs M 'Keever,
of rich quality. In the original report on the wafer above re-
ferred to, full details, chemical and microscopical, were given,
but in the foregoing, only the more irnportant points are given.
'Total analyses, 33.
CHARLES A. CAMERON.
