1913-15.


LOCAL 'GOVERNMENT(IRELAND) ACT,
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL,
MINUTES
PROCEEDINGS
LOUTW COUNTY COUNCIL
Al their' •Third Ouårterly' Meeting held in the Council
on Thursday, 14th November;
, Adjourned Quarterly Meeting, held on Thurs: %
day,' 48th Nove!nber, 19124 -Special •Meeting held
on Thursday, '9th January; '@13'.
FINANCE. COMMITTEE
At ftheir 'Special,Mééting held on Monday, •i8th Noven$
ber,11912 Meeting held on Monday,05th Noveni-Cj
ber , T Monday, 9th December; Monday, 23rd
Décember, 1912 ; 6th January, i9i3.
PROPOSAL COMMITTEEc
At their Meeting held on: Monday,' 6th Januarys
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) ACT, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At their Third Quarterly Meeting held in the Council
Chamber, Dundalk, on Thursday, 14th November,
1912 ; Adjourned Quarterly Meeting held on Thurs-
day, 28th November, 1912 ; Special Meeting held
on Thursday, 9th January, 1913.
FINANCE COMMITTEE
At their Special Meeting held on Monday, 18th Novem-
ber, 1912 ; Meeting held on Monday, 25th Novem-
ber; Monday, 9th December ;
Monday, 23rd
December, 1912 ; 6th January, 1913.
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE
At their Meeting held on Monday, 6th January, 1913.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council
at their third Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council
Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Thursday, 14th
November, 1912, at one o'clock.
Present
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq„ J.P.
Other Members—J ames Connolly, J.P. ; John Dolan,
Joseph Dolan, Wm. A. Doran, Chas. A. Duffy, J.P. ,
Bernard Hamill. J.P. ; Joseph M. Johnson, Patrick
Kearney, Joseph H. M' Ardle, James M 'Carthy, Richard
Matthews, John F. Murphy, J.P. ; Patk. O'Connell,
Michael O'Meara, Denis J. Rath, Peter Woods, J.P. ,
Wm. Woods, J.P. ; and James Wynne, Esquires.
I.
2.
3.
4.
AGENDA.
Confirmation of Minutes of the Council.
Confirmation of Finance Committee Minutes.
Confirmation of Piers and Harbours' Minutes.
Consider List of Proposals for Payments fognulated
by the Rural District Councils and Proposal Com-
mittee.
4
5. Fix dates for Fourth Quarterly Meetings of Rural
District Councils and Proposal Committee.
6. The further -consideration of the County Council
Scheme for the treamtent of the Tuberculous Population
of the County.
7. The further consideration of Mr. Charles E. M 'Cann's
application for superannuation.
8. The further consideration of Mr. Murray's appli-
cation of 5th September last.
9. Correspondence.
10. Notice of Motion :—
I hereby give notice that I shall move at next
meeting of the County Council—
That a Bye-Law be passed to extend to the
whole County of Louth, that every person who in
any public street or road is guilty of any riotous
or indecent behaviour, or who uses any blasphemous
or indecent expressions, shall be liable to a penalty
not exceeding forty shillings, and that any Constable
may take into custody, without a warrant, and
forthwith convey before a Justice of the Peace, any
person who within his view commits such an
5
' I hereby give notice that I will move at next
12.
meeting of the County Council that we rescind the
order requiring the Rate Collectors to lodge full
amount of their warrant each half-year, and that
we adopt Part One of the Local Government Board
Order, requiring them to lodge each half-year
90 per cent. of their warrants."—Signed,
8th Nov., 1912.
B. HAMILL.
RESOLUTIONS OF THE COUNTY COUNCIL, 14th NOVEM-
BER, 1912.
Proposed by Mr. Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Duffy, J .P.
Resolved—That the Minutes of the Meetings of the
Council held on the 15th August, 5th September, 26th
September, and the 4th November, 1912, having been
printed and a copy sent to each member were taken as
read and were confirmed.
Proposed by Mr. Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Dtlffy, J.P., and
Resolved—That the Minutes of the Finance Com-
mittee on the following dates be and are hereby adopted
offence.' '—Signed,
14th October, 1912.
DENIS J. RATYI.
' I hereby give notice that I will move at the
11.
next meeting of the County Council to rescind the
Scheme arranging for Tuberculous Patients to be
treated in Peamount Sanatorium, and that a new
Scheme be drafted providing for the erection of a
Sanatorium for this County.' '—Signed,
by this Council, viz. .
8 July—see printed Minutes, page
22
7 August
12
19
2nd Sept.
16
14th Oct.
11th Nov.
29
29
30
32
34
37
42
43
55
8th Nov., 1912.
B. HAMILL.
6
That the Council refuse to comply with the Local
Government Board's letter of 24th October, asking them
to call on Mr. Hughes, Rate Collector, to resign, owing
to the fact that the Council gave the Collectors one
month's extension of time to close their collection and
Mr. Hughes closed within that period.
Proposed by Mr. J. M. Johnson,
Seconded by Mr. B. Hamill, J.P.,
Resolved—That we ratify, approve and adopt the
minutes of proceedings of the Finance Committee held
011 Monday, 30th September, 1912, with the addition of
the following letter from the Department of Agriculture,
and the resolution following in connection therewith.
Copv OF LETTER.
26th September, 1912.
DEAR SIR,
I have to state for the information of the Louth
County Council that the Department have had a further
report made in respect of the quayat Dullany. The general
condition of the place do not seem favourable for any
large expenditure from the Department funds, but it
is now understood that the County Council are pre-
pared to interest themselves in the matter. The De-
partment would be prepared to reconsider the question
of making contribution in conjunction with the County
Council for the purpose of providing an extension of
the quay in question. It is suggested that this should
take the form of a concrete groyne, the cost of which
is estimated at about 1500. The Department are there-
fore willing to contribute within a limit of {250 one
half of the actual cost involved, provided the other half
be forthcoming locally.
I am, dear Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
T. P. GILL
Resolved—That we strongly recommend the Louth
County Council to consent to the offer of the Depart-
ment of Agriculture, and agree to bear one half of the
cost of repairs to Dunany Pier—cost not to exceed {250.
Same to be a County-at-large charge, including Urban
Districts.
Proposed by Mr. Rath,
Seconded by Mr. Doran, J. P.
Resolved—That the Minutes of the Piers and Harbours
Committee on the 21st October, 1912, be and are hereby
confirmed by the Council, as appearing on page 52 of
the printed minutes.
Proposed by Mr. Wm. A. Doran, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. R. Matthews.
Resolved—That the proposals for payments formu-
lated by the Ardee No. 1 Rural District at their third
quarterly meeting, held on Tuseday, the 5th day of
November, 1912, amounting to 1891 3s. 5d., as set out
on Form 22 furnished to the County Council, be and
are hereby approved of. (See page 55 printed minutes.)
Proposed by Mr. Rath,
Seconded by Mr. Joseph Dolall
Resolved—That the proposals for payments formu-
lated by the Drogheda ( 14011th) Rural District Council
at their third quarterly meetillg, held on 'I'hursday,
the 14th November, 1912, amounting to {606 17s. 1 ld.,
as set out on Form 22 furnished to the County Council,
be and are hereby approved of. (See page 55 printed
minutes.)
8
Proposed by Mr. Duffy, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Peter Woods, J . P.
Resolved—That the proposal for payments formu-
lated by the Dundalk Rural District Council at their
third quarterly meeting, held on Monday, the 4th Nov.,
1912, amounting to 11739 19s. od., as set out on Form 22
furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby ap-
proved of. (See page 55 of printed minutes.)
Proposed by Mr. James Wynne,
Seconded by Mr. C. A. Duffy, J.P.
Resolved—That the proposals for payments formu-
lated by the Proposal Committee at the third quarterly
meeting, held on Monday, 11th November, 1912,
amounting to 15,052 2s. 10d., as set out on Form 22,
be and are hereby approved of.
Proposed by Mr. Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Wynne
Resolved—That the County Council hereby determine
that the following should be the dates for the holding of
the fourth quarterly meetings of the Rural District
Council and the Proposal Committee, viz. :
Ardee No. I—Tuesday, 7th January, 1913.
Drogheda (Louth)—Thursday, 9th January, 1913.
Dundalk—Monday, 6th January, 1913.
The last day for lodging notices alid applications for
District Councils will be 17th December, 1912. The
Proposal Committee Ineet on Monday, 6th January,
1913. The last day for lodging applications for the
Proposal Committee will be 17th December, 1912.
9
Proposed by Mr. Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Murphy, J.P.
Resolved—That we approve of the regulations as to
admission of patients and the purchase of beds in the
Sanatoria provided or managed by the Women's National
Health Association of Ireland ; that we direct the seal
of the Council to be affixed to the agreement with the
Women's National Health Association of Ireland, and
that We order fronl the said Women's National Health
Association the following benefits forthwith, viz. .
Twelve beds, at 170 per bed, as cost of publishment.
Six beds for insured members and six beds for unin-
sured patients. The allocation of the funds at the
disposal of the County Council for Tuberculous treat-
ment in County Louth was referred to a Special Finance
Committee Meeting, to be held on Monday, the 18th
November, 1912.
Proposed by Mr. B. Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. John Dolan, and
Resolved—That we adopt the recommendation of
the Local Government Board, reducing the remuner-
ation from {28 to 125 12s. 5d. to Mr. M'Cann (query
No. 10). To be altered by our Secretary.
Proposed by Mr. Rath,
Seconded by Mr. M 'Carthy, J.P., and
Resolved—That the following notice of motion
standing in the name of Mr. Rath be hereby adopted :
That a Bye-Law be passed to extend to the whole
County of Louth, that every person who in any public
Street or road is guilty of any riotous or indecent behavi-
our, or who uses any blasphemous or indecent expres-
10
sions, shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding
forty shillings ; and that any Constable may take into
custody, without a warrant, and forthwith convey
before a Justice of the Peace, any person who within
his view commits such an offence.
14 Oct., 1912.
Signed,
DENIS J. RATH.
Proposed by Mr. Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Rath, and
Resolved—That the following notice of motion
standing in the name of Mr. Hamill be hereby approved
of :—
I hereby give notice that I will move at next meeting
of the County Council that we rescind the order re-
quiring the Rate Collectors to lodge full amount of their
warrants each half-year, and that we adopt Part One
of the Local Government Board Order, requiring them
to lodge each half-year 90 per cent. of their warrants.
11
being over age, the Council is strongly of opinion
that as Mr. Lyons holds the Degree of Bachelor of
Engineering, has been in the service of the County,
both under the Grand Jury and the County Council, for
28 years as Assistant County Surveyor and has a complete
practical knowledge of the requirements of the County ;
that he should be allowed to be a candidate for the
position and should be approved forthwith as a
qualified candidate.
Proposed by Mr. Doran, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Murphy, J.P., and
Resolved—That Mr. Finigan be paid his salary
due on producing an Insurance Card.
Nov., 1912.
Signed,
BERNARD HAMILL.
Proposed by Mr. J. M. Jollnson,
Seconded by Mr. Wm. Doran, J.P., and
Resolved—That referring to the letter of the Local
Government Board of the 8th November, 1912, as to
tbe ineligibility of J. M. C. Lyons, our acting County
Surveyor for the County of Louth, on the score of him
12
Minutes of Proceedings of Louth County Council at
their third adjourned quarterly meeting, held in the Council
Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Thursday, 28th day
November, 1912, at one o'clock.
Present :
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Patk. Byrne, J. P. ; Jas. Connolly, J .P.
Wm. A. Doran, J.P. ; Chas. A. Duffy, J.P. ; B. Hamill,
J. P. ; Patrick Kearney, James S. Kelly, Joseph H.
M' Ardle, James M'Carthy, J. P. ; Richard Mathews,
Patk. O'Connell, Peter Woods, J.P. ; and James Wynne,
Esquires. Also present—Drs. Irwin and M 'Quillan,
AGENDA.
1. Acting County Surveyor's Reports.
2. To consider Tenders for Works not taken by
contract at the Rural District Councils.
3. Consider List of Proposals for Works formulated
by the Rural District Councils.
4. The further consideration of the County Council
Scheme for the treatment of the 'Cuberculous Popu-
lation of the County.
5. The further consideration of Mr. Murray's appli-
cation of 5th September last.
6. 'ISo nominate a person to act on the Louth Insurance
Committee vice Mr. Patrick McGee, resigned.
7. Correspondence.
Proposed by Mr. Doran, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Kelly, and
Resolved—That the report of the Acting County
Surveyor for Ardee and Drogheda Rural Districts, as
appearing on page 1 of the Schedule of Proposals, furni-
shed to each member of the Council, be and is hereby
adopted.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Byrne, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Kearney, and
Resolved—That the report of the Acting County
Surveyor for Dundalk Rural District, as appearing on
page 1 of the Schedule of Proposals, furnished to each
member of this Council, be and is hereby adopted.
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S OFFICE, DUNDALK,
28th November, 1912.
To the County Council (Supplemental Report).
MR. CHAIRMAN AND beg to report
that the extension of the Electric Lighting System by the
Dundalk Urban Council to St. Patrick's Cemetery,
Dowdallshill, necessitating the erection of poles along
the footpath may diminish to some extent the ad-
vantage to be derived from the widening specified in
proposal No. 7 Dundalk Rural District now before you.
The poles have been erected in the usual way along the
outer edge of the footpath. When the widening speci-
fied has been carried out, 2ft. 6 ins. of the footpath
will project outside the poles. Poles without lights
14
so near the middle of the footpath may cause an
obstruction. I may add that several lamps attached
to poles near the town are a decided boon to persons
living in the Rural District. In considering this matter,
if proposal No. 7 were rejected. other arlangement*
might be mpde
i am, Ge•.ll.l.eme.?.
Vour Obed ient servp.:pt,
J. M. C. LVONS.
TENDERS FOR WORKS.
No. 8/10 Dundalk. To repair and maintain for
seven months, from ISt September, 1912, to the 31st
March, 1913, 450 perches of the road from Dundalk
to Ardee by Cavan and Stephenstown, between Mrs.
Rath's house in Ballybarrack and the first cross-road
at Stephenstown leading to Knockbridge. The tender
of Mathew Lynch, of Rathmore, was accepted at 145.
Proposed by Mr. Doran, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Kelly.
Resolved—That the proposals for works formulated
by the Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council at their third
quarterly meeting, held on the 5th day of November,
1912, and the contracts taken thereunder, as set out
on Form 20 furnished to the County Council, be and
are hereby approved of by this Council.
Proposed by Mr. M 'Carthy, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Kelly
Resolved—That the proposals for works formulated
by the Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union at their
15
third quarterly meeting, held on the 14th day of Nov.,
1912, and the contracts entered into, as set out on
Form 20 supplied to this Council be and are hereby
approved of.
Proposed by Mr. Duffy, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Byrne, J. P.
Resolved—That the proposals for works formulated by
the Dundalk Rural District Council at their 3rd quarterly
meeting, held on the 4th day of November, 1912, and
the contracts entered into, as set out on Form 20
furnished to this Council, be and are hereby approved
of, except No. 7 on the Schedule of Proposal, which
is referred back to the Rural District Council, and the
tender of Thomas Toner be rejected. That the Chair-
man, Messrs. W. A. Doran and J. M'Carthy be ap-
pointed to inspect the footpath and confer with a Com-
mittee representing the Urban Council and the Rural
District Council.
Proposed by Mr. Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. M 'Carthy, J.P.
Resolved—That all works not taken by contract
be placed in the hands of the Assisting County Surveyors
Proposed by Mr. Doran, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Kelly.
Resolved—That the Schenle for the treatment of
the Tuberculous Population of the County as recom-
mended by the Special Finance Committee meeting,
held on the 25th inst., be hereby approved of.
16
THE COURTHOUSE, DUNDALK,
5th September, 1912.
MR. CHAIRMAN AND I respect-
fully request that you will kindly reconsider your
decision on my application of 11th March last ; you
granted me {10 remuneration last year for the same
extra work.
Your obedient servant,
T. MURRAY, Court-keeper.
Proposed by Mr. Duffy, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Hamill, J.P.
Resolved—That Mr. Murray's application for LIO
be granted by the Council for extra work done during
the year 1912.
Proposed by Mr. C. A. Duffy, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Wm. A. Doran, J.P.
Resolved—That Mr. Richard Mathews be appointed
to act on the Louth Insurance Committee in room of
Mr. Patrick McGee, resigned.
Proposed by Mr. Hamill, J .P.,
Seconded by Mr. Wm. A. Doran, J.P.
Unanimously resolved—(l) That we condemn in the
strongest possible manner the tyrannical action of the
National Board in summarily dismissing Mr. Mansfield,
Vice-President of the Teachers' Organization, for his
public condemnation of the system of inspection in the
National Schools.
17
(2) That we call upon the Chief Secretary for Ireland
to secure a thorough investigation into the working of
the inspection system under the Board of National
Education, to include in this investigation the dismissal
of Mr. Mansfield, to produce the correspondence between
himself and the National Board on said dismissal, and
to ensure that the personnel of the Commission shall
be one commanding the confidence of the Teachers
and the Public. Copies of this resolution to be sent
to the Chief Secretary for Ireland, The Commissioners
of National Education, The M. P.s for North and South
Louth, Daily; Independent, and Mr. E. Mansfield.
DUNDALK GAELIC LEAGUE.
have been asked by above Committee to
request Louth County Council to give an expression of
opinion on proposed Birrell grant to pupils of primary
schools. Will you kindly make reference to this point
on agenda, if not too late.
P. M'DONNELL, Secretary.
Proposed by Mr. Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Kelly.
That this Council endorses the attitude taken
by the General Council of County Councils on the
scheme for Scholarships for pupils of primary
schools by Mr. Augustine Birrell, and that we decline
to relinquish our legal rights in the manner suggested
by the said scheme, having already declared Irish an
essential subject for Scholarships in the National
University of Ireland.
Amendment—
Proposed by Mr. Wm. A. Doran, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. J. H. M' Ardle.
That we proceed to the next business on the agenda.
On a division there voted for the amendment—
Messrs. Wm. A. Doran, Duffy, Wynne, P. Byrne,
P. Kearney and M 'Ardle—6.
Against the amendment—Messrs. Connolly, Hamill,
O'Connell, P. Woods, Kelly, M 'Carthy—6. The Chair-
man and Mr. Dolan did not vote.
The voting being equal the Chairman put the original
motion to a vote, with same result.
CORRESPONDENCE.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD, DUBLIN,
25th November, 1912.
SIR,—With reference to your letter of the 15th inst.
enclosing a resolution of the Louth County Council
proposing to rescind the order requiring Rate Collectors
to lodge the full amount of their warrants each half-
year, I am directed by the Local Government Board
for Ireland to draw attention to the terms of the Public
Bodies Order, 1904, the terms of which are mandatory.
If the Collectors in Co. Louth are not prepared to
carry out their duties in accordance with that order,
they should resign their positions, as exemptions cannot
be made in their favour.
I am, sir,
Vour obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
19
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD, DUBLIN,
27th November, 1912.
am directed by the Local Government Board
for Ireland to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
of the 23rd inst. relative to the proposed provisional
scheme for the treatment of persons in Louth County
suffering from Tuberculosis, and, in reference thereto,
I am to state that the Board observe that the cost of
the twelve beds at Peamount Sanatorium, which the
County Council propose to purchase is estimated at {70
per bed. The Board think it well to point out that this
figure is to be regarded at present as an approximate
estimate, and that the ultimate liability of the County
Council cannot be determined until the Institution has
been completed.
As regards the revenue account in connection with
the scheme, I am to point out that it would be well that
the County Council should ascertain from the County
Insurance Committee what proportion of the sum
available for Sanatorium benefit will be placed at the
disposal of the Council for meeting the expenses of the
scheme.
The Board desire to add that they have been advised
that an Insurance Committee are only empowered to
make arrangement with persons or local authorities
having the management of a Sanatorium or other
Institution for the treatment of Tuberculosis, con-
iequently the item relating to the maintenance of
Insured persons in Peamount Sanatorium will require
to be modified.
I am, sir,
Vour obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
20
NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE COMMISSION,
DUBLIN,
27th Nov., 1912.
SIR,—The National Health Insurance Commission
(Ireland) desire to state, for the information of the
County of Louth Insurance Committee, that they have
had before them a copy of a Scheme for the treatment
of cases of Tuberculosis in the County which is to come
up for discussion at the meeting of the Committee on
the 28th inst., with a view to its being recommended
to the County Council for adoption. The Commission
observe that, according to the statement in the Scheme
setting forth the estimated annual receipts and expen-
diture, a credit balance of 1884 would be available each
year, and they would therefore suggest to the Com-
mittee that this sum might with advantage be allocated
as follows :—
(a) In the provision of a whole time nurse, with an
allowance for travelling expenses.
(b) In the appointment of a Clerk in connection with
the proposed Central Dispensary, at a wage of say LI
a week, and (c) in supplementing the amount (L 100)
already set aside for domiciliary treatment, as that
amount is totally inadequate for the purpose. The
Commission would add that it is not practicable at the
present time to frame a reliable estimate of the amount
that would be required to meet the annual cost Of
domiciliary treatment.
I am, sir,
Vour obedient servant,
JOHN HULIHAN.
21
SPECIAL MEETING OF THE CO. COUNCIL
To confer with the Louth Insurance Committee
relative to the scheme for the treatment of the Tuber-
CUIOUS Population of County Louth.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council,
held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Thursday, 9th January, 1913, at one o'clock.
Present :—
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Messrs. Patrick Byrne, J.P. ; Chas.
A. Duffy, J.P. ; Bernard Hamill, J.P. ; Joseph M.
Johnson, Joseph P. Kearney, Joseph H. M' Ardle, John
F. Murphy, J.P. ; Patrick O'Connell, Wm. Woods, J.P. ,
Dr. Dickson, from Insurance Commission ; Dr. Brown,
from Local Government Board ; Dr. Irwin, from Women's
National Health Association ; and Dr. M'Qui11an, Ardee.
The following attended from the Insurance Com-
mittee :—Very Rev. .Archdeacon Segrave, P.P. ; Rev.
Canon Ford, M.A. ; Mrs. Duffy, Mrs. M' Kitterick,
Miss Patteson, Dr. Flood, James Hughes, and S. Locking-
ton, J.P.
AGENDA :
have been requested by the Chairman to call
a Special Meeting of the County Council, to be held on
Thursday next, the 9th day of January, 1913, at One
o'clock p.m., for the purpose of transacting the under-
mentioned business.
1. To confer with the Louth Insurance Committee
relative to the scheme for the treatment of the Tuber-
CUIous Population of County Louth.
2. Correspondence.
I am, sir,
Vour obedient servant,
T. F. FILGATE,
Secretary County Council.
Proposed by Chas. A. Duffy, Esq., J.P.,
Seconded by Patrick Byrne, Esq., J.P., and
Resolved—That we beg to tender to our esteemed
colleague, Captain Wm. De Salis Filgate, to Mrs. Filgate
and the members of their family our deepest sympathy
with them in their recent great bereavement, and that
our Acting Secretary be directed to forward copies of
this resolution to Captain Filgate and Mr. T. F. Filgate.
It was further proposed by Rev. Canon Ford, seconded
by Mr. J ames Hughes.and supported by Mrs.M'Kitterick,
That the Louth National Health Insurance Committee
desire to associate themselves with the foregoing
resolution.
SECRETARY'S OFFICE, COURTHOUSE,
DUNDALK,
16th December, 1912.
DEAR SIR,—I am directed by the Louth County
Insurance Committee to inform you that they have had
under their consideration the Scheme proposed by the
County Council for the treatment of Tuberculosis in
23
the County, and with reference thereto, they beg to
submit the following proposals to the Council for their
consideration.
(I) That the sum of one shilling and two pence per
insured person be handed to the County Council for the
treatment of Tubercular Insured Person and their
dependants.
(2) To expunge the words
1 Clerk for Insurance
Committee, etc., {75," and to insert " 1 Clerk for Central
Dispensary, {50.'
(3) That two Nurses and one Servant be procured for
Central Dispensary—principal, 180, Assistant, 140, and
Servant {10.
(4) That 125 of the {75 originally suggested as salary
for Clerk be devoted to Nurses travelling expenses.
(5) That the credit balance of the entire Scheme
should be devoted to Domiciliary and other forms of
treatment necessary.
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
VAL WARREN, Secretary.
Proposed by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Wm. Woods, J.P., and
Resolved—That the Scheme for the treatment of the
Tuberculosis Population of County Louth as provision-
ally adopted by the County Council be arnended by the
exclusion therein of the recommendation as set forth
in the letter of the County Insurance Committee, dated
the 16th day of December, 1912.
NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE COMMISSION,
DUBLIN,
7th January, 1913.
County Louth Insurance Committee.
SIR,—Adverting to your letter of the 4th ultimo cyn
the subject, I am directed by the National Health
Insurance Commission (Ireland) to state, for the infor-
mation of the Louth County Council, that Mr. Richard
Mathews, Knockdillon, Dunleer, has been notified that
he may now act as a member of the County of Louth
Insurance Committee.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
PIERCE KENT, Assistant Secretary.
25
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
SPECIAL FINANCE COMMITTEE MEETING.
Held in the Council Chamber, on Monday, the 18th
day of November, 1912, for the Purpose of allocating the
Funds at the disposal of the County Council for the treat-
ment of the Tuberculous Population of the County Louth.
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J. P.
Other Members—Messrs. J. F. Murphy, J.P. ; Patrick
O'Connell, J. H. M'Ard1e, Wm. Woods, J.P. ; J. Wynne,
C. A. Duffy, J.P. ; P. Byrne, J.P. Drs. O'Brien and
Irwin and Mr. O'Connell, Solicitor, were present.
The Committee were unanimous in recommending
the following tables for the approval of the County
Council
ESTIMATED INCOME AND CAPITAL EXPENDITURE.
Minimum Treasury
Purchase of 12 beds
Grant
in Peamount, viz. ,
{1783 0 0
6 for Insured per-
sons, and 6 for Un-
insured persons [840
Central Dispensary
with 6 observation
bedg
900
Drogheda Dispensary 100
Ardee & Carlingford,
each
50
Eight Shelters
110
{1783 0 0
12000
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
ESTIMATED ANNUAL
26
INCOME AND EXPENDITURE.
Number of Insured
persons at 1/3 per
1814
annum
A Id rate in 1000
Treasury Equivalent
Grant
1000
0
o
o
O
0
Rent of Dispensaries 150
Medical Officers Salary
and Expenses
500
2 Nurses & 2 Servants
in Central Dispens'y 130
Part time Nurses
80
Maintenance of same 104
Maintenance of Pat-
ients, including coal
and light,
312
Maintenance of Pat-
ients in Peamount 624
Patients Travelling
Expenses
30
Surgical Treatment
and Drugs
100
Domiciliary Treatment
not defined
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
27
FINANCE COMMITTEE MEETING.
Held in the Council Chamber, on Monday, 25th Nov.,
1912, at one o'clock p.m.
In the Chair—C. A. Duffy, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Alessrs. B. Hamill, J.P. ; J. Connolly,
J.P. ; J. F. Murphy, J.P. ; Wm. Woods, J.P. ; and James
Wynne, Esquires. Messrs. Lyons and Dromgoole,
Acting County Surveyors, were also in attendance.
The following were ordered for payment :
The Committee recommend to advertise for suitable Houses.
SECRETARY'S OFFICE.
Margt. Murray, per H. Rogan's
Lodgings
{6
E. Madden, per M. K. M' Dermott's
Lodgings
Mrs. Shortt, per L. Branigan's
Lodgings
M. M'Gahan, 12 days' wages
1
1
3
6
14
14
o
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S OFFICE.
J. Durnin, Road Rolling Drogheda
District
P. Murphy, repairs Drogheda Court-
house
F. M'Dermott, Road Rolling Dundalk
District
1
P. Curtis, Coal account do.
10
Total,
6
8
6
13
o
o
O
o
{12 14 0
3
o
2
{13 13 5
126 7 5
48
The Collectors' Arrear Sheets for half-year ended
30th September, 1912, were examined, and recommended
to the County Council for payment.
Mr. Lyons, Acting County Surveyor, was instructed
to make a supplementary report to the County Council
re the footpath from Dundalk Urban Boundary to
St. Patrick's Cemetery on the Dowdallshill road.
CORRESPONDENCE.
The following letter from the Collectors was read :—
DUNDALK,
25th November, 1912.
the undersigned beg to apply, for
payment of our Salaries in respect of past half-year's
Collection, as we completed same within the time
allowed by the County Council almost a month since.
We remain, Gentlemen,
Vour obedient servants,
J. WOODS, P. HUGHES, PETER M'DONNELL, P. CLUSKEV,
PATRICK M'L)0NNELL, J. M'CüLLOUGH.
The Committee recommended payment of same.
SEATOWN, DUNDALK,
Monday, 25th Nov., 1912.
DEAR SIR,—I am in receipt of your recent letter
relative to the payment of my salary and my Insurance
Card under the Act.
29
In reply, I am not in a position at present to produce
Card of Insurance, which I would ask the Council to
defer until I resume duty, which I hope to be able to do
in a short time.
Yours faithfully,
JOSEPH F. FINIGAN,
(per MARV A. FINIGAN).
DOUGLAS PLACE,
DUNDALK.
I hereby certify that Mr. Joseph Finigan, residing at
Seatown, Dundalk, is under my care and unable to
follow his employment, suffering from debility after
pneumonia.
Signed,
JAMES J. CLARKE, L.R.C.S. & P.l.
November 25th, 1912.
Proposed by Mr. B. Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Connolly, J.P.,
And unanimously resolved—That we hereby recom-
mend the County Council to pay Mr. Finigan two months
salary that will be due on 30th inst.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD,
21st November, 1912.
Local Government Board for Ireland have
had before them your letter of the 15th inst., forwarding
a copy of a resolution adopted by the Louth County
Council on the 14th inst. respecting Mr. J. M. C. Lyons,
one of the applicants for the position of County Surveyor,
and in reply the Board direct me to state that under the
existing law they have no power to dispense with the
requirements as to the age qualification in this case.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
go
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee
held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, the 9th day of December, 1912.
In the Chair—Bernard Hamill, J. P.
Other Members—Michael Meade and Ed. Goodman,
Esquires.
The Secretary submitted the following payments,
which were considered and ordered for payment.
SECRETARY'S OFFICE.
31
the furnishing of Abstracts of Title on behalf of Mr. C. D.
King, of Annagassan, to the grounds acquired by the
Council {or the pujpcx:e of the approach road to the
Annagassan Pier.
I am of opinion that the Bill as drawn
is excessive andshould be taxed, and I accordingly send
you a copy of same with requisition to tax, and shall
thank you to have same signed and sealed and returned
to me at your earliest convenience.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Account referred to County Solicitor for Taxation.
J. F. Finigan
Mathew M'Gahon
T. Martin, Education Act
Mrs. Murray, per Rogan
Mrs. Short, per Branigan
3
o
1
1
Sister Mde. Ricie, per Miss M' Parland 8
per Miss Callan 10
J. W. Bacon 10
12 0
16 0
16 11
10 0
COUNTY SURVEYOR's OFFICE.
James Durnin
J.
F.
F.
J.
J.
B.
T. Dolan, Ardee
M' Dermott, Dundalk
Murphy, Dundalk
Rice, Dundalk
Rice, Dundalk
Boyle, Dundalk
Total,
20 0 0
15 0 0
13 7
FRANCIS STREET, DUNDALK,
9th December, 1912.
Re ANNAGASSAN NEW ROAD.
DEAR SIR,—Mr. James H. Murphy, Solicitor, has
sent me the enclosed Bill of Costs in connection with
32
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee,
held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on
Monday, 23rd day of December, 1912.
Present :
In the Chair—Patrick Byrne, J.P.
Other Members—Messrs. Meade and James Wynne.
The Secretary submitted accounts for County
Surveyor's Office and that of his own, which
were
examined and order for payment, viz. :
SECRETARY'S OFFICE.
Sheep Dipping Account
Scholarships
Education Act
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S OFFICE.
163
60
26
16
8
18
3
4
8
O
9
5
3
Road Maintenance ..
Total,
CORRESPONDENCE.
{46
{197
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD, I)UM.IN,
5th December, 1912.
SIR—I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Ireland to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the
29th ultimo, respecting Mr. J. M. C. Lyons' candidature
for the position of County Surveyor in Louth County,
and in reply, I am to state, for the information of the
County Council, that the Board have nothing to add
to their letter of the 21st ultimo on the subject.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
A. R. BARLAS, Secretary.
33
OFFICE OF PUBLIC WORKS,
9th December, 1912.
SIR,—In reply to your inquiry of the 20th ultimo, on
the subject of the Gyles' Quay Coastguard Station,
I am directed by the Commissioners of Public Works
to inform you that this Station was closed and surren-
dered by the Admiralty to the Landlord in 1905. The
boat slip is not included in the premises so surrendered ;
it was built at the joint expense of the Crown and the
Royal National Lifebcat Institution about 1877.
I am to add that certain pier and harbour works, viz. ,
a pier consisting of awgarf, a storm parapet, and sloping
escapement, etc., with excavation of the harbour, were
executed by the Board under the Sea Fisheries Act,
and transferred to the Grand Jury in 1879. So far as
the Board's records shows, the boat slip in question
was not included in the transfer, but if the County
Council desire it to be transferred to them now, the
Board for their part will be glacl to facilitate the Council
in the matter.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
H. WILLIAMS, Secretary.
December 16, 1912.
DEAR MR. reference to the resolution
of the County Council to refund the amount of Rates
paid by the Fund on Dun Dealgan for the year before
we could secure its exemption, I understand that the
Local Government Board have at present refused to
sanction the refund on the grounds that rates once
paid cannot be refunded.
I cannot think that this is either right cr just. The
rates are demanded with strongest penalties for non-
payment. We paid without prejudice, being assured
that . as soon as we had an opportunity of laying the
business, etc., before the valuation authority we could
get back what we had been called on to pay for property
used for public purposes and benefits.
The Council know the circtllnstances, and the good
object, and also, I hope, the great and to a large extent,
I think, successful exertions the Archæological Society
have made to repair and restore the old Irish fort and
to get together a collection of historical objects of all
periods and all interests.
I am aware of my own knowledge that in similar
circumstances, where there was a question of a reduction
of valuation, other bodies have refunded the amount
overpaid. In our case the circumstances are more in
our favour, and the amount (15 odd) although small,
is of considerable importance to the fund, which is very
small. Will you kindly bring the matter once more
before the Council, whose consideration we are grateful
for, and trust that they may authorise you to issue tlle
refund.
Yours faithfully,
HARRY TEMPEST,
Hon. Sec. Dun Dealgan Fund.
Referred to the County Council.
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND TECHNICAL
INSTRUCTION FOR IRELAND,
18th December, 1912.
SIR,—With reference to tile concluding paragraph
of your letter of the 6th inst., I have to state, for the
information Of the Louth County Council, that the
Department propose to carry out the work of repairing
Dunany Pier under their own supervision.
I am, sir,
Vour obedient servant,
T. P. GILL.
CORPORATION OF DROGHEDA.
TowN CLERK'S OFFICE,
COURTHOUSE, DROGHEDA
18th December, 1912.
DEAR SIR,—On every Saturday and Fair Day
Mr. Hughes, the County Secretary for Agriculture,
uses a room in this Courthouse, which necessitates a
fire being lighted, and on every Thursday and Friday
Agricultural Classes are conducted necessitating both
lighting and heating ; under the existing arrangements
the Corporation are asked to contribvlte one-tuird of
the cost, and as you know they have no power, strictly
speaking, to incur any such expenditure. Would it not
be well, in order to avoid the possibility of a sur-
charge, if sonle contribution were made from the funds
of the County Scheme for Agriculture in which the
County Council and the Corporation would participate,
Although the possibility of a surcharge may seem re-
mote, yet in my experience, one never knows what
question will be raised at audit upon the complaint of
some individual or another who is always on the look
out for something to complain about.
Vours faithfully,
J. B. CONNOLLY.
36
WOMEN'S NATIONAL HEALTH ASSOCIATION OF IRELAND.
VICE REGAL LODGE,
DUBLIN,
December 20th, 1912.
DEAR SIR,—At the meeting of the representatives of
County Councils sending patients to Peamount, held
at Ely House, on Thursday, December 5th, to confer
on the basis to be adopted for the formation of Com-
mittees of Management for Peamount and Rossclare,
several alternatives were discussed and also the question
as to whether Counties making provisional use of the
accommodation at the Women's National Health
Association Sanatoria should be represented on the
Permanent Committee. It was finally decided that
representation should only be given to Counties con-
tracting for permanent beds, and that the Committee
of Management should consist of one representative
from each County Council or County Borough contracting
for permanent beds, and that there be added from the
Women's National Health Association a number equal
to one half of such County representation. This was
moved by Mr. Walter M 'Murrough Kavanagh (Chairman
Carlow County Council), and seconded by Mr. David
M. Moriarity (Chairman Kerry County Council), and
carried unanimously. Certain difficulties arising out
of the legal interpretation of Section 16 of the Insurance
Act were considered, and a letter from Mr. Glynn,
Chairman of the Insurance Commissioners, was read,
saying that he was advised that the best way of pro-
37
ceeding would be " To prepare a perfectly simple and
intelligible tripartite agreement between the Comnlittee
of Management, the County Council, and the Insurance
Committee, whereby the Committee of Management
undertook to treat insured persons in the Sanatorium
in consideration of the payment of the Sanatorium Fund
by the Insurance Committee to the County Council,
and, at the same time, the County Council undertook
to provide for ' the treatment of any insured persons
not treated in the Sanatorium.
If this
agreement be adopted the legal difficulty will
be got over, and there will be no splitting up of the 1/3
between the Committee of Management, The Insurance
Committee and the County Council.
The meeting also considered two alternatives suggested
by Mr. Glynn. (1) That the agreement above referred
to should form the basis of the agreements between
County Councils which have agreed to take beds in Pea-
mount, and that the Insurance Committees of these
Counties should be parties to the agreements, which
should be made with the Comtnittee of Management of
Peamount ; or (2) That a Joint Board should be formed
under the Tuberculosis Act of 1908 between the Councils
which have taken permanent beds in Peamount and that
the Scheme to be drawn up between these Councils
should provide that for the first three years the Women's
National Health Association, in consideration of the
temporary work to be done in Peamount, over and
above the permanent work undertaken for the County
Councils, should be represented on the Joint Board and
on the Committee of Management. The meeting
38
unanimously decided in favour of the first Scheme,
believing that for the presenf the County Councils did
not wish to assume further liability for Peamount,
although it was agreed by all present that in the event
of any special need, Counties who were represented on
the Committee of Management would favourably consider
any appeal made to them by the Committee.
The Special Council Meeting held by the Women's
National Health Association on the evening of the same
day (Dec. 5th) adopted the recommendation above
quoted as the basis of the Committee of Management,
and nominated as their first six representatives the
following :—
The President (The Countess of Aberdeen), The Hon.
Treasurer (Sir Wm. T. Thompson, M.D.), The Medical
Secretary (Dr. Prudence Gaffikin), Mrs. J. J. Lawlor,
Mrs. Michael F. Cox, Miss M 'Donald (late Matron of the
Richmond Hospital), and that pending the constitution
of this Committee, the present Provisional Committee
of Supervision be requested to carry on the work en-
trusted to them. A deputation from the Meeting of
Representatives of County Councils and the Women's
National Health Association waited on the Local Govern-
ment Board on December 6th and submitted the de-
cision arrived at to the Vice-President. Sir Henry
Robinson explained that whilst there were other modes
Of forming Conjoint Committees of Management, either
under the Tuberculosis Act of 1908, or under the In-
surance Act of 1911 which would require the sanction
of the Local Government Board, the plan stlbmitted
39
by the deputation required no such sanction, but left
the responsibility of maintenance on the Women's
National Health Association and the Committee of
Management, whereas the other two plans would carry
responsibility for maintenance on the part of the con-
tracting County Councils. The deputation made it
clear that the representative meeting the day before
had decided against assuming any such responsibility
at present, and it was pointed out that the action now
adopted would not prevent a Conjoint Board being
formed later on. Sir Henry Robinson agreed with this
conclusion, and the deputation thanked him and with-
drew.
I beg, therefore, to ask you to request your County
Council at their next meeting to nominate a represen-
tative to act on the Committee of Management of the
Sanatorium where your Council has contracted for beds.
I remain,
Vours very faithfully,
COUNTESS OF ABERDEEN.
POS'r OFFICE TELEGRAPHS.
ALBOROUGH HousE, DUBLIN,
20th December, 1912.
• Postmaster General, actillg under the
powers conferred upon him by the Telegraph Acts, 1863
to 1908, is desirous of obtaining the consent of the Louth
County Council to the exceution of works, particulars
40
of which are as follows :—Erection of overhead tele-
graphic lines along the public roads from the Gate Lodge
of Ballymascanlan House to the junction with the
Dundalk-Newry road, and from the cross-roads at
Ravensdale to Ravensdale Lodge. A plan of the route
it is proposed to follow is enclosed for your information.
The Postmaster General undertakes to make good any
damage which may be done in the placing or maintenance
of the line, and, in the hope that you will comply with
this request, I hand you herewith a form of consent
for your signature, and shall be glad if you will return
it to me at your earliest convenience.
I am, sir,
Vour obedient servant,
W. TURNER.
Referred to Mr. Lyons, Assistant Co. Surveyor for
report.
17 FRANCIS STREET, DUNDALK,
20th December, 1912.
Re ANNAGASSAN PIER ORDER, 1912.
DEAR SIR,—The Bill confirming the above Order
received the Royal Assent on the 13th inst. Vou might
kindly let me have paying order for 1200 from your
Council on account of my costs, as agreed on by resolution
o.n the 28th September, 1911.
Vours truly,
JAMES H. MVRPHV.
FRANCIS STREET, DUNDALK,
16 December, 1912.
Re ANNAGASSAN PIER ORDER, 1912.
DEAR write to inform you that the Bill con.
firming this Order received the Royal Assent on Friday
last, the 13th inst.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
42
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee, held
in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Monday,
6th day of January, 1913.
Present :—
In the Chair—Charles A. Duffy, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Messrs. Joseph M. Johnson, James
Connolly, J.P.; Peter A'Voods, J.P. ; James Wynne,
John F. Murphy, J.P. ; Luke J. Elcock, Michael Meade,
Jas. M'Carthy, James Kearney, Richard Mathews, John
Dolan, Patrick O'Connell, and William T. Skeffington,
also J. M. C. Lyons and James B. Dromgoole, Acting
Co. Surveyors, Esquires.
The following amounts were examined and ordered for
payment
SECRETARY'S OFFICE.
p.
T.
F.
M.
Gaffney, Education Act
P. Harmon „
T. Malone
Faulkner
43
35, LAURENCE STREET, DROGHEDA,
31st December, 1912.
The Secretary Louth Co. Councilv Courthouse, Dundalk
DEAR SIR—Mr. Joseph Mullen, of Mullamore, Tallan-
stown, Ardee, informs me that hehad a contract for the
repair of the road from Tallanstown to Duffyscross,
which expired on the 31st March, 1911, and that he was
Paid in full for the Contract, with the exception of C 3,
which was retained until he removed a bank on the road:;.
He informs me that he removed this bank, and that
your Assistant County Surveyor, Mr. Lyons, certified
for the payment of the balance C 3, which was made, and
the paying order was taken up by Mr. Lynam, the Co.
Snrveyor, in November, 1911, but so far my client has
not received this order.
Would you kindly have enquiries made, and have the
order referred to, paid to my client, as I presume the
matter has got overlooked.
Yours faithfully,
FRANCIS G. M'KEEVER, L.L.B.,
Solicitor.
The Committee recommended that the above amount
be paid.
M 'Gahan, Clerk in Office
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S OFFICE.
James Durnin, Road Rolling
Martin Butterly & Co., Road Rolling
Francis M'Dermott
Total,
2
o
o
3
C 12
1
C13
626
14
15
2
2
o
6
6
17
6
1
O
O
o
7
O
7
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the above Committee, held
in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Monday,
6th January, 1913.
Present :
In the Chair—Charles A. Duffy, J.P.
Other Members—Messrs. Joseph M. Johnson, James
Connolly, J.P. ; Peter Woods, J.V. ; James Wynne,
John F. Murphy, J.P.; Luke J. Elcock, Michael Meade,
Jas. M'Carthy, Patrick Kearney, Richard Mathews, John
Dolan, Patrick O'Connell, Wm. T. Skeffington, Esquires.
Messrs. J. M. C. Lyons and James B. Dromgoole, Acting
County Surveyors, were also present.
APPLICATION THE COUNTY SURVEYORS.
Contracts for a term of one year, from ISt April, 1913.
No.
No.
No.
1. To repair Ardee Courthouse, L12—Approved.
2. To repair Drogheda Courthouse, L40—Approved.
SPECIAL WORK.
3. To supply and fit 8 gas radiators in
Approved.
Drogheda Courthouse, 145
No. 4. To repair Dunany Pier, etc., cost not
to exceed {500. 1250 levied off County
at Large ; {250 contributed by the
Depnt. of Agriculture and Technical
Approved.
Instruction for Ireland
Contracts for a term of one year, from ISt Ahril, 1913.
No.
5. To repair the' County Courthouse,
Approved.
Dundalk, 130
No.
5a. To pay half the cost of Steam Road
Rolling in the three Rural Districts
from which the Urban Councils are
Approved.
exempt
No. 6. To supply on carts in merchants yards
Best Scotch Coal (screened) as required
for use of Road Rollers
Approved.
APPLICATIONS BY THE SECRETARY.
No. 7. To supply Printing and Stationery for
County purposes for one year, including
the Printing to be done for the Clerk of
the Crown and Peace under Jurors and
Registration Acts. (Confined to the
County Louth Printers)
Approved.
8. To supply for one year, from the ISt
No.
of April, 1913, Ardee, Drogheda and
Dundalk Courthouses with Best Wigan,
Whitehaven, Maryport, or Orrel Coal,
at Æ per ton, delivered. Contractor
to supply Coke, Bogwood, Firelighting
Materials at market prices, as required Approved.
No. 9. To prepare the Courts and Court-
rooms for Assizes, Quarter Sessions,
and Revision Sessions in County Court-
house for one year, from ISt April, 1913.
Not to exceed L 15
Approved.
No. 10. To insert the County Advertisements,
etc., in one Dundalk and Drogheda
Paper for one year, from ISt April, 1913.
Not to exceed 3d. per line
Approved.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee
Meeting, held in thc Council Chamber, on Monday, the
20th day of January, 1913.
Present :—
In the Chair—Mr. C. A. Duffy, J.P.
other Metnbers—Messrs. Wm. Woods, J.P
J allies
Wynne, P Byrne, J.P. ; J. Connolly, J.P. ; B.HamiII,J. P.
J. M. Johnson, P. O'Connell, J. H. .WArd1e. D.
O'Connell, Solicitor. was also in attendance.
The following payments in cotilleetion with the
Secretary's Office were exaniined and ordered for pay-
ment
The Receiver of Wrecks, Newrv, Burial
Carcases
Martha Shortt, Board, &c., L.
Branigan
i Margaret Murray. Board, etc., H. Rogan
Matllew McGahan
1
3
18
2
11
10
O
9
6
o
O
6
2
Office :—
County Surveyor's
James M' Adorey
T. Williamson
P, Rice
P. Curtis
Frank M' Dermott
P. Kinaghan
J. M 'Cartney
R. Gogarty
L. Conlon
P. Boyle
J. Mullen
T. M'l)onald
J. Carroll
J ames I)urnin
J ames Toris
12 10
3
17
1
1
o
o
20
IO
3
2
14
1
2
14
18
6
19
19
O
0
0
O
O
6
6
6
8
O
o
O
o
o
O
CORRESPONDENCE.
CLERMONT PARK
DUNDALK,
13th January, 1913.
SIR,—A pony belonging to me took ill about 10 days
ago, and sorne of the men about the place told the
Sergeant at Blackrock. He calne to see it ; he spoke
to me and told me it was the mange it had, and com-
pelled me to get it shot that evening, Thursday last
9th inst.
It was the only little pony I had, and it places
me at a great inconvenience to be without one.
I hope
you may be able to get me the value of it, which was
I am sure about 15 or 61, so that I may be able to get
one very soon which I cannot do without.
An answer as soon as is convenient will oblige.
Vours respectfully,
LIZZIE CALLAN.
No order made.
3
DROGHEDA RURAL SUB-COMMITTEE OF THE Co. Loti'1'Y1
LOCAL PENSION COMMITTEE,
CLERK'S OFFiCE, DROGHEDA UNION,
18th January, 1913.
L)EAR SIR,—Mr. Charles Markey, J. P. , Glaspistol
Clogherhead, having resigned his membership of this
Sub-Comnlittee, I am directed to recommend the
appointment in his place of Mr. Laurence Murphy, D.C.,
Painstown, Togher, Dunleer.
Vours faithfully,
J AMES BRADY,
Clerk of Sub-Committee.
The matter was referred to County Council.
Re ANNAGASSAN PIER ORDER.
17, FRANCIS STREET, DUNDALK,
10th January, 1913.
DEAR SIR,—Referring to my letter of the 20th ult.,
I enclose you copy of my Parliamentary Agents account,
amounting to {248 (Ss. 4d., which I have settled by a
P ayment of 1228 12s. 6d. In addition to this sum
I have already paid out large amounts to over
in reference to the above, making the total outlay
paid by me to date more than {328 12s. 6d.
Vou might kindly bring this account before your
next Financial Meeting, and give me notice when same
will be held. so that I can attend.
Yours truly,
JAMES H. NIERIMY.
Recommended that Mr. Murphy be paid a sum of
1200, in accordance with lormer resolution of Council.
L0CAL GOVERNMENT BOARD, DUBLIN,
17th January, 1913.
TUBERCULOSIS SCHEMES.
Financial Arrangements.
SIR,——I am directed by the Local Government Board
for Ireland to state that they learn from their Medical
Inspectors who have been in communication with
County Councils on the subject of the schemes which
are in course of preparation for the establishment of
Dispensaries and Sanatoria, that while the Councils
are fully alive to their powers under Part 11. of the
Tuberculosis Prevention (Ireland) Act, 1908, they are
reluctant to bind themselves to any final financial
undertakings in connection with Sanatorium benefit
under the National Insurance Act until they have some
more definite idea of the burdens in respect of main-
tenance and administration expenses for which they
may render the ratepayers annually liable if they enter
into arrangements with Insurance Committees for
institutional or domiciliary treatment of insured persons
and their dependants suffering from tuberculosis.
The Board, therefore, deem it well to explain, for
the information of the County Councils, the Insurance
Committees, and the County Councils in regard to the
maintenance charges which may be imposed by the
provision of treatment for persons suffering from tuber-
culosis in each county.
This is clearly set out in a letter from the Chancellor
of the Exchequer to Mr. Hobhouse on the 31st July last,
in which the following paragraph occurs which covers
the case of Ireland
' Under the Insurance Act an annual sum of about one
million is provided for the treatment of insured persons While
the Bill was passing through Parliament provisions were inserted
for extending sanatorium benefit to dependants of insured,
and in view of this the Government consented to bear one-half
of any deficit in regard to sanatorium benefit where local
authorities undertook the other half.
It is now urged that
schemes for the treatment of tuberculosis should relate to the
whole community, and that generally they should be organised
and carried out by the councils of counties and county boroughs.
This extension involves additional outlay, and in view of this
the Government have decided to place at the disposal of the
Local Government Boards of the three kingdoms annuallv a
sum of money which will represent approximately half -the
total estimated cost of treating the non-insured persons as well
'I'his money will be
as the dependants of insured persons.
distributed by the Local Government Boards, in pursuance of
regulations to be made by those Departments, to local authorities
which undertake schemes, to be approved by the Departments,
for the general treatment of tuberculosis in their areas ; and
provision will be made accordingly for these grants in the
Estimates of the three departments.
As rggards the cost of treating insured persons, the sum
already provided under the Insurance Act, which, as I have
already stated, is about one million pounds, can only pass to
local authorities in pursuance of agreements made between
them and insurance committees. But I have no doubt that
insurance committees generally will be anxious to deal with the
local authority of their area, and the Association may rest
assured that the G vernment will do all in their power to secure
this. "
The annual sum of one million above referred to as
being provided for the treatment of insured persons
represents the estimated produce of the contribution of
IS. 3d. from insured persons ullder Section 16 (2) of the
National Insurance Act. Ireland's share of this sum
will accordingly depend upon the number of insured
personk in each ecuntv.
The County Councils will also observe from the fore-
going letter that not only does the guarantee of the
Treasury extend to payment of one-half of the net
cost of the treatment of tuberculosis when undertaken
by the County Councils by arrangement with Insurance
Committees on behalf of insured persons and their
dependants, after deducting the amount contributed
by the Insurance Cornmittee, but, furthermore, where
Irish County Councils have taken or take measures
under the tuberculosis Prevention (Ireland) Act for the
treatment of the disease among the inhabitants of the
county generally, whether insured persons or otherwise,
6
the whole of the net expenses chargeable upon the rates
under the Act may be pooled and onerhalf of the total
sum incurred with the Board's sanction may be de-
frayed from the Treasury Maintenance Grant provided
the statutory procedure is observed.
The County Councils will see at a glance that this is
an enormous concession, and one which they should be
quick to take advantage of by pressing forward the
completion of their schemes for Dispensaries and Sana-
toria which have been before them for the last few
months, and also by making arrangements with the
Instlrance Committees for the treatment of insured
persons and their dependants.
The Councils will, of course, understand that this
grant-in-aid is an annual subsidy and quite apart fronl
and in addition to the 1145,ooo provided under the
Finance Act, 1911, for the establishment of Sanatoria
and Dispensaries now about to be distributed in ac-
cordance with the principles laid down in the Board's
circular of 27th August last.
At the same time, it will be noted that the two
grants though distinct are connecting links in the
Government scheme, the {145,000 being applicable to
the capital cost, and the annual grant defraying one-
half of the net cost in respect of the salaries of officers,
establishment expenses and upkeep of the institutions
and the treatment of patients therein, for which the
County Councils would be liable.
In preparing their estimate of their probable liabili-
ties the County Council would no doubt be able to obtain
from the Annual Reports of the Registrar-General
some statistics of the number of cases of tuberculosis in
each county which might form a basis for their estimate
of the year's expenditure. The Board also understand
that at an early date the Insurance Commissioners may
be able to give them an estimate of the amount of the
Insurance fund which may be available in each county.
The National Insurance Act requires that Insurance
7
Committees should be primarily respormsible for seeing
that insured persons, and any class of the dependants
of insured persons to whom they have extended sana-
torium benefit, receive the appropriate treatment,
and this responsibility necessarily remains under the
system now proposed.
Subject, however, to this responsibility, it is competent
for the Insurance Committees, with the consent of the
Insurance Comlllissioners. to enter into arrangements
with local authorities for providing treatment and to
pay over the sums available under the Act for tlle
purposes of such treatment. The Council will observe
that the Chancellor of the Exchequer in his letter to
Mr. Hobhouse expressed the opinion that the Insurance
Committees would be anxious to deal witll the local
authority of their areas and he undertook that the
Government would do all in their power to secure that
this should be done.
Having regard to all the foregoing considerations
and to the immeasurable benefits which may accrue
to persons suffering from tuberculosis in Ireland by
taking the fullest advantage of the Treasury Grant,
the County Councils would, in the Board's opinion,
be well advised to levy a rate of ld. in the Pound for
the coming year's expenditure under the Tuberculosis
Act.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN, Assistant Sec.
A deputati011 consisting of Messrs. Hughes and Peter
M'l)onnell, Rate Collectors, waited 011 the Committee
relative to the followillg letter from the Local Goverll-
ment Board.
8
LOCAL GOVERMNENT BOARD, DUBLIN,
18th December, 1912.
SIR,—With reference to the lists of arrears of rate
in the County of Louth for the period ended the 30th
of September, 1912, recently forwarded by you to this
Department, I am directed by the Local Government
Board for Ireland to return the list, herewith, and to
state that the Rulings of the Board are duly stamped
thereon.
In the case of item 2426 on Collector John Kelly's list,
the Board assume that the Rate in the case of No. 2427
has been duly collected and lodged.
Item 165 on Collector Patrick M 'Cullough's lists has
been excepted from the Board's approval, the receipt
in this case having been altered. The Board have also
disallowed 2s. 6d. the cost of a decree included in the
amount of 5s. 7d. appearing ill column 12 opposite item
2793 on Collector Patrick M'L)onnelI's lists. Such
charges should not appear 011 the Schedules of Uncol-
lected Rates.
Item 5381 on Collector John Wood's lists has also been
excepted from approval.
Fuller information regarding
the period of vacancy all(l the present occupiers, if any,
should be given in this case.
With reference to Collector M 'Cullough's second list
(amount 142 12s. cod ) the Board desire Ille to point out
that if, as stated in your communication of the 29th
ultimo, the Estate has been sc;ld in Court, it would appear
that on proper representations being made the Collector
would no doubt be paid the amount of rates and arrears
due, which, from the information before the Board,
appears to be a personal debt due to the Collector and
recoverable as such by him.
The Board presume that the original receipts for
these rates are still in existence and in your possession
9
or in that of the Collector. In the former eventuality
the receipts might be handed tc the Collector to enable
him to obtain payment.
The Board have also excepted from their approval,
pending further satisfactory explanation, the several
items appearing throughout the lists in regard to which
no receipts have been furnished. With reference to
those cases in which it is stated that the receipts were
given when the portion of rates concerning land was
paid, I am to state that the Board are unable to approve
of these items, as in the absence of the receipts there is no
12 of the lists represent the actual balance remaining
over after the land portion cf the original rating had
been paid.
I am, at the same time, to point out that the Rulings
of the Board have been givetl on the assumption that
the information contained in the several lists is in all
respects accurate, and must not, therefore, be regarded
as interfering with the jurisdiction of the Auditor in
case for any cause he should at audit find it necessary
to deal otherwise with any item or items.
\Vith reference to certain cases through011t the lists,
e.g., items 4809, 4860, &c., on Collector John Wood's
lists in which though part payment of the original rating
appears to have been made yet the original receipt
remains attached to the lists, the Board desire me to
request that the procedure outlined in the last three
paragraphs of their Letter of the 5th of June last may
be followed in future, otherwise the items involved
will be liable to disallowance.
The receipts of Collectors Patrick Hughes and Patrick
Cluskey have been furnished in disorder, and I am to
draw your attention to the last paragraph of the Board's
Letter of the 7th December. 1911, No. 140/M/1911,
and to request that in future all the receipts may be
10
furnished filed in the same order as the corresponding
items appearing on the lists.
The Board observe that many items throughout the
lists are proposed to be struck off as irrecoverable on
account of poverty, and I am to point out that a CCI-
lector is only entitled at the end of the half-year ended
the 30th September to claim a refund in respect of
rates which are strictly irrecoverable. The amounts of
such items therefore should appear in future in column
14 of the lists, so that they may be recovered during
the currency of the second half-year of the yearly rate.
I am also to point out that items respecting vacant
houses appearing in the arrear lists for the half-year
ended the 30th of September should not be struck off
as irrecoverable except where the houses in question
were vacant at the time the rate was made aud remained
unoccupied throughout the whole of the period claimed
for.
A Summary of the enclosed lists should be forthwith
furnished to this Office. A supply of forms is sent
herewith.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
Proposed by Mr. Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. J. M. Johnson,
Resolved—That we recommend the County Council
to pay to the Collectors the full amount returned on
the arrear sheets for half-year ended 30th September
last, and that in reference to cases where the Local
Government Board refuse to take a split receipt where
only part is paid, that the Secretary be directed to
provide an interim receipt.
11
Proposed by Mr. P. Byrne, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Wm. Woods, J.P.
Resolved—That we recommend the County Council
to pay to the Rate Collectors the full amount of poundage
or remuneration due in respect of the first moiety of
their collection lodged on 31st October last.
On the application of Mr. O'Connell, Solicitor, the
Committee recommend that an appeal be lodged in the
Crilninal Injury Claims at Redbarlls.
Mr. Patrick Bvrne drew attention to flooding of a
cottage at Haynestown Railway Bridge. caused by
water flowing from railway line on to the public road.
Mr. Lyons, Acting County Surveyor, was directed to
inspect the place and report to next meeting of County
Council.
12
COUNTY LOUTH SCHOLARSHIP
COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of lhe above Commütee, held
in the Council Chamber, on Monday, the 20th day of
January, 1913
Present .
In the Chair—Mr. J. Connolly, J . P.
Other Members—I). O'Connell and Jos. T. Dolan.
It was resolved to submit for approval to the County
Council the following Schellie for Scholarships for the
ensuing year :
CONDITIONS OF Lou'l'll COUN'I'V COUNCIL SCHOLARSHIP
SCHEME, 1913.
The Louth County Council offer two Scholarships of
150 a year each, tenable at the I)ublin or other College
of the National University for the Session October,1913
to June, 1914, and renewable for the two succeeding
years, alid for a fourth year if the Student follows a
Course of Agriculture, or in Industrial or Commercial
Science.
'I'he Scholarships will be open for Competition
to male and female Students who fulfil the following
requirements
(1). Whose parents or guardians are and have been
resident in Co. Louth for the past three years,
or whose parents or guardians have at any time
within the last twenty years been resident in
the County for six years.
(2).
(3).
(4).
(5).
The
13
Who satisfy the County Council that they are
in need of assistance—that they are unable of
their own means to obtain a University
Educatio n.
Who have been educated ill Ireland.
Who are of good health and character and
under 19 years of age.
Who pass in Irish and reach a standard of
honours in the aggregate of subjects in the
'Test Examination which gives proof of ability
enough to put a University Educaticn to good
use.
' rest Examination will be the Intermediate
Examination of 1913—the order of merit being deter-
mined by the printed marks obtained by the applicants
in Senior Grade Honours as published ill the Official
Results List—a Pass in Irish being essential.
The Scholarships shall be awarded to the two candi-
dates best qualified in the juclgment of the County
Council on consideration of merit in this test exarni-
nation, and of the fulfilment of other requiremellts.
If either or both of the highest eligible conmpetitors will
not aeeept Scholarships they shall be awarded to those
next in merit, if qualified.
One or both Scholarships Illay be altogether withheld
if sufficient merit or need of assistance is not shown.
The Student accepting a Scholarship must pass the
Matriculation of the National University (unless the
Ulliversity accept his Intermediate Examination as
qualification) in 1913, and attend regularly the first
year's course in some faculty of the Ulliversity, and
reside in a hostel or other residence approved by the
County Council and the College autllorities.
14
The College fees and maintenance shall be paid direct
by the County Council to the College authorities and the
hostel proprietors, the balance, if any, to be expended
on books and other expenses.
In order to retain a Scholarship for the second and
third year a Student must pass the College Examination
of that year at a Stalldard of merit to be fixed by the
Council in consultation with the College authorities,
and must also present a satisfactory report from the
College as to attendance at lectures and general conduct
during the year.
The County Council shall have cotnplete discreti011
in applying or modifying these rules and in withholding
or reducing Scholarships.
Candidates for Scholarships must apply to the
Secretary of the County Council before the
1913, and the Council shall meet to consider applications
and award Scholarships, on
1913.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) ACT, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At their fourth Quarterly Meeting held in the Council
Chamber, on Thursday, 23rd January Adjourned
Quarterly Meeting held on Thursday, 27th February,
1913.
FINANCE COMMITTEE
At their Meeting on Monday, 3rd February ; Monday,
17th February ; Monday, 3rd March; Tuesday'
18th March ; Monday, 31st March ; Monday, 14th
April, 1913.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) ACT, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At their fourth Quarterly Meeting held in the Council
Chamber, on Thursday, 23rd January.' Adjourned
Quarterly Meeting held on Thursday, 27th February,
1913.
FINANCE COMMITTEE
At their Meeting on Monday, 3rd February ; Monday,
17th February; Monday, 3rd March; Tuesday,
18th March ; Monday, 31st March ; Monday, 14th
April, 1913.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at
tlwir Fourtn Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council
Chamber, Dundallc Courthouse, at onc o'clock, on, Thursday,
23rd January, 1913.
Present :—
In the Chair—William A. Doran, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Edward Goodman, Michael O'Meara,
J.P. ; Joseph M. Johnson, Patrick Byrne, J.P. ; Patrick
Kearney, Charles A. Duffy, J.P. ; Joseph, Dolan, Joseph
H. McArdle, Patrick Donegan, Thos. Maguire, Patrick
O'Connell, and James McCarthy, J.P., Esquires.
The Minutes of the last meetings of the Council having
been printed, and a copy sent to each member, were taken
as read, and were confirmed.
Confirmation of Finance Committee Minutes.
Proposed by Mr. Edwtu•d Goodman,
Seconded by Mr. James McCarthy, J.P.
Resolved that the Minutes of the Finance Committee
Meetings held on the following dates be, and are
hereby adopted, viz. :—18th November, 1912 ; 25th No-
vernber, 1912 ; 9th December, 1912; 23rd December,
1912 ; 6th January, 1913; 20th Januarv, 1913.
3
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Byrne, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P.,
That the Minutes of Proceedings of the Scholarship
Committee be adopted, with the exception of the following
alteration — " Whose parents or guardians have been
resident in the County Louth for the past three years."
On the motion of Mr. Goodman the Council sanctioned
a rate of ld. in the C, to be levied off the entire county.
ARDEE No. 1 PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr. P. Donegan, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. J. Dolan,
Resolved that the proposal for payment formulated by
the Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council, at their Fourth
Quarterly Meeting held on Tuesday, 7th January, 1913,
amounting to C83G 6s Sd, as set out on Form No. 22,
furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby
approved of.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Thomas Maguire, and
Resolved—That proposals for payments formulated by
the Drogheda (Louth) Rural District Council at their
fourth Quarterly Meeting, held on Thursday, the 9th day
of January, 1913, amounting to Cö96 16s. 1 ld. as set out
on Form No. 22, furnished to the County Council be, and
are hereby approved of.
4
DUNDALK PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr. Charles A. Duffy, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Kearney, and
Resolved—That the proposals for payments formulated
by the Dundalk Rural Council at their fourth Quarterly
Meeting, held on Monday, the 13th day of January, 1913,
amounting to Cl,18ö 9s. 6d., as set out on Form No. 22,
furnished to the County Council be, and are hereby ap-
proved of.
COUNTY AT LARGE PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Charles A. Duffy, J.P., and
Resolved—That proposals for payment formulated by
the Proposal Committee at their fourth Quarterly Meeting,
held on Monday, the 6th day of January, 1913, amount-
ing to 43. 4d., as set out on Form No. 22,
furnished to the Council be, and are hereby approved of.
Dates of next QUARTERLY Meetings.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Charles Duffy, J.P., and
Resolved—That the County Council hereby determine
that the following shall be the dates for the holding of the
first Quarterly Meetings of the Rural District Councils
and the Proposal Committee—Ardee No. 1, Tuesday, 1st
April, 1913; Drogheda (Louth), Thursday, 10th April,
1913 ; Dundalk, Monday, 7th April, 1913.
The last day for lodging Notices for District Councils
will be Friday, 11th March, 1913. The Proposal Com-
mittee will meet on Monday, 7th April, 1913. The last
day for lodging applications for the Proposal Committee
will be Saturday, the 19th March, 1913.
5
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
County Surveyor's Office,
Dundalk,
23rd January, 1913.
MR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN,
As directed by the Finance Committee on Monday
last, I inspected the road at Clermont Bridge, at Heynes-
town. The road is flooded under the bridge owing to a,
gullet crossing the County road being broken down and
partly choked. The gullet carries the drainage of the
railway embankment, and appears to be a work con-
structed by the Railway Company, and should, I presume,
be maintained by them. I have reported the matter to
the resident engineer.
(2.) The road-roller was idle two days (13th and 14th
instant) owing to the driver being summoned to attend
Quarter Sessions as a witness. I asked the solicitor to
pay the hire and flagman's wages, 18s. 4d. I have not
received a reply.
(3.) | beg to recommend that consent be given by a
resolution to the erection of overhead Telegraphic lines
along the public road to the gate-lodge of Ballymscanlon
House, to the junction with the Dundalk Newry road, and
from the crossroads at Ravensdale, to Ravensdale lodge.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
J. M. C. LYONS.
Proposed by Mr. J. M. Johnson,
Seconded by Mr: Patrick Donegan, and
Resolved—That the Report of Mr. Lyons, Acting County
Surveyor, as now read, be adopted by this Council, and
that the matter relating to Heynestown bridge be referred
to our solicitor.
6
CORRESPONDENCE.
Office of Public Works, Dublin,
23rd December, 1912.
SIR,—In reply to your letter of 12th instant on the
subject of Gyles' Quay Coastguard Station, I am directed
by the Commissioners of Public Works to inform you
that the lifeboat-house was built entirely at the expense
of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, and that the
Crown have had no interest in it. It is understood that
when the site of the Coastguard Station was surrendered
to the landlord by the Admiralty, arrangements were
made with the landlord by the Institution, for the future
occupation by them of the lifeboat house, which stands on
a portion of the Coastguard Station site.
It will be seen that the ownership of the lifeboat house
is a matter quite distinct from that of the boat-slip.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
W. WILLIAMS,
The Secretary,
Secretary.
Louth County Council.
Francis Street, Dundalk,
2nd Januccny, 1913.
DEAR reference to the matter of Gyles'
Quay lifeboat house and the boat-slipg which was referred
to me on the report of the Harbour Constable, the Council
is doubtless aware that the Gyles Quay Coastguard
Station was closed, and surrendered by the Admirality to
7
the landlord, St. Clair E. M. Stobart, in the year 1905.
The boat-slip is not included in the premises so sur-
rendered, it was built at the joint expense of the Crown
and Royal National Lifeboat Institution about 1877.
Certain peir and harbour works, viz. :—A pier, consisting
of a wharf and stone parapet and sloping, escarpment, &c.,
with excavation of the harbour were executed by the
Commissioners of Public Works, under the sea Fisheries'
Act, and transferred to the Grand Jury in 1879, it does
not appear that the boat-slip in question was included in
the transfer, buf if the Council desire to have it trans-
ferred to them now, I am sure it can be done without any
delay. The lifeboat house was built entirely at the ex-
pense of the Royal National Lifeboart Institution, and the
Crown have no interest in it.
11 was understood when the site of the Coastguard
Station was surrendered to the landlord by the Admiralty,
arrangements were made with the landlord, by the Insti-
tution, for the future occupation by them of the lifeboat
house, which stands on a portion of the Coastguard Station
site.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
T. F. Filgate, Esq.,
Sec. Louth Co. Council.
Local Government Board, Dublin,
22nd Jccnucwy, 1913.
am directed by the Local Government Board
for Ireland to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 15th instant, enclosing a copy of scheme for the
treatment of Tuberculosis provisionally a,dopted by the
Louth County Council.
In reply, the Board think it well
to advert to their letter of the 27th November last, from
which the County Council will see that the cost •of the
00 0 00 0
o
00 000 0 0 0000
00000 0 0 0 0 0 0
000 0 to
0 NO
o
o
eco o
twelve beds to be acquired at Peamount Sanatorium, at
a bed, is to be regarded as an approximate estimate,
and that the ultimate liability of the County Council can-
not be determined until the Institution has been com-
pleted.
While the Board generally approve of the scheme, they
would point out that no provision appears to hove been
made for the isolation and treatment of patients in the
advanced stages of Tuberculosis.
As the present estimate is the first of its kind prepared
by the County Council, the enteries can only be regarded
as an outline of the probable cost of the scheme, and
although the Board could not accept all the items in the
Revenue account, still they consider it wiser to defer a
detailed examination of the figures, until the scheme has
been in operation for some time, and particulars of the
actual cost are available.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS, Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
Proposed by Mr. J. M. Johnson,
Seconded by Mr. Joseph H. McArdle, and
Resolved—That the sums sanctioned by the Local
Government Board, set out as irrecoverable, be paid to
our rate collectors, and also the poundage fees, as sanc-
tioned by the Local Government Board.
Proposed by Mr, Joseph H. McArdle,
Seconded by Mr. James McCarthy, J.P., and
Resolved—That the necessary steps be taken by our
solicitor to have the Slip at Gyles' Quay vested in the
County Council.
10
Proposed by Mr. James McCarthy, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Joseph Dolan, and
Resolved-—That we appeal against the decision of the
County Court Judge in the case of alleged malicious injury
of Miss Robson's Red Barn.
The following resolution was unanimously adopted by
the Louth County Council, at their meeting held on
the 23rd instant.
Proposed by Mr. Michael O'Meara, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. James McCarthy, J.P., and
Resolved—That we congratulate Mr. John E. Redmond,
and his faithful colleagues of the Irish Party, on the
splendid result of their strenuous and persevering efforts
in the Home Rule cause, and that we rejoice in the hope
that at length we are within reach of a settlement of the
National demand, that should be satisfactory alike to the
Irish and British Democracies. That we express our
thanks to Mr. A. Roche, the popular representative •of
North Louth, for his services to his constitutents on all
questions local and National.
Proposed by Mr. Michael O'Meara, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. James McCarthy, J.P., and
Resolved—-That we, the Louth County Council, beg to
place on record our determination not to accept the Birrell
grant for Secondary School Scholarships under the con-
ditions sought to be imposed, viz., allowing the students,
after their three years' Intermediate course, to pass into
the University without further examination, and without
satisfying the County Council as to their general attain-
ments, particularly in Irish ; also allowing them to choice
University.
11
Minutes of Proceedings of the- Loilth County Councili
at their Adjourned Quarterly Meeting, held in the Council
Chamber, on Thursday, the 27th day of February, 1913.
Present
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Patrick Callan, James Connolly, J.P.;
William A. Doran, J.P.; William Woods, J.P.; Peter
Woods, J.P.; James Wynne, James Halfpenny, J.P. ;
Bernard Hamill, J.P. ; Michael O'Meara, J.P.; John F.
Murphy, J.P. ; Joseph H. McArdle, Joseph M. Johnson,
and Patrick O'Connell, Esquires.
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
At the fourth (Adjourned) Quarterly Meeting on 27th
February, 1913.
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,
There are 49 Road Maintenance Contracts to be re•
newed from 1st April next—27 in Ardee District, and 22
in Drogheda District. Forty-six new contracts have been
made, subject to your approval ; 36 for a term of five
years and 10 (where the roads have been partly steam
rolled) for a term of three years.
The amount allowed in Ardee District for 27 contracts
was CI,543 6s. Sd. per annum, which was reduced to
Cl,408 As. lid. on tendering.
In Drogheda District the amount allowed was
C758 4s. Sd. per annum, which was reduced to
C(j47 3s. 2d. on tendering.
A steam roller clause has been inserted in the Speci-
fication on all important roads- now under consideration,
12
and contractors should understand that only the soundest
stone will be paid for. In some. instances inferior stone
has been supplied by contractors, and where detected,
money has been deferred or struct off. Good road metal
is the essential for good roads, and no amount of extra
labour will make a good road where soft material has been
laid down.
During the year the following contractor failed to carry
out his contract, which has been taken up by me in ac-
cordance with clause 21 of the Specification. I beg to
recommend that this contract be cancelled, and a new
contract is now applied for :—
No. 6, Philip Finlay, Dundalk to Drumconrath.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
JAMES DROMGOOLE,
Acting County Surveyor.
DUNDALK DISTRICT
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S REPORT.
At the fourth (Adjourned) Quarterly Meeting on 27th
February, 1913.
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,
I. The Dundalk Rural District Council propose to re-
new thirty-nine Road Maintenance contracts, nearly al I
of which have been set by contract, subject to your ap-
proval. Competition for contracts at the Adjourned
Meeting was quite up to the average, the amount at which
the roads were taken being eleven per cent. below the
amount allowed, and three per cent. less than the amoup
at which the same roads were set five years ago,
13
2. Applications for Special Works to the amount of
C948 IOS. Od. were also considered, but new works re-
presenting only C427 were passed. Of these the most
important is a Provisional Proposal for a new line of road
through Carrickaleagh, at an estimate cost of C360, which
is not to be formally considered now; the other works
are necessary road buildings.
3. The supply of road metal (trap rock) from the Bally-
makellet district, &c., to roads in the vicinity of Dundalk
has been rather protracted during the past season, and as
the quantity of this stone required for next October will
be greater, facilities for increasing the output from quarries
are most necossary. I beg to suggest that a stone-breaker
be purchased for this purpose.
4. Recent references in the press to the Road Board
funds show that about forty-five per cent. of the total
amount allocated to Ireland, up to March 31st last, has
been accepted. A re-distribution of the amounts allotted
to the several counties, and not claimed, is now proposed.
5. It is to be feared that the two years' allowance
marked for Louth, amounting to C2,400, may be diverted
and accepted by other counties unless immediate steps
are taken to qualify for a grant ; and with this object in
view, I would suggest that the Roads' Committee be
asked to take this matter up and formulate proposal, to
be prosecuted, and I hope, to successful issue.
6. | would also ask you to authorise the hire of a
second road-roller for Dundalk district for a few months.
It will entail no additional cost ; your solicitor to carry
out the legal formalities.
7. During the past year .ten road contractors have failed
to carry out their contracts, and the roads have been taken
up in accordance with clause No. 21 of the specification.
14
The followihg are the -contracts referred •to, and I beg
to recommend that the contracts be cancelled. New con-
tracts are now applied for : —
DUNDALK DISTRICT.
No. 282, John McCann, 824 perches, Dundalk to Newry.
No. 313,
No. 350,
No. 356,
No. 381,
No. 389,
No. 419,
No. 470,
No. 471,
No. 474,
Arthur Hanlon, 1,005 perches, Carlingford to
Whitestown.
Bernard McBride, 513 perches, Dundalk to
Blackrock.
Patrick Belton, 483 perches, Knockbridge to
Corderry.
Owen McCann, 1,070 perches, Ravensdale to
Newry.
Michael Reilly, 989, perches, Dundalk to Dunleer
Bernard Boyle, 993, Grange to Whitestown.
Bernard McKenna, 1,007 perches, Carrickma-
cross to Blackrock.
Peter Kerr, 833 perches, Dundalk to Carrick-
macross.
Michael Reilly, 838 perches, Coinmons to
Wottonstown.
1 am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
JOHN M. C. Lyoxs,
Acting County Surveyor
15
The following supplementary Report from the Acting
County Surveyor, Mr. John M. C. Lyons, was also sub-
mitted to tbe Council.
On Tuesday last, 25th instant, I found workmen exca-
vating for foundations of a new building, inside Carling-
ford Harbour.
The building, I understand, is being erected by Carling-
ford Lough Commissioners. I saw captain Doran, who
appears to be superintending the work, and he informs
me permission has been obtained from the Board of Trade.
The new building being inside your harbour, and ap-
propriating about 30 feet of a part of the pier, which
could be used by fishing boats, I beg to recommend that
your solicitor be instructed to take proceedings against
the Carlingford Lough Commissioners. Mr. \Vilson, of
Warrenpoint, is the contractor.
Proceedings have been instituted by order of the Finance
Committee, against the reputed owner of a new building,
inside 30 feet of the centre of the county road •at Blackrock.
The case Was entered for Friday last, but adjourned at
the request of the defendant's solicitor ; an undertaking
being given that work would cease pending the trial, but
the road contractor has reported that some work has been
done since.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
JOHN M. C. LYONS,
Acting County Surveyor
In deference to the request of Mr. C. Mac Mahon,
solicitor, the Chairman and Council proceeded to consider
the matter of the alleged encroachment of the house now
being built by Mrs. Walls, at Blackrock, which the Acting
16
County Surveyor, Mr. J. M. C. Lyons, states is not the
statutory 30 feet from the centre of the public road.
After considerable discussion it was decided to refer the
matter to the two Rural District Councillors representing
the district, and also to Mr. T. J. Byrne, J.P., the County
Councillor representing the Haggardstown Electoral Di-
vision, for consideration and report.
The following matters arising out of the Acting County
Surveyor's Report, Mr. J. M. C. Lyons, were referred to the
Finance Committe, and to the Council's solicitor.
SUPPLEMENTARY REPORT.
Paragraph (1).—Referred to the Council's Solicitor to
take such action as he may deem necessary.
Paragraphs (3) and (4), as appearing in printed sche-
dule, referred to the Finance Committee, as was also
paragraph (5) with reference to the Road Board grant.
Respecting paragraph (6)—i.e., the hire of an additional
steam roller—the Council authorised the Acting County
Surveyor to do so.
On the motion of Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P., seconded
by Mr. Peter Woods, J.P., the following resolution was
agreed to :—
Resolved—That in each of the following cases of ex-
pired contracts the Acting County Surveyors be directed
to take up the work and that the balances be expended
in removing accumulations of mud.—Deferred March,
1912.
DUNDALK RURAL DISTRICT.
C5.—345 Owen M'Kenna, jun., 320 perches, Dundalk to
Louth.
C3.—346 Patrick Brennan, 372 perches, Dundalk to
Louth.
17
CIO.—351 Patrick Mathews, 426 perches, Dundalk to
Castleblayney.
C3.—365 Patrick M'Gee, 483 perches, Knockbridge to
Corderry.
SPECIAL WORK.
Owen Rice, 264 perches fourth class road by Ballyna-
maghery—C9 value.
Proposed by Mr. Hamill, J.P.
Seconded by Mr. Peter Woods, J.P.
In accordance with the Secretary's advertisement the
Council next proceeded to consider Tenders for works not
set by contract at adjourned meetings of the Rural
District Councils and the Proposal Committee.
PARTICULARS—-
CONTRACTS.
COUNTY AT LARGE.
No. I—TO make 'IO Perches of a New Line of Road between the
entrance to Mr. King's Mill Premises and the proposed New
Pier at Annagassan.—Not to exeeecl €80.
No. IA—TO repair Ardee Courthouse for One Year, from 1st April,
1913—Not to exceed €12.
NO. 3—To supply and fit 8 Gas Radiators in Drogheda Courthouse.—
Not to exceed €45.
ARDEE No. 1 RURAL DISTRICT.
No. 178—To maintain for Five. Years. from 1st April,
1913, 261
Perches of the Road from Drogheda to Dundalk, by Mosstown
Graveyard, between the Collon and Dunleer Roads and Rath-
escar New Line.—Not to exceed E5 88. 9d. per unnum.
c
18
No. 196—To maintain for Three Years, from 1st April, 1913, 1165
Perches of the Road from Ardee to Drogheda, by Collon,
between Whiteriver Bridge ancl Monasterboiee Avenue Gate.—
Not to exceed e 145 12s. (id. per annum.
1913, '274
No. 197—To maintain for One Year, from 1st April,
Perches of the Road from Miss Bride's house on the road leading
"from Kearney's Cross to Braganstown and Stabannon Chapel,
on the road leading from Kearney's Cross to Ardee.—Not to
exceed 17s. 001.
SPECIAL WORK.
No. 198.—To lay 30 Yards of 6-inch Bore Earthenware Pipe along
the footpath between the entrance to the Chapel and the
National Schools in Dunleer.—Not to exceed E'2 15s. (ld.
DROGHEDA (LOUTH) DISTRICT.
No 11.—To maintain for Five Years, from 1st April, 1913, 312
Perches of the Road from 'l'ogher to Dunany, between
Mr. King's Mill and District Boundary at T)unany Glebe.—
Not to exceed €5 4s. Ocl. per annum.
No. 2ö.—To make 576 Perches of New Road, Castlelunmey and
Rathdaniel, from Mr. Peter Matthews's house on the Drogheda
Road to Richard Campbell's house on the Collon Road ; to
be completed 31st March, 1914.—Not to exceed E150.
DUNDALK DISTRICT.
No. 3.—To repair the Sidewalk at the entrance to Louth Chapel.—
Not to exceed €10.
No. 6.—To re-build the Gullet under the County Road between the
lands of Mr. Thomas Kinahan and Mrs. Neary at Whiterath.——
Not to exceed €10.
No. IO.—To maintain for Five Years, front April, 1913, 824
Perches of Road, Dundalk to Newry, between the bounds of
the Barony at M'Kinley's Forge and the Mearing of Louth
and Armagh, at Claretroek.—Not to exceed $58 is. ld. per
annum.
No. 18.—To maintain for Five Years, from 1st April, 1913, 428
Perches, Dundalk to Castlebellingham, between the Road to
Haggardstown Graveyard and Lurgangreen Bridge.—Not to
exceed €107 per annum.
19
No. 44.—To maintain for Three Years, from 1st April, 1913. 510
Perches Laneway, St. James' Well, Greenore, to the County
Road at Ballagan Shore.—Not to exceed El 9 28. (id. per annurn.
No. 51.—To provide and lay a 4-1neh Diameter Pipe on the road
from Dundalk to Forkhill, between the turn to Roskeagh and
Kileurry Post Office.—C'ost not to exceed $6.
COUNTY AT LARGE CONTRACTS.
With respect to these contracts no Tenders were
received, and they were consequently placed in charge
of the Acting County Surveyors.
Regarding the remaining contracts, the Council accepted
the lowest tender in each case when found in conformity
with the Secretary's advertisement.
The following is a list of the tenders accepted
No. 196—J0hn Halpin, Collin
C140 15 0
No. 3 Byrne, Corcreagh
9 18 0
No. 6
do.
No, 10 do.
No. 18 do.
No. 51 do.
Patrick M 'Connon, Newrath 9 9 0
C. M'AlIister, Dundalk
56 6 10
John H. Murphy, Dundalk 92 15 0
Terence Muckian, Dundalk 6 0 0
The Council
then passed the undermentioned
resolution :
Proposed by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P.
Seconded by Mr. William A. Doran, J.P., and
Resolved—That all works not taken by contract be
placed in charge of the Acting County Surveyors
excepting Castlelumley new road.
20
LIST OF WORKS FORMULATED
DISTRICT COUNCILS AND THE
CO MITTEE.
Proposed by Mr. William A. Doran, J.P.
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Callan, and
BY RURAL
PROPOSAL
Resolved—That the proposals for works formulated by
the Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council at their Fourth
Quarterly Meeting and set out on Form 20, furnished to
the County Council, be and are hereby approved of.
DROGHEDA.
Proposed by Mr. William A. Doran, J.P.
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Callan, and
Resolved—That the proposals for works formulated by
the Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union at their
Fourth Quarterly Meeting and set out on Form 20,
furnished to the County Council, be and are hereby
approved of.
DUNDALK.
Proposed by Mr. William Woods, J.P.
Seconded by Mr. John F. Murphy, J.P., and
Resolved—That the proposals for works formulated by
the Dundalk Rural District Council at their Fourth
Quarterly Meeting and set out on Form 20, furnished to
the County Council, be and are hereby approved of.
21
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE.
Proposed by Mr. James Wynne.
Seconded by Mr. John F. Murphy, J.P., and
Resolved—That the proposals for works formulated by
the Proposal Committee at their meeting held on Monday,
6th January, 1913, be and is hereby adopted by this
Council.
CONSIDERATION OF ESTIMATE OF RATES IN
RESPECT OF THE ENSUING FINANCIAL
YEAR.
Before proceeding to discuss the annual Estimate of
Rates in respect of the ensuing financial year, the Chair-
mon read the following telegram from the Drogheda
Councilors :
Chairman, County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
Unavoidably absent ; strongly protest against advance
on district rate — Donegan, Rath, Kelly, McCarthy,
McKeown—reduce threepence.
There was very considerable discussion over the matter,
and finally the Council were unanimous in passing the
following resolution :
Proposed by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Callan, and
Resolved—That the Rates, as set out in the Secretary's
estimate in Drogheda and Dundalk, be reduced by 2d. in
the C, and by ld. in the in Ardee district, and that in
all other respects the estimate be adopted by the Council.
22
The following resolution was then passed by the
Council—
On the motion of Mr. James Wynne,
Seconded by Mr. William Woods, J.P., it was
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the
Finance Committee on the 17th February last, be, and is
hereby adopted by this Council, that is—allowing Mr.
Joseph Loudon the sum of $12 IOS. ()d. for the services
rendered by him.
CORRESPONDENCE.
The following letter from Dr. J. A. McQuillan, was
read.
February, 20th, 1913
DEAR SIR,—I would be glad if you please let me know
when the next meeting of the County Council takes place.
I would also like to remind you that I was provisionally
sanctioned by the Local Government Board, early in
November last, which sanction placed me under salary,
and at that time I had to appoint a substitute to do my
work while I was taking out the necessary course.
Dr. O'Connell has been doing the work since then, and
of course I will have to pay him for doing so.
I hope to take up duty about the 1st March ; hoping I
am not giving you too much trouble.
I remain,
Sincerely yours,
MCQUILLAN.
23
Proposed by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Michael O'Meara, J.P„ and
Resolved—That we pay Dr. McQuillan up to the 31sU
December, in respect of his salary of C400 a year.
The following letter from Mr. M. Comerford, Town-
Clerk, Dundalk, was read, and referred to the Finance-
Committee, Dundalk Urban District Council.
20th February, 1913.
DEAR a meeting of the above Council held on
the 11th inst., on a discussion on the Road Board Grant
to the County Council of Louth, as to the Dundalk Urban
Council's share. On the motion of Mr. Deery, seconded
by Mr. O'Rourke, the following resolution was unani-
mously adopted
c' That we call upon the County Council to apply for
their share of the money available for the purposes of
road maintenance, and that we call upon our Urban re-
presentatives, and the representatives of the adjoining
Rural Districts to urge upon the County Council to push
forward the claims of Dundalk, for its share already spent
and recoverable for the past two years, and for the coming
Letter from the Secretary, Irish Lights' Oflice, Dublin,
as under
22nd February, 1913.
reference to your letter of the 27th ultimo,
I am directed by the Commissioners of Trish Lights to
24
state they do not disapprove of the suggestion to alter the
Carlingford (old) Pier-head Light by replacing the existing
lantern by a square lamp-head, with a red pane of glass,
facing north, so as to give a red light over an arc equal,
practically to the arc now opaque, and I hereby convey
to the Louth County Council the Statutory sanction of
the Commissioners of Irish Lights to the proposal.
I am to request that a draft Notice to Mariners on the
subject may be submitted for the Commissioners' ap-
0 19
proval.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
CORLE,
Secretary.
25
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the above Committee held in
the Council Chantber, Courthouse, Dundalk, on Monday,
3rd February, 1913, at One o'clock.
Present—
In the Chair— Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other members—William Woods, J.P. ; Joseph M.
Johnson, Patrick Byrne, J.P. ; James Wynne, and James
Connolly, J.P., Esquires.
The Secretary submitted the following payments which
Were examined and ofdered for payment.
SECRETARY's OFFICE.
Joseph A. Carben•y, D.I., R.I.C.
H. E. Henderson, D.J., R.I.C.
Miss Margaret Murray per H. Rogan
Mrs. E. Madden per Mr. M'Dermott
Mathew M'Gahan, clerk
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S OFFICE.
Peter Kinaban
James M'Cartnev
Richard Gogartye
James Durnin
Charles Dougherty & Co.
Patrick Boyle
Patrick Connolly
Frank M'Dermott
TOTAL,
12
2 14
1 16
C17
11
6
0 10
0 10
1
6
5
0
25
o
1
6
53
9
9
9
0
0
6
0
o
8
0
o
0
2
26
The Secretary's assistant, Mr. Finegan, applied for a
months salary to end of January. In view of his illness
and the fact that he was an insured person under the
Insurance Act, payment was not ordered.
A paragraph in the Auditor's Report relating to the
apportionments of the Returning Ofticer's Bill of Costs
for last County Council Election was considered. This
matter was postponed until next meeting of Committee,
Mr. C. J. M'Gahon, the Returning Oflicer, to be requested
to attend.
A deputation consisting of Messrs. T. Soraghan and P.
J. Murphy, two members of the Dundalk Rural District
Council, waited on the Committee and explained that a
building was in course of erection for Mrs. Walls,
along the public road and adjacent to the entrance to !
the beach, at Mr. Hamilton's Baths Blackrock. In view
of the fact that this new building was within 30 feet Of')
the centre of the public road, they asked that steps should
be taken to have the Law on the subject enforced. The
Committee resolved unanimously that the Acting County
Surveyor, and the County Solicitor, be directed to take
whatever legal proceedings were necessary to compel the
party offending to keep the buildings the statutory
distance from the centre of the public road.
3, Jocelyn Street, Dundalk,
25th January,
Arthur Agnew
—Applicant.
Louth Co. Council—Respondents.
Dear Sir,
1913.
I should feel obliged if you will kindly let me have:
27
cheque for C4 2s. Od., amount of Decree which I obtained
in this case last October, and which I duly notified you at
the time.
Yours faithfully,
Maurice Molony.
T. F. Filgate, Esq., sec. Louth co. Council.
The above amount was postponed until after 1st April,
1913.
To the Secretary Louth Co. Council.
Derrygalley, Moy, Co. Tyrone,
27th January, 1913.
Re Omeath Park and Mansion.
Dear Sir,
In the event of the Louth County Council deciding
to procure a Sanatorium for treatment of Consumptive
Patients in their own County. On behalf of the owners
of the above-named property, I beg to offer it as a very
suitable Pro ton object.
It stands in its own ground, of
about 60 Acres, and the House is in a commanding
position, half-a-mile from, and overlooking Warrenpoint,
and the Mourne mountains are in view. I should say
that there is not a healthier spot in the County Louth, or
more suited for lesidence of Consumptive Patients.
The House could easily be adapted to the purpose of a
Sanatormm.
Yours faithfully,
Lt. Col. G. S. Alexander.
The subject matter of the above letter was postponed.
28
Minutes of Proceedings of the Fiyrance Counnittee, at
their Meeting held in the Council Chamber, on Monday;
17th yanuary, 1913.
Present—
In the Chair-—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other members—Patrick Byrne, J.P. ; Joseph H.
McArdle, C. A. Duffy, J.P.; William Woods, J.P.•, James
Connolly, J.P. ; James Wynne, Michael Meade, Patrick
O'Connell, Bernard Hamill, J.P., and Joseph M. Johnson,
Esquires.
The Acting Secretary submitted Accounts for Works in
charge of the Acting County Surveyor's and theb
Secretary's Offices, which on examination was passed by
the Committee. The Treasurer's authority amounted to
the sum of 7s Od.
The Annual Estimate of Rates in respect of the
Financial year ending 31st March, 1914, was submitted,
and after a short discussion it was ordered—" That the
Estimate of Rates be printed and circulated among the
members of the Council, with an explanatory table show-
ing the Increase of the Rates in each district and the
cause of same."
The Committee were unanimous in recommending an
increase of CIOO per annum, in respect to the County
Council contribution to the Louth County Infirmary.
29
CORRESPONDENCE.
Letter from the Department of Agriculture and Techni-
cal Instruction as under—
Sir,
15th February, 1913.
Adverting to previous correspondence I have to trans-
mit to you, herewith, for the consideration of the Louth
County Council, a plan of the proposed works of improve-
ment at Dunany. The geoyne will, no doubt, collect
sand, &c. under its lee, and would do so if it extended out
even twice as far as is shown in the plan. The Council
should realise this, as the berthage will need clearing from
time to time.
In connection with your letter of the 6th December
last, would you be good enough to let me know the time,
approximately, when the contribution of the Council will
be available.
I am, &c.,
T. P. GILL, Secretary.
To the Secretary, Louth Co. Council.
The following communication from Messrs. Sheridan &
Co., Was next read :—
Francis Street, Dundalk,
10th February, 1913.
Dear Sir,
We understand your Council have been in corres-
pondence with the Board of Works and the Life Boat
30
Institute, about the Life Boat House and slip, at Gyles
Quay, acquired by our Mr. Mackay as his personal estate
from the owner in Fee, and we have accordingly written
to the Board of Works, and also to the Life Boat Insti-
tute, requesting them to explain the alleged claim, we are
informed that a claim has been set up by one or either
of these Corporate Bodies to this property.
e have also been consulted by some of the Fishermen
from whom dues are sought to be collected by the
authority of the Council for the use of the Quay, and we
are to point out to you that if the County Council seek to
continue this levy and to make the fishermen pay any
dues whatsoever, they will have first to provide a proper
and safe anchorage for the Boats sheltering in the
Harbour, as we take it, even if the slip belonged to the
Council, and that they had the right to allow boats to be
hauled up over it to a place of safety, that a device of this
kind, would not comply with the requirements of the
Statute and the Bye-Laws as providing proper and safe
anchorage for the boats, in respect of which toll could be
collected.
We apprehend there are other difficulties the Council
will also have to face, but it is premature for us nos•, to
deal with same.
Yours faithfully,
SHERIDAN & Co.
The Secretary, County Council, Dundalk.
The undermentioned communication from the Clerk,
Richmond District Asylum, was read and referred to the
County Council—
February 4th, 1913.
Dear Sir,
I am directed to forward you the following copy of
31
a resolution passed by the Joint Committee
That the Joint Committee request the County and
Borough Councils of the District to call upon the Mem-
bers of Parliament representing the District, to claim from
the Chancellor of the Exchequer Surplus, such amount
as will be sufficient to put the Local Texation (Ireland)
Aceount in a solvent condition, to enable it to pay
arrears of Capitation Grants and other Statutory charges
and to pay all future Statutory charges in full.
I inclose a Statement showing the amount of the
Capitation Grant Claims as certified for the past three
Years, and the actual payments made on foot of same.
Yours faithfully,
H. F. MURHIY, Chief Clerk.
To The Secretary, Louth Co. Council.
33, Laurence Street, Drogheda.
Dear Sir,
I wish to apply for the salary due up to 21st of
D
ecember, to my late husband, Doctor J. J. Byrne,
C Oroner. As soon as Administration is taken out I will
correspond with you.
Yours truly,
HARRIET BYRNE.
Ordered—That the balance of salary due the late Dr.
Byrne, as set out in Mrs. Byrne's letter, be discharged
by the County Council.
32
Letter from Mr. Joseph Loudon, as under :—
Dundalk,
17th February, 1912.
Mr. Chairmen & Gentlemen,
I beg leave to apply to you for some remuneration
for extra work done during Mr. Finegan's late illness, for
a long time before Mr. Finigan gave up, his health was in
such a precarious state that he was unable to perform his
portion of the office work, which fell into arrears ; to wipe
out this accumulation of work, I had to remain in the
office every night until ten o'clock.
I might mention for the guidance of the Committee,
that on a former occasion when Mr. Finigan was away
from the office ill, two clerks were appointed to do his
work at 30/- per week each, this time only one clerk was
appointed, this item alone saved an expenditure of
IOS. Od.
I have every confidence the Committee will recom-
mend to the County Council the amount they consider I
am justly entitled to, as they have always done with any
claim for extra work done for the Council.
Thanking you in anticipation,
I am, Mr. Chairman & Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
J. LOUDON.
To The Chairman Finance Committee.
On the motion of Mr, B. Hamill, J.P., seconded by Mr.
M. Meade, it was recommended—That Mr, Loudon be
allcwed a sum of C12 IOS Od.
33
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee, cc
their Meeting held in the Council Chamber, on Monday,
the 3rd day of March, 1913.
Present—
In the Chair—C. A. Duffy, Esq., J N.
Other members—Bernard Hamill, J.P. ; Patrick Byrne,
• Edward Goodman, James Wynne, Patrick
O'Connell, James Connolly, J.P. ; and Michael Meade,
Esquires.
Messrs. Daniel O'Connell, Solicitor to the
Council, and the Acting County Surueyors, were also
present.
The Acting County Surveyors submitted accounts for
Works in their charge, and the Secretary for those in his
Office for which the Committee, after examination, ordered
payment.
Steam Road Rolling—The following Statement by
Mr. James Wynne was referred back from the County
Council.
I beg to move that this Council adopt the Scheme of
Road Rolling, under the Road Board Grant, and applica-
Yon be made to the Road Board for a grant of one
•alf the cost of purchasing fully equipped plant, and a
!urther advance of the second half for five years free of
Interest.
The plant to consist of the following :
2 Traction Engines, 6-horse single cylinder,
Pressure 180 lbs ; delivered free Dundalk,
at ±403 lös. Od. each
C807 10 0
2 Injector necessary extra at C8 lös. each
2 Steam Road Rollers, 12 tons, with In-
jectors, at C394 17s. Gd. each
2 Compensating Gear, necessary, delivered
Dundalk, at C13 3s. 3d. each
I Baxter Stone Breaker 14x8 or other ap-
proved maker, delivered Dundalk
1 Goodwin, Barsby & Co. fitone Breaker,
12x9, delivered Dundalk
2 Watering Carts, newest make, C34 each
4 Sleeping Vans at CGO each
2 Traction Waggons to carry 8 to IO tons,
at C120 each
2 Best Driving Belts, at each
Sundries
17
789
26
180
160
68
240
10
10
C2549
10
15
6
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
O
0
6
0
0
0
0
0
35
Court House, Drogheda,
March 3rd, 1913.
On the motion of Mr. James Wynne, seconded by Mr.
Patrick Byrne, J.P., it was ordered—That the Statement
as submitted by Mr. Wynne, with accompanying letter
from Acting County Surveyors, be forwarded to Road
Board Authorities, and that the matter be left in the hands
of the Acting County Surveyors ; and further that the
Acting County Surveyol s apply on behalf of the Dundalk
Urban District Council for their proportionate share of the
Road Board Grant, in respect of Steam Rolling and
Tarring in Dundalk Urban District—the sum in qvestion
being CIö8.
DROGHEDA CORONERSHIP.
Respecting this matter there was very considerable
discussion, with the result that Committee ordered that
the undermentioned letter be forthwith addressed to the
Town Clerk of Drogheda.
Dear Sir,
The matter of the vacancy caused by the death of
Dr. J. J. Byrne, late Coroner for Drogheda, was on refer-
ence from the County Council, the subject of consideration
by the Finance Committee of this Council to-day, and I
am directed to inform you that as at present advised, any
appointment to this post rests with the Louth County
Council.
Yours faithfully,
OSWALD HARDY,
Acting Secretary.
To J. B. Connolly, Esq., Court House, Drogheda.
The foregoing matter arose through the Secretary
having received the following wire :
To Filgate, Secretary County Council, Dundalk.
Corporation have on Agenda for Wednesday's Meeting,
motion to arrange Election of Coroner for Drogheda,
regret cannot attend your meeting to-day.—-From Elcock.
The next matter on the Agenda was consideration of
plans for
REPAIRS TO DUNANV PIER.
Very considerable discussion ensued respecting this
matter, and finally the Committee were unanimous in
arriving at the following decision, viz :
T bat a Committee consisting of the following gentle-
men be appointed a deputation to meet the Department's
36
Engineer—Mr. Oliver— for the purpose of consultation
on the matter. Messrs. Michael Meade, Patrick Byrne,
J.P. ; Denis J. Rath, Joseph M. Johnson ; also the follow-
ing local gentlemen—Rev. Peter Finigan, P.P. ; Joseph
Harmen, John Harmon, Stephen Segrave, and Mr.
M'Dowell ; the two Acting County Surveyors ; Messrs.
Lyons and Dromgoole were also to be present. Mean-
time Secretary to ascertain what date will be suitable for
the Department's Engineer to attend at Dunany.
The following correspondence was then submitted uto
the Committee—
Local Government Board, Dublin,
27th February, 1913.
Sir,
With reference to the preparation of your esti mate to
provide for the expenditure of the County during the
next Financial Year, in connection with liability for Land
Purchase, I am directed by the Local Government Board
for Ireland to acquaint you that they have now received
copies of certificates from the Irish Land Commission,
and the Commissioners of National Debt, showing the
actual arrears in Purchase Annuities, &c., under the Land
Purchase Acts ; and the Board are, therefore, in a position
to state definitely, for the information of the County
Council, that the amount which will be deducted in
respect of the above liability, from the Estate or Death
Duty Grant, payable in the County in the course of the
next month, is a sum of C444 7s. 3d.
I am, sir, your obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
The Secretary of the Louth Co. Council.
37
Letter from the Council's Solicitor as under :—
Francis Street, Dundalk,
3rd March, 1913.
Re CRIMINAL INJURY APPEALS.
Dear Sir,
1 beg to report that the Decree of C855, in favour
Of Miss Selina Robson, and the Decree of CIOO, of Mr.
George Gray, awarded by the County Court Judge in con-
nection with the burning of property at Red Barns, were
confirmed by Mr. Justice Boyd, at the Assizes just held.
The area of levy to be the County at large.
The Decree of C14 lös. Od. in favour of Mrs. Mary A.
Hughes, for the burning of Stall at Market Square, was
reversed by Lord Justice Cherry.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
T. F. Filgate, Esq., Sec. Louth County Council.
On the application of J. M. C. Lyons, Acting County
Surveyor, the Commutee authorised him to hire a Steam
Holler from Mr. H. R. Osborne, Drogheda.
Respecting Mr. D. O'Connell's letter as to the payment
Of Malicious Injury Decrees, the Committee ordered that
the following Minute be made :—
The Decree—Selina Robson, been affirmed by the
Judge of Assize, on the 1st March, may not be included
in the estimate for the ensuing twelve months, which was
considered and confirmed by the County Council, at their
Quarterly Meeting held on the 27th February.
38
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee, at
their Meeting held in the Council Chamber, on Tuesday,
the 18th day Moreh, 1913.
Present :—
In the Chair—C. A. Duffy, Esq., J.P.
Other members—Patrick Byrne, J.P. ; Patrick
O'Connell, and Joseph M. Johnston, Esquires. Also
present—Messrs. Daniel O'Connell, Solicitor to the Co.
Council, and Dr. J. A. M 'Quillan.
The Secretary submitted Accounts for Works, in charge
of his office and those of the Acting County Surveyors,
which on examination were passed by the Committee.
The next item on the Agenda was the consideration of
letter from the Women's National Health Association
which read as follows—
Peamount, Hazelhatch, Dublin,
11th March, 1913.
Dear Sir,
I am directed by the Committee of Management
of Peamount Sanatorium, to inform you that at a meeting
held on Friday last, 7th instant, it was unanimously re-
solved that the following resolution should be sent to the
County Councils who have not yet nominated their repre-
sentatives, and request that such County Councils should
do their utmost to appoint a representative, so that they
39
may be able to attend the next meeting, which was fixed
for Wednesday, the 9th April, at Ely Ilouse, Dublin, at
3 0'clock p.m.
That Wednesday, the 9th April, be fixed for the trans-
action of business, including the appointment of the
Resident Medical Officer, that notice be sent to those Co.
Councils who have not yet nominated their representative,
and request they would at once take steps to be repre-
sented at that meeting.
Yours faithfully,
WILLIAM J. THOMPSON.
On the motion of Mr. J. M. Johnson, s•econded by Mr.
Patrick O'Connell, it unanimously recommended—
That Mr. Charles A Dtiffy, J.P., of Seatown Place,
Dundalk, be elected a member of the Committee in ques-
tion, and that the Secretary address the undermentioned
letter to the Hon. Sec., Sir William J. Thompson.
Secretary's Office, Dundalk,
18th 1913.
1)
ear Sir,
At a meeting of the Finance Committee of this
council held to-day, they unanimously decided to appoint
e Under-mentioned gentleman as their representative to
attend your meeting to be held on Wednesday, the 9th of
April, respecting the appointment of a Resident Medical
Officer, by the Committee of Management of Peamount
Sanatorium, viz A. Duffy, Esq., J.P., Seatown
Place, Dundalk.
The favour of an acknowledgment will be much
esteemed.
Yours faithfully,
T. F. FILGATE, Secretary.
To Sir William J. Thompson, M.D., Dublin.
40
The following further communication from Sir William
J. Thompson, was next read—
21st February, 1913.
Dear Mr. Warren,
I find very often when .Patients return bome from
Peamount, that if they sleep in a shelter, they continue
the benefit they have derived from being at the
Sanatorium.
It has been reported to us that John Connolly and W.
Cormack, are willing to use shelters if they could get
them. The W.N.H.A. have shelters ready, and a County
Council has the .power to purchase them. I would feel
greatly obliged if you would be so kind as to find out
whether the County Louth County Council would supply
the shelves for these men. The Shelters cost C13 each,
this includes a bed, mattress, bolster and pillow.
Sorry to give you so much trouble, and thanking you in
anticipation.
Yours very truly,
WILLIAM J. THOMPSON.
To Valentine Warren, Esq.
In connection with the foregoing letter, the following
was also read—
Jocelyn Place,
March 13th, 1913.
Secretary, Co. Louth Insurance Committee.
Dear Sir,
I should feel obliged if you would kindly let me
know whether the County Insurance Committee or the
County Council have power (pending the forming of
Sanatorium and Care Committees, N,'hich I presume will
be formed here, as elsewhere, in connection with the
Tuberculosis Dispensary), to extend Home Treatinent,
viz. —Medicine and nourishment to non-insured persons
on their return from Sanatoria. - We have one such case
at present of a patient who spent 10 weeks at Newcastle,
paid for while there, by the local branch of the Women's
National Health Association.
Since the patient's return, they have not been able
(thro' Want of means), to procure the necessary medicine,
and n0t11'ishment required. Our Committee gave a small
sum Of money for this purpose, but unfortunately the
means at our disposal will not permit us to give any
further help at present, but we have another patient, who
will also require looking after in this respect.
Apologising for troubling you.
I am, yours faithfully,
N. M'GINITY,
Hon. sec., VV.N.H.S.
Having discussed the subject matter of these letters it
Was proposed by Mr. J. M. Johnston, seconded by Mr.
Patrick O'Connell, and recommended—
That the County Council procure, as a pattern, one
shelter at C13, and one to be made by a loctbl •tradesman,
and further that the shelter be given to the patient
Cassidy and meantime Dr. M'Quillan to visit him at his
home, and ascertain whether he is a fit person for a
shelter.
The Committee on the recommendation of J)octor
M 'Quillan decided to send the patient, James M' Donald,
to a Sanatorium, pending the appointment of a Sanatorium
c
ornrnittee.
42
On the application of Dr. M'Quillan, the Committee
authorised him to procure such Books, Requisites, and
Printing, as may be deemed necessary for his use.
In further compliance with Dr. M 'Quillon's request as
regards sending patients to the Louth County Infirmary,
the Committee were unanimous in leaving the matter in
the hands of Mr. C. A. Duffy, and that the matter be
brought before the next meeting of the County Council.
The following letter and resolution from Mr. Valentine
Warren, was also referred to the County Council.
14th March, 1913.
Dear Sir,
I am directed by the Louth County Insurance Com-
mittee to forward you a copy (as attached), of a resolution
unanimously adopted by them at their meeting held on
the 6th instant. It will be esteemed a favour if you have
it laid before your Council at the earliest opportunity.
Yours, etc.,
V. WARREN.
Proposed by Mr. James Hughes, J.P.,
Seconded by Mrs.(). A. Duffy, and
Resolved—That we request the County Council to pro-
ceed as early as possible with the erection of Central and
Branch Dispensaries, as the need for these tends towards
the stamping out of Consumption, is pressingly urgent.
(Signed) JAMES WYNNE, Presiding Chairman•
V. WARREN, Clerk.
6th February, 1913.
43
Respecting the house now being built by Mrs. Walls,
Blackrock, the following report was read—
Blackrock, 3/3/13.
The Committee appointed by the County Council, con-
Sisting of Messrs. T. J. Byrne, J.P. ; P. J. Murphy, D.C.
(Mr. Soraghan, R.A.C., being absent owing to illness) ;
Wm. Barber, C.E. ; Mr. Cahill, C.E.; J. M. C. Lyons,
Acting Co. Surveyor, met at Blackrock to-day, March 3rd,
at 4-33 p.m. Having inspected the site of the new build-
ing, and had map and measurement of same before them
it was arranged to adjourn the further consideration of
the matter for three weeks, when your Committee propose
to meet again and further report.
T. J. BYRNE.
P. J. MURPHY.
Letter from Mr. P. J. Kelly, Solicitor, as under—
KELLY V.
Dear Sir,
Kindly let me have
the apportioned amount
herein.
T. F. FILGATE, Esq.
13th March, 1913.
Co. COUNCIL.
cheque for C39 3s. 9d. being
to be paid by your Council
Yours truly,
P. J. KERLEY.
The Committee decided to adhere to their original
decision in this maater—i e.=not to pay any Malicious
Injury Decrees until levied and collected.
The following letter was read, bul the Committee made
no order on the subject matter of same.
Drogheda,
March 15th 1913.
The Chairman Finance Committee.
Dear, Sir,
I respectfully ask the assistance and advice of the
County Council's Solicitor, in proceeding against the
Vendors of the Newcomen property at Clogher Head, as
they dispute the valuation in two cases ; there are four
years rent due ; the property is now sold.
Hoping for a favourable reply.
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
P. MCCULLAGH.
Letters were read from the Local Government Board
as under—
14th March, 1913.
Sir,
With reference to previous correspondence, I am
directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland, to
forward, for the information of the Louth County Council
the accompanying copy of letter which the Board have
addressed to Dr. J. A. M 'Quillan, respecting his appoint-
ment as Medical Superintendent of the Central Tuber-
culosis Dispensary, to be established by the Co. Council.
T am, &c.,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
(Copy.)
Local Government Board,
14th March, 1913.
Sir—I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Ireland, to return to you, herewith the Certificates lodged
by you at this office, and to state that they note that you
have completed your six months' course of special instruc-
tion in connection with your appointment as Medical
Superintendent of the Central Tuberculosis Dispensary to
be established by the Louth County Council.
The Board presume that you will now enter upon the
discharge of your duties in County Louth.
I am, &c.,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
Dr. J. A. M'QUILLAN, Ardee, Co. Louth.
46
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance
their Meeting held in the Council Chamber,
31st March, 1913.
Present
P. Hughes, Esq., J.P., in the Chair.
13 10
47
Alfred Palmer, Preparing Rate Books 0 13
Committee, at
on Monday,
P. J. Clarke
E. French
J. F. O'Mahony
J. M'Guinness
F. Moneypennv
M. NI'Gahon
J. 1. Kindlan
D. woods
J. Carroll
SIR,
0 15
Other members present—F. Murphy, J.P. ; B. Hamill
J.P.; E. Goodman, M. Meade, P. Byrne, J.P.; and James
Wynne, Esquires.
The following accounts were examined and paymentS
2
2
2
1
1
3
1
1
7
5
2
2
9
16
3
0
1
7
5
6
17 12 11
19 11
ordered—
James Durning, Flagman
Frank M'Dermott
P. ward, Road Rolling
Michael Lynch, Road No. 317 ...
Richard Gogarty, Road No. 317, Dundalk
Patrick M'Connon, Road No. 474, Dundalk
1
1
15
1
0
C25
6
6
6
27
6
6
2
0
1
6
1
Total,
CORRESPONDENCE.
6
o
6
Local Government Board,
Dublin,
13th March, 1913
T Murray (paid Chimney Sweep)
Secretary's Office.
Mrs. E. Madden McDermitts
Scholarship
D. O'Meara, Salary, Education Act 16
With reference to the appointment by the Louth
Count
Y Council on 5th September last of Mr. Joseph
oonan as temporary Collector of Poor Rate for the
district of the late Mr. Patrick Moonan in Louth County,
directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland
to request that you will be, so good as to inform them
What steps are being taken towards making a permanent
appointment for this District.
By Order of the Board,
P. J. Campbell,
T. Kearney
P. Garvey
1
9
0
14
0
5
18
7
The Secretary
Louth County Council.
E. W. LEACH
11 6
Ordered to be put on Agenda for next Meeting of
the Council.
Town Clerk's Office,
Court House, Drogheda,
27th March, 1913.
The Secretary,
County Council of Louth,
Dundalk.
DEAR SIR,
Referring to previous correspondence on the
subject, I beg to inform you that the Corporation of
Drogheda have appointed Mr. Joseph J. Farrell to the
position of Borough Coroner at a salary of C25 per annum.
The appointment was made on the 19th instant,
Yours faithfully,
J. B. CONNOLLY.
Francis Street,
Dundalk,
31st March, 1913.
KING TO MURPHY.
DEAR SIR,
I beg to report that I attended on the Taxation
of those costs before Master Mathews, and that same were
certified to the amount of C18 6s. 7d. The costs were
ncurred in connection with the acquisition of the land
course, are borne by the Council.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
T. F. Filgate, Esq.,
Sec. Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
Payment recommended.
49
Local Government. Board,
Dublin, 19th March, 1913.
am directed by the Local Government Board
for Ireland to enclose herewith, for the information of the
County Council, the accompanying copy of the Tuber-
culosis Prevention (Ireland) Act, 1913, and to point out
that its provisions are intended to obviate certain diffi-
culties which have been experienced in connection with
the administration of Part 11 of the Tuberculosis Pre-
vention (Ireland) Act, 1908.
Section I and 2 relate to finance and remove the dis-
tinction drawn in the earlier Act in regard to the classi-
fication of establishment expenses and of patients' ex-
Penses. All expenses 'incurred by a County Council on
account of the treatment of tuberculosis over and above
the proportion defrayed from Public Funds as set out in
the Board's Circular of the 17th January last —8 M. 1913,
Miscellaneous—will in future be leviable over the entire
County area.
Provision is also made to authorise a County Council
to borrow money temporarily for defraying expenses for
e cnrrent financial year in respect of the treatment of
Tuberculosis, which may not have been contemplate at
the time when the estimates for the year were prepared.
Section 3 will enable Sanatoria established by a com-
bination of Sanitary Authorities under the Public Health
Acts to be acquired by County Councils in pursuance of
the Tuberculosis Prevention Act.
Section 4 enables County Councils who have established
Sanitoria to receive therein patients from other Counties,
and Will thus afford an alternative to combination between
county Councils through a Common Hospital and Joint
Committee of Management. Such cases will be dealt with
under agreements made in purscance of Section 4 (1) (b)
of the principal Act.
50
Section 5 permits the Local Goverment Board to place
any land vested in them at the disposal of a County
Council as a site for a Tuberculosis hospital or dispensary,
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
The Secretary
of each County Council.
The Town Clerk
51
Dr. M'QuiIlan was instructed to apply to Dr. O'Connell,
Surgeon Co. Infirmary, for the temporary use of the
Hospital Dispensary, for the examination and treatment
Of Tuberculous Patients; also permission to erect a
Shelter for the use sof John Cassidy, referred to in Dr.
M'Quillan's report.
Ordered—Thbt all clothing, etc. required for Shelters
be procured in a Dundalk establishment—Messrs. Good-
man, Hamill, O'Connell and Wynne being appointed a
Sub Committee to select same.
Resolved—That the following members be appointed a
Samaritan Committee for the purpose of selecting sites,
etc.—
Messrs. The Chairman, B Hamill, J.P. ; E. Goödmati,
J. Wynne, P. O'Connell. P. Byrne, J.P ; three to form
a quorum.
A letter was read+om Mr. N. Neary, Road Contractor,
applying for deferred for mud accumulations, Payment
Was recommended if Mr. Lyons, Acting County Surveyor,
Would certify that the work was satisfactorily performed.
Lyons was also instructed to allow Mr. John Watters
to continue his Contract, which was taked up for neglect,
on condition that he signs an agreement to supply only
Ballymakellett Stones in future.
of each County Borough Council in Ireland.
Letter from Local Government Board, 9th March, 1913,
referred to Dr. McQuillan for Report.
GENTLEMEN,
I beg to report on Che following Tubercular
Patient who is not insured—
John Cassidy, aged 36, Quay Labourer, 39, Mary St. No
Dundalk.
This patient was in Newcastle Sanitorium for 15 weeks'
is home from same since 8th March. He feels mucb
better than when he left home, und gained one stone
weight.
The house contains two small rooms and kitchen,
lives with wife and child, he has a room to self.
As he is very keen on sleeping out of doors, I would
suggest the provision of a, shelter for him, which could be
placed in his yard. The yard is IO yards by 4, the onlY
difficulty is shelter will not go through the door, unless
taken to very small portions.
I have the honour to be,
Your obedient servant,
J. A. MCQUILLAN
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee held
in the Council Chamber, Court-house, Dundalk, on Monday,
14th April, 1913, at one o'clock.
Present :—
In the chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—C. A. Duffy, J.P.; Michael Meade,
James \Vynne, James Connolly, J . P. ; Edward Goodman,
Patrick Byrne, J.P. ; J. M. Johnson, and Patrick
O'Connell, Esquires.
The following amounts were examined and ordered for
52
0 17
3 10
53
Peter M'Enteggart,
Patrick Boyle,}
Patrick Hanlon,
Patrick M 'Dermott, Flagman
Richard Gogarty, road maintenance
Michael Ferguson, Sunday Giles' Quay
Nicholas Neary, road maintenance
Total,
10
7
4
1
6
269
C98
o
o
3
6
4
o
19
6
o
o
9
0
6
o
9
2
The Tuberculosis Medical Officer, Dr. M'Quillan,
made
payment :—
SECRETARY's OFFICE.
P. J. Clarke, preparing Rate Books C3
J. Kinlon,
Dan Woods,
John M 'Guinness,
James Carroll,
Matthew M'Gahan,
Francis Moneypenny,
John F. Somers,
Edward French,
A. J. Palmer,
3
2
2
1
1
1
1
o
1 11
Mrs. E. Madden, per Branigan,
Board and Lodging,
3
Miss Murray, per Rogan, Board
and Lodging,
5
Total,
13
7
17
17
8
4
12
8
8
COUNTY SURVEYOR'S OFFICE.
T. T. Reilly, repairs to Ardee Court-house
Peter M'Guinness, cur hire Dunany Pier
James Durnin, Flagman, Ardee .
James Carroll, roads maintenance
Martin Butterly & Co., coal supplied
Thomas Halligan, road maintenmce
Thomas Halligan,
3
2
8
1
1
6
6
19
8
1
I
8
10
16
6
10
6
16
13 2
6 18
11
5
5
O
0
9
3
5
3
application for authority to purchase a microscope,
Urgently needed for bacteriological examination purposes,
at cost of C20, and other requisites at a cost of C2. The
Committee authorised the purchase of those articles.
Mc. Edward Goodman brought before the Committee
the fact that an office was needed for the Clerk to the
Insurance Committee, and Mr. Warren, the Clerk, came
before the Finance Committee and stated that the Insur-
ance Commissioners would not allow his committee to treat
with any persons other than au public body for this purpose.
It Was mentioned that offices could be had from Mr.
Bothwell, in Earl Street, at a sum of C12 per annum, and
It Was unanimously decided that the County Council be
recommended to acquire these offices for the purposes of
the Insurance Committee.
A letter from the local Manager of the Insurance
Company guaranteeing the Rate Collectors, was read.
It referred to failure of Mr. Joseph Moonan to close his
Collection on 31st March, and was referred to the County
Solicitor.
A letter from the County Solicitor as to boat slip ut
Giles' Quay and also to the erection of a hut in Carling-
ford Harbour by the Carlingford Lough Commissioners,
Was read. The Solicitor was directed to take counsel's
opinion on the matter referred to.
It Was also decided that the agreement between the
County Council and the Insurance Committee for the
54
treatment of tubercular insured persons be drafted by
the County Solicitor and submitted to the Insurance
Committee.
An application from the temporary clerical staff em-
ployed at rate books for increased remuneration for
certain items of work, was ordered to be brought up again
at the completion of the work, when the total cost would
be ascertained.
The Secretary's assistant, Mr. J. F. Finegan, produced
a certificate as to ill health from Dr. O'Connell, and he
was granted a week's leave of absence, Mr. Matt M 'Gabon
to be employed as a, substitute at 5s per day.
The Chairman drew attention to the fact that the Local
Government Board had not as yet taken any steps
towards furnishing the County Council with the names Of
of candidates qualified for the vacant post of County
Surveyor, although the names of applicants had been
forwarded to them so far back as November last, and the
Secretary was directed to write to the Local Government
Board and ascertain the cause of the delay.
The Secretary submitted Forms 22, for the districts o
Ardee, Drogheda and Dundalk, setting forth all paytnentS
to road contractors, as recommended by the three Rural
District Councils.—Payment recommended.
Proposed by Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Seconded by Mr. Edward Goodman.
That we recommend the Council that new offices be
erected for the County Council as the present accommo-
dation for the growing business of the Council and its
committees is quite inadequate, and we request our
Secretary to communicate with the Board of Works as to
the terms and conditions for a loan for the purpose, an
also to ascertain from other County Councils who have
built offices for particulars and details regarding the
initiation and carrying out of the work.—UnanimouslY
adopted.
öö
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the above Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber on Monday, the 27th
day of January, 1913.
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—John F. Murphy, J.P. ; James S.
Kelly, Joseph U. M'Ardle, and Joseph M. Johnson,
Esquires.
The Committee were summoned for the pul pose of
opening and considering of Tenders for the following
Works, &c.
APPLICATIONS BY THE COUNTY SURVEYOR.
No 1
• —To Repair Ardee Courthouse for One
Year, from 1st April, 1913, to 31st
March, 1914.
• —To Repair Drogheda Courthouse for
One Year, from 1st April, 1913, to
40 0 0
318t March, 1914.
• —To Supply and Fit 8 Gas Radiators in
45 0 0
Drogheda Courthouse ...
• —To Repair Dunany Pier, &c., cost pot
to exceed Cö00 (250 levied off County
at Large, C250 contributed by the
Department of Agriculture and Tech-
nical Instruction for Ireland)
• -—To Repair the County Courthouse,
Dundalk, for One Year, from 1st
30 0 0
April, 1913, to 31st March, 1914
-To Supply on Ca,rts at Ardee, Drogheda
and Dundalk, Best Scotch Coal
(screened) for One Year, from 1st
April, 1913, us required for use of
Road Rollers.
No Tenders were received for the above Works.
56
APPLICATIONS BY THE SECRETARY.
No. 7—To Supply Printing and Stationery
for County purposes for One Year,
from 4st April, 1913, to 31st March,
1914, including the Printing to be
done for the Clerk of the Crown and
Peace under Jurors' and Registration
Acts.
Messrs Tempest, McDougall, and Mathews'
Tenders were accepted.
No. 8—To Supply for One Year, from 1st
April, 1913, to 31st March, 1914,
Ardee, Drogheda, and Dundalk Court-
houses with best NV igan Coal, at
C—per ton, delivered. Contractor
to supply Coke, Bogwood, Fire light-
Materials, at Market Prices as
required.
F. O'Neill's Tender for Ardee and Dundalk
Courthouse were accepted.
A.' Murdock and Son's Tender for Drogheda
Courthouse was accopted.
No. 9—To prepare the Courts and Court Rooms
for Assizes, Quarter Sessions, and
Revision Sessions, in County Court-
house for One Year, from 1st April,
1913, to 31st March, 1914. Not to
exceed
15
H. & J. O'Hare's Tender was accepted.
No. IO—To insert the County Advertisements,
etc., in one Dundalk and Drogheda
Paper, for One Year, from 1st April,
1913, to 31st March, 1914.
The Tenders of Drogheda A rgus and Dundalk
Democrat were accepted.
In every instance the lowest tender was accepted.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) ACT, 1808.
LOUTH
COUNTY
COUNCIL.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
Finance Committee at their Meeting
held in the Council Chamber, on
Monday, the 21st day ot April, 1913.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes OJ Proceedings of thc Finance Committee,
held in the Council O/tamber, Court [louse, Dundalk, on Monday,
the 21st April, 1913, at one o'clock.
Present—
In the Chair—C. A. Duffy, Esq., J.P.
Other Members present—P. Byrne, J.P. ; B. Hamill, J.P. ;
•J• F. Murphy, J.P. ; W. Woods, J.P. ; J. Connolly, J.P. ;
J• Wynne, M. Meuae, P. O'Connell, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted County-at-large payments
which were examined and recommended for payment.
The following pvplieation from Mr. V. Warren, Clerk to
the Central Dispensary, was read
COURT HOUSE,
T)UNDALK,
19/4/13.
GENTLEMEN,
I respectfully apply for remuneration for my serviees
rendered in connection with the, Council's Scheme for the
treatjnent of tuberculosis, which has for some time necessi-
tating a considerable amount of work.
Thanking you in anticipation,
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
V. WARREN, Clerk.
Referred to the County Council.
4
The following application frotti the Rate Collectors
was read :
To THE CHAIRMAN AND MEMBERS FINANCE COMMITTEE.
GENTLEMEN,
We the undersigned Collectors of Poor Rate beg to apply
for balance of remuneration due in respect of first moiety
of our respective, collections.
Signecl,
PATRICK HUGHES.
PETER M'DONNELL.
PATRICK CLUSKEV.
PATRICK M'I)ONALD.
Payment recommended.
5
I am to add that the Board trust that the necessarv
steps are being taken with a view to the establishment of a
permanent Central Tuberculosis Dispensary.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
[COPY. •j
COUNTY OF LOUTH NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE
JOHN WOODS.
J0TIN J. KELLY .
P. M'CULLOUGH
Slit,
COMMITTEE.
CLERK'S OFFICE,
COURT HOUSE, DUNDALK,
15th April, 1913.
The Secretary submitted the Collector's Lists of irrecover-
able arrears, for the half-year ended 31st March, 1913, which
were referred to the County Council.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Letter from Govermnent Board, enclosing copy
of letter from the National Health Insurance Committee :
LOCAL GOVERNMENT Boxun, DUBLIN,
18th Apr", 1913.
SIR,
T am directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland
to forward, herewith, eopy of a letter which they have re-
ceived from the Louth County Insurance Committee, inti-
mating that the use of a romn in the County Infirmary has
been secured for Che purposes of a temporary 'l'u bereulosis
Dispensary, and I am [o state that the Board presume that
this provisional arrangenxent has been made with the con-
currenee of the County Council.
1
am directed to inform you that the Committee of
Alanagement of the Louth County Infirmary have been so
kind as to place a room in their Institution at, the disposal
Of the Tu bereulosis Oflieer as a teniporary Dispensary, pending
the erection of the Central Dispensary by the County Council.
Trusting the arrangement will meet with the approval
Of the Local Government Board,
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
V. WARREN, Clerk.
Letter from C. I). Oliver, Esq., Engineer of Department
Of Agriculture and Teehnieal Instruction, relative to Dunany
Pier :
ENGINEER'S OFFICE,
2 KILDARE PLACE,
DUBLIN,
16th April, 1913.
DUNANY PIER (JONES's QUAY) IMPROVEMENT.
DEAR SIR,
As requested by the Committee which I mef at Dunany
1
now forward a revised plan for the works there on the
lines laid down.
The reduction in the width of the berth - enables me to
provide for carrying out the quay woll to the full height
of the present pier for length of 75 feet beyond which the
base of a similar wall will be carried out for a further 35 feet
to a height of (i feet over the, excavated level.
This is probably as much as con be done for the money
available, but if we are able to save anything in the progress
of the work we can carry on the full height wall little further.
I am confident that thc wall designed is of ample strength.
It will be understood that. as I pointed out on the ground,
this wall must not be raiserl to its full height at once, but
It probably
brough up gradually as the, shingle aecutnulates.
will not be finished under two years, depending on the rate
of such accumulation.
Yours Faithfully,
CHARLES D. OLIVER.
Referred to the County Council.
Letter from. Mr. T. B. I)romgoole :—
CLERK'S OFFICE,
UNION WORKHOUSE,
AROEE,
15th April, 1913.
DEAR SIR,
As the time is now on for serving the Franchise
Requisitions and Inaking other preparations for the revision
of the Parliamentary Voters Lists. I should be glad to have
vour views as to what shoul(l be done to have the work carried
out in the district of the late ur. Moonan, Rate Collector,
pending the appointment of his permanent successor. I
understand that Mr. Joseph Noonan's temporary appoint-
ment ended on 1st Mareh last, and if this be the case he
would have no power now to art in the matter of serving
'i'he time for serving the forniS
the Franchise Requisitions.
will expire at the end of May, and if the new appointment
probably made and sanctioned in ti:ne to allow the new
Coileetor performing the duty, 1 should feel obliged if you
would consider what. is best to do.
Yours faithfully.
T. B. I)ROMGOOLE.
7
It was decided to refer this communication to the Local
Government Board. with a suggestion that the Relieving
Officer should,
if possible, be em ployecl to discharge the
duty referred to.
Letter from Road Board : —
SIR,
THE ROAD BOARD,
QUEEN ANNE'S CHAMBERS, BROADWAY,
WESTMINSTER, LONDON, S.W.
14ih April, 1913.
In reply to your letter of the 10th ultimo applying for
a grant to an expenditure of El 3S on surface tarring works
in the Dundalk Urban District, I am directed by the Board
to say that it is not their practice to make contributions
to works that have been carried out. but if the Urban
District Couneii are prepared to expend a further su of
$133 on approved works of surface tarring or tar macadam
and will submit details for approval, the Board wi!l consider
favourably the, question of making a grant of towards
the expenditure.
The Board are not prepared to make a grant or loan
towards an expenditure of €254!) on stemn rolling plant,
but if the County Council will borrow from other sources
the atnount required the Board will be prepared to make a
Yrant of El 100 and loan of 100 free of interest, repayable
five years, to an approved seheine of road crust itnprove-
work on the Lhlblin •Dundalk- Belfast Road. the Dundalk-
Armagh Road, or the Dundalk-Shereock Road.
If the County Council resolve to accept this offer par-
tic talars of the works of improvement with which they decide
should be forwu•ded to the Board for approval
In due course.
I ani, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
W. REES JEFFREYS, Sccrciary.
Referred to the County Council, with a reconnnendation
that the offer of the Roacl Board so far as relates to Rural
Districts be accepted.
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDNIGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At their First Quarterly Meeting held in the Council
Chamber on Thursday, •24th April, 1913; Special
Meeting on 30111 April, 191b; Adjourned Quarterly
Meeting held on Thursday, 29th May, 1913 ; An-
nual Meeting, 13th June, 1913.
FINANCE COMMITTEE
At Meetings held on 28th April, 14th Mav, 26th
May, 9th June, 23rd June, 7th July, 1913.
SCHOOL ATTENDANCE COMMITTEE
At their Meeting held on 30th June, 1913.
DROGHEDA :
ADVERTISER' PRINTING WORKS.
.11
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDNIGS
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At their First Quarterly Meeting held in the Council
Chamber on Thursday, 24th April, 1913 ; Special
Meeting on 30th April, 1913 ; Adjourned Quarterly
Meeting held on Thursday, 29th May, 1913 ; An-
nual Meeting, 13th June, 1913.
FINANCE corv1MITTEE
At their Meetings held on 28th April, 14th May, 26th
May, 9th June, 23rd June, 7th Jul v, 1913.
SCHOOL ATTENDANCE COMMITTEE
At their Meeting held on 30th June, 1913.
DROGHEDA :
" ADVER'I'ISER' PRI.VHNG WORKS.
Louth County Council.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at
their First Quarterly Meeting held in the Council
Charnber,
on 'I'hursday, the 24th day of April, 1913.
Present
In the chan —
• • • Peter Hughes, Esq., J. P.
()ther Inetnbers—W. A. I)oran, J.I .
. W 111. Woods, J. P
C. A. Duffy. .J.P.; Peter woods, J P
. . M'Carthv, J.P.;
•atil•enee M 'Keon, .Janres llaipenny, .Josepll
11. .WArdle,
Aliehael Meade, Denis J.
.Jaujes ynne, Michael
Rath,
Minutes of the last tneeting of the Council havinc
In•inted and a eopv sent to each jnetnber were taken as
being read and contirnunl.
'Olifirnu;ttion of Finance Countnittee Minutes.
IIV Mr. Peter Illi"hes, .J.P.
Mr. A. Doran, .J.J .,
and
it tee
on the lill(ler-lnentioned dates be and are hereby
bv this C011ijeil, viz •.—ÄLifulav, 3rd February,
17th ; 3rd March, 1151.'1•, 18th Mareh,
19 Io ; 31st Marell, i!) 1:'
0, and 111th April, 19 13.
11 Finance Minutes.
bv Al r.
llan,ill, .J. P
Mr. C. A. l)uffv, .J.P
and
Ved—'l'hat the Militites of Proceedings of the Finanee
c
01110111 tee
•t their held on the
21st of 1913, •
a printed copy of which is now stibinitted to the Council, be
and are. hereby approved of, including Mr. Warren's salary,
19 12, and anjountino• to
to date. froin the 28th Noveniber,
17s.
next. Quarterly Meetings of Rill•al l)istriet
Dates for
Councils.
Proposed bv Mr. Bernard Ilanlill, .1.1'.
Seconded bv Mr. WI)). Woods, .J.P.
, and
Resolved—
the following shall Ije the, dates for the holding of the Second
Quarterly Meetings of the Rural I)istriet Councils, :
rdee,
.J Illy 1st, 191.3.
lay,
'l'uesday, .Julv *til, 19 1 fl.
l)rogheda.
Dundalk, Monday, July 7th,
The Proposal Connnittec to Meet on Monday, 7th July,
1913.
RURAL
PA YMF,N'I'S
FOR
'I'll E
.I)IS'I'RIC'I' COU NC ILS OF ARI 1) ROGI I F.
ANI) DUNDALK.
PAY UEN'TS.
Proposed bv Mr. W jn. A. .J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. R. Matthews, and
ResoÅ d—
'I'llat the proposals for pa YI nents f. yrntlllated
tlae Ardee No. I I)istriet Council
First Quarterly
at their
Meeting. held on 'l'uesday, the 1st day of April,
1913,
set out on Forin 22 furnished to the Countv Council, be
are hereby apdroved of.
These pavinents anjount to E 7 S'
18s. ld.
PA YMF.vrs.
.Nlr.
.1. J. 11,
Seconded bv Mr.
L. .M•Keon,
a lid
Resol\ (l—
• ' 'I'ha t the prt 'sals for pastnents forni n Inted by
votitll Rural l)istriet of l)roghetla I •nion at their First
Qila rterlv Meeting held on 'I'lltn•sdil v,
the 10th
(lay of April,
, and set otit on Forni 22 furnished to the County
are herebv approvetl
'I'ljese p:tN1nents
*Ononnt to €.-jS4 19s. •Al
PAYMENTS.
M r. Woods, J. P
•Seconded by Mr.
J. M".ynne, and
• 'I'hat the
proposals for
the Rural District ('onneil at their First Quarterly
eefing held on Monday, the 7th day of April, 191
, and set
out on I•'ornj 22 furnished to the Countv ('ouneil,
jot'.
be and are
'l'hese lift A'lnents
nonount to €1,575
FOR
'I'llE
OF
ROOM OF MR.
'EASED.
Mr. W. A. Doran, J.P.
Mr. M. Meade,
and
advertise. for
the
appointment of
for District
(leath of Mr.
rendered vacant by the
Patrick at a rate of Sixpence, in the
eolleeted
and
1011 •red
credit of the
Oililtv ('onneil.
Appoilltlnent to i.e
( Quarterlv Meeting on the 29th Slav, 19 1 fl.
Inade at Adjourned
TO CONSIDER
ITEM NO. 7 AGENDA.
FOR SUPPLYING FOR
F,N'I'S.
"I'lle follow ill'"
received
Shelters as pattern,
at €14 INS. Oil. each.
()wen Carroll,
Inniskeell,
I)lllillalk,
for
the•
of IOS.
Kennan & Sons, Street, _l)llblin, Six
Shelters as pattern at El 2 17 s. Gd. each.
J. C. Stack, I)111HIalk, for the still)
of
041.
Bernard I)llffv, Quay Street, for the
of (id.
The tender of 'Mr.
Bernard l)uffy havino•
been dillv (le-
('bared the lowest bv the ('hairlijan ancl Council, was aeeor
ingly accepted.
APPOINTMEN'I' 01,' A SANATORIUM COMMI'I"I'EE.
The Council were linauilnous in appointing the unde
mentioned gentlenjeli to
be
Inelilljers of the Sanatoriti1Jl
Conliilittee
Viz.
Peter Ilughes, .J.P •
Berna
Hanjill, J.P •
Patrick ()'ConnelI, Valentine M"arren..
CORRESPONDENCE.
(hneath,
'23rd April,
We the undersigned Magistrates of the Petty Sessiotrs
l)istriet of Carlingford beg to request your Council to be
good enough to provide a Pound for (hneath.
It is urgently
required in this loeality,
your earnest attention.
F. Filgate, Esq.,
Secretary County
and we trust the nuttter will receive
.J. Fineoan.
M. O'Meara.
wtn.
Council.
7
Adjourned until next (Quarterly Meeting.
Mr. Omeara to
Inake enquiries as to
Was read,
and the Council (leeided to offer Mr. Bothwell the.
per annum for the use of his pretnises. Mr.
O'Connell, the ('0111teiI's Solicitor to draw up an acrremnent
as befiveell the ('Olliity Council aml liiiil :—
G Earl Street,
Dundalk.
22nd April, 1913.
l)enr Sir,
I have rootns at above address to let, which I think would
Innke suitable oiliees for the Secretary to the Advisory ('0111-
Illittee to Insurance ('onnnissioners.
1 M'Qnillan, Mr. E.
moodtnan, and the Secretary (Mr. inspected thein
and they appeared satisfied with thrill.
'l'he rent required is
El 5 per antililll.
I all) only tenant of the place, but the land- •
lord, Mr. R. A. 2. ()'Neill is prepared to enter into an aqrree-
Inent for lettino•.
E.
J. BOTHWELL.
T. F. Filgate, Esq..
Seeretarv,
Louth Countv Council.
Letter fronl Col. G. S. Alexander. as under :—
a Sanatoritnn for treattnent of C 'onstnnptive patients
their own Cotilltv on behalf of the owners of the above
property I beg to offer it as a verv stiitable pro. tent.
object.
the house is ili a eoli11nancling position half a utile fronj and
O verlooking Warrenpoint, and the Mourne Mountains are in
view. I should say that there is not a healthier spot in the
County Louth or one Inore suited for residence of C 'onstunp-
tive patients.
'l'he house could easily be adapted to the pur-
The Council eonsiderecl the holding unsuitable for their
requirernents.
I [lighes, Esq.,
Seconded bv Goodlit;vn,
and
new olliees be erected for
the Counts
as the
ness of the ('ouneil
and its Connnitiees is quite inadequate,
and we reqllest 0111' Seeretarv to with the Board
of Works as to the terins and
eontlitions for a loan for the
purpose, also to ascertain frtilll
other County Councils
who have built olliees, for particulars and
details regarding
the initiation
earrvill"' out of the work.
Killarnev I)istl'iet,
Clerk •s ()tliee.
21st February, 1913.
I)ear Sir,
I ani directed the of the above I)istriet to for-
ward you the copv of a resolllti011
adopted by then)
at their Illeetiljg 011 the 15th inst.,
M'itll
a, v to its adoption
hv your
Yours Faithfuilv,
P. CA I{F.Y,
Clerk of ('ouneil.
"I'he Seeretarv,
Count v Council,
Dundalk.
(Copy of Resolution).
Proposed MI'.
Seconded bv M r.
Ell 'rene
'I'hat we
regret to find the q 'liail'lnall of the
Great Southern and \Vestern ('otnpanv stntili" at
the
last half-yearly lijeeting of the Shareholders that the
I )ireetors eon tetill)lated altering the svstelll
of open ootnpeti-
tive exaniinati01i for
clerkships in their : that in the
the interests of fair
play we earnestly request the l)irectors
of the Conq»nny to refrain froun adopt incr a eotll•se which
could
be 0111 v
construed as an
at to keep the
Nationalist's ellild out of the service.
'I'hat copies be sent to the Board, to the Nat ionalist M.P.'s,
the Countv,
l)istriet
and Urban ('onneils, a lid ('orporations
in Irelalid.
Approved.
9
Council Cha Illber,
'l'own llnll,
Waterf0H1, 5th March, 1913.
Proposed by Aldernmn ()'Snlliva1i, M.T).,
Seconded by Councillor M'. Fitzgerald, and
Resolved—That we call on the County Borough Councils
•and Cotillty Councils of Ireland to Ineet once more and en-
deavottl' to get redressed the grievances the Country suffers
frolil by reason of the failure of the Local Taxation Account,
and to take such joint netion as be deterinined upon.
Approved.
Local Board, I)ublill,
No. 20, 191
Louth ( •oililty.
28th April, 13.
The I,oeal Governtnent Board for Ireland have Iltul before
thern vour letter of the 17th
inst.,
respecting the vaeaney in
the ()iliee of the ('onnty Surveyjr Louth Countv ;
and in
the (lireet lite to state for the infortnati011 of the
held until the 21st .June next, and the result mav not be
announced for soille titne after this (late.
If the County Council think it desirable they Inigllt ill the
meantilne endeavour to secure the tcnnporary services of a
Illy qnalified Engineer who has been certified bv the Civil
Service Connnissioners as qualified to discharge the duties of
ounty Survevor.
I ani, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
A. R. BARI,AS,
Secretary.
'I'he Secretary,
.outll County Council.
10
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Special .Nleetino•
the Council Ch;unber,
on
flay of A pril,
the .
1 9 13.
Present
In the chair—Peter Illighes, Esq., .J I
( )ther l}vrne, .J.P. ; Patrick
Bernard llanlill.
• Michael
Johnson,
.Jatnes vnne,
Aleade,
.Joseph 11.
Mitrplt.v, .J.P.; .Janu•s Connollv,
M'A rdle,
WII). A. Doran, .J.P. ,
.Josepll P.
lev
l)enis .J.•
Ratli,
Pat i.
.1.1 : and Patrick Callan, Esquires.
'l'he (o'01tneil Ivere stiltitnoned for the purpose of passin€r a
Resolution
Rates in respect of the ensttill€r
fornjal
tnakino•
financial year ending 31st Maa•ell, 1914. And aeeordin€rlv
the followin•r resolution was dillv passed bv the Council :—
Proposed bv M r.
B. I l;nniil, .J. P.
.John F. M .J. P.,
Seconded Mr.
Resolved—'l'ijat ill with
Estillt;tte of Rates for
and Separate adopted
General
I'V the County
Conneil at their „Meeting held Oil 'I'llnrsdav,
the 27th day of
herebv lilak•e rates to be off the
Countv of Louth for
the linaneial vear ending
1st Mareh,
11
the Rate IBooks in respect of the financial year 31st
Mareh, 19 1 -l.
'I'lle f0110M•ing Minutes
also sulnnitted froin the Clerk
to the Insurance (_•onnnittee and
of
the
Couneil
M illtltes of Proceedino•s of the I)rogheda
Dispensary Sites
Connnittee held in the ('otn•thouse, l)roghedil,
011 Tiles-
day, the 29th (lay of April, 191,'}.
Present
In the ell Ill —
; • • L. J. Eleoek, ,
()ther Inejnb('1S
M 'Carthv,
.Jmnes S. Kell v,
.Jollli l)olali,
and .J. A.
It was.leei(led to reeoliilnenql
Skellington,
M 'Qliillan,
Esquires.
l,anql.
d.
"l'he, ( onneil then deputed Messrs.
and Edward ( {oodin;tn to attend with
19 11, as set out below.
'I'he rates in the General and
Separate Cha t•ges are :
Ardee .
lh•oohedn .
d.
1 lamiil, J. P. ,
the Chail'lllan and sign
'I'llftt the preinises at the corner of Williatn Street
and the Allevs be procured as a 'I'tibereulosis I)ispensary for
one year.
2.
'l'hat the structural alterations neeessarv Ije lil;ule,
cost not to exceed €20.
'I'hat the rent be L€•2G per annuli).
4.
'I'hat the 0M'11er, Mrs. Gogartv,
Plit the
house Ili
good repair,
and have the different roqnns (Ione Ill' as required
by the T. M. O.
5. That the owner bear half the cost of the alterations;
the Countv Council to bear the renminiljg half.
'I'hat the necessary requisites as per list furnished
by T. M. be procured for I Dispensary.
Estilnatecl cost
Is. 9d.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Carlingford Dispensary Sites
12
in the Court house,
Comtnittee held
Monday, the 28th (lay of April,
19 13.
In the chair—Joseph 11. M'Ardle, Esq.
()ther menibers—Messrs. J. l). Kearney, .J.
and V. Warren.
Dundalk, on
A. McQuillan,
1.3
l)undalk, on Monday, the 12th day of May,.
Chamber,
1913.
• Present
B. M' Kevitt's house ill Meeting I louse
1.
Lane, Carlingford, be procured for the purpose of a 'I'uber-
enlosis J)ispensarv, at a rent, of €12 per annum, plus
per year for ('leaning of house, and liollt and heating.
'I'hat the necessary requisites as per list furnished
liv the T. M. be procured for the I)ispensary. Estimated
vost
Minutes of. Proceedings of the Ardee Tuberculosis Sites
Conjlilittee at their Ineeting held in Ardee, on Satur-
the '26th day of April,
1 9 13.
(lax,
Present
J.P
In the chair—Wm. A. Doran, Lsq.,
I Inlpenny, J. P. ; Joseph Dolan,
Other
Esquires.
M.A. ; and .1. A. T.M.O.,
It was unanilnouslv decided that a three roorned
1.
as a Branch Tuber-
corrugated iron cottage be procured
etilosis l)ispensary for Ardee, at a cost of about EGO, and
with the consent of the Town Comillissioners, be placed
of the Fail' Green.
a corner
'l'hat the cottage be of Irish Ilianufaeture.
•2
'I'h:tt the neeessary requisites as per list supplied
by the M. be procured for the I)ispensnry at an
estitnnted eost of E.'B•2.
l)111HInlk l)ispensary Sites
Minutes of lh•oeeedings of the
in the Council
Cotmnittee at their Meetino•
held
the chan —
Bernard Ilamill, Esq., J.P.
Other Inelilbers—C. A. Duffv, J.P •
.J antes W
Edward (Goodinatl.
ancl Patrick ()'ConneII, J. A. M'Q11illan,.
T. M. and V. Esquires.
It was proposed by C. A. 1)11fTy, Esq.,
Seconded bv Goodinan,
. and
Unanitnously reconnneli(led
—That the
l)mnesne Site 011 •
the Castletown Road,
offered bv Mr. Turner
at
Is. per ft., be procured for the purpose of a Central I)is--
pensavy.
That the Clerk write innnediatcly Mr.
'Furner, statilrr•
feet of
the Site offered at Is. per foot.
TO be approved bv the General Cotlli('il.
14
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of of the County Council
Quarterly Meeting held in the
on 'l'hvu•sday, the 29th
Council
13.
Present
•—1)eter Ilughes, Esq., J.P.
In the chai)
Patrick Callan,
Dolan, A. l)ornn, . ;
Other
NV ill. Salis I•'ilonte, I).L. ;
l,tlke .1.
.latnes I I:tlpenny, ll:uuill, .1.P.
Duffy, .1.P. ,
Michael
.lauue.s S. Kell v,
P. Kearney,
R iehat•€l
M. Johnson,
.loselill 11. M' .launes NI'Carth.v, .1 P
O'Connell, Niellael
Meade,
M'athews, John F. Milt•phy, .1.P.
Skellington,
Will.
l)ellis .
W villie,
O Meara, .1.P. •
w lil. Woods, J.P. •
Woods, I.P
Esquires.
Tho Council first proceeded €0 considertion of
the following Reports from t,liC Acting County Strrveyor,
viz..
DUNDALK l)lsrrmcrr.
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,
1. proposals passed by the Rural Bs-
Council are all of a useful character, and are fully
described in reports to t.he District Council, and
out on Form '20 for your consideration.
2. The tnileage cf Lanewavs or 4th class roads under
Ardaghy
tnailbto•.lance contracts shows a steady increate.
Lanoway (No. lal has been provisionally passed a,t,
a cost. not, to exceed $100.
3. The Abstract, of Ex»cucli€ure cu roads for
year ending M 31st, shows an increase in
ccs'„ of works of ,C'2ß 2d. over the previotn year,
1.3
but, a sum oi 1133) 14s. IOd. representing the cost ot
steam-rolling in this district has been added for €.he flist*
time.
4. In my draft notice t.o Mariners re Carlingford
Vier Head Light, as required by the Irish Lights Com-
missioners, I specified, after consulta.lion with the Har-
bour Master, that i_ile Red Light should be exhibited
between September 1st and 1st in cach year.
5. Steam Rolling of roads for 1.110 present will
terminate, I expect„ about the middle of the next month,
mnd it, will be open Vo you to review the terms of your
hiring contract wi',ih thc Eddison Company.
6. T be Committee appciu€ed afu t.lae February meet-
to consider the Read Board question, met on March
3rd last. and unanimously agreed €0 ask the Road Board
for a grant towards the cost, of purchasing nocessary
road olant.
7. The reply was a refusal. and f,his appears €0 be
in accordance with custom, as it has been stated recently
in Parliament, that' no advances by way of grants or
loans have been made io Highway Authorities in Ireland
for the purchase of road-making machinery.
8. The Road Board is prepared to make a grant to-
wards the improvement, of the road crust ; that is, to-
wards the expense of steam rolling additional stone of
approved qualify. The, cost, cf this work, however, must,
be a District' charge and solely in hands of the Bs-
triet Councils.
9. The Oundalk Rural District, Council refused fo
pass a sum of .t533 'in July, 191 1, to be expended on
the North Road, as €0 qualify for an equivalent grant
from the Road Board.
IO. I am asked bv the Irish Roads Tmprovement As-
sociation, in coniunc€ion with the Automobile Assoeia,-
ttion and Motor Union. to bring under your notice a
draft resolution (a copy of which is . attached hereto)
favouringthe introduction of a measure amendincr
Local Government, Act, for the purpose of putting the
sole control of main roads in Che hands Gf the County
Councils, to be administered as a County-at-Large
charoe.
11. AL t.lvo recent meeting of thc lustilt•ution Gf Civil
Engincers Mr. Cowan read a, paper on main roads,
expressed thc belief the desirability of tho proposed
chanoe.
12. The lines oi vcacls scheduled by the Road Bcard
towards which grants from that. Body are applicable are
probably thc roads in which the Aseiociation are mcstlY
interested, but it will be plainly seen by a reference
the tables I Eave prepared, that, if these only wore
clarecl main roads and rnaintained partly or solely as
a County-at-Large chan•ge, tile contribatticns from
five districts would not be at all equitable, and tho new
arrantyemellt, would interfere with the adjusl. ments Of
financial relations arrived a,t. twelve years ago W
tween thc Louth County Council and the Urbmn Coun
cils of Drogheda and I)undalk. Under Sections 70 and
71 these adjustmcuts hold good for fifteen vcars, an
they are expressly intended to include adjustments
as to main roads, if any.
13. I beg to suggest that, the ± 1,100 now available
as a grant from the Boad Board, be divded according to
tillO mileage of the scheduled roads iu the three Rura
Disticts, viz : —
184 7 3
6 737
Ardee No. I Rural District,
176 15
6 5 25
Drogheda Rural
738 17 1
28 0 5
Dundalk Rural District
Totals, 5 7 O
Also that, the question of purchasing road-making
machinery be referred back to a Committee of
•County 'Council.
14. The Triennial Road Congress be held
17
London between June 23rd and 28111, and everyone
interested in road matters axe cordially invited Lo attend.
It has been suggested that- it would be a suitable
time to interview thc Road Board to s.eek a more libeval
gran to outih.
Personally I should esteem it a favour to be allowed
the privilege of accompanying the Chairman and Vice-
Chairman, (jr your IJepttaes, on that auspicious occas:on.
I am Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
JOHN M. C'. LYONS,
Actino Co. Surveycr.
SUGGESTED RESOLUTION.
That, this Council is of opinion that, the present
torn of control in regard to the leading roads in tho
County under which all expenditure is a Eist: ict charge,
illould be amended in such a way as to bring main or
Imporant County roads under the scle control of tho
County Council, to be maintained as a charge cn the
nty-atrLarge.
That this centralization of management would tend
towards impro verneut in the roads compatible wyit,h
economy, and would also greatly facilitate negotat,ions
the Road Board, in that, the latter Body is em-
PGWered under the Development and Roads improvement,
Funds Act, 1909, to negotiate only as far as Ireland is
COUcerned with the Councils of Counties aud County
roughs.
That the Secretary be instructed to send a copy cf
this resolution to the Local Government Board.
ARDEE AND DROGHEDA DISTRICTS.
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen—
sent up by the Ardee and
Passed to repair a damaged cutvert; at Williamstown-
18
The Drogheda (Louth) Council passed C3() to repair
a pitching where the R'iver Boyne encroaches on the
road from Drogheda to Balt.ray, and C25 €0 build a new
fence near Melifon,€ Abbey ; also they have passed pro-
visionally cC200 to make a now road by Castlelumney to
Rath daniel.
All Ohese proposals are of a useful and necessary
character, and further details are given in the accom-
panying Reports to thc Councils.
The whole of Ohe broken stone available in the Dro-
ghedla has boen rolled in, and I expect that the
road rolling in Ardee District will be finished about the
middle of Juno.
As a rule, the quality of the stone supplied was
better than the previous year, and consequently the re-
sults obtained -weve more satisfactory.
The total Road Expenditure for Ardee District, in-
eluding the cost of steam rolling for t,he year ending 31st'
March last, as shown on annexed Return, is 6s
2d, showing a reduction of L'482 13s 2d as compared with'
t,he previous year, and in Drogheda District the total
expenditure is 42,460 19s 4d as compared: Witth 12,624
14s Cd, a reduction of ,C163 15s 2d.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
JAMES DROMGOOLE,
Acting Co. Surveyor.
On i,he motion of NIV Bornard Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. James McCarthv, J.P.,
Resolved—That the 'Reports of the Acting County
Surveyors as appearing on the SOhedule of Proposals for
thc 29th May, 1913, be and hereby approved of, Witb
t,he exception of t,he suggested resolution of Mr. J. M.
C. Lvons.
Tenders for t,he undermentioned Works were next
eonsidered bv the Council, viz
19
ARDEE DISTRICT.
201—To repair a culvert on the road from Arvdeo to
Annagasson, at John Curtis's house, Townland of
NV iliarnstcwn. Coty-, not tc exceed .C3.
DROGHEDA DISTRICT.
4—Maintaiuing for 9 months, from July ISE, 1913,
perches of road from Tugher €0 Dunany, between
Mr. King s mill Wild' thé disfiriec boundary at Dunany
Glebe. Not to exceed L' 6 IOS.
DUNDALK DISTRICT.
3 To makc a footpath in the vicinity of Lordship
Clhapel and Schools, from J 11 M*Ardle's, Rampark,
tibe road leading to Piedmont. Cost n ot to exceed
13—T'c fill the hollow near the bounds of the COunty
at' Shean, and rebuild a gap in the fence at Drum-
billa. to exceed .CG.
16—T0 erect a wire paling along the fcot,path on the
Lowclallshill road, L•ct.weell the Urban Bounds and
r. Murphy's, ga,Ä'. Not exceed 120.
The Council in every instance accepted the lowest
in respect of above works, and conaracts were
a n Ilhediatcly afterwards duly entered into by the persons
FOR WORKS FORMULATEID BY THE
RURAL DISTRICT COUNCILS.
ARDEE WORKS.
Proposed by Mr. M'm. Do Salis Filgate, I). L. ,
Seecndcd by Mr. Mon. A. J.P., and
klic proposals for works fo€rmulated
by the Ardee No. I Di:ttrict (huncil at their Quarterly
20
Meeting held on the 1st day of April, 1913, and set out
un Form 20 furnished to the County Council, be and axe
hereby approved of by this Council.
DROGHEDA WORKS.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P.,
Soondod by Mr. Denis J. Rath, and
Resolved—That, Che proposals for works formulated
by the Louth Rural Ihstrict of Drogheda Union at their
Quarterly Meeting held on Thursday, the 10th day Oi
April, 1913, and set out on Form 20 furnished to the
Oounty Council, be and are hereby approved of by t'bis
Council.
DUNDALK WORKS.
Proposed by Mn•. W. Woods, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Byrne, J.P., and
Resolved—Thai, the propcsals for works formulated
by the Dundalk Rural District Council a,'b their Quar-
d
torly Meeting held 01) the 7th day of April, 1913, an
set, on Form 20, furnished €0 the County Ccvaucil, be aod
aro hereby approved of by this Council.
Proposed by Mr. Edward Goodman,
*wonded by Mr. James McCartihy, J.P., and
Resolved—That all works not tendered for be placed
in the charge of t\he Acting County Surveyor's hands.
The item on the agenda was the appoint,metl
of Poor Rate Collector, which appeared on the Ageno
as under : —
4—A,ppoin.tment of Poor Rate COIIec€or for
Eledtoral Divisions of Ardee Urban, Xrdee Rural, Clotr
keen, Mansfieldst;own, and Talianstown, in accordan0Ø
witlh the advertisement, issued by the Secretary.
21
There wero three applications fcr this appointment
from the following persons, viz : —-
Joseph Moonan, Ardee.
Patrick S. Donegan, Monastc:rboice, Drogheda.
Paltrick McGee, Charleville, Dunleer.
The Chairman adopted the usual course by dividing
the Council as between these three candidates, and the
following was t*be result of the voting :
For Moonan there voted—Messrs James Halpenny
and Wm. T. Skefhngton—2.
For Donegan there voted—Messrs Patrick Callan,
John Dolan, Patrick Donegan, Luke J. Elcock, Wm. Do
Salis Filgate, D.L. ; Bernard Hamill, Joseph M. John-
Sun' Joseph P. Kearney, Patrick Kearney, James S.
Kelly, Michael O'Meara, 'Denis J. Rath, and Peter Woods
For McGee there voted—Messrs Patrick Byrne,
oseph I)ålntn, Wm. A. I)oran, Charles A. Duffy, Edward
man, • Peter Hughes, Micnael Meade, Joseph H.
ÄIeArdIe, James McCa,rhy, Richard Mathews, John F'.
wurphy, Patrick O'Connell, W ro. Woods and James
Ynne—14.
The Comairman here stated to the Council that in-
stead Cif taking a further division of the Council he would
ask the two gen€llernen who voted for Mr. Moona,n on
first, division for whom they would now vote, and
they both replied, and said Mr. Donegan.
The Chairman therefore declared that gave Mr.
negan 15 votes against, Mr. McGee's 14, and he
fore declared Mr. Donegan duly elected by 15 votes to
14. The Chairman added that, the terms of his ap-
Pointrnent tlo be strictly in accordance with the ad'ver-
tisemont issued by the Secretary.
following Report front Mr. Valentine Warren, was
rnarked Approved "
bv the Conneil :—
Ineetino• of the
'I'tiljerelllosis I)ispensary
Site C
'Olillilittee was held on Frida the •23rd May, 1913.
Eleoek in the
A Iso present—Messrs
eltair.
John I)olan.
.J. S. Kellv,
and I)r. M •Quillail.
Rev Canon
'layloux was also present.
22
of the Reve
Owing, to the serious opposition
Ledoux as representing
Allies and the Schools ili the illilllediate neighbourhood. it
was considered advisable to stop the work on the site
selected at the corner of Church Lane and endeavour to
secure another site in different part of the Town.
After considerable discussion, it was suggested that
portion of the Old Gaol might be suitable, and that all
estimate of the cost of preparing it for a Dispensary
submitted to the Cormnittee irmnecliately. Mr. Goga I't.g
to be-asked to make 'out an Estimate.
At a meeting Of the Drogheda Tuberculosis I)is•
pensary Site Committee held in the Courthouse,.
Leda, on Tuesday last, May 27th. Mr. L. J. Eleock ill
the chair. Alsa present—Mr. Dolan, MI' Kelly, and
M'Quillan. Rev. Canon Ledoux was also present.
Mr. Gogarty's estimate for the Gaol pretnises
The Continittee,
considered, the amount being
after hearing Rev. Canon Ledoux re his objections
the William Street site, decided to recommend the:
County Council to secure the Gaol premises as a DiS'
pensary.
The follcwing resolution was unanimously adopted
the Council :—
Proposed by Mi'. .J oseph Dolan. Seconded by
Edward Goodman, and unanimously resolved —TIW
after due consideration we are thoroughly convinced
1st. • That the time, has now come when it becomes
imperative on the Government to abolish dual owner
ship of land in Ireland, thereby placing all occupiers
an equal footing.
tenanted arable land in Ireland fit for cultivation for
the purpose of re-distribution.
(A) To provide holdings for the 8,000 Evicted
Tenants and their 40,000 dependantS
23
not yet provided for, and securing to
them a full, fair, and final settlement
of this question, and thereby eradicate
the long existing grievances of this
deserving portion of the community
who are dleprive€l of t,heir homes,
their capital, and their livings through
no fault of their own, but because
they could not continue paying the
exorbitant rack-rents imposed upon
them, and seeing others enjoying
their old homes under more favour-
able conditions by recent legislation.
(B) To provide economie holdings for the
large number of young men now
leaving onr country to seek a living
in foreign climes.
'l'hat we urgently appeal to all I rish repre-
3rd.
Sentali&es who have the welfare of their Country at
heart to join together irrespective of party, to make this
Bill which will be the last Land Bill introduced into
the British Parliament a final and satisfactory settle-
ment of this long heart burning question.
4th. 'l'hat copies of this Resolution be forwarded
to the Prirne Minister of England, the. Lord Lieutenant
Of Ireland. the Chief Secretary of Ireland, the Leaders
Of the Irish National Parties, and the Leader of the
IJnionist Party.
Association of Secondary Teachers,
Ireland,
Auburn Avenue,
l)onnybrook, Dublin,
11 15 1'13.
Dear Sir,
I am directed by the Chairman of the Executive of
this Association to ask for your assistance in ourefforts
to secure the annual sum of E40,0()O promised by Mr,
Birrell for improving the condition of lay 'Secondary
Teachers in this Counti•y:
'I'he eonolitions attached to the, grant have been un-
reservedly accepted by all the Bodies representing the
Assistant Masters for the. improvernenf of whose status
the grant is avowedly given.
We feel that there is grave danger of the Grant being
withdrawn, and as the stun
at present available for
Secondary Education in Ireland is totally inadequate for
the growing needs of the, Country. the loss of this large
surn will be, nothing short of a national calamity.
We suggest that you should pass the Resolution ap-
pended, or one, of a silnilar nature.
We would point out that
this Grant is quite
independent of, and unconnected with the
grant for Scholarships.
I am, Dear Sir,
Faithfully yours,
P. C. GALLAGHER, Ilon. Sec.
Proposed by Mr. B. Harnill. J.P.
Seconded by M r. Wm. Doran, and
Resolved - That in the opinion of this Council it will
be a serious loss to Secondary Education in Ireland if
the Annual Grant of prornised l).y the Treasury
is not at once secured, and that the Chief Secretary
should be asked to take such steps as will make the
Grant available (In ring the current year.
'I'lle followino• eonnnu11icati01i from the Commis-
sioners of Irish
Lights was next submitted to the
Council and approved, and copies of the ()rder to
be printed and sent [o the Connnissioners :—
Irish Lights Olliee,
Carlisle Buildings,
Dublin, 26th May, 1913.
With reference to your letter of the 26th ultimo.,
witli which was forwarded a draft Notice to Mariners
resppcting the proposed red light, the evection of which
on the pier head at Carlingford, under King John's
Castle, has been sanctioned by the Commissioners of
25
Irish Lights
• I am (lil'eeted to forward herewith an
amended (Iraft Notice to Mariners on this subject which
has been approved l).y the Connnissioners, and I am to
inform you that if the Louth Connty Council will have
400 copies of this Notice forwarded to this Office, they
Will be distributed in the usual course.
This Notice should also be published in the
' Shipping Gazette.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
THOS. COOB,
Secretary.
J. M. C. Esq.,
County Surveyor's Office,
Courthonse, Dundalk.
NOTICE TO MARINERS
East Coast of Ireland, (Lough Carlingford), Carlingford
Harbour,
Pier Heaci Light
.—lntendeci Improve-
Inent.
County Council Office.
Dundalk.
The Louth County Council hereby give notice that
the lamp on the outer end of the Old Pier under St.
John's Castle which is exhibited a white fixed
light visible from the bearing of 2500 (S. 89' W. Mag.)
through 27')0 (West Mag ) to the West shore of the
Lough will be fitted so as to allow in addition to the
White fixed light the exhibition of a
Sector of Red I nght
visible [he bearing of 2500 (S. W. Mag.) to
the West Shore of the Lough through 1800 (S. 181 v' W.
Mag.)
l"Urthe1' Notice will be issued when this improvement
has been carried out.
APPROXIMATE POSITION.
Latitude,
• 35" N. Longtitude, •
By Order,
SECRETARY.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
ANNUAL MEETING.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council
at their Annual Meeting, held in the Courthouse,
Drogheda, on Friday, the 13th day of June, 1913,
at 11 0'clock, a.m.
Gentlemen Present—Messrs Patrick Callan, John
Dolan, Wm. A. Doran, J.P. ; Patrick Donegan, J.P. ;
Luke J. Elcock, Edward Goodman, Peter Hughes, J.P.;
Joseph P. Kearney, James S. Kelly, James M 'Carthy,
J.P.; Richard Mathews, Laurence M'Keon, John F.
Murphy, J.P. ; Patrick O'Connell, William T. Skeffing-
ton, J.P. ; Jatnes Wynne.
On the 1110tion of Mr. Edward Goodman.
Seconded by Mr. Pat.ick Donegan, J.P.
It was Resolved—That Mr. Luke J. Elcock do take
the chair.
ELECTION OF CHAIRMAN.
The Council next proceeded to the Election Of
Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the County Council
for the ensuing year, and it was proposed by Mr. JameS
M'Carthy, J P. ; seconded by Mr. Joseph Dolan, and
unanimously Resolved—That Mr. Peter Hughes, J. P"
of Castlering. Dundalk, be and is hereby elected Chair-
man of the Louth County Council for the ensuing
twelve months.
27
ELECTION OF VICE-CHAIRMAN.
Proposed by Mt'. William T. Skeffington, J.P.
Seconded by Mr. I:aurenee M 'Keon, and
Unanirnously Resolved—That MI'. William A. Doran.
J.P., of Harristown, Arclee, be and is hereby elected
Vice-Chairman of the Louth County Council for the
ensuino• twelve Inonths.
At this juncture of the proceedings Mr. L. J. Elcock
vacated the Chair, and the C'hairrnan, Mr. Peter Hughes,
J.P., was votecl thereto.
The Chairman and Vice-Chairman having returned
suitable thanks for their unanimous elections to their
'l'he following correspondence was
respective chairs.
read by the Secretary
Ardee, 6th June, 1913.
Dear Sir,
I beg to infonn you that at the. Annual Meeting of
the Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council held this day,
Wm. De Salis Filgate, Esq., D.L., of Lissrenny, Ardee„
Was elected Chairnxan of the Council for the ensuing
Year.
Yours faithfully,
THOMAS B. DROMGOOLE,
Clerk R. D. Council.
Townley F. Filgate, Esq.
[Post Card.]
Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union,
June, 1913.
Patrick Donegan. Esq., J.P., Monasterboice, Drog-
heda, appointed Chairman R. D. Council for ensuing
Year.
THOMAS DOWDALL,
Clerk of Council.
28
Dundalk Rural District Council Ofllce,
Union Workhouse, Dundalk,
11 th June, 1913.
Dear Sir,
At their Annual Meeting held on the 6th inst., the
'Council of this District unanimously re-elected Mr.
Wm. Woods. J.P., Carlingford, as their Chairman for
Ithe ensuing year.
Yours faithfully,
P. R. FINIGAN,
Clerk of the Council.
T. F. Filgate„ Esq.
29
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Connnittee at their
Meetill'f held in the Council Chajnber, on the
28th day of April, 1913.
Present
In the Illtghes, Esq., J.P
()tller Members— ,
. Jatnes Connolly,
A. Duffy, P.;
J.P.; Miehael Meade, ancl Patrick Connell, Esquires. IVIr„
Daniel Solicitor, was also present at the Meeting.
The Seeretarv snl)tnitted Aeeounts for "Works in eltarge
Of the Acting County Surveyors, and for those in his own
Office, which on extunination were passed by the Connnittee,
and paynjent duly ordered.
the
James Connolly, .J.P
On the application of Mr.
Innlittee were unanintous in reeonnmending an expenditure
Of €3 for requisites ill Ravensdale Courthouse.
The following letter was referred to Mr. I)rotngoole for
his rep
ort thereon :—
Port, l)unleer,
April 24th, 191$.
I)UNANY PIER.
To the Clittil'ln:tn of Louth County Council.
Sir,
I Understand your Council propose extending the Pier at
l) unany a considerable distance seaward. My land lies ad-
joinino• to the Southward,. and is subject to extensive erosion
by the sea. If this wall: is constructed it will
direct the•
natural flood of the tide, atnd in rough weather send the sea
right over my farl".
I would like to see the Ilarl'our in
proper working order, but when it eqnnes to washing a nutn's.
hmnestead away it is a serious tnatter, so I would respect--
fnllv ask your Council to reconsider the ntatter before enter-
ino into expensive litigation.
I ani, &e.,
LA CO.NI.O,N, Port.
Letter fronl the Irish (_'ountv Couneils' General Council,
('hairlilflll of the Irish Parl ianjentarv Part v,
be requested to introduce the deputation and the Ri•rllt I Ion.
Sir Edward Carson, K.('.
( 'hairn•an
of the Irish
Parn
S, Ije asked to aeeonjpanv stone.
101 ed
Messrs
Nolan. M.P's
-tsked to attend on
behalf of the Louth County ('ouneil.
as Illider
INSUFFICIENCY
l)ear Sir,
I ani directed bv
TIIE
the
Council to transniit to von
the above subject.
is that
10 Lower Leinster Street,
I)llblin, 24th April, 1913.
l,ocxl, 'ISAN ATION (IREI,ANI')
I rish Count v ('ouneils' General
the
resolution on
•sed
the
deputation to the
the Chief Seeretarv for
of the Exchequer
Chancellor
Ireland, should
eonsist of one froin each
Countv and County Borough Council in Ireland.
\Vit11 this object I directed to ask your ('ouncil to be
representat ive their
so 'rood as to 110111inate
next ineet-
In the event of the reception of the deputation being tixed
next Council Meeting, I toke the
for a date prior to your
libarty of sug€resting that your Council ight be represented
or sotne person 1001" inated bv hill'.
by the Chainnan,
The favour of an earlv replv will lye esteetned.
Yours faithfnllv.
A. KF.0G11 .N01.A.N.
Seeret:trv.
• , • I'ljat deputation be appointed to wait on the
Resolved—
of the Exchequer and the C 'Ilief Secretary for
Cha neell.
Ireland for the
l'il rpose of (Ir;tM'i1jg their
attention to the
serious loss, atnounting to sotnethiljg
like per
bv lt•ish l,oeal A titli01•ities throtlgli the in
annuli), suffered
suflieienev of the I,oeal 'l'axation (Ireland) Account to tneet,
the charges placed on it by the I,oeul Governinent (Ireland)
Act, 1898, nuost, of which were
lit•eGonslv discharged bv
Annual
Parli:nnentarv Grnnts.
that .Mr. •
A li'l
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Connnittee at their
Meeting held in the il C'lyalllber, on M"e'lnesday
_utll day of May, 1913.
Present :—
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other (YConnell, Joseph M, John-
son, and Edward Goodman, Esquires.
T'he Secret,ary submitited acccunts for works in charge
of the Aeting C;ounty Surveyors and those of his ofll
office, which, on examination, were passed by the Conr
mit,tee.
Respecting f1ho letter received from Mr T. B. Drom-
gocle, Clerk of t'he Ardee Union, the Secretary
directed Ito write to NIT I)romgoole and state that! in
tho cpinion of the Committee he should ask Mr Joseph
Moonan to assist: him in the work cf this year s Registrar
tion.
DANGEROUS SIGNALS.
Commit/tee directed Mr Lyons, Acting County
Surveyor, to make application to tihe next moetAing Of
the Proposals Committee to have dangerous signal posts
erected at, the following places, viz : —aBallybonak Hill'
Windmill Rload, and Groen Gates.
The Committee décided to make Mr Oliver the Sutr
Contractor for Annagasson Pier, and Mr (YConneIl
directed tio draw up agreement, as bet;ween the Depart'
memt's Engineer and the County Council.
Let:tor from Mr. P. C Cowan as under : —
Dublin, 8th May, 1913.
Dear Stir—Yours of the 7th inst,. I think your let'
for must have been, w •tte••. under some misat)preherrsi01i
as my connection wit,ll the Road' Board, which is
merely that. of a member cf 'two advisory Engineering
Ccmrnitlt.ees. I could asslst sou or the gentlemen
mcntioned ili your letter in arranointT aun interview with
{'he Road Board Authorities, as to which the Secretary
Of the Board Should be addressed.
Yours, et.c.,
P. C. COWAN.
Leuer from L. G. Ijcard as under
9+011 May, 1913.
No. 14,710.
Sir—With reference tiheir letter of the 12th No-
vember last, I am directed by the Local Government
Ecard for Ireland to state that they have extended for
a further period of six montihs •tlheir provisional appro-
val tho appointment, cf Dir. J.. A McQuillan as Me-
dical Superintendent of ehe Central' Tuberculosis Diis-
pensary to bc established by the Louth County Council.
Meeting of I' inanec Committee, on Monday, the 26th
clay ef Na.y, 1913.
Pi•esent : —
In the Chair—Peter Hughcs, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—C. A. Duffy, J. P. ; Edward Good-
man, Michael Woods, John F. Murphy, J. P. ; and
Patrick (Y Connell, Esquires.
The Secretary accounts for works in charge
of the Acting County Surveyors and those of his own
office, which, on examination, were passed by the Com-
mittee.
Mr. James submitted an accounL from a
named Michael McGuigan, for the sum of Æ3
7s 3d, which Lhe Corhmidteo .was informed was statut,e-
barred, and after some discussion on the matter the Sec-
l€t,ar.y was directed to write tc the Local Government
Beard and Vik their permission to discharge the account
in question.
The u,ndermenLicned looter was referred to the County
Council, viz : —
ATdee, 23rd May, 1913.
To the Members of the Louth County Council.
Gentlemen—We are instructed by Ghe Ccmmit.tee oi
tihe Irish College Of Omeaith put, before you their re-
ques/o for a contribution towards the maintenance of the
College, and to ask you to appoint representatives of
the Council tc its Govcrning Body.
They (eel' sure that, t.llis enterprise to provide nummeu•
elasscs in Irish for schcol teachers, and to save the living
language in the district (if the County, where it. is still
spoken, win thc sympathy and tohe financial support'
of the rnctrrbcrs of tulle Council, and of all Who wculd
wish to see preserved any link of our County and its
people with their past.
The sttcccss of the session of last year in attracting
about, foray student-s justifies the Committee in or-
.35
ganisi.n,cr tiwo six week sessions for • this summer from
Judy to end cf September.
The engagement of a conuvtelli. teaching staff under
direction of Professor MacNeill, of the Najtional
University, Principal of the Coblego, and the rent and
upkeep of Omeat:h Hcuse, will entnil a large expenditure,
which the students' fees cannot, at) all meet'.
We, therefore, appeal with confidence to the patriot,ism
of the people of Louell to provide the funds necessary
for a •work of such local interest and such national value.
Yours truly,
REV. PATRICK •O'GRIENAN, C.e., 'Rhtlhfriland ;
JOSEPH T. DOLAN, Ardoe ;
rm•easurems.
Tho following Report from Mr. James Dromg0000,
County Surveyor, upcu which nc order Wlas made,
-Vas yead : —
Mr.' Chairman and Gentlemen—Xl requested by t,he
Finance Commit,t.ee, I have investigated Mr. Laurence
Ccnlcnls complaint, re anticipated damage to his pror
perty -adjacent to Dunany Pier. Two of Conlon's fields
lie along the coast. to Che eastward of the Pier, and con-
Siderable erosion has taken place, especially since thq
Old jetty bars 'been demolished. It oxpected the pro-
pesed extension of Pietr will prevent, the travel of
the shingle €0 tlhe west.ward, .and I enn see no reasofi tn
•anticipate injurious results. v -On the contrary, if the
Propcsed exitiension makes any chauge at, all, it is sure to
as a protection, by causing t,he shingle to accumulato
along Conlon's holding.
Your obedient Servant,
J AMEs Ih0MGOOLE,
Acting County Surveyor.
25th May, 1913.
The following letter from Mr. J. T. Clinton, V.S.,
Was read and referred to the Executive Committee : —
May 25th, 1913.
Tho Secretary Louth County Council.
Dear Sir—A case of suspected Foot and Mouth Di-
sease has cccurred on the L. N'. W. Railway Company/ 3
premises at 'Greenore amongst a consionmeat, of cattle
from Ballybay. I visited the premises to-clåy in com-
pany with the Departmental Inspectors, who have
matter in hand.
An out,brreak of Swine Fever (suspected) occurred tor
(bay on tile premises of J. Prendergast, Blackrock.
examined the •anirnals and forwarded the necessary par
ticula,rs to the
The T'uberculosis (Animals) Order is being extended
to- Ireland, and comes, into force on June 2nd. will
be necessary for your Council, acting as €ihe Local Atr
thorify, take the necessary ster to carry out' the Or-
der. I would suggest t Imat a commit-tee of the Council
should meetl tho Veterinary Inspectors and discuss the
matter tihem.
Your obedient Servant,
J. T. CLINTON, M.R.C.V.S.
Tho following letter was read from the County of
Louth National flealt,h Insuqrance Committee : —
Clerk's Office, Courthouse. Dundalk.
21st Mhy, 1913.
Dear Sir—I am directed by the Loutih Insurance Com-
mittee to inform yc„u they having had under their con-
sideration the draft agreement prepared by Mr. (YCon-
nell, SOIici€or, and with reference theretc I am to state
€hey havo approved ci the agreement with slight alter.
at,ions.
Yours faithfully,
V. WARREN,. Clerk.
T. F. Filga€e.
37
The following letter was referrred to Mr. Lyons for
his revort :
Oflice of Public -works
Dublin, 30th April, 1913.
Sir—Tn reply to your let•ter of the 28th instant, I
am directed by the Commissioners of Public Works to
st;at.e that, Icans are made by Ghem to County Councils
for the: purpose of any work for which the Council axe
authorised to borrow, and the ra,t.es Off interest are as
follows : —3b per cent'. when the period does not, exceed
30 years; 3} per cent. when the period exceedS 50' years.
The loans are repayable by equal half-yearly instal-
ments of t.he principal. If loan is required it will bo
necessary, in the first, instance, for the County Council
to apply to the Local Government Board for that
Board's sanction, in accordance with the provisons of
•Article (21) of the Application of Enactments Order of
22nd [Dlecember, 1898.
J0HN F'. MURPHY, Chairman.
CO. OF LOUTH NATIONAL INSURANCE
COMMITTEE.
Clerk's Office, Courthouse, Dundalk,
21st May, 1913.
Dear Sir—I am directed by the Lou€ih Insurance Com-
mitteé to request t.he County Council to proceed at as
early a. date as possible with (tho appointment, of a duly
qualified Nurse in connection with their scheme forr Lhe
treatment] of tuberculosis.
Yours faithfully,
V. WARREN, Clerk.
Minute of I'roeoeciings oi • Finance COmrnittee
Monday, the 9th day ci J unc, 1913.
Present : —
In thc Chair—-Jchn F. NIurphy, Esq., J.P.
on
Othell' Members—J ames Wynne, Ecter NV oods, J.P. ;
aud Joseph M. Johnson,
Jamei (JOnuol ly, J . I). ;
Escuires.
The Secretary submioted accounts for works in charge
of tho Acting Coturly Surveyors, and thcse of hisowu
office, which, cu exaltiinati011, were passed by tho Com-
mitåee.
The following letter from the three Vet;erinary Inspec-
tors was referred to the Executive Committee for their
consideration : —
Dundalk, June, 1913.
Sir—As you a,ro ühe (Ireland)
Order came inio force on the 2nd inst. The duty of
carrying out, the provisions of the Order devolves upon
your Veterinary Ills,pectors, and will t'hrow a large
amount, of ext,ra duty and serious responsibilities upon
us. We therefore respectfully ask your Council fro grant
such an increasrz in salary as will recompense us fa
tho extra duties irru,cpsed upon us.
We are, Sira
Your obedient Servants,
J. T. CLINTON, M.R.C.V.S.,
E. MAXWELL, M.R.C.V.S.,
_ANDREW A. DONNELLY, M.R.C.V.S.
Veterinary Inspectors.
T. F. Filgate, Esq.,
Secretary Louth County Council.
The following letter and map from the Estates Com-
misicne,rs, •was referred to tho Acting County Sur-
veyor, Mr James Dronrgoole, for his considération and
report : —
Fast.ate Uf Ohe Irish Land Commission, formerly tho
Estate of The Lcrd Ra.t.hdonnell. E.C. 7071,
Section 6. Co. Louth.
30th May, 1913.
Sir—I am directed by the Estates Commissioners to
enclce,c a copy rna.p showing a plantation on the above
Estate which is at present] in their hands, and to ask
whether your Council •would be prepared to make an
offer for the purchase of same wiuh a view to its
preseu•cation. 1 am to refer you to the provisions of
Seatlicjn 4 and 20 cf the I rish Land Act, 1903, as amen-
ded Section 18 of the Act of 1909.
I am, etc.,
J011N T. DRENNAN.
The following letter f: om Mr. R. 11. •Dorman, Co.
Surveyor of Armagh, •was next submilted by tho Sec-
retary :
County Surveyor •s Office, Armagh,
7th June, 1913.
T. F. Filgato, Fsq.,
Secretary Louth County Council.
Doat Sir—Mr. Cowan, Chief Engineering Inspector
to the Local Government. Board, with the County Sur-
Veyors cf I)tublin and Waterford, and myself, have been
an Advisory COrnmittee of Engineers to the
Road Board.
Mr. Cowan and I propose leaving Drogheda Station
about 9.45 0'clock gyn next, Wednesday morning, 11th
inst., to inspect the main road from there through Dune
dalk 'to 1301fas1U for the Board. I do net k 110N' whether
a County Surveyor nas yet been appointed in Mr.
Lynarrffi place, and I do not, know whether the County
Louth Council have taken any to have an estimate
Prepared for t.hö making of the portion ci the Dublin
€0 Belfast road passing t,hrough County Louth, so I write
to ask you if you can give me any information. Per
haps also you could drol) a line to the Assistant Stil%
Veyor for tfhe southern part of the County, asking him
40
to meet us t,he, Drogheda Station on Wednesday
morning. T suppose he would be able tc tell us if any-
tilling has been done in the way of yneparing an esti-
mate.
Yours faithfully,
R. H. DORMAN.
On hearing this, letter read, the Committee made the
following ot-der : —
That: Mr. James .l)romgoole meet the gentlemen
named in MT. ,Dorrnan's let,ter at Ihogheda Station, on
Wednesday mornino, and that he request, him to meet
the following gentlemen members of the C'ounty Council
afi 11 0'clock a.m., or a,ny other time that will suit
them, for an informal conversation 011 the subject of the
Påoads Board' Grant so far as County Louth is eon-
cernecl, viz : —The Chairman (Peter Hughes, Esq.,
J. P), Messrs. James Wynne, J. M. Johnson, Edward
Goodman, Eatrick O'CcmneII, and Bernard llamill, JN.
The following resolutions were then submitted and
adopted by the Commit-tec : —
Wyn no's 110101, Diublin,
June, 1913.
bear Sir an ltnmomptu mee€ino held at Wynne's
Tlc:tel, blin, thc 3)tJ1 iust., to consider the situa-
t.icun created by extraordinary aetion of the Presi-
cf the Wcnnen•s National Health Association and
the Local Goveennnent, JBOard in connection with the
anointment cf a Me•Gical Superintendent for Peamount
Sanat_€u.inm, the. an lie.xed resolution was unanimously
adopted by us.
We calmest ly desi ve to bring Che question dealt witlll
under the notice of all C'ounty Councils who intend to
prcxidc Sanatoria either for their Counties or
jointly with other ('ouneiis, as well as [hose who send
rn,tients to in order that thev may take such
immcdiaüe action as they may consider necessary in the
peculiar circumstances of the case.
Yours faithfully,
P. J. McKenna, co. Council, Westmeath.
Jas. A Kiernan, Solr.,
Thomas McDermott,
Co. Council, Leitrim.
M. Cassidy, Co. Council, Donegal.
Patrick McCann, CO. Council, Lonoford.
John Fitzgibbon,
Co. Council. Limerick.
J'ames McDonnell,
Fudjmund Anglun, South Riding, Tipperary.
Peter P. Moloney, South Riding, Tipperary.
William MeEncrney, Waterford.
Edmund Nugent, J.P., Wala-ford.
TO the Secretary of each, County Council.
"That. we view with surprise the efforts i;hat, are
made by the Piresident, of the Women's National Health
Asgociation and the Local Government Board to set
aside the decision arrived at. on the 7th Miay by tha
Committee of Management of Peamount Sanatorium in
Connection wih tihe election of a Medical Superinten-
dent for that Institution. That such proeedUre is clearly
an atttempt to impose a veto on the unanimous selection
made by all the represenåatives cf thc County Councils
Present at the meeting, and to take away from thom all
control whatsoever in the management of tho Sanato-
That the proposal not to permit any medical men
assume the position of Superintendent of Peamount
WihO has not' had exverience in he management, of a
Sanatorium, however qualified in every other respect, bo
given effect to, it, would debar practically every young
medical man in Ireland from obtaining thwt. on- any other
similar appointment in their own country. That in our
minion all Co. COunmls should decline to send any moro
patients to Peamoun€ until such time as they be permitr
ted to exercise some control in Cho management, of tha,t
Inså(itution.
Adov.ted.
CONJOINT COMMITTEE
I.M.A. AND
2nd
The Secretary,
Louth Count-v Council.
B.N.A..
J unq
Dear Sir—T am directed to transmit to you
1913.
for the
information Gf your Council the following resolution
which was passed at a meeting cf the Sanatorium Sub"
Committee Gif the Conjoint CCmmittee held on the 30th
"111 view cf 'the fact that Dr. J. J. McGrath possesses
all the qualifications yaescribed by the Local Govern-
ment, Board, the Sanatorium Benefit, Sub-Committee of
the Conjoilrt Committee condemns the attempt which
being Inade to annul Lis. appointment, and considers
tha.t the Local Governrnent, Board should sanction his
afppoiutmellt as Medical Superintendent to the Peamounå
Sanatorium.
I am, yours faithfully,
Aclqtecl.
M. R. J. HAYES.
cf Ihoccodings of 't)he Finance Ccmtnit:tce at,
their rneot'ing heid iii the Council Chamber, on
Monday, ('he 23rd day of June, _1913.
Present, :
In Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
other Members—Wm. Woods, J.P.; C. A.
J. P. ; James Connolly, J. 1). • Peter Woods, J.P. ;
Patrick Kearney, John F. Murphy, J.P. ; Bernard
Elamill, J. P. ; and Patrick O COnneII, Esqtlires.
The submit'aed accounts for works ill charge
of the Ac€ing County Surveyors, aud t:hcse of his own
office, Which, on examination, were passed by the Com-
mitltee.
CORRESPONDENCE.
MR. P. DONEGAN S SANCTION,
Leffiter from the Local Government Board, dated I ILh
June, 1913. No. 30113, 1913.
Louth County.
11th June, 1913.
Sir—allhe Local Government Board for Ireland havo
had before them your letter of the 5th insti., and t,he
replies to quericys respecting the appointment of Mr.
Patrick S. Donegan as Poor Rate Collector in Louth
County, and I have state that, the Board have ap-
Proved of this appointmcnt on the terms out, in t;he
query form, returned herewith, which should be eare-
åull.y filled for future referenee, the remuneraition of
l)onegan to be regulated, by a poundage rate of 6d
in accordance wit'h the Public Bcdies Order, 1904.
The Board observe that Mr. Donegan does not, reside
in the. collection district, and they presume tihø
County Council are satisfied that his non-residence will
prevent him from efficien'tly the duties
of his office.
am to add that the bond of Mr. Donegan should bc
submitted for tÅhe Bcards' inspection in due coul€e.
I am, etc..
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant, Secretary.
The Secretaxv,
Louth County Council.
PAYMENT OF L'25() FOR DUNANV PIER.
No. F.B.
I)epartmont. of Agriculture, etc.,
19th June, 1913.
Sir—With reference to your lotter of the 4th March
last, I have to state that tho Dipparrnerro would feel
obliged if tho Louth COunty Council will kindly lodge to
the ereclilt. of t:he Department their ccntribuCåon of Æ250
towards the cost of the proposed work* of improvement'
at, Dunany. A Receivable Ordev f.o enable this €0 be
done is sent herctwit,h.
I am, etc.,
T. P. GILL, Secretary.
Payment] recommended.
The Receivable Order reads thus : —
" T'Ivo Chief Cashier of the Bank of Ireland will
please receive and place to the credit of the Paymasters'
Gencraly Supply Account: the amount stated hereon, aud
transmit this authority to t,he Paymaster-Generals Office,
'Dublin Castlc.—Lt250.
WEEDS ANI) AGRICULTURAL SEEDS
(IRELAND) ACT, 1909.
Further letter from the as follows :—
No. A 12433/13.
19th June, 1913.
Sir—Adver€ing to previous correspondence, I have
aequainf fer the information of the County Couv
cil, tho Dwar€ment have arranged to commence
the work of inspection, under the above Act, at an early
T have at. the same tillie to request that, til*
date.
Council will assetisi) the Departrnenf as far as pcssible ill
Nihis matter by taking such action as may be necessary
45)
to :liave all roads and lands i ntheir control kept clear
of Noxious Weeds during the cornincy season.
I am, etc.,
T. P. GILL, Secre,tran-.
The Committee decided to adhere to the same pro-
cedure regard tihis Act as in previous years. Thia}tj
to say, that they recommend' the County Council to an:
Culer being made by t,he Department: of Agriculture aud
Technical Instruction for Ireland declaring that through-
out flue Counc,.y Louth, all plants cf the following
*pecies, viz. : —Thistle, Ragwood, Colesfcot, and Dock-
are noxious weeds: for thc purposes cf the Weeds and
Agricultural Secds (Ireland) -Act, 1909.
The followino cowrcspondence respecting the appoint-
of Resident Mcdical Superintendent to Peamouut»
Was next submit/ted the Committee : —
APPOINTMENT OF RESIDENT ME'MCAL
SUPERINTENDENT TO PEAMOUNT.
Alayo County Council,
Secretary's Office, Castlebar,
June 12th, 1913.
DEAR SIR WILLIAM THOMPSON,—
Aiti a Meeting of Che County Council on Wednesday
two letters wit.h reference to the appointment cf a
Medical Suverill.tenclelli€ for Peamount were read. One
Of t)hese purported to come from an " impromptu meet-
Ing " Of the Coun;ty Councillors held in Wynne's Hotel,
Dublin, tho other was from the Poor Law Guardians of
Cavan Union. Both were accompanied by resolutions
adcpfiion here) in which dissatisfaction was expressed
With the attempt which it was alleged was being made to
have the appoint.rnent cancelled.
As you probably know Mayo County Council have,
decided to acquire 30 beds in Peamcunt, and only await
.an unde,rs'aa.utliug witli the Ccun;tev Insurance
about the pootling of funds, etc., etc., to tuke steps to
have accommodation provided, for this reason tlléy
are altogether disint;erest.ed in the matter. It: wag
felt, ait. the meeting that the adoption of a resolution on
any fitrltiect the merits which are unknown by t,he
Council would be now merely unbusinesslike, but unfair
for those singled out, for condemnation iu resolu-
tion, and I was directed to apply to the Women's National
Health Assccia;: ion for information regarding the reason
vv'ihicll influenced t:he Assceiation opmocre the a.ppoi,n+
ment cf a who is to vcssess the
requisite qualifications for the position, and whc it, is
understood was eleetod thereto.
Y our* sincerely,
(Signed) J. T. KELLY.
WOMEN S NATIONAL HEALTH ASSOCIATION
OF IRELAND.
(INCORPORATED).
7 Ely Place, Dublin,
Junc 16th, 1913.
MR. KELLY,—
T beer to ackncwledge the receipt of your letter of
f:he 12th infit'. in reference the appointment of Rlesidenit'
Medical Superintendent, at Peamoullt Sanatorium, and
in reply send you enclosed Memorandum which will
furnish your Council with all the information required.
I need hardly say that it is Che sole desire of the
Wemen's Nat,icnal Health Association to secure the best)
and most; efYteiellfJ teeat_ment for the patients sent'
to Sa naferiums, and that they consider prac:ical es-
indiuensable
peri ence o•ainecl in Sana oriurn an
qualifiea/t'icn fo• filling the pasifion of Resident Médiea'l
stuwrintendeli€.
In view ef the misunderstanding which a.ppeqr'l to
h,ave arisen in connection with jihis matter, the Ofhce1S
•of the Women's Natico•al Association deem: it'
-17
.desirable to placc fact-s before tille public tc which
course I you will have no objection.
Yours faithfuly,
WILLIAM J. THOMPSON,
Hon. Secretmy Peamount,
S'anat.cri u m.
JOSEPH T. KELLY, Eso.,
Secretary Mayor County Council.
AVO'MeN'S NATIONAL, HEALTH ASSOCIATION
OF IRELAND.
(INCORPORATED).
7 Ely Place, Diubiin,
June 17th 1913.
Sir—xn view of the rnisuud.e1Standing which appears
have arisen in connection with t,he appointment of a
(Resident, Medical Superintendent for' Peamnount Sa,lltiaor-
ium, the Officers of t,he Women's Health Association
deem it desirable to place the facts contained in enclosed
Memorandum before your County Council.
I remain, yours faithfully,
WILLIAM J. THOMps0N,
Hon. Secretary Poamount;
Sa naturi um.
No. 1996/1913.
i15seeIlæneous.
Local Government Board,
Jue, 1913.
Local Government Board for Ireland have
Observed from communications recently addressed to them
gome diversity of practice obtains in he differenltj
'Cbunties as regards the mode of charging the contribu-
of County Councils under the National Insurance
Act, 1911, as employers of workmen on roads and of'her
2jubIie works.
The have obtained legal advice on the, point,
and after careful consideration of thc various arguments
SUbrnittodl, have now arrived atl the conclusion that
thes
e contribution(s shculd b? a county-a,tAarge charge
48
under Section 45 (l) of the Local Government, (Ireland)
Act, 1898, there being no other provision in law which
could be hold to determine their chargeability.
T am, Sir,
Your obedient' Servant,
A. R L BARLAS, Secretary.
The Seercar_v cf each County CV)uneil.
NO. G 2134/13.
Ih•paytment of Agriculture
and Technical Instruction for Ireland,
IJryrer Merrion Street, Dublin,
13th June, 1913.
SALE OF FOOD ANI) DRUGS ACTS.
reference, to previous correspondence re-
lative Io t,he enforcement of the above-mentioned Acts,
I have to state for the information of your Local Aur
tlho;rhtv, an, Officer of the Thpartment, acting on
instructions] under Section 2 of Lhe Act: cf 1899, obtained
on thc 16th ultimo, at, Ardee, County Louth, tahreø
samples of butter fcr analysis. The samples were duly
submitted to t-he Public Analyst for the County,
certifies that, they proved to be pure.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient' Servant,
T. P. GILL, Secret,at}'.
The following letter from the Executors of the lata
Mir Patrick Moonan was read, and it was ordered thot
the Secretary writ-e tc [he Local Government, Board for
perrhission to pay him his fees and irreccveable arrears:
T. F. Filgaie, Esq., Secretary.
Louth County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
Dear Sir—As Executors of late Mr Patrick Moonall
(Collector of Rates, Ardee No. 1 Rural), we respectfully
49
beg to apply for balance of Poundage Fees on his Col-
leetlion from perica to 31st March, 1913, also for a re-
fund of the irrecoverable rates on same collection.
Your obedient Servants,
Joseph J. Dolan,
Patrick Camnbell,
Ekecu tors.
The Committee next' proceeded take into eon-
Nideration the following application from the three
VetJerinary Inspectors : —Messrs. Clinton, Maxwell, and
It, is as under : —a
Dundalk, 6th June, 1913.
Sir—As you are aware the Tuberculosis (Treland)
Order came into force on the 2nd inst. The duty oi
carring out, the nrovisons of the Order devolves upon
your Veterinary Inspectors, arydl will throw a large
amount, of extra duty and serious responsiblitjeeu upon
us such an increase in salary as will recompense us for
as such an increase in salary as will recompense us for
('he extra duties imposed us.
Your obedient Se. vants,
J. T. CLINTON, M.R.C.V.S.
W. E. MAXWELL, M.'R.C.V.s.
A. A. DONNELLY, M.R.C.VS.
After a protractted discussion on the subject matter,
Of the foregoing application, the Committee were ununi-
rnous in making the following recommendation to the
County Council, viz : ——That, we fix the future annual
Salarietl 'Olf the three Veterinary Inspectors as : —
Jcc•etph T. Clinton, Dundalk, C] 30 per ann.um.
William E. Maxwell, Ardee, C90 per annum.
Andrew A. Donnelly, Drogheda, C90 per annum.
Tho following letter from Dr. J . A. McQuilan,
, 'was marked " approved " by the Chairman.
Glenlerrrelv—u beg to recommend that Owen Duffy,
Plogherhead, who is an non-iv ured person, and is suffer-
Ing from phthisis, and Mrs Connroy, Bachelors' Lane,
also a non-insured pet-son, be sent, to a Sanatorium for
a period of twelve tweeks each.
Yours truly,
J. A. MCQUILLAN.
June 23rd, 1913.
50
The undermentioned was also approved by the Chairman
and Members of the Finance Committee, viz.'.
That. Mr. O'Connell, Solicitor, take necessary steps
to procure site for Central Dispensary on terms already ap-
proved by the Council from Mr. El'urner.
The Secretary of the County Council (Mr, Townley
F. Filgate) informed the Committee, that owing to the
present state of his health he felt unable to continue in
his office as Secretary of the County Council, and, he,
therefore, asked them to accept his resignation.
The matter will now come formally before the
next Meeting of the County Council, which will be
held on Thursday, 24th inst.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Commitsee at their
Meeting held in the Council Charnber, on Monday, the
7th day of July, 1913.
Present
In the chair—Charles A. I)llffy, Esq., J. P.
Other Members—James Connolly, J.P. ; .Jmnes NV
Patk. O'Connell, Bernard Hamill, J.P. ; and Josepil M.
Johnston, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted Aeeounts for Works in
of Acting County Survevors and those of his own ()fliee'
which on examination were passed by the Committee.
The Secretary also submitted County-at-Large pavmentS
in respect of the quarter ended 30th June last, which were
reeonunended for payment at next meeting of the Council.
In connection with the Accounts submitted and passe
from Dr. M '(luillan, Medical Superintendent Tuberculosis
Scheme, the Comtnittee ordered that Dr. M 'Quillan and Mr •
Council, enurnerating therein the number of patients now
51
under treatment; and any other information they may deem
necessarv for consideration of the County Council.
Arising out of the new Sheep Dipping (Ireland) Order,
191.?', for County Louth,
the Committee authorised the
Secretary to hire two edditional tanks from Messrs. Cooper
Nephew's, Berklamstead, and that the following Gentle-
Inen be. constituted a Committee to appoint two Dipping
'Sttperintendents—one for Carlihgford and district, and one
for Chneath and district—during the time the Order is in
force,
• —Messrs. Wm. woods, J.P. ; Michael O'Meartg
JP ; Joseph 11. NI'Ardle, J.P ; Peter woods, J.P ; James
Connolly, J. P. ; and Joseph P. Kearney. —Committee to
lheet on Monday, the 14th July, 1919, at one o'eloek, p.m.
DUNDALK RURAL DISTRICT.
SCHOOL ATTENDANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of above Committee at their Meetino
held on the 30th day of June, 1913.
Present .
'—Rev. J. Moodv, M.A., in the chair. Other
.J. Watson, B.A.; Rev. T. Murphy, C.C. ,
P. J. Finigan, M.D., .J.P. ; and M. O'Meara, J.P., Esquires.
The Secretary read the minutes of the previous meeting
of the Committee which were passed and duly signed by the
'I'he reports from the School Attendance Oflicers were
hext reacl and considered satisfactory.
'I'he next business was the appointment of Seeretarv,
011001 Attendance ()flieer. and Assistant School Attendance
Rev. J. Wutson, B. A. , proposed, and Rev. T.
Murphy, C.C., seconded, the re-appointrnent of Mr. Daniel
a.s Secretary and School Attendance Officer for the
12 months. Dr. Finigan, J.P
proposed, and MI'.
52
M. O'Meara, J.P., seconded, the re-appointrnent of Mr. P. J.
Campbell as Assistant School Attendance Officer. T •
above motions were each unanimously passed.
The following Notice of Motion which appeareci on the
Agenda issued to the Inembers of the Coturnittee. was next
considered :—
I hereby give notice, that I shall move at the next
Meeting of this Committee, that our School Attendance
Officer (Mr. Daniel Meara) be allowed per annum to-
wards travelling expenses.
(Signed),
R. T. BLUETT. M.A.
After a lengthy discussion on the subject matter of this
Notice it was
Proposed by Dr Finigan, J.P.,
Seeonded by Rev. J. Miatson, B. A. , and
Unanimously Recommended—That our School Attendance
Officer (Mr. Daniel C)' Meara) be allowed per annum
towards travelling expenses, and that we respectfullv request
the sanction of the County Council to this reeonunendation.
I certify above Minutes to be a true and correct copy.
(Signed),
DANIEL O'MEARA,
eretarv to Connnittee.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) ACT, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
OF
FINANCE COMMITTEE,
At their Meeting held in the
COUNCIL CHAMBER, DUNDALK,
ON
MONDAY, 21st JULY, 1913.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT (IRELAND) ACT, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
MINUTES
OF
PROCEEDINGS
OF
FINANCE COMMITTEE,
At their Meeting held in the
COUNCIL CHAMBER, DUNDALK,
ON
MONDAY, 21st JULY, 1913.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee
at their Meeting, held in the Council Chamber, on Monday,
the 21st day of July, 1913.
Present :—
In the Chair—Patrick O'Connell, Esq.
Other Members—Bernard Hamill, J.P. ; Joseph H.
M'Ard1e, J.P. ; James Wynne, J.P. ; and Joseph P.
Rearney, Esquires.
The Secretary submitted accounts for works in charge
Of the Acting County Surveyors and those of his own
Office, which, on examination, were passed by the
COInmittee. He also submitted accounts—County at
Large—in respect of the quarter ended 30th June last,
and the Committee, on examination of same, recom-
mended the Council to discharge them at their Meeting
to be held on the 24th inst.
4
The following letter from the Local Government
Board was read, and as the Committee were of opinion
that it did not effect the County Council, no order was
made on it :—
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD, DUBLIN,
25th June, 1913.
SIR,
In connection with the establishment of County
Insurance Societies by County Councils under Sect. 81
of the National Insurance Act, 1911, tile Local Govern-
ment Board for Ireland deem it right to point out to
County Councils the steps which it is open to them to
take, in order to fulfil their duty of safeguarding the
interests of the ratepayers, in cases where they may be
required to give security to the Irish Insurance Com-
missioners by means of a charge upon the County Funds
to provide against any malversation or misappropriation
of moneys by the officers of such Societies.
The Board understand that the bond required to be
given by the County Council to the Insurance Com-
missioners provides that if a deficiency in the funds of
such Society is shown to arise wholly or partly from
such malversation or misappropriation the Com-
missioners shall be entitled to recover from the County
Council the amount of such deficiency, in so far as it
is not made good by the defaulting officer or other person.
The appointments of the officers of a County Society
are subject to the approval of the County Council, and
it would, therefore, be open to the County Council to
insist that each such officer should furnish a bond
of such amount and on such conditions as to prevent
the possibility of the County Funds being called upon to
meet any liability under the bond given by the County
Council to the Insurance Commissioners. In order
that the Council might themselves be in a position to
5
enforce the terms of the bonds of the officers, it should
be required that such bonds should in all cases be given
to the County Council either solely, or, if this course
is not practicable, to the County Council and County
Society (or Trustees) jointly and severally. The County
Council would do well to secure that the bonds of the
officers should be drawn in such form as to prevent
liability being repudiated on technical grounds.
The County Council might accordingly have the
bonds in each case examined by their Solicitor, special
regard being paid to the obligations on the County
Council, both as to amounts of security and otherwise,
undertaken in pursuance of the bond given by the County
Council to the Insurance Commissioners.
Provision should also be made for securing that the
bonds may be kept in force from time to time by the
payment of annual premiums or substitution of sureties,
as each case may require.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
Further
letter from
as follows :—
LOCAL
SIR,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
the Local Government Board,
GOVERNMENT BOARD, DUBLIN,
9th May, 1913.
I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Ireland to draw attention to the judgment recently
delivered by the Court of Appeal in the case of Weir v.
Fermanagh County Council and Enniskillen Rural
District Council, in which an important opinion has
been expressed as to the procedure to be followed by
6
County and Rural District Councils in regard to
proposals under the Local Government (Procedure of
Councils) Order, 1899, as amended. which involve the
borrowing of money for the execution of public works.
This opinion is to the effect that in such instances
it is mandatory on a rural district council in formulating
a proposal under Article 13 (2) of the Order to state
their decision as to the minimum number of years
within which the money to be borrowed shall be repaid,
and that if the rural district council omit to do so, the
County Council shall refer the proposal back to the
rural district council for amendment in this respect
before the proposal can be approved by them. The
opinion equally applies to proposals formulated by a
proposal committee of a County Council.
As the borrowing of money by county councils is
contingent on the sanction of the Local Government
Board being subsequently obtained, it will be necessary
that the number of years for repayment of the loan
proposed. by the rural district council (or proposal com-
mittee) and approved by the county council should not
exceed the period to which the Local Government Board
will be prepared to consent under Section 60 of the
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898 ; as otherwise
the requisite procedure for an amended proposal would
have to be carried out before the loan could be
sanctioned.
In order to prevent trouble to the councils and delay
in carrying out works, the Board deem it right, so far
as it it possible to do so, to apprise the councils of their
general practice as to the periods allowed by them for
the repayment of loans for carrying out proposals
affected by this opinion.
The large majority of such loans are for the purpose
of re-making roads by steam rolling, and in such cases
the period granted by the Board rarely exceeds five years,
it being, of course, understood that the specifications
and other arrangements for executing the works are
7
found satisfactory. The Board regret that they cannot,
owing to varying conditions, lay down any general rule
as to the period for repayment of loans required for
Other works, and in such cases they can only suggest
to the coullcils that in formulating and approving
proposals it should be specially borne in mind that if
they are to avoid carrying out the procedure a second
time they must insert a figure which would be certain
to be within the period likely to be sanctioned by the
Board, and on this point they should be guided by the
advice of the County Surveyor.
It would seem to be
open to a rural district council or proposal committee,
having inserted such number, to add to the proposal
qualifying words such as " or such greater number of
years as may be allowed by the Local Government
Board for the repayment of the loan."
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
A. R. BARLAS, Secretary.
The following letter from the Clerk of the Dundalk
Rural District Council, dated 28th ultimo, was referred
to the County Council :—
DUNDALK UNION,
CLERK'S OFFICE,
June 28th, 1913.
DEAR SIR,
Vou will notice the serious Illistake that has been made
in the printing. of the Forms 22 recently sent me and
which I now return. Of necessity I have had to use
them on this occasion, but I would not wish to submit
them again to Mr. Newell.
Vours faithfully,
P. R. FINIGAN,
SCIerk of the Council.
The undermentioned letter from Mr. P. A. Spalding,
dated 2nd inst., was referred to the Council's Sclicitor :—
DUNDALK URBAN DISTRICT COUNCIL,
ELECTRICITY WORKS, DUNDALK,
2nd day of July, 1913.
DEAR SIR,
I shall be glad to have your Council's permission to
erect a stay on each of two of our steel poles on the foot-
path on the Newry Road just below the entrance to the
Cemetery. The stays would form no obstruction on
the footpath and would be boarded over at the lower
ends.
The accompanying sketch shows roughly the ap-
pearance of the stays to the poles
Awaiting the favour cf your reply,
Yours faithfully,
P. A. SPALDING.
9
The Finance Committee referred the undermentioned
letter to the County Council for their consideration :—
NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE COMMISSION,
DUBLIN,
7th -July, 1913.
SIR,
I am directed by the National Health Insurance
Commission (Ireland) to refer you to the terms of the
proviso to Section 81 (8) of the National Insurance
Act, 1911, which enables them, where any part of the
cost of sanatorium benefit is defrayed by the Council
Of a County or County Borough, to increase the repre-
sentation of the Council on the Insurance Committee
formed for their administrative area and to make a
corresponding diminution in the representation of the
insured persons.
As your Council propose to defray part of the cost
of such benefit, the Commission have decided to increase
the representation of the Council on the County of
Louth Insurance Committee fronl eight members to
ten members. The Council have already appointed
eight menlbers, and these members will hold office until
the 15th July, 1914. It will, therefore, be necessary
for the Council at once to meet and appoint two additional
representatives, and the Commission would be glad if
you would take such steps to have such meeting con-
vened at an early date.
I am glad to add that the additional members so
appointed will also hold office tllltil the 15th July, 1914.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient servant,
PIERCE KENT.
10
The following letter from Mr. James Brady, Clerk to
Drogheda Local Pension Committee was referred to the
County Coulncil :
DROGHEDA RURAL SUB-COMMITTEE OF THE Co. LOUTH
LOCAL PENSION COMMITTEE.
CLERK'S OFFICE, DROGHEDA UNION,
7th July, 1913.
DEAR SIR,
I am directed to report a vacancy on this Committee
through the death of Mr. Thomas Maguire, County
Councillor.
Yours faithfully,
JAMES BRADY,
Clerk of Committee.
11
The following correspondence from the Local Govern-
ment Board respecting the appointment of Secretary
to the County Council was ordered to be read at the
next meeting of the Council :
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD, DUBLIN,
8th July, 1913.
SIR,
I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Ireland to acknowledge the receipt on the 4th inst. of
your letter intimating the resignation of the Secretary
to the Louth County Council, and, in reply, I am to
forward, for the information of the County Council,
the accompanying copy of the Board's Order of Decem-
ber, 1899, prescribing the qualifications for the position
of a Secretary to a County Council, together with a
copy of a circular letter setting forth the procedure to
be followed in making an appointment to the Office.
A form of queries in connection with the vacancy
is also enclosed.
By order of the Board,
E. W. LEACH.
12
GENERAL ORDER
Regulating the qualifications for the Offce of Secretary
of the Council of an Administrative County (not
being a County Borough) as constituted under the
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898.
To the Councils of the several Administrative Counties
(other than County Boroughs) constituted under the
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898 :
And to all others whom it may concern.
WHEREAS by Section 83 (1) of the Local Govern-
ment (Ireland) Act, 1898, it is provided that the Council
of a County other than a County Borough shall appoint
the Secretary of the Council (who shall act as Clerk of
the Council) :
AND WHEREAS by Sub-section (4) of the saip
Section it is provided that the said Secretary of the
Council shall have such qualificati011s (if any) as may be
prescribed.
AND WHEREAS we, the Local Government Board
for Ireland, deem it expedient to prescribe the qualifi-
cations of persons appointed to the said Office of
Secretary of a Council of a County other than a County
Borough.
i3
NOW, THEREFORE, we do hereby Order and
Direct that on and after the date of this Order no person
shall be eligible to be appointed to the Office of Secretary
Of a County Council in Ireland :
I. Unless he is over twenty-one years of age at
the date of his appointment ; and undertakes
to devote his entire time to the duties of his
office :
11. And unless he
(a) is an existing Secretary of a County Council
or has acted for a period of three years as a
duly authorised Assistant to a Secretary of a
County Council, •and satisfies the Local
Government Board that he has efficiently
discharged the duties of his Office :
or (b) unless he shall have been examined, and his
qualifications certified by some person or
persons appointed for that purpose by the
Local Government Board :
Provided that the Local Government
Board may, if they see fit, dispense with the
examination in the case of a candidate for
the Office of Secretary of a County Council,
who can produce a certificate of having
passed a public examination at least equivalent
in the opinion of the Board to that which the
Board require to be passed by Secretaries Of
County Councils, or can show that he possesses
actuarial, legal, or other special qualifications
for the Office of Secretary.
No person shall be appointed to the Office of Secretary
of the Council of a County who is unable to satisfy the
Local Government Board as to his age and character.
Sealed with our Seal this Eleventh day of
December, in the Vear of Our Lord One
Thousand Eight Hundred and Ninety-nine.
(Signed),
lö
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD,
DUBLIN,
1899.
G. W. BAI,FOUR.
H. A. ROBINSON.
WM. L. MICKS.
R. BAGWELL.
SIR,
I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Ireland to state that their attention has been called to
the method of procedure adopted in some Counties 011
the occurrence of a vacancy in the oflice of Secretary,
and the Board desire to suggest, for the information
and guidance of the County Council, that, before pro-
ceeding to the making of a fresh appointment to this
office, the following preliminaries should be observed :—
In the first place, the County Council should fix the
amount of salary which it is proposed to allow for the
office in question, and should communicate their decision
to the Local Government Board, with a view to obtaining
the concurrence of the Board, as required by Section 83,
Sub-section 4, of the Local Government (Ireland) Act,
1898.
Advertisements should then be inserted in the local
newspapers, and in one or more of the Dublin daily
papers, inviting candidates for the position, and speci-
fying the amount of salary agreed upon, the limits of
age fixed, and particulars as to the latest date for sending
in applications and testimonials.
The Board would remind the County Council that
each member should receive a summons to attend the
meeting at which it is proposed to make the appoint-
ment three clear days at least beforehand, as prescribed
by Article 36 (10) VI. of the Schedule to the Local
Government (Application of Enactments) Order. 1898.
16
As their approval is necessary to this appointment,
the Local Government Board, on being informed cf
the existence of a vacancy, will forward to the offices
of the County Council a form of questions to be answered
respecting the candidate selected by the County Council.
I am, sir,
Vour obedient servant,
Secretary.
To The Secretary of the Co. Council.
17
. .. COUNTY COUNCIL.
APPOINTMENT OF SECRETARY.
I.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
State in full the Christian Name and
Surname of the person appointed
His intended place of Residence
(a)
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
His Age ..
State of Health
Whether free from any bodily in-
firmity likely to impede an
active discharge of his duties
How employed immediately before
his appointment ;
Whether he is prepared to devote
his whole time to the duties of
his office
Does he hold the GfF1ce of Clerk of
the Peace, or Clerk of the Crown,
or Poor Rate Collector ?
Is he a member of any public body ?
If he has been a member of any public
body, the date upon which he ceased
to be such member
If he has been in the Army, Navy,
Excise, Police, or other Public
Service, state
(a) Which service
(b) The cause of his leaving the
same
(c) Date of leaving
18
7. If he has been an Officer of any Public
Body,
(a) Name of Public Body
(b) The office held by him
(c) The cause of leaving
(d) Date of leaving
8. Whether he has ever been Bankrupt or
Insolvent ; if so, state
(a) The date of his Certificate or
Discharge
(b) Whether the County Council
have satisfied themselves
that the circumstances were
not unfavourable to char-
acter
9. What steps have the County Council
taken
(a) To ascertain his competency
to perform the duties of
Secretary efficiently
(b) To satisfy themselves that he
is otherwise fitted for this
office
10. State
(a) The date from wllicll it is pro-
posed that his duties should
commence
(b) The amount of salary attached
to the office
*(c) Date of resolution of County
Council appointing him to
the office
11. State as regards Security,
(a) The nature of it
(b) The amount required by the
County Council
(d)
19
The names and addresses of
persons willing to act as
Sureties
Whether any one of them is a
member of the Co. Council
or other public body
12.
13.
Have the County Council made due
inquiry, and satisfied themselves of
the sufficiency of each of the Sureties
named ?
(a) State the cause of the vacancy
(b) The date of its occurrence
(c) The name of the person who last
held the office
(d) If a Resignation, state the reason
for resigning
Signature of the Chairman of
the Meeting of the Co. Council at
which the above Answers were
(considered and adopted.
Signature of the Oticer appointed.
(The Christian Name and Surname being written in full.]
Reported to the Local Government Board
for their approval,
day of
19
*A copy of the County Council'k resolution should be attached.
tBond of Sureties should be forwarded for inspection by the Local
Government Board.
20
Letter and Statement re Blackrock Pier from Mr. J. H.
Murphy, Solicitor, Dundalk, dated the 16th inst., were
referred to the County Council for their sanction—viz. :
17, FRANCIS STREET, DUNDALK,
16th day of July, 1913.
Re BLACKROCK PIER.
DEAR SIR,
I am acting for a number of the inhabitants and
fishermen of Blackrock in connection with the above.
I enclose you copy of my letter to the Estates Com-
missioners and their reply in reference to the ownership
of the foreshore where it was proposed to make the Pier.
As I am quite sure the Board of Trade will grant the
necessary site for the proposed Pier and Roadway
thereto, I would ask your Council to put the matter in
hands at once.
I wollld suggest that your Council, through their
Solicitor, should communicate with the Department of
Agriculture and Technical Instruction and ask them
to send down their Engineer to make the necessary
plans and furnish an estimate for a Pier and Roadway
suitable to the requirements of the district.
Yours truly,
J. H. MURPHY.
21
Re BLACKROCK PIER.
Copy Correspondence with the Estates Commissioners.
17, FRANCIS STREET, DUNDALK,
14th day of March, 1913.
FORTESCUE ESTATE, COUNTY LOUTH.
DEAR SIR,
I am acting for the Fishermen of Blackrock Village,
County Louth, in connection with the construction of
a proposed Pier at Blackrock, County Louth, by the
Louth County Council. The site chosen for the pro-
posed Pier is on the foreshore adjacent to the holding
belonging to the late George Rogers, now in the pos-
session of his widow, Mrs. Elizabeth Rogers, situate in
the Townland of Haggardstown, County Louth, for
which a Purchase Agreement was signed by the late
George Rogers on the sale of the above estate under the
1903 Land Purchase (Ireland) Act.
The negotiations for the site for this Pier from Major
Fortescue to the Louth County Council were com-
menced as long ago as the year 1904, and Major Fortescue
the owner of the foreshore, would not give a site to the
Louth County Council for same.
Vou might kindly let me know will ther Estates Com-
missioners become the owners of the foreshore adjacent
to the holding of the late George Rogers, in the town-
22
land of Haggardstown, County Louth, when the sale
of the Fortescue Estate is sanctioned. Vou might
kindly let me know as soon as possible, as my clients
are anxious to get the County Council to construct the
proposed Pier at Blackrock if it is possible to obtain a
site for same from the Estates Commissioners, when the
sale of the above estate is sanctioned.
Yours truly,
J. H. MURPHY.
23
ESTATES COMMISSIONERS' OFFICES, IRISH LAND COM-
MISSION, UPPER MERRION STREET, DUBLIN,
11th July, 1913.
ESTATE OF M. C. E. FORTESCUE, COUNTY LOUTH.
Record Number, E.C. 5303.
SIR,
With reference to your letter of the 14th March last,
re proposed new Pier at Blackrock Village, County
Louth, I am directed to state that the Estates Com-
missioners are informed that the foreshore adjoining
the late George Rogers' holding in Haggardstown
belongs to the Crown, and that any application ill
reference to it should be addressed to the Board of Trade.
Such application may be made through Mr. Harpur
Scaife of the Quit Rent Office, Dublin. If any part of
Rogers' holding is required for the purposes mentioned,
an application should be made by the registered owner
of the holding to the Sub-division Department of the
Irish Land Commission.
Vour obedient Servant.
B. J. O'DONNELL.
24
RATE COLLECTOR'S ARREARS.
Letter from the Local Government Board on the
above subject was read, and on the motion of Mr. Joseph
H. M'Ard1e, J.P., seconded by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P.,
it was unanimously recommended—" That the amounts
of irrecoverable arrears shown on the Lists of our
Collectors be discharged by the County Council at their
Meeting, to be held on Thursday next."
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD, DUBLIN,
16th July, 1913.
SIR,
With reference to the lists of arrears of rate in the
County of Louth for the period ended the 31st March,
1913, recently forwarded by you to this Department,
I am directed by the Local Governnlent Board for
Ireland to return the lists herewith, and to state that
owing to the unsatisfactory manner in which the
Collectors have discharged their duty and the lists have
been furnished to this Department, the Board regret
they cannot see their way to approve of the recom-
mendations of the County Council,• consequently any
payments they may decide to make in respect thereof
must be on their own responsibility and subject to
review by the Auditor.
The Board deem it well to set out generally the
irregularities which appear in the present lists and which
they regret to find have been more than once brought
under the notice of the Secretary of the County Council
but without avail.
25
Several of the amounts on the unused receipts do not
agree with the corresponding amounts on the lists of
arrears—e.g., J. Moonan, 1715 ; P. Cluskey, 1946, 2379,
etc.
It would appear that new forms of receipt have been
specially written out in a great many cases in order to
bring many of the items on the lists and corresponding
amounts on the receipts into harmony—e.g.,
P. M'Donne11,
J. J. Kelly,
3148
3151
3158, etc.
1926
2095, etc.
In these cases the amounts on the receipt forms now
for the first time furnished agree with the corresponding
amounts in column 12 on the lists, but for the reason
given above the Board cannot, in the absence of further
explanation, accept these documents as supporting the
claims of the Collectors for recoupment of irrecoverable
arrears.
On reference to the lists of John Woods and J. V.
Johnston, in which new receipt forms also have
apparently been made out . in many cases, it will be
found that the system mentioned in the preceding
paragraph has not been followed—e.g.,
J. Woods,
J. V. Johnston, .
4809
4860, etc.
730
731, etc.
26
In these instances it will be observed that the amounts
on the new form of receipt do not tally with the amounts
in the arrear lists, but represent apparently the amounts
actually received by the Collector, and it is only possible
to arrive at the amount in the lists by deducting the
amount on the new receipt form from the amount on the
original receipt.
The certified Summary of Arrears furnished by you
is also incorrect, and is returned ; a new list should be
made out correctly embodying the recommendations
of the County Council, and the annexed list should be
returned therewith.
Items appearing in column 13 of the lists (Refund
amount to Collector, but carry forward for subsequent
collection) cannot be legally so refunded, as the Col-
lectors did not close their collections by the 28th Feb.
It will be seen that no entry of these any)tlllts (column
13 in Lists) appears on the summary as furnished.
The Board cannot see why the Council propose to
strike off items 5381 on Collector J. Woods' Lists as
irrecoverable.
The Board must reqtlest that, in future, before the
lists of arrears are submitted to them that they may
be subjected to close scrutiny in the County office.
The system outlined by the Board in their letter
of the 5th June, 1912 (29604/1912) in cases of part
27
payment of rates should also be strictly followed in
future.
Six forms of Summary are also enclosed.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS, Secretary.
The Constabulary forwarded a list of names and
addresses of sheep Owners who exposed their sheep for
sale without being accompanied by a declaration as to
their being dipped, and the Committee referred same
to the Council's Solicitor.
28
The Committee made no order on the undermentioned
letter from the Police Authorities in Dublin :—
METROPOLITAN POLICE COURTS,
INN'S QUAY, DUBLIN,
16th day of July, 1913.
SIR,
Vou are requested to take notice that this Court will,
on the 23rd day of July, 1913, at the North Court
proceed to hear an application made under the provisions
of the Children Act, 1908; for the committal to a certified
Industrial School of the undermentioped children on
which hearing your Council will be given an opportunity
of being heard in accordance with Section 74 (6) of above
Act.
I am, Sir,
Vour obedient Servant,
J. E. DIXON, for Chief Clerk.
The Secretary Co. Louth Council—
Dundalk, Co. Louth.
Names of Children.
Thomas, Patrick, Charles and
Terence Byrne,
Stated to have resided at Arthurs-
town, Ardee, Co. Louth, until
October last.
131,
Address.
Summerhill.
Dublin.
Name and address of person bringing case into Court'
Julia Byrne, 37, Up. Mountpleasant Avenue.
29
Arising out of the Report of the Acting County
Surveyors on the subject of Steam Rolling, the Com-
mittee made the following recommendation to the
County Council—viz. , That the terms offered by the
representative of Messrs. Edison, who was present,
be accepted—viz., That the hire to be 24/- per working
day for a six months contract, commencing about the
ISt October, 1913, with a standing charge during the
working season of 7/- per day ; the charge for the
Scarifier on Engine No. 189 be withdrawn, and no charge
during the idle season ; also that the Edison Company
be asked to supply an additional Roller or two, if found
necessary, at the same rate.
REPORT.
To THE FINANCE COMMITTEE LOUTH Co. COUNCIL,
July 21st, 1913.
MR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN,
Steam Rolling of stone in the Rural Districts has been
finished, and no more stone will be available until
October ISt next when the annual measurements for
next year's stone will commence.
As you are now open to make new terms with the
Edison Company, Ltd., for the ensuing year, we would
suggest that a new agreement be entered into for a
term of say six months. A reduction in the cost of hire
might also be asked, and also that the charge for the
Scarifier attached to the Roller No. 189 be withdrawn.
30
Mr. Bartlett of the Edison Company, Ltd., is in
attendance to-day, and would be pleased to confer
with you should you so desire.
We are, Gentlemen,
Vour obedient Servants,
JOHN M. C. LYONS,
J AMES DROMGOOLE,
Acting Co. Surveyors.
31
The following letter was ordered to be read at the
next meeting of the County Council—viz. :
UNION AND RURAL DISTRICT OF DUNDALK,
BOARD ROOM, UNION WORKHOUSE,
DUNDALK,
July 11th, 1913.
DEAR SIR,
At their Meeting on Monday last the Guardians of
this Union decided to intimate, with the co-operation
of the County Council, a Farmer's Association for this
district, and desired me to ascertain what convenient
day the County Council could receive a deputation
of Guardians to discuss the project.
Vours faithfully,
P. R. FINIGAN,
Clerk of the Union.
32
The following correspondence was also read :—
CORPORATION OF DROGHEDA.
TowN CLERK'S OFFICE,
COURT HOUSE, DROGHEDA,
19th July, 1913.
Mr. VAL WARREN, Court House, Dundalk.
DEAR SIR,
I think it only right to acquaint you that a Member
of the Corporation has given Notice of Motion to move
that the resolution granting portion of the Old Jail
premises for a Branch Tuberculosis Dispensary be
rescinded. In the circumstances I think it would be
advisable if your Committee did not take any step in
relation to the premises until the Notice of Motion has
been disposed of.
Yours faithfully,
J. B. CONNOLLY.
.33
LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD, DUBLIN,
17th July, 1913.
SIR,
I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Ireland to acknowledge the receipt of your letters of
the 30th ultimo and 14th inst., relative to arrangements
for the treatment of Tuberculosis in Louth County ;
and, in reply to your inquiry on the subject, I am to
state that a Committee appointed under the provisions
of Section 5 of the Tuberculosis Prevention (Ireland)
Act, 1908, would have power to manage a Sanatorium
or Tuberculosis Dispensary established by the County
Council. The Council could not delegate to such Com-
mittee any powers other than those connected with the
management of the Sanatorium or Dispensary.
Pending the establishment of such institutions and
the appointment of a Committee of Management under
the above-mentioned Section, it is open to the County
Council under Article 36 of the Schedule to the Local
Government (Application of Enactments) Order, 1898,
to appoint a temporary Committee to take all the
preliminary steps as to inviting tenders and inspecting
sites, etc., with a view to making recommendations
respecting these matters to the County Council for their
approval.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS, Secretary.
34
21/7/'13.
Dr. M'Qui11an attended and applied for a fortnight's
leave of absence to take up temporary duty as Medical
Officer of Peamount by request of Her Excellency,
Lady Aberdeen ; Dr. O'Connell to do duty in his absence.
It was decided to recommend grant of Dr. M'Qui11an's
request, Dr. O'Connell to perform his duties in his
35
CARLINGFORD HOTEL,
CARLINGFORD, Co. LOUTH,
19/7/'13.
absence.
V.
CARLINGFORD HOTEL,
CARLINGFORD, Co.
DEAR SIR,
Thanks for list of Sheep Owners received.
WARREN.
LOUTH,
18/7/'13.
As regards
my having any suggestions to make, representations have
been made to me here that it would hit some of the poor
owners very hard if they have to pay the regulation
amount twice in a period of eight days. A " small
owner can ill afford to pay, say, 5/- now and 5/- again
ill eight days time. More especially would it be hard
on the owners of healthy sheep. I think if your Council
could decide to give the second dipping free, or at least
at half price, it would be greatly appreciated. In this
connection it must be borne in mind that the ownerS
are also expected to assist in the dipping for which they
are paying.
Perhaps you will bring the Inatter before the Executive
Committee at Monday's meeting.
Vours faithfully,
W. ASHE KING.
DEAR SIR,
I wish to bring to your Committee's attention the
necessity of employing some men to assist M 'Kevitt
in the dipping. To - day when we were ready to
commence work there was none to dip, The sheep were
in most cases brought by decrepit old men, women and
children, none of whom could give any assistance. I
had, therefore, to employ four men at 4/- a day, as the
owners said if the dipping was not done to-day they
would not bring them again.
It is absolutely necessary that at least three men be
employed to assist M' Kevitt, otherwise we won't get
through over 100 per day, and it will take many months
to complete the dipping. I have arranged for three
men on Monday, as I really cannot get on with the work
without them.
In to-day's inspection of some 400 sheep I found
scab with three different owners.
Vours faithfully,
W. ASHE KING.
36
CARLINGFORD,
16th July, 1913.
To the Secretary of the Louth Co. Council.
DEAR SIR,
Mr. King, V.S., was speaking to me to-day, and he is
not satisfied about one man doing the dipping ; he had
four in Co. Down. He is preparing to start on Saturday
morning. We had to look for a yard and can have one
from Miss Lee for two week's for the sum of LI.
Will you please let me know what can be done about
it.
Yours faithfullv,
W. WOODS.
Left in the hands of the Local Committee.
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY. COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings
OF
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At their Second Quarterly Meeting held in the Council
Chamber on the 24th July; Adjourned Quarterly
Meeting held on the 21st August ; Special Meeting
held on 'l'hursday, the 25th September, 1913.
FINANCE COMMITTEE
At their Meetings on 7th August, 18th August, 1st Sep-
tember,
15th September, 29th September,
13th
October, 27th October,. 3rd and 10th November, 1913.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE,
22nd Septenjber, 13th October, and 27th ()ctober, 1913.
SCHOLARSHIP COMMITTEE,
At their Meeting held on the 15th September, 1913.
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE
At their Meeting held on the 27th October, 1913.
DROGHEDA :
DROGHEDA ADVERTISER " PRINTING WORKS.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
Second Quarterly Meeting held in the Council Chamber,
Courthouse, Dundalk, on Thursday, the 24th day of
July, 1913.
Present :—
In the Chair—PETER HUGHES, Esq., J.P.
Other members—Patrick Byrne, J. P. ; Patrick Callan, J.P.;
Patrick Donegan, J.P. ; Edward Goodman, Bernard Hamill,
J.P. ; Joseph M. Johnson, Patrick Kearney joseph H.
M'ArdIe, J.P. ; James M'Carthy, J.P. ; Richard Nlathews,
Laurence M'Keon, John F. Murphy, J.P. ; Patrick O'Con-
nell, Michael O'Meara, J.P. ; William Woods, J.P., and
James Wynne, J.P., Esquires.
The Minutes of the last meetings of the Council having
been printed, and a copy sent to each membe:, were taken
as read and were confirmed.
Confirmation of Finance Committee Minutes.
Proposed by Mr. James M'Carthy, J. P..
Seconded by Mr. Edward Goodman, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of proceeding ofthe Finance
Committee at their meetings held on the undermentioned
dates, viz. April, 1913 : 14th May, 1913 ; 26th May,
1913 ; 9th June, 1913 ; 23rd June, 1913 ; 7th July, 1913 ;
and the 2 ISt July, 1913, be and are hereby confirmed.
School Attendance Committee Minutes.
Proposed by Mr. Michael O'Meara, J. P. ,
Seconded by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P., and
Resolved—That the Minutes of proceeding of the Dundalk
Rural District School Attendance Cc mmittee, a copy of
which has been furnished to each member of the Council,
be an I are hereby approved of, save and except that we
increase the School Attendance Oflicei's (Mr. D. O'Meara's)
annual salary by V 10 a year, instead of .€20 a year as recom-
mended by the School Attendance Committee.
CO-OPTION 01.' A MEMBER OF 'I'llE COUNTY
ROOM OF 'I'llE LATE MR.
COUNCIL IN '1'111•',
THOMAS MAGUIRE.
I 'roposed by Mr. Laurence M' Keon,
Seconded by ur. James M'Carthy, J.P., and
—'I-hat we hereby co-opt Mr. Nicholas T • Mur-
Resolved
phy, of Hill of Rath, Drogheda, to be a member of this
Council in room of the late Mr. Thomas Maguire.
P.XYMF,S'I'.S TO ROAD CONTRACTORS.
ARDF.E.
Prcpooed by Mr. Patrick Callan, J P. ,
Seconded by Mr. Richard Mathews, and
Resolved—That the proposals for payments formulated by
the Ardee No. 1 Rural District Council at their Second
()ualterly Meeting held on the ISt day of July, 1913, and
set out on Form 22, furnished to the County Council, be
and are hereby approved of.
These payments amount to the sum of ES25 17s 1 ld.
DROGHEDA PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. James MiCarthy, J.P , and
Resolved—That the proposals for payments formulated by
3
the Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union at their Second
Quarterly Meeting held on the 8th day of July, 1913, and
set out on Form 22, furnished to the County Council, be and
are hereby approved of
These payments amount to the sum of .E5 42 1 ld.
DUNDALK PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr. William Woods, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Byrne, J.P., and
Resolved—That the proposals for payments formulated by
•the Dundalk Rural District Council, and set out on Form
22 furnished to County Council be and are hereby approved
•of.
'l*hese payments amonnt to the sum of El. 374 IOS 5d.
APPOINTMENT OF MEMBER ON ARDEE SCHOOL
ATTENDANCE COMMITTEE.
Proposed by Mr. Richard Mathews,
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P., and
Resolved—Thac Mr. John Kieran, Jun., of shville,
Ardee, be and is hereby adopted a member of the Ardee
School Attendance Committee, in room of Mr. John Ma-
grane, J.P., resigned.
FIXING DATES FOR QUAR'I' ERIN MEETINGS OF
RURAL DISTRICT COUNCILS ANI) ITS
PROPOSAL COMMIT'I'EE.
Proposed by Mr. Edward Goodman,
Sect.nded by Mr. Bernard llamlll, J.P., and
Resolved—That the County Council hereby determine
that the following shall be the dates for the holding of the
Third Quarterly Meetings of the Rural I)istrict Councils and
Proposal Committee.
Ardee, Tuesday, 7th October, 1913.
Drogheda, Tuesday, 21st October, 1913.
Dundalk, Monday, 6th October, 1913.
The last day for lodging notices and applications to the
Rural District Councils shall be Tuesday, 9th September.
1913.
The Proposal Committee to meet on Monday, 27th
October, 1913.
The last day for lodging notices and applications to the
Proposal Committee shall be Wednesday, the 15th October,
1913'
5
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council,
at their Special Meeting held on Thursday, the 7th
day of August, 1913.
Present :—
In the chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Patrick Byrne, J. P. ; James Connolly,
J.P. ; Joseph Dolan, William A. Doran, J.P.; C. A.
Duffy, J.P. ; Edward Goodinan, Bernard Hamill, J.P. ;
Joseph M. Johnson, Patrick Kearney, Michael Meade,
Richard Mathews, John F. Murphy, J.P.; Patrick
O'Connell, Peter Woods. J.P.; William Woods, J.P. ;
and James Wynne, J.P., Esquires.
The Council were sunnnoned for the purpose of
taking into consideration the fixing of the salary of
future Secretary of the County Council, and arrange
procedure for election.
The Council passed the following series of resolutions.
Proposed by Mr. John F. Murphy, J.P.
Seconded by Mr. Michael Meade, and
we hereby eon firm the recommen-
dation of the Finance Committee Inade this (lay
respecting the Annual Salary to be paid to the future
Secretary of the County Council of Louth—-that is to
say—E200 por annum in addition to the usual fees
under the Franchise and Jurors' Acts, and that the
appointment be må(le as soon as possible and that our
Solicitor be directed to draw up an advertisement for
the appointment.
'l'he following letter from Mr. Valentine Warren
was next read :—
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,
I am directed by DI'. McQuillan to inform you that
at the meeting of the Drogheda Corporation' yesterday,
it was decided not to give the Old Goal prelilises for the
purpose of a 'I'uberculosis Dispensary.
With reference to the Central Dispensary at
J)undalk, 1 am to respectfully request you to consider
the advisability of recommending the appointment of
an Architect to draw the plans, specifications, etc. with a
view to a hasty completion of the Scheme.
I am, Mr. Chairman and Gentlenmen,
Your Obedient Servant.
V. WARREN, Clerk.
Arising out of Mr. Warren's letter the Council
the following resolution :-—
Proposed by Mr. J. M. .Johuson,
Seconded by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P., and
Resolved —That the appointment of an architect for
the Dundalk Dispensary be left in the hands of the
Tuberculosis
the
under
Provisional Connnittee
(Ireland) Act.
The undernmenlionecl resolution was also passed by
the Council :
Proposed by Mr. J. M. Johnson,
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Byrne, J.P., and
Resolved—That inasmuch as the Annagassan Tlarbour
Authorities have secured a Provisional Order in accor-
dance with the suggestion of the Department of Agri-
culture, who promised a sum of towards its pro-
motion, and as the County Council have already paid
their quota of we beg to apply to the Department
for payment of the promised by them.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings of the I,onth County Council at
helll in
their Adjournecl Quarterlv Meeting,
'l'hursda.v, the 21st day of
Council Chamber 011
August, 1913.
Present :—
In the , J.P.
, allies ('on-
Other Men) bers—Pairiek Byrne,
noily, J.P. ; .John Dolan, Joseph Dolan, Patrick
Eleock, Ed-
gamo. J.P. ; Charles A. Duffy, .J P. : I *like J.
ward Goodman, James Ilalpenny. Bernard Hanjill, J.P. ;
Joseph M. Johnson, Joseph P. Kcarney, Patrick Kear-
my, James S. Kelly, Michael Meade, Joseph 11 'Ardle,
J .P., Richard Mathews. Laurence M 'Keown. John F. M ur-
phy, J.P. ; Patrick O'C onnell, Michael (Y eara, J.P. ;
Peter
Denis J. Rath, William 'I'. Skellington, J. P, ;
J.P.
Woods, J.P. ; Willianr Woods,
J.P., aud N. T. Murphy, Esquires.
CONSIDERATION OF Till", FOLLOWING
FROM ACTING COUNTY SURVEYORS.
DUNDALK DISTRICT.
Mr• Chairman and Gentlemen,
l. The Duncialk Rural District Council lilianimousl.v
passed an application for €739, the still) alloitecl to the
District for improving part of the Scheduled Goads un-
der the Road Scheune, and also a stun of V26s to
pay for during the conmino• season.
These, with other for sonje useful special
works, are set out on Form 20 for your
2. The Council reconnnend the purchase of Road-
making Piant, and appointed a Cormni[tee to confer
with the County Council in deterinining the part of the
Scheduled Roads on which the Road Board Grant is to
'I'he breaking and delivery of proper
be expended,
8
stone will form [11? chief item of expense in any im-
provetnent schelne, an I I beg to recommend that this
unatter be referred to a when I shall, I hope,
be able to give details for formulating a proposal for the
purchase (by a loan) of machinery and quarries.
3 The Rural District Council has so fully
appretiatecl the advantages of a loan free of interest, in
addition to the grant from the Road Board, that, I should
like to give that body i with your permission) an oppor-
tunify of taking up the balance of El, 100, which has, I
understand, been refused by the Rural District Councils
of Ardee ancl Drogheda.
The l)alance (L'361) will only cost the district E 72 [s.
per annum for five years, for a total outlay of
per annum for five. years the l)istrict can have the im-
Inediate use of $2,200.
I am, Gentleynen, your obedient Servant,
JOHN M. C. LYONS,
Acting County Surveyor.
ARI)EF, AND
Mr. Chait•rnal) and Gentlemen,
The A rd Rural District Council at its Quarterly
Meeting on the 1st July approvecl of E 187 to pay the
cost of Steam-rolling for another six months, conunenc-
ing about the 1st October next, and provision must now
be made for the hire of a Roller for this District.
The Drogheda District Council, at its Quarterly Meet-
ing on the 8th July, refused Illy application for E175 to
continue Steatn-rolling, unless the Road Board pay
It is to be regretted this course has
one-half the cost.
been decided on, as soume of the most important roads
in the district have, about two-thirds their length al-
ready Steam-rolled, and the remaining one-third would
be cotnpleted before 1st April next, when these roads
could then be let at a cheaper rate.
By reverting to the old Inethod of rolling in the
broken stone by vehicular traffic, I am afraid much of
the advantages gained and expenses incurred during the
past two seasons "ill be thrown away.
9
Both Ardee and Drogheda District Councils have de-
cided. for the, present, at least, not to avail themselves
of any portion of the- free grant frotn the Road Board
by refusing to pass (EIS5 Amee District and El 77
Drogheda District).
'I'here are no other proposals of itnpcytanee.
I arn, Gentlen1011, your obedient Servant,
JAMES DROMGOOLE,
Acting County Surveyor.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Byrne, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. N. T. Murphy, and
Resolved—That the Reports of the Acting County
Surveyors, as appearing on the Scheclule of Proposals
for the 21st August. 1913,
be and are hereby approv ed
of, provided that the A1 dee and Drogh(Åla Rural Dis-
tricts get their proportionate share.
The Council next proceeded to consider Tenders for
the following Works, which were cluly advertised, and
in every instance the lowest tender was accept( (l.
WORKS.
Tenders for the following NV(jrks will be considered
by the County Council, as per advertisenwnt.
DROGHEDA DISTRICT.
No. 58—To make 576 perches of new road be-
tween Castlelmnne.y and Rath(lonnell,
from Peter Mathews' house, I)rogheda
road, to Richard Campbell's house.
Collon road.
Cost not to exceed 2200 0
. take up and reconstruct GO lineal
yards of paved ehannel between Mi-
chael Kirwan's housc and Margaret
Fitzpatrick's in Clogher.
Cost not to
. 10
exceed
o
10
No. posts and (langer notices in
_ 10
the district. Cost not to exceed
DISTRICT.
No. 3—To re-set curl) stones and re-plaee
tnissing stones along 105 perches, and
to repair the fence along 33 perches of
footpath on the, road from Dundalk to
Newry, between the Urban Boundary
and Mr. Kerley's shop, Dowdallshill.
Cost not to exceed
feet of protective wall
be
along the footpath at, Omeath,
tween Colonel I)obbins' wall and Mr.
Malone's tea rooms. Cost not to exceed
No. 7—To pay the cost of erecting sign-arms
and danger notices at eross-roads. Cost
not to exceed
O
O
O
O
It was then proposed by Mr. Bernard Ilanlill, J.P.,
—That all
seconded by Mr. Woods. ,J.P., and resolved
Works not tendered for be placed in elrarge of the
Acting County Sut•ve.vors.
Item No. on the Agenda, viz : —Consideration of
Tenders for erection of Branch Dispensary at Ardee in
Only one
advertisement issued.
accordance with
tender received which was accepted by the Council, It
was as follows
Ilumpht•eys, Limited, ) 9 Stephen•s Green, Dublin.
RE BRASCII DISPENSARY-ARDEE.
We estimate the cost of erecting cottage at Ardee in
accordance with your plans and speci fieations at the
sunl of V-S9 IOS.
"I'llis work will be nxanufacturecl at our own yard ill
Dublin.
For IIUMP1iRF,YS LTD.
A. Clarke.
11
PROPOSALS FOR
Proposed by Mr. Michael Meade.
Seconded by Mr. James Halfpenny, and
Resolved - That the Proposals for Worl,s fortnulatecl
by the Ardee Kural Distrid•t Council at their
last
Quarterly Meeting, and set out on Form 20 furnished to
the County Council be ancl are hereby appro ved of, and
we now our Secretary to atlix the Seal of the
Council to the contracts entered into.
WORKS.
Proposed by Mr. Patrick Donegan, J.P.
Seconded by Mr. Denis J.
, and
Resolved—'l'hat the lh•oposals for Works formulated'
Rural Dist rict of I Drogheda Union.
by the Louth
are hereby
furnished to the County Council be and
approved of, and we now authorise our Secretary to.
allix the Seal of the Council to the contracts entered
into.
DUNDALK WORKS.
Proposed by Mr. William Woods. J.P.
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Byrne, J.P., and
_ —That the Proposals for Works formulated
Resolved
bv the Dundalk Rural District Council and set out in
Form furnished to the County Council.
be and are
hereby approved of. and we now authorise our Secre-
tary to affix the Seal of the Council to the contracts
entered into.
12
APPOINTMENT OF SECRETARY TO THE
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL IN ACCOR-
DANCE WITH ADVERTISEMENT
ISSUED.
Applications were received from the following
—Messrs. C. Dundalk; P, J.
gentlemen, viz .
Joseph P. McGinity, Dundalk ;
Butterly. Mullary ;
Arthur O'Neill, Dundalk : A. Y. 'l'iernan. Drogheda ; •
17
"I"ullvvallell ; Andrew Sheeran,
..James Connell,
and Mark J. Boyle,
Harold's C ross Road, Dublin,
Liverpool.
The Chairman and Council adopted the usual
course by taking a vote of the Council as between the
respective candidates, which resulted as under :—
FOR MR. McAlÆsTER. .
Messrs. Patrick TB.yrne, J.P. : James Connolly, J.P. ;
•C. A. Dully, J.P. ; Edward Goodman, James Halfpenny,
Bernard Hamill, J.P ; Joseph P. Kearney, Patrick
Kearney, Michael Meade, Joseph H McArdle, J .P , Richd.
Mathews. John F. Murphy, J P. : Patrick O'Connell,
Michael O'Meara, J.P.: Denis J. Rath, Peter Woods, J.P.,
and .J•cunes Wynne, J P
FOR MR. BUTTERLEY :
Messrs. John Dolan. Joseph Dolan, Patrick Donegan.
J.P., and Laurence McKeown—4.
FOR MR. TIERNAN :
Messrs. L. J. Eleock, James S. Kelly, William T.
•Skeffington, .J.P., and Nicholas T. Murphy—I.
Fort MR. McGlNlTY :
Joseph M. Johnson — I.
Mr. McAlester having had a clea • m•tjority of votes
over the combined votes recorded for Messrs. Butterly,.
Tiernan and McGinity, the Chairman duly declared him
elected Secretary of the Louth County Council on the
terms and conditions set forth in the advertisement
issued for this appointment.
Mr. McAlester then appeared before the Council, and re-
turned suitable thank* to the members of the Council for the
honor done him in electing him as their Secretary.
Item No. 6.
Consideration of applications for the position of County
Surveyor for County Louth in accordance with the letter of
the Local '•overnment Board, setting forth the names of the
gentlemen who are qualified to act in that capacity.
Copy of Local Government Board letter.
7th August, 1913.
reference to previous correspondence, relative
to the vacancy in the position of County Surveyor for County
Louth, I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Ireland to inform the County Council that the following
applicants for the position are qualified for appointment,
Gerald A. Adair, Mr. John Caffiey, Mr. J S.
Cairns, Mr. Stafford Gaffney, Mr. R. H. King, and Mr. J.
J. Murphy.
The election of County Stn•veyor may n ow be pro-
ceeded with. As regards Mr. Murphy the Board desire
me to state that the evidence of age furnished by him
would go to show that he is within the prescribed
limits, though he has not produced a birth cerlificate.
They also desire we to •add that MI'. Caffrey has since
been appointed County Surveyor in Donegal County.
tl'he, applications, etc., forwarded by you are returned
herewith.
Considerable discussion ensued respecting this matter;
and finallyit was
14
Proposed by MI'. Michael O'Meara, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. John F. Murphy, J.P. :—
That we postpone the appointinent of County Sur-
veyor for County Louth for a period of three months.
'I.'he ('Irairnrall took a division on this proposition, and
following was the result of the voting :—
For the proposition—Messrs. Patrick Byrne, J.P. ;
Janies Connolly, J.P. ; Joseph Dolan, Patrick Kearney,
Michael Meacle, Richard Mathews, John F. Murphy,
J.P. : Michael J.P. ; Willian) Woods, J.P., and
Wynne, J.P. - 10
Against the proposition there voted—Messrs. John
Dolan, Patrick Donegan. J.P. : Charles A. Duffy, J.P. ;
Luke J. Edward Goodnran, James Halpenny,
'Joseph M, Johnson, Joseph P.
Bernard Hamill.
S. Kelly, Joseph 11. M'Ar(11e, J.P
Kearney,
Laurence M 'Keown, Pattack O'Connell, Denis J. Rath,
Peter Woods, ,J.P., and
William T. Skellington, ;
Nicholas T. Murphy—17.
The Chairtnan therefore declared Mr. O'Meara's
•motion lost I).v 17 votes to 1().
Finally. it was proposed by Mr. Bernard IlaJniII, .J .P.,
.J•atnes S. Kelly, and Resolveql
—That
•seconded by Mr.
.101)11 M. C. Lyons, B.E.. of
appoint Mr.
we hereby
('astle Road, l)unqlalk, County Surveyor for County
advertiselnent issued by
Louth in accordance with the
the Secretary of the County Council.
The following gentlernelj voted for this resolution,
. : Messrs, Patrick Byrne, J.P. : .latnes Connolly,
•viz —
„J.P. ; John l)olan. Patrick Donegan, ,J.P. :
.James
Luke J. Edward (Goodlilan,
Duffy, .P.
Halfpenny, Bernard Hantill, 'I.P. ' .Joseph M. Johnson,
Joseph P. Kearney, Patrick Kearney, .Jatnes S. Kelly,
Michael Meade, Joseph H. M'Ardle, .J.P, ;
Mathews, Patrick O'Connell, Michael O'Meara, J.P. •
Denis J. Rath, William T. Skeffington, J.P.; Peter
Woods, J.P., and N. T.
The Chairman therefore declared Mr. J. M. C. Lyons,
B.E., unanimously elected by the Council as County
Surveyor for County Louth.
Item No. 7.
FURTHER CONSIDERATION OF TUBERCULOSIS
SCHEME,
In connection with the foregoing matter the following
correspondence was read :—
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
DROGHEDA DISPENSARY SITES COMMITTEE.
Meeting held in the Courthouse, Drogheda,
Thursday, the 14th day of August, 1913.
There were present : —
Presiding : W. T. Skeffington, Esq.
on
Other members—J. Dolan, James Kelly, and J. A.
M'Qui11an, J.M.O., Esquires.
It was proposed by Mr. Kelly, seconded by Mr.
Dolan, and resolved—That this Committtee, having
done what they could to obtain suitable premises for a
13t•anch Tuberculosis Dispensary, and Iraving failed in
our endeavour to obtain same, we, now reeonolnend the
County Council to allocåte the snm of .C6C() to build a
Dispensary at Drogheda.
W. T. SKEFFINGTON, Chairman.
V. WARREN, CLERK.
Referred to ottr Solicitor to ascertain whether the
16
Council could pr jeure a further sum of money to
devote an extra grant to for the purpose
above stated.
PROVISIONAL
OF TEIL' LOU Til
COUNTY COUNCIL.
Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse,
Dundalk, on Monday. the 11th clay of August, 191.9", to
consider the question ot' appointing an Arehiteet in
connection with
the erection of the Tubereulosis
Central Dispensary.
Presiding :—Peter Ilughes, Esq., J.P.
Other members :
Hamill, .J.P.; Patrick
(YConnell, C. A. Duffy, J.P. Patrick Byrne, J.P, and
M'Quillan.
It was proposed by Mr. llamill, seconded by Mr.
Byrne, and Resolved—That Mr. Vincent O'Connell,
Earl street, Dundalk, be appointed Architect to (lt•aw up
the plan and specification for the Tuberculosis Central
Dispensary to be erected on Castletown Road, Dundalk,
at the usual rate of remuneration paid the profession.
V. WARREN, Clerk.
Referred back to Special Ctnnmittee ; and it was also
ordered that Mr. Joseph M. Johnson's name be placed
on this Committee.
Letter from Dr. J, A. M 'Quillau, as under
August 19th, 1.913.
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,
I beg to apply for three weeks leave of absence. If
you will kindly grållt same I will arrange with Dr.
O'ConneH to do my duty while I arn away.
Your obedient Servant,
J. A. MCQUILLAN.
17
Leave of absence was duly granted to Dr. McQuillan,
on the conditions stated in his letter.
The following comrmunication from the Department
of Agriculture and 'I'echnieal Instruction was next suli-
mitted to the Council, and a copy ordered to be sent to
each of the Veterinary Inspectors.
It is as under.
16th August, 1913.
Sir.
With reference to your letter of I inst., and the
entry on the subject in its enclosed copy of certain
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council, I
have to state that the Departinent observe that the
application of your Local Authority Veterinary In-
spectors (Messrs. Clinton, Maxwell and Donnelly) was
for increases of salary on aeeonnt of extra duties arising
out of the operations of the Tuberculosis (Ireland)
Order of 1913. "l'he Department assume, wherefore, that
the additions proposed to be made to the present salaries
of the Inspectors are in respect of such extra duties, and
they will be glad to learn on what basis these additions
(representing increases of from 250 to ;
per cent)
Irave been computed.
It is doubtless the case that the Order will impose
considerable extra work at first on the Inspectors, but
it is anticipated that as the operation of the Order pro-
ceeds the duty to be dealt with thereunder will
gradually decrease and finally become occasional only.
In these circumstances it seems to the Departinent
that large increases of salary on account of the Order
could not in any event be justified as a pel'lnanent,
arrangement.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
P. GILL, Secretary.
A petition and letter froin the ratepayers and inhabi-
tauts of Castletown and District was read setting forth
the various reasons why the proposed site of the Tuber-
18
eulosis Dispensary at Castletown Road was objected to
by thenm.
No Order was Inade by the Council on this matter.
DUNDALK SCHOOL ATTENDANCE COMMITTEE.
On the litoti01i of MI'. Michael O'Mara, J.P., seconded
by MI'. "Bernard Ila Illill, .J.P., it was unanitnously re-
.Jitlnes Connolly, J.P., of Ravensdale,
solved—That MI'.
Dundalk, be and is hereby appointed a member of the
Duncialk School Attendance Committee.
Letter fronl the Local Government Board dated
I Ith August, 1913, approving of the salary of a year
which the County Council had fixed for the position of
Secretary to the County Council,
Denis J. Rath, seconded bv Mr.
the 1110ti011 of Mr.
Michael ()'.Meara, J. P.. the Itil(lermentioned resolution was
unanitnously passed bv the Council :—
'I'hat this ('0111u•iI hereby direct the attention of the
Fisheries I)epartjnent of the Board of Agriculture for Ire-
land, to the great and urgent neeessitv for the further exten-
tion of the Fisherv Piei• at Clogher Ilead; That the Pier in
its present state is totaly inacle(lllate to suit the requirmnents
of fishing
boats attracted thereto by the
recent establislnnent of a Fish Curing Industry; or afford
tllC111 sullieient protection
in stornlv weather. That we
request the Boa to send
down their enoineer to inspect
in conjunction with a, Comtuittee appointed by this
ille Pier,
('onncil to inspect the Pier, and report thereon as to the best
Illeans of Inaking further extensions to the Pier."
'l'he C 'otility Council Scholarship Seheme was before the
Meeting, and it was decided to fix 15th Septetllber as date
for applications under the Sehmne•, and that a
Special Meeting of the ('otiljeil be called for 25th Septenlber
to make awards.
19
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth Coufv Council at their
Special Meeting held in the Council Chamber, on 'I'hurs-
day, the 25th day of Septenvber, 1913.
Present
In the chair—Peter Ilughes, Esq., J.P.
• Bernard I lamill, .J.P; Patrick Done-
Other melilbel S—
A)Villiam T. Skellington,
gan, J.P.; Patrick Callan, J.P
Laurence
J.P. ; Patrick O'Connell. Michael O'Meara, J.P. ;
McKeown, Richard Mathews, James Connolly, J.P. ; Peter
and Jatnes Wynne, J.P. ; Esquires.
Woods, J.P.
The Council were sunnnoned for the purpoes of taking
into consideration the undermentioned Aoenda :—
'I'he Council to take into consideration the reeomnrell(lation.s
anade by the Scholarship Committee, at their meeting held
1913, and award
on Monday, the lötll Septmnber,
Scholarships as they lijay deem necessary.
Thc Secretary read the Minutes of Proceedings of the
Scholarship Conunittee at their Meeting held on Monday,
the löth September, 1913, and after considerable discussion
en the subject Inatter of s;tlne, the Council were Illi'dllilnou.s
in passing the followino• resolution
Proposed by Mr. Michael O'Meara, J.P.
Seconded by Mr Patrick J.P., and
'I'hat the reeonnnendations contained in thc
Resolved—
Minutes of Proceedings of the Scholarship Conunittee, at
their Meeting held on the 15th instant, and now subitiitted to
Special Meeting of the County Council, be and are hereby
approved of bv this Council.
The special business of the Council having becu now
transacted the Chail'lllttn refered in feeling terni.s to the
20
: I ownle,v
recent deaths of the following VI"/ '
F. Filgate, latc Secretary Louth County Cotillc•il ; Mr. John
Johnston, J.P., late member of the Council, and Mr. Patrick
Ford, late Editor of the " Irish AVorld," A lil('l'iea.
The followino• resolutions were then passed :—
Proposed bv Mr Veter Ilughes, J.P
Seconded by Mr. Michael C)' Meara, J.P
and
Resolved—That we, the Inenlljers of the Louth County
Council learn witli sincere regret of the death of out'
late esteemed Secretary, Mr. 'I'0M•nley F. Filgate, and we
beg to tender to the friends and relatives of the deceased
gentlelii$lll our sincere reoret in their bereavenwnt.
Proposed bv the seeonded bv MI'. Meara,
: 'I'hat we, the Illembers of the Louth County
and —
Council learn with regret of the dernise of the late Mr. Jollil
Johnston, who was for years a lilemljer of the Council, and
that the Secretary be directed to convey to his relatives our
sincere sytnpathy in their bereavetnent.
Proposed by the
Seconded by Mr. Skeffington, and
Resolved we desire to express Ollr sorrow at the
lamented death of Mr Patrick Ford, late Editor of the
whose noble advocacy of Treland's cause for
Irish World,"
the past 40 years has won our gratitude and the admiration
of the Irish Race, and we tender to his relatives Otu-
respectful sympathy in their bereavement. :
21
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at their
Meeting held in the Council Chamber on 'I'hursday, 7th
day of August, 1913.
I'resent :—
In the chair—William A. I Doran, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Patrick Byrne, J.P • C. A. l)uffy, J.P. ;
Edward Goodman, Bernard H:unill, J.P. ; Joseph M.
Ohnson, Richard Mathews, Patrick O'Connell, N. T.
Murphy, Peter Woods, J.P • illiam Woods, J.P., and
•James Wynne, J.P., Esquires.
The Secretary submitted Acco unts for Works in charge o
the Acting County Y urveyors, anci thcse of his own officef
AYhich, on examination were passed by the Committee.
The second itelil on the agenda read as follows :—
' Conunittee to fix salary of future Secretary of the
County Council and arrange, procedure for election."
And if was proposed by Mr. Edward Goodman,
Seconded by Mr. Bernard Hamill, ,J.P., and
Reconmmended—rlrat the salary of the future Sec-
retary of the County Council of Louth be the sum of
•€200 per antitun, with usual fees uncler the Franchise
and •Jurors' Acts, and that the appointment be made as
•soon as possible, and that our solicitor be directed to
draw up an advertisement for Illis appointment.
The Secretary—MI'. T. F. Filgate, supplied the Conb-
with the Collowing information respecting his
own salary.
As Secretary to the County Council per annume
oes under l"ranshise and J urors' Acts 35
ees under Motor Car Act
15
iu all.
Letter from Mr. Patrick Tlnghes, Poor Rate Collector
as under :—
Park Street, l)undalk,
8th August, 1913.
The Chairman and Gentlemen, Louth Co. Council.
Sirs,
I beg to apply for balance of remuneration due me to
31st March, 1913.
Yours,
PATRICK HUGHES,
Collector of Poor Rate.
Proposed by Mr. C. A. Duffy, J.P.
Seconded by Mr. Peter Woods, J.P., and
recommended—That Mr. Patrick
Unanimously
Hughes be paid the balance of the remuneration due to
him by the Council up to date.
23
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Conli)litiee at
Monday, 18th August, 1913.
Present :—
In the chair—James Wynne, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—Peter Woods. J.P. ; Michael Meade,
James Connolly, J.P., ancl Patrick O'Connell, Esquires
The Secretary Submitted Accounts 1'01* Works in
charge of the Acting County Surveyors, and those of
his own office, which, on examination, were passed by
the Committee.
The following letter from Mr. W. Ashe King, the
Departmental Veterinary Inspector was read :—
Crown Hotel, Warrenpoint.
7th August, 191%
Dear Sir,
books, only came to hand last night, too late for Ine to
reply by the evening post.
The following are the names of the nien enlployed
With the tank :—
James M 'Alister
John Fearon
John Eccleston
John Ryan
Carlingf(
(Io
do
(Io
John M'Allister and James Eccleston were working
for part of first week.
The wages agreed ur on were ds. per day, and for the
first four days I paid the four men that arnount, as this
Was outside my provineo.
I arranged with MI'.
William Woods, M.C.C., that Hugh M'Kevitt should
take charge of the workman,
and
he has been
Paying them out ot the receipts for (lipping.
21
will be seen by above, your Council owes Ine 4s..
As regards dip, I have ordered it
paid ont for labour.
froin Messrs. Backhouse, Dundalk, as required.
Yours faithfully,
W. ASHE KING.
The Committee were of c pinion that the method of
paytnent was very irregular, and that the full aniounts
eollecteqi should have been lodged with the Treasurer
and a detailed account sent to the Secretary.
"l'ile following letter was referred to the Council's
Solicitor, Mr. Daniel O'Connell, with instructions that
he institute proceedings to recover the rates therein
referred to :—
Drogheda, 11th August, 1913.
Dear sir.
Would you kindly bring before the Finance Com-
mittee, at, their meeting on Monday, the
following
stalenrent in reference, to the sale of a farm on the
Newcornell Estate, sold by the Executors of the late
The farm consisted of three ratings at
Father Clarke ?
and f 10 in Clogher Townland. alid E I I) in Callys-
Vendors in their a/ Ivertisetuent
town adjoining.
all rates would be paid up to the
of sale stated that
The Solicitors for the Vendor*
March, 19 13.
(Messrs. Sheridan & Co.) sent me, on the 30th
Novennljer, 19 12, a cheque for the rates on the Æ41 and
.€13 valuations, but refused io pay on the El 9 valuation.
I sued the Executors in June last, before the County
Court 'tulge, through your Solicitor—Mr. O'Connell—-
but Mr. Mackey, for the _Executors, raised the point
the
Mr. M•Evoy,
that the lilatfer was ill Chancery.
purchaser, tells Ille that all the rents and other ehargeS
'l'he only lilatter• outstanding •at e the rates
are paid.
on the e 1 9 valuation. I would ask the County Council
(YCon nell to proceed against the
instruct M 1'.
to
Executors again. I respectfully sublilit they should
take the Inatter• up now.
Yours faithfully,
P. M'CULLOCGH.
P.S.- 'I'he of rates (lue are {'1.0 19s. ld.—four
years. Mr. O'Connell knows all the particulars.
following eonmmunication the Road Board
was also and approved of by the C'omlilittee :—
'I'he Road Board,
Queen Annes' Chambers,
Lqnclon, S.W.,
9th August, 1913
Sir,
IMPROVEMENTS IN THE DUNDALK URBAN
DISTRICT.
1 directed by the Road Board to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the ISt instant, at d to say that,
subject to certain modifications in the specifications, they are
prepared to make the follcwing grants for the under-
mentioned improvements in the Dundalk U V). C.
Road,
Surfacing with Granite,
Grouted with Plascom,
1,750 square yards
Dundalk —
Sh ercock Road,
I Dublin—Belfast Road,
Surface
Tarring in
accordance with Road
Board Specification No r
'l otal
Cost.
307
397
Net hnpt.
( •ost.
232
91
Grant
150
Go
At ld per
I enclose
draft
statement
of grants,
square yd.
323
210
which please return
26
after verifying the description of the proposed works.
The
Assistant Engineer is writing to the Borough Engineer
respecting the specification for the proposed works.
I am, Sir,
County Louth.
Your obedient Servant
W, REES JEFFREYS, Secretary.
Reference No. 2430.
27
THE ROAD BOARD.
S'I'A'I'F.MFN'I' OF PROPOSED GRANT
FROM THE ROAD IMPROVEMENT FUND.
Authority
• —LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Name of Road: l)undalk Shercock road; l)ublin Belfast
road, in the I)undalk Urban District.
Description of Illnprovement :—Surface-dressing with tar
in accordance with the Road Board Specification No. r,
varicus sections of the roads (14521 square yards) described
ROAD BOARD.
DRAFT SPATEMENT OF PROPOSED GRANT
FROM THE
ROAD IMPROVEMENT FUND.
Authoritv :—
LOUTII COUNTY COUNCIL.
Name of Road—Dundalk-Shercock Road.
I)escriptican of
mprovement—ln the I)undalk Urban
District—
Surfacing with granite, bound with plascom, from Anne
Street Police Station to the junction of Mary Street South in
Anne Street. Dundalk, (1750 square yards) in accordance
in Statement marked A. 2431.
Estimated cost of Improvement
Grant by the Road Board
$91
60
with Statement marked A. 2430.
Estimated cost of improvement
Grant by tl;e Road
CONDITIONS OF GRANT.
PAYMENT or GRANT—
±'60 on Couruy and l)istrict Surveyors Certificate approved
by an Engineering Inspector of the Road Board, that the
work ha.s been satisfactorily coinpleted, and a aetailed state-
ment of the actual expenditure.
E307
150
CONDI'I'IONS OF GRANT.
PAYMENT OF GRAN'I'—
275 on requisition when applicants are ready to commence
work.
on County and District Surveyors Certificate approved
by an Engineering Inspector of the Road Board that the
works have been satisfactory completed, and a detailed
stat nnent of actual expenditure.
County Louth. •
Reference A.
A. 243 r.
28
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance ('onnnittee at their
on Monday 1st
Meeting held in the C 'ouncil Chaniber
Septenlber, 1913.
Present :
In the chair :—C. A. l)llffy, Esq., J.P.,
. . : Woods,
. —Jatnes Wvnne, J.P
( ither Mellil»ers :
Patrick ()'Conncll, Pat l'iq•k Byrne,
. ames
Esquires.
Connolly, .J .P., and limn ill, J.P.
'I'lte Secretary aeeotllits of the works in charge
.of the acting County Survevors. and those of his own office,
011 exaniination, were passed bv the Connuittee.
which,
CORRESPONDENCE.
'I'he following letter Messrs.
1913, was read and
Solicitors, Newry, dated August,
referred to the Council's Solicitor.
•29th Altgust, 1913.
l)ear Sir,
of Car-
we by Al r. M'.\llister.
l.c•hnlf of your
labourer, who was ernplo.veql Oli
lingforql,
of dipping sheep under the supervi-
Council for the lillt•pose
V.S. ( eliellt was engaged
Ashe-King,
Sion of IMI'. W.
on 21st Jilly, and continued until 4th Au•rust, when he was
eqnnpelled to discontinue owing to irritation to his anns re-
Ile has since been un-
eeived in the course of the dippingr.
able to work, and is at Ijresent under the eare of the I)oetov,
be able to work for some time to
who states he will
not
I lis wnqres were •Is a (lay, or 24s. per week, and one
ecnne.
1 2s. for the four weeeks endin•v 1st prox.—will be
—i.e.,
half
.E2 8.4 for wliiell
mittance and obli€re.
Yours faithfullv,
O'HAGAN.
Letter from the Local Government Board, as under :—
28th August, 1913.
Sir,
The Local Government Board fcr Ireland hace had
before them your letter cf the 25th instant, intilnating that
the Louth County Council. at their meeting on the 21st
.J. M. C. Lyons to the vacant
ult.,
appointed Mr.
post of Ccunty Surveyor ; and. in reply, the Board direct me
to state that Mr. I,yons is, as the County Council have
already been informed, ineligible for appointment as County
Surveyor.
The Board have to request that the Gounty Council wili
proceed to select for the position one of the duly qualified
candidates.
I am, etc.,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
The Committee ordered that this letter be referred to the
County Council.
Letter from the Department of Agriculture and 'I'echnica
Instruction, as under
23rd August, 1913.
Sir,
Adverting to your letter of the 7th instant, fowarding
copy of a resolution passed ht a meeting of the Louth
County Council on the saine date on the subject of the
expenses of the promotion cf the Provisional Order affecting
Annagassan Ilarbour, I have to state, for the information of
the Council, that the repartment regret that any misunder-
standing should have arisen concerning this matter; but
they desirc to direct the attention of the Ct uncil to the discus-
Sion which took place relative thereto at the meeting of the
Council, which was held on the 16th Novetnber 1911. Mr.
Green Chief Inspector of Fisheries, pointed out at this meet-
ing that it would not be possible for the I 'epartment to pay
costs in connection with the Provisional Order, and gave, as
one obvious reason. the possibility of the scheme being
opposed by parties in whom the Department were equally
30
interested. The suggestion that a Harbour Board should be
formed was made for the convenience and protection of the
County Council, and lest there Inight be any mistake in
regatd thereto, Mr. Green stated that, whether a Harbour
Board was formed or nct, the l)epartment were prepared to
make a grant towards the cost of the Harbour Works, if the
County Council were also willing to make a contribution.
'I'he I)epartment did, however, assist as far as was possible
in the preparation of the case made in favour of the
Provisional Order by having plans prepared and printed,
It may also
which involved them in considerable expense
be mentioned that, owing to the difficulty in finding a
suitable dumping ground for the material dredged from the
Harbour, the l)epartment's contribution towards the cost of
•the Works may eventually be greater than was originally
intended.
I am, etc ,
T. P. GILL, Secretary.
A copy of the foregoing letter was handed to Mr. Michael
Meade to be read at the next meeting of the Annagassan
Harbour Committee.
Letter from Mr. AV. E. Maxwell as under : —
Ardee, August, 1913.
The Secretary Louth Co. Council.
Sir,
I would be obliged if voti can let me have an Order
on Sununers angl thc Contractors for the Council, of a
Serum inoculation Syrin•ve, and a. supply of Tliberetllin. for
diagnostic lillt•po.ses, Illitler the Tilbereulosis (Ireland) ()rqler
us, the
In dealing witli the ease stibiilitted to
of 1913.
ask whether have used this re-
Departinent invariably
iniunetions is to exhaust every
action, and one of their
for
knowll Ineans prior to slaughter of suspected anitnal.s,
I, at least, heve not been supplied
.purpose of verification.
yet with these necessaries.
Yours faithfully,
E. MAN w El.l.,
I nspee,t01'.
31
The Chairman Committee authorised the Secretary
to supply Mr Maxwell wit, the nvt,icles men.fjioned in his
-leiter.
Lotter was read from Mr A A Donnelly, V.S., dated
August 31sf1, 1913, JS follows : —
Dear Sir—I beg to ocknowledge tho receipt of your
lotter enclosing a copy of a letter from Ehe I)eparbment re—
Jating to the proposed increase in salary recently grant.ed
by your Council to Choir Veterinary Inspectors for extra
duty under the Tuberculosis Order.
Department, while admi [ting tihat the 'J'ubercu-
losis Order will impose considerablo extra duty on the V ote-
rinary Inspectors at, first, state t,hat on there will only
be occasional cases to deal with. I think the reverso
prove to be the case.
When tille Order becomes better known by the general
publljic, repoeted cases will become more frequent,. All re-
ported cases, whether they eventually turn out to be ease.
Of tho disease under ilhe Order or otherwise. will entail
much work, and numerous visits on tho part, of the In-
spedtOrs. Testing an animal with tuberculosis alone mean.
least five visits to the premises where t.he suspected casa
IS, and Lhe proper carrying out Of the Order throws a
WeiÉhty reponsibility on the Veterinary Inspectors. fie
of the Department as regards tihe percentage of
increase in salary is inaccurate, and it will in time be found
that wo are certainly not being overpaid for the duties we
have perform.
Yours faithfully,
ANDREW A. DONNELLY.
The Committee made no order on this letter.
following correspondence from the Council's Soli-
•itor, Mr Ihniel O'Connell, was road •
32
22nd August, 1913
Re Byrne Children—Thomas, Pa.%rick, Charies :uncl 'I'erence.
Dear Sir—OWith reference to this ease which was ad-
journed at the Inn's Quay Police Court, Dublin. to enable
t,ho Council to be representsecl, I beg to report tlhat
appearing on t.'he 24th July, 30th July, and 7th inst., €110
Divisional M C Meelnernes, K.C., agreed
with our contention that County Louth was not liable to
towm•ds the maintenance• of the children. and the
Council was consequentls freed frotn liabilits.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Further letter from Mr. O'Connell, as follows
Francis Street, Dundalk,
22nd Augusi. 1918.
Re Sheep Dipping Prosecutions.
Dear •Sir—I beg to report that I appeared at Droghoda
Potty Sessions on Monday last, tihe 18th inst., on behalf Of
the Clounoil in f1ho mzttor of tho summonses against Patrick
Rooney and William Kelly for exposing sheep for sale
Drogheda, in tho first caso 105 sheep on the 5th inst., and
in tåhk* ot'her six sheep on tho 9th inst., without having the
requisite DeclaraXion of having dipped sheep as pre-
scribed by t.he Shoep Dipping (Ireland) Order, 1912.
Døfenda,nts were each fined 2s 6d and Cl costs.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Further let,ter from Mr O'Connell as under : —
30th August. 1913.
Dear Sire On the matter of the vrcposcyl Pier at
rock, I set out hereunder copy letter, dated 26th inst.,
re-
eeived from tho Secretary of the Department of Agriculture
and Tec/h•nical Instruction for Ireland :
'*Witih reference to thai part of your letter of the 22nd
inst., relative to a site for a proposed Pier at Blackrock,
co. Loti.th, I have state that. in the present condi [ion
of their funds the l)epartment would bo unable to contri-
bute to Qhe cost of the proposed works. The various sites
were inspected when tho matter was before the l)aprtment;
a few years ago, bub their Engineer will be askecl to look
at, the place again when in the vicinity.
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL (YCONNELL.
Francis Street. Dundalk ,
30th 'August, 1913.
Dear Sir—With reference to the subject of the sugges-
ted expansion of Pier at, Clogher I give 'hereunder
copy letter received from the Secretary of the Department.
Of Agriculture and Technical Instruction for Irelo.nd and
dated 24th inst. :
"With reference to part of your let'ter of Che 22nd ins[.
on tho subject of on inspection by the Depa rtment•s En-
ginger Of tho Fishery Pier at Clogher Head, I havo to
Xtato that f,ho matter will be attended to as soon as official
business permits."
Yours faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
The undermentioned letter from the Seerefnry
COmrnissioners was read and referred to Mr Joseph '1' Dolan—
nstate of Charles A Kingston and Others, Lou fib.
E.C. 3773.
26th August, 1913.
'Sir—I am directed by t}he Commissioners to
inform you that prot eeding.s for {Ire style oi the above-
named Estate hove been before Lhern, and that
in the Townland of Barnaveddoge, Varish of Dro-
Jilin, Balony of Ardee, are t.wo ancient monuments—two
Saanding Stones—which appear to be wort;hy of preserva-
The Commissioners of Pu blic Works ore unable to
tio.
accept the custody of these monurnents, and the Fsta.tos
Com missioners will be glad to be inforrn«l tha,ti your Council
will consent to ke then and have them vested under Sec.
4 of the Irish Lnnd Act, 1903.
I am to request Ibe favour of an early reply.
Your Obedient Servant,
B. J. O'DONNELL.
The following was submitted to Committee, and it
•was ordered that a meeting of t,he Scholarship Committee
be sumrnoned for Monday. the 15th inst., to award Schölar-
ships for the coming year
CONDITIONS OF YOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL SCHOLARSHIP
SCHEME, 1913-14.
The Louth neil offer two Scholarships of
L'ö() a year eacéh, Itenable the Dublin •or other •College
of the National "U niversi:€v for the Session October. 1913,
to June. 1914, and renewable for the two succeeding years,
if the Student follows a •Course 'in
and for a fourth yen r
Agrieulfiure, or in or 'Commercio.l Science. 'Ilhe
Sehola.r.ships will be oyen for io •male and
lent:tle who fulfil Che following requirements : —
(l) Whose parenfs or .guarclians sare 'and Olave been resident
in Co. Lotlfilv for the past. three years.
(2) Who satisfy t*he County Council that they are unab!e
Of -t,ljoir own to obtain Universiw Edu-
ea+.i01t.
(3) Who have been educated in Ireland.
(4) Who •are of good he:ibtli end character mncl -under 19
years of a rye.
(5) Who pass in Irish reach a standard •of honours in
t,he aggregaie of rsnbjeets in the Test Examination
which gives •proof of ability enough to put a Uni-
yersit.y Education [o .good
Tho Test, Exanination will be Lntermediato Ex-
tion of 1913—the order of merit being determined
by t/ho printed marks obtained by f.ihe applicants in Sonior
Grade Honours a.s published in the Official Results List—a
Pass in Irish being essential
The Scholarships shall be awarded to the two Candi-
dates best qualified in the judgmenb of the County Council
on consideration of morits in Ellis test; examination, and
Of tille fulfilment of the other requirements. If either or
both of the highest eligible competitors will not, accept
•Scholarships they shall be awarded to Ghose next in merit,
if qualified.
Ono or both Scholarships nay be altogether witihheld
if sufficient merit or ,need of assistance is nob shown.
'l'ho Student å,ceept.ing a Scholarship must pass tbe
Matricula.åion of the Nnt»ional University (unless .t!he Uni-
versify accept his Intermediate Examination as qualification)
in 1913, and attend regularly tlho first year's oourse in some
faculty of the UniversitJ, 2
' nd reside in a hostel .or -other
residence approved by the Cotmt,.v 'Council and t!he 'Co(lege
.authorities.
{lhe Coldego fees shall be paid direct by t,he (h '(huneil
tilte (hllege authori tåies and the hostel proprietors, the
'balance, if amy, to be expended on books a,nd other ex-
penscs.
In order to retain Schol.n.rship for the Sdhoon for the
second and third year a Student. must pass bhe 'College Ex-
amination Of that year at a standard of merit to ,be fixed
by the Council in consultation with the College authorities,
and •must, also present n satisfactory report from tlho College
as to atltendance at. lectures aml general conduct during
the sear.
County Council shall havo complotve discretion in
or modifying these rules and in withholding or
redueing Scholarships.
Candidates for Scholarships must, apply to the Secre-
of tho County Council before the 15th Septomber, 1913,
tho Council shall rnee€ to consider applications and
Scholarships on the 25th of September, 1913.
36
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of tihe Finance Committoe at
*heir Meeting held in the Council Chamber, on Monday, the
15th day of September, 1913.
Present :
In the Chair—C. A. Duffy, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—J P Kearney, W T Skeffington, J.P. ;
J Wynne, J.P.; W A Doran, J.P.; P O'Connell, Peter
Woods, J.P.; Patrick •Byrne, J.P.; and W Woods, J.P,
Esc: uitM.
Acting Secretary (Mr O Hardy) submitted accounts
for works in eharge Of the Acting County Surveyors and
the County Council Office, which. on examination, wore
passed by tho 'l'hese aceounts amounted to the
sum of 247 18s 4d.
Tho following correspondence was submitted to the
Committee.
byt.ber from Patrick Hodgins, Harbour Constable, Clog-
her HOMI, dated 2nd Sep€ember, 1913, as under : —
Dear Sir—As one of the men here refuses €0 give
poundage for his yawl, and I have asked it on many occa-
•ions, would you kindly ask your Solicitor to write to hill'
as you did with Ferguson, Longhshinny. He always pays
now. a.ddre«s of the man who refuses to pay is : —
Michael Kirwnn (Master).
Your Obedient Servant,
PATRICK Honarss.
the foregoing letter he referrod to
37
Council's Solicitor to take such steps as he may deom neces-
sary to recover the dues in question.
Letter from Ibe Local Government Boo.rd as follows,
dated 8th September. No. 48054, 1913 : —
Sir—I am directed by the Local Government
Board for Troland to aoknosvledge the receipt of your telo-
gram of this day, and I am to state that, they regrot to
learn of the death of Mr Filga,te, lato Secretary of the
Louth County Council.
In confirmation of their telegram of to-day tho Board
desire mo to inform you tjha.t they will raise no objection
to Mr Charles McAlester acting temporary as County Soe-
rotary, ponding their decision as to t,ho permanent appont—
ment.
I am, Sir, your Obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN, Assistant Secrøtary.
Application was made bs Mr Lyons, Acting County
Surveyor, for to erect a protecting fonce to tho Brant*
Dispensary at Ardoe, as per tender, from Messrs Humph-
ress, Dublin
Tho Committee decided make tho ordor for payment
of this amount.
mtt,er from Mr Joseoh Noonan, dated 22nd ultimo,
ae under: —
Dear Sir—I respectftrlily beg to apply for poundage fee
on my rato collection for periods to 30th 1912,
•nd 31st March, 1913.
Yours, etc.,
Josnpn M00NAN.
Committee instrucbed tho Secretary to ask the
Government Board for permission to pay these fæe.
Tho question of the payment of accounts for Veterinary
38
instruments, etc., and compensation awarded the owners.
of slaughltl€yrod nnirnals, c•cnd otfher expenses incurred in con-
nection with the Tu berculosis Order, 1913, wus under dis—
oussion, amd the Secretary was directed to ask the permis-
Sion of the Local Governmen'•-å Board to have these a,rnou-ntß
discharged tJhrough the Subsidiary Account.
Tho Veterinary Inspector for Dunda,lk District (Mr J
T Clinton) attended tho meeting and requested the Com—
mitt,ee to ask tho Department, for the removal of the re-
stit•idtions against the removing of sheep from the restrict&l.
area, and as the matter was considered very urgent owing
to Dundalk Fair being held on Wednesday, the 17th inst.,
the following +uelegr•omn was mdered to be sent to the De—
part,ment, viz..
•JReferring to Veterinary Inspector's Iet-
Lors of Thursday and Saturday Iu,sb, re removwl of restric—
Lion in Special Sheep Dipping Area, pdeaso wire if restric-
Lions will be removed in time for Dunda:lk Fair on Wed—
nesda.y next. Wire reply.
Illhe Secretary was directed, on receipå of reply, to wiro
oarli County Councillor and Police Station in the affected'
zroas.
were submitLod in connection with expenses
for -wages, etc., in carrying out the special sheep dipping
operations under Che County Louth (Special Dipping Area)'
Sheep 'Dipping Order of 1913, and ib was decided to pay
LILO following accounts subject tho Department's sanction,
viz : —16s a, week to Francis Murp'hy and James White, re-
Npect,ively; 16.s a week, with a special bonus of 30s to tho
Oha,rgo hand (Hugli McKevitt), tund Vs a day each to four
mon employed to assist in tho sheep dipping operations.
Mr William Woods brougfh€ under the notice of the
Commit,teo tho question of red light on Carlingford
Pier, and stated that frequent, complainin had been mado
regarding tho position of same.
After considernb!e discussion it was decided +40 ask tho
Acting Chunty Surveyor (Mr Lyons) to make a written ro-
•port for tho next' meeting of the Financo Committee, and
also on tlho present eondition of tho w.c. on tho Quas
rii ngford.
FINANßE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of idle Finance Cotnmitt,ee a•
their Meeting héld in the Council Churn ber, on Monda.v,
the 29th day of Septotn ber, 1913.
Present :
In the Chair—C. A. Duffy, J.P.
O lher• Members—Patrick Byrne. J. P
J H M CA rd%le.
J.P.; w.haOl O'M€uu,a, J.P.; F J.P.
James Connolly, J.P. ; Willia.m Woods. J. P.
Jamevg
Wynno, J. P. ; Bernnrcl .Ha.milI, J.P.; and Pa.triek O'Con-
nell; Esquires.
The Minuies of the previous nte•iing of the Committew
wero taken as read, and were duly signed by t•he Chairman.
The Secreåury su bmitted accounts for
works in dhjarge
Of the Acting County Surveyors, ancl those of his own office,
which, on examination, were passed by the Committee.
"171ese• acount.e amoun•ed to the sum of L•332 14s (id.
Letter frorn tho Council's Rate Coil:eetors,
dated
inst., asking for a.n extension of one month up to the 31st
October next, to corn,plete their reypective collections,
statiing tha.t owing to tho lato season the Inn,j01ity of rato-
Payers were unable to mee± their demands before the 31st
Oetcb€r.
Cornrni€t.eo were unanimous in complying wi 'Yi the
Codlect,orw' request, and dirv•ctecl the Seereiar_v to respect-
fully ask the (Local Government Board for t'heir formal
sanction to this extension of time. The pplieation was
signed by eighi of the nine of 'the COuncil's (TO 'lectors.
The Consåabulary forwarded list of n:unes of sheep
40
Solicitor wit}J (11 reeiions to instii legal proceedings.
it, was decided that the Illa tte•r be referred to the Council's
for sele on the Fair in Arcle? the 24th inst., and
ow ne,rs from tlre Ardee District who exposed their sheep
Letter was read from tihe Seeretary Road .l!oa.rd dated
25th inst.,
stating that they hatl caused an inspecåion
be macle cf a considera Lie mileage of roads throughout Ire-
laud W'i.ill the view of further grants to the irnprovement of
these roads, and asking 11121, the ('hairnjan of the Council
and any other
representa lives of t Ile Council, accompamed
by County Surveyor and representatives of the Rural
District 'Cauucils concerned. would meet the Chairmnn of
the Road Board who wn:s visit inu Ire•lnnd on tahis business
bet,ween t,he
n nd bhe 18th of October. A rnnp was
also on which was coloured that part of the mile-
a in County Lout:h to which Road Board are dis-
posed to The section of the road was the main
road .from to Newry, from the junction of tho
( !arlingford Rond to Jonesborough.
After discussion cn the foregoing letter it was decided
to appoint a deputa Élion consisting of the Chairman of tho
County Counci l,
tihe Chairmen of the Rural and District
Councils, the Chairman cf '-die Dundalk •Board of Cuar-
dians, the Acting County Surveyors, and tho representative
on the County ('ouncil of the district through which t'he
road 'passes, to meet the Chairman of the Road Board to
confer with Ili cn texe
A reoort was reocl from Mr J M C Lyons as to the
red light on Caflingford Pier, and thc repairs necessary for
the slip-way and 9. new fender for the outer end of Pier :
also as €0 the roofing of tho w.e. on the quay.
'Ithe Com m.ittee decided all the necessary wortk in
connection with the above matters be done by Mr Lyons.
Brom Mr J Connolly, Town Clerk, Drogheda,
•dated the 20th inst., enclosing copy of. report. on 'the esta.b-
lishment of a Sana$oriurn in Drogheda, and after discussion
on the matter, it was decided to refer tho report to ±the
County Council.
Nf.r Paériek (YConnell, brought under the notice of the
'Committee the question of the erect,ion of danger signals
in such places in tlJ0 county as would prevent accidents
with motor or other t,rnffic.
The Committee directed Mr Lyons to inspect the various
places in the County such signals were necessary and
report to tho County C%uncil.
On t,ho rnofJion of Mr J H McArdle, seconded by Mr
'Connolly, it was recommended—That Mr Oswald Hardy bo
•employed in the Secretary's Office until the end of October
at dhe same remuneration as the late Mr T F Filgate re-
eeived. and also tlhnt the services of Mr Joseph Loudon bo
•retained until the end of October at the samo remuneration
he is at present receiving, viz. , 30s per w€AYk.
42
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of tho Finance Commi:tee 2K
t}beir Moeting held in the Council Cha nuber, Dundalk
(%urthouse, Monday, the 13th cloy of October, 1913.
Prescn% : —
In the Chair—C. A. Duffy, Esq., t!. P.
Other Members—William Woods, J.P. ; James Con-
noily, J.P.; Peter Woods, J.P.; James Wynne, J.P.;
Patrick O'Connell, and Bernard Hamill, J. p. , Esquires.
'1'114* Secretary submitted accounts for works in charge
of €'he Acting County Surveyors, ' and those of his own
Office, which, on examination, were passed by the Commw-
t.oe. These payments amounted to the sum of lös 9d.
Loiter was re•.i.cl from t,he Local Government Board,
dated 7th Oc.hober, 1913, No. 51,730, relative to the request
to gra,nt an extension of t.ime to 31st Oetober, instJ., to tho
Poor Rate Collectors for ilhe purpose of cornpleting their
colle:ebions, which request the Local Government Board
stated they were not. prepared to accede to.
Af,ter a, protraci,ed discussion on €110 matter, ii was•
proposed by Mr Bernard Hamill, J.P., seconded by Mr
Peter Woods, J. P. , and recommended—That the Secrotary
write a strong let,t.or to tho Locul Government •Board and
point, out, the extmsion of time was to facilitato
the ratepayers. and not the eolllee.V»rs, and that owing €0•
the lato Ivorvest and difficulties of selling corn produce, etc,
it was necessary to grant the extension.
Lotter was read from tille Local Government Board,
(lilted 3rd ()etober, No. 51,607, 1913, assenting to tho pay-
rnonf, of remunornt,ion to Mr Joseph P Moono.n, in æspect
of the amount of his collection of poor rate for the year
ended 31st, Murch 12.st.
'Letter was reacl from bhe Secretary Ardee Sc nool At-
tendance Com Initiee, dated 4th inst., that his Conu-
mittee had increased his salary by sum of C3 per an-
num. 'ITho Clom mittee wero unanimous in recommending
tdlis increase to the County Council.
The Seere;tury inforrned the Committee that Messrs H
and J O'Hare, the contractions for the preparation of tho
County Courthouse for Sessions, etc., had given up business
and left town, and as 010 Courtllou,se was urgently. required
for the Michaelmas Sessions, he had asked the old contrac-
Cors, Messrs B Eatterson and Ck)., if Chey would do tho
necessary work a.t the so me price as this year's contractors,
and letter was read froni Messrs Pa -Iterson and Co. con-
sent,ing to finisll the year's cont,raet at tilte prev•nt, price,
viz. , Cö IOS for half sent'.
The Comrnittee approved of this arranoement,
Letter was read from the I)epartgnenJt o," Agricul!ture,.
dtted 3rd inst., NO. 4049. 1913, stating in tho preseni
oonditåon of their funds. the Departrnen€ are unable to Offer
any contribution to tile proposed extension; of tiho Pier ate
Clogher Head, and promising in case funds should at somo
fUtu.re timo become available for the work, to formulate
definito scheme of improvement.
Arising out of this letter the Secretary was directed to
write the: Department regarding Blackrock Pier, and ask
what they are prepared to do in the matter of the proposed
new Pier.
Lott,tor was read from t,he Ardeo Rural District
Council, dated 1st inst.. enclosing memorial from tho in-
habitants of Castlebe,lingham to his Council, praying that
sornotlhing might be done a,bnte the dust nuisance caused
by motor traffic through tho village.
It; was (leeided to submit this corn,pluitlt '.o the Chair-
man of the Road Ibom•d at the Conference witiå tho Louth
which was fixed for Tuesday, 14t'h inst., at,
County Council,
Dundalk.
It, was '.'./lso (ioc•.ided refer the ma tter of motor traffic
generally to the Council•s Solicitor for bis advice as €0 tho
question of speed limit for motors, as i'. was the excessive
.spoed at. which motors were driven that caused dust
nuisance complained of.
Circular leitt,cr was read from the Department dated 3rd
inst,., No. 13,000, 1913. pointing out, that it was unlawful
for any member of Counts Committees to benefit under any
Scheme administered by the Committee he is a member of,
and noting that, this would entail a. disqualification for seven
years to a.my Councillor so benefit't,ing.
'Phe lofter was initialled by the Chairman.
OMEATH PARK.
'Loiter was read from the I)opartuoent dated 11th inst.,
No. A 16765. 1913, stating that Omea€h park, comprising
the demesne on the Woodhouse Estat.e Omeath, was at
present offered for sale through the Land Judges Court' ;
thaii inspcet.ion of tlhe demesne had boon marle by tho
Department's Chief Forestry Inspector, and chat it was very
suitabbo for acquisi%ion and preservation bs t,he County
Council; that, it was probable t'ho property could be ac-
quired by the Council under the Land Purchase Acts, and
would be elliigiblo for granils from the Development Fund
towards cost, of maintenance and management, and ask-
ing Whotiher tho Council would be disposed io take stepg
for the purchase of the property.
The Roport, referred to in idle lof€er set out that ihe
vah10 of tlhe timber now standing would probably be about
±500.
Aftor discussion, it was decided to appoint the following
45
Committee to confer with Mr Lyons. Actill(f County Sur-
veyor, and reporfi to the Council on tho whole ma t,ter.
Comrnittee are as follows—M essrs Wyn. Woods, Peter
Wcods, J P Kearney, M O Meara, J Connolly, Rev Father
Quinn, and Rev Futher Woodcock.
A discussion took Place regarding the question of the
plankation at Willistown, which had been under discussion
at a previous rneeting of tho Counci'l, ancl Mr Drumgoole
was directed to arrange with tire Committee appointwed to,
deal with the matser; to meet, and report to the County
Council at their next meetino. The committee eon.sisiod of
Messrs M Meade, M Clinton, J Harmon, J Conachy, Eugeno
Carra.her, Rev P Fagan, P.P., and Sir H
Letter was read from iiho Limerick Industrial Associa-
tion asking the Council to send two do!egotes to the Nint„h•
All-Ireland Industrial Conference to be held in Limerick
on tihe 22nd oncl 23rd inst. Messrs Bornnrd Hamill and
James Wynne were deputed to attend and represent tho
County Council.
Letter was reo.d from General Council' Trish County
Councils asking for paying order for tho affiliation foo of
210 for the Loutih County Council for the year 1913-14, a.nd
it was decidod t/hat this Council would only pay an affilia—
tion fee of C5, this being the amount paid in former years.
The following resolution from the Menth Farmers' As-
sociation was adopted : —'That in view of the fact that there
has not been a ease of Foot and Mouth Disease in
for the past ten months, we call u.pon the Irish M.P.'s to
bring pressure to bear on tho English Board of Agriculture
to remove dhe detontion on Irish Stock at the ports of
arrival in Engiand and Scotland."
The Alßt;ract of Accounts of the Richmond Lunatic
• Asylum was submitted for 'uhe half-year ended 30th Sep-
tomber, 1912, and the list of ,patients was laid before th€•
CornmiEee.
On the application of tho Secretary, the Committee
au thorised hilli to enjploy C McGarrity to clean the paper
rootli in tho 0111 Jail Premises for the reception of disused
documents, books, etc., in his office.
'The Connnittee reeotnnjended that tlhe Secretary of the
County Council be appointed to perform the duties relating
to Motor Car Licences, east on the County Council by tho
14 inance Act. of 1910.
A requisition was recoivod from tho 'l'own Clerk of
Drogheda for certain requisites for the Drogheda Court-
house, and it, was ordered tih:u these be supplied.
Mr Lyons, Aeeting Counts Surveyor, made application
to tho Committee for perniission +10 inst,rue€ Council's Soli-
«it,or prosoctlt,o road who had not their
mefal ready for inspoetion by the 1st October.
After a prolonged discussion the Commiåt,eo docjded
till.ai, 'Mr Lyons shotlil(l notify t,'he contractors thab prosecu-
i,ions would be t,nken if idles wero not, ready for the Sur-
veyor's inspection by f.he end of October.
47
FINANGE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of t.ho Finance Committee at
.t,heir Meeting held in the Council Chunber, on Monday,
.tihe 27th day of 1913.
Present, : —
In the Chair—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Ot,her Members—Michael Meade, Bernard Hamill, J.P ;
-James Wyn•ne, J.P.; John F Murphy, J.P.; Joseph H
McArdle. J.P.
and William Woods, J.P., Esquires.
'Dhe Minutes of the previous meeting were read and
confirm od.
The 'Secretary submit•iecl the County-at-Large payments
for quarter endod 30th Suptember, u,lit., i"ieh had been
already before dbe Pnoposal Committee, 'and t,'hese were re-
.oontmendecl fear ya.yment.
The Secretary submitted 'Ihumsurer's Authori ties for
•works in charge of tho Acting County Surveyor, and those
•of his own office, which, on examinotion, were passed by
tihe Committee.
'l'he Abstract of Aceount,s of the T)undulk Union, t'he
I)undalk Rural District, Council, Che Ardee Union, and the
Ardee No. DI Rural Disuriet Council were loid before the
Committee uncl initialed by the
Let ter
was read from the Labour Exchange,
dated inst., asking the Council for their ap-
proval for the •use of the vestibule of t'he County Court-
house at Dundalk, for the holding of t,he November Hiring
Fair, and the Secretary was directed to reply and stat,e
itha,ti the Committee approved of the proposed use of tlhe
Courlihouse for the above purpose.
48
An a,pplicaticn was read from Mr T Mnrrny, Court-
house keeper, asking for the usual osvauce for extra work
for the past twelve months, and it was ordered that tho
matter come up for consideration in one month's time.
'l'he Secretery read report of {'he Conference of
Road Board wit'h the County Council deputation held in
the Council Chnrn ber at on Jhe 14th inst.
'I'he following gen•t'lernen represented the County
Council : —Messrs Peter Hughes, J. P. , Chairnjan ;
.11amiil, J.P.; W Woods, J.P.; P Donegan, J P. ; and E
Goodman. The Road Board deputntion consished of—Sir
George Gibb, Cihairman of the Road Board; and Mr May-
ba.ry, Engineer. Messrs J M C Lyons, J ames Drcmgoole,
M S0112rs, and T J Delahunty were •Aso present.
'I'he Report set out the v.".rious matiters discussed at
tibe Conference, the principal of which were Chat, the Chair:
man of tlhe Road Board was in favour of the complete
provement of the surf'?.ee of the Dublin-Belfast, main road
from the Drogheda Boundary to the Courvt,y Boundary at
Jonesborough, a distonce of about, 27 miles, end that tho
Road Board were to make grants for tlhat pur-
pose, but that they nwu.st, be satisfied as to the qualiüy of
the metal used on the road and the general finishincy of the
surface. The amount; that bhis work was roughly estimated
to cost was about and wus to spread over a period
of about six years. and the grant would mean about
a rranged at the Conferenee•
of t,he cost. It was finally
that a complete estimate Li' t.he cost of this work would be
prepared by Mr Lyons, Acting Counts Surveyor, assisted by
Mr Dromgoole, and the Borough Surveyors of Dundalk and
Drogheda, and submitéed to the Road Board as soon as
possible.
The Report was duly approved of by the Committe?.
In connection with tho memorial from the inha bitrants
of Castlebelllinghnm as to the dust nuisance caused bs mo-
49
tor traffic read at a former meeting of tho 'Committee, tho
Secretary . was directed to write a reply thereto, and state
Ohat the roads in their district, would be included in the
propesed Scheme of the Road Board, would tend
to abate the dust troublo complained of.
Letter was read from the Manager Dunda 1k Electricity
Works asking for permission to erect poles for electric ill-
stallalion on the Farendreg road to Mr D Cox's house at,
T.iisnmvilly, and asking whether €110 County Council would
be inclined to light this road with electricity, and quoting
the sum of C2 IOS per annum for each 'lamp.
The question for the permission to erect polos was re-
ferred to Mr Lyons, and the mahters of the powers of the
Couneil as to the lighting was referred to Mr O'Connell,
Solioi±or.
Letter was read from Mr O'Connell, doted 20th inst.,
as to the speed limit of motors, and the regulation of Lo-
comotives on highways.
Wiåh rega,rd to motors, the Solicitor that i he
Council could apply to the Local Governmenc Board to make
regulations prescribing somo defined limits or to be
therein referred to, within which a person shall not drive
a motor car at a speed exceeding 10 nriles per imoiu•. With
regard to Locomotives, the Solicitor advised that n,ew Re-
gulations bo drafted em bodying the Ijrovisions ts to Loco-
motives Highways in tho Public (Is
(Ireland) Act.
1911, which Act makes very material al.era lions in the law
on the subject.
The letter was initialled by the Chairman.
ANCIENT MONUMENTS.
Letter was read from Mr Joseph Dolan, Arclee, certify-
ing tlhat• tho two ancient monuments at 'Barnaveddoge, Ar-
dee, were worthy of preservabion os archaeological relics,
50
-and stated that the Council would not be put to any ex-
pense in connection with their vesting.
'Ille Comruliißtee recommended that Counts Council
sllould toke them over as suggested by the Estates Com-
missioners.
The Secretary informed t,he Commit.t.oa that Criminal
Injury App'!ieations had been Inade in the following cases—
Francis M CA Rassun, amount, J'7 ; Joseph Woods,
amount, Clö0 ; G H Pentland, Drogheda,
Monascrebe,
amount, C2(); and he had sent same to the Council's
Solicitor.
Lecter was re:vd from Mr T M Horan, Solicitor, Belfast,
enclosi ng Notice of Assignment from George Gray to tibe
Nationa:l Benefit Insurance Company, Ltd., of the decree
granted in Mr Gras •s for malicious injury ; Mnount,
and C19 2s cosas, and asking when money would be
lbtvid.
'Phe Secretn ry str that, Ille bad sent this letter tio
whose reply was also road, in which
Council" Solici tor,
he stated that as decree anva,its inclusion in next sear's
estimate, Lhe 2tnounC was not 2vailable for paymont until
Mm•dh, 1915.
Letter was read from Mr (YConnell re Workman's Com-
pensation Claim by John McAllister, in connection with in-
juries sustained while attending io dipping tank at Carling-
Chat as Mr W Ashe-King, the Department's V.S.,
ford ;
had st.atecl there no doubt t,he sores on tihe
applicant's arm were occasioned by tho dip, and that no
defence could be sustained to tibe claim, and that, tho mai-
tor was settled out of Court on the payment Of Lt3 as dam-
ages, and C.3 13s wiinesses expenses and doctor's fees.
'Ene Committee decided to notify the Department aud
obtain their npproval.
51
Circular leflter from the Department, dated 24th inst.,
No. A22162, 1913, giving information as to the danger of
disqualification of members of Councill bs being bene-
ficiaries under Counts Committee Schemes.
The letter intialled by the Chairman.
Letter was read from the Local Government, Board,
dated 16tJh inst., No. ö42ö0, 1913, re Rate stating
that the Board are unable to see any grounds for acceding
to the extension of time asked for by the Collect018.
Furtiher letter from the Locul Government Board,
dated 23rd inst., No. 104M, 1913, sta*ling that the Motor
Car Act, 1903, was continued until the 31st December, 1914.
Respecting fahe oecount submitted from tihe Drogheda
Corporation for the Droghed?. Courthouse for water sup-
l)'lied, and in which tbore was lajrge discrepancy between
the quarters ending June and September, Mr Dromgoole,
Aeting C.S., was ordered to report on this mo.tter.
dated Ijtih inst., No. 100M, 1913, enclosing copies of the
T Uberculosis (Procedure of Committees) Order, 1913, was
re<ld a.nd initialled by the Chairman.
Regarding the appointinent of the Seeretary
of the
ouneil
as Clerk to the Local
l)iseases of Anil nals
under the
Act,
letters
were read from
the Secretaries of the Count v
( 'onneils of Meath,
'Oitrim, Carlo H', Westineatll,
'I'vrone, Monaghan.
l)llblin
and
, stating the announts paid to then) as lununer-
Otien
as Clerks to the Local
the sums
The Seeretarv read
the tulvertisetnent containing the terins on which
he u•as
no liointecl as Seeretarv, and it was decided that the question
his rentnnerati011 under the l)iseases of Anilna.ls Acts will
at a tneetine• of the l•'inanee Cotnnjittee to be
lield on .M011dav, the 3rd November next on notice.
Letter was read front the Court-keeper—Mr. T. Murray —
regarding the defective condition of the Ileating ApparatllS
in the Courthouse, and also that the roof required repairs.
The matter was referred to Mr. Lyons for his report
Letter was read f1'01i1 Alli. ()swald llarcly, C.V.S., notifying
next for
nuule on Friday
that applications be
committals to Indnstrial schools of the following three
J. I Iannawav, and 'l'eresfl
children, viz. _l)evlin, .
Murphy.
A Bill of Costs Council's Soliet01' was stilnnitted'
rra.x was signed and sealed, and
and the requisition to
Council at the taxation.
(hi the appliration of tile Secretary.
tllt
Joseph Loudon be continued ill
than the services of Mr.
Secretary's Office 011 the terins of pet* week, payable
future arrange-
through the, Subsidiary Account, pending
ments in the olliee.
bv the ('ottut.\
'I'he question of pavntents to be Inade
Louth Insurance Chili)tnittee to the ('Otility Council Of
insured was under
rate arranged per capita for
der
ooincr revision by the National Ilealth Cottilnission, Ito
was taken in the Inatter.
53
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
Älilfiltes of Proceedings of the Executive Cojnmittee at their
Meeting held on Alonday the 22nd day of Septenmber,
1913.
Present
111 the ehair: Charles A. I)llffy, Esq., J.P.
Other Melilbers M" ynne, J.P. ; John F. Murphy,
; l?atrick ()'Connell, Patrick Kearney, James Connolly,
William Woods, .J.P.; Patrick Byrne, J.P. and
Bernard Ilalilill, J.P. Esquires.
Alli. Joseph Clinton, V.S. was also in attendance.
Respecting the Dipping
'I'ank at Ravensdale, it was
decided to store it at the premises of Mr. Logan, who, it was
Stated by Mr. Clinton "'ill do so free of charge.
Mr. Clinton in connection AVith the Special I)ipping
Oljerations at Ravensdale, Carlingford, and ()lneath,
and
the Committee
I •ee€jnnnended paynient subject to the I)epartlnent's sanction.
With respect to the pavments for eontpensation to the
t nvners of anililals slaughtered under the Tuberculosis
(Ireland) Order, 191.3, the C
onnnittee were unanimous in
r e COIIi1nending that all such paynjellts be discharged through
the Subsidiary Account.
111 order to assist fariners and
others owning live stock
miglit be affected by this ()rder•, ig was decided that the
(Iraw 111) a poster explanatorv of the provisions of
the Act, and have saine posted throughout the County.
Letters were read from Messrs.
Clinton, Donnelly and
respecting the proposed increases in their respect-
Salaries, and af er discussion on the Illatter the Com-
mittee reeonnnended the increases for one vetn• onlv, and that
copies of the Inspector's letters be forwarded to the l)epnrt-
Inent.
Letter read frotn the Irish Pig Dealers' Association.
dated 11th inst., enclosino• copy of the followin•r resolutione
and asking its adoption by the Cotinty Council.
Resolved—That the ntcqnbers of the Irish Pi•v l)ealers'
Association are of opinion that the tillie has come when the
detention period enforced on pi(rs exported front this eottntry
to England be retnoved,
as of these tilliilnals are for
immediate slauo•llter at destination.
It was lilianirnously
Letter was read fronl t Ije Local Governtuent Board dated
18th Septmnber, 1913. No. 47,051. as follows :
Sir
'l'he Local (loverlilnent Board for Ireland have haol bef0H*
then) the rer ies to queries other corresponde•nee respect-
ing appointjnent of Mr. Charles AI'Alester, as Secretary to
the Louth County Council, and the Board direct to state
thai they approve of the appointment of Mr. M' Alester
Secretary to the ('ouneil, at a salarv of €200 a year exclusive
of fees under the Franchise and Jurors' Acts.
The Board desire Ine to add that it is prestnned that the
-l)eparttnent of Agriculture and 'l'eehnieal Instruction for
Ireland will be addressed as regards Mr. M 'Alesters appoint-
ment as Clerk to the Loenl Auth0rity under the I)iseases 0
Animals Acts.
I all), Sir,
Your obedient Servant.
A R. BA RI.AS, Secretary-
To the Presiding Chairnj:lll,
Louth Couutv ('ouneil.
The Secretary was instructed to inforlli the I)epartlnellt Of
his appointinent as Seeretarv to the C •onnty Council, and ask
their direction regarding his appointment as Clerk to the
Local Authority under I)iseases of Anitnals Aets, 1904,
'l'he followino• letter was rend frotn
the
Agriculture cla.ted 21st Sept. No. -1.31 7-1
I of
i have to acknowledge the
receipt of your
letter of the
19th inst. and to state in reply that the sanction
the following pavments in connection with the earrvino• out
of the Count v 1,011 th (Special Dipping a rea) Sheep l)ipping
Order of 19 '3, i iz
IGs. a week eaell to I•'raneis M Ill'l)hv
White. ;
I (is. a week with a special bonus of .
to Illigh MeKevitt.
4s. a dav to earli of four persons Io assist in the
dipping operations.
I a:n, Sir,
Yotn• obedient Servant.
T. P. G I LL, Secretary.
the Acting .
Letter was rend fronl John Fearon,
Carlingford, regarding
011 Carlingford l'ier, which was
referred to the Finance mittee f' consideration.
EXERUTSVE COMMITTEE.
Milliltes of Proceedings of the Executive Connnitiee at
ill the Cotiltcil C'h:nnber
.\leeting held
011
I Fth
I h•esent :—
' X, Duffy, Esq., .J.P.
In the (
their
the
, : Woods, J.I
.J;unes Connolly,
.J:nnes NV vnne,
Patrick
Peter \V0011s. J.P
Bernard Il;unill, P., Esquires.
O'Connell,
The Seeretnrv sublilitted accounts front Messrs. J. T.
('linton, V. S.. for fees
the Special Sheep
Francis Mill'l)hy,
and M"illialll
Order ;
I lenrv Patterson,
Ile also sulnnitted
I hilldalk I)ellloerat,"
Miss
accounts
the
for special
advertiselnents
Ih•oghetla Argus,
ancl 'I'tiberetllosis ()rder of
l)ippino•
( )rder
Sheep
1913.
eo:npensation in the following eases,
where anililals were slauulitercql under the 'I'uberenlosis
(I reland) ()rder of l!) 1 3, k•iz. : —l,nurenee M'Cabe, Joseph
('olernan, N. 1B. King,
Molloy,
.J or. Ian,
• • .Josepll Mullan, W. A.
Peter
angl Pat riek .J. Caraher.
accounts, after exa Initiation,
All
the, fore.roino•
were
passed, a lid pa.V1nents ordered.
dated 8th inst,
Letter read fronl the I)epnrtnnent,
iproval of the follmving
expressing their
of u•ork
the County
Lolit 11 (Special
l)ippiro•
( Sheep
I)ippino•
( ler
after discussion
recomnmeli(led
that he
paid at, the sanie
of
rato
as the
Otl ler
dippers, viz. I per week.
I uetter read
the l)epart Inent.
(la ted
3rd inst.,
No. 4672 u
regarding the ;mpoilltllient of the Secretary of
the Cottiltv ('0111jeil as the associated ofliee of Clerk to the
Local Altlhoritv under the Diseases of Alliin als Acts, and
inqu
how sel »arate reniunerati011 'sed to
be attached therero.
After discussion
on the foreo•oilto•
let ter,
the Secretary
was directed to u•rite to about half (lozen of the neigl:lootll'-
Counties, a IHI also to Count v Carlou•,
alid inquire if any
separate liljerati011 was paid the Secretaries under the
Diseases ot' Anilnals Act and the 'I'tiberelliosis ()rder
of
V ETER INARY INSPECTORS REPORTS.
;rts u•ere
read -Messrs.
( lintol), Donnelly, and
Ala.xu•ell, the Cotlll('il's
Veteri narv Inspectors, for the month
of ber,
the contents of contained nothing of
.auv jeeial illil)ortance.
rates of salary for a period of six 11101iths onlv, viz. :
Mr.
Donne lv,
auntlin; Mr.
, and Mr. Maxwell, per anntnn.
account lv;ts suli!llitted bv ( )w€ll Keenan,
per
Dipping
58
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
Minutes Proceedings of the Executive Cotntnittee at their
on Monday, the
Meeting held in the Cotineil Chamber
27th (Inv of ()etober, 1.913.
Present :—
• • • Peter Illighes, Esq., J.P.
111 the .—
Other —C. A. Duffy, J.P. ; O'Connell,
Joseph
.J.P ; J.P. ; F. ;
% Silllil•eS.
and Woods, .J. P. ,
11. Mae Ardle, .P.,
'I'he Mililltes of the previous Ineeting were rend and
eon tirnteql.
Ivas read the Depart of
Letter
sanction ino
inst.,
dated •25th
pavnjents to
No. 13.
I)ipping Sliperintendent, for wawes, rent, and
()wen Keena 11,
eartage, to I •IS, ()ll.
12th Sept.
letter froin the Departtnent.
Circula c
No. 4.307 '07 with regard to precautions noninst pollution of
and was initiated bv the
l)ipping,
strea Ins bv
chairman.
inst.
letter frotn the l)epnrtnnellt (Inte•1 25th
Fu rther
No. 7/1 stating that as practically all the sheep in the
had been subjected to a second
l)ipping Area
Special
and that this would satisfv the
(lipping after 31st Jilly,
requirelll('llts of the Principal ()rder as to an Autittnn I)ipping.
A discussion took place, and the eh:tirtnan pointed out that
large of sheep were ted into the Special Area
this season of the vear,
but
of opinion that an Alltlttnn Dipping was necessitv,
fov
inaslntteh as the sheep owners in the area hall
two
flippings ill the it was recontinentl(hl that charge
should be for the present a uttlillli (lipping in the special
area.
application was rc;tfl fronv Mr. Nlilttlu•w
ask ill"
Innk•intr the
('In lilo.ved
as heret(
to
Returns for the Alltttlll'l Sheep
angl it was
period.
decided to etnplo.v hilli for one week for this purpose.
Letter Avas read frcnn MI'. l)alliel ()'ConneIl,
'I ici
reporting the result of prosecutions at Ardee Pettv Sessions.
aoainst 21
she. p ou•ners, for failing to produce declaration.
of clipped their sheep
\Vith in the preseril)etl
period,
and stating that fines anjotlliting in
all to
and costs
arnoltntill€r to E 7 •2s. 6d., were itnposed in these eases.
enclosing a. letter from
agent for the
Mati nsel l,
Urquhart Estate,
A Iftlee,
asking that a paling would
erected at the Ardee l)ipping Tank to
prevent darnatre to
the wall of the
house on the propertv a"joining the tank.
'I'he eomtnittee directed that the attention of the dipping
Superintendent at Ardee called to this letter,
and have
paling erected.
60
SCHOLARSHIP COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Scholarships Committee at
their Moeting held in the Cotiljeil Ch;unber on Monday,
1913.
the 15th Septenlbel',
"Present
In the eltair Skellington, Esq., J.P.
. —Joseph T. Dolan and Patrick O'Connell,
Other
Esquires.
'I'hc Secretary submitted a eommt111ieati011 froun Rev. A.
Reoistrar, University College, in which he
W, ('onro.y,
.stated that the following sttulellts passed their respective
viz.
Ilio•llly satisfactory manner,
exalilinations ill a
Ilenry
Miss Ursula M •liarland, Miss Margaret Callan, Mr.
and r. Laurenee Branioall.
Rogan,
AI ichael M •I)emnott, the
the ease of Mr.
Respecting
Registrar stated ill his report that this student had failed in
and consequentlv the
Ilis first University Exalilinati011,
C '0111 rnittee (leeiclegl not to continue his Scholarship.
Regarding the eases of the iirst three students nanted
11 llanimous in
herein, the Conjnyittee
a continuation of their Scholarships of .€.'3() eaell. and in Mr.
Branni•ran's ease it was decided to reeonnnend that his
as per his
increased frot)l to €50,
Scholarship
be
application.
new Scholarships from the under-
Applieat ions for
mentioned persons were next considered by the Comillittee,
Joseph
Collon,
I Ianratty,
A.
VIZ. :
and AV illiatn M'Enteggart,
respect to the first named two students—Messrs.
ith
it, was found that they both
Ilanrattv and M 'liarlflli(l
passed the Senior G rade of the Illtertnediate Examinations
with honours, WI) ile M 1'. M'Entegoart Inerelv got a pass,
-Messrs. P. A. Ilanrattv and Joseph Ale each be re-
a, Scholarship of .€5Cj, provided that on
connnell ned for
investioation it is found that both candidates are elioible.
61
PROPOSAL COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Proposal Comrnittee at their
Ineeting held in thc Council C'hanmljer on Mondav 27th
day of October, 1 91:}
Present
In tho chair —Peter Ilughes, I"
,sq., .J.P
Other - C. A. Duffy, J.P
Patrick O'Connell,
James Connollv,
.J.P. • Meade, Bernard In ill,
James iVvnne, J.P. :
John F. Murphy, J.P. ; Joseph
11. rdle, J. i). ; and AV00ds, .J. P., Esquires.
respect of the quarter ended the 30th Septetnber last,
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
M inutes of Procoedino•s oi the Finance Commit:ee at their
Sleeulll(f held the Council C 'Ila lllber, on Monday, the
(lay of Novelliber, 1913.
Present, : -
In the chair—Peller Hughes, ES(!., J.P.
()tllver members—C A. Duffy, J.P. ; Michael Meade, James
Wynne, J. I'. ; James Connolly, J . P. ; Patrick O Connell,
and John F. Murphy, J.P., Esquires. 'Sir I)aniel O Counell,
Council's Solicitor, 21so in attendance.
The Minutes of the previous Meeting of the Finance Com-
liiittee were and confirmed.
Before proceeding witli the business on the agenda, the
( broug*å:, utu-ler t,he notice of the ('omrnittee re-
port of co.'.se in which tuandamus was granted against
the Great Northern Railway in connection with a danger-
ous road at the County Fermanagh. under
a. Railway Bridge, and which tlhey wore cotnpe;lled to widen.
Ho stated that he had asked Mr O Connell, SOIicitor., to
antencl this nn•eting, and •advise the Council 41etlret• the
Great N orthern Railway C0nt,pa.ny could be eotnpelled to
put the road uncler the Faughart Railway Bridge in a stato
of safety, as numerous accidents, some oi which were fatal,
Iyad at) this spot. After discussion the (Iymmittt•
requested Mr O'Connell to advise as to the Council's posi-
tiion to eom POI the Railway Company to improve fhe road
by widening the Bridge, and, if necessary, take counsel's
opinion on the 1112t,f.or.
Mr. C. A. Duffy brought under the notice of the Com-
ntit'tee his position as representative of tile County Council
on the Committee of Manaooment of Peamount Sanatorium.
I-Io rend lefiter Irul received front the Wonwn•s National
Ileall[h Association in which ho asked to become a
membor of the Association and pay CI per annum, and that
it Ivould be necessary for him to be n member of this As-
sociation to entitle him to aet on any of the Committees
in connection tlherowith, one of which Pöamount Sana-
torium.
63
'I'he Committee were of opinion that he (Mr. Duffy) was
eutiQ1ed, as represent,atlve or the County Council, to act on
tine reamount„ Sanatorium Committee watJhou•b ans sanction
from the W .11. Association, and Secretary was
directed to u Tite and x.sk t,he any
change had been made regarding mem be,rshw of Vhe
Teamount Sanatorium Committee.
The Secretary Ivas directed to have in forni ation for the
next meetiner of the Finance Commit,uee of the anjount (if
any) already paid to the Peatnount Souatorium for tfhe beds
purchased by the Counts Council.
'1110 Secretary read correspondence in connection witih his
appointment as Clerk to the Local Aut(hority under the
of Animas Acts, 1894, etc., a,nd Tuberculosis (tre-
land) Order Of 1913. Tilis inel'tldcd the letter from the
Local Government Board, dated 18th September; the letter
from tlåe Department, of Agriculture, dated 3rd of October,
aski,ng 110M' tnueh rentuneration it was proposed to be at—
taehed to ühe office ;
the terms of his appointment as
Secretary of the (hunt)' Council, and tho the
Counqy COuneils, who had been asked what salary they paid
their Seerefraries for acting as Clerk to the Local Authority.
Tho letters showed that the foilowing salaries were
paid in the re.spective Counties, viz. .
Monaghan, C70.
'l Slone, L'80
Westmea tell,
L•50.
Ca/low, Cö().
Dublin, C 150 por nnnunt
In each case half of which is paid by tho I)opartn10.nt ot
Agriculture and Technical Instruction.
After discussion, it was unanimously recommended that
Secretary of our Council be paid a salary of per
annum as Clerk to the Local Authority under the Diseases
of Animols Aets.
Lettor was read from Mr Heron, dated 29th October, in
reply to lotter from this Council in which he was iniormed
that tjhe malicious injury claim of Messrs R. and G. Gray
could not, be paid by the County Council until March, 1915.
Mr. Heron asked in his letter if it, could not be arranged
to have the money paid at an earlier date.
The Committee decided that as the amount (El 19 2s Od)
was so large that it could not be paid until it was colloebede
Circular letter was read from the Under-Secretary, Dublin
Castle, anc.losing the Leinster Assize Order of 1913, which
set, out, that the Wirvter Assizes for County Louth would
held in Green Street Dublin, and that ib would
be necessary for the 'I!rea.surer of the County bo bo in
attendanco to pay witnesses' expenses.
Lett•or was read from the Local Government Board, NO.
39,553, dated 23rd October, asking 'have the Abstract of
Accounts of the Louth County Council for half-years ended
31st March, 1913, and 30th September, 1913, sent without
The Secretary informed t,he Committee that he was work-
ing at dhese Aeounts and that he had written tihe Local
Government Board thut 'Jh,e for t•he first perlod
would be sent at once, and that for tho second period in a
month's time.
'1110 letter was initialled by the Cliftirman.
Mr. Connolly brought under Ohe notice of the Committee
tho question of tillo Autumn Lipping in tho Special Dipping
Area, and st,ated that some members of the Local Commit-
tee considered that, an autumn dipping was not necessar.v•
After discussion, in which it was pointed out by dhe Chair-
ma,n that the Autumn I)ipping was more urgent than the
Summer one, and that with the consent it
was proposed to do tihe Autumn Dipping free of charge to
i,ho owners in this special area, it was decided that the
Autumn Dipping would be proceeded with.
65
FINANGE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at
their Meeting held in the Council Chamber on
Monday, the 10th (lay of November, 1913.
Present : —
In the: chair—C. A. Duffy, Fsq., J P.
Other Connolly, J.P. ; Willimn
\ J P. .John F. Murphy, J.P. ; .Jarnes Wynne,
J.P.; Joseph H. M'Ardle, J.P. ;
William A. Doran, .J.P. ; M. Meade, N. T. Murphy, and
Patrick O'Connell, Esquires
'l'he Minutes of the previous Finance Committee were
read and confirmed
The Secretary submitted Aeconnts for Works in
charge of the, Acting County Surveyor, and those of his
own ofTice, which, on examination, were passed by the
The Treasurer's authority amounted to
.L'G4 lös. 0(1.
The Secretary also submitted Fornis 22 from the Clerks
of the respective Rural District Councils, which were dilly
recom ntendecl for payment by the County Council.
In addition, the Seeretary submitted the underinentioned
ts, ieli were
also recommended to be discharged by
the C01/lltv viz, .
• osepll P. Noonan
—l}alanee of rernunera[ion
as Rate ('olleetor
.J:tlnes V. Johnston
do.
• o.sepll Clinton, V..S.—AlhlitionaI Salarv to
30th September as Veterinary Inspector,
and sant•tioned bv Depart tnent
A. A. Donnelly, V.S.
do.
do.
lv. E. Maxwell, V.S.
20
of
Ardee Dispensary
. —Fee for Plan aud Speeilie:ttion
of saine
4
I
1
IO
9
d.
1
1
0
66
Letter read from Sir William Thompson, W. N. H.
Association, stating that Mr. C. A. Duffy, J.P., was
properly a member of the Peamount Sanatorium Com-
mittee, as representative of the Louth County Council.
The Secretary informed the Committee that no
amount had yet been paid the Peamount Sanat01 inm
Committee for the beds purchased by this Couucil in
that Institution.
Letter was read from the Loeal Govern njent Board
relative to the Rate Collection of First Moietx of Poor Rate,
stating that Collector McCullough having (dosed on the 30th
September, is entitled to his usual remuneration, but that
the other Collectors have forfeited their right to reinuneration
in respect of the half year ended on tJittt date, and asking
that the Co'lectors proceed with
all due diligence with the
Current Collection.
After discussion the Coin 111 ittee reconnnended the County
Council to pass a resolution asking the Local Govermnent
Board that inasmuch as all the Collectors eqnnpleted their
respective collections by the 31st ()etoljer, that the Local
Government Board sanction the pavtnent of their renitlljern-
tion for the half year ended Septetlllrn• last.
The Secretary stibillitted Collectors' Arrear Lists in
respect of the half year ended 31st Sept('lililel', and after
examination these were for
pa v:nent the
County Council.
An application from the Poor Rate Collectors was read
asking that their salaries and irrecoverable arrears in
future paid through the Subsidiary Account.
'I'he ('Olit-
mittee reeojntnended that tllé Cotilit& Council igcant this
request.
On the application of the Secretary it was reeomtnel"lecl
that in future all Insurance Prejniums and Refunds on
Fidelitv Premiu Ins be discharged through
the
Letter was read from the Department. dated 5th inst. •
No. 5127/13, sanctioning the free dipping for the Autumn
period in the Special I)ipping Area.
Letter was also read from the Department, dated 4th
November, No. 5130/13, sanctioning that the payments of
inerease of salaries tn the, Veterinary Inspectors might date
as from the 1st June, 1913.
I"ltrther letter from tlje Department, dated 5th inst.,
agreeincr to the terms of settlement made bv
the Council's Solicitor—Mr.' O'Connell
M"orkjnen's Compensation Clailn by John M 'Allister. Totar
amount, inclusive of eosts, being CIS 13s. Od.
Letter was read from the Department, dated 7th Novem-
her, No. 70/13, stating that, in regard to the proposed
now Pier nt Blackrock, that the Departinent's Engineer
hoped to visit the place in ft few (Iavs.
'I'he Secretary was directed to ask the Department for
infor1nati011 as to the exact date when their Engineer would
visit Blackrock, and when he received their reply to sumrnon
the Local Cornillittee to meet hilli
'I'lte Sceretary
directed to instruct Council's Solicitor
to prosecute threo persons who had exposed their sheep for
the .th•d inst. without been aeronl-
bv Declaration.
"l'he qnestion of the light on Carlingford Pier was again
the r. that he expected
'l'he following cf sympathy, was passed by, the
Mr. Ilmnili, J. P.
Olided by Mr. Jarnes M' ynne, J. I'.
sec-
Cotmnittee cf the Louth County Council, tender our >incere
to our respected Chairtnan (Peter Hughes, Esq.,
J N.) on the irreparab:e loss sustained by on death
of his relative (Miss Jane Carroll, Kilcroney), a lady whose
kindly disposition and universal charity endeared her to all
classes of the community.
The Committee directed the Secretary to bring un the
notice of the County Council the frequent clashing of Meet-
ings of the Councii's Committees, and those Meetings of the
County Committee;and the Insurance Committees, which are
held in the Council Chamber simultaneously, which result in
great confusion.
The Committee recommended that the time of Meetings
should be so arranged that there would be no clashing in the
future.
Local Government (Ereland) Act, 1898.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of
Proceedings
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
At their Third Quarterly Meeting held in
the Council Chamber on the 13th
November, 1913,
DRGGHEDA :
"DROGHEDA ADVERTISER" PRINTING WORKS.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings of tihe Louth County. Council at
their Third Quart,erly Mckiåing held in COuncil
Chamber on Thursday, thc 13th dhy of November,
-1913.
Present : —
In [he Chair: WILLIAÄi A. DORAN, Elsa. , J.P.
Other members : —James Connolly, J.P. ; John Dlolan„
Patrick Donegan, J.P. ; Bernard Hamill. J.P. ; Joseph
P. Kearney, ,ejarnefl S Kelly, Michael M,eade, Joseph H.
M 'Arcl'io, J. P; Jameis M ICa,rthy, J. P; John F'. Muephy,
J. P. ; Faitriek Connell. Michael O'Meara, J. P. ; Wm
T. Skeffmoton, J.P; William Woods, J.P; and James
Wynne. J.P, Esquires.
His WorshiD, tho Mayor of and tlhe Town
Clerk, Mtr. J.- B. Connolly, were also present, at the
mejeting, and Che Council's Solicitor. Mr Dianiel
O'Connell.
The Minutes of t,he last; meeting cf Iuhe Council havino•
been printed, and a copy sent, to each memnberr, were
t;aken as read, and were confirmed.
CONFIRMATION OF' FINANCE COMMITTEE
MINUTES.
Proposed by Mr Bennard Hamill, J. P.a
Seconded by Mr John F. Murphy, J.P., and
Resolved—That the Min utes of Proceedings of the
Finance ati their: meetings held on the under-
mentioned dates,; and a copy Off which 'has been furnished
to each member cf the Council be, and are hereby con-
firmed Ly. this Council, viz z .71'h August, 1913; 18th
2
August, 1913; 1st, September, 1913 ;
15th September,
1913; '29•t/h September, 1913; 13th Uctjuber, 1913; '27111
October. 1913; 3rd November, 1913; and 10th Novem-
1913.
CONFIRNVAI'ION EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
MINUTES.
Proposed by Mr. John DOIan,
Seconded by Mr. James S. Kelly, and
Resolved—That, the Minutes of Proceedings of the
Executive Cbmrnit.tee at their meetings held on tho un-
dermen tioned dates. and a copy of which has been
furnished to each member of 'the Ciouncil be and are
hereby confirmed by this Council, viz
: —22nd September,
1913; 13th October, 1913; and 27011 1913.
CONFIRMATION OF PROPOSAL COMMITTEE
MINUTES.
by Mr. James S. Keilly,
Seconded by Mr. Michael O Meara, J. P. , and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of t'he
Proposal Comnmittk'•e. held on tho undermentioned date'
and a copy of which has been furnished to each member
of the Council be, and are hereby confirmed by this
'Council, viz : -
• • —27th October, 1913.
PROPOSALS FOR PAYMENT.
ARDEE.
Proposed by Mr. William A. Daran, J.P.,
Seconded by Mi. Michael Meade. and
Resolved—That the Proposals for Payments formtt-
3
lated by the Arlee No. I Rural I)ist.rict Cbuncil, at
t.heir last Quauterly Meeting held on the 28th October,
1913, and se out' on Form 22, furnished to the County
Council 'be. ond are hereby apprved of.
These xjayme.ntls amount' to the sum of 1795 9s IOd.
DROGHEDA.
Proposed by Mr. Jobn Dolan.
Seconded by Jr James M 'Cartihy, J.P., and
Resolved —That, the P+oposals for Payments, formu-
late;cl by t,'he Loui,h •Rural District/ of Drogheda, Union,
at' their last quar;terly mceCing held on the 21st October
1913, and set, out on Förrn 22, furnished to the county
Council be, and are hereby approved of.
These payments amount, to the sum cf Æ578 16s 4d.
DUNDALK.
Proposed by Mr. William Woods, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Michael J.P., amd
Resolved—That Proposals for Payments, formu-
lated by the Dundalk Rural District Council, at their
last' quarterly meelting, held on t,he 6th day of October,
1913, and set out on Form 22, furnished to the county
Council be, aud are hereby approved of.
These payments amount to the sum of El ,239 18s 9d.
COUNTY-AT-LARGE PAYMENTS.
Proposed by Mr. Bcmard flamill. J.P.
Seconded by Mr. James 'Wynne, J.P., and
Resolved—That tho Propcsals for Payments for the
County-atkLargc, formulated by the Proposal Committee
at, tilmeir meeting held cn the '27th October, 1913, and
out' FOrrn 22m furnished to the County Council,
and amounting to the sum of Li5,474 3s IOd be, and are
hereby a.?pvoved of by this Council
DATES FOR. QUARTERLY MEEITNGS OF RURAL
DISTRICT COUNCILS AND PROVOSXL
COMMITTEE.
Proposed by Mr. James S. Kelly,
Seconded by Mr. Pat,rick Donegan, J.P., and
'Resolved—Thao the County Council hereby determine
the following shall be dates forr the holding of
f.he Fourth Quar't0111y Meclings of the Distil ict
Councils ancl Proposal Conunitbee : —
Ardiee, Tuesday, 6th Janumry, 1914.
Dundalk, Monday, 5th January. 1914.
The Proposal Committee meet on Monday, 5f'h
January, 1914.
Tho next item on Clue agenda read as follows : —Con-
sideration of leu.en• from Local Govern ment, Board re-
garding the appointment, of Mr. J. M'. C. Lyons as
County Surveyor.
The letter is as under : —
28tÅh August, 1913.
Tho Local Government, Boatrd for Ireland have had
beforo tthem your letter of the 25th instant, intimating
tha,t t,he Louth County Council, at their meeting on the
21st, ult... appointed Mr. J. M. C. Lyons to the vacnnf
post of County Surveyor ; and, in reply, the Board (linwtl
mo state that Mr. Lyons is, as the County Council
5
have aiiuady been informed, ineligible for a,ljvoiatment
•us Surveyor.
Toe Ißo.ucl have Co request that COunty Council
"'i/l seleei idr the one i he duly
q:ualiliccl candidates.
I arna etc.,
J. E. DEVLIN, Assistant Secre[ary.
111 connection W'it,h CITO same ma'tiler Lhe Secretary read
the following letter from Mr. J. M. C. Lyons .
COunty Surveyor•s Office,
Dundalk, November 13th. 1913.
NIR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN.
Local Governmenü Board having refused sanc-
Lion my appointment as County Surveyor the grounds,
understand, t.hat I am eligiblc according to regulation
(latcd February, 1907, | presume t,haW Chere is nothing
further can be done, and with your permission, I beg
to rctire, and to again return you my moat, sincere
thanks for the honour you conferred uporn me.
I am Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
JOHN M. Cl LYONS.
After a very protracLecl discussion on the subject
matter of t,he forwgoing correspondhnce, the Count•il were
unanimous in passing the followig resolution.
Ih•oposed by Mr. Bornartl Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Michael O'Meara, J.P., and
Resolved—That We hereby decide to advertise for a
County Surveyor for County Lout'h at a salary of ±300
6
a year, aud allowance for travelling expenses, when
cert.iLied aud vouched for, and thac Lhe be
mado at t,he next Adjourned Quarterly Mcetlltg•, and
Lhac we allow 150 for clerk and oiilce, and tha;l, we
hereby rescind the resolution of the Council on
the löt,h August, 1912. fixing the salary of County Sur-
veyor eC27b per auuum.
TUBERCULOSIS OBSERVATION LISPEXSARY
AT DROGHEDA.
oonuect»ion with thc foregoing, a depu.at,iou conssl-
ing LIAO Mayor of Lwogheda (Councillor J Callaghan),
and 'I"own Clerk Q J. B. eonnolly) att.ended the
tnee[ing, and following report, which had been sub-
mitÅt»ed by the Corporation of brogheda, was read by Lhe
Secretary of the County Council .
Town Clerk's Office,
Courthouse. Drogheda,
16th September, 1913.
To the Council of the Borough of ihogheda.
GENTLEMEN,—
The County Councils of Meath and Louth havo
made applications to you and to the Board of Guardians
respectively for the use of the Old Jail premiscs and
Dispensary in John Street, for Branch Tuberculos1S
Dispensaries. Neither application has been acceded to •
1 do not know What, annual revenu• the County Coun-
cil off Meath will have for maintenance of Sanatoria'
but' as Louth will have a y of the Meatb
:evenue should be proportionately greater.
BOth Councils have to take €110 claims and
ment%9 of Drogheda its neighbourhood into considO-
Lion, as if is entitled' to a proportionate return
from its contributions under the National Healt,h Insur-
7
ance Act, and the ratte levied under the Tuberculosis
Act amounting to hundredu of pounds annually.
Experience has shown, as in the case of Dundalk
Infirmary, is likely to derive mucu
benefit from a Sanatorium established elsewhere.
There does to be any reason why botdl
CVjuncils should not agree Go allocate out to the Capital
sum available in each County for the building of
Sana;toiia a suflicier t amount, for a Sanatorium in
Lyogheda, and cut) of their annual income a sufficient
amounii for the maincenance of such Sanatorium. If the
Corporation were to make a representatin this effect,
accompanied by an offer of a suitable building site at a
nominal rent, it would probably be favourably con-
sidered, and if there are any obstacles in the way—it
has boeu suggested tlha,t the Local Government Board
will only consent' to one Sanatorium in each •County—a
deputation to t,he Local Government Board might remova
that, obstacle.
Your obedient Servant',
J. B. CONNOLLY. Town Clerk.
The Mayor of Drogheda then road the following sbate-
rnenC : —
Tho A'iayor said—We have come to-day ait, the request
of bhe Corporation of I)9roghoda. represent to you that,
we are dissatisfied with your presenti Sillatorium Scheme.
AS we undarsband it, t,he County Council have docrid6d
[o levy a rate of one renny under t,he Tuberculosis Act,
whiclh will bring in an annual income of $1 ,000. To
this is to be added a further annual income of CI,OOO
which you will receive under the Insurance Act, leaving
you with annual income of $2,000 for the shamping
out' of tuberculosis. As your scheme stands, wie in
Drogheda will derive very little benefit, and cctl±ainly not
at, all in proportion tio tihe extent, to which we are being
8
taxed. The population of Dundalk at. tho last Census
was 13,128, and the population of • Dtrogheda 12,501.
Experience IMA established tho fact, Lha,t, County Institu-
tions, sueil as Che (Jen Observation Dispensary pro-
posed, are only axailed of by tho t,owns• in which they
are situate. For •example, you already have a County
Infirmary in Dundalk, which has never been availed of
by a Drogheda person since its establishment. We woulda
therefore, ?ask •you to exclude the town of Drogheda
from 't,he proposed rale under t,he Tuiberculosis Act, and
from J any- advantages which your scheme under t•hati Act'
might, émbrace. and in return for our share of the grant
under Che Insurance Act—we arc indirectly tased under
the Insurance Act, just tho game as you are-—it'hait' we
should bey at, liberty to send pattient,s Peamount,. We
havo adopted the Notåfioa,tion Cla uses of the Tüberctllosis
Act, and have appointed a Medical Superintendent
If, tnlmereforo comes to this that' every
Ofhoctr of Health.
Medical Practitioner in Drogheda is bound to notify t,he
Meclical Superintendent, Officer of IlealtJh of all tuber
culjar cages coming undier his notiioe, and it' could be left
in Jihe disctrctiion of t'lmalt' officer • to sav whet'hen• the
paat,ienlns should be yenf, to Peamotnut, or temporarily
trevued in one of our local hospitHls If on talwe other
band you cannot' see your way to mepta f'he wishes of the
people of I)lrogheda, T am to suggest' tilya.t, you should
set' up and maintain in Drogheda an Observation Pis-
pensary 'ike Che one proposed for I)undalk, so we
might' olbt,ain some return for our taxa.t,ion but, Of
course, wo would preferr to be excluded, as I have
already explained.
After considerable discussion. it, was decided to refer
Otis rnaf.tjer to Finance Commit'tee of tihe council
to on Mondåy, fie 24th instf.
The quest,ion of t:hc consideration of the leral proceed-
ings velating to the encroachment by the buildina erected
bv Mrs Walls. Blackrock, was next considered by the
Council. Mr. (YC6nneII,' Solicitor, 'explained chat
9
case was corning on for hearing at Dundalk Pet,t.y
Sessions on Friday, the 14th inst,ant', and suggested that,
the Council should pass a resolu.t,ion autuhu:ising him Lo
Proceed with the prosecution.
It, was considered by Lho Council t'hat, tJhe instructions
already given •to Mr (Y Counell to proceed with the casB
covered the whole and he was authorised to con-
tiinue the prooeedings ait, Petty Sessions.
COLLECTORS POUNDAGE.
The following resolution was passed by the Council : —
Proposed by Mr. James Connolly, J. P. ,
Seconded by Mr William Woods, J. P.. and
Resolved—That we, the Louth County Council, re-
YPe(-tfully request ['he Local Government, Board for their
sanction to pay our Collecdors their full half-year's re-
rnuneradion, a,nd roundago fees in les;pect of the half-
year ended 30t2h September last in view Olf the fact' that,
all the Collectors lodged the full amount, of tiheir
respective warrants on or before the 3 Isab October last.
Tn furt,Leranee of this matter of the Rate Collections,
t'he Secretary was directel to write and ask the Local
Government, Board to rcucive a deputation from the
County Council on t'he matter.
ANCIENT MONUMENTS.
The following resolution was adopåed •
Proposed by xrr. Jocqeph 11. M' A'idle, J. P..
Seconded by Mr. ,nrnes S. Kellv, ancl
Resolved—That we, the Louth county Council, hereby
consent to tako over the custody of the two Ancient
Monuments situated in the Townland of Barnawddoge,
Parish of Dlrornin, and Barony of Ardee, as requested
in the letlf,er of the Estates' C'ommissioners. dated 26th
Augusi, 1913, and whcih have been certifi&l as w;rtihy of
preservation by the County Loudh Archæologieal Society.
LOCOMOTIVE ANI) MOTOR TRAFFIC.
With regard to t,he question of Locomotive 'Ih•afhc and
Che Speed of Motors in the (Yount:y, the Council, after
discussion, passed the following resolution :
Proposed by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J. P.a
Seconded by Mr. William T. Skeffington, J.P., and
Resolved—'fihajt application be made to the Local Gov-
ernment, Board for Ireland to make regulations whereby
no Derson shall drive a motor car at; a speed exceeding
ten miles per hour wit,liin the urban districts of Dundalk
and Drogheda, and the villages of
Dunleer, Orneajth, Ardee and Carlingf0'd.
Proposed by Mr Bernard Hamill, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. Michael (Y Meara, J.P., and
Resolved—That, our Solicitor be instructed to draw
up new regubat,ions regarding Locomotive Traffic in
County, embodying the provisions as to locomotives on
public highways in the Public Roads (Ireland) Act, 1911•
HEPORT FROM PROVISIONAL SANATORIUM
COMMI'ITEE.
The following ropoH; from above Committiee was read¯
11
REPORT OF THE PROVISIONAL COMMITTEE
APPOINTED '10 CONSIDER AND' REPORT TO
THE GENERAL COUNCIL ON THE PROPOSED
CENIRAL 'I'UBERCUL,OSIS DilSrENSARY .
Meeting of i,hc Committee held in ['Ito Courthouse,
Dundalk, on Monday, day of Seijlember, 1913.
Presidinc—C A Duffy, Eeq., J.P.
Ot/hér Members B Hamill. J.P. ; P
(YCönnell, Pat,riek Byrne, J.P. ; and James Wynne2
Also A J McQuillan, T.M.O.; and tho
following members of the Insurance (JornrniLGue, viz..
Rev P Lyons, A.D.M. ; Mrs C A Duffy, Dr E F' Flood,
and Mr James Hughes.
The requisition signed by tihe inhabitants of Castle-
and precrinls against; the urectåon of t-h,e Dispensary
in that, Ioca,IKy was subliliüted as directed by the County
Council. A lengthy discussion ensued, during which the
Tuberculosis Medical Oilieer 90iut,ed out certain state-
men[s in t'he requisition attributed to him which were
accurate. Eventually it, was unanimously decided : —
recommend t,he County Council (o proceed at as
early a (Into as possibhe wit. L [Ime euectåon of Lho Central
Lispensary on the sile already chosen Castletown
Road, Dundalk; as this Ctjrnrnitåee, appointed by tho
Council €0 deal with t,he rna,ütejs and tihe represenLatåves
Of the Insurance C!omrnit'toe present are undivided in tho
01)inion :
Thai absolutely no dnarger of infection.
(2). the chosen is within Borough
Boundary, and greatly facilitates the important
matters of Drainage, Wat,er and Lighting.
(3). That tho Si't,e is tibe •highest in Che immediate
loculity and quite dry.
12
(4). From a financial point of view the most' desirable.
The following Accountvs we10 gubmiLt,ecl, examined, and
payment' recommended .
Sir William J M.D..
lflearnuuuf, Sanalorium,
Sir William J Thompson. M.D.
Thomas Roe ()tfiioe)
I am,. Mr. Chairman and Gentilemen.
Your obedient, Servant,
14
14
17
7
0
V. WA)RiREN2 Clerk.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL VROVISIONAL
COAINICITEE.
Meeting held in '[1110 Courthouse, Duudlalk. on Monday
t,he '22nd day Of September, 1913. consider aud re-
portl the General Council Che Architects Elan and
Specification of proposed Central Dispensary.
presidingr—C A Duffy, Esq., J.P.
Obher Mwmbers present—Messrs Bernard Hamill'
J.V.; eatn•ick OConuoIIa ea;trick Byrne, J. I). ; and
James "Wynne.
Algo (YConnell and Vincent O Connell'
Esq., Arcliit»eot,.
It, was unanimouely decided—
'TIIaÅ1 bofore making a final recommendaå,ion to
County Council, and having in view the fact file
Architect's If>t'ima.to amounts to (Cl ,39S IOS Ild), and
is much in excess of tille sum allocat,ecl for t,he purpose ill
13
the original Scheme, namely C900, Go fortward the Plan
and Specificalliou as submi0t12d Lo the Local Government,
Board for CJheir orlji.iliion, and at, t/he same time Lo re-
quest, €Jhern to arrange Lo have t,he proposed Sit,e inspec-
ted, and if possible approved of ad' earliest, daLe pos-
sible.
A signed agreement wus and approved of,
by winch "I'obaas Kava nagll, Ijrakjest•own, Ardee,
week (Teu Silliliings) Cowards ibis maintenance while he
is an inmate of Pleurnouut. Sanatorium.
1 am, Mr. Chairman and Genl;lemen,
Your obedient, Servant',
V. WARREN. Clerk.
L0UTT1 COUNTY COUNCIL
LREEORTS OF VROVISIONAL IN
CONNECf10N WITH THE SCHEME FUR TTIE
TREATMENT OF TU BERCULOSIS.
Meeting held in Cho Council Clbamln•, (Njurt,house.
Dundalk, on Monday, tho 13'Uh day of Octiober, 1913.
Present :
A Duffy, Esq., J.P.
Otlher Members—Burnard Hamill, J. P. ; James
Wynne, J.P. ; I)aorick O'Connell, Esquires.
Also O Brien, L.C.B. Inspector ; Dr
McQuillan, T.M.O. ; Vincent O'Connell. Architect.
Latitor from the Chairman of the County Council
regretl[ing his inability to attitondj.
It] wus decided to adjourn tho Meeting until one o'clock
14
p.m., on Tuesday, Ohe '21slb inst., which (j Brien pro-
mised to a.ttje•nd and submit, tilue result. of his inspection
Off tohe Silti0 chosen on Clast:letown Road. Dundalk, on
which it) is proposed Io erect Che Central Diispensaxy.
James Wynne, IDiaLrick O'Connell, Vincent, O'Connell,
Fisquires, IDr McQuillan, and tibe Clerk were appointed
to accompany Ohe Inspector.
Meeting adjourned untill Tucqcla.y, Lhe 21st day oi
October, 1913, when there attended : —
Bernard Ilornill, J. P. ; V&lrick O Connell, Esquires.
Also O'Brien: L.G.B. Inspector ; Dr
M•Quillan, T.M.O., and Vincent O Connell, ESq., Archi-
toct,.
Dr O'Brien reporting on the result) of his inspection,
recommended the (hunc,il to make another effort, to prcy
cure some cfilwr site with a largeu• area tillan what is
available at, Castilet:cwn 'Rioad. which in his ovinion is
gomewha/t' limited.
The question of the Militia Barracks could not, he
stat.escl, be entertained owing Lo Ohe expendilure it would
involve. I-IO further voillilccl to several suitable sites
around Mountlharniltjon and Lisnawlilly if Uhey could be
procured.
IL wag decided to convene another meeting of the Com-
rnit'Oee to consideyr t'he Inspectbo•r's Report ; inquiries to
be mado in Ube meant,irue relative bo the sites suggested.
15
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
PROVISIONAL COMMITTEE.
held in Ithe Council Chamber, Courthouse,
Dundalk, on Monday, the 27th day of October, 1913.
PreseuL : —
In Ubai—C A Duffy, Esq., J.P.
()ltlher Members—Bernard liarrj ill, J.P. ,
(YCouneII, ESquires.
Mso present—Dr J A McQuillan. T.M.O.
Patrick
The Committee had under their consideration the Local
Government Board Inspector's report as already out,
Wiit:h reference to Lhe Site for Cbe General Tu berculosisj
Dispe nswry.
Alft«r considerable discussion, during which it was
stated that, none of the sites suggested by the Inspec-
tior are available on any terms.
LI was unanimously decided to direct. the Clerk to in-
form the Local Government, Board that' the Committee
regret, they are unable to procure, on any terms what,-
evor, any one of the Slit,es pointed to by 'Dir (Y Brien, or
any otiher convenient place suitable for the purpose ; and
to add. t)hat, the will be glad to have åny as-
Sistance the Board can render in Lhe ma,titjer.
The Committee approved of the arrangemenb made by
tihe Tuberculosis Medical Officer to have Ardee Dispen-
sary fitted to his requirements witlh shelving, etc. and
a fence erected around same by Mr J Ilughes, Ardee,
for tlhe sum of El 19s (One Pound nineteen shillings),
tho matter was pressingly urgent owing to the near ap-
proach of Ardee Fair.
16
The following Accounts wepe considered and recom-
mended for payment : —
Humphries, Ltd., Dublin—Ardee Dispensary, Æ89 IOS.
B McKevi1Ltl, Carlingford
(lualf-year), 18 IOS.
Bernard Duffy, C13.
Leffer 43815/13, as per Clopy encloued, referred by the
County Insurrance Comrnititee Lo the COunty Council,
with vetferenoe to tille provision of tilaermomet.exs for tu-
Lerculosis peusons atwentding tille Dispensaries.
It. was decided to recommend tilua,t, a supply the
articles named be; procured at, an approximtu&u cost of 9s.
(Nine Shillings) per dozen.
Lecter 43742/13, from t'he Clonilllissüon (copy enclosed)
referred by tibe lusur.ance Commn:teo to the
County Counci'l wibli reference to proposal to pay a
surn of C 20 pctr annum to tille Nursing Associa-
Lions for services rendeÜCld Ly the IJisLrict. Nurses.
Ita was decided recommend payment; of' the sum
proposed, provided Che services of Che Nurses are avail-
able in accordance witlll terms of a resolution passed
by t,he County Insurance eommi'tileo at their Meeting
1101d on tille I lit,ll day of September, 1913.
(Copy).
National Ileal.t,h Insurauce Commission.
Dublin. 25th September, 1913.
43815/13.
Insurance Cornrni€,tjee for [he County of Louth.
Sir—Willh reference to previous corve.ondnce and t'0
your letter of 16th inst., relative t„he proposal Of
17
t.i.•e Insurance Cbrnmit,tce for the C0unIy oi Lou011 to
C;ljermometers 'cubercuåosri.l peusons xecelvx.ng
axsweusary Ulle oi
Connnrit;tlee, 1 am curccoocl. by Lile National liua,ltn lu-
stuanee (Lrelanc-i) Uo out, cuaL 'lilber-
eulccsl.s Dispensai'l•ce are provided by Couudy Q-Ayunclls,
and, as Comuussion of the opinion thermor
meters should bo regarded as oi tulle equipanent, oi
these inst,iU11d1011s, Chey consider C,hat, such autacles should
be provided by County Council ancil not. by tille In-
surauce (JommiUtee.
Ii Ghe County Council are not, howvvoc, a,t, present, in
a posioio•xn to provide tlue€ie articles, t,he C'Ommissiotn, in
order meet, the wishes of tih,U Cornmilllee ill tthe mat-
ter, will offer no objection to t'he thermometjers being
provided out of t.he funds of Committeee on con-
dit'ion that County 'Ciouncil till'dierLake to recoup bhe
Ccnyrnij.teo lute• on the cots'-. of t,Lese articles.
I am, Sir, your obedient Servanltl,
PIERCE KENT.
The Clerk, Insurance Committee
for County Louth,
Courthouse. Dundalk.
(Copy).
National Ecali€lh Insuranee Commission.
Dublin, 27th September, 1913.
43742/13.
Sir—The National Tlealt,h Insurance Commission (Ire-
land) have had t'hem thc Entry contained in the
Minutes of Proceedings of t;he Insura,nce Committee for
County of Louth at) their Njeeting on tho Ilt,h inst.,
relative the proposal of t'he Commit)toc to pay a sum
18
of Æ'20 per year to each of Lhe Nursing Associations of
.Ardøe, (Jastil;eabellingham, Drogheda, and Dundalk, in re-
spect of certain services to be rendered by the Nurses oi
t,lljeso Associations iu connection 'ohe til eatmell't, of
persons recommended by Cornmilt,tee for •Sanatorium
Benefiti under tho Nationa,l Insurance Act'. 1911.
Witlll redarncte thereto, the Commission desire to be
informed Whctlher this expenditure is yroposed to be
paid with tlhe cognisance of Ulme Lout,ll COunty Council,
and also whether, pending the coming into operation of
tho scheme adopted by the Council, it, is intended that,
tho petrsons who are neither insured persons nor the de-
pendants of suc,h ECi€ons should be treated at the Dis-
pensaries and be attended by Nurses referred Io.
I am, Sir, your obedient, Servant,
PIERCE KEN!.
Tho Clerk: Insurance Commit]tce
for Count,y Louth,
Courthouse. Dundalk.
SCHEME FOR THE TREATMENT OF
TUBEROULOSIS.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
PROVISIONAL COMMITTEE.
Dundalk, 10t,h Novembc:, 1913.
Mr. Chairman and meeting held to-
day of the Sanatorium Sub-Committee pro-
visionally in connedtlion with the Council's Scheme for
the treatment of Tuberculosis, T was directed €0 forward
for the Council's consideraltion and dirccWiG,ns thereon ,
tihe undermentioned recommendations unanimously
adopted ; ad reference thereto, I am to stiate that)
adopted ; and with reference thereto I to stato that
af extreme urgency and importance : —
19
(l). In view, oi Lile decisuon of t.lae Ijuudalk
N umng reiusung Che yaru-tune servlW.s oi
t'IJenr Nursee connection 'the Sunemc for Lhe breat-
ment of tuberculosis, co recommend Ulle County (Jountbll
to arrange for the immeuayte appointment, of a duly
qualified whole-ume urse.
(2). To recommend the County Council Lo proceed
with Ohe appointment of a Committee of Management
in accordanco with tilme vrovisions Olf Section 5 of the
Tuberculosis Prevention (Ireland) Act. 1908, to whom
rnight, be suiltably delegated all matatjers appertaining to
the Central and Branch and thc Scheme for
the breptirnent, of Tuberculosis generally.
I am, Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
V. WARREN, Clerk.
Was also decided to recommend Mrs Carney, 63
George's 'Drogheda, for 12 weeks' treatment at
Poamount Sanafforium ; estimated cost, L' 12.
I am to add tjhat, this lady is neither insured nor the
dependant of an insured person.
Your obedient Servant.
V. WARREN, Clerk.
In accordance with thc rccomnmndat.ion contained in
{'he report., it was decided, on the motion of Mr Bernard
Hamill, J.P., seconded by Mr William Woods, J.P., to
advertise for a Nurse at C5() per ann.um, with $34 per
annum for maintenance allowance pending the erection
of the Central Dispensary, and that the Council's Soli-
citor draw up the advertisement: for same.
Mr O'Meara, J.P., requeet•od information as to why
20
the Ccrnmitltee appointed ill conneuLi011 With the proposed
vurchase oi (_)meaijh Park was summoned. The Sec-
iCltary sita,WcI the Addling County Surveyor had
arra.ngeå to fix a date suiåa,bie for the Cornrmw.t.ee and
Limself tzo meet' at (Jjnea.dh, and it, waa arranged t.h•atL
tot. 'ocvce;tary summon the meeting fox 'I'ueesday, flue 18th
illÜt., ait, 10.30 a.m.
LetÅer w'as read from Nir Uiin,ton, V.S. 1 egaiding the
Sneap Lipping in t,he Coctiily Special Area, and
Ohe SejcraCar_v was clixeclecl to wriroe tn tille Ijegpartmenc
arca tllttil tihc 1st, I)ceumbcr next.
BLAC'iBi100CK PIER.
Tho following Committee was appointed to meeh, Lhe
Fungillcer of t,ho 'I)'epartrncllt of Agticul€ure on his visit
Dundalk on Tuesday, tibe 2'5tJh inst•.. in connedüion
with the albove matter, viz : —Messis Peter Hughes,
J.P. ; B Hamill, J.P. ; J M Johnson, OConne11,
J. V. ; James Wynne, J.P. ; E Gooclrna,n, Patrick Byrne,
J.P.; T U.l).c,; and P J Mtu:phy,
ENCROAC71MENTS AT BALLYMAKENNY.
Regarding this where the Acting County Sur-
veyor had stopped tho from proceeding
t,he building of the National School at Ballymakenny,
on accounti of encroachments the Count,y Council decided
to withdraw their objection and let] the work proceed.
was road from McQuillan reporting that) he
had engaged Mrs Reilly, Fair Green, Ardee, as Care-
taker of Che Ardee Dispensary. at' the rate of Is 6d per
week. rne Council approved of the appointmenü
The following were read and c•rcllcred tc be ili-
sertjed on the Minutes : —
21
Lisrenny, Ardee,
26th Septembeaz 1913.
On behalf of my family and myself, 1 beg to tender
to the Louüh County Council our sincere thanks for tho
kind and sympathetic reuol ution passed by that, body
on the 25th inst., on the lamented dealtlll of my brother
—Mr T. F. hilgat,e.
WM. DE SALIS FILGATE.
4 Susanville Rjcad. Clonliffe Road,
Dublin, 3rd Sevternber, 1913.
Dear Sir—On behalf of myself and the relatives of the
late Mr John Johnston, I beg to convey to the County
Council our thanks for their resolution of syrnpaUhy in
regatrd to t,he lamented death of my husband.
Yours faithfully,
ELIZA BETIJ .
WILLISTOWN PLANTATION.
The follotwing Report; was read from the Commit,toe
appointed by the Council to consider a,nd report on the
question of the purchase orf this plantation •
Having been requested by the Countiy Council to meet
and inspedt, the plantation at Willistowrn, we wish to in-
form you t,halt' we. the undersigned members of the Com-
mittee. have done so. We came to the conclusion that,
a faiir offer to make to the Elstates Commissioners with
tihe view as to its purchase would be $15 per st,a.tute
acre, area of same 5 acres, which might. be C75, and also
a few pounds per annum to a ca retaker to look after
the timber. The total a,rea ig 5a 3r 12p, but [here are.
3rat) under water and waste. which leaves 5a Or 5p of
timber. According to Mr James Ih•omgool?, a, fair esti-
22
mato of bhe number of trees st,anding would be 7,000.—
Signed,
E J Caraher, Father Fagan, P.P. ;
Michael Moeajde. COC. ; Arthur Clin-
Lon, and Thomas Conachy.
After short' discussion on tho above matter, the Coun-
cil's Solicitor was directed Lo make the offer of $15 per
acre, or a lump sum of $75, to the Estates Commssiouers
for the plantation.
On tlho motion of Mr Michael O'Meara, J.P.. seconded
bv Mr Patrick O'Connell, tho Council passed the follow-
ing resolut,ion in Silence—viz.—
'i That, we, the members of the Louth County COunciI,
learn with great, HNret, of the lamented doath of Miss
Jane Carroll, a near relative of our respeceed Chairman
—Peter Hughes, Esq., J.P.—-and we direct our Secretaay
to convey our sincere sympathy to IJirn in his sad be-
reavement."
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
'Minutes of Proceedings of the Louth County Council at their
Adjourned Quarterly Meeting held in t.ho Council
'Clha„rnber on Thursday, the '27th of November, 1913.
Present : —
In t,he Chair—WlLLIAM A. DORAN, Esq., J.P.
Other Members present : —Vh,triek Byrne, J.P. ; Patrick
Callan, J.fP; James Connolly, J.P. ; John Dolan, Joseph
Dolan, Patrick Donegan, J. P. ; Charles A. Duffy, J . P. ,
Edward Goodman, Bernard Hamill, J.P. ; Joseph M.
Johnson, Josoßll 'P Kearney, Patrick Kearney, Michael
Meade, Joseph H. M•ArdIe, J.P.; Jarnes M J. p. ;
Mathews, John F. Murphy, J.P.; N T Murphy,
Patrick O'Connell, MiOhaeI (Y Meara, J.P. ; Donis J Rath,
William T. Skeffington, J. P. ; Wi']iiams 'WoodE, J.P., and
James Wynne, J. P. , Esquires.
CONFIRMATION OF MINUTES OF 'IME
COUNCIL.
Proposed by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J.P.
Seconded by Mr. James Wynne, J.P., and
'Resolved—That' t;he Minutes of Proceedings of the nuth
County Council at, their 'I':hird Quarterly Meeting held on
13th November, 1913, a:nd a printed copy of which has
been furnished to member of tihe Council, be and are
hereby approved of.
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE COMMITTEE MINUTES.
Proposed by Mr. C. A. Duffy, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr Bernard ilarnill, J.P., and
Resc.llved—That the Minutes of P rocoeding•s of tho Finance
Committee at their Meoting held on the 24th doy of Nov-
ember, 1913, and a printed copy of which has been furnished
2
to nwnß_er Of Council, be and are hereby approved
Ame:ndmcnt rnoved by Mr James Winne, seconded by Mr
Paaut:k tile ou page 3 of the
proceedings of Finance Cornmii.tee on 24th Nov-
be are hereby rejected, said minutes being
a granting to Drogheda for equipping
and eree.fiing a suitable Dispensary at Drogheda for Tuber-
For this amondmcnt t;hore voted : —M€wsrs. Patrick
Byrne, Joseph Dolan, Edward Goodman, PaÅrick Kearney,
John F. Murphy, William Woods, and Ja.rnes Wynne—7.
Agairust, the amendment there voted : —Mesa-s Patrick
Callan, Jarnes Connolly, Joihn Dolan, Patrick Donegan,
A Duffy, Bernard Elami,bl, Joseph M. Johnson, Joseph
P. Kearney, Joseph H. McArdle, James McCamy, N. T.
u rplay, 'Patrick O Denis J. •Rabh, and Willian T.
Skeffington—14.
T'he Chairman, therefore, (Itcclared t,he amendment lost by
14 votes to 7, and the original motion was then put from
the elvair, atul d•eélarod ea rriecl by tjhe samo majority
CONFIRMATION OF FROM THE ACTING
COUNTY SURVEYORS.
Proposed by •M,r Pati'.ck .Byrno, J.V.,
Seconded by Mr Francis Murphy, J .41). , and
•Ret-solved—That tihe Reporås of the Acting Chunt.y Sur-
v oyors as appearing on the Schedule Of Proposals for the
27th November, 1913, nud a copy Of whioh has been for-
warded to eadh member of tho Council, be and are hereby
approved of.
FOR WORKS.
A ROEE.
Propcxseci by Mr WiiEturn A. Doran, J.,P.,
Seconded by Mr Michael Meade, and
'Resolved—That, the Proposals for Works,
formulated by
the Ardee No 1 Rural District Council at their
last QuarteFly
3
he.Ql Gil Tuesday, t,he 7th day of October, 1913, a,nci
set out on Form 20 furnißhed to the County Council, be and
are hereby approved of ; and we now authorise, cur Secretary
to affix the common tscal of the Council to tho contracts
entered into.
I)R0GHEDA iWomcs.
Proposed by Mr M dCardhy, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr John Dolo,n, and
Resolved—That. t!he Proposals for Works, formulated by
the Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union at their 'last
Quarterly Meeting held on Tuesday, the 21wt day of October,
1913, and set out on, Form 20 furnished tio Ohe County
Council, be and are hereby approved of; and we now
authorise ottr Secretary to affix tho ccmmon seal of the
Council to the contracts entered into.
DUNDALK WORKS.
Phoposed by Mr. C. A. Duffy, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr William Woods, J.P., and
Resolved—That tho Proposals for Works, formulated by
tho Dundalk Rural District, Council at tiheia• last, Quarterly
Meeting held on Monday, the 6th day of October, 1913, and
set out on Form 20 furnished to the County Coumeil, be and
aro hereby approved of ; and wo now authorise our Secretary
to affix the common seal of 0110 Council to the contracts
entered injto.
WORKS NOT swr BY COLVI)RACI'.
Proposed by Mr Bernard Hamill, J .P.,
Seconded by Mr James 'Wynne, J.P., and
Resolved—That all Work not, taken by Contract at, the
4
last meetings of t;he Rural Distlict, Council be placed in
charge oi tile Acting CottlL'15' Surveyors.
The next item on i,he agenda was tho appointment Of
Nurse for Central Di.spetnsary.
The advertiselnent iijr read as follows : —
ADVERTISEMENT.
COUSIY OF LOUTH.
APPOINTME(NV N URSE FOR CENTRAL
DISPENSARY.
'13110 Cotllfry Council of Louth invite applications from duly
qualified persons holding Certificates from Dispensary or
Sa natori urn for T Itin•rctllusis work, to act as •whole-timo
Nurse at (lyntral a.nd Bra neh Dispensaries and to visit out-
side as required.
Candidates lilti.st send in tlheir applications in writing to
the Seereiary. ( bunty Ctyuncil office, Dunda;lk, not later
than 4 0'clot•k, 011 the '2601 November, 1913, to be accom-
paniecl by qualifications testimonials.
The lary will be CöC) per armurn, with an annual allow-
auce of €34 for rnaintenance pencling tho erection of Che
permanen;å Central
For furtiher particu laps application should be mado to
LWAIÆSTER, Secret01T.
'County Council Offices, Dundalk.
14th November. 1913.
In pursuance of Vhe foregoing advertisement, issued by tho
Segretary, the following applications were duly received :
(YHaga n, Milil •Brook, Water Lodge, Dundalk ;
A nvnie Mtvrra.v, 74 Trinity Drogheclia., and Margaret
E. YI •Nally, Union Infirmary, Lisburn Road, Belfast.
Each cn.ntlida.te enc!o.se€l copies of qualifications and char-
acter, wdiicll •were subrni€åed to the meeting. The Chairman
then adopted the usual course in {he selection of one of the
candidates, by taking n vote Of the Coun«il as botweenl Itihe
three mpplican,ts.
For Mi.•s O'Hagan thero voted—Messrs Patrick Byrne,
James Connolly, C. A. Duffy, Edward Goodman, Bernard
Hamill, Josop\h M. Johnson, Josctpll P'. Kearney, Ptabrtick
Kearney, -M ichael A'leacle, Jcs1Ap'h H. McArd le, Patrick
O'Connell, iehael O'Meara, and Wilhimn Woods—13.
For Miss Murray Lhere voted : —Mcssrs. Patrick Callan,
John Dolan, Joseph Dolan, Willüam A. Doran, Patrick
Donega n. James M'Car[hy, Riciha.rcl Mathews, John F.
Murphy, N. T. Murphy, J. Rat;h, and William T.
Skeffington—ll.
Mr J:unes Wynne doelinccl to record his vote.
Miss AI'Nallly did not receive any votes.
The Chairman, therefore, declared Miss E. O'Hagan, oi
Mlater Lodge, I)unclallc. duly elected by 13 votes to 11, awl
that hor avpointni011t be strict accordance with the ad-
vertits.entellt, issued by the Secretary
'1110 (.'ouneil next proceeded to the following item on tho
. : —Appointme'lit of Cotntnittee of Management
arvendn, viz
in connection the (I'll berculasis in accordance
xvith ühe Provisions of Section 5 the 'i'u•bercul'ltsis (Irekund)
Aet of 1908.
Proposed by Mr. Pa a•iel: (YConne11,
by Mr. Jollil F. Murphy, J.P., and
Resolved—-Tlmata •we hereby nt tho following gantle-
menibel%s of the County Counc€l, as a, Disponsary (hil-
iDiti,ce of M in accordanee with the provisions Of
Section 5, Tu berculosis (Ireland) 1908, and tlhat they
have power to add to their numbers, and to whom is
delegated all ma.t;ters in cxynnoctiun wi,ül the Schemo of
Tulbelxsulosis in tihis County, viz. : John Dolan,
Williaun A. Doran, Donegan, C. A. Duffy, Luke J.
Mlcoek, Fxlward Goodman, Bernard flamill, Peter Huglu*3,
J. M. Johnson, James M •Cartjhy, Patric*k O'Connell, 'D. J.
Ratih, William T. Skeffington, William woods, and
Wynne.
Oonsideration of Intler from tho Local Government Board
re Appointmn«nrt of County Surveyor.
following kvt,cer fronl Ithe Local Government Board,
datv»d 18th No. •GO,617, 1913, was read by tlhc•
Secretary respecting tthe above matter : —
Looa,l Government •Board for Irolan.d have had
iwfore them your lotter of '0110 13tIh instant, respecting
t,he position of County Surveyor for County Loutdl.
The Board dearo mo to point out. Ghat in accordanco with
prescribed procedure the Co. should have pro-
qx»odod to appoint, as County Surveyor, one of the ca.ndidntes
"Mynt,ioned 'in the Boardk letter of tho 7th August last, as
qualified for the position; but in V'iow• of tdme fact that, t(ho
00. Cbumcil havo now decided to offer an increased salary
for tho post', t.ho iBomrd are not, disposed bo object to they
proposal to re-adveyrt.ise the position
It, sihoul(l be clearly understood 'Qhat„ no person can bo ap-
point,od County Surveyor un,letsxs Imo is duly qualified for the
position in accordance Wi 'the statute. applications
rocoivexl in response to the advertisement, to be it9sued should
be subrniåcod to the Bot:urd 'before any steps for
the final seleoton of a County Surveyor are taken by the
Council.
A oopy of a memorandum •retsp(WtÅing tho appointment of
Counvt,y Surveyors 'in Ireland its for t;ho information
of bhe Council
I am, ot,c.
J. E. IlhVLIN, Assistoanlt, Seerotary.
very mneiderable discuxgion on tho subject matter
7
of übe foregoing letter, t,he Councill were unanimous in pass-
ing the following resolution :
Froposed by -ur. Bernard Hamill, J. P. ,
Seconded by Mr John F. Murphy, J.P., and
Resolved—muot, wo hereby decide to hold a special meeting
of the Co. Council for t;ho purpose of appointing a County
Surveyor for County Louth on tlhis •day three weeks, viz..
18th December next, and that applications for Lho position
should be received not, later than tho 10th of December,
1913, when a list of the applicants will be forwarded to tho
Local Government Board, and should tjhoy be returned in
timo tho appointment will be made on Thutrsday, tho 18t&
Deoember next.
ITEM 8 ON ACDNDA.
Consideraion of Report from Committee appointed by
County Council in connection wit,ll ()moath Park.
T!te following report. of tho Committeo appoint,ed by tlhe
Council in connection tvit,h tillo proposed purchase of Omeath
Park was read :
Tho Commit'tee met on 'Puotsjday, the 18th insb., when tho
following gentlemen a.t,tenjded, viz. : —Revd. M. J.
Quin, P.P.; Revd. Faher Woodcock, O.C.; Messrs. Joseph
P. Kearney, M.C.C.; Michael (Y Meara, J.P., and J M C
Lyons, Acting co. 'Surveyor.
'19110 Committee made a full 'inspeci„ion of [he Demesne and
the buildings thereon, and after discut€sing at lengt!h the
wholo question of price, they arrived at tho following de-
cision :
Proposed by Mr Joseph P. Kca rney, M.C.C.
Seoo•ndorl by the 'Rev Father Woodcoek, O.C.,
and unanimously passed—What we the Omeath De-
8
rmxsne Park and House, aro value about 21,500, and wo are
of opinion that tho purchase by tho County Council would
be a very good invest,mont.
Arising out, of this Report a lengthy ditqcutssion ensued,
in which (it •wus generally considered tÅhat, t{ho value placed
on tho property by tho Committee—viz. was exces—
in view of fael that, tho maximum valuation placed
by the Deparment's [nspoetor was C'1,320.
Finally tome following rcxsolution •respecting this matter
was proposed by Mr J. M. Johnson, seconded by Mr Michael
O'Meara : —That tho mat;ter of tihe puroharso of ()meath
Park be referred to tlho Count.y Commit.•too of Agriculture
and Technical Instruction for consideration and report.
The Chairman took division on this proposition, and the
following was tlhe result of tho voting :
For Mr Jöhnson's proposition—Messrs Jarnes Connolly,
John Doilan, 'Bernard Hamill, Joseph M. Johnson, Joseph P.
Kearney, Joseph H. McArdle, Jamas McCarthy, Richard
Mathews, Patrick O'Connell, Michael O'Meara, D. J. Roth,
W. T. Skeffington, William Woods, and James Wynne—14e
Against the proposition tihero P. Byrne, 'P.
(hl'lan, Joseph Dolan, W. A. Doran, P. 'Donegan, E. Good-
man, P. Kearney, M. Meade, J. F. Murphy, and N. T.
Murphy—10.
Tho Chairman thoroforo declared Mx Johnson's motion
earried by 14 votes to 10, that the matter be referred to
the County Louth Öomtnittee of Agriouhure.
REPORT OF BLACKROCK PIER COMMITTFÆ.
Tho undermentionod Report from •dho Committee appoin-
ted to meet the Depart,rnenrt.'s Engineer ro tho proposed Pier
at Blackrock, was road by tho Secretary and approved of by
the Council : —
The Committee appointed by the Oounty Council to meet
9
the Engineer of the of Agriculture, met on
Tuesday, t'lv. 25th inst., when the following gentlemen at-
tended : —Very Rov Canon, Clarke, P.LP., •Haggardstown ;
Bernard ,llamill, J.P.; 1'. M.C.C.; J, M.
Johnson, M.C.C. ; E. Goodman, M.C.C,; Byrne,
J.P., M.C.C.; Thomas soran, U.D.C.; P. J, Murphy,
U.D.C.; Mathew White, B. J. H. Murphy, so-
]ioi/tor; D. O'Connell. Solicitor; and J. M. C. Lyons. Mr
Oliver, Engineer to tho Depa was present', and in
company with the Cmnmit.tee inspected tho sito of the pro-
posed Pier at •Blackrock. A num of Blackrock liehermen
and somo of Che prominent buyers of were present.
The Engineer discussecl the matter writth the fishermen as
to 'the most, desirable place to havo tho (Pier, and in com-
pany with thom, walked over the ground. Tho consensus of
opinion was that the leasi expensive and the most suitable
site would be immediately behind the Lifeboat House, where
a .süony patsago exists to the rivcw, marked by posts on
side, whetx. bhe lifeboat iB generally laumdhed. It was tjhø
unanimous opinion of the Committee, t.ho fishermen, and the
Engineer, that, the only ciffect'ivo pier would bo ono that,
would stand over high vat,er and afford a proper passage
for vehicll,es Prom the publiic road to the waior's edge, and
thus enable t,ho boats to bo unloaded direct, from the water.
ThJis would give tcho fishermen additional four hours at,
eaéh tide, which would be an extraordinary advantuago ; and
in• addition the pier would act as a breakwater, and have
the effect, of diverting bhe course 01 the river and expedite
t,he passage co deep water. The Wngir»eer also' •suggested
t,hat the beach on tho west side of the pier could be easily
made a good roadway for vehicular traffic, and on the water
side a safe b.eaeh for boats.
After a very exhaustive inspection and discussion with t,he
Committee and the fishermen, tho Engineer arranged to
make his report to the Department, and go {into the pro-
cost, €tnd promised bo bave this ready in about a fort-
night,.
DENCD.
LotJtor from tJhe Iriéh Automobilo Assoøiatåon and Motor
10
Union, dated 20th instant, was read thanking the Council
for tho Of Diroctjon Signs in tho County, which
surve a most useful purpose in 'helping (local r«siclents and
also Strangers travelling within the Counity. The Associa-
Lion also enclosed copy of t,ho following resolution passed by
dhoir body : —
a vote Otf 'bhankÉ be to the
Couruty Council, and to the Surveyors, for tho
kindly Nipi;rt, Of co-operation Ohey had shown in eon-nectiou
with the Automobii!Lo Association and Motor Union's offer of
Direction Signs."
Fujllt)her from Che sarno AstsciaLion was read asking
the (Ayusneil to have 'tole hedges in County Louth at certain
corners of roads brimmed so as not. to mask public traffic.
letitter was referred to the Acting County Surveyors.
The following letiter from tlho Local Government, 'Board,
dated 26011 inst., No. 62,351—1913, was read by Lhe Secre-
Sir—Tho beal Government, Board for Ireland have- had
before them your further let.t•er of 21st, ingtant, and
previous cod-respondence relative to tho collleotion of the poor
rate in Louth County for thc half-year ended 30th Septem-
ber last.
Wiffh reference t'horeto, I am •to refer you to the Board's
lotters of tlhe 7th and 16th uiljtimo, and to ertaate that
they could not allow any prefereut,ia] treatment. to tho Poor
Rato Collectors in County Louth.
Tho Board accordingly consider rtåuut no good purpose
oould be effected by receiving a deputation from 'bhe County
Oouncil on the subject, as suggesbed in your letter.
I am, etc.,
A. R. 'BARLAS, Secretary.
On hearing dho foregxng let'tor road, Mr. Bernard
Hamilll piroposed, and Mr. McCarthy seconded, and
it was—
11
'Resolved—Thai. we regret to learn 'that tho Local Govern-
ment •Board will not sanction payment, to tho Rate Collec-
tors or receive a deputation on the subjexyt, as the Council
are in duty bound to pay the Collections their poundage fees
in respect of half-year ended 30tlh September last.
The following communication from tho Chainman of tihe
CounQy Council, Air Petor Hughes, J.P., was read, and or-
zlered to be inserted on Che minutes of the Council :
Cast•loring, Knockbridgo,
'25th November, 1913.
Gentlemen—I sincerely thank you, Lhe members of tho
Louth County Council, for your kind exprvx.så,on of regret
and sympathy on the lamented death of Mis Carroll.
Yours faithfully,
IPETER HUGHES.
NO'I'IUE OF MOTION.
T'ho following Notice of Motion wats handed in: —
1 hereby give Notice that, at, tkho next, mooting of
Courvty Council I shall mover—That t/ho hour of holding
Council's Meetings be 11 0'clock, a.m., instead of ono
P.m.
(Signed)
MICHAEL (Y MEARA.
12
EXECUTGVE COMMITTEE.
M;intltets Of proceedings of the above Commiütee
Meeting held in the Council Chamber on Monday,
day of December, 1913, mt one o'clock p.m.
Presenti : —
In tho A . Duffy, Esq., J.P.
Other Mombers present—Patrick Byrne, J.P. ,
ab tlheir
the 8th
J ames
13
carried out. A case of swine fever, ocu examination, was
found not to be so.
HR. CLINTON's REPORT.
During the month of November three cases of suspected
Sheep Scab occurred at Greenore Port'. •I had the suspected
animals slaughtered by order of the Department of Agri-
culture. All the sheep which were in contact with the sus-
pect.ed ones have been dippecl. Five cases of suspected Tu-
bereulosis in cows abso occurred at, Greenore, and two simi-
lar cases in cows at Dundalk. 1 have dealb wit,ll the ani-
mads in accordance with tho ordeo• of the Department of Ag-
Oonnolly, J.P.; M. O'Meara, J.P.; J. P. P.
ney, William Woods, J.P.; J. H. McA,we, J.P.; J. M.
Johnson, and James Wynne, J.P., Asquires.
T. Clinton, 4. A. Donnelly, and W. E. Maxwell,
Veterinary Inspectors, wore also in aåt,endn.noe.
The following reports from Ghe Veterinary Ill'*pectors wero
read by the Secretary : —
MR. DONNELLY's REPORT.
During the montih Of November I had four suspect,ed cases
røported under the Tuberculosis Order. Tho animals had
boon sent to Drogheda Port for Shipment. I had three of
t}bem moved back to County Meath to premises from
which tth,ey came. The fourth case, after inwpection and
oxamination of the unima•l, proved not to be a case under
the Tuberculosis Order.
I had tlhree outbreaks of tsheep scab to deal with, the
animals also having been sen•b to Drogheda Pont. In two
of the cases I had the sheep moved to Count,y Meath, after
•time diseased animals had been slaughtered uit,h the autho-
rittv of the owner. In the third ombreak otno animal in
dock of 102 sheep was affected with sheep sc:ub. The diseased
animal was slaucrht,ered. 'Dhe remaining animals have been
Greatetd, are now quite healthy, and the restrictions ha.vo
been withdrawn.
I furnished your with full returns on the pre-
Forms, in each ca:se giving full ptu•ic.ulars.
MR. MAXWELL'S REPORT.
I examined usual markets fairs, etc., helld in the Ardee
No. 1 District for N ovember. A case unclor {he 'Ihlbercular
Order occurred at Ikumcashel, and aftor consulting with
Deparüment of Agriculture, it was decided the animat
(lid not, fully come under the Act, and slaughter was not
r icyulltum•.
'Ihe reports were by the Chairman .
'1110 Secretary submitted tibe fol lowing Accounts
neetion Mith Sheep Dipping : —
T.
M' Ardle—wages
W. Leonard
Murphy—sundries
P.
F.
Carroll
N.
Norris—rent
sheep dip
11.
Backhouse —
T. R. Connolly
T. M'lver
P. M'Gee
L. J. Ilealv
Ardee Rural District Council—rent ...
W. Tempest—printing
T. NV illiamson—sunclries supplied
P. Jennings & Co.
M. Byrne—rent
M. M 'Gahon — cheeking returns
M. M'QuilIan —dipping allowance
Cooper & Nephews—rent tanks
12
o
1
.51
18
15
15
9
o
4
1
2
5
R, Sumner & Co.— sundries supplied
3
O. Keenan —wages
o
1
IO
O
10
14
o
10
11
9
18
0
2
16
in con-
4
4
4
0
O
1
2
9
0
9
0
6
0
1
14
15
(YMea.ra, J.'P.; J. P. Kearney, P, Kearney, Wm. Woods,
After examination the Committee recommended same for
J.P.; J. H. J.P.; J. M. Johnson, B. Hamill,
payment.
J.P., and James Wynne, J.P., Dsquires.
An Account, for L'4 3d for supplying Ardeo Tank with
The Committee ordered payments for Sheep dipping ae-
water was considered excessive, and was referred back for
counts recommended by the Executive Committee of this
future congide;raticm.
date, amounting to the sum of C162 18.s ld.
The Commititee exmrn:ined the fdllowing accounrts and or-
VETERINARY INSPECTORS SALARIES.
dered payments thereof :
COUNTY SURVEYOR's CFFICE.
The Secreta;l+' informed the CommitJtee Lhot dhe period
s
for hieh the Departinen•b of had sanctioned
uh,e increases Io the Veterinary Inspectors' Sa.luries, namely,
- 16
6 morntilus from tiho 1st June, 1913, had expired o:n the 1st
December, and according to the lobber from the Department
of Agriculi'ture, dated the 8th ()cöober, 1913, No. 4626—1913,
would require 00 be now reviewed by the Committee.
3 11
After a discussion, it wes prcpose•cl by Mr P. Byrne, J. p. ,
seconded by Mr J. Connolly, J JP'. and pased, that the Ex-
. 12
ecutive Com mittee reconvmond üha;t, the Salaries Of the Vet-
erina,ry Intspeut«yns be as fdlows : —Mr Clinton, L130 per
annum, and Donnelly and M.axwell be continued at
the rates for further period of six months from
the 1st Docomber, 1913.
The Secretary read report from tho R.I.C., Collon, notify-
ing three cases of owners who had complied with
the provisions of the Sheep Dipping Order, and the Com-
mittee t.hat, the Solicitor slhould prosecute in these
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Ploceodings of above Committee, at their
Meeting hold in the Council Chamber on Monday, tho 8th
day of December, 1913, at, 1.30 0'clock p.m.
Present :
In Chair—C. A. Duffy, Esq., J.P.
Other Members—P. J.P.; J. Cknmol,ly, J.P.; M.
T.
Matthews
J.
Du rnin
B.
Grogan
Byrne
T.
P. Byrne
Callan .
A.
J. Ward
T.
Callaghan
T. M'l)onald
T. Morgan
J.
Craven
P.
Rafferty
M. Reilly
Rafferty
Rafferty
J. Ilanlon
M. Fearon
R. Brown
J. Fearon
P. Clarke
P. Murphy
3
2
I
1
1
0
3
6
1
o
o
0
0
1
1
0
C)
6
3
3
19
10
19
4
IO
10
12
IS
3
3
4
s
C)
8
11
11
o
8
8
S
8
6
9
6
9
Carlingford Quarry
Co.
Morgan
P.
M 'Gailey
J.
M 'Carthy
C.
WII ite
T.
Murray
J. O'Hare
T.
Rogers
J.
ilannawav
Clarke
T.
W. Kelly
N. Matthews
J. Garland
T. Reilly
W. Reilly
Kavnnagll
M 'Shane
11.
Matthews
P.
Kinahan
0
o
1
1
1
I
I
o
12
1
1
5
7
1
15
18
o
o
18
O
9
19
9
9
5
5
19
o
9
4
5
0
0
5
6
O
O
o
6
2
O
6
8
s
s
'2
o
8
7
7
8
8
0
SECRETARY'S CFFICE.
Studentß' Lodging—Mrs Dolan
Same
Sa me
C. McGarrity
J. Louden
—M'isxs OonynOlPon
—Miss Dillon
1
1
3
o
3
16
COMMI'rTALS TO INDUSTRIAL SCIHOOLS.
was read fom MT. Whe.lchan, Inspector of Society
for P' revenuon of Cruelty to Children, stating that applica-
Gion •was 111 acl:e on 28th November for t,he committal of a
Ohilcl named Tereusa Murphy to an Industrial School.
Letters were rend from Mr. flardy, 'C.P.S., Dundalk,
ghut,ing applications would be macle at Dundalk Petty
SC'é1ions •for t,be committal to Irvl.ustrial Schools of the fol-
lowing children—Mary J. Crilly and Brigid Crilly, of Wil-
Etreet, Dundalk ; ancl John, Michael, Mary, James and
Daniel Gibbons, of Castletown, I)tllldaiik.
ELECTRIC LIGHTING IN DISTRICTS.
Lotter .was rend from Mr. (_YConneIl, Solicitor, dated tho
27tJh Nov ember ,
stating that imm the mutter of Electric
L'ighlåin,g in the Rural District, t,hat it, was a matter for
the Rural Council, a,nd not, for t4he Co. Cbuncil ;
also, th;ajt, with regard to tlhe quetstion of wa.yÅleave for Elec-
trie Lighting St.a,nda.rchs, that an agreement should be pre-
pared between the Council a.nd tho U Hban District Council.
The letter was initialled by tho Chairman.
CARLINGFORD PIER LAMP.
The Secretary read telegram received from the makers of
å'ho lamp for (firlingford Pier, stating they had despatched
same, a.nd the Acting County Surveyor, Mr. Lyons, stated
ho would have a,rra.ngemcnts made to have tho lamp erected
on (its arrival.
CLOGi1FJiUIEW1) VIIFIR.
With reference to tho letter from the Offco of Public
Works dated the I'ltlh November, regarding certain repairs
to Clogher.hea„d Pier, the following report from Mr. Drom-
goole, Acting County Surveyor, svas read, and the Secretary
17
was directed to send copy of same to the of Works—
Dunlecr, 28th 1913.
Dear Sir—In reply to your inquiry, I beo• to report that,
tlhe scoured-out portion of the xpproaeh rotul at the point,
of junction iVit11 Clogher Ileac! Pier a,åtendecl to during
the month of August, Vlast, by laying down sufficient con-
crete, and tho air vents thoroughly cleared out at the tsame
time. 117,11ere the concrete hats I ifde,cl on the surfaceway,
patching has been done, but tille cracks I cc.r.Eider of
no importance, and may aet as air vents. The missing
timber eurb has not been •replaced, as there is a in
getting a mayson or stone cutter t/O pucn.cll Che for bolts.
I have lcst sight of the mat,ter, ancl hope to have a.ll
the defects pointed out by tjhe Comm i'ssioncvs of Pu blic
Worl•s remedied in about, 10 days' time.
Yours faithfully,
JAMES DROMGOOLE,
Acting County Surveyor.
ROAD BOARD GRANTS ANI) EXPENDITURE.
The following circular lobber from the Loca,l Government
Board, dated 2Stih November, No. 56183—1913, was read
and initialled by the Chairman : —
No. 56183—1913.
Miscellaneous.
Local •Government, Board,
Dubhn, 28111, November, 1913.
Sir—I am directed by the Local Government Board for
Ireland to state for the information of 18110 Council, that in-
quirios have boen addressed to them as to whether grants
made by the Road 'Board to local bodies in Ireland E!h0111d
be taken into account in determining Ohe limit of expendi-
ture on roads under Section '27 (2) of the Local Government
18
(Ireland) Act, 1898; and ('lie Local Government Board de-
Site ti() state that they have taken legal advice tin the mat-
ter, and tlhey consider that only expenditure out of the rates
should be taken into account for the purpose of calculating
the Ihni,t of expenditure under the Sub-section above re-
ferred to.
I am Sir, your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS, Secretary.
NURSE 'IVßERC1jLOSiS DISPENSARY.
Letter was read froun t 110 Loca•l Government Board dated
2nd Novern ber, No. 62911— 1913, approving of the appoint-
(Y Hagan as Nurse for tille Central Dispensary
fo be by t'he Louth CIOL111ty Council at a salary
of Cö() per
with a temporary allowance of C24 per
annum fc,r Inaintenance pending the completion of the Dis-
pensar.y.
LOCAL EILECTiONS, 1914, ANI) AP'-
01" OFFICER.
('i rcul:vr
i'rcnj * Ipe Loenl Government. 'Board, dtbte€]
Deccan bet', 'NG'. 132-—- 1913, vcas read. The circular stated
io tho
approac,hing electjons of County andr
District in 1014, that the Cou neil
sh0'1tf(I appoint ing ()fficer at. tilme earliictst,
(late and fix Che day of election m accordance witli Section
94 (7) of itie Local (Govermnent (Ireland) Act, 1808.
It was •decided to refer the ina tter Lo the next ordinary
of the Council.
.I.X.JURV CLAIMS.
was rend from Mr. P. J. Kerley, Soliei •.or, Dun-
requesting pn.viileni of injury elaims due to
'Photrnas Maguire, Lnnnet, and MichaOI Kelly, Dungooley.
19
Secretary was directed to Mr. Kerley hat tho
claimts would be paid when the 'levy for them was collected.
OVERDUE ACCOUNTS.
A circular was read from Ulwe Local Government
Board, dafued 4th Decenlber, No. 13311—1913, stating that
the Board had cleeded t lia,b they Avi,'ll nat. authorise in fu-
ture extensions of time for Ohe payment of overduo accounts
unless satiESfactory evidence is produced showing that tho
delay which has occurred has boen unavoidable.
TUBERCULOSIS MAINTENANCE GRANTS.
A furtther circular le.'üer on t)il'is was road, dated
the 5th December, No. 64201—1913, from tho Local •Govern-
ment Board, stating that. tho Tuberculosis Scahemo should
exbend to the whole popu latiion of t,ihe County, and that tho
services of the and use of institutions to be pro-
vided under the Scheme should availablo for tho treat-
menb of all classes of tho community, whether insured or
non-insured, and that half thc not ex,pendi'buro will be de-
frayed out oi the :naintrna.neo grant, a.ml requesting that a
of oxpen.liåure of tho Council's Scheme for
tho treatment, of Tu•boreulotsis during tme period from the
15th Jtily, 1912, 31st, March, 1913, be furnished be-
fore t;ho 31st, December, 1913.
The Soeretaxy di to have Lho neco•sary• state-
furnished to tho Local Government •Board.
PAYMENTS THROUGH SUBSIDIARY ACCOUNT.
The foll€Ä1g letter was read and initialled by the Chair-
-man : —
Local Government 'Board, Dubliin,
4th 'December, 1913.
No.
Louth County.
Sir—With reference to your letter of the 28th ultimo, I
20
am direciåecl by the Local •Governntent Board for - Ireland to,
state that they will raise no objection to the payments being
made by tihe Loutih County Council through tihe Subsidiary
Account in respect of n Ill 'insurance premiums, refunds of
fidelity bond premiums, irrecoverable arrearg of rate, and
arry salaries of rate collectors Inay be sanctioned.
I am, Sir, your obocbenf, Servant,
J. E. I)EVLIN, Secretary.
The Secretary ,
Louth County Council.
PATHWAY AT BALLYMASCIANLON.
Letter was read from Miss Plumjke'tf, Balllymascan,lon,
dated 6th December, complaining of t)ho state of t,he parh-
way between the Village of Ballymascanlon and ttho Newry
Road.
The Acting County Surveyor, Mr. Lyons, was directed to
make an inspection .mnd have the matter attended to, and
the Secnetary was directed tio write Miss Punket,t• that
the necessary repairs to the pathway would be done at once.
MR. FTNEGAN'S ILLNESS.
Two certificates were received frolil Dr. J. J. Clarke eer-
iifyin,g that Mr. Finegan suffering from bronchial
catarrh, and wats unable attend his work.
The Seeret,äry was direeåbd by the to employ
Mr. M. McGahon, at ulte usuul rate of wages during Mr..
Finegan's illness, as required.
21
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of of Loui4h County Council at i,heir
Special Meeting, held it! the Council Chaunber, on Thunsday,
18th day of December, 1913..
Present, :
In the Chair—W. A. Dolan, Esq., J.P.
Other members—Messrs P. Byrne, J. P. ; P. Callan, J.
Connölily, J.P.• John Dolan, P'. Donegan, J.P.; L. J. E]-
eoek, J. Halpe,nny, J.P. ; B. Ila•ntill, J. P. ; J. M. Johnson,
P. Keanmey, M. Meade, J. McCarthy, J.P.; L. McKeon, J.
F. Murphy, J.P.; A. 'r. Murphy, P. O'Connell, M. O'Meara,
.J.r.; D. J. Ratlh, W. T. Skeffington, J.P.; 'Wm Woods,
J.IY.; a,ncl James Wynne, J.P.
'I'he, ( 'ounc•.il summoned for the purpose of considering
applications for the position of County Surveyor, and the
Secretary read the following letter. received from tho Local
Government Board •
No. 66431—1913.
Louth County.
Local Government Board, Dublin,
16th December, 1913.
Sir—I am directed by Local Govern,monJt Board for
reland to acknowledge the receipt of your letlter of t,he
It'll instant, submit't;iino• tlhe 19 applications for
the position of County Surveyor in Louth County; and, in
reply, I am to state for the information of the County
Council, that Messns J. Caffrey Qind T. Walsh, existing
County Surveyors, and MessiS S. Gaffney; H. King, J. J.
Murphy ancl G. H. Fleming, who have already been certi-
fied by tho Givil Service Commissioners, aro eligible for ap-
pointmen€ by Lhe Council, €ubjecst, to the Board's approval
The Board desire to add that, Mesxsrs. R Davidson, J. A.
Main, E. M. Savage, pnd W. Stuart are nob eligible for
appointment, as they have not been certified by the Civil
The Board are not in a position to express any opinion
with retspoo+e, to the trainincr and experience of tho remain-
22
Service Commissioners. iiiey are entered for au examination
yehiell commences on the 6th proximo, and the result. will
probablymot be announc•ecl for some weeks yet.
In connection witih vacancies in the post of County Sur-
veyors In otiher Count).es, for wiiieh Messrs J. A. McAnulty,
C . H. Waftson and R. Nunan were appicants, the IBoard
making the necessary inquiries, were satisfied that,
their training a,nci pracvd%bi experience did not render them
eligible. examinati by thc Civil Servioe Commis-
yvongrs.
'ing candidates, as they bave not been furnished with suffi-
eient evidence relating but oven if ithcir qualifica-
tions wero Imown to be in this respeob, the-
Bcard fear that. ih would not be pct•sible to ha,ve them ex-
amined by the Civil 'Service for some. months.
The applicafiotnts„ etc. , forwarded by you are enclosed.
I am, Sir, your obedient Servan:b,
J. E. DEVLIN, Secretary.
11)he Secretary,
Lou.ill County Council.
On the reading of •t!his letter a took place as
to Che names of other candcclate€, who had mode application
for t,ho position cf County Surveyor, uncl Who were not re-
ferred to by the Local Government Bca,rd in their letter.
Mr Skeffington statecl that Mr. T. J. l)elnhunt.y, Bo-
rough Surveyor, I)roghcyla, had made application for Oho
position, and his n,a.me should be considered, and Messm
O'Meara and filcoek stated that under tho t'('t'rnts of tho ad-
vert,isomonit, all Lho applying should bo considered.
M€-•trs Tlarnil,l a.ncl Byrne obj eeberl to t.ho consideration of
any nam«s exeetpc„ tahos:o by the Local Government
' Who Solicitor, Mr. ()'Connell, was requested by Lhe Chair-
man to •advie,le the Council cyn the matter, a,nd Mr. O'Con-
noll stated t)hat [he Council could at their discrotlion docide•
2.3
what names t;hey would consider, and t,he Clyairnjall ultima-
teiy ruled that only those gentlenjen who •v. ere approved by
Lhe Local •Government Board sihoulcl be voted on.
The Secretary tihen read the applications from the six
follows :
Messits •J. Caffrey, l)onegal ;
G. •H. Flenling; Downpatrick ;
S. Gaffney, 1)VYliin ;
J. H. King, Dublin ;
J. J. Murphy,fC01'k; a.n,d
Thomas Walsh, *Maryborough.
The Chairman took a cf the Clouncil on these
names, and the following was result :
For Caffrey—me.+lrs llamil:l, Joih,nsoil, Meade and M•Keon
—4.
For 1M John Dolan, Elcoek, P. Kearney,
McCarthy, N. 'I'. Murphy—, 'Ruth, Skeffington, and Wm.
W oods—8.
For Walsh—Messrs P. Byrne, Cal Ian, Doran,
•Donegan, Halfpenny, J. F. 'Murphy, ()'Meara, and
W y nne—10.
The Chairman then took a vote between Mes•sr.s Wal.sll and
Murphy, which as" follows :
For P. •By rne, ('a.llan, Doran, Donegan,
Holpenny, fla,nwill, Johnson, Meade, McKeown, J. F.
M urphy, (YUonnOI'I, O'Meara antl 'Wynnc—13.
I)olan, Elcock, P. Kenr-
For ,
J. Rnåll, Skeffington g and
N. T. Murphy, 1).
William Woods—S.
The Chairman declared Mr. Walsih (Iti:ly elected. anil the
following resoltltion wats nilnousiy • —
Proposed „b.v Mr Patrick Byrne, J.P. ;
by Mr. Patrick 'Con an,tl
Resolved—That, we hereby Thoma,s Walsh, C.E.,
as County Surveyor for the County of Louth. at a salary
o! per annum, wtfh an allowance of per annutn
for travelling expenses, Ebere certified and vouched for, and
a annual allowance of $50 for Clerk in Office.
FINANCE COMMiTTEE.
Mr. Walsh having been called before tho Council, tho
('hairntan informecl him that he had been duly appointed
Minutes of rroeeetlings of above COmnpittee at thei,r
Counts Stl rvey(jr, aml i'€quested to know when he could
Illeeting, heid in the Council Chamber, Dundalk, on Mon-
commence his cluaLies. Walsh thanked the Council for
(lay, the 22nd December, 1913, ai one o'clock p.m.
the appointment, ancl Stated he could com,rnenee his duties
Prosenc •
on Iså of April next, or sooner if his Council would permit
In the Chair—C. A. Puffy, Fisq., J.P.
him to clo so.
Otiher members—Jmnes Connolly, J N. ; E. Goodman, and
-James Wynne, Ei,q uires.
The (thairma•n directed Cha. till.e Acting County Surveyons
I). Soilicitcn• to the Council, was also in
Mr.
svc,ultl continue to perform the (luties until Mr. Walsh was
au onda nce.
propared t") take up duty.
The Searetary submitied the following accounts for works
in charge the Acting CGunty Surveyors, and those of his
.own ()fiiee, whiell on examinatiion overe passed by the Com-
mi,t.tee :
CCCNTY SURVEYOR'S OFFICE.
14 10
J. I)urnin
P Jennine-rs Co
P.
Carroll
'C.
Morgan
P. Callan
J.
M 'Kenna
J.
Durnin
Grogan
B.
T3yrne
Byrne
Callan
A.
J. Ward
C.
Morgan
P. Jennings Co.
Gaskin Bros.
T. Williatnson ...
M 'Court and
Greenlee
F. M 'J )erlnott .
V. M 'Connon
1
o
o
0
o
1
1
I
1
O
o
1
1
10
20
3
4
8
7
15
9
3
3
O
18
14
3
13
5
0
(1
8
7
o
9
3
o
8
11
11
o
0
9
3
o
(j
o
M 'Kenna
B.
J. M'Cabe
P. M'Gee
T.
Murray
Clarke
T.
Ilare
A.
Berry
T.
J.
M'Shane
Boyle
J
O. Rice
11. Reilly
IO.
Boyle
J.
Kavanagh
T.
Reilly
W. Reilly
J. Craven
J M'Geougli
P. Rafferty
9s. 711.
017
14
o
9
1
9
5
1
14
o
1
3
19
o
0
19
14
10
9
1
o
6
5
2
o
2
10
8
8
8
6
8
5
2
2
10
8
2
8
0
o
Amount
E. Connellan
Sister de Ricci
J. Louden
M. M•Gahon
26
SECRETARY'S OFFICE.
Mary Dillon, Sc110'iarys11i'1)
5 11
23 lö
15 14
do.
do.
V. M 'N amee, Billposting
P. Ga ffney, Education Account
T. P. Harmon
T. Faulkner
Thoma,s Kearney
Patrick Ga:rvey
D. (YMea,ra
do.
do.
do.
do.
do.
do.
do.
3
1
3
3
2
7
o
9
o
18
O
11
O
o
0
o
5
11
4
2
10
5
" Dundalk I)emocrat " do.
P. S. Donegan, Refurcl A rrears
Patrick M' Donnell
Patrick M'Culilough
John J.
Pa.urick El,'ughes
Patrick Cltps:key
Petec M Obonnoll
Joh n Wonrls
J. V. Johnston
Anu.unt.
0
23
. 30 12
2
.. 17
. 56 13
. 5017
. 45
Letter was read from the Adveråising 'Mana gor
4
19
12
9
of
O
o
(b
o
0
o
6
o
o
10
o
o
6
7
3
1
3
1
1
6
4
the
Leader," Dublin, n•skirg for a share Of tlhe •Council's
advertisements, buf no order was made.
TUBERCILOSIS DISTENSARY AT DROGHEDA.
The following Icti%tvr from Loral Government Board was
read. it, was decided to refer same to the County
Council :
Local 'Boa
Dublin, 8th December; 1913.
No.
am directed by the Local Government ecard for
27
Ireland to acknew [ecl•re the receipt of your letti,ier of the öt,h.
insta,nt, relative No the proposed ailltoeation of a sum of
seven hunclrecl pound's for tho erection equipment of
Tuberctrlosis I)'ispeynsary at Drogheda, and I am to request
Ehat you will -be good cagough to furni14}1 particulatts of the,
objects which this expenditure is to be devoted.
I am. Sa•,
Your obedient Sérvant„
A. R. BARLAS, Secretarv.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
Lefiter was read from Mr. J. B. Connolly, Town Clerk,
Drogheda, asking what provision the Coumyty Council have
(iecidecl make for the Borough of under their
amended Ccunty Tuberculosis Scheme.
The informed tho Committee that he •had replied
to Mr. Connolly, and iniorrned him the County Council
had decided to aiioca.te a sum of C70() under tille County
Ixut,.h 'Scheme to erecta aml equip a Tuberculosis
Drogheda.
RATE COLLECTORS.
The following letter was read ancl initialled by the
Chairman
Local Govermnent Board, Dublin,
8th December, 1913.
No, 64,552 | 1913.
Louth County.
Sir—The Locai Govern ment Board for Ireland have•
had before them your letter of the 2nd Instant relative•
to the collection of rates in Louth County, and, in reply,
the Board desire to point out [hat they do not agree in
the view expressed therein that "
the County Council
are in duty bound to pay the Rate Collectors their poun-
dage fees in respect of the half-year ended Sep-
tember, 1913."
It is obligatory on the Collectors to lodge the whole
of the first moiety of their collections on or before the
30th September in each year, and if they fail to do so,
they cannot be paid any poundage fees without the sanc-
tion of' the Board.
If, therefore, the County Council
dlirecd that Che Collectors should be paid poundage fees
without the Board's sanction, the members authorising
the payment would render themselves personally liable
to be surcharged by the Auditor.
The Board in their letter of the 7th October last set
out fully their reasons for refusing to extend the time
for the closing of the first half-year's collection in the
County. and [hey now (lil ect me to point ont illat Louth
was the only County in Ireland where the Collectors as
a body failed to close their collections on the 30th of
September, and that in the majority of the Counties all
the Collectors closed within the prescribed time.
In these circumstances the Local Government Board
are not prepared to re-consider their decision.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant.
The Secretary
Louth Conn ty Council.
The followihg letters were
County Council :
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
DRAINAGE.
read and referred to
Iluocal Govermnent Board, Dublin,
10th 1913.
No. 65,466/1913.
Louth County.
Sir,
I alii directed by the I ,oeal Govertnnent Board
the
for
Ireland to forward, to be laid before the Louth County
Council, the enclosed copy of a letter which they have re-
20
ceived frolii the Connnissioners of Ptil)lie Works relative to
the question of transferring the business of the Board of
Trustees for the Wottonstown brainage District to the
Countv Council,
and T ani to request that you will be good
enough to furnish the Board with the views of the Council
on the matter.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant.
The Secretary,
Louth Countv Council.
Copy Letter from Board of Works,
Olliee of Public Works, Dublin,
5th I)ecetuljer, 1913.
No. I nw.
Louth County.
No.
07.
Sir —I am directed by the Commissioners of Public
Works to state i hat in the year 1 851 the Wottonstown
Drainage District in the County of Lonth was cowti-
tuted under the provisions of the Act 5 ancl Victoria,
Chapter 89, and the sum of E 1,102 was expended on
For some years
the requisite arterial drainage works.
the Board have been desirous of securing the Election
of Trustees for the. proper maintenance of the drainage.
The last election took place in the elected Trustees
being :—
ur. W. D. Filgate. Lisrainey, Ardee
Sir Ilenr.y Bellin*ham, Ihu•t., Bellingham Castle
A. Vere Foster, Bart., Glyde Court, Ardee
Sir
J. Ripton Garston. Bragganstown, Castleloellingiltun
Mr.
J. Gibbings, Shirley I-louse, Carrieknraeross
Mr.
.J• J. M 'Caul, Carrielanaeross
Mr. W. J. O'Reilly, Knock abbey, Louth
Mr. J. Wetringt011, Iblllyma-:kney, Dundalk
P. I). Caraher. Maine, Castlebellinghalll
Mr.
M. C. E. Fortescue. Stephenstown,
Denis Brown, Arthurstown, Ardee
30
These trustees according to the law of the matter, re-
•main responsible until successors are elected, but in
point of fact there is no apparent' likelihood of any elec-
tion, as some of the proprietors have, sold their lands, and
others who have been approached have either declined
to facilitate an election of new trustees or ignore the
Board's represen tations on the subject. The District is
a small one, the drained or inmproved area being about
316 acres, as shown in [he Award copy herewith.
"l'he case is one in which the Local Gover'2ment Board
may deem it expedient and necessary in the interest* of
the district to make provision under Section of the
Local Government (Ireland) Act, 1898, for the transfer
of the business to the County Council of Louth.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
11. WILLIAMS,
Secretary.
The Seeretary,
Local (}overnment Board.
QUALIFICATIONS OF RATE COLLECTORS.
A General Order of the Local Governlijent Board'
dated the 5111 December, 1913 (No. M), setting out
the qualifications of rate collectors, was read and in• •
itiallecl by the Chairman.
REGULATION FOR SPEED LIMIT OF MOTORS.
Letter from the Io. G. Board was read, relating to the
-speed of Motors in the vicinity of Ihe towns of 1)1'0-
gheda, Ardee and I)undalk, and tho villages of Castle-
and Olneath, and the
matter was referred to the Council's Solicitor.
DEEDS OF CASTLEI,TJMNEY, RATHDANIEL,
ANI) ALMONI)STOWN ROADS.
The following letter from Mr. D. O'Connell, Solicitor,
31
in above matter, dated 12th December, 191.-0•, was read :
Dear Sir—I have a letter from the Estates Comillis-
Sioners in which they inform me thal the Lanol Registry
are not prepared to aet on ilme several Conveyances from
the tenants in this matter, dated the 4th October, 1912,
•as the, landlord did not execute his Conveyances to the
Council until November, 1912, and the Estate became
vested in the Land Commission on the 24th October,
1912.
They further state i Irat if the Deeds are now re-
executed by the tenants so as to cover their interest in
the lands, the Land Registry will act on the Convey-
ances, and register the Council as owners of Che plots
conveyed.
You might bring the facts before the Council that I
may have their formal authority to proceed to have the
Deeds perfected in the way suggested.
Your:s faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Charles McAlester,
Secretary Louth Co. Council.
After a discussion, Mr. O'Connell was instructed to
have the (let*'ls perfected as snagested by the Estates
Comm issioners.
PROPOSED PURCHASE OF ONIEATII PARK.
The following communications fronx the Louth C
Committee of Agriculture were read and referrecl to the
County Council :
Louth Co. Committee of Agriculture,
Dundalk, 11th December, 1913.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
Dear Sir - -The. appended resolutions were unanimously
adopted at Monday's lheeting of the above Committee,
and I was directed to forward them to you for the con-
sideration of your Council.
Faithfully yours,
JAMES HUGHES',
Secretarv.
Proposed by Mr. J. M. Johnson, Mr
James Marmion, ancl resol vecl :
'I'llat we recomtnell€i
the Louth County Council to
negotiate for the purchase of Omeatli Park, to be Inain-
taine€l by the Department of Agriculture under the
Forestry Scheme, and that the purchase of sanxe, if
effected, be made under the Land Purchase Acts; that
meanwhile, pending the next meeting of the County
Council, the following prepare a report to be subnmittecl
to them detailing all lhe circumstances ancl in
connection with the matto
' • Jajnes Wynncv
Thomas F. M 'Gallon, Joseph M 'Gee, William Brennan,
Joseph M. Johnson, Jas. Connolly, Rev. M. J. Quinn, P. P. ,
and the Secretary,
Proposed Purchase of Omeath Park.
1 7th 1913.
Dear Sir—The report enclosed herewith was unani-
mously adopted at to-clas,s yneeting of the ('01M rnitlee
appointed by the County Committee of Agriculture to
consider the question of the proposed purchase of-
Omeath Park by the County Council.
Faithfully yours,
JAYE* HUGHES.
The Secretary
Louth County Council.
Copy Report on Omenth Park.
The Connnittee have inqilit•v as to the arnonnt of
arable and grazing land incliltletl in ()tneatll Park, angl as to
the annual value of satne.
'l'hey find that EIO to Æö() per
annum Inay be expected fro:n
annual lettin•rs of land ;
ill
addition, thc house, which is fine building antl in fair eon.
33
was let last year for for the summer months.
.1f put in thorough repair the Ilouse would eommnand a good
rent, or it might be let on repairing lease for a Ili"her figure
than above narned.
If the Council acquire the property, at even the outside
figure mentioned in the report of the Department's expert,
the annual returns from sub-letting would more than meet
the annual instalments under the Land Purchase Acts.
There would thus be no loss to the County Council on the
purchase.
'I'lle Cmnmittee have no means of checking the estimate
of value placed on standing timber, and would recommend
a valuation of both laud and timber by an expert, as a means
of arriving at a fair value of the property as it stands, and
as a basis of an offer for purchase.
As regards costs of maintenance, management and re-
planting, the Conunittee estimate that a figure of €200 to
±250 per annum would cover these costs, and would recom-
mend, if the Council decide on purchase, that application be
made for a grant from the Development Commissioners to
cover this.
If such a grant be obtainod there will be no
cost to the County, either on account of purchase or main-
tenanee, including re-planting, and the County will thus
acquire a property of considerable future value at a little or
no present cost. The timber eut on the park during the
past few years realised, we are informed, over El ,500.
With scientific planting and proper managerhent, the re-
established plantations should yield a very much higher figure
.after a period of years.
T. F. MCGAJ10N.
J. CONNOLLY.
WILLIAM BRENNAN.
MICJII,. J. QUINN, P.P
SHEEP DIPPING PROSECUTIONS.
Letter was read from Mr. l). O'Connell, Council's
Solicitor, reporting that three persons, who were prosecuted
at I)unleer Petty Sessions on the 9th December, for exposing
sheep for sale at Dunleer fair on the 3rd November, without
34
having the req uisite declaration in respect of the dippingy
were each fined Is. and 3s. (id. costs.
BEDS IN PEAMOUNT SANATORIUM.
rl'hc following letter from Sir Wm. J. Thompson, M.D.,
was read and initialled by the Chairman
Peamount,
Hazelhatch, Dublin,
19th December, 1913.
Dear Sir,
My attention has 'been drawn to a report of the County
Louth In•urance Committee in one of the Dundalk papers,
in which it is stated that the 12 County Louth beds are not
reserved for their patients.
I beg to say that this report is
not correct, as we can at any moment take in and acgommo-
date 12 patients from the County Louth.
Yours very truly,
WM. J. TIIOMFSON, M.D.
The Secretary,
County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
PROSECUTIONS BY SCHOOL ATTENDANCE
OFFICER FOR DUNDALK RURAL DISTRICT.
Letter was read from Mr. l). O'Meara, Secretary,
Dundalk R tiral District School Committee, requesting the
permission of the Finance Committee for the Solicitor of the
County Council to advise as to certain prosecutions at Petty
Sessions under the Education Act.
After a discussion, the Conunittec decided to grant the
services of the Council's Solicitor to advise in the matter.
ROAD BOARD GRANTS TO DUNDALK URBAN
DISTRICT.
Letter was read from the Road Board, dated 17th
December, enclosing cheque for 79, final payments under
grants for improvements Inade to road surface in the town of
Dundalk, and payable to the Urban Council of Dundalk.
through the Louth County Council.
The Committee directed that a cheque should be drawn
in favour of the Dundalk Urban Council for the amount of
this grant, viz. , €179.
SOLICITORS' TAXED COSTS.
Letter was read from Mr. P. L. Macardle, solicitor,
Dundalk, dated the 9th December, 1913, enclosing cer-
tificate from the Taxing Master of the amount of Mr.
Daniel O'Connell's costs, amounting to ±126 Ils 1 ld.
The amount claimed was :
Deductions
Amount certified
±'131 6 7
4 14 8
126 11 11
WATER FOR ARDEE DIPPING TANK.
The following letter from Mr. Laurence Callan, Ardee,
for water supplied to Ardee tank was read and referred
to County Council
Ardee,
10th December, 1913.
Dear Sir—In reply to your letter of the, 9th Decem-
ber I beg to state since the sheep dipping commenced
in Ardee it was I did the work of carting the water, and
I had no complaint till- the present one. It was Messrs.
T. F. Filgate and J. Meade I arranged with at Is. 3d. per
The journey is twice as far now. as the sheep
load.
dipping tank was removed to the far end of the town.
1 should be looking for more money instead of being re-
duced, as I often had to take my horse from other work
and send it for one load of water, which was very in-
36
convenient to me. Therefore, I cannot accept any less
than the full amount of nuv bill Is. 3d.
Respectfully yours,
LAURENCE CALLAN.
The Secretary County Council.
The account referred to in above letter was for 65
loads of water at Is 3d per load—CT Is 3d.
OFFICE ACCOMMODATION.
The following communications from the County
Louth Insurance Committee and the Louth County
Committee of Agriculture were read and referred to the
County Council :
Insurance Committee for the Co, of Louth,
Clerk's Office, Dundalk,
21st December, 1913.
Dear Sir—I am directed by the Insurance Committee
for Louth to forward to the Louth County Council a
copy (as attached) of a resolution unanimously adopted
at their meeting held on the 17th lust.
Yours faithfully,
V. WARREN, Sec.
C. McAlester, Esq.,
Secretary Louth Co. Council.
C Resolution.]
That we again draw the attention of the Louth County
Council to the great existing need for County Ollices in
Dundalk ;
That owing to our duties being considerably increased
and will be further increased from the 15th January
next, we are now compelled to seek suitable perinanent
offices, as the rooms temporarily provided by the Council
in Earl Street are both inadequate and undesirable for a
County Public Body.
37
From inquiries made, it is now clear we must pay ar
very high rental for offices, although our income for ad-
ministrative purposes is very limited, to avail of a non-
recurring Treasury Grant of available up till the
12th January next, for furnishing and equipment :
That we thei•efore trust the County Council will lose
no time to have this important matter dealt with, in
order that the business of public bodies may be, con-
ducted under conditions in keeping with their positions.
Louth County Committee of Agricuiture.—ResoIution
passed at meeting of above Committee at their'
meeting held on the Sth December, 1913
Proposed by Mr. J. M. Johnson. seconded by Mr.
Michael O'Meara. and resolved :
That we desire to bring uncler the notice of the
County Council the inconvenience under which the
County Committee of Agriculture labour in respect of
Office accommodation and for meetings ; and that we
would strongly urge upon the Council the absolute ne-
cessity that exists for a Committee Room and Office for•
the proper carryingtont of their business.
PROPOSALS COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of above Committee at their
Meeting helcl in the Council Chamber on Monday,
5th January, 1914.
In the chair -C. A. Duffy, Esq., J P
Other Members present—J. M. Joh nson. M. Meade,
B. Hamill, J.P. ; .J. F. Murphy, J.P. ; James Connolly,
J.P., and James Wynne, .J.P., Esquires.
Messrs. James Dromgoole and J. M C. Lyons, Acting
County Surveyors, also present.
The following Proposals were considered by the
•Committee :—
APPLICATIONS BY THE COUNTY SURVEYOR.
No. I—To Repair Ardee Courthouse for One Year, from
rst April, 1914, to 3 rst March, 1915. 0 0
Approved
No. 2—To Repair Drcgheda Courthouse for One Year, from
ISt April, 1914. to 31st March, 1915. E 40 0 0.
Reduced to Eso o o.
No. 3—To Provide a IVatering Cart for Ardee, with Pump
attached, and 20 feet Steel Armoured Hose.
8-130 0 Approved.
No. Repair the County Courthouse, Dundalk, for
One Year, from ISt April, [914, to 3 rst March,
1915. E' 30 0 0. Approved.
No. 5—To Supply on Carts at Ardee, Drogheda, and Dun-
dalk, Best Scotch Coal (screened) for One Year,
from ISt April, 1914, as required for use of Road-
Rollers. Approved.
APPLICATIONS BY THE SECRETARY.
No. 6—To Supply Printing and Stationery for County Pur-
poses for One Year, from ISt April. 1914, to 31st
March, 1915, including the Printing to be done for
the Clerk of the Crown and Peace under Jurors'
and Registration Acts. Approved.
No. 7—To Supply for One Year, from ISt April, 1914, to
31st March, 1915, Ardee, Drogheda, and Dundalk
Courthouses with Best Wigan Coal at E—per
ton, delivered. Contractor to supply Coke, Bogn
wood, Fire lighting materials at Market Prices
as required. Approved.
No. 8—To Prepare the Courts and Court Rooms for Assizes,
Quarter Sessions, and Revision Sessions. in County
Ccurthouse for One Year, from ISt April, 1914,
to 31st March, 1915, not to exceed El 5 0 0.
Approved.
No. 9—To insert the County Advertisements, etc., in one
Dundalk and Drogheda Paper for one Year, from
ISt April, 19 r 4, to 31st'NIarch, 1915, not to exceed
3d per line. Approved.
Mr. J. M. Johnson drew attention to the unsatisfactory
manner in which the present contractor for printing
and stationery was carrying out his contract, and com-
plained of the great delay in getting orders executed.
The Secretary was directed to have advertisements
issued for tenders for the above, and
The Meeting adjourned until Monday. the 19th
January, 1914.
exalilined, and payments
40
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
Minutes of Proceedings of above ContliÜttee at their
Äleeting held in the Council Chamber on Monday, 5th
January, 1914.
Tn the Chair—Chas. A. Duffy, J.P.
Also present—J. M. Johnson, M. Meade, B. I lamill,
J.PG J. F. Murphy, J.P.; Jas. Connolly, J.P.; .J:unes
Wynne, J.P., and P. O'Connell, Fusquires.
Messrs. J. M. C. Lyons uncl Jatnes I)romgoole, Acting
County Surveyors, were also present.
The Minutes of the previous Finance Commit'ee were
taken as read.
The following accounts for works in charge of the,
Acting County Surveyors and the Secretary's Olliee were
19 11
19
14 10
0 11
15 .11
41
REFUND FIDELITY BOND
Patk. M 'Donnell
John J. Kelly
Patk. Cluskey
Peter M'DonneIl
John Woods
PREMIUMS.
1
2
2
2
10
10
15
10
5
0
0
ordered
B. Grogan
P. Byrne
T. Byrne
A. Callan
J. Ward
J. Brannigan
Jas. Hanlon
Robt. Brown
John Fearon
P. Jennings & Co.
F. M•Dermott .
B. M'Kenna
.Jas. M'Cabe
Patk. M 'Gee
P. Jennings & Co.
Wm. Reilly
John Craven
Thos. O'Rourke...
Thos. Martin
Matthew
0
o
o
0
1
1
0
O
13
1
1
1
4
19
16
1
0
19
9
3
3
4
0 12
0 19
i 16
0 12
2 19
8
11
O
3
9
0
4
8
4
4
O
4
2
o
O
0
Thos. Murray
John Byrne
John Lanney
John O' Ilare
Thos. Clarke
Arthur Ilare ...
P. Jennincrs & Co.
M. Mathews
Jas. Boyle
()wen Rice
Ilngh Reilly
Patk. Grimes
Patk. NI'Kenna ...
P. Jennings & Co.
Jas. Kavanurrh .
Thos. Reilly
P. Jennings Co.
P. Jennintrs & Co.
Mrs. R Dolan ...
Joseph Louden
0
o
1
5)
1
o
o
o
o
1
1
1
O
3
13
15
17
14
0
8
2
'2
4
o
8
8
9
2
8
5
4
0
0
8
o
8
Amounting in all to the sum of EC)8 1 Is. 1 ld.
The Secretary read notice from R. J. Newell, Esq.,
Local Government Board Auditor, dated 31st December,
1.013, of his intention of attending at the Courthouse, Dun-
dalk, on Wednesday, the 7th day of January, 1914, at ten
o'clock, för the purpose of Auditing the Accounts of the
Louth County Council for the half-years ended 31st March,
1913, and 30th September, 1913.
WILLISTOWN PLANTATION:
The following letter from Mr. O'Connell, Solicitor, with
enclosure from the Estates Commissioners, in connection
with the purchase of the Willistown Plantation, were read,
and referred to the County Council :—
Francis Street, Dundalk,
12th Decmnber, 1910.
RE WII.I.ISTOWN PLANTATION.
Dear Sir,
I enclose herewith copy letter, dated 11 th inst., received
from the Estates Connnissioners, intimating their acceptance
of the Council's offer of .E75 (Seventy-five Pounds) for thc
purchase of the above plantation.
The fortn of undertaking to purchase, appears to be in
order, and you might obtain resolution of the Council
authorising the Seal of the Council to be aflixed, as re-
quired.
'I*he I)raft Scheme I shall approve of in due course„
when I have the views of the Council thereon.
42
I shall submit both those documents
-desire to brinn- them forward for perusal.
Yours faithfullv,
Charles M'AIester, Esq.,
Seeretary Louth County Council.
to you when you
O'CONNELL.
Copy Letter.
E. ;i2004/l$.
Estates Commissioners Oilice,
Irish Land Commission,
Upper Merrion Street, Dublin
I lth I)ecetnber, 1913.
Estate of the Irish Land Conjlllission, formerly the Estate
of Lord Rath(lonnell, E.T., 7071, Co. Louth.
Sir,
With reference to the Estates Comnjissioners' letter of
22nd ult., in reply to yours of 1 t,tll idem, I am directed to
state that the Commissioners accept the offer of for the
purehase by your Council of the plantation in question, and
I am directed to forward, for execution by them, an under-
taking to purchase saine on these terms, which,
it is
quested, Inay be duly executed, and returned to this ofliee as
soon as possible.
I tiln tol draw your attention to Section 18 (2) of the
Irish Land Act, bv which you will see that the
.scll('llle for the user of the lands shall be framed, or
approved, bv the Department of Agriculture and Technical
Instruction for Ireland,
and to request that the neec.ssarv
steps may be taken to have this done
as soon as possible
after the execution of the undertakinL" to purchase.
I enclose for your guidance a draft scheme fituned to
Ineet the requirements of the Irish Land Aets referred to.
Your obedient Servant,
l). O'Connell, Esq.,
Solicitor, Dundalk.
43
STEAMROLLING OF ROADS.
The following resolution passed by the Clare County
Council was read, and referred to the County Council :—
(Cory.)
" That in view of the increasing demand for steam--
rolled roads, and the willingness of the Road Board to
co-operate financially and otherwise in the execution of
Approved Schemes, we consider the time has come when the
whole procedure in connection with proposals and the bor-
rowing of money under this heading should be considerably
sir.)plified and accelerated.
We accordingly req nest the Local Government Board
to take the earliest opportunity of amending the Local
Government (Procedure of Councils) Order 1899 in this
respect, so as to enable Rural District Councils at any
specially summoned Jneetincr to fornmlate and adopt pro-
posals for steamrolling of roads, and to empower County
Councils at any meeting thereafter to authorise the carrying
out of sante by contract or otherwise, due regard being had
to the recommendations of the Rural District Councils on the
several. proposals. "
Adopted.
SALARIES OF VETERINARY INSPECTORS.
The following letter from the Department of Agricul-
ture, dated 30th December, 1913, No. (284/13, was read
and initialled by the Chairman, and the Secretary in-
formed the Committee that he had sent the returns asked
for :—
Department of Agriculture and Teehnical Instruction
No. G2S1/'l$.
Sir,
for .lreland.
(Veterinary l}raneh),
50 aud ,51_ Upper Mount Street,
Dublin.
30th December, 1913.
With referenee to your letter of '23rd instant, indicatin•r
that the County Louth Executive C'cnnmittce, under the,
Diseases of Anitnals Acts recommended the continuance
for a further period of six 111011ths of the application to the
Local Atithority's Veterinary Inspectors of the special seale
(lilties under the Tuberculosis Order, I have to
of fees for
state that before considering the question of issuing their
approval in regard thereto the will be glad to
be furnished with a return showing the extent of the work
under the Order discharged by eaell of these Inspectors
during the first six months to which the seale was made
-to apply.
.1 mn Sir,
Your obedient servant,
P. Gil.l„
Secretary.
'l'he Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
'l'he following letter M•a.s read and initialled by the
'Chairntan :—
J of Agriculture, and
Teelillieal Instruction for Ireland,
a IMI •
31 Upper .Mount-st, Dublin,
18th 1913.
No. C147/13.
'Sir,
With reference to your letter of the IGth instant, and to
previous correspondence in the Inatter, I have hcrclyy to
•convey this Departinent's approval to your appoiljtnjent by
45
the Louth County Council as Clerk to the Local Authority
u ii(ler the Diseases of Animals Acts. The Department also
approve of the proposal to attach a salary of El 00 per
annum to the oflice, but it is deemed desirable to stipulate,
at the same tillie, that this approval may be subject to re-
vision in the event of a cessation of work under the
Tuberculosis (Ireland) Order of 1913.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
RICHMOND ASYLUM PATIENTS.
dated 3rd
January, enclosin€T return of adliiissions of patients charged
against County Louth for the quarter ended 31st December,
The nutnber was seven, which included one patient,
1913.
who had siuee died, and one patient who was paying €20
per annum.
TRAVELLING INSPECTORS FROM DEPARTMENT
dated '21 th
Circular
letter froin the i)epartlnent,
I)eeelllber, 1 913, No. was read, statiivg that they
had recently appointed Superintending Veterinary Inspectors
to investigate conditions which may seem to call for action
by the Central Atrthority, and that these inspectors would
travel through the country, and requesting the Local
Authority to apprise their oflicers regarding the course pro-
posed, so that clue facility Inay be afforded to the Superin-
tendin(v Veterinary Inspectors.
'l'he Secretary informed the Conunittee that he, had
the Veterinary Inspectors Messrs.
officially notified
Clinton, Donnelly, and Maxwell—of the Department's
instructions in the matter, and the Committee approved of
this course, and the letter was initialled by the Chairman.
MR. FINEGAN'S ILLNESS.
Two certiffcates from Dr. J. J. Clarke were read, dated
the 29th December, 1913, and 5th January, 1914, certifying
that Mr. Joseph Finegan was still unfit to resume work and
was suffering from debility after bronchitis.
LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL.
Minutes of Proceedings of Lho Louth Counfty Council ast their
Fourth Quarterly Meeting helld in bhe Council Chamber,
Courthouse, Dundalk, on 'Ihumsclay, 22nd day of January
1914, ait one o'clock, p.m.
present : —
In Vhe Chair—PETER HUGHES. Esq., J.P.
Others present—Patrick Byrne, J.P.; J. Connolly, J.P. ;
Jolyn Dolan, W. A. Doran, J.P.; C. A. Duffy, J.P; L. J.
Elcock, B. Htunill, J. P. ; J. M. Jolhjnson, Patrick Kearney,
Michael James McCarthy, J.P.; J. F. Mtuvhy,
,JN.; N. T. Murphy, D. J. R,affh, Wm. Woods, J.P.; and
Jn.mes Wynne, J .P., Esquires.
Mr. Daniel (YConneIl, Solicitor, and Messrs, Thoma6
Walsh, 'B.E., County Surveyor; J. M. C. Lyons and James
Dromgoole, Acting County St:rveyors, were in attendance.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
_PHjposed by -ur. Wm. Woods, J.P.,
Seconded by Mr. John Dolan, and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of •t(he Louth
County Council at, their Ireeijngs 1101d on the 27th Novem-
ber, 1913, a.nd the 18uh December, 1913, a printed copy of
which 'has been furnished to each member of the Council, bo
and -aro herx•by approved of
OF COMMITTEE MINUTES.
The following resolution 'vats passed: —
by C. A. Duffy, J.P. •
Seconded by B. Homil'l, J.P., and
•Resolved—Thai the Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance
Corn rnifltee their meetings hold on the 8th December,
1913, 22nd Decem ber, 1913, 5th January, 19149 and 19th
2
January, 1914, a printed copy of which has been furnished
to eaoh member of tille Council, be and are hereby approved
CONFIRMATION OF EXECUTIVE
COMMIT ILE AILNUTES.
Tho following resOIuiUi011 was passed :
Proposed by Mr. James Wynne, J.P. ,
Seconded by Mr. William Woods, J.P., and
Resolved—Thtwt bhe ILiuuues of Proceedings of the Execu-
tive Committee at their Meeting held on t'110 8th day of
December, 1913, a print,ed copy of which has been furnished
Co each member of tille Council, be ancl aue hereby approved
of.
CONFIRMATIOS OF PROPOSAL COMMLT'IEE,
MINUTES.
The following resolution was pased :
Proposed by Mr. John Dom
Seconded by Mr. Wm. Woods, and
t,hø Minutß of of the Pro-
posal Commit.toe ait tihoir meetings held on the 5th January,
1914, and the 19th day of January, 1914, a printed copy of
which has been furnished to eaoh member of the Council be
and åre hereby approved of
PROPOSALS FOR PAYMENTS.
ARDEB.
The following resolutions were : —
Proposed b' Mr. Wm. A. Doran.
by Mr. Michael Meade, and
3
Resolved—That, the Proposals for I'ayments formulated by
the Ardee No. I Rural District. Council at. their last Quar-
teri:y Meeting. heid on January, 1914, and set out on
Forni '22 furnished to the County Council, he and are hereby
approved of.
Is ld.
DROGHEDA.
Proposed by Mr. James MeCart,hy, J.P. ;
Seconded by Mr. Denis J. R,aat'h, and
Resolved—That, the Proposals for Paynjenls formulaied b;
the Louth Rural District of Drogheda Union, at their last
Quarterly Meeting lhejd on the 13t,h day of January, 1914,
and set out, on Form 2'2 furbished to the County Council, be
'I'hese payments amount to the
and are hereby approved of
sum of 25-39 17s ld.
LI DALK.
P 1 oposecl by Mr. Wm Woods, J.P. ;
Seconded b: Mr. Patrick Byrne, J.P., and
Resolved—Thai the Proposals for Payments formulated
by Dundalk Rural Distriot Council at their last euar-
terly Meating hold on the 5th day of January, 1914, and set
out on Form 22 furnished to the County Council, be and
aro hereby approved of. These payments amount to tho
sum of C1663 IOS 5d.
COUNTY-AT-LARGE PAYMENTS.
Tho following resolution was passed :
Proposed by Mr. Hamill, J.P.;
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Byrne, J.P., and
Resolved—That the Proposals ' for Payments •for the
Chun*-ateLarge fonnul&ted by Propoeal COmmitNee. a,'t
their Metat,nyg held on the 15th (lay of January, 1914, and
sot out on Forni 22 furnished 'to the County Council, aud
a-tnotl'll'ting to L'1893 17s Ild, be ancl a.re hereby approved of
by t,his Council.
DATES OF QUARTERLY MEE'I!LXGS OF RURAL DIS-
"FRICT COUNCILS AND PROPOSAL COMMITTEE.
Proposed by Mr. James Wynne,
Seronrled M r. N. T. Mltl"phy, and
Resolved
'Vhat the County Council Ivereby determine that
the ing shall be the (lates for •tihe holding of the First
Quarterly Meer.'ings of the Rural District. Councill* aud the
Cornrmit,tee : —Arciee, Tuesday, 7th April,
1914 ;
Tuesday, 14th Aprii, 1914; I)uuclal'k, Monday,
(h,h A pril, 1514. 'lhe Pi•oposal Committee to meet on Mon-
the (lay of April, 1914.
he next item on tho Agenda was consideration of Report
cf the County Conunittee of Agriculture on ()rneatih Park.
A protracåecl 100k place on bhis subject, in
',vhioh M essrs J ohnson,
'Wynne, Elcock, N. T.
M util)hy, McCarthy ancl Rath took part, and ultimately tho
ion was u naninvous•ly adopted—
Proposed by Mr. J. M. Johnson,
Seconded by Mr. .Janjes 'Wynne, and
Resolved—That' t*he resol ution of tille Committee of Agri-
culture at page 32 of Che printed Minutes, and the Report
of iJhe Sub-Commit.tee of that body at pages 32 and 33 of
Minute,s of Prooeedings, be tund are hereby adopted, and that
steps be at once taken to ascerüain the purchase price of
•Orneat'li Park under the Land Purchase Acts, and to ascer-
thin amou•nf the Departue,llit of Agricult'tvre and Develop-
Inent 'Connuisx,ioners• are pr€po.red to adva,uco t Ije County
Ceun,e.il for its nucl .
'The followill'cv is the of (10111 ;niiufee of ligri-
refel:recl -io in the above resOlution of. t;he County Council :
5
Pi•opOsed by Mr. J. M. Johnson,
Secånded by Mr. James Marmion, an
Retsoilvcd—That wo recommend the Lou'üh County Council
'to negotnite for the purchase oi Or-neath Park, to be main-
'tainecl by the Department of Agriculture under the Forestry
p urelr.l,se of sa:tne, if effected be
the
Scheme, and tilak
macle under •the Land _lhurolvase Acts; that meanwhile. pend-
ing 'the next, meetin•r of the Council, the following
proparo a report to be submit't.ed [o them detailing all tho
circumstances and matters in connecylion with matter :
Messrs James Wynne, Thomas F. McGahon, Joseph M •Gee,
M"illiam Brennan, Joseph M. Johnson, Ja.mes Connolly, Rev
M. J. Quinn, I) N. , a,nd the Secretary.
Copy 'Report on Omeat(h Park.
The Committee have made inquiry as to the amount oi
arable and grazing land included in Omeat«h Park, and as to
auuual value of same. They find that. CdO to 50 per
annum may be expected from auuual Eltings cyf land; in
additicz, the house, which is a fine building and in fair
diticu, was let. Ia" year for for summer mouths.
If pub in thorough repair the house would command a good
rent, or it ILighc• be let on repairing leac for a higher
figure than above named.
If the 'Council acquire the property, at oven the outside
figure mebt.ioned in the report of talle expert,
the annual returns from sub-lotting woulld moro than meet
the annual instalments under t(he Laud Purchase Acts.
There would tlhujs be no loss to tho .Council on the
purchase.
The Committee have 110 means of checking the estimate
of value placed ou standing timber, and would recommend
a. valuation of bcyt,h and timber by an expert, as a
means of arriving at a fair value of •the property as it
und as a, basis of an offer for purchase.
'As regards costs of maintenance, managemeub and re-
planting, Oo•mmitfiee estimaio that, a figure of 0200 to
C2ö0 per aunum would cover costs, and wbuld reeom-
6
mend, if Che Council decide on purchase, t,haf application be
made for a, grant. from the Develc„pmeut Ck»mmissioners to
cover this. If sucih a grant be obtained there will be no
cost itihe County, either on account of purchase or main-
tenance, including re-pla,nting, and the County will thus
acquire a property of considerable future va)luo ab a little or
no present, cost. The timber cut, on the park during the
past; few years realised, we are informed, over Cl,500. With
scientific planting and proper management, tlhé re-estab-
IiÉhed plantations should yield a very much higher figure
after a period of years.
T. F. M€GAHON.
J. CONNOLLY.
WILLIAM BRENNAN.
M J. QIN.x, P.P.
CONSIDERATION OF REPORT THE LOUTH
COC NTY COUNCIL '1 LOSIS IJISPENSARY
OF MANAGEMENT.
The above i 'em on the Agenda was next considered, tho
principal matters discussed being the question of the recast,
ing of tille Tuberculosis Scheme and the blishmenjt of a
Sanatorium in and for the CountLY of Louth. In the Report
' of the Tuberculosis Dispensary Committee tho proposal was
made to acquire Annavernn House, Ravensdale, for the pur-
pose of a County Sanatorium at, a sum of C 750. A protrac-
ted discussion ensued in which a number of 'Councillors took
part, and tho following resolution was paseed : —
Proposed by Mr. J. M. Johnson,
Seconded •by Mr. N. Murfrhy, and
'Resolved—That the report. (Jf Tuberculosis Cmnmit.toe
be referred back to lhe Commiti%eo for further report, to
etyme up for at next •adjourned meeting of •the
Council, and that a erynpnittee consisting of a(lil the members
n.f i•he County Couneil, ancl Dr. McQuillan, be appointed to
visit. and havo thcin• report, etnboclietl in Che illl't,her report,
of the Meeting of this Commitifee to be held
7
this dib}' week, 29th inst., and thab Dr. O'Brien, Medical
Officer, L.G.B., be asked to be ill attendance.
MR. O MERA'S NOTICIN OF MOI'LON TO CHANGE
THE HOUR OF MEETING.
In tho absence of Mr. O'Meara, Notice of Motion on
tibe Agenda fell through.
APPOINTMENT OF RE'IVRNLVG OFFICER AND FIX-
ING DATE FOR THE ELECTION OF CO. COUNCIL
ANI) RURAL I)IS'IUUCI' COUNCILS.
following Resolution was passed : —
Proposed by Mr. Bernard Hamill', J. P'. ;
Seconded by Mr. James 'Wynne, J.P., and
we decide on a'ppoånt(ing n Reburning
Resolved 'Ill at
Officer for the elect'ion of Count'.v and Rill"al DiÅtriet, Chun-
the Adjourned Quarterly Meating of t)he County
Council, to be held on uhe 26t„11 day off February, 1914, and
at the same time to fix the dace of the, said elections.
APPOINTMENT OF SCHOOL SIYIENDANCE
COMM J'IVI'EEIS.
The followilyg resol ut.ion was passel •
Proposed by Mr. Michael Meade,
.J ames Wynne, and
Soconcle€l by M r.
we hereby appoint the following gent'lø-
men to aet as School A Committees for the several
Districts as follows, for the period ending the 31st March,
1917:
No. 1.
Pasrick Byrne. Mooremouni..
Riehnrd Stokes. AIT!ee.
.J. R. Garstin, I). L.. Braga nqown.
Ja mes Magra,ne, I)unleer.
John Kieran. jun., J.P., Ashville.
DROGEEDA (Loury).
Joseph Dolan, Gaulstown.
Pat,riek Donegan, J Monastorboice.
McCartå1,y. J.P., Newfound•well.
Nicholas T. Murphy, Hill of Roth.
D. _J. Roth, Clogherhead.
DUNDALK.
T. J. Byrno, J .P., Rosmakea.
C. A. Duffy, J.P.. DundR1k.
Peter Hughes, J. P. , Castlering.
J. H. McArdle, J.P., Rampwrk.
Michael O'Meara, J.P., Omeath.
Consideration of RetsOlutions from the County Commit.t.ee of
Agriculture and t:he Louth County Council Tuberculosis
Dispensary Committee relative to the uecessitö' for in-
creased Office Accommodation for the 'Committees under
Ghe jurisdiction of the Council.
A discussion ensued on the subject rnaiåer of these resolu-
Lions, which wore seut forward from the County Committee
of Agricultture and the Louth Counté' Council Tuberculosis
Dispeusary Commit'tee: as to the necessity for the County
Council to provide beUter Offco "Accommodation or tho va-
rious Committeee under its judisdidtion.
The following resolution was passed :
Proposed by Mr. James Wynne, J.P. ;
Seconded by Mr. Bernard Hamill, J..P., and
Resolved—That in order to meet' the presing clemmnd for
proper office for the discharge of the County
business, we request tÅhe Fmance Committee to formulate a
Report, to be submitted at the next' meeting of the County
Council ou the subject, and eaid Repott to embody details
as to tha termg and conditions under which a loan cül be
obtained for purpoe.
9
PURUEIA.SE 014' WLLLLSIOWN ELANTATION.
following resolution was pasod .
Proposed by -ur. Michael Meade,
Seconded by Mr. Patrick Byrne, J.iP., and
ResolveW—TIIa.t Seal 01 the Council be affixed to
undertaking to Willistown from the
Irish Land Commission. Price arranged, 55.
wu I 'I'ONS'I'OWN DRAINAGE.
the Local 'Govermnent Board, No.
63466/12, of December, 1913, and from the Board
('f ks. No. 3186, oi the ötll December, 1913, were cou-
by Council, and •on motion of Mr. Meade,
seconded by Mr. P. Byrne, it was decided to refer the mat-
ter Lo Mr. O'('onnel'l, Solicitor, for his reporv.
ABDEL SULLI? DIPPING TASK.
A disputed account in connection ilme supply of water
for the Slueep I).pping 'l'ank ai A't•dee, was considered by
the Council and refe.tud back to the Finance Commit,toe.
ROAD R.OI,LLXG.
A letter the Clare County Council enclosing copy of
resolution adopted by that body in connection the
sieani-rolUing of •toads, was marked "read.
NOTICE SURRENDE\R OF PREMISES IN
E.\IU, STREET, DUSDALK.
er read flom the Insurance Committee for tha
infotauing the Council that üo
('ounhv of Louth .
('onunii,tee had acquired new offices 90 Clanbrassil Street.
l)nntlalk, asking that the Council would be good enough,
r.o hase not'i(€• served on the landlord of the old premises In
10
If directed by Ohe Council that neoessa,ry Nofico
would be served on Mr. Richard T. OLNeilI of t/he surrender
of t,he prejuises three months after the let February, 1914,
by the Council's Solicitor. Mr. (YConnel!I.
PREPARATION OF RATE BOOKS.
On t,lhe moltiion of Mr. J. M. Johnwon, seconded by Mr.
James Wynne, the Secretaw was empowered to employ Lhe
extra Staff to prepare the New Rate Books.
'IT,LOR.
The following letter was read
l)eall' Sir—I beg to hand in my resignation as a member
of bhe Louth Counyty Council, in consequence of the Rule
a,doptecl by the Department of Agriculture.
(Signed),
PATIucK 'BYRNE.
On the motion of Mr. John Dollan, i€econded by Mr.
Hamill, it was unanimously decided to request Mr. Byrne
to •reconsider :hi.; decision, which he consented to do.
SO'IIICE OF MOTION.
The following Notice of Motion was handed in :
That, at tille next meeting of the Lottit'll Council,
Trustees of Fsta,te, Ardee, be written to by
Uhe Secretary of the Council as to wheiheu• they •would eon-
eider offering tlhe land and house in possessi,on for sale
to the County Council, and, if so, what t'heir terms for salo
would be; and on rccoipt. oi' their answer, if favourable, io
purchatse, the sn,me steps to be teken are being taken in
wiAih the proposed purchase of Park ;
and to aseertain if the money will be advanced.
(Signed),
'22nd January, 1914,
W. A. D0RAN.
Minutes of Proceedings of above a,t, thoil' Meet-
ing held in the COuncil Chamber, on Monday, the 2nd
day of February, 1914.
Present : —
In the A. DUFFY, Esq., J.P.
Otilier Menwbers Mn tnilii, J.P. • J. M. Jdhnson,
J.P. ; M. Meade, 'Wynne, J.P„ Esqu,ires.
The MibuLes of the previous Finance Commitiee me.el.ing
wore confirmed.
The Seerota,ry submitted t/he following Aeoouuts- for
workis in charge of the Acting County Surveyors, and those
Tin connection with-his own Ofheo, Which we10 examined and
payments ordered.
On t,he of Mr. Johnson, J.P., seconded by Mr.
Hamill, J.P.. it was decided to pay Mr. Finegatn, who was
still unable to resume dutéJ, owing illlneos, his sala,1'3' for
the mcath of January.
COUNTY
Michael MeGuigan3()
LiST OF PAYMANTS.
311
SURVEYOR'S OFFICÉ.
s.
o
o
5
16
5
9
5
17
14
19
o
0
5
d.
0
0
o
o
8
8
6
2
8
8
8
0
s
Patrick Byrne
Thomas Byrne
Arthur Callan
James Ward
Bernard Lee
Patrick Curtis
Patrick Ilanlou
.Jalnes McGough
1
15
1
3.
3
11
James Corbally
Thomas Ilagan
James Carroll
Owen Carroll
Patrick Tirney
G
Michael Fergi1S01i
Francis Mel)ernwtt 1
John McGailey
Castlehill Quarry
Patrick Magee
John O'Hare
Arthur O'Hare
Thomas Berry
Andrew O'Neill
'I'homas Savacre,
A nclrew O'Neill
Castlehill (Quarry
Owen Rice
Patrick Bovlc
"l'homas Reillv
Bernard Grogan
5
1
I
1
1
Bernard McKehna I
James McCabe
1
Thomas Clarke
1
Michael Mathews 10
Peter Berry
Patrick Rice
Peter Rerrv
Owen Berry
Jmnes Bovle
Michael
Peter M e Elroy,
cancelled
o
o
0
1
3 11
11
3
4
12
3
1
8
5
9
8
5
8
5
8
o
o
8
17
•2
19
8
19
9
8
18
9
5
8
SECRETARY'S
J. W. Bacon, College Fees
OFFICE.
P. McParland, scholar
Branagan
P. A. Hanratty
Rogan
Summers
T. O' Rourke
M. McGahan
J, Louden
J. F. Finegan
Total
J.
L
H.
R.
65
1
2
1
o
3
z
3
9
176
2269
o
s.
o
15
o
O
16
15
o
19
0
17
o
4
3
d.
o
6
o
O
'2
o
0
9
3
13
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Letter was read front t,he Manager of " An Claideanuh
Solvs,• tile official organ of the Gaelic League, asking for a
share 01 any adverssements issued bs Che County Council,
and which are sent io the Dublin papers.
011 the 1110tion of Mr. Johnson, seconded by Mr. Hamill,
ib decided to recommend Vhe Council to accede to the
request, and so the movetnent for the preservation of
dhe IrÄ1 Language.
ROAD BOARD GRANTS.
The following letter was teacl from the Roacl Board, giving
their views on the schetne and estimate submitted to them,
the Secretary was directed to have copies of the letter
tnncle and submitted to the Acting Counity Surveyors amd
the 'Borough Surveyors of Drogheda and Dundalk, aud that
Mr. Lyons, afuer consultation with the other Surveyors,
should prepare Report for the next meeting of the County
Council.
Tlhe i'vozd Board,
Queen Anne'S Chambers,
Broadway, Westminster,
London, S. W. ,
23rd January, 1914.
dircted by Road 'Board to refer your
transmitting for [he consideration of
loft,er Of tille 24th ult.,
Board, detailed for Lhe strengühening and sur-
facing of the, fasi Main Road from tone Drogheda
Boundary t. i,he Armagll Coutlfy Boundary, and to
say that the Board observe therefrom that, the total cost
of the work amounts to L:2'2 and a. net, improvement,
of C19,164.
Thu detailed estintates 'have been by Che Engi-
ng Dopa:'tment of the Board, and I enclose herewith
eop of their on the scheme. You will obtservo
that modificati0L of the eha.ra«tor of the work
is suggesst.ed, which would reduce Clie amount of the esti-
mated expenclitaure fronl 422,409 to say: L' 18,685 ; and the
Board will be glad to hove vile of the Louth
Council upon. t/lwe proposed modifications.
At an
int«rview with the Cha irman on the• 149th October last repre-
senüatdivets of the Louth County Council put, forward q.
scheme, the provisional estimate for which was
Tho Chairman tihen stated that, the Botiid would be pre-
pared to fint nee an approved scheme eotsting this sum in
such a. way tho Local Autihorit.ies concerned would not
have to more than ,CI.€j00 per ann:um during a
period cf sears, including expenditure on maintenance
(luring that period.
In to give effect, to tillis under-
taking, it have been necessary for the Board to make
a grant, from Lhe Roacl Imp: ovomen€ Fu:ncl of abcyuf
but, in viow of tihe inorease of expencliture, which its neces-
yiftat.ecl by the revised scheme now est,ima.i.od at C18,68ö (or
including 'naintena,uce for six yea1Yö at thc: Board
prepareG to ino •ease Lheir grant, to and to ad-
vance on loan C 10,800 freo of interest, repayable by five
equal annual instalments 'in lieu Of a loan of E6,650.
The Council will observe thali the grant. and loan of the
Board are increased by and 150, respectively,
and the annual expenditmue which will fall on the County
Couneiil and ot'her Automorities concerned, is increased from
El ,600 to E2,43ö in the first year, and C'2,475 in the five
remaining years.
A copy of tho p:oposccl financial schemo is enclosed, and
Che Beard will bo glad to learn if tho County Council are
prepared to proceed with tho above-mentioned . works of
improvement„ with the assistance of tho Boaard as indicated
tlhcneilll. The Board, of coutE0. leave tixo County Council to
make tÅheir own financial arrangements whith the Borough of
Drogheda and tho Dundalk Urban District.
I am, Sir,
Your obedie1F- Servant,
W. REES JEFFREYS, Secretary.
The Secretory ,
Louth County
Council.
To {he Secretary,
Louth Cohtnby Counoll
15
ROAD.
Total lengt'll, including U.D.C. •s, 31å miles.
In the districts, it is proposed the roads shall
be 21 feet. wide for a length of 131 miles, aud 24 feet foc
13å miles.
aeter. If the same pricw per super yard is allowed as in
Lho estimate, and the width is agreed upon, tho
et'itiimn,te will be reduced to C14,ö3ö.
In thc Dundalk Urban DistTtct„ the road is st.ated
to vary between 19 aud 50 feet in width, or au average of
35 feet. The estimate provides for making up tihe whole
wid:..l of carriage-uay and surface, tarring ühe same at an
cst,imaled cost of
Personally, I do not know t/he road, but should think
if a 24 feet in width were made up properly and sur-
face tarred, and the sides shaped, it would be all t"hat, is
ueoessary. This I estimate would cost, roughly, CI,800.
The estima+..e, as sent in, ehould be amended in any event,
ms the amount, of Shippings allowed is and should
be reduced to 470 tons, making the total estimate Cl,954.
In tho Droghoda U.D. 4dhe average Which is 30 feet. I
remember t,hits road, a,nd it will not make a satisfactory
job unless bhe whole widt,ll of t;he street is clone. Tho
amount of pit sand or gravel allowed for binding is exces-
Sive, amd should be reduced to 492 tons, making the total
No surface tarring is allowed. If bhis is added it will
muan an additional C2'L6, n aking a total of 02350.
Summary of Revised : —
16
Rural Dietricts
Duntla,lk U. D.C.
U.D.c.
SPECIFICATION.
17
1,800
2 350
C18,68ö
C,
The w'hole of the work should be carried out in accord-
anee Wilsh Lhe speeilictliion supplied by tille Acting County
Stvrvo.vor w.iit'h slight a meudnjents with the exception that
ill the Drog!heda U.D. 2-incb gauge stone sha,ll be used.
'With regard to tihe su;face tarring, the Acting County
Sun veyor "Jtwtes that- the shall be done in accordance
with • iVhe Specification of the Dunda'l!k Urban Surveyor, but
no Speéifiea;tion has been sent by him. 'Dhe work should be
clone in accordance with Roard Board Specification No. 1.
J. S. KILLICK.
13th Janu:uv, 1914.
18
LOCOMOTIVE BYE-LAWS CO. LOUTH.
Let'ter was read from Mr. I). O'Connell as follows : —
Francis Street, Dundalk,
19'tü1 January, 1914.
RE DRAFT BYE-Laws (Loco.uonvys).
Dear Sin—I enclose draft of new Bye-Laws with respecb
to 'the use of Locomotives in Lhe County, which I have pre-
pared and settled by counsel.
You might submit t}he draft to uext Commitit,ee Meeting,
and, if approved, you should have same printed and broughit
before illce Acljc•umgnl Quarcefls next, month, at
which a rewolutfion will require ito be passed making the
Bye-La,iß and affixåyg the seal and entered in tlhe minutes.
When the Common Seal of t;he Council has been affixed and
attesåed and signed by you as Secretary, I shall make the
necessary arangements for submitting the Bye-Laws to the
Local Govermnent Board fov confirmation.
Your€ faithfully,
DANIEL O'CONNELL.
Oha.ples McAleOer, Esq.,
Secretavt•y, Louth Counts Council,
The following Draft Bye-Laws were then read and a,p-
proved by the Commi$tee, and Lhe Secretary was directed
to havo same printed and submitted to County Council in
accordance with (he advice of Solicitor.
19
(Copy Bye-Laws).
42 and 43 Vic., cap. 57, sec. 6.
U3YE-LAWS
Wi'th ttespect to the use of Locomotives in the County
of Louth.
1. No Locomotive propelled by siemn, or by other than
animal shall be wn, conducted, or driven, or
pnsg or be allouocl to pass, on, through, or over any road or
iii/„ghxun..v within the Co. of Louth (exclusive of the Urban
of Dundalk antl mcgheda) between the hours of 10
o'clocyk in the evening and 0'clock ill the morning of any
day, provided that this prohibition shall not apply to Loco-
moaivesknown as Steam Road Rollers when in use for t,lje
purpose cf makingor repaning roads.
2. No Locomotive shall be upon or pass over tho
following Bridges, li.•uuely :
(1) 'Vlie Obeli-sk Gi:der Bridge the River Boyne.
(2) Piccllnout Ihiclge, across tohe G lenmore River.
(3) 'I Ile Suecl Deck 'Bidge, acios.s 'the Glenmore River,
between and Gizemnore.
(4) 'I'lme St,eel Deek i}. idge, a.cro»s talle Ballymascanlon
River, between Proleek Bell•urgan.
(,3) Jonesborough l) ejtween Ca.rrickanoena and
Feede.
Ans person in charge of a Locomotive acting con-
3.
trary to a ly of the foregoing Bye-Lams shall be liable for
such clffoneo to a of Five Pounds; provided,
helces, the Justices or Coutuu before u 'hom any
or antev proceedings may be taken
made.
if tiliey fit, ad-
in :tn.v such offence,
as ft of any suny less than t,he
full" the by tihis Bye-La w.
4. Fl om and after the date of confiq•mntion of these
the Bye—La wilh 'respeci to use of Loco-
20
motives in the County of Louth which made on the
28th day of July, in uhe year one thousand nine hundred
end ten, and were approved by the Local Government
'Bea:xl for Ireland on tahe 17th clay 01 August, in tihe year
one t'housaud nine hundred and ten, shall be repealed.
5. These Bye-a-taws do not apply to Light Locomotives,
as defined by the Locomotives on Highway Act, 1896.
and Sealed with tulle Common
Seal o! the Louth County Council, thLS
day of
One 'l'housand
Nine Hundred Fourteen, in the
presence of
foregoingr Bye-Laws n:ntnberecl I
vo 5, are 'hesreby confirnoed by us, the
.Local Government Board for Ireland,
this
day 01
110.WS TO
1914.
Letter was read froin the Local Government Board, dated
'20th Jan,uaas, No. 1870—1914, stating üha,t lilt, did not ap-
pear to them that,' the Coutu€eeper was entitled to any-
thing beyond t\he salary fixed by Statute for his office.
After discussion tille Committee directed the Secretary to
i,he Local Government Board and point out, that, tho
bonus was granted for increased work in connection with
the Courts, and requesting the Board consent to tille pay-
menf of bonus.
ACCOMMODA'I'IC)N.
"l'he resolution of the County Ckvu,lleil diretht'ing t,he Finnnee
to foantlla;te a report on the quosi.ion of ()fliee
Aceonnnoclati011 for tyliC' Council Gither bodies
' eon junction wats before Che Commit-
A discussion,
the Ser.retary was clit•eeted to write
to Board of Works anil a." on term•s a loan would
gra nied for the pu ' of new offices for the
Counity Council,
21
OMEATH PARK.
Tho resolution passed at' the meeting of the County Coun-
cil, held on Lhe 22nd January, was uucler discussion by the
( 'ommni\tteo, and ithe Secretary was directed tjo write the
Depan•tjment of Agrieultute and find bhe purchase price
of ()mealth i)årk Lhe Land Purchase Acts, and also
what grants t,he Development, Commissionens would mako
the County Council for its upkeep and management.
ACCOUNT FOR ARDEE DIPPING TANK.
The account. for the supplyrmg of water to the Ardee Sheep
Dipping •rank, referred back by the County Council, was
undor consideration o • the Cbmmit/tee, and after dis-
cussion, on thc motion of Mr. Wynne, J .•P., seconded by
Mr. Hamill, J. P. , it was (iecided reoomtnencl payment, of
t 11'.' Account.
COUNTY LOUTH INSIJRALSOL COMMITTEE AND THE
COUNTY COUNCIL FINANCIAL RELATIONS.
A skeleton schenæ of a proposed basis of financial arrange-
Inents betw€T11 the County Council and the Insurance Com-
mi tteo was laid before t.he Commiib+,ee, but' as the mat-
.ter was entirely without. offieiail sanction, it was decided
that a special meetling of the TuberculIO*is Dispensary Com-
mitt,ee of Management Moti,ld be convened for Monday, the
9tih February, 1914, by Mr. Wavren, Secretary, and the
whole question discussed, and a report bo prepared and sub.
mitted to the County Council, at their Adjourned Quarterly
Meet ing.
RATES FOR 1914-15.
'Ille Demand for Richmond Asylu.m for Che year 1914-15
a.mounjting to the sum of C 12025, was laid before the •Com-
mi,ftoe nnd initialled by the Chairman, and tiko Committee
atuthorised the Secrekury to include in his Estimate of Ratee
for the eoming year the penny in the för the Tubercu-
Iosis
22
CLOGHER HEAD FIDR.
The following letter from the Board of Works was read
and referred to Mr. Drorr-goole, Acting Co. Surveyor, for
his report :
Office of Public Works, Dublin,
30th January, 1914.
16693, 13.
Sir I ann directed by the Commissioners of Public Works
to refer to youn• letter of the 12th ultimo, relative to Clogher
Head Pier, ancl to inquiere whether all] tthe repairs have been
conrlpetd as anticipated in the Acting County Surveyor's
report, of the 28th November, 1913.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant*
J. SViLLlAMS,
The Secretary, Louth Co. Council.
Dundalk.
Secretary.
COLLICC'IT)R CLU SKEY'S BOND.
The following lotter was read :
Mansfieldstown, •2nd February,
To the Secretary,
Louth Counto• Council
.1)ear Sirw•Kinclly bring under the notice of the
1914.
Finance
to-day the amount of my Bail .Boncl, ats I over-
eievgecl,
according to 'Ily salary.
Ta ke for nnstanee [he
case of P. McCullough, salary El 1(),
bond, CI,OOO;
( Ittskey, 'salary C 100; bond El, 100. 'I'llis its not fair. Goi
levisecl ancl oblirre,
Your obedient, Servant,
P STRICK
23
The Secretary was directed to have a note oi tho figures
of the various Bonds, with Premiums and Salaries, for the
next mee\aing of the Finance Commititeo.
The question of the purchase of a Typewriter and Dupli-
cat01for Ior the Secretary's Office was under discussion, and
on tibe motion of Mr. Johnson, seconded by Mr. Wynne, ift
was recommended that a Typewriter aud Duplicator be pur-
chased, and the Secretary was directed 00 get quotations
for both.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.
M inn [os of Proceedings of above Commit,tee at their
Meeiting held on Monday, the '2nd February, 1914, in
the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Ijtmclalk, mt' 1.30
Pret•ent : —
In tlhe Chair—C. A. DCFFY, rl'kq., J.P.
Other Members present—JB. Hamill, J.P.; J. M. Johnson,
M. Meade, and James Wynne, J.:p., Esquires.
'I'he Secretat:y read Khe following reports from the Veter-
inary Inspectors, which were initialled by the Chn.it•man : —
Mr, CLINTON'S REPOR'I'.
Dundalk,
31st Januarv, 1914.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
Sir,
I beg to report that the sheep was found on the
( :reat Northern Railwav (tonu)nnv's enlises affeeied with
seal) is of the disease.
As the owner is unknown
I have the anilnal detained on prenlises pending instruc-
tions front the, l)epartlnent of Agriculture. I have had the
sheep dipped periodicallv since it, was found at the railway.
CLVSKEY,
24
employed a man to carry out the dipping at a charge- of
six shillings.
Owing to the outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease it
will be necessary for your Veterinary Inspectors to be very
particular in the inspection of all animals in the district at
present. I am arranging for a meeting with Messrs. Don-
nelly and Maxwell in the matter.
Your obedient Servant,
J. T. CLINTON.
MR. DONNELLY'S REPORT.
Drogheda,
9th January, 1914.
Gentlemen, — During the month of December, 1914, I
had five outbreaks of Sheep Scab in this district. The
animals in each case had been sent to Drogheda port
for shipment, and came either from the Dublin market or
County Dublin. I had the diseased sheep slaughtered
with the permission of the owner, and the incontact
animals treated. The restrictions in all cases have now
been withdrawn. There were two cases reported under
the Tuberculosis Order. I dealt with both these, and
furnished your Secretary with the necessary report on
the prescribed forms for each suspected case. No
other outbreak of contagious disease in animals oc-
curred during the month in this district.
Yours respectfully,
ANDREW DONNNLLY.
To the Louth County Council.
Executive Committee.
25
MR. MAXWELL'S REPORT.
6th January, 1914.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
Sirs—I beg to report that I examined the usual fairs,
markets, auctioneers' sales of live stock fcm the month
of December.
The diseased cow at Drumcashel, which the Depart-
ment stated did not come fully under the scope of the
Tuberculosis Act, was sold by owner for slaughter.
I am, Sir,
Faithfully yours,
W. E. MAXWELL.
FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE.
The following letter from the Department, dated 1st
February, No. D I, was read, and the Secretary was
directed to send copies to each of the Veterinary Inspectors,
with instructions to afford every assistance possible to the
Oflieers of the I)epartment, if called upon :—
Departlnent of Agriculture and
Technical Instruetion for Ireland,
(Veterinary Branch),
50 & 51 Upper Mount Street, Dublin,
1st February, 1914.
No. 1) 1.
FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE.
The Department of Agriculture and Technical In-
*truetion for Ireland desire to brino• speciallv to the notice
of Loeal Authorities under the l)iseases of Anilnal.s' Aets
the fact that. Foot and Mouth 'Disease has appeared again
an having been at Naas,
in Ireland,
another, on this
County Kildare, on the 30th ulti11i0,
and
(late, at Ballv.sa.x, in the satne countv.
26
In these circumstances, so gravely affecting the inte-
rests of the live-stock trade, the Department trust that all
Local Authorities will instruct their Inspectors to exercise
special vigilance, and to impress on stockowners throughout
their districts the importance of like watchfulness, so as to
secure that there shall be no avoidable delay in recognising
any additional cases of the disease, should such unhappily
occur at other places, and reporting them forthwith as the
law requires.
With a view of facilitating the efforts for eradication
of the malady the Department also hope that your Local
Authority will instruct their Veterinary Officers to bc ready
to furnish expert assistance if called upon.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
The Clerk of each Local Authority
1
Coutb County Council.
Minutes of proceedings of Louth County Council at
their Adjourned Quarterly Meeting, held in the Coun-
eil Chamber, Courthouse, ou Thursday, 26th
day of February, 1914, at one ojelock p m.
Present
In the Chair—William A Doran, J P.
C)thérs present—Laurence, M 'Keown, J ohn Dolan,
Charles A l)uffy, J P; Michael Meade, Patk Kearney,
Luke J Elcoek, James Connolly, J P; Ed Goodmmy,
Joseph M'.\rdle, J P; Joseph P Kearney, Richard
Mathews, Patk O'Connell, Patk I)onegan, J 1) ; James
S Kelly, M'Carthy, J P; Denis J Rath, wm T
Skeffington. J P; Michael O'Meara, JP; Joseph M
Johnson, J P; and James Wynne, J P, Esquires.
Mr Daniel O'Connell, Solicitor; and Messrs John
M C Lyons, James I)romgoole, Aeting County Sur-
veyors; and Dr M 'Quillail were in atltendanee.
CONFIRMATION OF GENERAL MINUTES.
Proposed by Mr Charles A Duffy, J P ;
Seconded bp Mr Wm T Skeffington, J P; and
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the
Louth} County Council, at their Meeting held on the
22nd day of January, 1914, a printed copy of which has
been furnished to each Member of the Council ge, and
are hereby approved of.
2
CONFIRMATION OF FINANCE COMMITTEE
AIINUTES.
Proposed by Mr Charles A Duffy, J P ;
Seconded by Mr Joseph P Kearney and,
Resolved—That the Minutes of Proceedings of the
Finance Committee, at their Meetings held 011 the 2nd
February, 1914; 16th February, 1914, and their Ad-
journed Meeting held 011 the 17th February, 1914,
a copy of which has Leen furnished to each Member of
the Council be, and are hereby approved of.
CONFIRMATION OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
MIN UTES.
Proposed by Mr James Wynne, J P ;
Seconded by Mr Edward Goodman, and
Resolved That the Minutes of Proceedings of the
Exeeutive Committee, at their Meeting held 011 the
2nd day of February, 1914, a copy of which has been
furnished to each Member of the Council be, and are
hereby approved of.
ACTING COUNTY SURVEYORS'
Proposed by Mr Denis Ratli,
Seconded by Mr Michael Meade, and
Resolved-—That the reports of the Aeting County
Surveyors, as appearing ou the schedule of proposals
for the 26th day of February, 1914, a. copy of which
has been furnished to etaeh Member of the Council be,
ancl are hereby approved of.
3
CANCELLATION OF CONTRACTS.
Proposed by Mr Denis Rath,
Seconded by Mr Michael Meade, and
Resolved—That ill accordance with clause 21 of the
specification, the following contracts are declared tx) be
broken : —
ARI)EE RURAL DISTRICT.
No. I I—Patrick Corbally, 832 perches, Ardee to
Slane.
.No. 14—Veter Cassidy, 460 perches, Castlebelling-
ham to Louth.
No. eter Cassidy, 491 perches, Tallanstown to
Corderry.
No. I lö Thomas Durnili, 821 perches, Arthurstown
to Wildgoose Lodge.
So. 117—Veter Sharkey, 1777 perches, T•allaustown
to Bridge.
RURAL DISTRICT.
No. Boyle, 460 perches, Drogheda to
Colion.
No. 18VJose•ph Boyle, 714 perches, Drogheda to
Collon.
No. 22(Vfthomas M 'Juillhn, 518 perches, Ballyma-
• kenny to Milltown.
DUNDALK DISTRICT.
No. Neary, 1389 perches, Lurgangreen to
Christianstown.
No. 312—James Nixon, 989 perches, Corderry to
Darver.
4
No. 315—Thomas Magee, 4335 perches, Whitecross to
Castlering.
No. Reilly, 838 perches, Commons to
Wottonstown.
No. Peter Markey, 1428 perches, Bellew's
Bridge to Ballybinaby.
No. 411—John M 'Galey, 824 perches, l)undalk to
N ewry.
So. 412 Terence Boyle, 1005 perches, Carlingf0Hl
to Mueklagh.
No. 421—Stephen Lennon, 750 perches, Bridge-a-
Chrin to Marmion's Cross.
N o. 424—1Brya11 Coyle, 993 perches, Grange to
Whitestown.
No. 429—Patrick M 'Guipwness, 494 perches, Dundalk
to Ardee.
No. 440—Patrtick Murray, 97 G perches, Bellew's
Bridge to Ballsmill.
No. )wen M 'Gahan, 488 perches, Louth to
Mills of Louth.
No. Mathews, (i97 perches, Priorstate
to Toomes.
No. 4G9—UIImomas Matthews, 254 perches, Stoneuo
to Essexford.
TENDERS FOR WORKS NOT SET BY
AT ADJOURNED MEETINGS OF RURAL
DISTRICT COUNCILS.
The following tenders being the lowest were a•c-
eepted :
Ardee No. 223 Thomas Molloy, StabannomæÆ9 2s
Dundalk— •No. 10 Patrick Mulroy, Mullavalley,
Louth—El:} 15s.
T)undalk No. 1 •3—1) atrick Mathews,. Mountpleasa,nt
17s Gd.
5
womcs To BE PLACED IN CHARGE OF CO.
SURVEYOR.
In reference to these the following resolution was
passed : —
Proposed by Mr Edward Goodman,
Seconded by Mr Wm T Skeffington, J P ; and
Resolved—That the proposals for works passed by
the Rural District Council and Proposal Committee,
at their last Quarterly Meeting, and for which no con-
tracts are entered into, be placed charge of the Co.
Surveyor.
LIST OF WORKS FORMULATED BY RURAL
DISTRICT COUNCILS.
ARDEE •wom€s.
Proposed by Mr Michael Meade,
Seconded by Mr John Dolan, and
Resolved—That the proposals for works förmulated
by the Ardee No. I Rural District Council, at their
fourth Quarterly Meeting, held on. Tuesday, the 6th
day of Janumry,• 1914, and set out on Form 20, fur-
nished to the County Council ; and the contracts enterr-
ed into at their Adjourned Meeting held on Tuesday,
the 27th day of January; 1914, be and are hereby ap-
proved of, and we authorise our Seeretary to affix the
Common Seal of the Council to the eon tract entered
into.
tj
DROGHEDA WORKS.
Proposed Ly Mr Patrick Donegan. J P;
Seconded li.y Mr James S Kelly, and
the proposalk for works formulated
by the Louth Rural District of Drogheda. Union, at
their Fourth Quarterly Meeting, held 011 Tuesday, 13th
(lay of January, 1914, and set out on Form 20, furnished
to the County Council, and the contracts entered into
af their Adjournel Meeting held on rlhtesday, 3rd day of
February, 1914, be and are hereby approved of, and
that the Secretary be now authorised to affix the Com-
mon Seal of the Council to same.
DUNDALK WORKS.
Proposed by Mr Charles A I)uffy, J P ;
Seconded by Mr James Connolly, J P; and
the for works formulated
by the I)unxla.lk Rural l)istriet Council, at ther Fourth
Quarterly Meeting held on Monday, 5th day of January
1914, and set out on. Form No. 2(), furnished to the
County Council, and Che emmtraets entered into at their
Adjourned Meeting, held on Monday, 2nd day of
February, 1914, be and are hereby approved of, ancl
that the Secretary be authorised to affix the Common
Seal of the Council to same.
corsrrx LOUTH SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME, 1914.
Proposed by Mr AV m T Skeffington. J P ;
Seconded by Mr Michael O'Meara, J P ; and
Resolved—That the Louth County Council hereby
approve of the conditions of the Louth County Council
Scholarship Scheme for 1914-15 as follows : —
Two Scholarships of Æö() a year each, tenable at the
Dublin, or other College of the National University for
the Session, October, 1914, to June, 1915, and renew-
able for the two succeeding years, and a, fourth, if the
student follows a course in Agriculture, or in Indus-
trial or Commercial Science.
The conditions to be similar to those for the 191%-14
Scholarships Scheme.
The following is a copy of the Scheme :
OF LOUTH COUNTY COUNCIL
SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME, 1914- 15.
The Louth County Council offer two Scholarships of
a year each, tenable at the Dublin or other College
of the National University for the Session October,
1914, to June, 1915, and renewable for the two sue-
lows a course ill Agriculture, or in Industrial or Com-
mercial Seenee. The Scholarships will be open for Com
eial Science. The Scholarships will be open for Com-
betition to male and female Students who fulfil' the
following requii•ements :
(1) Whose parents or guardians are: and have been
resident in Co. Louth for the past three years.
(2) Who satisfy the County Council that they are un-
able of their own means to obtain a Univer-
sity Education.
8
(0) Who ha.ve been educated in Ireland.
(4) Who are in good health and character au.d under
19 years of age.
(5) Who pass in Irish and reach a standard of honours
in the aggregate of subjects in the Test Exam-
illation which gives proof of ability enough
to put a University Education to good use.
The Test Examination will be the Intermediate
Examination of 1914-—the order of merit being deter-
mined by the printed lilarks obtained by the applicants
in Senior Grade Honours as published ill the Official
Results List—a Pass in Irish being essential.
The Scholarships shall be awarded to the two eau-
didates best qualified in the judgment of the County
Council 011 consideration of merit ill this test examina-
tion, and of the fulfilment of the other requirements.
If either or both of the highest eligible competitors will
not accept Scholarships they shall be awarded to those
next ill merit, if qualified.
()ne or both Scholarships may be altogether withheld
if sufficient merit or need of assistance is not shown.
The Student accepting a Scholarship must pass the
Matriculation of the National University (unless the
University accept his Examination as
qualification) in 1914, and attend regularly the first
year's course in some facultv of the University, and
reside in a hostel or other residence approved of by the
County Council and the College authorities.
9
The College fees shall be paid direct Ly the County
Council to the College authorities ancl the hostel pro-
prietors, the balance, if any to be expended on books
and other expenses.
In order to retain a Seholarship for the second and
third year a Student must pass the College Examina-
tiou of that year at a standard of merit to be fixed by
the Council in eon-sulfation with the College authori,-
ties, and must also present a satisfactory report from
the College. as to attenda.nee at lectures and general
conduct. during the year.
The County Council shall have complete discretion
in applying or modifying these rules and in withhold-
ing or reduci,ng Scholarships.
Candidates for Scholarships must apply to the Seere-
t,ary of the County Council before the 15th September,
1914, and the Council shall meet to consider applica-
tions and award Sehoarships, at, end of September,
1914.
APPOINTMENT OF RETURNING OFFICER.
Before the applications received in response to the
advertisement were opened, the Secretary read the fol-
lowing letter received from Mr Francis P Joh nston,
Solicitor, Dundalk : —
Francis Street,
Dundalk,
25th February, 1914.
RETURNING OFFICERSTIIP.
Dear Sir,
I understand that for the position of Return-
10
ing Officer for the County Council Elections there •are
two applicants, Mr Patrek Roe and myself.
I leav'il.
however, that Mr Roe is not and wilil not be of age uptil
April next, and I take it the L G B would not sanction
the appointment of a person who is a minor on the
date of appointment.
I need hardly say Ihat person-
ally I have nothing whatever against Mr Roe, but
merely wish to point out that in my view he is not
qualified.
I presume the L G B have Imrdly tlaonght
it necessary to include this disqualification
usual circular, but it is elementary law that a minor
could not in, the first place enter into the necessary eon-
tracts pertaining to the duties of It which could be
made binding.
Your Solicitor, with whom Mr Roe served his ap-
prenticeship, will, I think, bear me out as to/ Mr Roe'*
age, and also as to the danger of appointing minor.
Should the Council in the circumstances still ailosv
Mr Roe's name to go forward, then I desire that m j
name be withdrawn.
Yours faithfully,
FRASCIS P
Charles M' Alester, Esq,
Secretary Louth Co. Council,
Dundalk.
The Chairman having requested the advice of the
Solicitor on the matter, Mr C) 'Connell! advised the Coun-
cil that Mr P J Roe had been an apprentice of his, and
would reach his majority by the 11th April, 1914, and
11
masmueh as that he would not be doing a,ny of the
actual duties of Returning Officer before that date,
that the Council could safely elect him to the position
of Returning ( )ffieer.
The following application was then read :
Francis Street,
Dundalk,
13th February, 1914.
Dear Sir,
Pursuant to your advertisement of the 7th inst,
I beg to make application for the position of Return-
ing ( )fficer at the forthcoming Local Government
Elections.
Yours faithfully,
PATRICK J ROE.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Dundalk.
This being the only application before the meeting,
owing to Mr Johnston's withdrawal, the following re-
solution was then passed unanimously :
Proposed by Mr Charles A Duffy, J P;
Seconded by Mr Joseph M Johnson, J P, and
we hereby appoint Mr Patrick J
Itoe, Dundalk, as Returning Officer for the Election
of County and Rural District Councillors for the
County of Louth, according to the• advertisement is •
sued.
12
DATE OF COUNTY ELECTION.
The following resolution was passed unanimously : —
Proposed by Mr Edward Goodman,
Seconded by Mr James S Kelly, and
Resolved—That we hereby fix Thursday, 4th June,
1914, , as the date for the holding of the Elections for
County and Rural l)istrict Councilllors for the County
of Louth, according to Section 94 of the Local Govern-
ment (Ireland) Act, 1898.
CONSIDERATION OF REPORT FROM TUBER-
DISPENSARY COMMITTEE OF
MANAGEMENT.
The next item on the agenda was as above.
After a discussion on the question of the proposed
acquisition of Anna verna Ilouke, Ravensdale, for the
purposes of a Sanatorium for County Louth, the fol-
lowing motion was
Proposed by Mr L J Elcoek, and
Secommded by Mr James M 'Cart.hy :
Thai we do not acquire fhe house a,lld premises at
Annaverna„ Ravensdale, for the purpose of a Sana-
torium, aud that we do not erect ili either Dundalk or
l)rogheda Observation I)ispensaries; but only small
Consulting l)ispensaries in these places, at a cost not to
exceed $300.
13
The following Amendment was
Proposed by Mr J M Johnson, and
Seconded by Mr James \Vynne :
Thai the project of a Sanatorium for County Louth
be postponed for six months.
"l lue Chairman took a vote on [he latter, with the
following result :
For the AmendmeWAIessrs James Connolly, • C A
Duffy, J M Johnson, J P Kearney, Patk Kearney, aud
James
Against the Amendmen& Messrs John Dolan, W A
Doran, P Donegan, L J Eleoek, J S Kelly, M Meade,
J Tl M'Ardle, J R Mathews, L M'Keown, P
O'Connell, M O'Meara, T) .J Rath, and W T Skeffing-
ton—a 4.
rl'he Chairman declared the amendment lost, and the
original motion was carried by a majority of 14 to (j.
It was unanimously decided to refer the, proposed
financial arrangement between the Insurance Com-
mittee and the County Council to the Finance Com-
mittee for their report.
MR LYONS' REPORT OX TILE PROPOSED
GRANT and LOAN FROM TITE
BOARD.
After discussion on this report, printed on pages
24 to 26 of the Minutes of Finance Committee Meeting
of the 16th February, 1914, it was unanimously de-
cided to submit the following proposal to the Road
That the Council request that the Road
Board, viz :
15
ON COUNCILS.
The Chairman •then, signed the l)emands 011 the
U rban Councils, which were as follows :
Board should give the following grant : —
For Rural Districts,
For l)undalk Urban District„
For l)rogheda Urban I)istrict,
900
1,175
$9,045
I)rogheda,
Dundalk,
5,266 17 9
and a loan for Rural Districts only, the sum of $7,270,
to Le repaid ill. six years..
SECRETARY'S ESTIMATE OF RATES FOR TIIE
FINANCIAL YEAR FROM 31st MARCH, 1914,
TO TITE 31stMARCH, 1915.
(Ille estinmate of Rates for the ensuing financial year
to the 31st March, 1915, and a eopy of which had been
sent to each member of the County Council, and to the
Clerks of the Urban Councils of Drogheda and l)un-
dalk, and the Clerks of the Unions of Ardee. Drogheda,
and l)undalk, was submitted to the Meeting. After the
Secretary had answered several q ueries on the Esti-
mate, the following resolution was passed unani
mously :
Proposed by Joseph M Johnson„ Esq, J P, seconded
by Michael O'Meara, Esq, J P, and
the General, Estimates of Rates, and the Estimate of
Rates for Separate Charges. as set out on Forms 45 and
46, with the various rates in the El, as set out therein,
adopted by the Finance Committee, be and are
hereby adopted by t]le County Council."
PROPOSED NEW COUNIT OFFICES.
The -recommendation from the Finance Committee
was next considered. The following is the recommen-
dations.
That we recommend the County Council to issue an
advertisement for plans for building new Offices, and
to offer a substantial prize for the successful com-
petitor, whose design may be accepted, and that a eom-
mittee be appointed for [he purpose of drawing up a
memorandum of the Offices required, and arranging
such other details as may be found necessary for the
carrying out of the project.
After a short discussion the following resolution was
passed unanimously :
Proposed by Mr Joseph M Johnson, J I)
Seconded by Mr Edward Goodman, and
Resolved—nat the recommendation of Finance
Committee, as at page 10 of Minutes of proceedings, be
adopted, and that the following Committee be ap-
pointed—Chairman Vice-Chairman, Messrs Wm
T Skeffington, J P; Luke J Elcoek, J Rath, Jas
Wynne, P ; Joseph M Johnson, J P; Bernard
[lamiil, J P; C A Duffy, and wm Woods, J P.
16
FORESTRY SCHEME.
PROPOSED PURCHASE OF OMEATTI PARK.
lllme following resolution was passed unanimously :
Proposed by Mr Joseph M Johnson, J P ;
Seconded by Mr Michael M(hira, J P, and
Resolved—That we (leei(le adopting a Forestry
Scheme, as suggested by the Department of Agricul-
ture„ for the purpose of acquiring suitable woodlands ill
County Louth with a view to their preservation, and
that the Finance Committee of the Council be re-
quested to prepare a list of the woodlands in the County,
whose acquisition is desirable, and that in accordance
with a resolution of the Council a.t Meeting of 22nd
January, 1914, that our Solicitor be instrmcfecl to
eeed with the purchase of ()meath Park.
NOTICE OF MOTION RE RUXTON ESTATE
TIOUSE GROUNDS, ART)EE.
The following Notice of Motion on the Agenda for
this day's Meeting, standing in the name of W A
Doran, Esq, J P, was adopted as a resolution unani-
mously : —
Proposed by Denis J Rat,h, Esq ;
Seconded by Edward Goodmau, Esq, and
Resolved—That the Trustees of the Ruxton Estate,
Ardeet, be written to by the Secretary of the Council as
to whether they would consider offering the laud aud
house in their possession for sale to [he County Coun-
and if so, their terms for same, on receipt of
17
their answer, if favourable, to purchase, and that the
satire steps be taken, as are Leing taken in eonneetion
with the proposed purchase of ( hueath Park ;
to ascer-
tain if the money will be advanced.
ADOPTION OE BYE-LAM'S AS TO TIIE USE OF
LOCOAI(JI'IVES IN COUNTY LOUTII.
The following resolution was passed :
Proposed by AV T Skeffington, Esq ;
Seconded by John Dolan, Esq, and
Resolved— That we hereby approve of. and adopt the
Dye-Laws as prepared by our Solicitor, with respect to
the use of Locomotives in the County of Louth, and
that we authorise our Secretary to affix the Common
Seal of the Council to the said Bye-Laws-
APPROVAL OF RESOLUTION OF AIU)EE I)IS-
TRICT COUNCIL AS TO OF PART
1 OF THE TUBERCULOSIS
(IRELAND) ACT.
Proposed by James M'Ca,rthy, Esq, J P;
Seconded by Michael Meade, Esq, and
Resolved-mat, we approve of the resolution of the
Ardee So. 1 1)istrief Council as to the adoption of Part
1 of the •Tuberculosis Prevention (Ireland) Act, 1908,
wh iell relates to Notification and Disinfection.
18
CONSIDERATION OF TTIE QUESTION OF TIIE
OF AS ASSISTANT IN Til E
SECRETARYS OFFICE.
The above matter, caused by the death of the late
Assistant Secretary, Mr J F Finigan, was next eon-
sidered by the Council, and it was decided to refer the
whole question of the ()Hiee Staff to the Finance Com-
mittee for a report thereon for the next meeting of the
County Council,
OBSTRUCTI( nx AT CLOGIIEIUIESI)
Letter was read from the Ilarbour Master, Clogher-
head, complaining of an obstruction of an old yawl at
'the Harbour and also as to the non-payment of fees bv
some parties using the pier for Ch (Fir boats, •and re-
questing the Council to instruct the Solicitor fo proceed
against the offenders.
(hl the motion of Mr Rath, seconded by Mr \Vynne,
it was decided to instruct the, Council's Solicitor to have
proceedings instituted if found necessary.
'CLAIM OF MRS. GOGARTY, DROGHEDA, FOR
REST ANI) REPAIRS TO PREMISES TAKES
DROGHEDA TUBERCULOSIS
PESSARY.
Letter was read from Secretary Tuberculosis Com-
mittee of Management enclosing claim for rent, and
costs of repairs ancl alterations to premises rented for
a l)ispensary in and requesting the Council
to deal with same.
19
IC was decided to refer the account to Messrs Eleoek,
Skeffingtou:, M 'Carthy, l)olan, and Kelly, t" arrange
the matter on the best terms possible.
BLACKROCK PIER.
following letter from the Department was read,
and the SecreWary was directed to ask them when funds
would likely be available for the project :
Department of Agriculture and Teehnieal
Instruction for Ireland,
Upper Merrion Street, Dublin,
19th February, 1914.
Sir,
With reference to, previous correspondence on
the subject of the proposed improvement of the land-
ing aeeomodation at Blackrock, County Louth, I have
to state for the information of the Louth County
Council that the l)epartment have received Mr ()liver's
repoli on the matter; but owing to the present coll-
(lition of their fullds the Department are unable to
offer any contribution towards the cost of the project.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
T. P. GILL,
Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
Courthouse, Dundalk.
20
ANI) MOUTII DISEASE.
The following resolution, submitted by the Meath
fra,usnjit same to the proper quarter when closed :
Farmers' Association, wa.s, on the motion of Mr J
I)olau, seconded by Mr MiCarthy adopted : —
' 'In view of the frequent outbreaks of Foot-and-
Mouth Disease ill 130th Great Britain and Ireland for
the past two years and the great inconvenience a.nd
hardship which feeders of Irish live stock are sub-
jeet by the present regulations, an immediate Par-
lianrelltary Inquiry is necessary and a new set of
suitable to the altered conditions is urgently
neecléd. "
THE FETIIXiU) LIFEBOAT DISASTER.
0 10
Thc following resolution was passed and a subscrip-
Cion list opened towards the Fund for the Widows,
(jrphans, and of the brave metn who ilosi
their lives in their efforås to save the shipwrecked crew.
Proposed Mr Edward Goodman,
Seconded by Mr I)enis J Ilath, and
Resolved-4hat we beg to tender our deepest
sympathy to the relatiVes and friends 'Of the gallant
men of Fethard who lost their c lives in an heroic
attempt to rescue the shipwrecked sailors of the
Mexico," recently wrecked off' the NVexf0i'(l roast,
and that a subscription list, be opened from the Menjbers
of this Council in aid of the funds now being raised for
the sustenance of the bereaved families of these brave
lilen; and that copies of this resolution be sent to the
County Council of NVexford and the District Councils
of that County.
21
me following amounts were handed in, aud the
Secretary was directed to take charge of the Fund •and
LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
W X Doran, Esq, J P
E Goodman, Esq
Jas Wynne, J P
P Donegan, E'sq, J P
Michael Meade, Esq, J P
J Esq, J
J 11 MSArd1e, Esq, J P
Jas Connolly, Esq, J P
Patk O'Connell, Esq
Jas Halpenny, Esq
Michael O'Memu, Esq, J P
I)atmiel ()'Conneli. Esq, Solicitor
Chas M 'Alester, Secretary
1
1
1
1
I
1
1
1
1
1
1
s
o
O
o
o
l)
o
o
o
o
O
o
o
d
o
0
o
0
o
o
o
o
0
0
o
o
DEATHS OF MRS. WOODS, CARLINGFORD;
MRS. MUIU)IIY, STONETOWN, ANI) J.
TIAINEN-NY, ARI)EE.
The following resolutions of sympathy were passed
ill silence:
Proposed by Edward Goodman, Esq ;
Seconded by Wm A l)orau, Esq :
Resolved -That we tender to our esteemed colleague,
Mr James Ilalpenuy, our sincere sympathy on the loss
a,nd that our
sustained by the death of his son ;
Secretary be directed to convey to him this expression
of sympa.ihy in his bereavement.
22
23
Resolved- That we tender to our esteemed colleague,
Mr John Francis Murphy, our sincere sympathy on the
Finance Committee.
(leath of his mother; and that our Secretary be directed
to convey this expression of sympathy to him ill his
bereavement.
Minutes of Proceedings of the Finance Committee at,
That we beg to tender to our esteemed colle:ague, Mr
their Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court-
William Woods, our sincere sympathy on the death of
house, Dundalk, on Monday, the 2nd day of March,
his mother; aml that our Secretary be directed to con-
1914, at one o'clock p.m.
vey to him this expression of sympathy in his bereave-
In the Chair—C A Duffy, Esq, J P.
ment.
Other Members presen€—J M Johnson, J P; I)
DEATH OF MR. J. F. FINIGAN.
O'Connell, J 11 M'Ard1e, J P, and Peter Woods,
The following letter was read:
J P, Esquires.
Douglas Place,
The Secrefeary submitted the following accounts for
Dundalk.
works in charge of the Acting County Surveyors, aud
Dear Sir,
Will you please convey to the members of the
Louth County Council my most sincere thanks to them
for their kind resolution of sympathy ill my bereave-
njent, and oblige,
Yours very sincerely,
ANNE FINIGAN.
To
Charles M' Alester, Esq,
Secretary, Louth County Council.
14 10
those of his own office, which, on examination,
w ere
passed aud payments ordered :
SURVEYOR'S OFFICEV
Patrick Wogali
tl'homas Reilly
J ames l)urnin
Matthew M tilåagh
A Murdock and Sons
Bernard Grogan
Patrick Byrne
'I'homas Byrne
Alåhur Callan
Mrs M Lynch
Tl'homas
Bernard M 'Kenna
John O'Hare
Thomas Clarke
o
1
44
1
1
1
0
5
1
I
s
2 18 10
5
1
15
4
9
5
o
9
9
1
8
8
11
3 11
11
8
8
o
Patk M'Connon
5
Althur O' ilare
9
T'homas Reilly
5
William Reilly
John Craven
Joseph Llarkins
2
Thomas Murphy
Thomas Murphy
O 11
Patrick Malone
15 11
J ames Fearon
0 17 11
Michael Breen
0 11 11
James M 'Kevitt
0 15 11
Franeis Quinn
0 17 11
John Smith
11 11
( )wen Rice
P Jennings and Ccw
8
4
L Branigam, Student
.H Rogan, do
o
J M'PaAand, do
PA Ilanratty, do
0
M M'Ga1uui, Clerk
19
J Louden, do
4
The following letfers from the Local Government
Board were read and initialled by the Chairman : —
Local Government Board, Dublin,
24
12
1
1
1
1
o
4
1
0
o
1
$107
SECRETARY S OFFICE.
1
2
G
107
Total , $127 19
o
8
8
0
c;
9
o
0
o
0
'23rd February,
No. 7162/1914.
Louth County,
Sir,
The Local Government, Board for
have had before them your letter of the 7th
1914.
Ireland
instant,
25
relative to the proposal of the Louth County Council
to grant a bonus of LIO to Mr T Murray, Courtkeeper
of the Dundalk Courthousp; and, with reference there-
to, the Board desire to state that in view of the facts
now brought before them they will raise no objection
to this proposal.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Secretary.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council.
SCHEME.
Local "Government Board, Dublin
February, 1914.
so. 7920: 1914.
Louth County.
Sir,
The Local Government Board for Ireland have
had before them your letter of •the 11th instant, relative
to the claim of the Louth County Council for recoup-
nient from the Exchequer Grant in respect of their
expenditure on the treatment of Tuberculosis for the
period to the 31st March last; and I am to inform
you that the net deficiency of expemliture after exclu-
Sion of the items borne by the Insurance Committee,
has been eertified t') be E (i'2 9s 4d. Board have,
accordingly, given directions for the issue of a paying
order for 4s Sd.
As regards the question of Ille amount of Che cou-
tribution by the Insurance Commi,tåee towards the
26
salary of the Tuberculosis Officer, I a.m to observe that
the mutter is one for the consideraton of the County
Council, having regard to the extent of the services
rendered, but so far as the Board are concerned they
see no objection to a contribution on the basis of one-
half or two-thirds of such salary.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant„
J. E. DEVLIN,
Assistant Seerefary,
The Secretary,
Louth County Council, l)undalk.
FIU)M I)EAT'IT DUTY GRANT.
Local Governrnellf Board, l)ublill
27th February, 1914.
so. 4,908: 1914.
Miscellaneous,
Sir,
I am directed by the Local Government Board
for Ireland to acquaint you that they have now recoived
copies of certificates of the Irish Land Commission and
the Commissioners of National Debt showing the actual
arrears in purchase etc., uuder the Irish
Land Acts; and I to for the information of
the County Council, that the amount which will be
deducted in respect of Land Purchase liability from the
Estate or Death l)uty Grant, payable in the County
in the course of the next month, is a sum of $81 7s
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary,
The Secretary,
Louth County Council,
VETERINARY SURGEONS AND LICENCE DCTY.
Local Government Board
Dublin, 27th Feinmary, 1914.
No. 10063/1914.
Mi laneous.
MOTOR CAR LICENCE DUTIES.
Sir,
I am directed by the Local Government Board for Ireland
to state that it, has been brought to their notice that some
diversity of practice obtains •as to the enforcement of the
payment of motor car licence duties by Veterinary Surgeons
using motor cars for the purpose of t/heir profession, and I
am to acquaint the County Council that the Board are advised
that Veterinary Surgeons are not entitled to the abatement
under Section 86 (4) of the Finance (1909-10) Act, 1910. IHIe
Board have been informed tha•t the- Lords Commissionens of
his Majesty's Treasury take the same view.
The Boa:rd deem it well to communicate this decision to the
County and County Borough Councils in Ireland in order to
remove any doubt which may have hitherto existed on this
point.
The Seeretary of
The Town Clerk
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
each County Council.
of each County Borough.
MOTOR LICENCE DUTY.
Letter was read from Mr. T. L. M 'Gee, Ardee, stating t,hat
he did not •consider he was liable for payment of Motor
Licence Duty as his ears were for Ihire purposes.
28
The Secretary was directed to obtain the opinion of the
Council's Solicitor as to this question, and any other
bearing upon the collection of the duties.
BUSINESS DELEGATED BY COUNTY COUNCIL TO
FINANCE COMMITTEE.
The Secretary brought uncler the notice of the Committee
the following matters, which had been referred to t;he Finance
Committee for report, viz. :
Forestry Scheme.
Proposed County Offces.
Financial arrangement with Insurance Committee.
Assistant in Secretary's Office.
After n diseu.s€ion cn the matter, it was decided, on the
motion Of Mr. Johnson, J.P., seconded by Mr. O'Connell, to
ask the Department of Agriculture to send down their Chief
Forestry Inspector to the next ordinary meeting of the Finance
Committee. on the 16th instant, to assist the Council in
drafting a• Forestry Scheme for the County of Louth.
Tt was also decided to convene a special meeting of the
Finance Committee for Monday, the 9th instant, on special
notice, to consider the other three matters, viz. :—
Proposed New County Offices.
Financial arrangement with Co. Louth Insurance Committee,
and
The Clerical arrangements in the Secretary's Office.
LAMP AT CARLINGFORD HARBOUR.
Mr. Peter Woods, J.P., brought under tlhe notice of the
Commitfee the t,pouble experienced in connection with the
lighting of the new Lamp at Carlingford Pier. He stated
that the Harbour Master had extreme difficulty in lighting
the lamp, as it required to be taken out of the standard to
light and fill, and being an ordinary duplex lamp with an
29
open chimney, it was practically impossible to keep it lighted
w'hile it was being replaced in the frame.
Mr. Lyons, the acting County Surveyor, on being reque»sted
by the Chairman €0 explain the matter, stated that he had
procured this lamp speciallS and at considerable expense ; that
it was recommended specially for a Harbour light, and that
in his opinion Chere was no difficulty in the lighting of same.
A very lengthened discussion ensued •on the matter, in which
very conflicting views arose, but no order was made by the
Corn niittee.
.30
Finance Committee.
SPECIAL MEETING.
Minutes of proceedings of Fina nee Committee at their Spe—
rial Meeting held in the Council Chamber, Court House, Dun-
dalk, on Monday, the 9th day of March, 1914, at one o'clock,
In the C'.mir—C A Duffy, Esq, J P
Present Goodman, J M Johnson, J
P; James
Connolly, J P; M O'Meara, J P; J H WArdle, J P; P O'Con-
nell and James Wynne, J P, Esquires.
FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS WITH INSURANCE
COMMITTEE.
The Committee discussed the figures of the proposed provi-
sional arrangement suggested between the Insurance Com-
mittee and the County Council, Whereby treatment for tuber-
ctllar Insured versons and their dependants will be provided by
the Council on payment of the following sums 'by Che Insurance
Committee, pending the completion of tho County 14011th Ttr—
berculosis SO'.1erne : —
Per An.
For DI' M 'Quillan's services acting as Committee's
For
For
For
For
31
Nurse (Y Hagan to attend domiciliary eases in Dun-
dalk ancl Carlingford
the services of one District Nurse in each District
of Drogheda, Ardeemn«l Castlebellingham in eon-
neetion with domiciliary treatment
the use of at Aeast Six of the Council's
cost of romoval, repairs and disinfecting, etc, to
be borne by the Council
Ureating patients at Dispensaries at 9s per a,nnum,
say
For Vretiting Clvronie eases in Advanced Hospital, CI Is
per week
Patients' travelling expenses
Total
30
15
13
,Li7ö1
Medical Adviser
For the use of not less Chan Six of the Council's Beds
at Peamount Sanatorium, i.e., 26 patients would
receive 12 weeks'
For treati:ng Surgical
Louth Infirmary,
received 2 weeks
treatment each
cases in Surgical Hospital, say,
at IOS per week, if 20 cases
each
e'250
312
20
On the motion of Mr Goodman, seconded by -Mr Jdhnson,
J P, the following motion svas passed unanimously
' 'That we reeornmend, that pending the completion of the
County Louth Tuberculosis Scheme, that the County Council
accept the sum Of C80() per annumn as the eontribution Of the
Insurance Committee to the County Council for the services of
Dr M'Qnillan as medical adviser; the use of Six of t!he• Coun-
eil's Beds in Peamoun€; 20 eases of surgical treatment in
Louth Infirmary of two weeks each at per week, the servi-
ces of one Nurse to attend domiciliary treatment in Dundalk
and Carlingfoud ; the services of one Distlict Nurse in Drog-
heda, Ardee ancl Castlebellingham in connection with domi-
eiliary tratment; for the use of at least Six of the Council's
Shelters, costs of removal, repairs and disinfecting inclusive;
for treating patients at dispensaries, cost not to exceed Clö per
annum; for treating chronic cases in Advanced Hospital, cost
not to exceed C3Cj per annum ; and patient's travelling expen-
ses, cost not to exceed C13 per armum."
CLERICAL STAFF IN THE SECRETARY'S OFFICE.
The qruxstion of the vacancy in the Council's offices was next
discussed, and it was the view of the Committee that the whole
question of the staffing of the offce should be put on a perma-
nant basis, so Chat the various departments of elme Council's
complex work should 'be done in a thoroughly efficient man-
nor. The various heads of the work were under review,
namely—The cheeking of the Rate Collectors' abstracts, the
ordinary •accountancy of the office, the correspondence, taking
and recording of minutes, road payments and county-at-large
payments, work under the Diseases of Animals Acts (including
work under S'heep Dipping Order and Cattle Tuberculosis Or-
der), Motor Licences •and Registrations and accounts there-
with, various and intricate returns for Recoupment Claims to
lhe several Goverllrnent Departments, special account keeping
in connection with t;he Tn berculosis Scheme, the details •of the
valuation work, etc; preparation of the complicated "leclyules
required by Act'S of Parliament, and Che general heavy work
in connection with the half-yearly audits under the Local Go-
vernment Board.
It was ultimately unanimously decided €0 recommend the
County Council to make t.'he following appointments, viz
Alr Joseph Louden, at a salary of CI IOS per week.
A Senior Clerk at a salary of C8() per annum, increasing to
Cl'2() maximum, by annual increments of C,5.
A Junior Clerk at a salary of C.50, increasing to C80 maxi-
mum, by annual increments of
That tho two latter appointments be made by competitive
examination, conducted, as in other counties, by the Local Go-
vernment Board, and that, in the case of tlhe Junior Clerik,
proficiency in Shorthand and Typewriting be compulsory.
PROPOSED NEW COUNTY OFFICES.
'Ilhe Committee next considered the question of the proposed
New Offices, and after discussicn it was clce;xlecl, on the motion
of Mr Johnson, J P, seconded by Mr Goodman.
' 'That, our County Surveyor be directed to prepare a map of
the premises available at the Old Jail site for building new
offices; that he ascertain tho details of the additional areom-
modation required to 'be providccl for, submit same for
consideration at a meeting cf tine Finance Committee."
'Bye following correspondence in connection with the matter
was read and initialled by the Cha :—
The Royal Institute of the Arehiteet.s of Treland,
31 South Frederick Street, Dublin
5th March, 1914.
The Secretary,
Louth County Council, Dundalk.
Dear Sir,
I notice in the peport of a recent meeting of t"IiO
County Council that it is proposed to hold a competition
among Architects for the design of the Council's new offices.
T a.m instructed send you the enclcsed regulations for ar-
ehit,ectural competitions issued by the Royal Institute of the
Architects of Ireland, Which may be of assistance to the Coun-
eil in such conditions and instructions as will
aexsgptable to Architects of good standi ng, and thus ensure
fulier and better competition.
My Institute will be very pleased to give further ptuiiculars
or any otther assistance in drawing up instructions and condi-
tions on lines equitable to the Council and our profession.
Yours faithfully,
FREDK. G. HICKS,
Hon. See.
Regulations of the Royal Institute of the Architects of Ireland
For Architectural Competitions.
It is assumed that Che object of the Promoters is to obtain
the best design for the purpose in view. This object may best
be secured by conducting all Competitions upon the lines laid
down in Che following Regulations, which aave been framed
with a view to securing the lyst results to the Promoters with
scrupulous fairness to the competitors.
Members of the Royal Institute, of the Architects of Ireland
and Allied Societies not compete excepting under conditions
based •on these Regulations.
The Condi Lions of a Competition shall contain the follow Re-
gulations (A) to (F) as essential :—
(A) There shall be appointed for every Competition one
.or more fully qualified professional Assessors, to whom
the Whole •of the designs shall be submitted.
(B) No Promoter of a Competition, and no Assessor en-
gaged upon it, nor any employee of either, shall eom-
pete or Assist Competitor, or act as Architect, or
joint Architect, for the proposed work.
(C) Each design shall be accompanied by a declaration,
signed by the eompe€itor, or joint competitors, stating
that. 'the design is his or their own personal work, and
that the drawings have been prepared under his or
their own supervision. A successful competitor must
be prepared to satisfy the Assessor that he is the bona-
fide author of the design he has submitted.
(D') The premiums Shall be yaid in accordance with the
Assessor's award, and the author of the design placed
first by the Assessor shall be employed to carry out the
work, unless the Assessor shall be satisfied that there
is some valid objection €0 such employment, in which
case the author of the design placed next in order of
merit Shall be eloployed, subject to a similar condition.
The award of the Assessor 'hall not be set aside for
any other reason.
(E) If no insttuetions given to the author of thc, de-
sign selected by the Assessor to proceed within twelve
months from the date of the award' then 'he shall re-
oeive payment for his services in connection with
preparation of the Competition (Irmving.s of a sum
to 11 wer cent on the amount of estimated
cost. If the work is subsequently proceeded with, the
11 cent previcusly paill Vo him shall form part of
his ultimate commission.
(P) IPho selected Architect shall Ibe paid in accordance
with the Schedule of Charges sanctioned and pub.
lislwtl by the Royml Institute of the Architects of Ire-
land.
I.—Tlre Promoters of an intended Competition should, as their
first step, appoint one or more professional Assessons, ar-
ehitects of established rcputation, whose appointment
kbe publis/hed in the original advertisements and in-
structions. The selection of an Assessor should be made
with the greatest possible care, as the successful result of
Competition will depend very largly upon his exper-
ie.nce and ability.
The President Of the Royal Institute of the Architects of
Ireland is always prepared €0 act as honorary advised to
Promote•s in their appointment of Assessors.
2. —The duties of an Assessor are as follows
(a) To confer and advise the Promoters on their
requirements, and on the questions of cost and pre-
miums to be offered.
(b) To draw up instructions for tkhe guidance of eompe—
titors, and for the conduct of the Competition, incor-
porating the whole of the clauses of these Regulations
which are applicable to tlle particular Competition.
NOTE. —It is essential, in drawing lt.p the Instructions,
to state definitely which of the conditions must be .<rictly
adhered to, undt penalty of disqualification from the
Competition, and which of them are optional.
(e) To answer queries raised by competitors within a li-
mitecl time during the preparation of the designs, such
answers to be sent to all competitors.
(d) To examine all the designs su brnitted 'by competitors,
and 60 determine whether they conform to the condi-
tions, and to exclude any wlt;eh do not.
(e) To report to the Promoters on the designs not so ex-
eluded, and to award the premiums in strict adherence
to the Conditions.
3. —Compptit,ians may be conducted in one of the following
ways : —
(a) By advertisement. inviting architects willing to corn-
for the intended work to send in designs.
For
Competitions for pubdie works of great architectural
importance this method is recommended.
(b) By advertisement. inviting architects willing to com-
pete for the intended work to send in their names by
a given day, with suoh other information as they may
think likely to advance their claims to be admitted to
the Competition. From these names the Promoters,
with the advice of the Assessor, shall select a limited
number to compete, and each competitor thus selected
shall receive a specified sum for the preparation of his
design.
(c) By personal invitation to a limited ntnnber of selec-
ted arc)hitects to join in n competition for the inten-
ded work. Each competitor shall receive a specified
sum for the preparation of his design.
NOTE —Where a deposit is required for supplying the
4.
37
Instructions, it shall be returned on the receipt of a bona-
fide design, or if the appliea,nt cleclines to compete, and re-
turns the said Instructions Mlitllin a month after the re-
ceipt of replies to competitors' questions.
The number, scale, and method of finishing of the twqn:ired
drawings shall be distinctly set forth. The drawings shall
not be more in number or to a larger scale than necessary
clearly to explain the design, and such drawings shall be
u niform in size, number, mode of colouring ,ancl mount-
i.ng. As a general rule, a scale of 16 feet to 1 inch Mi 11 be
found sufficient for plans, sections, and elevations, or in
Che case of very large buildings a smaller scale might
suffice.
Unless the Assessor advises that perspective drawings are de-
sira ble, tåhe.v shall not be admitted.
6. —No design shall bear any motto or distinguishing mark ;
but all designs shall be numbered by the Promoters in or-
der of receipt.
(j.—A design shall be excluded from a Competition—
(a) If sent in after the period nanted (accidents in tran-
sit excepted) ;
(b) If it does not give substantially the accommodation
asked for ;
(c) If it exceeds the limits of site as shown on t,he plan
issued by the Promoters, the figured dimensions on
which shall be adhered to ;
(d) If the Assessor shall determine that its probable cost
will exceed by IO per cent the outlay stated in tlhe In-
structions, or the estimate of the competitor should
no outlay be stated. If the Assessor be of opinion
that t,'he outlay stated in the Instructions is inade-
quat.e, the shall not be bound in tho selection of a de-
sign by the amount named in such Instructions, but
the question of cost shall nevertheless be a material
element in the consideration of the award;
38
(e) If any of tho Conditions or Instructions other than
those of a suggestive Oharacter are violated ;
(f) If a competitor gjnall disclose his identity or attempt
to influence the decision.
7.—All designs ancl reports submitted in a Competition for a
public building, except any excluded uncler •Cla,use G, shall
publicly exllibit,ed after the award has been made,
which award shall be published at t'he time of exhibition;
ancl all designs and reports submitted in a competition for
a, v,rivate 'building shall be similarly exhibited to the eom-
petitors.
8.—All drawings su'bmitted in a competition, except those of
the design selected to be carried out, shall be returned to
competitors.
The usual R.I.A.I. Seale of Charges for Ass€nssing Competi-
tions, whether •by jury or otherwise, is the sum of Thirty
Guineas, plus one-fifth per cent upon the estimated cost of 'the
proposed building.
F. G. mcKs,
Hon. Secretary R.I.A.I.
The Royal Institute of the Architects of Ireland,
31 South Frederick Street, Dublin.
POOR RATE COLLECTION.
following letter was road, and the Secretary was directed
to send copy to each of the Poor Rate Collectors :—
Local Government Board,
Dublin, March, 1914.
No. 11122.
Louth County.
Sir,
With reference to the collection of the Poor Rate in
Louth County for the current half-year, I am directed by the
Local Government Board for Ireland to state that they have
received a report from their Inspector, Mr E A Saunderson,
39
from they note that at this advanced stage of the col-
lection (the 28th ultimo), only out of a total of C16,368
had been collected.
The Collectors are, no doubt, aware that the question of the
extent to which their remuneration in respect of last half-
year's collection eau •be paid, remains undecided, and their
failure Io proceed diligently with their collections in the pre-
sent half-year must be regarded as seriously prejudicing tmeir
claim to lenient. treatment.
The Board have noted especially that the following Collectors
are extremey backward in their collections Hughes,
Veter M.Donnell, Patrick Donegan, John Kelly and Patrick
Cluskey.
I am €0 add that ait the elose Of the year the Board will be
compelled to cofisider whether Collector Hughes can be allowed
to retain his position.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
A. R. BARLAS,
Secretary.
Secretary ,
Louth County Council.
County Surveyors, and those of the Secretary's Office,
40
Finance Committee.
Minutes of Proceedings Of the above Committee at their
'2 11
Sleeting, held in the Council Chamber, Courthouse, Dundalk,
on Monday, the 16th March, 1914, at one o'clock, p m.
In the Chai—Chas A Duffy, Esq, J P.
Others present : —James Connolly, J P; E Goodman, J M
Johnson, J P; J H M'Ard1e, J P; J F J P; P O'Con-
nell, M O'Meara, J P; and wm Woods, J P,
Mr Forbes, Chief Forestry Inspector for the Department of
Agriculture, and Me—rs Lyons and Dromgcolw, Acting County
Surveyors, were, also present.
The following accounts for works in charge of the Acting
11 10
Alicha•l Mat;hew.s
James Boyle
P Jennings and Co.
T Reilly
Wm RIG Ily
P Jennings and Co.
John Craven
Pa trick Carroll
P Jennings and Co-
Patrick Hanlon
John• Byrne
SECRETARY'S OFFICE.
Thos Martiu (Education Act)
Miss Callan (Scholarships)
Miss M •Parland, do.
H Rogan, do.
L Branagan, do.
P A Hanratty, do.
Joseph M 'Parland, do.
V M 'Nnmee, Bill Posting (Valutn)
P J Clarke (Rate Books)
J M 'Guinness, do.
J Kincllon, do.
F Monevpenny, (IO.
Chas MtCarthv,
H J Palmer do.
French, do.
J O' Mahony, do.
F M•Ard1e, do.
Ilhomas Gorman, do.
M M•Gahan, do.
J Louden, do.
10
o
o
1
1
1
o
'2
6
0
2
3 10
8
9
8
7
3
3
8
5
4
3
11
7
17
2
5
amined and payments ordered
SURVEYOR'S OFFICE.
John C Kieran
13 ernard Grogan
1110tna,s Byrne
Arthur Callan
Th omas M 'Kenna
Patrick Kirk
Timothy Murray
E Gallaeher
P Rice
E Gallaeher
Philip Clarke
E Cal lacher
Bernard M 'Kenna
P Jennings and Co.
Patrick Mulroy
John
Thomas Clarke
A rthur O'Hare
Peter Cumiskey
G
1
1
1
12
o
5
1
1
o
1
1
1
0
9
0 10
0
IO
4 11 10
8
16
7
7
7
5
0 13 11
9
5
5
s
were ex-
o
8
3 11
3 11
6
5
6
'2
2
0
8
8
6'
o
1 15
o
12
6
8
16
1
o
3
0
3
2
o
O
2
3 18
6
3
3 10
2 18
2 13
8
2
o
2
1
1 10
0 18
2
19
o
3
12
o
8
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
5
1
9
3
'2
o
1
The Bank Books were inspected a.ncl initialled by the Chahi-
xnn n.