Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
1 of 58 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect 
putting them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is 
available on request. 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ  NA  CRUINNITHE  MHIOSIÚIL  DE  COMHAIRLE  CONTAE 
CHIARRAÍ  A  THIONÓLADH  I  SEOMRA  NA  COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS  AN  
CHONTAE, TRÁ  LÍ, AR  AN  LUAN , 24 AIBREAN, 2017 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL 
HELD IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE ON 
MONDAY, 24TH APRIL 2017 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
R. Beasley 
M. Cahill 
P Connor-Scarteen         
B. Cronin 
J.J. Culloty 
P. Daly 
T. Ferris                             J. Finucane                       S Fitzgerald  
      
J.F. Flynn 
N. Foley 
M. Gleeson  
        
D. Grady 
J. Healy-Rae 
N. Kelleher  
        
M. Kennelly 
S. Locke 
J. Lucid 
 
         
D. McCarthy 
P. McCarthy 
T. McEllistrim 
         
J. Moloney 
N. Moriarty 
D. Nolan 
 
         
T. O’Brien 
B. O’Connell                      M. O’Shea   
         
L. Purtill 
J. Sheahan 
G. Spring 
 
         
A. Thornton 
 
APOLOGIES/LEATH SCÉAL 
 
M. Healy-Rae 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Ms. M. Murrell, Chief Executive    
  Mr. J. Breen, Director Water Services     
                
Ms. A. McAllen, Head of Finance 
  Mr. M. Scannell, A/Dir. Job Cr/Sust. ED          
Mr. M. O’Donoghue, A/Dir.H.&Corp.S.   Mr. C. O’Sullivan, Director of Operations        
Mr. L. Quinlan, Meetings Admin. 
  Ms. K. Lynch, SEO Finance 
                        
Mr. B. Looney, Head of IT 
  Ms. J. Maher, Fin. Mgmt. Accountant              
Mr. D. Doyle, SE Operations 
  Mr. P. Neary, SE Operations 
 
              
Mr. G. Riordan, SE Operations 
  Mr. J. Griffin, Tourism Officer  
 
    
Mr. T. Hayes LEO Officer 
  Ms. J. McCarthy, SEO Tourism 
 
    
Ms. B. Fitzgerald, Econ. Dev. Officer   Mr. O. O’Shea, Press & Comm. Off.                 
Mr. G. O’Brien, A/SEO Envir. Serv.         Mr. D. Ginty, A/SE Planning 
                        
Ms. B. Reidy, SSO Corporate Support   Mr. R. Norris, Tech. Support, IT 
             
Ms. M. Galvin, CO Corporate Support    Ms. J. O’Sullivan, CO Corp. Support         
 
 
The meeting commenced at 10.35am. 
 
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. M. O’Shea took the Chair. 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
2 of 58 
 
17.04.24.01 Cathaoirleach’s Report 
 
The Cathaoirleach read the following report into the record of the meeting: 
 
“A discussion took place on the following: 
 
Agenda for the April Council Meeting 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan gave a briefing on the Agenda for the April Council Meeting and the 
relevant senior staff went into more detail on the individual agenda items. 
 
Draft Creative Ireland Kerry Activation Plan 
 
Kate Kennelly, Arts Officer gave an update in respect of this draft which is 
included in the agenda of the April Council meeting. 
 
Draft Official Events Protocol 
 
This also is included in the agenda of the April Council meeting and Liam Quinlan 
advised that the draft for adoption had previously been considered by CPG and 
was circulated to all Council Members for comment. 
 
Request for permission to make a Presentation to Council 
 
Mr. Liam Quinlan advised that an email was received from Iarnród Éireann that 
indicated that review of their customer service at all stations across the network 
is being undertaken.   They requested permission to make a presentation to 
Council on the upcoming changes. 
 
It was advised that if Iarnród Éireann makes a presentation to Council that it 
would focus on strategic issues like future plans for the Mallow/Killarney/Tralee 
service also. 
 
Any other business 
 
Minister Ross visits Kerry 
 
The Chief Executive advised that Minister Ross would visit Kerry on Wednesday 
19th April and that both she and the Cathaoirleach would meet with him at Kerry 
Airport that evening. She also advised that the executive would also discuss the 
World Cup Rugby Bid with the Minister in Fitzgerald Stadium, Killarney.  
 
Opening of Centenary Park, Listowel 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley paid tribute to the work of Kerry County Council on the design 
and layout of the new Centenary Park in Listowel which was officially opened the 
previous weekend.   
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
3 of 58 
Wild Atlantic Way  
Cllr. R. Beasley expressed concern at the directional signage in respect of WAW 
Loop proposed by Fáilte Ireland which management undertook to pursue with 
them.  
 
The Chief Executive advised that it is planned to host a Conference for all local 
authorities on the WAW in Kerry in September and undertook to update Council 
on initiatives undertaken by Fáilte Ireland to promote the WAW.   
 
Update on the North Kerry Landfill 
 
Mr. J. Breen advised that Fehilly Timoney Environmental Consultants have been 
appointed to advance the expressions of interest.  The consultants will be making 
contact with those who made submissions previously and with the community in 
Kielduff in the coming weeks.  CPG and Council will be updated on progress in 
due course. 
 
Clár Funding 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan advised that applications for projects for Clár funding have been 
invited by the Dept. of Arts, Heritage and Gaeltacht Affairs. Similar to last year 
the main focus will be on safety measures at schools but schools will be required 
to make a contribution.  Community areas may also qualify for funding.  The 
national allocation is €5m. Mr O’Sullivan advised that the timeframe for putting 
the Programme together is very short as it must be submitted by early May and 
this will not allow time to present it to full Council before it is submitted. 
 
Invitation to MEPs and Senators to attend the May Council Meeting 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan advised that as per the Cathaoirleach’s request MEPs for the 
South Constituency and Kerry Senators would be invited to attend a full Council 
meeting in May to be held in the same format as with the TDs recently.” 
 
In conclusion the Cathaoirleach extended a vote of sympathy to Cllr. Dan 
McCarthy on the recent death of his father Denis Snr.   
 
The Cathaoirleach also extended a vote of sympathy to the Darcy Family on the 
death of former County Manager Mr. Paddy Darcy. 
 
All members indicated they wished to be associated with these expressions of 
sympathy. 
 
17.04.24.02 Confirmation of Minutes 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Moloney, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Gleeson it was 
resolved that the minutes of the March Ordinary Meeting of Kerry County Council 
held on 27th March 2017 be confirmed. 
 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
4 of 58 
17.04.24.03 Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
 
The Chief Executive read the following report into the record of the meeting:         
 
“Introduction 
 
Section 136(2) of the Local Government Act 2001, as inserted by Section 51 of 
the Local Government Reform Act 2014 places an obligation on the Chief 
Executive to prepare a report, to be known as the Management Report, in 
relation to the performance of his or her Executive Functions during the 
preceding calendar month, including implementation of policy or other matters 
required by the Council in the exercise of its Reserved Functions and the 
provision of services by the Council. 
 
As agreed by the Members, the report will be forwarded to you on a monthly 
basis along with the documentation for the ordinary monthly meetings. 
 
Members will also be aware that an update report is provided at each Municipal 
District Meeting on the work of the Directorates within Kerry County Council.  
These very detailed reports provide updates on the main activities per directorate 
at Municipal District level on such matters as the Housing Programme, the 
Roadworks Programme, Water and Wastewater projects, Environmental 
Services etc. Please note in particular that the revised Municipal District Housing 
Report presented at the Municipal District Meetings includes updates across all 
social housing activity at municipal district level for the information of Municipal 
District members. As previously advised in order to avoid duplication of reporting, 
updates on these matters are not included in the Chief Executive's Report. 
 
The report below has been prepared for the April 2017 Council Meeting. 
 
 
Finance Directorate 
 
The Annual Financial Statement for 2016 is on the April Council Agenda for 
consideration by the Members. 
 
Infrastructure, Operations, Health & Safety Directorate 
 
Tralee Active Travel - Redevelopment of The Mall 
Works are on-going and on schedule. The Council has a full time Engineer on 
site, liaising with local businesses. The Mall will be closed to traffic after the May 
bank holiday weekend and traffic diversions will be in place. The Contractor has 
indicated that the works at the junction of Denny Street and the Mall, as well as 
the pavement overlay of Denny Street are expected to be completed by the 22nd 
May, following which Denny Street will be opened to two way traffic. The 
Contractor also intends to cease works on the Mall between the 12th and the 
22nd August, which coincides with the Rose Festival.        
 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
5 of 58 
Listowel By-Pass 
A preplanning meeting with An Bord Pleanála is scheduled for the 27th April.  
Subject to the outcome of this meeting, it is our intention to submit the CPO and 
EIS for the Scheme to the board in May.   
 
Road Improvement and Restoration Programme  
Works under these programmes, as outlined in the adopted Schedule of 
Municipal District Work Plans have commenced. The Municipal District Engineers 
will inform you fortnightly by e-mail, on the scheduling of specific works in your 
area.    
 
CLÁR - Local Authority Measures    
The Department of Arts, Heritage, Regional Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs has 
announced a further funding programme for interventions that make the 
school/community facility environs healthier and safer for children and adults, in 
CLÁR areas, with €4.25 million being made available nationally. The maximum 
level of grant aid per project is €50,000 and a minimum contribution of 5% is 
required towards the cost of a project from the school / community. Due to the 
very short timeframe for completing the applications and the closure of schools 
during the Easter recess, Municipal District management have been requested to 
identify suitable projects taking into consideration representations made by you 
and to liaise with the relevant operators on the funding requirements. The 
Director of Operations circulated details of the scheme to you last week.    
 
Economic & Community Development Directorate 
 
Economic Development Unit (EDU) 
 
iEER  Learning Camp Northern Ireland/Kerry 
The Economic Development Officer attended the iEER Learning Camp in Belfast, 
Newry & Kerry the last week of March.  This was hosted by the Northern Ireland 
and Kerry Partners.  European partners from 10 different regions attended the 
learning camp. 
 
The iEER is an Interreg Europe funded flagship project bringing together 10 
regions around Europe. Initiated by a group of regions awarded with the 
European Entrepreneurial Region label, iEER will define smart paths and 
solutions to boost regional entrepreneurship ecosystems supporting young 
entrepreneurs.  The Interreg-funded project aims to boost the collaboration of 
European and regional actors to better support entrepreneurship, particularly 
young entrepreneurs. Another objective is to improve the quality of services and 
structural fund support designed for entrepreneurs, particularly young 
entrepreneurs. The project aims to break down silo mentality and bring together 
all actors having a hand in entrepreneurial success. Universities, local and 
regional authorities, entrepreneurship support organisations and SMEs are 
closely involved in the project both on the local and interregional levels. On 
completion of the learning process the findings are collected, analysed and 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
6 of 58 
compiled into regional action plans and into an iEER Boost Growth Handbook. 
This will be a useful guide for other European regions, outlining best practice. 
 
During the period 2018-2020 regional action plans will be put into place and 
progress monitored. Lessons learned will be collected into a policy 
recommendation.  
 
Kerry Local Enterprise Office  
 
March 2017 saw the successful delivery of Enterprise Month with over 40 events 
scheduled throughout the County. The LEO office was the organiser of 12 of 
these events. Highlights of the month included the County Enterprise Awards at 
which Antoinette Butler of Irish Host Families was chosen to represent the 
County at the national awards. The Student Enterprise Awards were held on the 
31st of March with the winners of the Junior Award coming from Presentation 
Milltown, the Intermediate Award from Killorglin Community School and the 
Senior Award from St Joseph’s Ballybunion. There is a high level of ongoing 
enquiries and very strong bookings for training courses. As part of Enterprise 
month the IT Tralee Cantillon 2017 in association with FEXCO Fintech forum was 
held on the 31st March 2017.   The theme this year was Building Borderless 
Business. 
 
The LEO office received its 2017 budget allocation from Enterprise Ireland with 
an overall increase in funding to €804,972 from an initial budget of €734,557 in 
2016. 
 
Tourism Unit 
 
CMMA/LGMA Local Authorities Tourism Conference 
The Tourism Unit recently produced a ‘Statement of Strategy & Workplan’, which 
along with statements from each local authority in the Country, was launched at a 
conference, which took place in Enniscorthy, Co. Wexford at the end of March.  
The theme of the conference was to ‘Collaborate Locally to Compete Globally’.  
The conference brought together representatives from local authorities all over 
Ireland to share learnings and best practices, and to listen to experts in the 
tourism field.  The aim of the conference was to ensure that working together, 
Local Authorities will continue to grow and develop their tourism offering in an 
increasingly competitive global marketplace.   
 
Destination Kerry Promotion in Boston  
To coincide with the visit by the Cathaoirleach to Boston last month, the Tourism 
Unit organised a Kerry Tourism Promotion with Tourism Ireland and Shannon 
Airport for the Boston and New England travel trade in Capitol Grille /Hynes 
Convention Centre, Boston on March 20th. All the major tour operators attended 
and also the North American sales manager of Norwegian Airlines which will 
commence to operate new direct, low cost, services to both Shannon and Cork 
from July.   
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
7 of 58 
Astronomy Course 2017 
Following on the success and popularity of the Astronomy Course held in the 
Dark Sky Reserve in February 2016, the Tourism Unit in collaboration with UCC 
and the Skellig Centre for Research & Innovation, is organising and presenting a 
UCC accredited ‘Introduction to Astronomy’ weekend course from the 12th to 
13th May 2017.  The Dark Sky Reserve in South Kerry covers a 700 sq. km area 
and is one of only 3 gold-tier reserves in the Northern Hemisphere.  The huge 
tourism potential of the area, at a time when visitors want new and innovative 
experiences, has yet to be realised.  The course aims to promote astronomy and 
stargazing within the reserve and will help develop local business opportunities, 
whilst offering a unique experience to this growing market. 
 
Events Calendar 
The Tourism Unit has recently upgraded its event’s calendar with the introduction 
of a new ‘submit your event’ feature, which enables event organisers to add their 
event to this rapidly expanding calendar of ‘what’s happening’ throughout the 
county.   This Event Guide is an easy and accessible way of promoting events 
and festivals, both big and small, to a wide national and international audience.  It 
can be accessed online at http://www.tockify.com/enjoykerry or through the 
Tourism Unit’s social media platforms.  The Elected Members are requested to 
promote this facility amongst their local communities.  
 
Community Department 
 
Community Support Fund, 2017 (CSF, 2017) 
All applications received under the CSF, 2017 were carefully considered within 
the criteria and capacity of the Fund and 347 projects were approved for funding 
by the Elected Members at Municipal District Meetings convened for this purpose 
during the month of March.  The letters of offer are currently being processed by 
the Community Department and will issue to the successful applicants in the 
coming week. The early notification to Community Groups in 2017 should 
facilitate the implementation of the successful projects in the Spring/Summer 
period. 
 
Communities Facilities Capital Grant Scheme, 2017 
In early March, the Minister of State for Communities and the National Drugs 
Strategy, Catherine Byrne, T.D., announced a new Capital grants scheme for 
disadvantaged urban and rural areas.  In Kerry, the scheme will run from July 
2017 – December, 2017 and is focused on providing small-scale capital grants to 
fund local Age Friendly capital initiatives and projects. The total amount of the 
grant available for allocation in Kerry is €64,000. Applications are now being 
invited for funding under this scheme.  Eligible facilities will include community 
centres, youth clubs, sports/recreation facilities and other not-for-profit 
organisations’ facilities.  The Scheme will offer grants up to a maximum of €1,000 
per project. Media advertisements to advertise the Scheme will be placed this 
week.  The closing date for receipt of applications is 30th June, 2017.  
Application forms together with a guidance document on the Scheme have been 
uploaded to the council’s website and to the PPN website. Forms are also 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
8 of 58 
available from the Community Department. The Scheme seeks to address some 
of the difficulties local community groups face in terms of accessing small scale 
levels of funding to match their own fundraising efforts in order to get capital 
community projects off the ground. 
 
Kerry Community Awards, 2017 
The Kerry Community Awards are intended to honour those community 
organisations, managed by volunteers, who freely give of their time and energy to 
sustain and develop projects in their local communities.   In total 38 applications, 
representing community projects already implemented throughout the county, 
have been submitted for consideration under the 2017 Award Scheme.  These 
applications are currently being assessed by an adjudication panel selected by 
the Kerry Community Awards Planning Group.  The awards will be presented at 
an evening event scheduled for Wednesday 10th May, 2017 and hosted by the 
Dromhall Hotel, Killarney.   
 
Social Inclusion and Community Activation Programme, 2014 to 2017 (SICAP) 
SICAP is a key intervention for the harder to reach in our community with the 
delivery of the Programme being overseen and managed by the Local 
Community Development Committee (LCDC). It is a requirement that the actions 
set out under SICAP reflect the priorities and needs identified in the community 
aspect of the Local Economic and Community Plan (LECP).  
 
The current Programme will expire at the end of 2017. The DHPCLG have 
confirmed that there will be a new SICAP programme for the period 2018- 2020 
and have initiated a consultation process  through Pobal to review where the 
current programme is at and how it should look going forward in which Kerry 
County Council and  the Programme Implementers in Kerry will be fully involved.   
 
Minister Byrne, Minister of State at the DHPCLG, visited Killarney on 3rd March, 
2017, with the objective of receiving an overview of a SICAP project implemented 
in Kerry.  The project selected by the LCDC for the Minister’s visit was the Kerry 
Social Farming project. This Project offers an opportunity to people with 
disabilities to engage with host farm families and the farming community. The 
Kerry Social Farming Project is an excellent example of a SICAP project – 
targeting support to a very important target group, applying community 
development approaches to ensure their participation and developing 
collaborative approaches with other local & national stakeholders to further 
develop and grow the project.  
 
Kerry Public Participation Network 
The Kerry Public Participation Network (PPN) has commenced work on the 
LECP Higher Level Goal 3.7 "To create an environment where people with 
disabilities can participate in communities with equal rights to live life to their full 
potential."  The action involves the running of education and awareness raising 
workshops at Municipal District level PPN structures.  The areas to be addressed 
include Access/Transport, Employment, Tourism/Leisure/Social and 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
9 of 58 
Education/Training.  The first workshop will take place involving Killarney Access 
Group.   
 
Kerry Recreation and Sports Partnership Strategic Plan 2017- 2022 
The Kerry Recreation and Sports Partnership Strategic Plan 2017- 2022 was 
launched by the Minister of State for Tourism and Sport, Patrick O’Donovan TD 
on 27th March, 2017.  
The six-year strategy focuses on the mission to increase participation in sport 
and physical activity by people of all ages and abilities in Kerry. The launch which 
took place at Siamsa Tíre featured panel type discussions on the above themes 
with speakers including, Jimmy  Deenihan (Chairman, KRSP), John Treacy  
(CEO, Sports Ireland)   Eamonn Fitzmaurice, Gavan Hennigan, Ellen Keane and 
Keith Wood. These panel type discussions worked very well and we were 
grateful to have such engaging speakers to support the launch. 
 
New Initiative under 2017 CLÁR Programme to support first-response 
organisations  
On the 31st March, 2017, Minister of State for Regional Economic Development, 
Michael Ring TD, announced details of the CLÁR programme for 2017. This 
year’s CLÁR Programme includes a new initiative to support voluntary first-
response organisations who provide an excellent service in rural areas, very 
often under very difficult circumstances. This funding is intended to enable these 
organisations to purchase or upgrade equipment that is fit for purpose in 
assisting in their life-saving activities. 
 
The CLÁR programme is funded by the Department of Arts, Heritage, Regional, 
Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs. Proposals in respect of this initiative should be 
submitted directly to the Department of Arts, Heritage, Regional, Rural and 
Gaeltacht Affairs for assessment and approval at the following email address 
clar@ahg.gov.ie.  
 
Planning and Sustainable Development  
 
The Listowel Heritage & Community-Led-Regeneration Strategy is to be 
launched on Thursday May 11th 2017. This strategy aims to environmentally, 
economically, and socially regenerate the historic town of Listowel.  
 
The strategy proposes 18 actions for Listowel’s Heritage assets that aim to:  
a) 
Provide the town’s residents with an enjoyable living environment,  
b) 
Provide the towns traders with a fruitful business environment and  
c) 
Provide future visitors to Listowel with a more interesting and engaging 
offering in terms of shopping, activities, attractions, accommodation and heritage 
interpretation.  
 
Funding sources for year one projects identified in the strategy are currently 
being investigated.  
 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
10 of 58 
Water, Environment, Fire & Library Services Directorate 
 
County Clean-up Day /Spring Clean 
The Sixth Annual County Clean clean-up day took place on Saturday 8th April.  
Kerry County Council wish to acknowledge and pay tribute to the thousands of 
volunteers that came out on the day to clean up their respective areas and to 
KWD for their ongoing support of this event.  4,700 volunteers registered for this 
year’s event which is an increase of 1000 on the 2016 figure.  Final tonnage 
figures for the amount of waste collected are still being compiled and these will 
be published when available.   
 
The 2017 Spring Clean period runs throughout the month of April and will 
continue until mid May.  70 groups have registered to date and groups or 
individuals can continue to register by contacting the Environment Department in 
Maine Street on 066 7162000 or emailing environ@kerrycoco.ie. All waste 
gathered by registered groups or individuals during spring clean will be collected 
and disposed by Kerry County Council. I want to acknowledge the excellent effort 
and spirit demonstrated by communities throughout the county in their 
participation of this initiative.   
 
Housing Directorate 
 
The contract signing for the next Housing Programme construction project will be 
signed on 4th May next. This project consists of 4 units - 2 No. 3 Bedroom and 2 
No. 4 Bedroom semidetached houses and associated siteworks on Bill Kinnerk 
Road, Tralee.  
 
Repair & Leasing Scheme Update 
The Circular giving effect to this scheme under the Action Plan for Housing and 
Homelessness - Rebuilding Ireland Programme has recently been received. 
We are currently assessing the terms of the scheme with a view to launching the 
scheme in Kerry over the coming weeks. A national workshop is being held on 
25th April and this will assist in clarifying the terms and conditions of the 
scheme.” 
 
Ms. Murrell advised members that since her report issued there was an 
announcement on the Town and Village Renewal Scheme which highlights that 
the process has changed and communities must submit expressions of interest.  
The Municipal District Officers will work with communities in this regard and 
expressions of interest must be received by the end of June. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin highlighted that on the 14th February the members for the Killarney 
MD granted approved for the Part VIII for the much needed cemetery for the 
Killarney area and he asked that it would be progressed as a matter of urgency. 
 
Cllr. Cronin added that he recently met Minister Shane Ross during his visit to 
Kerry and he asked him if he would provide funding for Listry Bridge.  The 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
11 of 58 
Minister asked if a design was prepared and Cllr. Cronin called on management 
to design and cost works required to widen/repair/replace the bridge at Listry.  
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson stated the CE mentioned in her report “The Kerry Public 
Participation Network (PPN) has commenced work on the LECP Higher Level 
Goal 3.7 "To create an environment where people with disabilities can participate 
in communities with equal rights to live life to their full potential.”  He then moved 
Notice of Motion No. 19 as it related to this issue. 
 
19. 
Availability of Wheelchair/Disability Accessible Taxis 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Gleeson PROPOSED: 
As the situation nationally, in relation to the ready availability of 
Wheelchair/Disability Accessible Taxis is totally unsatisfactory, that this Council 
calls on the Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport to critically assess the 
situation and to seek to introduce measures and, if necessary, legislation that will 
ensure the equality of Rights of persons with disabilities. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
 Cllr. Gleeson read the following statement into the record of the meeting: 
 
“It has rightly been said that society can best be judged on how well it cares and 
caters for those who are less well able to care for themselves due to age, illness 
or disability. 
 
There are few as disadvantaged as people who wish to travel somewhere but are 
unable to do so because they have a degree of incapacity that prevents them 
from driving or availing of standard public transport. 
 
It is to overcome that disadvantage that some Taxi drivers have been allocated 
grants to adapt their vehicles to make them wheelchair accessible. There are in 
Kerry quite a few such Taxis. 
 
Sadly it is quite often the experience of people with a disability who call for a Taxi 
that no such appropriate vehicle is available at that time to transport them. 
 
The reason for the Taxi being unavailable is usually because the vehicle is said 
to be on an errand.  That reply suggests that either there are not enough 
Wheelchair accessible Taxis or else Taxi drivers do not wish to have to transport 
wheelchair people. 
 
I know that there is a Taxi Regulator who has responsibility for the issuing of Taxi 
permits but I feel that the relevant Minister should examine this matter with a view 
to ensuring equality of treatment for all and especially for those who are 
disadvantaged due to disability.  If Taxi drivers who have received the adaptation 
grant habitually refuse to facilitate those with a disability then their situation 
needs to be reviewed.” 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
12 of 58 
Cllr. B. Cronin SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy thanked and congratulated all those who took part in the 
County Clean Up day recently.  He condemned those who continue to litter and 
also those who used the County Clean Up to clean out their houses.  He asked if 
volunteers continue to pick up roadside litter and to place it in Kerry County 
Council bags will it be collected by KWD. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton expressed her annoyance that the Minister for Transport did not 
find time to meet with the members for the Listowel MD when he visited the 
county recently.  She enquired as to the issues which were discussed with the 
Minister when the Chief Executive and Cathaoirleach met him and if the Dale 
Road, the re-instatement of funding for the Specific Improvement Scheme and 
the state of roads in the county were included.   
 
Cllr. Thornton welcomed the Centenary Garden which has given a permanent 
space to commemorate those who died in 1916.  She also welcomed progress 
on the landfill.  Cllr. Thornton stated there is no WAW signage for Kerry at the 
exit from Shannon Airport and she requested that a letter would issue to TII and 
the Minister for Transport insisting that WAW signage would be provided 
immediately for County Kerry.  In conclusion Cllr. Thornton welcomed the update 
on the preplanning meeting with An Bord Pleanála in relation the Listowel By-
Pass which is scheduled for the 27th April.   
 
Cllr. D. Grady welcomed the improvements in the construction and provision of 
social housing.  He expressed concern that the plans for the Cycle Track outside 
Killarney have been abandoned and he added that Killarney cannot afford to let 
this facility go.  A number of roads in Killarney town including Ross Road and 
Mission Road are in a very poor state and he asked that they would be improved 
as soon as possible. 
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen asked that application forms for all Grant Schemes i.e. 
Clár and Town and Village Renewal Schemes would be forwarded to councillors.  
He congratulated all those who took part in the County Clean Up Day recently 
and he added it was a great success.  Cllr. Connor-Scarteen asked that there 
would be a standard item on the Agenda for Municipal District meeting on the 
Wild Atlantic Way going forward.  He also asked that members would be 
provided with a copy of the route and that they would be afforded the opportunity 
to discuss it. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley concurred with the views expressed by Cllr. Thornton in relation 
to Minister Ross’s failure to meet with public representatives and also expressed 
his concerns in relation to the section of the Dale Road from Abbeydorney Village 
to Ballinclogher Cross and requested that a funding application be made to the 
Minister.   
 
Cllr. Beasley highlighted that at a recent Listowel MD meeting Ms. Siobhan King 
from Fáilte Ireland briefed members on a proposed new loop on the WAW 
whereby tourists would be directed to Limerick and The Burren when they exit 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
13 of 58 
Tarbert Car Ferry.   He believed Kerry is being neglected as it was intended the 
WAW would promote coastal areas.  A number of years ago he proposed that a 
Ring of North Kerry would be developed from Tarbert / Asdee / Ballyheigue / 
Tralee / Listowel / Tarbert but this was not done. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly commended the Kerry Recreation and Sports Partnership who 
organised another Park Run the previous weekend both in Tralee and Listowel.  
In excess of 700 people take part in the Park Run each week and people who do 
not normally exercise should be encouraged to take part. 
 
Cllr. S. Locke stated he met Minister Ross with the Chamber Alliance and that he 
gave a commitment that the Macroom By-Pass would be completed by 2020.  At 
that meeting he also emphasised the importance of the Adare By-Pass to the 
economic development of Kerry and expressed concern at the proposed Loop on 
the WAW which would direct tourists to the Burren and Limerick.  The Minister 
undertook to review this proposal.  The importance of progressing the proposed 
Tralee/Fenit walkway and the provision of funding for it was also highlighted.  
Again he undertook to consider this request and to revert to the Chamber on it.  
Road widening of sections of the Tralee/Killarney road were highlighted and the 
Minister again undertook to revert to the Chamber on this issue.  Cllr. Locke 
separately requested an update on funding for Foodshare Kerry. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill asked if Minister Ross met with those in favour of the South Kerry 
Greenway during his recent visit to Kerry and outlined that the proposed 
Greenway is the single biggest initiative for South Kerry and the area urgently 
needs it and that it should be supported by all members. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn highlighted he recently moved a notice of motion asking how 
much land the Council owns in Mid Kerry that is suitable for housing and he 
asked that housing schemes would be designed for this land and references the 
proposed housing development at Ardmoneel, Killorglin which has been delayed 
in starting.  Cllr. Flynn then referred to defibrillators and stressed the importance 
of training people to use them.  There are First Responder groups in both 
Killorglin and Milltown and KETB are providing training for them in the use of 
defibrillators.  He supported the views expressed by Cllr. Cahill on the South 
Kerry Greenway and he added that business people in Caherciveen are 
becoming very impatient at the slow progress on it.   
 
Cllr. T. O’Brien then moved Notice of Motion No. 30. 
 
30. 
Fenit / Tralee Walkway 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given each member of the Tralee Municipal District 
PROPOSED: 
That we the members of the Tralee Municipal District would like to express our 
disappointment to the poor progress that has taken place in relation to the Fenit/ 
Tralee Walkway and we would now like a definitive schedule set out to show this 
Council’s commitment to the project. 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
14 of 58 
 
 
The following reply issued: 
There has been a significant volume of work in the past 12 months on 
securing the legal agreement with CIE on the transfer of the lands. The 
transfer of the lands comprising the North Kerry line is now complete. The 
next step in the process of securing the appropriate planning consent is to 
carry out an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) screening report and 
a Natura Impact Assessment (NIA) screening report. This will determine if 
an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) or a Natura Impact Statement 
(NIS) is required and whether the planning application will be dealt with 
through a Part 8 process or whether the application will need to be 
submitted to An Bórd  Pleanála, which would require a more detailed and 
costly application.   
 
In order to complete these screening reports, it will be necessary for our 
own ecologists to walk the line and complete the preliminary assessment. 
Once the screening reports are complete the scope of the planning process 
will become clear and the resource implications can be assessed. It is not 
possible therefore to provide a definitive timescale for completion of the 
planning process.  
 
However, it is our objective to progress the scheme in 2017, but our priority 
at present is on the publication of the CPO and EIS for the South Kerry 
Greenway and the progression of the Great Southern Railway Trail in 
Listowel through planning, given that grant aid has been made available for 
these projects. 
 
Cllr. T. O’Brien stated the motion asked for a definitive schedule which is not 
included in the reply.  This project has been delayed for too long and he called on 
management to provide members with a schedule for this walkway. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae expressed concern that the CPO process for the South Kerry 
Greenway will delay the project. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly concurred with the views expressed by members from North 
Kerry in relation to Minister Ross’s visit to the county.  A By-Pass is proposed for 
Listowel at a cost of €40m which is a major project yet he would not meet the 
members for the Listowel MD.  Cllr. Kennelly PROPOSED that a letter would 
issued to Minister Ross seeking a meeting with him in Dublin and members of the 
Listowel MD. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley indicated she wanted to be associated with the comments in 
relation to the County Clean Up Day.  Tidy Towns Groups have been very 
successful in co-operation with Kerry County Council.  A number of groups 
applied for funding from the Community Support Fund but their applications were 
deemed premature pending notification of Clár funding.  Cllr. Foley asked that 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
15 of 58 
these groups be informed of the recent Clár funding announcement to afford 
them the opportunity to apply.  Cllr. Foley further asked that the location of 
defibrillators in Tralee town centre would be agreed with the relevant local 
groups.   
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty confirmed that Minister Ross met representatives of those in 
favour of the South Kerry Greenway together with business representatives from 
Caherciveen.  She stressed the importance of ensuring that the views of all 
parties are heard and the process must take its course in accordance with 
Government policy. 
 
Cllr. J. Lucid congratulated all involved in the County Clean Up Day and agreed it 
was annoying that the Minister would not meet with the members for the Listowel 
MD.  He supported the views expressed by Cllr. Beasley in relation to the 
proposed Loop which would exclude North Kerry and he expressed concern that 
this could dilute the positive impact of the WAW. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney concurred with the views expressed by previous speakers in 
relation to the lack of interaction by the Minister with the members for the 
Listowel MD.  Members received a letter which stated the Minister did not have 
time to meet them yet he heard last week that the Minister was in Listowel.  Cllr. 
Moloney SECONDED Cllr. Kennelly’s proposal that a meeting would be 
requested with the Minister. 
 
The Cathaoirleach stated both he and the Chief Executive met Minister Ross in 
Farranfore when the Chief Executive availed of the opportunity to discuss 
Greenways, Macroom By Pass and the need to improve the road to Fenit.  The 
Cathaoirleach pointed out that a number of schools want to apply for Clár funding 
but they cannot download the application form and he asked that this problem 
would be rectified.  He referred to his recent visit to Boston with Mr. Griffin, 
Tourism Officer when they had an excellent meeting with tour operators and the 
CEO of Norwegian Airlines.  During the course of the meeting he indicated that 
he wanted to focus tourists on rural areas in the Shannon, Cork and Kerry areas.  
The Cathaoirleach called on the Chief Executive to invite the CEO of Norwegian 
Airlines to Kerry with a view to promoting flights to Kerry Airport by his airline. 
 
In response the Chief Executive referred to the Tralee / Fenit walkway and 
highlighted that a lot of work has gone into securing the land which has now been 
acquired.  The South Kerry Greenway has taken a lot of resources as it is 
complex and difficult technical solutions were required.  As agreement could not 
be reached with all landowners it was necessary to initiate the CPO process.  Ms. 
Murrell then referred to the North Kerry Greenway and stated a successful 
application to fund its design was made through the Town and Village Renewal 
Scheme.  She assured members that the Tralee / Fenit walkway would be 
pursued and clarified that it will be necessary to identify a funding source for it 
before it can be progressed.  The development of Greenways has the potential to 
transform areas and the South Kerry Greenway is critical for an area in decline.   
In relation to the new burial ground for Killarney Ms. Murrell stated a full design 
report had to be prepared together with the CPO documents and the CPO will be 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
16 of 58 
advertised shortly.  She advised members that a contractor has been appointed 
to progress the development of the extension to the Old Kilcummin Graveyard 
and work will commence shortly.   
 
The Chief Executive undertook to revert to members on Listry Bridge.  Officials 
will be in discussions with Fáilte Ireland shortly and they will raise the issue of 
signage on the WAW with them.  She was not aware of a commitment to allocate 
€10,000 to Foodshare Kerry but €1,000 was committed from the Community 
Support Fund by the Tralee MD.  An application was submitted for funding from 
the Environmental Awareness Fund and Foodshare Kerry can be considered for 
funding from it.   
 
Cllr. Ferris stated she understood that it was intended that €3,000 would be 
allocated per MD per annum for this purpose. 
 
The Chief Executive advised that tenders were advertised for Consultancy 
Services for the Construction of 14 No. Dwelling Houses and Associated 
Siteworks at Ardmoneel, Killorglin.  The scheme had to be redesigned which 
required protracted discussions with the Department.  Ms. Murrell acknowledged 
the work of the Capital Infrastructure Unit in managing the substantial housing 
construction programme.  She undertook to revert to members with the closing 
date for the Repair and Lease Scheme and to ensure the link to the Clár 
application form is accessible for schools. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly stated while he understood the South Kerry Greenway is getting 
priority plans should be drawn up for other Greenways to ensure funding can be 
availed of as it becomes available.  He asked for the date when the Ecologist 
would walk the Tralee/Fenit route. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris referred to the proposed road closure in Ardfert at the end of May 
and early in June to facilitate work on the sewerage scheme and she called on 
management to ensure this will not have an adverse impact on businesses in the 
area. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton asked if the Dale Road was discussed at the meeting with the 
Minister. 
 
The Chief Executive undertook to take on board Cllr. Ferris’s request in relation 
to Ardfert.  She availed of the opportunity to meet with the Minister when he was 
in the county and while she raised a number of issues with him the Dale Road 
was not discussed.  However, this was raised with senior officials in his 
Department in the recent past.   
 
Cllr. Thornton again emphasised the Dale Road’s condition and the Minister 
refused to meet with members from the Listowel MD either in Dublin or in Kerry.  
She PROPOSED that the Minister would be invited to come to Kerry to travel the 
Dale Road. 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
17 of 58 
Cllr. B. Cronin referred to Item 4 and declared in accordance with Section 177 of 
the Local Government Act 2001 that he was a connected person in relation to 
Item 4(c) and he would leave the meeting while this item was being considered. 
 
Cllr. Cronin then left the meeting. 
 
17.04.24.04 Disposal of Property 
 
(a)  
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. T. McEllistrim, SECONDED by Cllr. J. 
Finucane it was agreed to approve the disposal of a plot of land consisting 
of approx. 0.498 acres situated in the townland of Ballyroe in the DED of 
Clogherbrien to (name and address withheld for data protection purposes.  
An unedited copy of the minutes is available on request) in accordance 
with the terms of notice issued on the 6th April 2017 pursuant to Section 
183 of the Local Government Act 2001, Section 211 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 and Article 2016 of the Planning and Development 
Regulations 2001. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Cahill, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Healy-Rae it 
was agreed to approve the disposal of a plot of land consisting of approx. 
0.565 acres with a former Single Rural Cottage thereon situated in the 
townland of Muingaphuca in the DED of Caragh to (name and address 
withheld for data protection purposes.  An unedited copy of the minutes is 
available on request) in accordance with the terms of notice issued on the 
6th April 2017 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 
and Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act 2000. 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Healy-Rae,  SECONDED by Cllr. J. 
Sheahan it was agreed to approve the disposal of a plot of land consisting 
of 0.033 acres approximately in total and is know as 43 O’Kelly’s Villas, 
Killarney situated in the townland of Kilcoolaght in the DED of Killarney 
Urban to (names withheld for data protection purposes.  An unedited copy 
of the minutes is available on request) in accordance with the terms of 
notice issued on the 6th April 2017 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001, Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act 
2000 and Article 206 of the Planning, Development Regulations 2001 and 
Article 206 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001. 
 
(d)  
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Healy-Rae, SECONDED by Cllr. S. Locke it 
was agreed to approve the disposal of a plot of land comprising 0.112 Ha. 
(0.277 St. Ac.) situated in the townland of Ballintermon in the DED of 
Ballinvoher to (names withheld for data protection purposes.  An unedited 
copy of the minutes is available on request) in accordance with the terms 
of notice issued on the 21st March 2017 pursuant to Section 183 of the 
Local Government Act 2001, Section 211 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 and Article 206 of the Planning and Development 
Regulations 2001. 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
18 of 58 
(e) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane,  SECONDED by Cllr. P. 
McCarthy it was agreed to approve the disposal of a plot of land 
comprising 0.029 Ha (0.072 St. Ac.) situated in the townland of 
Ballintermon in the DED of Ballinvoher to (name and address withheld for 
data protection purposes.  An unedited copy of the minutes is available on 
request) in accordance with the terms of notice issued on the 21st March 
2017 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, Section 
211 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 and Article 206 of the 
Planning and Development Regulations 2001. 
 
(f) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.F. Flynn,  SECONDED by Cllr. J. Healy-Rae 
it was agreed to approve the disposal of a plot of land comprising 0.333 
Ha (0.823 St. Ac.) situated in the townland of Farranalickeen in the DED of 
Ballinvoher to (name and address withheld for data protection purposes.  
An unedited copy of the minutes is available on request) in accordance 
with the terms of notice issued on the 21st March 2017 pursuant to Section 
183 of the Local Government Act 2001, Section 211 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 and Article 206 of the Planning and Development 
Regulations 2001. 
 
(g) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.F. Flynn, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Healy-Rae  
it was agreed to approve the disposal of a plot of land comprising 0.011 
Ha (0.027 St. Ac.) situated in the townland of Ballynane in the DED of 
Ballinvoher to (name and address withheld for data protection purposes.  
An unedited copy of the minutes is available on request) in accordance 
with the terms of notice issued on the 21st March 2017 pursuant to Section 
183 of the Local Government Act 2001, Section 211 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 and Article 206 of the Planning and Development 
Regulations 2001. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin then returned to the meeting. 
 
17.04.24.05 Variation No. 2 to the Listowel Town Development Plan 2009 – 
2015 
 
(a) 
Chief Executive’s Report on submissions/observations 
received in relation to Material Alterations to Proposed 
Variation No. 2 of the Listowel Town Development Plan 
 
Mr. M. Scannell referred members to his report dated April 2017 on this item 
which was circulated and he briefed them in detail on the report. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton asked that the review of the Listowel Development Plan would 
be brought forward. 
 
Cllr. D. Nolan agreed that the Listowel Development Plan should be reviewed at 
an early date. 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
19 of 58 
Mr. M. Scannell advised that significant progress has been made on the review of 
the Killarney Development Plan.  It is intended to commence the review of the 
Tralee Development Plan in the coming weeks and work on the review of the 
remaining two plans will take place in the autumn.   
 
 
(b) 
Making of Variation No. 2 to the Listowel Town Development Plan 
2009 - 2015  
 
Cllr. J. Lucid PROPOSED that this Council hereby resolves that proposed 
Variation No. 2 of the Listowel Town Development Plan 2009 – 2015 as originally 
proposed at the Meeting of Kerry County Council in December 2016, be adopted 
to (a) incorporate the provisions of the Core Strategy (as contained in the Kerry 
County Development Plan 2015-2021) and (b) the deletion of the proposed 
Eastern By-Pass (indicative route) as shown on Map 3.  
 
Cllr. L. Purtill SECONDED this proposal. 
 
A vote was taken which resulted as follows: 
 
For: 
Cllrs. Beasley, Cahill, Cronin, Ferris, Finucane, Flynn, Gleeson, 
Grady, J. Healy-Rae, Kelleher, Kennelly, Locke, Lucid, D. 
McCarthy, P. McCarthy, Moloney, Nolan, O’Brien, O’Connell, Purtill, 
Sheahan, Spring, Thornton, O’Shea (24) 
 
Against: 
None (0) 
 
Not Voting: None (0) 
 
Absent: 
Cllrs. Connor-Scarteen, Culloty, Daly, Fitzgerald, Foley, M. Healy-
Rae, McEllistrim, Moriarty, Quigg (9) 
 
The Cathaoirleach declared the proposal CARRIED. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae then moved Notice of Motion No. 17 as he had to leave the 
meeting. 
 
17. 
Call to take on seasonal workers 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council would take on all Road Staff who are classed as 
"seasonal workers" in our Engineering Areas. some over 10 years. Staff in these 
areas are at an all time low. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The recruitment and appointment of staff is an executive function and is 
determined by the level of funding approved by Council for the carrying out 
of its functions as provided for in the adopted Budget and the level of grant 
aid received for work programmes.   

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
20 of 58 
 
Specifically in relation to Roads maintenance, there are a number of factors 
which influence the staffing level, but the level of funding available for the 
Roads Programme is the primary determining factor in manning levels. 
There has been a significant reduction in available funding from central 
government over the past 10 years from €22.7m, in 2008, to approximately 
€13 million per annum in the past 4 years.  Furthermore, during this period 
a number of services traditionally provided by the Council, such as the 
Refuse Collection service were discontinued, with some of these staff 
being redeployed in operations.  
 
Traditionally, the Council has supplemented its permanent work force by 
recruiting seasonal staff, particularly where additional monies are made 
available for the roads programme, and this will continue until a 
sustainable higher level of funding is provided by the funding authorities. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae stated there are just 3 or 4 seasonal workers in each area and 
since 2008 or 2009 no staff member that retired was replaced yet roads must be 
maintained.  Staff in a number of areas but in particular in Caherciveen are 
finding it difficult to carry out the work due to staff shortages.  These seasonal 
workers were always available and he called on management to make them 
permanent. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill SECONDED the motion and added that the staff who retired over 
the past few years should be replaced. 
 
17.04.24.06 Annual Financial Statement for year ended 31st December 2016 
and approval of additional expenditure (including provisions) 
 
Ms. A. McAllen referred members to the Annual Financial Statement for year 
ended 31st December 2016 which was circulated.  The aim of the Annual 
Financial Statement is to fairly present the financial position as at end 2016.  The 
Annual Financial Statement is subject to external audit by the Local Government 
Audit Service.  A copy of the Auditor’s Opinion and Report will be circulated to 
each Member of the Council when it is received, in accordance with normal 
practice together with a report from the Audit Committee after their meeting with 
the Local Government Auditor.   
 
Total Financial Activity of the Council for the year 2016 and a comparison with 
the previous year is provided on page 20 – Income and Expenditure Account 
Statement for the year ended 31st December 2016 and page 21 – Balance Sheet 
as at 31st December 2016.   
 
The overall Financial Activity of the Council for the year was €172,460,654.  The 
Report deals with four key elements of the Annual Financial Statement (i) Income 
and Expenditure Statement – Revenue Account, (ii) Capital Account, (iii) 
Borrowings and (iv)Fixed Assets.   
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
21 of 58 
The graphs on pages 10 and 11 of the Report set out the distribution of 
expenditure amongst the Divisions/Programme Groups and the sources of 
income of both the Revenue and Capital Accounts. 
 
The total expenditure on the Revenue account for 2016 was €136,017,255.  
 
An excess of income over expenditure in 2016 has resulted in a surplus of 
€83,478 for 2016.  The Income and Expenditure Account Statement and 
supporting notes and Appendices provide greater detail.   
 
The Council has prudent expenditure controls in both Revenue and Capital and 
strengthened debt management measures to maximise income where possible.  
This effective resource management has facilitated continued delivery of local 
services by this Council and has enabled the Council to carry forward provisions 
for a number of on-going specific projects following review of the financial 
accounts and identification of specific projects in future years as well as 
addressing significant liabilities facing the Council as highlighted on previous 
occasions and by the Local Government Auditor in recent years Audit Reports.  
 
The main provisions carried forward include in particular:- 
 
• €1,730,000 – Local Authority Land Bank. 
Creation of a fund to maximise development of existing land banks, 
strategic review of land loans and to avail of any economic opportunities 
on strategic sites. 
 
• €1,100,000 towards Killorglin Area Service Centre Funding obligation. 
This provision is made to increase the budget provision and the specific 
reserve for future financial obligations of €7.942m for this project. 
 
• €300,000 towards a capital infrastructural upgrade of corporate buildings 
across the county including a provision towards the new telephone 
system. 
 
• €150,000 I.T. Capital Replacement Fund to upgrade hardware and 
software across the county. 
 
• €330,000 contribution towards contingency superannuation fund to avoid 
exceptional pension payments liability in any given year. 
 
• €100,000 toward the Fenit Harbour Dredging Programme. 
 
• €150,000 contribution towards the fire fighter gratuities fund in preparation 
for retirements foreseen in the coming years. 
 
• €100,000 contribution toward the Muingnaminnane Aftercare fund. 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
22 of 58 
As recommended by the Local Government Auditor, a review of all Credit 
Balances in the Capital Account, together with potential expenditure 
requirements was undertaken.   
 
It was recommended that following review, should any of the Credit Balances 
need to be assigned for other purposes, then the Members approval is required.  
In this regard, the following reassignment of credit balances is included: 
 
• €200,000 from LA Land Bank to Killorglin Area Services Centre Provision.   
 
Ms. McAllen then outlined additional expenditure variances to the allocations 
approved in the Adopted Budget as outlined on Page 4 and stated in the main 
these are as a result of increased grant allocation during the year.   
 
• Division A – Housing and Building 
 
Adopted Allocation  
 
€23,518,917 
Out-Turn 
 
 
 
€25,201,653 
 
Additional expenditure was incurred in relation to RAS and Social Leasing which 
is fully recoupable, and on Vacant/Void houses with a significant portion of this 
also recoupable from the DHPCLG.   Following the assignment of €200,000 
towards loan redemption provision and €200,000 towards the provision made in 
respect of Killorglin Area Services Centre Funding obligation, €1.3m was 
provided in respect of Housing Land Bank Servicing Fund.  €150,000 was 
allocated towards unfunded capital balances. 
 
• Division B – Road Transportation and Safety 
 
Adopted Allocation   
 
€30,777,812 
Out-Turn 
 
 
 
€37,440,926 
 
The main reason for additional expenditure is attributable to increased grant 
allocations of €20,253,699 versus budget allocation of €14,093,700 following on 
from the severe storm and flooding in late 2015/early 2016.  €4,650,000 was 
received from DDTS to carry out repairs on non-national road structure.  TII 
provided €486,500 for repairs to National Primary and Secondary roads.  
Increased allocation also included €239,952 for Bridge Inspections along with 
increases in Low Cost Remedial Measures and NP and NS Route lighting. 
 
Own resource support for 2016 CLAR and Town and Village Renewal Schemes 
of €104,200 has been provided.  Additional expenditure of €131,771 was 
incurred in funding Plant and Machinery account, Monument Quarry and 
€288,000 to fund completed Road projects. 
 
• Division D – Development Management 
 
Allocation 
 
 
 
€  9,665,084 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
23 of 58 
Out-Turn 
 
 
 
€11,438,476 
 
The main reason for additional expenditure is the charging of SICAP expenditure 
of €1.65m to Revenue Account, whereas when Budget 2016 was prepared, 
indications were that this new funding source was to be accounted for within the 
Capital programme.  This expenditure has been fully recouped from Government 
grants.  Of the total provision of €1.1m toward the Killorglin Area Services Centre 
funding obligation, €440,000 was funded from within this Division. 
 
• Division E – Environmental Services 
 
Adopted Allocation  
 
€16,950,140 
Out-Turn 
 
 
 
€17,691,873 
 
The principle over spend in this Division arose in Retained Fire Services which 
relates to the payment of activity fees to Fire Service personnel for activities 
undertaken by them and for the purchase of non-capital equipment that was 
required during the year.  This also includes a provision for Fire Service 
gratuities; this is based on the age profile of the staff and a peak in retirements 
foreseen in 2017.  Additional Revenue Funding of €100,000 was applied to 
Landfill Closures capital balances. 
 
• Division F – Recreation & Amenity 
 
Adopted Allocation  
 
€7,960,446 
Out-Turn 
 
 
 
€8,651,093 
 
The main reason for additional expenditure is the funding of debit capital 
balances, including €192,836 for outdoor leisure capital projects.  €242,000 was 
provided towards Killorglin Area Service Centre Loan Charge obligations and 
€56,500 was provided as the own resource contribution towards Clár Outdoor 
Leisure Projects.  €21,883 was provided towards the funding of the Casement 
Exhibition at the County Museum. 
 
• Division G – Agriculture, Education, Health & Welfare 
Adopted Allocation  
 
€2,830,701 
Out-Turn 
 
 
 
€2,960,619 
 
The additional expenditure within this division relates to flood mitigation works at 
Tullig, Castleisland.  This was funded through income from the Office of Public 
Works (OPW) and balance of own resource funding. 
 
• Division H – Miscellaneous Services 
 
Adopted Allocation   
 
€17,244,256 
Out-Turn 
 
 
 
€17,732,243 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
24 of 58 
The main reason for additional expenditure refers to increased activity in relation 
to Agency and Recoupable Services.  This has been fully recouped through 
corresponding additional income. 
 
Local Income  
Our reliance on locally sourced income is increasing and will gain greater 
significance into the future.  We will continue to maintain and strengthen our 
focus on debt collection.  A Summary of Major Collections – Appendix 7 is 
included in the Report which illustrates the percentage collections for 2016 and 
the level of debtors associated with each of these income streams.  During 2016, 
we saw further considerable improvement in both collection and reduction of 
arrears owing in the critical area of Rates. 
 
Charge on Non-Principal Private Residences:- This charge, repealed in 2014, 
yielded a gross income, countywide, to Kerry County Council of €1.5m for 2016 
in respect of arrears owing by owners of NPPR’s which were discharged during 
the year.  The income generated from this will fall as each year progresses.   
 
Capital Account 
Expenditure in the Capital Account must have an identified source of income as 
per Department Circular.  There was an increase in activity in the Capital Account 
for 2016 as illustrated on Page 6 of the Report.   The Plant and Machinery is in 
the Capital Account for 2016 and this is the last year as notified to members 
during the Budget.  In 2017 and future years it will operate in the Revenue 
Account.  As a once off measure following creation of a credit in the accounts by 
the debit take on of debtors in early 2000’s the Department issued a Circular to 
enable the historic balance on the Specific Revenue Reserve in the Balance 
Sheet, €7,478,134, to be used in Kerry County Council’s case to facilitate the 
writing down of unfunded capital balances as illustrated on the Table below. 
 
This is a once off non cash credit and its use is restricted by Department Circular.  
 
Knightstown Pier Construction 
Works  
2,093,465
Land Deerpark Killarney 
1,482,745
Machinery Yard Debit Balance 
700,000
Land Ballydrisheen, Killarney 
558,271
Castleisland Land Acquisition 
423,077
Bbunion Car Park Purchase 
328,611
N70 Pavt - Mountain Stage 
222,000
Duagh Phase 1 Access Road 
185,000
Blennerville Bridge 
66,306
Library Capital Works Tralee 
52,882
Environment - Old Debit Balance 
26,981
CIE Land Purchase Listowel 
22,337
Bunavalla Pier Improvements 
486,201
Inch Coastal Protection Works 
405,364
Piers and Harbours balances 
277,010
Ballinskelligs Pier Improvements 
147,884

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
25 of 58 
Specific Revenue Reserve 
Balance  
7,478,134
 
 
The Public Spending Code (PSC) is an ongoing annual requirement.  The 
summary of capital expenditure incurred during 2016 gives an overview of the 
level of activity throughout the year.  
 
Programme 
Group 
Expenditure 
   € m 
  
2016        
       € m 
Housing and 
13.28 
House Purchases  
8.86
Building 
  
Land Loan Redemption/ Land Purchase   
0.29
  
  
Mitchels Regeneration Tralee  
1.62
  
  
SEAI/Energy Efficiency 
0.75
  
  
Schemes/ Single Rural Cottages/ 
Extensions/Admin  
0.67
  
  
Voluntary Housing 
0.30
  
  
Capital Advance Leasing Facility - 
Housing Associations  
0.53
  
  
Refugee Resettlement / Miscellaneous 
Projects    
0.26
Roads,  
13.29 
NRA  - Projects  
9.70
Transportation 
and Safety 
  
NRDO/HQ Road Design Office   
1.76
 
  
Development Levy Works  
0.25
  
  
Road Restoration  
0.75
  
  
Estates in Charge Bond/NTICI Works  
0.24
  
  
Area Vehicle Trading a/cs  
0.12
  
  
Development Contributions Debtor 
Accounting Adjustments  
0.27
  
  
Miscellaneous Projects  
0.20
Water and  
2.73 
Irish Water Projects  
2.51
Sewerage 
  
Estates in Charge Bonds/NTICI Works  
0.22
1.12 
Community Projects -REDZ, LEADER, 
Island of Geese, Town & Village    
0.57
  
Tourism / 1916 / Museum Exhibition  
0.27
Development 
Incentives and 
Controls 
  
KRSP Projects  
0.12
  
  
Development Contributions Debtor 
Accounting Adjustments  
0.16
Environmental 
0.19 
Landfill Aftercare Commitment  
0.05
Protection 
  
Burial Grounds Programme  
0.03
  
  
Environment /Fire Services / Civil 
Defence Upgrades  
0.11
  
  
  
 
1.71 
Greenways/Active Travel/Amenities   
1.71
Recreation 
and Amenity 
  
  
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
26 of 58 
Agriculture, 
Education, 
Health and 
Welfare 
1.11 
Piers and Harbours -DECLG/OPW/DAFM 
Projects  
1.11
Miscellaneous 
2.04 
Plant and Materials Account  
0.72
  
  
Killarney Motor Tax Online Service  / 
NPPR Payment Plans  
0.53
  
  
Corporate Buildings/ Projects  
0.56
  
  
I.T. Capital Upgrade  
0.23
TOTAL 
35.47 
  
35.47
  
  
Recoupable Grants/Other Income  
32.39
 
Capital Borrowing/Mortgaged Housing Loan Activity 
 
The Council’s Capital Debt at the 31st December 2016 amounted to €81.81m, a 
decrease of €3.86m on the December 2015 figure of €85.04m. 
 
Fixed Assets 
The Balance Sheet indicates that at 31 December 2016, the Net Book Value of 
our accountable assets is €3,517.2m (an increase of €8.4m on the 2015 figure 
after depreciation) and the details are included in Note 1 to the accounts.   
 
Ms. McAllen stated the Revenue Surplus for 2016 is €83,478 and increases the 
accumulated general reserve as at the end of 2016 to €6,355,246.  The retention 
of a cumulative revenue reserve is a very positive reflection on both the elected 
members and the continuous efforts of staff of Kerry County Council in 
maximising resources, achieving better value for money, maximising revenue 
and increasing overall efficiencies over the past number of years.  However, it 
must be noted that this is based on accrual accounting and not all of the funds 
are realised at the end of 2016.  The balance on the account is considered 
prudent and satisfactory for an organisation of this size and complexity.    
 
Ms. McAllen advised that the ongoing financing of the Council is not without its 
challenges both in the short and long term.  The Council has responsibilities in 
relation to significant financial liabilities in relation to landfill aftercare, the 
servicing of a material land loan liability and a substantial liability in relation to 
Killorglin Area Services Centre.  Investment required for successful delivery of 
the Action Plan for Jobs, the Local Economic and Community Plan, and Tourism 
Strategy will require substantial own resource funding to match any grant aid 
available.  In addition further capital investment is required for the purchase of 
the Tralee Technology Park, the development of Greenways and Smarter Travel 
projects throughout the county.  Revenue collection continues to be challenging 
together with reducing income streams.   
 
Kerry County Council took actions during 2016 and continues into 2017 and the 
future, to adjust and match both operational day-to-day spend and its long-term 
capital investment programme with available funding and resources.  

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
27 of 58 
 
In conclusion Ms. McAllen thanked all the staff of the Finance Department for 
their professionalism and dedication throughout the previous 12 months. 
 
All members thanked Ms. McAllen for her detailed presentation on the Annual 
Financial Statement for year ended 31st December 2016 and acknowledged the 
excellent work of her Department in compiling the AFS.   
 
Cllr. N. Foley stated while she acknowledged the need for prudence the Fianna 
Fáil party PROPOSED that some mechanism would be identified to allow the 
flexibility either to purchase a Durapatcher for each Municipal District, increase 
the Community Support Fund or to upgrade town centres in each of the Municipal 
Districts through enhancement works. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris expressed disappointment that any surplus in the 2016 Budget was 
not put into services.  The interest only payment on land loans at €1m is 
substantial and she asked if some of these lands could be developed from 
funding from the Capital account.  The only way to reduce the cost of these loan 
repayments is to develop the land.  She asked that permission would be sought 
from the Department to use the Capital Account to develop these lands or to give 
it to voluntary bodies to develop it.  The Council cannot afford annual loan 
payments of €2m on land loans. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane agreed that officials must have some flexibility in the Budget to 
allow for unforeseen events such as bad weather.  The land bank is an asset and 
he asked that it would be reviewed to establish how it could benefit a community.  
He recently proposed that subsidised sites would be made available to first time 
home owners and he hoped this would come to fruition in the near future.  The 
Government intends to sell AIB in the coming months and it is hoped to secure 
€3b for the State.  Banks contributed €160m to-date to the State for the bail out 
but that is far short of the original cost to the State.  He recently moved a motion 
asking that social responsibility would be enforced on the Banks.  Cllr. Finucane 
suggested that any money received by the State for the Banks would be ring 
fenced for the less well off or disadvantaged.  He PROPOSED that a letter to this 
effect would issue to the Minister for Finance and at least then the country would 
see the benefit of the Banks bail out.  In conclusion Cllr. Finucane indicated his 
full support for the acquisition of Kerry Technology Park which is critical for the 
future economic development of the county. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea SECONDED this proposal. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley referred to Page 6 of the report and requested clarification on the 
sum of €328,611 for Ballybunion Car Park Purchase. 
 
Ms. McAllen confirmed this sum relates to an old unfunded balance and in 
accordance with Circular 11/2016 the historic balance on the Specific Revenue 
Reserve in the Balance Sheet, €7,478,134 was used to facilitate the writing down 
of unfunded capital balances. 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
28 of 58 
Cllr. M. Cahill welcomed the surplus in 2016 and he agreed provision should be 
made for land loans and the Killorglin Area Services Centre.  There should also 
be a social aspect and he PROPOSED that €0.5m would be allocated to 
purchase unfinished houses as good value is still available on property.  Some of 
these unfinished houses are becoming unsightly and derelict.  Cllr. Cahill further 
asked that funding would be provided to protect homes from flooding and to 
purchase at least one Durapatcher.  In conclusion Cllr. Cahill asked that provision 
would be made for the carrying out of a Feasibility Study for Cromane Pier. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn asked how much of the €64m allocation for housing has been 
spent to-date.  He asked that the Mid Kerry Area Plan would be progressed as 
soon as possible.  No assistance is available to those whose homes have been 
flooded and he asked that this would be reviewed. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin asked what plans the Council has to develop the lands at 
Deerpark etc.  There are 120 roads on the LIS list and it is ridiculous that funding 
has not been reinstated for this Scheme.  At the present rate of progress it will 
take 26 or 27 years to complete the list and hundreds more are waiting to apply.  
Cllr. Cronin referred to the weight of lorries travelling local roads and added in 
other countries they would be fined.  He was aware of particular trucks that travel 
LIS roads with a 46 tonne load.  He asked if Kerry County Council has any 
concern about these trucks travelling local roads.  Cllr. Cronin asked if the 
Durapatcher that is leased at present is costing €100 per hour and how many 
miles of pothole repairs it can do in a day. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson referred to the outstanding balance for Inch Coastal Protection 
Works and he asked if the Council is still pursuing the Department to fund this 
balance.  He requested clarification on the reference to Land Ballydrisheen, 
Killarney on Page 6 of the report circulated. 
 
The Chief Executive advised members that there are a lot of old debit balances in 
the Capital Account and the Circular enabled the Account to be tidied up 
considerably. The Auditor has been calling for this for some time, and the debit 
balances highlighted by him on Audit Reports have been prioritised.  Ms. Murrell 
acknowledged the excellent work of the Head of Finance and her staff and added 
that governance is very strong.  There is strong budgetary management 
throughout the organisation.  Generally speaking where there is over expenditure 
it is matched with an increase in grants.  The surplus is miniscule in the context 
of the overall budget for the year and it is important to be mindful of liabilities.  At 
Budget time provision should be made for liabilities for land loans and for the 
Killorglin Area Services Centre if possible.  Land loans are being offset as land is 
being developed for the Housing Programme.  The fact is we have a landbank 
and it must be funded as surplus funds arise.  The Killorglin Area Services Centre 
transformed Killorglin and the loan must be repaid.   
 
Ms. Murrell highlighted that a number of offices owned by the Council must be 
upgraded and this includes the roof at County Buildings which is critical.  Work is 
ongoing at the Killarney Offices.  Durapatchers are expensive but she understood 
other local authorities found them beneficial.  If the trial of the one that is leased 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
29 of 58 
at present is successful a durapatcher may be acquired through the Machinery 
Account. 
 
Cllr. Foley asked if the Council is permitted to purchase a Durapatcher from the 
surplus. 
 
The Chief Executive stated a Durapatcher will more than likely have to be 
purchased but it must be funded from the Machinery Account. 
 
Cllr. B. O’Connell PROPOSED that this Council hereby resolves, having 
considered the Annual Financial Statement for the year ended 31st December 
2016 to approve additional expenditure, including provisions, as outlined in the 
Financial Review. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane SECONDED this proposal. 
 
A vote was taken which resulted as follows: 
 
For: 
Cllrs. Cahill, Cronin, Culloty, Daly, Ferris, Finucane, Fitzgerald, 
Flynn, Foley, Gleeson, Grady, Kelleher, Kennelly, Locke, Lucid, D. 
McCarthy, P. McCarthy, McEllistrim, Moloney, Moriarty, Nolan, 
O’Brien, O’Connell, Purtill, Sheahan, Spring, Thornton, O’Shea (28) 
 
Against: 
None (0) 
 
Not Voting: None (0) 
 
The Cathaoirleach declared the proposal CARRIED. 
 
17.04.24.07 Audit Committee Kerry County Council 
 
(a) 
2016 Annual Report of the Audit Committee of Kerry County 
Council 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. B. O’Connell, SECONDED by Cllr. N. Kelleher it was 
agreed to note the 2016 Annual Report of the Audit Committee of Kerry County 
Council. 
 
(b) 
2017 Audit Committee Work Programme 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. B. O’Connell, SECONDED by Cllr. N. Kelleher it was 
agreed to approve the 2017 Audit Committee Work Programme. 
 
The Cathaoirleach informed the meeting that Item 15 would then be taken. 
 
17.04.24.15 Presentation by Mr. Stephen Blair, Director, Southern Regional 
Assembly 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed Mr. Stephen Blair, Director, Southern Regional 
Assembly to the meeting. 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
30 of 58 
Mr. Blair informed the meeting that there are two main types of EU Funding 
available: 
 
• Shared Management – this is how Structural Fund Operational 
Programmes are delivered.  The EU allocates funding to member states 
and they administer Structural funding. 
• Direct Management – Centrally managed Programmes either directly by 
the EU Commission or by an Agency. 
 
Mr. Blair briefed members on EU Funding Opportunities for Local Authorities 
under the following headings: 
 
• Structural & Investment Fund (ESIF) Programmes in Ireland 
• Regional Programme 
• European Territorial Cooperation (INTERREG) Programmes 
• Strand A – Cross-Border Ireland-Wales Programme 
• Strand B – Transnational 
• NWE Programme 
• Interreg Atlantic Area 
• Northern Periphery and Arctic Programme.  
• Interreg Europe 
• Urbact III – sustainable integrated urban development  
• Life – Environment & climate Change 
• Horizon 2020 – research 7 innovation 
 
The Cathaoirleach thanked Mr. Blair for his detailed presentation and requested 
details of the EU Framework Programme. 
 
Mr. Blair stated the national contact is located in Enterprise Ireland.  They will 
help to test an idea and will be open to getting partners in other countries. 
 
Mr. J. Griffin, Tourism Officer then addressed the meeting. 
 
Mr. Griffin advised that Kerry County Council is working on a number of EU 
Interreg projects at present.  Kerry is a minor partner in the Cool Route Sailing 
/Cruising project which is promoting marine tourism along the western offshore 
areas of the Northern Periphery of Europe and is a major partner in the 
"LIVE" Ireland-Wales Programme in co-operation with UCC, Bangor University 
and LLynn Peninsula in Wales.  This project, which has passed Stage 1, focuses 
on South West Kerry and the Llynn Peninsula and aims at facilitating research on 
the natural heritage of the areas, including the marine environment and how this 
information can be made available to visitors to enhance their visitor 
experience. Kerry County Council is also involved in the EcoSTARS Programme 
and the Dark Skies project, which is being lead by Blackrock Observatory/CIT 
and other partners.  South Kerry is the only Gold Tier Dark Skies Reserve in the 
northern hemisphere.  It passed Stage 1 and Stage II will be adjudicated shortly.  
Unfortunately a research project involving Valentia and other European cable 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
31 of 58 
stations, the Council and IT Tralee was not approved at Stage 1 but lessons have 
been learned and this will benefit other projects.   
 
Mr. T. Hayes, LEO informed the meeting in 2011 Kerry was nominated as one of 
the EU Entrepreneurial Regions.  There are up to 13 other such Regions and 
they are working together to establish best practice.  Representatives were in 
Kerry for 2 or 3 days during Enterprise Month and the delegation assisted with 
the adjudication of the Student Enterprise category and they were very 
impressed with the standard.  Part of the funding for LEO comes through the EU 
and it is necessary to partake in various frameworks to secure additional funding. 
 
All members welcomed Mr. Blair to the meeting and thanked him for his excellent 
presentation. 
 
Cllr. T. McEllistrim asked what priorities Mr. Blair envisaged for Kerry and Tralee 
town in particular. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney asked if funding is available for Greenways under the heading 
Sustainable Urban Development and is the application process exhaustive. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson asked if the Assembly keeps local authorities up to-date on 
funding opportunities in the EU as they arise.  He requested clarification on the 
role of the Assembly vis-a-vis local authorities.  
 
Mr. Blair advised members it would not be appropriate for him to identify priorities 
for Kerry.  Local authorities should consider projects for which national funding is 
not available.  Contact should be made with the national contact to get advice on 
how to prepare an application for funding.  Greenways are much more developed 
in the EU than in Ireland and Ireland is learning from the experience of other 
countries.  It maybe possible to secure funding for Greenway projects in the 
Atlantic or Northern areas.  The Southern Assembly has an office in Brussels that 
monitors developments in the EU.  A newsletter issues to all local authorities 
updating them on new funding opportunities etc.  
 
Cllr. J. Finucane stated in his opinion there is a disconnect between what 
happens in Europe and Ireland.  He asked Mr. Blair to consider hosting a 
seminar for private business people to update them on funding opportunities in 
the EU.  Cllr. Finucane stated the Shannon LNG project was blocked by a cartel 
of energy providers over a number of years and he asked if funding is available 
from the EU to purchase the Tarbert/Ballylongford Landbank.  This project would 
give greater independence to energy supply in the country.  He welcomed the 
recent announcement on broadband by Eir and he asked Mr. Blair if the 
Assembly has a role in prioritising road projects. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty stated the lack of a good broadband service is limiting 
development and business in Kerry.   In his opinion there should be greater 
interaction with the EU and it would be helpful if MEPs addressed the Council 
once a year.  They would be in a position to identify what funding may be suitable 
for Kerry. 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
32 of 58 
 
Cllr. D. Nolan stated Mr. Blair’s presentation highlighted the strong links between 
the regions and counties.  The percentage of funding available under each 
Programme varies and she asked that this information would be supplied to 
members.  She added that a lot of EU Programmes are about knowledge transfer 
rather than capital funding. 
 
Mr. Blair confirmed that the issue of disconnect with countries is a real problem 
for the EU.  These co-operation programmes are the most tangible output of co-
operation in the EU.  The purchase of land does not qualify for funding under the 
Interreg Programme.  The Assembly was mandated to have a role in the National 
Planning Framework and this will be followed by Regional Strategies.  The issue 
of transport in the region will be considered as part of this process.  The delays in 
the roll out of broadband are regrettable but there is a very strict process to be 
complied with under state aid rules.  Eir volunteered to service an additional 
300,000 homes and the Government will decide the number of homes to be 
serviced shortly and the contract will be awarded in one or more lots.  All 
companies must deliver 30mbps over the next few years.  The vast majority of 
households will be serviced through fibre and this will be future proof.  Broadband 
must be delivered to the State’s specification.  The level of funding available 
under the various Programmes varies from 50% to 85%.  
 
Cllr. M. Cahill asked Mr. Blair to provide Kerry County Council with a list of 
projects that qualified for EU funding and this can be circulated to members.  He 
asked if EU funding is available for Piers and Harbours or for coastal protection 
works.  Cromane is one of the country’s largest exporters of mussels yet they 
have no Pier.  Cllr. Cahill welcomed the rollout of Broadband and the new 
contracts which will be awarded later in the year.  He asked if the Assembly is 
applying for and securing the maximum amount of grant aid.  At a recent meeting 
he moved a Notice of Motion calling for the establishment of a dedicated office to 
deal with all types of grant aid including EU, national and local with a view to 
maximising the benefit for the county.  Cllr. Cahill welcomed the fact that the 
Assembly has an office in the EU and he called for greater interaction between 
the Assembly and local authorities.   
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn highlighted that coastal erosion is a major problem in Kerry and 
the lack of funding is a cause for concern.  He asked if funding is available under 
any of the EU programmes for this purpose.  Finally Cllr. Flynn asked if EU 
funding may be available for bridges and the Adare By-Pass. 
 
Cllr. S. Fitzgerald stated Kerry has the longest coastline in the country and it is 
under developed in relation to marine tourism, research etc.  He asked if funding 
is available from any of the EU Programmes for this purpose. 
 
Mr. Blair stated the Assembly has a production which shows the types of projects 
that secured funding and he undertook to supply the relevant material to 
members.  Many of the Programmes he mentioned have a strong maritime 
dimension but the Programmes provide learning on the technical solutions that 
can be deployed rather than funding for the works.  It is intended that a Maritime 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
33 of 58 
Spatial Plan will be produced for Ireland which will identify the needs and 
potential to be exploited.  The issue of accessibility and how to integrate the 
southern region will be part of the development of the regional spatial and 
economic strategy at a regional level.  This work will be ongoing over the next 18 
months.  Mr. Blair agreed that both businesses and the public service should be 
broadband ready. 
 
The Chief Executive thanked Mr. Blair for his informative presentation and she 
added that elected members and the executive are anxious to identify 
opportunities for the county.  The call for projects under the ERDF was beneficial 
as the Island of Geese project benefitted from it.  An application was submitted 
under the Interreg Atlantic Area in conjunction with UCC.  An Economic Officer 
was recently appointed by Kerry County Council and it is intended to focus on 
possible EU funding opportunities for the county.  Kerry County Council made a 
strong submission on the National Planning Framework that highlighted any 
counter balance to development on the eastern corridor much connect with 
Kerry.  Any plans to by-pass Kerry are not acceptable.  In conclusion Ms. Murrell 
welcomed the proposed Maritime Spatial Plan. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill asked if Ireland is applying for and securing maximum funding 
available from the EU. 
 
Mr. Blair highlighted that each member state pays a contribution to the 
Programmes and for years Ireland has received more in grant aid than what it 
contributed.  The local authorities that appointed Economic Development Officers 
or set up EU units have benefitted and they are self funding. 
 
The meeting adjourned for lunch at 1.30pm. 
 
The meeting resumed at 2.10pm. 
 
17.04.24.08 Report on the Operation of the Litter Pollution Acts 1997 – 2009 
 
Mr. J. Breen referred members to his report dated 18th April 2017 on this item which 
was circulated and he briefed them in detail on the report.  He informed members 
that KWD would not continue outside of the Spring Clean period to collect bags of 
refuse where a clean up of roadside litter is ongoing.  The Spring Clean initiative 
allows community groups to clean targeted areas over a specified period in 
partnership with KWD.   
 
All members welcomed the report and acknowledged the spirit of volunteerism 
among Tidy Towns groups and the excellent work of Council staff.   
 
Cllr. J. Moloney highlighted that those who litter do not show respect for the county 
and while the anti littering message appears to be getting through in the towns 
there is littering along approach roads to towns and villages.  He referred to the 676 
litter pollution cases investigated and the fact that there were just 9 prosecutions 
and he asked if this is due to lack of evidence.  Cllr. Moloney expressed the hope 
that in 2017 legislation would be passed that would allow houses to be surveyed to 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
34 of 58 
establish how they dispose of their refuse.  On the continent fines were increased 
and those convicted of illegal dumping are named and shamed.  Cllr. Moloney 
requested that a letter would issue to the Minister for Housing, Planning, 
Community and Local Government calling for more stringent legislation that would 
support the work of Tidy Towns groups.   
 
Cllr. S. Locke stated it is disheartening that 676 cases of illegal dumping were 
investigated in 2016 and he asked how much was collected in fines.  Following up 
on illegal dumping is very costly for the Council.  Illegal dumping makes the work of 
Tidy Towns groups very difficult and he expressed concern that the level of illegal 
dumping may result in the loss of gold medals in the Tidy Towns Competition in 
2017.  Kerry County Council should consider naming and shaming those 
responsible for illegal dumping. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson highlighted that the Council recently introduced charges for 
recyclables and the public are not receptive to these charges.  He welcomed the 
commitment to review these charges in 6 months.  Those who volunteer either with 
Tidy Towns groups or other groups to keep their area clean are heroic and they are 
out weekly cleaning up the roadsides.  He acknowledged the success of the County 
Clean-Up Day.   Coffee cups are regularly dumped on the roadside but it is 
possible to get biodegradable cups and this should be considered.  He called on 
Kerry County Council to use them in future.  Cllr. Gleeson thanked Micheál Ó 
Coileán who did excellent work in his role as Environmental Officer and he wished 
him well for the future. 
 
Cllr. T. O’Brien referred to the 9 prosecutions and expressed his disappointment 
that the number was so low.  He also suggested that a name and shame approach 
should be considered and that footage from CCTV cameras showing people 
dumping illegally at Bottle Banks etc. should be put up on the Kerry County Council 
website.   The faces of those responsible and their car registration number could be 
blacked out if necessary.   Cllr. O’Brien referred to dog fouling and he asked if a 
person can make a complaint giving the name of the person walking the dog.  It is 
very frustrating for both Towards a Better Tralee and Council staff who do excellent 
work to see the level of dog fouling on footpaths, parks etc. on the increase.  Cllr. 
O’Brien called on more people to get involved in keeping their area clean. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley asked if funding is available to increase the number of covert 
cameras as the only way to get prosecutions is if there is sufficient evidence.  
Signage should be erected to warn people that cameras maybe used in the area.  
People put out their bins for collection and others place bags of refuse beside the 
bin.  This is unacceptable and she asked that it would be monitored.  Cllr. Foley 
agreed that a name and shame campaign should be considered.   The amount of 
chewing gum on our streets is unprecedented and it is having an adverse impact 
on the aesthetics of towns.  She was aware that equipment is available to remove it 
and she called on management to consider purchasing buy one of these machines. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn advised that there are specialist companies who clean chewing gum 
off footpaths etc.  That week one such company was cleaning Longford town.  The 
street bins in Killorglin are too small and they are full every 2 to 3 days and he 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
35 of 58 
asked that larger bins would be provided.  Cllr. Flynn asked that a water connection 
would be provided to all Tidy Towns groups for their work. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty thanked KWD for their continued support of the County Clean Up 
Day.  He welcomed the fact that the amount of fly tipping was down in 2016.  Fines 
for illegal dumping are too low and are not a deterrent and they should be 
increased.   The securing of Gold Medals in the Tidy Towns Competition is very 
important for all towns and it takes great pride to get a town to this standard.  Kerry 
is a tourism county and for this reason it must be kept as clean as possible as 
many people depend on tourism for a living. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady concurred with the views expressed by previous speakers in relation 
to a name and shame campaign.  There are just 3 full time Litter Wardens in the 
county and he called for the appointment of a Litter Warden for Killarney.  A survey 
was carried out in Killarney a number of years ago of local authority households to 
establish how they dispose of their refuse when it was established that 13% of 
households had no means of disposing of refuse.  Cllr. Grady asked that a letter 
would issue to the Minister for Housing calling on him to introduce legislation that 
would give power to local authorities to tackle this problem. 
 
Cllr. G. Spring concurred with the views expressed by previous speakers in relation 
to a name and shame campaign.  The lack of successful prosecutions is a cause 
for concern and he asked if any of the convictions are as a result of the mobile 
CCTV cameras.  In conclusion Cllr. Spring asked that the education programme 
would be expanded. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy concurred with the views expressed by previous speakers in 
relation to illegal dumping.  If a charge of 20cent was put on biodegradable coffee 
cups it would help solve the problem. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan highlighted that the street cleaning machine in Killarney needs to 
be replaced.  Dog fouling of footpaths and parks is despicable and owners should 
be more responsible and clean up after their dogs.  The only way to address this 
problem is if substantial fines are imposed on the owners.  Cllr. Sheahan asked that 
a camera would be located at Brennan’s Glen where there is a lot of illegal 
dumping. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly pointed out that there is a white sticker on street bins with a contact 
number to allow the public to report if the bin is full.  However this number is 
illegible because of tea and coffee stains and he asked that this would be 
addressed.  In conclusion Cllr. Daly asked that occasionally a skip would be 
provided at various locations around the town to allow householders to dispose of 
larger items. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin stated that Tidy Towns Committees have tremendous pride in their 
areas and but for their involvement the situation would be a lot worse than it is.  He 
asked how many convictions were achieved as a result of evidence from CCTV 
cameras and how many cameras the Council owns.  In many instances tenants in 
rented houses do not use the refuse service and this is a cause for concern.  Cllr. 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
36 of 58 
Cronin suggested that an advertisement should be placed in the local papers 
advising the general public that the Council intends to carry out a survey of 
households to establish how they dispose of their refuse.  There is a lot of concern 
also at the increased charges at Transfer Stations.  Cllr. Cronin stated he did not 
believe that the problem of dog fouling is being adequately addressed.   Dog 
owners have no regard for buggies and wheelchair users and this is unacceptable.  
All dog owners should be responsible and clean up after their dogs but deterrents 
are weak. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea stated littering is widespread around the county.  The County Clean 
Up Day was a great success but there was more litter on the roadsides a few days 
later and this is disheartening.  Cllr. O’Shea asked that signage would be provided 
in towns and villages asking people to dispose of their chewing gum in the bins 
provided.  The problem of dog foul on streets and in parks is widespread also.  In 
Killarney the jarveys use nappies for their horses and he suggested that the only 
way to address the problem of dog foul is if dogs wore nappies. 
 
Mr. J. Breen agreed that the value of fines is an issue.  In the UK speeding fines 
are set at once and a half a person’s weekly salary.  He undertook to investigate 
the availability of biodegradable coffee cups and to consult with the County Solicitor 
on the suggestion that CCTV footage would be put on the Council website.  The 
law in relation to dog foul is that the owner is asked for his/her name and address 
and if they do not co-operate they can be asked to accompany the Litter Warden to 
the nearest Garda Station.  Efforts are ongoing to address the problem of dog 
fouling.  At present the Council has 6 cameras.  The placing of bags beside refuse 
bins is prohibited and all refuse must be presented for collection in a bin.  Chewing 
gum is an ongoing problem in all towns and villages but the focus should be on 
prevention.  Mr. Breen advised members that there was provision in the agreement 
with Irish Water to provide a water connection to Tidy Towns Committees and he 
undertook to follow this up with Irish Water.  He referred to members queries 
regarding the surveying of households and added that the difficulty is that the 
primary legislation to allow this was not enacted.  Mr. Breen confirmed that a 
number of the convictions secured related to the cameras.  The provision of a skip 
would have to be tightly controlled but this can be considered further.   
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. P. Daly, SECONDED by Cllr. S. Locke it was agreed to 
note the Report on the Operation of the Litter Pollution Acts 1997 – 2009 in 
accordance with Section 10 of the Litter Pollution Act 1997. 
 
Suspension of Standing Orders 
 
The Cathaoirleach informed the meeting it was 3pm and it would be necessary to 
suspend Standing Orders. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. S. Locke, SECONDED by Cllr. N. Foley it was agreed 
to suspend Standing Orders to allow the remaining items on the Agenda to be 
considered prior to Notices of Motion. 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
37 of 58 
17.04.24.09 Agreement with Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport in 
respect of lands at Dan Spring Road 
 
Mr. M. Scannell referred members to his report dated 18th April 2017 on this item 
which was circulated and he briefed them in detail on the report. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Grady, SECONDED by Cllr. N. Foley it was 
agreed to approve Kerry County Council entering into an agreement with the 
Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport in respect of the lands at Dan Spring 
Road leased by Kerry County Council to Tralee Harriers Limited for athletics, 
recreational and cultural activities. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton them moved her motions. 
 
14. 
Housing Adaptation Grant applications 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. A. Thornton PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council confirm how many Housing Adaptation Grant 
applications were successful to date and the amount of funding paid out. 
 
The following reply issued: 
119 Grant applications for which funding has been approved and allocated 
remained unpaid at 31/12/2016 awaiting completion of the works by the 
applicants.  
 
Mobility Aid Grant   
 
 
 
 
 
33  
€145,413 
Housing Aid for Older People   
 
 
 
55  
€112,140  
Housing Adaptation Grant for People with a Disability 
31  
€265,521  
 
In the period 01/01/2017 to the 11/04/2017 Kerry County Council has 
allocated a further 153 grants as follows;  
 
Mobility Aid Grant   
 
 
 
 
 
69  
€333,631 
Housing Aid for Older People   
 
 
 
54  
€291,606 
Housing Adaptation Grant for People with a Disability  
30  
€207,310  
 
In the period 01/01/2017 to the 11/04/2017 Kerry County Council has paid 
out a total of 58 grants where works were completed. As follows;  
 
Mobility Aid Grant   
 
 
 
 
 
21 
€96,198 
 
Housing Aid for Older People   
 
 
 
28   
€80,728 
Housing Adaptation Grant for People with a Disability  
9 
 €67,565  
 
Since the start of 2017 a further 150 new applications have been received. 
 
Cllr. Thornton noted the reply. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris asked how were grants allocated when the 2017 allocation was not 
received. 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
38 of 58 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue stated the Department gave local authorities permission to 
allocate grants up to 65% of the value of the previous years allocation even 
though the allocation for 2017 was not notified.  Most of the grants allocated were 
Priority 1. 
 
26. 
Confirmation of the list of priority projects proposed to Irish Water 
for inclusion in the next Capital Investment Programme 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. A. Thornton PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council confirm the list of priority projects proposed to Irish 
Water for inclusion in the next Capital Investment Programme. 
 
The following reply issued: 
In February 2016, Kerry County Council made a submission to Irish Water 
as part of the consultation process in their development of the Emerging 
Capital Investment Programme (CIP) 2017-2021. The submission focussed 
on priority areas for investment rather than individual projects. The 
submission was in accordance with, and followed from, the Irish Water 
Capital Investment Plan for priority Water and Wastewater Infrastructure 
which is referenced in the Kerry County Development Plan 2015 – 2021.  
 
The priority areas, as identified by Kerry County Council in this submission 
included: 
 
• Ensuring sufficient Water Quality and Capacity for all our water supplies, 
but particularly for those supplies that will be of critical importance to the 
economic development of the county (e.g. the Central Regional water 
supply), to be achieved through investment in new infrastructure and water 
conservation measures. 
 
• The preparation of Drainage Area Plans aimed at identifying and 
“bottlenecks” in our sewer networks which could potentially limit 
development, particularly for the larger towns of Tralee, Killarney and 
Listowel. 
 
• Ensuring a regional approach within the county to the proposal to 
rationalise the number of water supplies within Kerry so that it does not 
inhibit economic development. 
 
• The emerging CIP should take account of the existing Wastewater & 
Sludge Strategy for Kerry, which assessed all of the wastewater needs for 
every settlement in the county, including unsewered villages. 
 
• The emerging CIP should look to advance more projects through the 
Planning and Design stages of development in order to have a sufficient 
number of projects ready to advance through the next funding cycle. 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
39 of 58 
• The plan should make provision for the small number of water schemes in 
Kerry that remain vulnerable without adequate treatment being in place.  
 
• A strategic plan is required to ensure security of supply through the 
provision of a minimum of 24 hours storage to all supplies in Kerry. 
 
• A strategic plan is required to look at the capacities of all schemes in 
Kerry to ensure that sufficient capacity is in place to facilitate future 
development. 
 
• The emerging CIP should clarify the status of certain schemes that have 
funding approval but are not listed in the Plan as well as those schemes 
that were approved in previous Water Services Investment Programmes 
(WSIP) and are not listed in the emerging Plan. 
 
• That Irish Water’s capital investment priorities take account of other 
important environmental and economic assets in Kerry, e.g. blue flag 
beaches, designated shellfish waters, and the entire coastline of the 
county, which has the largest portion of the Wild Atlantic Way of any 
county. Investment priorities should not simply be confined to the narrow 
set of parameters set out in the licenses and certificates of each 
wastewater scheme. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton stated the list of projects submitted to Irish Water was not 
included in the reply.  She asked that the list would be forwarded to her. 
 
Mr. J. Breen undertook to contact Cllr. Thornton directly on this issue.   
 
The Chief Executive advised members that a 20 year Water Services Strategic 
Plan was adopted and that is incorporated into the County Development Plan. 
 
Cllr. Thornton stated constituents from certain villages like Duagh and Lixnaw 
asked her if they are on the priority list or not. 
 
Mr. J. Breen stated a list was included in the current County Development Plan 
and Irish Water will publish their next Investment Plan in the near future. 
 
17.04.24.10 Draft 2016 Kerry County Council Annual Report 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan referred members to the Draft 2016 Kerry County Council Annual 
Report which was circulated.  He advised that the final Draft will be presented to 
the May Council meeting for adoption and it is intended to officially launch the 
2016 Annual Report on the day of the June Council Meeting. 
 
It was unanimously agreed to note the Draft 2016 Kerry County Council Annual 
Report. 
 
 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
40 of 58 
17.04.24.11 “Invest in Kerry” proposed Launch 
 
The Chief Executive advised members that it is proposed to launch the new 
Invest in Kerry website shortly and she welcomed the collaboration with the IDA 
on it. 
 
Mr. M. Scannell then played a number of promotional clips from companies 
operating in the county which will be included on the new website. 
 
17.04.24.12 Draft Kerry County Council Creative Ireland Activation Plan 
 
Mr. M. Scannell referred members to the Draft Kerry County Council Creative 
Ireland Activation Plan which was circulated. 
 
Members unanimously agreed the Draft Kerry County Council Creative Ireland 
Activation Plan. 
 
17.04.24.13 Date for the Annual Meeting of Kerry County Council 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. B. Cronin, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Lucid it was agreed 
that the Annual Meeting of Kerry County Council would be held on Friday 30th 
June 2017 at 12pm. 
 
Cllrs. Ferris, Moloney and O’Brien asked that their apologies would be noted for 
the Annual Meeting as they would not be in attendance. 
 
17.04.24.14 Draft Kerry County Council Official Events Protocol 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan referred members to the Draft Kerry County Council Official 
Events Protocol which was circulated.  He briefed them in detail on the Protocol. 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.F. Flynn, SECONDED by Cllr. J.J. Culloty it was 
agreed to adopt the Kerry County Council Official Events Protocol. 
 
Restrictions on Presentations to Council 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris PROPOSED that the number of Presentations to full Council would 
be restricted to just those that are necessary. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley SECONDED this proposal and it was agreed. 
 
17.04.24.16 Presentation by Mr. Philip King of Other Voices 
 
The Cathaoirleach informed members that Mr. Philip King was unable to attend 
the meeting at that time and his presentation would be rescheduled. 
 
17.04.24.17 Summary of Proceedings at Conferences/Seminars etc. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.J. Culloty, SECONDED by Cllr. D. McCarthy it was 
agreed to note the following reports on behalf of the Kerry County Council 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
41 of 58 
delegates that attended in accordance with Section 142(5)(f) of the Local 
Government Act 2001 as amended. 
 
(a) 
AILG Training Module 6 held in Ballinasloe on the 24th November 2016 by 
Cllr. J. Moloney. 
 
(b) 
Conference on the theme “Civic Leadership and the Councillor” held in 
Wexford on the 24th February 2017 by Cllr. J. Sheahan. 
 
17.04.24.18 Report on visit to the US by the Cathaoirleach 
 
It was unanimously agreed to note the Cathaoirleach’s written report on his visit 
to the US which was circulated. 
 
17.04.24.19 Approval for the opening of tenders 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Lucid, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Moloney it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for Refugee Resettlement 
Programme Provision of Services for Programme implementation for the 
Refugee Resettlement Programme – Closing date: Wednesday 12th April 
2017 at 3pm. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Moloney, SECONDED by Cllr. D. McCarthy 
it was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for Engineering and 
Environmental Consultancy Services for the North Kerry Greenway 
(Listowel to County Bounds – Sluicequarter) – Closing date: Wednesday 
26th April 2017 at 4pm. 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.F. Flynn, SECONDED by Cllr. B. Cronin it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for Consultancy Services 
for the Construction of 14 No. Dwelling Houses and Associated Siteworks 
at Ardmoneel, Killorglin – Closing date: Friday 28th April 2017 at 3pm. 
 
(d) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. B. Cronin, SECONDED by Cllr. J.J. Culloty it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for Consultancy Services 
for the Construction of 20 No. Dwelling Houses and Associated Siteworks 
at Rathmore – Closing date: Friday 5th May 2017 at 3pm. 
 
(e) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. B. Cronin, SECONDED by Cllr. D. McCarthy it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for a Mobile Library – 
Closing date Friday 5th May 2017 at 3pm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
42 of 58 
17.04.24.20 Notices of Motion 
 
1. 
Replacement of ordinary school bag 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. O’Shea PROPOSED: 
To ask the Minister for Education to propose the replacement of the ordinary 
school bag with a more appropriate system where children can use bags with 
wheels to prevent possible spinal problems thereafter or as they grow. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea stated many young children are caused distress by the weight of 
their school bags.  The Government commissioned a report on this issue but it 
was not been published.  Many countries use tablets rather than text books and 
this should be considered in Ireland also.  A well know orthopaedic surgeon 
stated it is dangerous for a child to carry more than 10% – 15% of their body 
weight but many children’s school bags weigh more than this.  He suggested that 
school bags with wheels could also be considered. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley stated while she had no objection to the spirit of the motion 
corridors in schools are too narrow to facilitate wheeled school bags by all 
students.  This would be a logistical problem for schools because of the numbers 
of students. 
 
Cllr .T. Ferris suggested that teachers could allow students to leave their books 
at school. 
 
2. 
Review workings of Municipal Area Authorities 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Gleeson PROPOSED: 
That this Council calls on Rialtas na h-Éireann to critically review the workings of 
the Municipal Area Authorities under the following headings:  
 
(1) Their effectiveness or otherwise as political structures  
(2) Their cohesiveness as geographic and political entities  
(3) The pathetic nature of their funding and  
(4) Their effectiveness or otherwise in locations where they have replaced Town 
Councils. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson read the following statement into the record of the meeting: 
 
“At the outset I wish to pay tribute to the staff and Town Clerks with whom I have 
had the privilege to work since 1994. They had a wonderful commitment to local 
government and to the development of Killarney.  
 
Since 2014 there has been a dramatic change. The position of Town Clerk has 
disappeared. The focus of the still excellent staff is much more broad than it was 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
43 of 58 
heretofore. There is genuine concern that like the Gobadán in the seanfhocal the 
two strands cannot be fully and properly served.  In that context it is important to 
realise that for at least 4 months of the year the population of Killarney fluctuates 
between 20,000 and 35,000.   
 
As many of you will know I fought a long and rather lonely battle to save Town 
Councils. There was only very limited political or Organisational support for that 
stance. Some political parties in particular now seem to have a slight change of 
attitude but it is sadly too late. 
 
Colleagues it is important and indeed imperative to remember that the ultimate 
responsibility for the running of any area rests with the elected members and the 
appointed officials. Suggestions and proposals from individuals and organisations 
are always welcome but executive authority rests with the elected body and the 
Officials. 
 
In recent discussion with former senior Local Government Officials I learned that 
there is within the Government a feeling that they may have thrown out the baby 
with the bathwater. They may be beginning to realise that certain towns, such as 
Killarney, serve and energise not just the town itself but also a vast hinterland. 
 
That has been the essence of my argument all through the dissolution process. 
It’s not that I was possessive for Killarney but I think that I knew that a diminished 
Killarney will have far reaching consequence far beyond the town. 
 
There is also a growing realisation that for areas to function properly as political 
and economic units there must be a degree of physical contiguity and historic 
interaction. Without those all that exists is a disparate and forced structure where 
cultural, social and economic interaction does not occur as daily realities 
begetting unity. 
 
Of course it is good and right that there should be additional finance to enhance 
the infrastructure and boost the economic life of the two other towns and the 
villages in the Municipal but it is necessary to be very sure that this is not being 
achieved in a manner that may or will ultimately be self- defeating. 
 
Above all else, however the Municipals are not replicating the Town Councils as 
they do not have the authority to introduce an annual Budget. They merely 
authorise the disbursement of small sums of money to deserving groups. 
Essentially the Municipal area council is a sub committee of the Council, nothing 
more. In truth it is a diminution of local power, and a rejection of the much lauded 
core principle of Subsidiarity. 
 
It is beyond the comprehension of many visitors to Killarney that the position 
Mayor has vanished and that the use of the term is technically ‘illegal’. Having 
served on 3 occasions as town Mayor I am quite certain that the term must be 
restored- for mercenary reasons if no other. That is why I continue to use the 
term and will continue to do so. It is much more that a mere term of political 
endearment. 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
44 of 58 
 
It was my belief that there was to be a mid term review of the Dissolution 
Debacle. I now call on Government to honour that position and to do an in depth 
study on what has evolved from what was a very poorly thought out political act.” 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion and added it is ridiculous that Killarney 
MD cannot use the title ‘Mayor of Killarney’. 
 
3. 
Inclusion of Lislaughtin Abbey in the Wild Atlantic Way brochures 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. T. McEllistrim PROPOSED: 
That this Council calls on Fáilte Ireland to include Lislaughtin Abbey in the Wild 
Atlantic Way brochures, literature and maps in the interest of promoting tourism 
in North Kerry. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Ballylongford and its attractions are included by Failte Ireland on the Wild 
Atlantic Way and the area enjoys extensive marketing coverage Nationally 
and Internationally in the overall Wild Atlantic Way marketing campaign. 
For marketing purposes Failte Ireland has identified a number of target 
market segments one of which, ‘The Culturally Curious’, is a perfect fit for 
what North Kerry has to offer. Failte Ireland recognises the riches on offer 
in North Kerry which provide authentic and immersive experience, to 
engage the visitor, get them to spend more, stay longer and visit again. Of 
course collaboration between all Stakeholders is also needed to sell the 
unique stories of the area. The County Tourism Strategy includes the 
development and promotion of the Heritage Tourism product in North Kerry 
as a medium term action. Kerry County Council’s Tourism Unit and the 
local community in Ballylongford, work closely to also market the village of 
Ballylongford and its surrounding locality. With the assistance of the 2016 
Kerry County Council Community Fund, Ballylongford Tidy Towns has 
recently produced a “Welcome to Ballylongford” brochure which details 
many sites of interest, including Lislaughtin Abbey/Graveyard, Corrigafoyle 
Castle, St Michaels’ Church and other places of historical interest. A North 
Kerry Heritage Trails’ brochure and website has also been developed with 
the financial assistance of NEWKD. A number of trails are included and 
cover a range of interests e.g. Historic Castle Trails, Heritage & Culture 
Trails & Christianity & Spirituality There is no doubt that the Wild Atlantic 
Way has brought more visitors to the area, ensuring they stay overnight is 
the challenge which all the various parties are now working towards. 
 
Cllr. T. McEllistrim acknowledged the work being done and suggested that better 
signage on the coast road at Ballylongford is what is required. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea SECONDED the motion. 
 
 
 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
45 of 58 
5. 
Burst water mains in the Mid Kerry area 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Cahill PROPOSED: 
That Irish Water and Kerry County Council give a detailed report as to why again 
this year that there has been a huge surge in water bursts in the Killorglin, 
Beaufort , Milltown, Cromane, Listry and Ballyhar areas and when is the torture 
going to end in respect of the outages and off colour water for the residents and 
businesses of the Mid Kerry Area. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Irish Water and Kerry County Council have been extremely active in recent 
years in replacing the old and sub-standard water mains on the Mid Kerry 
Regional Water Supply Scheme. In 2014, 2015 and 2016 more than 12Km of 
mains replacement, costing €2.3 million, was carried out in the Mid-Kerry 
scheme. Contract works of value circa €500,000 to replace a further 4.5Km 
water mains on the Mid Kerry Scheme are scheduled for this summer. 
 
There have been a number of issues recently with the Breanlee water 
supply which has given rise to interruptions to the water supply.  Work of 
value €900,000 is currently underway to replace almost 8Km of water mains 
from Glencuttane cross to Ardmoniel and Annadale bridge on the Breanlee 
Water Supply Scheme. The funding amount approved also includes for the 
permanent reinstatement of the public road. 
 
There have also been recent interruptions to supply in the Beaufort, Listry 
and Faha areas and further submissions requesting another €2.33M 
funding to replace 11Km of water mains at the Board Of Works Road 
Beaufort, Anglont Killorglin and Callinafercy Milltown, all on the MKRWSS, 
have been made to Irish Water by the Council. 
 
Recent water interruptions may have led to temporary discolouration 
problems in some areas. KCC Staff work to scour the lines immediately 
after repairs to the watermain and also have ongoing scouring programmes 
in place as part of routine maintenance to mitigate against water 
discolouration problems. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill highlighted there is a never ending saga of burst water mains in 
Mid Kerry and he had sympathy for the staff in the Water Services Department 
who must repair them.  The problem is the lack of adequate funding and while he 
acknowledged the funding received over the past few years he stated it is only a 
small fraction of what is required.  Cllr. Cahill acknowledged the allocation of 
€900,000 for the Breanlea mains replacement earlier in the year but stressed it 
would take €30m to €40m to solve the water problems in Mid Kerry.  These 
problems are ongoing for the past 7 or 8 years during which time millions of euro 
was spent fixing leaks.  The Board of Works, Liebig and Callinafercy are the 
worst areas and public patience is waning.  Cllr. Cahill called on Irish Water to 
resolve the water problems in Mid Kerry and to provide funding to reinstate the 
roads following repairs. 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
46 of 58 
Cllr. B. Cronin SECONDED the motion and stressed that this has had a 
detrimental effect on areas such as Ballyhar.  He acknowledged the investment 
by Irish Water in the Mid Kerry Scheme in recent years but stated the supply line 
for the general Listry and Ballyhar area comes from the Board of Works road.  
The current problems arose because of years of neglect and lack of investment.  
He acknowledged the work of the staff who are trying to keep the service going.  
The ongoing outages are making life very difficult for customers in the area and 
he echoed the call for Irish Water to further invest in this Scheme.   
 
6. 
Increase in number of staff in Design Section 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Foley PROPOSED: 
Acknowledging the excellent work and calibre of staff working in our Design 
Section, but also recognising the huge volume of work currently being 
undertaken by this Section, that Kerry County Council seek to increase the 
number of personnel working in this area so as to facilitate the delivery of the 
maximum number of projects for the County in the most time efficient manner 
possible. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Capital Infrastructure Unit was established in 2014, and has to date 
delivered an extensive work programme, primarily on progressing the 
Council’s Housing Construction programme, the Tralee Smarter Travel 
Initiative and the Southern Greenway.  
 
This year, under the Rebuilding Ireland programme, the construction of 117 
new units will be proceeding through construction, with planning 
progressed for a further 80 units. The tender for the redevelopment of the 
Mall, at a cost of over €1.7 million, was awarded in late 2016, with a 
programmed date for completion in November 2017. The complex design 
and completion of the environmental appraisal of the South Kerry 
Greenway is ongoing, involving negotiations with over 170 landowners, 
and it is our intention to submit the CPO and EIS for the Scheme to An 
Bord Pleanála this summer.  
 
These schemes are substantially funded by grant aid from the Department 
of Housing, Planning, Community and Local Government and the 
Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport.  
 
Following the recent allocation of funding by the Department of Arts, 
Heritage, Regional, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs, under the Town and Village 
Renewal Scheme, a design team is also being procured to develop the 
Listowel to Limerick County bounds Great Southern Railway trail.   
 
Further projects will be progressed by the unit as funding is made 
available.  
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
47 of 58 
The staffing of the unit is an executive function having regard to available 
funding and I am satisfied that there are sufficient resources in the unit to 
effectively deliver the work programme for 2017, as current funding allows. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley acknowledged the outstanding work of staff in this area but said 
she was conscious of the huge number of projects on hand by this Unit.  Her 
motion was motivated by the disappointment that the Tralee Fenit walkway has 
not advanced.  
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea SECONDED the motion. 
 
The Chief Executive highlighted that the Town and Village Renewal Scheme 
funding was announced recently and if a suitable funding source can be identified 
this walkway will be advanced. 
 
8. 
Objection to the application of a TV Licence fee to laptops etc. 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.F. Flynn PROPOSED: 
That this Council write to Minister Denis Naughten to object to his recent 
proposal to allow the T.V. Licence fee to be applied to laptops, tablets and other 
personal devices. This will have serious consequences for students especially 
who rely on this sort of equipment to carry out their work. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn stated this proposed licence fee will have a serious impact on 
people working from home and students who are already struggling to fund their 
education. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill SECONDED the motion and stated this is further hidden taxation 
that will hit hard pressed families whom he understood are now turning to money 
lenders.   
 
Cllr. Flynn PROPOSED that the TV Licence Fee be abolished. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris SECONDED this proposal. 
 
9. 
Coastal Protection works 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. T. Ferris PROPOSED: 
What coastal protection works have been carried out in the last 2 years, what 
works have been identified as being required and what funding is available to 
carry out same. 
 
The following reply issued: 
A specific unit was established in 2016 to address the challenges identified 
by recent severe weather events in the county which caused flooding to 
properties, damage to public infrastructure and coastal erosion.  
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
48 of 58 
Since the establishment of the unit, the preliminary focus has been on 
designing schemes to address areas which are at high risk of flooding due 
to exceptional rainfall events and to submit detailed designs to the OPW for 
funding under low cost remedial measures schemes. These include plans 
for works at Incherea, Clieveragh, Currow and Foiladuane, for which we are 
engaging with the OPW on potential funding.  
 
The issues associated with addressing coastal erosion, which is a natural 
phenomenon, are much more complex, and will required detailed specialist 
studies, particularly given the extent of soft coastline in the county. The 
Council has partnered with UCC and UCG on sourcing EU funding for 
research projects to identify sustainable measures to address coastal 
erosion. We have also worked with the local community in the Maharees on 
low cost measures, including most recently the replanting of maram grass, 
to arrest coastal erosion.   
  
An application was made to the OPW in 2016, for €0.5 million in funding, to 
extend the existing rock revetment at Rossbeigh to protect the existing 
road, but to date no funding has been made available from the OPW for this 
proposal. 
 
In meetings with the OPW they have indicated very limited funding for 
coastal protection measures and funding is unlikely to be provided for any 
major scheme without detailed Coastal Erosion Risk Management Studies, 
which will require engagement of specialist consultants and is dependant 
on funding from the OPW, given the potential costs involved. It is our 
intention to engage with OPW and seek funding for some of these studies 
by mid 2017.  
 
The Flooding and Coastal Protection Unit is currently collating and 
monitoring those areas of the county which are considered to be of highest 
risk, in particular, where there is a risk of damage to homes and public 
infrastructure, including at Fenit (Kilfenora), Inch (Bunaneer), Mountain 
stage, Slea Head, Dunquin, Valentia (Corhabeg/Foilhomurrin Bay/Cliffs), 
Cromane, Banna and Rossbeigh. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris expressed concern that with the compromising of the landbank 
between Fenit Island and Fenit the Barrow area may be subject to flooding.  The 
river was dredged but there were objections to the removal of the sand to the 
Golf Club.  However at the present location of the mound of sand dredged from 
the river it is being blown back into the river.  There is an ongoing problem with 
coastal erosion from Carrahaun and it was suggested that the sand removed 
from the river could be used to reinstate the dunes.  She expressed concern that 
this sand may now be used to reinstate the sand dunes in Ballyheigue.  Cllr. 
Ferris added that there are no plans for measures to address this potential 
disaster which may occur.  She requested that a standing item would be included 
on the Agenda for the Tralee MD Meetings on it.  She called on management to 
ensure a plan is put in place for these areas before the barriers between the sea 
and dwellings are compromised. 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
49 of 58 
 
12. 
Coastal Erosion Risk Management Studies 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Lucid PROPOSED: 
What progress has Kerry County Council made in the completion of ‘Coastal 
Erosion Risk Management studies' for submission to the OPW seeking funding to 
address the coastal erosion problems that exist in Kerry. 
 
The following reply issued: 
A specific unit was established in 2016 to address the challenges identified 
by recent severe weather events in the county which caused flooding to 
properties, damage to public infrastructure and coastal erosion.  
 
Since the establishment of the unit, the preliminary focus has been on 
designing schemes to address areas which are at high risk of flooding due 
to exceptional rainfall events and to submit detailed designs to the OPW for 
funding under low cost remedial measures schemes. These include plans 
for works at Incherea, Clieveragh, Currow and Foiladuane, for which we are 
engaging with the OPW on potential funding.  
 
The issues associated with addressing coastal erosion, which is a natural 
phenomenon, are much more complex, and will required detailed specialist 
studies, particularly given the extent of soft coastline in the county. The 
Council has partnered with UCC and UCG on sourcing EU funding for 
research projects to identify sustainable measures to address coastal 
erosion. We have also worked with the local community in the Maharees on 
low cost measures, including most recently the replanting of maram grass, 
to arrest coastal erosion.   
  
An application was made to the OPW in 2016, for €0.5 million in funding, to 
extend the existing rock revetment at Rossbeigh to protect the existing 
road, but to date no funding has been made available from the OPW for this 
proposal. 
 
In meetings with the OPW they have indicated very limited funding for 
coastal protection measures and funding is unlikely to be provided for any 
major scheme without detailed Coastal Erosion Risk Management Studies, 
which will require engagement of specialist consultants and is dependant 
on funding from the OPW, given the potential costs involved. It is our 
intention to engage with OPW and seek funding for some of these studies 
by mid 2017.  
 
The Flooding and Coastal Protection Unit is currently collating and 
monitoring those areas of the county which are considered to be of highest 
risk, in particular, where there is a risk of damage to homes and public 
infrastructure, including at Fenit (Kilfenora), Inch (Bunaneer), Mountain 
stage, Slea Head, Dunquin, Valentia (Corhabeg/Foilhomurrin Bay/Cliffs), 
Cromane, Banna and Rossbeigh. 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
50 of 58 
Cllr. J. Lucid stated he wanted to find out what progress Kerry County Council 
has made in relation to the completion of Coastal Erosion Risk Management 
Studies for submission to the OPW seeking funding to address the coastal 
erosion problems that exist in Kerry. 
 
He raised the issue of coastal erosion on three prior occasions and he is very 
concerned with the lack of progress.  Last July he was informed in response to 
his question that Kerry County Council had applied to the OPW for €500,000 in 
2014 to carry out urgent repair work on a 280m section of cliff at Ballyheigue.  
The OPW requested that Kerry County Council submit a Coastal Erosion Risk 
Management Study before they could allocate funds. 
 
Last December he was informed that a new unit had been set up to work on the 
preparation of the necessary documentation, namely the CERMS for submission 
to the OPW. 
  
We are now in April 2017 and he is very concerned that an issue that was urgent 
in February 2014 has not made any great progress.  It is now three years later 
and still there is no progress.  This is not good enough, in fact, it is completely 
unacceptable. 
 
Obviously the new unit has not been given the necessary resources to do the job.  
Cllr. Lucid stated Kerry is just one county out of seven on the west coast with 
erosion problems.  He was aware that Clare County Council has already made 
submissions for funding.  If this is not prioritised we will be last in the queue when 
it comes to the OPW allocating funding. 
 
Cllr. Lucid asked that due consideration would be given to people living at risk of 
losing all or part of their property and he demanded that Kerry County Council 
invest all necessary resources to deal with this matter urgently.   
 
In response Mr. C. O’Sullivan stated a lot of work must go into the compilation of 
these studies.  Kerry County Council is working with UCC and UCG on these 
projects with a view to securing funding.  We were not successful last year and a 
further submission will be made in 2017.  Further studies are being progressed 
with a view to applying for funding to the OPW. 
 
13. 
Cataloguing and identification of areas with poor broadband 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B. Cronin PROPOSED: 
In light of the lack of proper Broadband in many areas of rural Kerry, can Kerry 
County Council assist in cataloguing and identifying the areas badly affected so 
that we can double our efforts to put pressure on relevant Government 
Departments and service providers to deliver a proper Broadband service. 
Currently many people working from home along with small rural businesses are 
trying to work with a pathetic service. 
 
 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
51 of 58 
The following reply issued: 
On the 4/4/2017 Minister for Communications, Climate Action and 
Environment, Denis Naughten TD, announced the Government had entered 
into an agreement with Eir to provide high speed broadband to an 
additional 300,000 properties nationally before the end of 2018. These 
properties were previously in the state intervention area which is covered 
by the National Broadband Plan (NBP). The Eir roll out will see an 
additional 25,000 properties in Kerry with access to high speed broadband 
before the end of 2018. The revised maps can be accessed on 
www.broadband.gov.ie and indicative delivery dates can be accessed on 
www.fibrerollout.ie. The public can access these maps and search for their 
property using their Eircode.  
 
When the Eir roll out is complete 67% or 59,978 properties in Kerry will 
have access to high speed broadband. The NBP aims to address the 
remaining 29,090. Kerry County Council have appointed a broadband 
officer as recommended in the recent ‘Report of the Mobile Phone and 
Broadband Task Force’. The Broadband officer will act as a single point of 
contact for engagement with operators within the local authority and will 
assist with accelerated rollout of the National Broadband Plan. 
 
 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin referred to the map with the reply and pointed out that much of the 
county is included in the national broadband intervention area.  In his area the 
EIR roll out stopped after a mile and for many houses the availability of 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
52 of 58 
broadband is dependent on the positioning of the house.  A good broadband 
service is vital for employment and rural businesses.  From 2018 all applications 
for Single Farm Payments must be completed online but broadband is not 
available in huge tracts of rural Kerry.  Many of the service providers will only 
service the more highly populated areas.  Cllr. Cronin asked if the Broadband 
Officer can put pressure on the service providers to provide a good broadband 
service for the areas identified by members. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion and stated that an adequate broadband 
service is not provided in many rural areas in Kerry and this is causing problems 
for employment and those working from home. 
 
Mr. M. Scannell stated the recent announcement by Eir of the roll out of 
broadband is important and it will see a further 25,000 properties in Kerry with 
access to high speed broadband before the end of 2018.  He advised members 
to go to the website to see the areas where broadband will be provided.  Kerry 
County Council will make a submission for the roll out of broadband for areas that 
require it for economic reasons.   The submission includes 21 areas and when 
this was assessed having regard to the Eir proposals 17 of these will be catered 
for.  This presents an opportunity to include more areas.  It is anticipated that 
67% of the county will have a high speed broadband service by 2018.  Mr. D. 
Reilly broadband officer will assist in the development of a broadband strategy for 
the county.  An education programme will be arranged both through the local 
authority and development sector on how best to maximise the benefits of high 
speed broadband. 
 
15. 
Facilitation of students from Annascaul Catchment Area who 
wish to avail of Bus Tickets to Tralee Secondary Schools 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. S. Fitzgerald PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council would write to the School Transport Section of Bus 
Éireann asking them to act in good time so as to ensure that the students from 
the Annascaul Catchment Area of West Kerry, who wish to avail of Bus Tickets to 
Tralee Secondary Schools next September are dealt with satisfactory before the 
school term starts. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. S. Fitzgerald stated every year there are issues for students who want to 
travel with Bus Eireann to attend school in Tralee or Milltown.  It takes 3 or 4 
weeks each year before they are informed if they will be allocated seats on the 
bus and he asked that bus tickets would be allocated to these students in good 
time before the start of the school year in September. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea SECONDED the motion. 
 
 
 
   

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
53 of 58 
16. 
Mobile Phone coverage in rural areas 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Sheahan PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council write to mobile phone service providers to improve 
their coverage to rural areas in Kerry. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan stated a number of constituents approached him about this 
problem.  Generally speaking mobile phone coverage in rural areas is poor with 
calls being dropped, bad reception and text messages coming days after they 
were sent.  He called on service providers to improve the service. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion. 
 
18. 
Call to ensure users of Saor Set get the same services as users of 
Saor View 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Communications, Climate 
Change and Natural Resources to ensure that users of Saor Set be given the 
same services as users of Saor View. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy stated under the Broadcasting Act of 2009, RTE were tasked to 
replace the existing terrestrial network with a digital one.  This was to be 
achieved through the introduction of Saorview at a cost of €70 to €100 per 
household.  Due to the topography in certain areas this Saorview system was 
found to be of no use.  A satellite system called Saorsat was then advised and 
the cost to individual households in his MD was far greater at €450 to €500.   
 
Cllr. McCarthy quoted RTE for their Public Representative Handbook as follows: 
“The services on SAORSAT are exactly the same as those on SAORVIEW”.  
Sadly this is not true as some people in Kenmare, Bonane, Tuosist, Lauragh and 
Kilgarvan have a complete loss of RTE2 for four hours at a time, during certain 
transmissions.  RTE2 transmits a message on screen for the duration of the four 
hours saying “this programme is not available”.  The programme is in fact 
available if one has Saorview but not the more expensive installation of Saorstat.  
Cllr. McCarthy called on the Council to write to the Minister to find a speedy 
resolution for the people that have been lied to during this changeover and not 
have their very genuine case brushed under the carpet by any RTE “off the shelf 
standard glib resonse”. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. O’Shea requested that Notice of Motion No. 21 be deferred to the May 
meeting. 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
54 of 58 
The Cathaoirleach stated Notice of Motion Nos. 22 and 27 would be taken 
together. 
 
22. 
Call to address the increasing number of burglaries and robberies 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Cahill PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister for Justice, Francis Fitzgerald, the 
Minister for Rural Affairs, Heather Humphreys and An Garda Siochana to 
address the increasing number of break-ins and robberies throughout the 
County, as a matter of extreme urgency, by installing CCTV Vehicle Registration 
Cameras at strategic locations as this will be a huge deterrent to criminals and 
travelling gangs. A community in County Louth carried out similar measures 
which proved to be very successful, reducing robberies by 100% during the first 
12 months. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill stated it is worrying that the number of burglaries is increasing.  He 
welcomed the funding of €1m per annum allocated for the next 3 years.  However 
he wanted to target specific roads to stop those who are in effect travelling gangs 
from other counties.  A number of elderly people were in their homes when they 
were targeted and they are living in fear.  Cllr. Cahill stated there is only one 
deterrent and that is CCTV Cameras.  This was done in one area in County 
Louth and it was a success.  The local authority, Minister for Justice and the 
Gardaí should all be involved in trying to reduce the number of burglaries in the 
county. 
 
27. 
Call for additional Gardaí for Kerry 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Sheahan PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Justice asking that additional 
Gardai be allocated to Kerry. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan stated anti social behaviour affects the lives of many people 
especially the elderly and additional Gardaí are needed to deal with this issue in 
particular in estates.  The lives of residents in estates are being made miserable 
and unbearable by the actions of a few.  In his experience the Community Garda 
does good work restoring law and order and giving back the freedom to those 
who were subjected to this type of bullying and intimidation. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly stated while he had no difficulty with the motions he believed it gave 
the wrong impression that there was a huge increase in robberies which is not 
the case.  At the last JPC meeting the Gardaí outlined statistics for robbery and 
Kerry was better than most counties.  He would be slow to give a bad impression 
of the county.   
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
55 of 58 
Cllr. Cahill stated he was not exaggerating as he was well aware of what is 
happening in his area.  Recent newspaper articles also indicated there is a big 
increase in robberies in South Kerry.   
 
24. 
Plan to repair footpaths 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Lucid PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council put a budget and work plan in place to repair the many 
footpaths that are broken and in poor condition in our towns and villages. 
 
The following reply issued: 
A sum of €200,000 has been specifically provided in the 2017 Service 
Delivery Plan, which was adopted by the members at it’s meeting of the 3rd 
April towards the repair of footpaths in the principle towns in the county. 
This is targeted at repairing/improving footpaths which are in poor 
condition and having regard to the level of footfall, and the specific 
locations which are identified in each of the Schedule of Municipal District 
Work Plans. 
 
These works are in addition to the significant investment on the 
redevelopment of The Mall in Tralee, at a cost of over €1.7m, which is being 
funded by the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport, under the 
Smarter Travel Active Towns Initiative, and Kerry County Council. 
 
It is intended to collate a specific program of footpath repairs, in each 
Municipal District, for consideration for funding in future years. 
 
Cllr. J. Lucid welcomed the reply and added that he wanted to highlight the fact 
that some footpaths are in a bad condition.  While he welcomed the development 
in Tralee he stated the allocation of €200,000 is not adequate.  He welcomed the 
specific programme of footpath repairs for each Municipal District and said up to 
now councillors funded footpath repairs and this had a very limited impact given 
the scale of the problem.  Cllr. Lucid asked that a timeframe would be set out for 
the repair of footpaths and he asked that adequate funding and staffing would be 
provided for this purpose. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion. 
 
25. 
Calling on Irish Water to fund the legal costs of removing wayleaves 
from landowners Folios in relation to Kilcummin Sewerage Scheme 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B. Cronin PROPOSED: 
As Irish Water drawings show the line of the sewer travelling along the public 
road from Kilcummin to Coolcorcoran, will Irish Water cover all the legal costs to 
remove wayleaves from landowners Folios which Kerry County Council had 
negotiated to originally bring the sewer pipe through landholdings and are now 
not needed. 
 
The following reply issued: 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
56 of 58 
The wayleave agreements in place for the Kilcummin Sewerage Scheme 
have been signed by both the landowners and Kerry County Council and 
the associated compensation has been paid. Responsibility for these 
wayleaves has now transferred to Irish Water as the Water Services 
Authority. 
 
The Kilcummin Sewerage Scheme is still progressing through the planning 
process which may yet involve changes or amendments to the line of the 
sewer as proposed by Irish Water. Furthermore, during the course of the 
construction of the scheme, other issues may come to light which may 
necessitate the construction of water assets through some or all of the 
existing wayleaves. 
 
For these reasons, the issue of removing wayleaves from the folios of 
landowners is premature, pending the construction and completion of the 
Kilcummin Sewerage Scheme. 
 
Once the scheme is completed, the issue of any surplus wayleaves will be 
reviewed and referred to Irish Water’s legal department for rectification. 
 
28. 
Provision of a “Stop” or “Yield” sign at junctions on all by-roads 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
That we as a Council put a "Stop" or "Yield" Sign at junctions on all by-roads. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council have stop signs at all junctions of local and regional 
road with national roads. All junctions of regional and local primary roads 
also have stop/yield signs. The majority of local primary and local 
secondary road junction have stop/ yield signs. 
 
Some local tertiary road junctions do not have stop/ yield sign and there is 
no statutory obligation or requirement under Traffic Signs Manual, for the 
council to have stop/ yield signs at theses locations.  These roads carry 
very low volumes of traffic and many are cul-de-sac road serving farmland 
and limited properties.   
 
There would be significant cost implication in signing all byroads, but if 
there are particular junctions of concern these can be examined and 
members should consult with the local MD office. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy stated a lot of tourists travel these roads and he believed such 
signs would help to prevent accidents. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea SECONDED the motion. 
 
 
 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
57 of 58 
17.04.24.21 Correspondence – Conferences and Seminars 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.J. Culloty, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Lucid it 
was agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllrs. O’Connell and Kelleher at 
the Southern Region Audit Committee Forum to be held in Killarney on 
Friday 5th May 2017. 
 
 
Cllr. B. O’Connell was nominated to report back to Council on this event. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Sheahan, SECONDED by Cllr. J.J. Culloty it 
was agreed to authorise the attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the 
London Rose of Tralee selection to be held in London on the 12th May 
2017. 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.J. Culloty, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Moloney it 
was agreed to authorise the attendance of Cathaoirleach, Cllr. M. O’Shea 
on a visit to Frankfurt from 23rd to 26th June 2017. 
 
17.04.24.22 Correspondence General 
 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were 
circulated. 
 
1.  
Letter dated 23rd March 2017 from Archbishop Charles J. Brown, Apostolic Nuncio 
in response to a resolution from Kerry County Council inviting Pope Francis to visit 
Kerry in 2018. 
2.  
Letter dated 23rd March 2017 from Deputy Danny Healy-Rae enclosing 
correspondence regarding the Tenant Purchase Scheme, LIS, roads issues and the 
need for public sewerage schemes for towns and villages in Kerry. 
3.  
Letter dated 27th March 2017 from the Office of the Minister for Finance in response 
to a resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to the housing crisis and 
enclosing a copy of his response to Apollo House. 
4.  
Email dated 11th April 2017 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Planning, 
Community and Local Government in response to a resolution from Kerry County 
Council in relation to planning guidelines for solar farms. 
 
5.  
Email from the Office of the Minister for Justice and Equality in response to a 
resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to the Courthouse in Ashe Street. 
 
6.  
Letter dated 3rd April 2017 from Clare County Council regarding a resolution 
adopted by that authority calling on the Minister for Social Protection to re-instate 
the telephone allowance for the elderly. 
 
7.  
Letter dated 7th April 2017 from Donegal County Council regarding a resolution 
adopted by that authority calling on the Minister for Defence to formally award the 
military Medal for Gallantry to the Veterans of the siege of Jadotville. 
 
 

Minutes April 2017 
24th April 2017  
58 of 58 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris asked if further correspondence was received from the Sisters of 
Mercy regarding the re-interment of the remains of women buried at Balloonagh. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan undertook to follow up on this correspondence. 
 
17.04.24.24 Any other business 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy thanked officials and members who attended his fathers funeral 
the previous week. 
 
Visit of Minister Mary Mitchell O’Connor to Kerry 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan reminded members that the Minister for Jobs, Enterprise and 
Innovation Mary Mitchell O’Connor would launch the Dingle Hub on Friday 28th 
April. 
 
Mr. Quinlan advised members that a Thank You card was received from Marisa 
Reidy thanking members for their support for their campaign for Orkambi. 
 
Mr. Quinlan also reminded members that the closing date for receipt of Notices of 
Motion for the May meeting is Tuesday 2nd May at 10am.   
 
 
Request for meeting in relation to Tralee Courthouse 
 
Cllr. P. Daly asked if a response was received to members request for a meeting 
with the Court Service in relation to Tralee Courthouse. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue stated a representative of the Court Service has agreed to 
meet members in committee prior to the next Tralee MD meeting. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris extended good wishes to Cllr. Quigg and his family who was absent 
from the meeting as his father is not well. 
 
The meeting concluded at 4.15pm. 
 
 
 
 
Liam Quinlan                                       _________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator                     Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
 
 
 
 
 
 
