 
1 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect putting 
them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is available on 
request. 
 
 
 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ AN CRUINNIÚ DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH 
I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRÁ LÍ, AGUS AR-LÍNE/FÍORÚIL 
AR AN LUAN, 20 AIBREÁN, 2026 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN THE 
COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE AND ONLINE ON MONDAY, 20 
APRIL 2026 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
 
ABSENT/ AS LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
Tom Barry, Marie Moloney 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
 
Mr. F. Reidy Chief Executive              
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue, Director of Corporate Services and People Development
Ms. N. O’ Sullivan, Director of Housing         
Mr. P. Neary, Director of Community, Climate Action and Operational Services
Ms. K Moriarty, Acting Director of Finance 
Mr. J. Nolan, Director of Active Land Management & Economic Development
Ms. B. Fitzgerald Acting Director of Capital Delivery, Climate Resilience and Culture
Ms. S. Horgan Meetings Administrator 
Mr. O’ Shea Press Officer
Ms. C. Fitzgerald S.S.O. Corporate Services 
Ms. O’ Shea A.S.O. Corporate Services
 
The meeting commenced at 10.30a.m.   
 
Angie Baily                           Robert Brosnan 
Tommy Cahill                 
Brendan Cronin
Paul Daly                            Charlie Farrelly               
Deirdre Ferris
Breandán Fitzgerald
Fionnán Fitzgerald         
Michael Foley (Cathaoirleach)
Podge Foley 
Martin Grady
Tommy Griffin                     
Jackie Healy-Rae
Johnny Healy-Rae          
Maura Healy-Rae               
Niall Kelleher                      Aoife Kennelly  
Michael Leane 
Sam Locke   
Dan McCarthy
Jimmy Moloney
Norma Moriarty
Liam Speedy Nolan
Terry O’Brien                       Niall O’ Callaghan
Bobby O’Connell            
John O’Donoghue  
Anne O’ Sullivan                 Teddy O’Sullivan-Casey  
Mikey Sheehy     

 
2 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
Cllr. Michael Foley took the Chair and welcomed everyone.  
 
 
20.04.2026.01 
Protocols/Induction 
Ms. S. Horgan, Meeting Administrator, referred Elected Members to the Protocols for 
Meetings of Kerry County Council and took a roll call.  
 
Vote of Sympathy  
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley proposed a vote of sympathy to Cllr. Tom Barry on the 
recent passing of his father Mr. Patrick (Patsy) Barry.  
 
All Elected Members wished to be associated with the vote of sympathy.   
 
On behalf of the executive, The Chief Executive also expressed sympathies to Cllr. 
Tom Barry on the passing of his father.  
 
20.04.2026.02 
Cathaoirleach’s Report on CPG Meeting 
The Cathaoirleach’s report on the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 14 April 
2026, was noted by the Members. 
 
20.04.2026.03 
Confirmation of Minutes 
(a) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan and SECONDED by Cllr. Terry O’ 
Brien, it was resolved that the Minutes of the Special Planning Meeting of Kerry 
County Council held on 27 February 2026 be confirmed.  
 
(b) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Terry O’ Brien and SECONDED by Cllr. Norma Moriarty, 
it was agreed that the Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Kerry County Council held 
on 23 March 2026 be confirmed. 
20.04.2026.04 
Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
The Chief Executive’s Report to Council for the month of April 2026 which had been 
circulated was noted by the Members.  
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae 
 Welcomed funding for the N22 and asked for clarification if the funding for the 
N72 is to complete the works in Fossa and at the Gap of Dunloe Cross.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald  
 Welcomed the provision of housing at Sruthán Sléibhe. 
  Welcomed funding for the N86 Dingle to Camp Road. Requested additional 
funding for sections of the Tralee to Camp Road.  
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty  
 Welcomed the update on the Greenway and referred to the very productive 
briefing given by NRDO office at March Kenmare MD meeting. Stressed that 
measure must be put in place for Caherciveen town.  
 
Cllr. Jimmy Moloney  

 
3 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
 Asked for an update on the agreed deputation / meeting with T.I.I. 
Cllr. Mikey Sheehy 
 Welcomed the expansion of the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant. 
 Ask for an update on the Expression of Interest for Fels Point.  
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly 
 Welcomed the Chief Executive Report and enquired if seasonal staff will be 
employed to complete the Roads Programme 2026. 
 
Cllr. Niall Kelleher 
 Does the recently announced refurbishment works for Killarney Fire Station 
include the previous planned extension.   
 Asked for an update on the Roads Programme  
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin 
 Asked for an update on the review for the Development Levies which was due 
to commence.  
 Requested an update on the casual trading bye-laws for the summer season. 
 Welcomed the Roads Funding and hoped that the Tralee to Castlemaine Road 
will not be forgotten in regard to funding.  
 
Cllr. Sam Locke  
 Concurred with comments in regard to Fels Point.  
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan- Casey  
 Welcomed the funding for a new Fire Station in Kenmare.  
 
Cllr. Podge Foley  
 Asked for an update on the following projects in Killorglin, the cinema, Bianconi 
car park and the Courthouse. In addition, he questioned if refurbishments work 
will be undertaken to the Killorglin fire station.  
  
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald 
 Welcomed the funding for the Roads Programme and requested an update on 
the LIS Scheme.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill 
 Asked if a location had been selected for the new fire station in Kenmare.  
 Welcome the allocation for the Ring of Kerry Road and expressed concerns 
that some parts of the road are substandard.  
 
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly 
 Asked for an update on the works to the N69 and the LIS Scheme.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
4 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
  
 
Mr. P Neary Director of Service  
 Confirmed that the Killarney Fire Station works are as previously proposed.  
Currently an assessment is being carried out on all Fire Stations, and an update 
will be provided in due course.  
 The Beach Bye-laws for the provision of Saunas will come before the May 
Meeting  
 The casual trading bye laws are currently being reviewed.  
 The LIS Programme has been circulated.  
 Confirmed that the funding allocated to Fossa is for the proposed works 
indicated by Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae. 
 
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service  
 The Expression of Interest for Fels Point will be finalised in a few weeks. 
 Funding has been received for the Killorglin courthouse. 
 A number of locations are being reviewed for a car park facility in Killorglin. 
 The feasibility study for the cinema in Killorglin will be finalised very soon. 
 The review on the Development Levies has commenced and update will be 
provided to the Members when available. 
 
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue Director of Service  
 Currently the Council is finalising a date with TII in relation to the deputation 
with the Elected Members 
 The Council has currently made a significant number of permanent 
appointments and is in the process of recruiting short-term seasonal staff for 
the summer season. The transition of staff from Uisce Éireann is currently 
ongoing.  
 
20.04.2026.05 To consider the Annual Financial Statement for the year ended 
31st December 2025 and to approve the additional expenditure (including 
provisions) as outlined in the Financial Review. 
 
Ms. K. Moriarty A/ Director of Finance gave an overview on the document dated 31 
March 2026 as follows.  
 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1 
The aim of the Annual Financial Statement is to fairly present the financial 
position as at end 2025. This is achieved through the production of Statements, 
Notes and Appendices as required by the regulatory accounting framework set 
by the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage (DHLGH). 
 
Close budget monitoring and management throughout the year and increased 
revenue collections ensured that the council finished 2025 showing a modest 
positive outturn. Financial provision has been made to safeguard where possible 
the council’s finances for the coming years and in part to meet current pressures 
on expenditure programmes due to the ongoing inflationary environment, 

 
5 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
geopolitical climate and availability of government grants. These financial 
provisions will also support future Budgets and provide own resource funding to 
support programmes targeted to the overall development of the county and 
provide some resilience in the prevailing economic climate. 
 
 
1.2 
The Annual Financial Statement is subject to external audit by the Local 
Government Audit Service whose purpose is to form an independent opinion of 
the accounts following a comprehensive review of the council’s accounting 
records and management practices, to certify the correctness of the Annual 
Financial Statement and to submit an Audit Opinion and an Audit Report, if 
appropriate, to the Local Authority, to the Director of Audit and to the Minister for 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage, in accordance with Sec. 120 of the 
Local Government Act, 2001, and as provided for in the Local Government 
Reform Act, 2014.  A copy of the Auditor’s Opinion and Report will be circulated 
to each Member of the council when it is received, in accordance with normal 
practice. 
 
 
1.3 
By Resolution at the October 2007 Ordinary Meeting, the council established an 
Audit Committee. As per the Local Government Reform Act, 2014, and in 
accordance with the approved Audit Committee Charter, the functions of the 
Committee are to: - 
 
 Review financial and budgetary reporting practices and procedures within 
Kerry County Council. 
 Foster the development of best practice in the performance by Kerry County 
Council of its internal audit function. 
 Review any audited financial statement auditor’s report or auditor’s special 
report in relation to Kerry County Council and assess any actions taken 
within the council by its Chief Executive in response to such a statement or 
report and to report to the council on its findings. 
 Assess and promote efficiency and value for money with respect to Kerry 
County Council’s performance of its functions. 
 Review systems that are operated by Kerry County Council for the 
management of risks. 
 Review the findings and recommendations of the NOAC and the response 
of the Chief Executive to these and take further action as appropriate. 
 
The Audit Committee is an important part of the overall control assurance 
framework and governance arrangements within Kerry County Council. It has 
an independent role in advising the council on financial reporting processes, 
internal control, risk management and audit matters. 
 
The Audit Committee met on six occasions in 2025. Focus areas throughout the 
year included the financial performance of the council, reports from the Internal 
Audit Unit, risk management, cybersecurity and data protection with the 
committee receiving regular detailed presentations on these topics. In addition 
to the agenda items covering all aspects of the committee’s role, management 
provided detailed briefings and presentations on a range of relevant issues 

 
6 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
impacting on control and governance issues within the council and this informed 
the work of the committee and facilitated audit planning and reviews of audit 
reports, findings and recommendations.  
 
The Audit Committee also met with the Local Government Auditor and with the 
Chief Executive as part of their work programme to consider the audited 
financial statement and auditor’s report. 
 
1.4 
Total Financial Activity of the council for the year 2025 and a comparison with 
the previous year is provided on page 21 - Income and Expenditure Account 
Statement for the year ended 31st December 2025, and page 22 - Balance Sheet 
as at 31st December 2025.  A Funds Flow Statement as at 31st December 2025 
is also provided. The Accounting Policies underpinning the accounts (in 
accordance with the Accounting Code of Practice) are laid out from page 15 to 
page 19 and supporting notes and appendices to the accounts are provided from 
page 24 to page 51. 
 
 
1.5 
The Overall Financial Activity of the council for the year is summarised below: 
 
Expenditure 
2025 
2024 
 
€ 
€ 
Revenue 
230,901,834 
230,764,567 
Capital 
127,728,828 
94,961,909 
Total 
358,630,662 
325,726,476 
 
Income 
2025 
2024 
 
€ 
€ 
Revenue 
230,985,072 
230,848,580 
Capital 
127,444,462 
99,079,999 
Total 
358,429,534 
329,928,579 
 
This level of expenditure indicates the ongoing extent of day-to-day service 
delivery and capital infrastructural development undertaken by the council across 
the county during 2025.  It also indicates the significance of operations of the 
County Council on the local economy. 
 
However, for the purposes of this review, I will deal with four key elements of the 
Annual Financial Statement, (i) Income and Expenditure Statement - Revenue 
Account, (ii) Capital Account, (iii) Borrowings and (iv) Fixed Assets. 
 
The charts at the end of this review give the distribution of expenditure amongst 
the Divisions/Programme Groups and the sources of income of both the 
Revenue and Capital Accounts. 
 
 
2. 
Income and Expenditure Statement - Revenue Account  
 
2.1 
This account covers the everyday expenses of the council, such as payroll, 
maintenance of Housing, Roads, Uisce Éireann, Land-Use Planning, provision 

 
7 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
of waste management infrastructure, environmental and pollution control, fire 
protection and firefighting, library service, administration/support costs, 
repayment of loan charges, insurance, central management charges and 
payment of government funded support grants for various schemes etc.  
 
 
2.2 
The Account may be summarised as follows: - 
 
2025 
2024 
 
 € 
€ 
Income 
230,985,072 
230,848,580 
Total Expenditure 
230,901,834 
230,764,567 
Surplus / (Deficit) for year  
83,238 
84,013 
Opening Credit Balance 
7,021,759 
6,937,746 
Closing Credit Balance  
7,104,997 
7,021,759 
 
An excess of income over expenditure in 2025 has resulted in a surplus of 
€83,238 for 2025.  Total Expenditure reflected above is gross of the transfer to 
reserves, i.e., transfers to reserves are included. The Income and Expenditure 
Account Statement indicates the movement from Gross expenditure to Net 
expenditure; Note 14 to the accounts provides greater detail. 
 
2.3 
Additional expenditure variances to the allocations approved in the Adopted 
Budget are outlined below: 
 
 Division A – Housing & Building 
 
Adopted Allocation         €59,381,674 
Out-Turn                          €60,624,465 
 
 
The main reason for additional expenditure includes increased activity in 
Maintenance and Improvement of Local Authority Housing, mainly due to 
refurbishment of vacant houses, this was funded mainly from internal capital 
receipts and the DHLGH Voids funding Programme and capital provisions. 
Increased expenditure was incurred also in the RAS and Leasing Programme 
reflecting activity levels in this area, this was recoupable. Expenditure in 
Housing Grants under the Vacant Property Grants reflects grants paid under 
this Scheme in the year, this is contra with income.  
 
 
 Division B - Road Transportation and Safety 
 
Adopted Allocation                €56,204,630 
Out-Turn                                €60,646,247 
 
The main reasons for additional expenditure include increased expenditure of 
€3.46m in Road Maintenance and Improvements of National Primary, National 
Secondary, Regional and Local Roads, this increased expenditure is matched 
by increased grant income.  Additional expenditure in this division also reflects 
the provision of supports to the Roads Capital programme to meet service 
delivery requirements. 

 
8 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
 
 
 Division D 
 - Development Management 
 
Adopted Allocation 
€26,914,119 
Out-Turn 
€28,681,388 
 
 
The main reasons for additional expenditure include €0.702m Residential Zoned 
Land Tax (RZLT); €0.432m additional payments in respect of SICAP which are 
fully recouped from the Department of Rural and Community Development and 
the Gaeltacht; €0.591m ICOB/Power Up Grant payments fully recouped from the 
Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment; Additional Conservation Grant 
payments of which €0.103m is fully recoupable from the Department of Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage. 
 
 
Division E - Environmental Services 
 
Adopted Allocation 
  €26,880,873 
Out-Turn 
 €29,179,424 
 
 
 
 
Additional expenditure in this Division reflects additional operational costs for 
street cleaning and waste disposal costs, grants paid for Community Climate 
Action are also included, these grants are recoupable. Increased expenditure for 
the operation of the Fire Service, linked to increased activity and implementation 
of pay adjustments in line with agreed pay agreements, adjustments which are 
largely recoupable from Central Government. Additional provisions are included 
for the Burial Ground Development Programme, in addition to provision for fire 
services equipment/station improvements as set out on page 6 and 7. 
 
 
 Division F – Recreation & Amenity 
 
Adopted Allocation 
 
 €12,068,611 
Out-Turn 
   €13,168,160 
 
The outturn includes additional expenditure on Arts Activities which was matched 
by increased grant income and additional expenditure on Maintenance of Parks, 
Pitches and Open Spaces which is linked to increased activity in this area. The 
outturn also includes several provisions, including provisions for Tralee Regional 
Sports and Leisure Centre, Beach Improvements, Mobile Library and Library 
Improvement Works.  
 
 
2.4 
Local Income 
 
During 2025 there was considerable improvement in the collection rate and 
reduction of arrears owing in the critical income area of commercial rates. 
Appendix 7 - Summary of Major Collection provides the percentage collection for 
2025 and the level of debt associated with each of these income streams.  The 
percentage collection for commercial rates increased from 88% to 90% in 2025 
reflecting continued strong collection performance.  The closing arrears for 2025 

 
9 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
have reduced by €729,458.  This closing balance continues to reflect a large 
number of commercial rate payers currently appealing their valuation to the Rates 
Tribunal and outcomes of appeals by Commercial Rate payers.  Kerry County 
Council issued 231 registered six day notices in respect of outstanding rates and 
a total of 37 rates court summonses were subsequently issued. The council 
continues to engage constructively with our customers, and all debtors are 
encouraged to continue engagement with the council. Our collection staff 
continue to work through satisfactory payment plans following engagement with 
our customers.  
.  
 
 
 
The 2025 draft Annual Financial Statements reflects a minor surplus on the 
Revenue Account, however the financial outlook for 2026, both locally and 
globally, is unpredictable given the continuing geopolitical uncertainty, the impact 
of ongoing inflationary pressures and the evolving global economic environment. 
The financial stability of this council is essential to meet, and mitigate, where 
possible, the challenges arising from the prevailing economic climate. 
Maintaining the financial stability of the council is key to leveraging grant 
opportunities applied for to this county, aligned to the Local Economic and 
Community Plan and other strategies for securing loans. In addition, financial 
provision is being made to support current and future Budgets and financial 
planning for future liabilities and opportunities, to safeguard the council’s 
finances in the years ahead. 
 
The main provisions carried forward include in particular: - 
 
 €440,000 Strategic Land Purchase. A provision is made to ensure adequate 
resources are available for future land purchases to support economic 
development of the county in alignment with Kerry County Development Plan 
and the Local Economic and Community Plan. 
 
 €500,000 Housing Voids a provision made to provide cashflow in respect of 
future housing voids programme of works. 
 
 €140,000 Mobile Library Fund provision. Provision towards the support of the 
mobile library. The mobile library service plays an important part in the 
provision of a library service to users who would be otherwise marginalised by 
virtue of location from main branch libraries. 
 
 €200,000 Library Capital Improvement works will support upgrade works to 
libraries across the county. 
 
 €200,000 Energy efficiency upgrading works for Kerry County Councils 
machinery yard, to include building fabric upgrades, heating and lighting 
enhancements and improvements to plant and equipment. 
 
 €200,000 Fenit Harbour Dredging. This provision supports the continuing 
development of Fenit Harbour which is of strategic importance to the 

 
10 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
economic growth of the county. Dredging is necessary to ensure an adequate 
channel depth leading into the harbour for the safe berthing of large ships.  
 
 €250,000 Piers and Harbours- this provision supports own resource 
requirement for match funding for projects funded by the Department of 
Agriculture, Food and the Marine (DAFM) for Piers and Harbours. 
 
 €250,000 Cyber Security Resilience Program and Business Continuity. This 
provision protects the IT systems from the ever-increasing risk associated with 
cyber-attacks, improve resilience and meet the standards set for public bodies 
under the National Cyber Security Baseline Standards (2021) and Network 
Information Security 2 (NIS2).  €200,000 LAN/WAN Upgrading provision to 
support IT upgrades to the Local Area Network and Wide Area Network. 
 
 €195,000 Provision to support government funding for grant schemes to 
enable adaptation and repairs to housing stock, improving suitability for 
elderly and disabled tenants. 
 
 €100,000 Tralee Regional Sports and Leisure Centre. This provision is to 
provide a fund for future enhancement works at Tralee Regional Sports and 
Leisure Centre. 
 
 €200,000 IT Infrastructure Resilience and Digital Services. This provision will 
support ICT Infrastructure across the council and the replacement of devices 
and networking equipment. It will support the advancement of the Digital 
Strategy for the county. €100,000 FMS Modernisation Cloud Migration 
provision will provide support to the mandatory Financial Management system 
upgrade across the council. 
 
 €150,000 Burial Ground Improvement Works. Provision to fund the Burial 
Ground Development Programme. 
 
 €150,000 Fire Service Equipment. Provision for fire service equipment to 
support future equipment     requirements throughout the county. 
 
 €200,000 provision towards Public Conveniences Capital Improvement Works 
Fund. 
 
 €200,000 for beach improvements works to support own resource 
requirements to match government funding and support the development of 
beach infrastructure of the county. 
 
 €500,000 Corporate Buildings provision towards Critical Capital Infrastructural 
Upgrade of Corporate Buildings throughout the county and contribution 
towards the Modular Office Buildings. 
 

 
11 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
 €275,000 provision for Cybersecurity and Supply Gov ICT infrastructure 
upgrade in the Local Government Operational Procurement Centre (LGOPC). 
 
The pensions liability for this council was significant for 2025. This trend will 
continue into the future given the profile of the workforce. A provision of €400,000 
is required to ensure that adequate funds are available so that any exceptional 
pension payments liability arising in any given year are met. The council 
maintains capital provisions which represent a contingency fund to avoid 
exceptional payments liability in relation to pensions in any given year.  
 
   
2.5 
The charge on Non-Principal Private Residences (NPPR), repealed in 2014, 
yielded a gross income, countywide, to Kerry County Council of €17,350 for 2025 
in respect of accrued income by owners of NPPRs which were discharged during 
the year. As per Circular Fin 04 2022 The Local Government (Charges) Act 2009 
was repealed in its entirety on 31 March 2025.  Liability for NPPR charges and 
late payment fees and any associated charge on a property expired completely 
after 31 March 2025.  A vendor is no longer required to provide a Certificate of 
Discharge or Certificate of Exemption to sell their property, beyond March 2025.  
 
Capital Account 
 
3.1 The current capital category transactions may be summarised as follows: - 
 
 
2025 
2024 
 
€ 
€ 
Income  
127,444,462 
99,079,999 
Expenditure  
127,728,828 
94,961,909 
Surplus (Deficit) for year  
(284,366) 
4,118,090 
Credit Balance @ 1 January  
99,714,369 
95,596,279 
Credit Balance @ 31 December 
99,430,003 
99,714,369 
 
 
Pages 48 to 49 of the Annual Financial Statement set out the details.  
 
The council has a substantial Capital Programme underway for the development 
of the county.  The capital expenditure increased from €94.96m to €127.73m in 
2025, which is an increase of €32.77m reflecting a significant capital increase in 
the county.  
 
Over the course of 2025 very significant progress has been made in progressing 
the Housing Capital programme, developing key transportation links to and within 
the county, and advancing the county Greenway programme, Active Travel 
projects and general infrastructure and amenity projects that support tourism 
across the county. Substantial grant funding has enabled considerable progress 
in the development of key strategic Urban and Rural Regeneration sites which 
will improve and progress the rejuvenation of our main urban development areas.  
 

 
12 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
The capital account reflects the Council’s continued commitment to drive 
development and support our communities, our towns, villages and hinterland, 
and economic activity therein. The 2025- 2027 capital programme outlined an 
ambitious investment of €690.32m of which €220.18m was estimated for 2025. 
The programme was prepared based on the information and priorities available 
in 2024 acknowledging that as a rolling programme it would change as 
allocations received, statutory process progressed etc.  
 
The outturn for the year was €127.73m. Key factors impacting the outturn, as 
indicated as part of the three year capital programme, include time requirement 
for progression of projects through statutory processes and public spending code 
approval gates, as well as the availability of funding to drive the delivery of these 
programmes. 
Building on the increased capital expenditure in 2025, the council continues to 
maximise capital investment opportunities for grant funding for strategic 
infrastructure for the county. 
 
 
3.2 
There is no general contingency fund available in the account. The favourable 
balance arising is attributable to a mixture of debits on some schemes and credits 
on others. However, all the credit sums have been allocated for specific projects, 
as approved previously, and are reviewed continuously. At the end of the 
financial year a capital debtors balance of €13,169,220 is included in the closing 
capital balance.  
 
 
3.3 
The Public Spending Code (PSC) was brought into effect in September 2013 and 
comprises a comprehensive set of rules, procedures, and guidance to ensure 
value for money in public expenditure. All Government Departments and other 
bodies, including local government, must comply with the requirements of the 
PSC. The Quality Assurance exercise in respect of 2025 expenditure, which will 
include an inventory of projects/programmes undertaken during 2025, is 
underway and will be an ongoing annual requirement for the council. 
 
 
 
 
3.4 
The Balance Sheet shows Capital Work In Progress (WIP) and preliminary 
expenses with an overall cumulative value of €68.46m on 31st December 2025. 
This represents an increase on the 2024 figure and is mainly due to further 
progress on capital projects such as: 
 
 
 Housing projects at Matt Talbot Road, Garryruth and Lohercannon Phase 2, 
Tralee and Ballybeg, Dingle. 
 Glenbeigh to Caherciveen Greenway and Tralee Northern Relief Road with 
both these projects having sections completed.   
 
The figure of €68.46m is represented by: - 
 
   € 

 
13 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
Local Authority Housing and Building 
29.24m
Road Transportation and Safety 
17.05m
Recreation and Amenity 
22.14m
Miscellaneous 
0.03m
 
 
4 
Capital Borrowing/ Loans Payable 
 
4.1 
Of the €54.95m balance as at 31st December 2025, €10.98m relates to 
Recoupable Loans which decreased by €0.98m on the 2024 figure due to 
principal repayments. €11.5m relates to mortgage secured Housing Loans and 
€30.79m relates to Assets/Grant Loans which decreased by €2.57m on the 
2024 figure with redemptions of €0.95m and repayments of principal of €1.62m. 
Land Loans decreased from €18.62m at year end 2024 to €17.25m at year end 
2025. Recreational Asset Loans decreased from €4.95m at year end 2024 to 
€4.45m at year end 2025 and Operations Asset Loans decreased from €5.6m 
at year end 2024 to €5.2m at year end 2025. In addition, further borrowings of 
€0.69m have been drawn down to fund more loans to customers. Shared 
Ownership Rented Equity decreased from €2.27m at year end 2024 to €1.62m 
at year end 2025, with redemptions of €0.64m and repayments of principal of 
€15.6k. 
 
 
5. 
Fixed Assets  
 
5.1 
The Balance Sheet indicates that at 31st December 2025, the Net Book Value 
of our accountable assets is €3,789.2m (an increase of €15.3m on the 2024 
figure after depreciation), and was constituted as follows: - 
 
 
€ 
Land  
145.4m 
Housing 
601.3m 
Buildings 
133.9m 
Plant & Machinery 
4.7m 
Computers, 
Furniture 
& 
Equipment 
1.2m 
Heritage/Parks 
10.6m 
Roads & Infrastructure 
2,892.1m 
 
The value and complexity of the council’s asset portfolio require continuous 
management and financial support in the interests of the overall economic and 
social well-being of the county. 
 
 
 

 
14 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
6. 
Conclusion 
 
6.1 
This financial overview supports the Annual Financial Statement for 2025. 
While the 2025 AFS reflects a minor surplus on the revenue account the 
financial outlook for 2026 both locally and globally remains uncertain given the 
ongoing impact of inflationary pressures on expenditure programmes and the 
evolving global economic environment.  This council will continue to closely 
monitor income and expenditure levels during 2026 and if required make 
financial adjustments to contain expenditure. 
 
This council remains fully committed to projects driving the economy of the 
county aligned with the Local Economic and Community Plan and the County 
Development Plan as evidenced by the extensive Capital Programme. The 
council is fully focused on meeting its targets under Delivering Homes, Building 
Communities 2025-2030 Housing Action Plan. The council has a very 
significant Roads and Transportation program to deliver, including Greenway 
and Active Travel programmes, over the course of 2026. The Climate Strategy 
for the council has set targets to be achieved over its lifetime. Projects which 
have secured national funding such as Rural Regeneration and Development 
Fund countywide, Urban Regeneration and Development Fund, Countywide 
Active Travel, Greenway Programme, Town and Village Scheme, Community 
Recognition Scheme, Climate Change, Town Centre First, Active Land 
Management, Thrive and Energy Efficiency Projects are advancing and being 
developed. Many of these projects require a local funding element and the 
ongoing management and availability of financing is critical to ensure the 
advancement of these schemes.  
 
In addition, Circular Letter Fin.03/2009 dated 13th February 2009 from the 
Department of Environment, Heritage and Local Government continues in 
force.  This Circular imposes very strict obligations on local authorities to avoid 
any deficit in the current account, to keep expenditure and income in the capital 
account in balance, to borrow only in accordance with ministerial sanction and 
to keep the net bank position limited to the previous year’s level.  This Circular 
was updated in January 2015 in relation to the Control and Monitoring of Local 
Authorities Contributions to the General Government Balance.  This, in effect, 
leaves very little discretion to local authorities to manage their affairs.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin asked for clarification following a query from a rate payer who 
received notification in regard to the 8% levy for unpaid commercial rates. Given the 
global downturn, Cllr. Tommy Griffin questioned the timing of the letter given that a 
number of businesses operate on seasonal basis.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill asked if there is a contingency plan in place for 2026 given the 
current fuel crisis. He requested further information on the €440,000 for Strategic Land 
Purchase such as where the land is and what will the land be utilised for. He asked if 
projects have currently been delayed and if so, why?  
 
Ms. Kathleen Moriarty A/ Director of Finance confirmed that the 8% Levy is a legislative 
requirement that can be charged for unpaid levies. Kerry County Council has an 
obligation to make rate payers aware of legislative requirements. She advised that the 

 
15 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
Revenue Department will always work with the rate payers and encouraged 
businesses to contact the Revenue Department, with regard to discussing payment 
plans. She confirmed that the Finance Department is closely monitoring any increased 
costs across the Directorates.  
 
In relation to Cllr. Tommy Cahill’s query on the strategic lands, the Chief Executive 
confirmed that this is a provision to ensure ongoing spend over the next three to five 
years, which includes a combination of Housing Land and Economic Land.  In relation 
to the rates payments, he advised that the Council will respond on a case-by-case 
basis.  
 
Cllr. Sam Locke welcomed the report and said this information will be relayed back to 
the rate payers and would always advise anyone to contact the Revenue Department 
to discuss any issues or concerns they have.  
 
Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan commended the Revenue Department for their outstanding 
assistance and said they are always very understanding of the situations presented. 
He too appealed to all rates payers to contact the Revenue if they have issues.  
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae cautioned on the impact of circulating this legislation stating 
that, we don’t want to frighten businesses and appealed to the Revenue Department 
to ensure that all businesses are aware that the Revenue Department is open for 
discussion.  
 
Cllr. Terry O’ Brien welcomed the document and said that sometimes the rates are an 
easy target and become the scape goat for when costs increase. He called on the 
Council to ensure that all businesses are aware that the Revenue Department is 
approachable.  
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Niall Kelleher, SECONDED by Cllr. Jimmy Moloney, that 
this Council hereby resolves, having considered the Annual Financial Statement for 
the year ended 31 December 2025, and as per Section 104 of the Local Government 
Act (as amended) 2001, to approve additional expenditure, including provisions and 
transfers.  
 
The result of the vote was as follows: 
 
For: Cllrs: Angie Baily, Robert Brosnan, Tommy Cahill, Charlie Farrelly, Deirdre 
Ferris, Breandán Fitzgerald, Fionnán Fitzgerald, Martin Grady, Tommy Griffin, Jackie 
Healy-Rae, Johnny Healy-Rae, Maura Healy-Rae, Niall Kelleher, Aoife Kennelly, 
Michael Leane, Sam Locke, Dan McCarthy, Jimmy Moloney, Norma Moriarty, Terry 
O’Brien, Anne O’ Sullivan, Teddy O’Sullivan-Casey, Mikey Sheehy, Michael Foley 
(Cathaoirleach) (24) 
  
Absent: Cllrs: Tom Barry, Brendan Cronin, Paul Daly, Podge Foley, Marie Moloney, 
Liam Nolan, Niall O’ Callaghan, Bobby O’Connell, John O’Donoghue, (9) 
 
Against: Cllrs: (0) 
The vote was carried. 

 
16 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
 
20.04.2026.06 To establish a Committee under Section 51a of the Local 
Government Act to consider, assist and advise the Authority in respect of 
proposed Variation No. 4 of the Kerry County Development Plan 2022-2028.   
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service referred to the report recently circulated to the 
Elected Members.   
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney and SECONDED by Cllr. Michael Leane, 
it is hereby resolved in accordance with Section 51a of the Local Government Act 
2001 and standing orders Q62-68 to appoint a special committee for the following 
special purpose: To consider matters connected with variation No.4 of the Kerry 
County Development Plan 2022-2028 and to assist and advise the authority on this 
matter. The members of the special Committee shall be all the elected members of 
the Listowel Municipal District. 
 
The result of the vote was as follows. 
 
For: Cllrs: Angie Baily, Robert Brosnan, Tommy Cahill, Charlie Farrelly, Deirdre 
Ferris, Fionnán Fitzgerald, Martin Grady, Tommy Griffin, Jackie Healy-Rae, Johnny 
Healy-Rae, Maura Healy-Rae, Niall Kelleher, Aoife Kennelly, Michael Leane, Sam 
Locke, Dan McCarthy, Jimmy Moloney, Norma Moriarty, Terry O’Brien, Anne O’ 
Sullivan, Teddy O’Sullivan-Casey, Mikey Sheehy, Michael Foley (Cathaoirleach) (23) 
  
Absent: Cllrs: Tom Barry, Brendan Cronin, Paul Daly, Breandán Fitzgerald, Podge 
Foley, Marie Moloney, Liam Nolan, Niall O’ Callaghan, Bobby O’Connell, John 
O’Donoghue, (10) 
 
Against: Cllrs: (0) 
 
The vote was carried. 
 
20.04.2026.07 To consider and adopt Kerry County Councils Scheme of Priority 
for Affordable Dwelling Purchase Arrangements, for the settlements of Tralee 
and Killarney, in accordance with the Affordable Housing Act 2021 and the 
Affordable Housing (No. 2) Regulations 2023 
 
Ms. Niamh O’ Sullivan Director of Service referred Members to Scheme of Priority for 
Affordable Housing Dwelling Purchase Arrangements for the settlements of Tralee and 
Killarney.  Kerry County Council published an open call for developers to provide 
affordable homes in the settlement of Tralee and Killarney in December 2025. A total 
of 5 submissions were received: 2 in Tralee and 3 in Killarney. These proposals are 
currently being assessed.  
In parallel with this, the Council prepared a Draft Scheme of Priority for Affordable 
Dwelling Purchase Arrangements in the settlements of Tralee and Killarney in 
accordance with the legislative provisions set out above. A number of meetings of the 
Housing SPC took place to consider same. The Housing SPC agreed the Draft 

 
17 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
Scheme of Priority and referred it to the Minister for Housing, Local Government & 
Heritage for consideration in accordance with the requirements of section 11(7) of the 
Affordable Housing Act, 2021. 
The following was included in the draft scheme. 
 
In relation to 70% of the dwellings, these will be prioritised based on the applicant’s 
household size and suitability for the property. Priority will then be given to the eligible 
applicants in the date and time order that their applications were received.  
 
For the remaining 30% of the dwellings, these will be prioritised based on household 
size and suitability for the property. Priority will then be given to eligible applicants 
based on the applicant being resident within the administrative area of the Municipal 
District, of the relevant affordable scheme, for a minimum period of 5 years on the date 
of application.  
 
The Department has confirmed the Minister was satisfied that the Scheme has been 
prepared in accordance with the relevant legislative provisions. 
 
In accordance with Section 11(4) of the Affordable Housing Act,2021 the making of a 
scheme is a priority, or the amendment of such a scheme are reserved functions. She 
recommended that the scheme of Priority for Affordable Dwelling Purchase 
Arrangements, for the settlements of Tralee and Killarney be adopted.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill thanked the Housing SPC and stated that the members for their 
work and contribution in preparing the scheme.  Affordable housing will help bring 
young couples back home from abroad and called on the Department to extend 
affordable housing across the county.  
 
Cllr. Naill Kelleher commended the Housing Staff and the Housing SPC for bringing 
the scheme to fruition and stated that realistically it will be 2027 before houses are 
complete and the scheme is likely to be over subscribed. He called on the Planning 
and Housing Department to facilitate an information session for the CIF.   
 
Cllr. Angie Baily asked that the scheme would be considered by Irish Banking 
institutions and requested that people who received inheritance wouldn’t be excluded 
from applying to the scheme.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerlad welcomed the scheme and said it brings hope to the rest of 
the county. He referred to the Gaeltacht areas and said that we must be imaginative 
in sourcing schemes and housing as these areas will never reach the 10,000 
population criteria.  
 
Ms. Niamh O’ Sullivan DOS  
 Confirmed that an information evening hosted by Kerry County Council will be 
held on 28th April 2026. 
 Purchases can use a mortgage from an approved lending institution. 
 All affordable housing applicant must be in receipt of a mortgage.  

 
18 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
 The Council intends to roll out the ‘Croí Cónaithe Ready to Build scheme’ for 
sites which will enable applicants who qualify for the scheme to purchase 
serviced sites in regional towns and villages at a discount of up to €30,000 to 
build their own homes. This scheme will be brought to the Housing SPC for 
review.  
 
Cllr. Sam Locke welcomed the scheme and said that applicants must be mindful that 
that there will be terms and conditions when applying for Affordable Housing.  
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan welcomed the scheme and said priority should be given only to 
applicants who submit a fully completed application.  
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae thanked the staff and SPC members for their input. She asked 
if there is a timeline for the Expression of Interest and what is the criteria in regard to 
gifting to a family member, is there a specific percentage that must be drawn down.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin welcomed the scheme and hoped it will be expanded to other areas 
across the county. He referenced the Local Authority Home Loan Scheme and said 
there appears to be an anomaly in self-build properties where applicants cannot apply 
if the build has already commenced and asked that that this will be reviewed.  
 
Ms. Niamh O’ Sullivan DOS advised that this is a pilot scheme and the Council has an 
extensive marketing campaign underway. In relation to loan approval, many financial 
institutions only give six months mortgage approval. All uploaded documentation will 
have to be valid and correct before it is accepted.    
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Terry O’ Brien and SECONDED by Sam Locke it was 
agreed to approve and adopt Kerry County Councils Scheme of Priority for 
Affordable Dwelling Purchase Arrangements, for the settlements of Tralee and 
Killarney, in accordance with the Affordable Housing Act 2021 and the Affordable 
Housing (No. 2) Regulations 2023.  
 
The result of the vote was as follows. 
 
For: Cllrs: Angie Baily, Robert Brosnan, Tommy Cahill, Charlie Farrelly, Deirdre 
Ferris, Breandán Fitzgerald, Fionnán Fitzgerald, Podge Foley, Martin Grady, Tommy 
Griffin, Maura Healy-Rae, Michael Leane, Sam Locke, Dan McCarthy, Jimmy 
Moloney, Norma Moriarty, Liam Nolan, Terry O’Brien, Niall O’ Callaghan, Anne O’ 
Sullivan, Teddy O’Sullivan-Casey, Mikey Sheehy, Michael Foley (Cathaoirleach) (23) 
  
Absent: Cllrs: Tom Barry, Brendan Cronin, Paul Daly, Jackie Healy-Rae, Johnny 
Healy-Rae, Niall Kelleher, Aoife Kennelly, Marie Moloney, Bobby O’Connell, John 
O’Donoghue, (10) 
 
Against: Cllrs: (0) 
 
The vote was carried. 
 
20.04.2026.08 
To note the Draft Kerry County Council Annual Report 2025. 

 
19 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
 
The circulated Draft Kerry County Council Annual Report 2025 was noted by the 
Elected Members. 
 
20.04.2026.09 To approve the change in representation of Community 
Sectoral Representative on the Housing SPC Committee.  
 
 
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue Director of Service referred to the circulated report dated 14 April 
2026. Following the retirement of Ms. Jennifer Coffey O’ Sullivan from the Housing 
SPC, Éigse na Brídeoige have nominated Ms. Caitlín Breathnach as Community and 
Voluntary Representative on the Housing Strategic Policy Committee.  
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Norma Moriarty and SECONDED by Cllr. Fionnán 
Fitzgerald it was agreed to approve the nomination of Ms. Caitlín Breathnach as 
Community and Voluntary Representative on the Housing Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
20.04.2026.10 Summary of proceedings at the following events on behalf of the 
Kerry County Council delegates that attended in accordance with Section 142(5)(f) 
of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended: 
 
(a) Report from St. Patrick’s Day Visit to New York from 16 - 21 March 2026 
by Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Michael Foley was noted.  
 
(b)  Report from St. Patrick’s Day Visit to London from 15 -16 March 2026 by 
Cllr. Martin Grady was noted.  
 
20.04.2026.11 Report on the operations and activities of the NEWKD by 
Cllr. Angie Baily in accordance with Section 141 of the Local Government 
Act 2001. 
 
(a)Report on the operations and activities of the NEWKD by Cllr. Angie Baily in 
accordance with Section 141 of the Local Government Act 2001 was noted. 
 
 
20.04.2026.12 To approve the opening of tenders  
(a) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Podge Foley and SECONDED by Cllr. Norma Moriarty 
it was agreed to approve the opening of tender for South Kerry Greenway Section 
3B Works Contract - Closing Date: Friday 10 April 2026. 
 
20.04.2026.13 Notice of Motion 
 
Emergency Notice of Motion  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Charlie Farrelly proposed 
To call on Kerry County Council to write to An Taoiseach, Mr Micheàl Martin, An 
Tànaiste and Minister for Finance, Mr Simon Harris and to Minister of Public 
Expenditure, Mr Jack Chambers calling on them to urgently address the hardship that 
households including our senior citizens are currently enduring with the cost of the 
living crisis .The latest package of measures that were announced last week, does 
absolutely nothing to help this sector of Irish society with for example no reduction in 
the exorbitant excise duty on home heating oil/kerosene, the price of which has risen 
from €400 for 500 litres in mid-January to currently €892.50 last Friday April 

 
20 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
10th .Unfortunately, it is now a fact of life within county Kerry and beyond that people 
are choosing between heating or eating.  
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly said it is a very worrying time for the public and politicians. 
The recent measures introduced by the Government have done nothing to help the 
elderly and the cost of home heating oil, people are choosing between heating and 
eating. It appears that this cohort of society have been left behind. He said overall 
it has been a bad week for Kerry and expressed regret at the loss of a voice in Dáil 
Éireann for Kerry. He called on the support of his fellow colleagues. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris SECONDED this motion and thanked Cllr. Farrelly for raising 
the matter. She expressed concerns that there will be further increases to the cost 
of gas and electricity.  The cost of living is crippling people and called on the 
council to review the Housing Adaptation Grant and provide further supports for 
home heating. As a county we are been punished for living in rural Ireland as the 
public transport is not adequate.  
 
2. Provide Information on Twin Cities with County Kerry 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Angie Baily proposed 
That this Council provide the names of all cities, regions, or municipalities currently 
twinned or formally partnered with County Kerry, dates of when each twinning 
arrangement was established, the purpose and objectives of the partnership, and what 
actions or engagements have taken place in recent years to maintain and develop 
these relationships, including cultural, educational, economic, or tourism exchanges. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council recognises the value of a twinning arrangement as a means for 
developing relations between individuals and groups in different countries and in 
promoting social interaction and cultural heritage. There should also be an economic 
benefit to the county, which should also be a consideration when discussing entering 
into a twinning arrangement.  
Legislative provision is set out in the Local Government Act which sets out that a local 
authority should not enter into a twinning arrangement until is it satisfied that such an 
arrangement is justified, having regard to the following:  
(a) the benefits likely to accrue to its administrative area and the local community, 
(b) the social, cultural and general interests of its administrative area and the local 
community, and 
(c) the total cost involved. 
Kerry County Council is currently reviewing existing twinning arrangements and 
developing a formal policy framework to guide future international engagement, 
including governance, objectives, and associated supports. Pending the appointment 
of a Twinning and International Affairs Officer under the Workforce Plan, a dedicated 
email address has been established as a central point for all twinning-related 
correspondence, this is being monitored by a current member of staff of the 
Community department in the interim.   
Subject to the adoption of a formal policy, the Council will consider the provision of 
appropriate financial resources to support related commitments. A comprehensive 
report on existing twinning arrangements will issue on completion of the policy. 
 

 
21 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
The list of partnerships and twinning arrangements is set out below. The majority of 
these are historic arrangements. There are also a number of memorandum of 
understandings in place, including between Kerry and Zheijang Province in China 
(2012) and Beit Sahour, Tralee (2019). 
 
Kerry 
Town/Village 
Twinned with 
Country 
Kerry 
Zhejiang 
China 
Beaufort 
Beaufort, North Carolina  
United States 
Castleisland 
Bannalec, France 
France 
Dingle 
Tolfa, Italy  
Italy 
Ha Maputso, Lesotho  
Lesotho 
West 
Springfield, 
Massachusetts  
United States 
Killarney 
 
Casperia, Italy  
Italy 
Castiglione di Sicilia, Italy 
Italy 
Concord, North Carolina 
United States 
Cooper City, Florida  
United States 
Kendal, England  
United Kingdom 
Myrtle Beach, South Carolina 
United States 
Pleinfeld, Germany  
Germany 
Scottsdale, Arizona 
United States 
Springfield, Illinois 
United States 
Staffanstorp, Sweden 
Sweden 
Killorglin 
 Plouha, France 
France 
Listowel 
Downpatrick, 
Northern 
Ireland  
Northern Ireland 
Listowel 
(North 
Perth), 
Canada 
Canada 
 Los Gatos, California 
United States 
Panissières, France  
France 
Shawnee, Kansas  
United States 
Tralee 
Beit Sahour, Palestine 
Palestinian Authority 
Holyoke, Massachusetts 
United States 
Springfield, Massachusetts 
United States 
Westlake, Ohio  
United States 
 
 
Cllr Angie Baily thanked the Executive for the detailed report and asked for clarification 
and follow up as regards a signed agreement between Zhejiang and Kerry. If a signed 
agreement cannot be identified, she asked that the agreement be signed or that new 
areas be considered. Cllr. Baily also requested the rationale behind the twinning’s be 

 
22 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
included eg cultural, economic, tourism in the report and advised the benefit of 
twinning’s to areas and the publicity it can achieve on an international level. 
 
Cllr Tommy Griffin SECONDED this motion and acknowledged the success of the 
twinning between Dingle and West Springfield, Massachusetts.  
 
3. Urgently Roll Out EV Charging Points 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Charlie Farrelly proposed 
I am calling on Kerry Co Council to roll out more charging points in Towns throughout 
Co Kerry as a matter of urgency as we fast approach the busy Tourist Season. 
 
The following reply issued:  
At present, there are approximately 174 publicly accessible EV charge points across 
County Kerry, reflecting significant progress in recent years and placing the county 
among the better-served regions nationally in terms of availability. In addition, a 
number of new charging locations were approved in October 2025 under national 
funding schemes, including sites in Castleisland, Listowel, Waterville, Kenmare, 
Killarney, Rathmore, Killorglin and Blennerville along key national routes. These will 
complement the existing network and improve coverage in both urban centres and 
rural communities. 
 
The Council will continue to work closely with ESB Networks, private operators and 
Government departments to accelerate the delivery of these projects. Priority is being 
given to high-demand towns, key tourism hubs and strategic transport corridors to 
ensure sufficient capacity, particularly during peak periods. 
 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly welcomed the reply however he raised concerns that there are 
only two publicly accessible charging points in Castleisland and having regard that the 
town is located on a route to both Dublin and Limerick, the lack of infrastructure is 
holding the county back. He called on the Council to prioritise Castleisland for 
additional EV charging points having regard to the current diesel and petrol crisis.  
 
Cllr. Angie Baily SEONDED this motion and in addition asked that the charging points 
would also accommodate camper vans. 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly moved Notice of Motion no 19    
 
 
19. Update on Patchmaster Machines 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Charlie Farrelly proposed 
To ask Kerry County Council to give an update on the status of the 2 no Patchmaster 
Machines that were purchased a few years ago at a cost of in the region of €250,000 
each that are lying idle most of the year in the Machinery Yard. Is it possible that if 
these Patchmasters are not being used by the Municipal Districts because of costs 
that are associated with that hire, would the Council consider trading in these 
machines for those that would be cheaper to hire to the Municipal Districts. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Maximising value for money, overall effectiveness, safety and reliability are key 
objectives underpinning roads maintenance in Kerry. The 2026 Specific Municipal 
District works plans are now adopted and the Municipal Districts are in a position to 

 
23 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
programme their maintenance works including the mobilisation and utilisation of the 
patchmaster. A dedicated rota system will be implemented for all the Municipal 
Districts to ensure this valuable resource is utilised in an effective manner. 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly said in the Castleisland LEA the cost to use this durapatcher is 
€2,500 per day, which has been deducted from County Councillor Allocation. He called 
on the Council to trade in the plant and replace it with more efficient equipment.  
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae SECONDED this motion and said this is the first time using 
his County Councillor Allocation towards filling potholes, the durapatcher is simply too 
expensive to operate. The very poor winter and cost to operate the durapatcher will 
impact on the completion of the Roads Programme.  
 
Mr. P. Neary Director of Service acknowledged the concerns raised. The use of the 
durapathcher has been significantly impacted by the very poor weather conditions, 
however he confirmed that the Council is reviewing efficient methods of utilising the 
durapathcher at Municipal District level.  
 
4. Establish Suspected Drink Spiking as a Crime 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jimmy Moloney proposed 
To ask the Minister for Health and the Minister for Justice if they will set out the current 
protocols in place where a patient presents at an emergency department and reports 
suspected drink spiking; the rationale for the absence of toxicology testing in such 
cases, even when specifically requested by patients or their families; the measures to 
ensure timely Garda statements and the preservation of evidence where a victim is 
incapacitated; and if they will commit to establishing a clear national pathway across 
hospitals and Garda stations to ensure suspected spiking incidents are treated as 
crimes, investigated promptly, and supported by appropriate clinical and policing 
protocols. 
 
Ms. S. Horgan stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Jimmy Moloney gave a very detailed analysis of his motion where he highlighted 
the urgent need for clear national protocols and a pathway to deal with suspected drink 
or needle injection, spiking incidents. He said it is about protecting people and 
ensuring accountability. Currently there is no clear pathway for evidence collection and 
suspects that the number of cases reported are lower than what is happening. He 
called for the introduction of stronger procedures to be put in place and greater co-
ordination between the HSE and An Garda Síochána.  
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty SECONDED this motion.  
 
1.Give Reasons for Underspending under the Second-Hand Social Housing 
Acquisitions Programme in 2025 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae proposed 
That Kerry County Council outline the reasons for the 47.8% underspend under the 
Second-Hand Social Housing Acquisitions Programme in 2025 and provide details of 
the measures now being put in place to ensure the full €2.3 million allocation for 
2026 is drawn down and spent. It is clear that failure to spend the full €3.5 Million 
allocation for 2025 has led to a reduced allocation for 2026. 

 
24 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
 
The following reply issued: 
Since 2023 Kerry County Council has acquired 25 properties under the second-hand 
acquisition programme. The Second-Hand Acquisitions Programme is a policy tool 
available to local authorities to support households in the most challenging housing 
situations, with priority given to households facing the highest risk of homelessness. It 
is an option to be used when no other solution is available. Other options such as the 
retention of a tenancy where possible, an alternative private rented tenancy, or a 
tenancy in a local authority or AHB social home, must be considered first.  
 
In March 2025 local authorities were notified of new and updated conditions from the 
2024 Programme, particularly regarding the Tenant in Situ Acquisitions eligibility 
criteria. The new conditions included a greater emphasis on early intervention to 
sustain tenancy and certification that acquisition was a ‘last resort’ to prevent 
homelessness. There is also a requirement that the property being acquired must be 
in receipt of social housing support payments for a continuous two-year period.  In 
addition, the purchase price must be within the Departments Acquisition Cost 
Guidelines limits and the inclusion of funding for repairs was removed. These updates 
impacted on the Council’s ability to buy homes and resulted in a drop in acquisitions 
in 2025.  
 
The Social Housing Second-Hand Acquisitions Funding for 2026 was notified to local 
authorities in February and will support acquisitions under the following categories of 
need; 
 
- Exiting households from homeless services  
- Persons with disabilities, older persons and care leavers requiring urgent housing 
responses and  
- Tenancy sustainment (via tenant in situ) 
 
Kerry County Councils 2026 allocation of €2,300,000 does not include the ‘Buy and 
Renew’ programme, which was included in the €3.5 million 2025 allocation. The 2026 
allocation is made up of an allocation of €1,700,000 for Kerry County Council and 
€600,000 for Approved Housing Bodies (AHB’s).  A full review of the Second-Hand 
Acquisitions Programme will be undertaken with the Housing SPC to ensure all 
opportunities are optimised having regard to the Department conditions. 
 
Cllr. Deridre Ferris SECONDED this motion and referred to the wording ‘last resort’ 
and said for the local authority it sometimes is the only mechanism to prevent 
homelessness. It is very frustrating where there is no other opportunity for housing in 
particular areas.  
 
5. Increase number of places for EU Citizens in state-funded dental schools 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Paul Daly proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Health, Jennifer Caroll MacNeill, 
asking that the number of places for EU citizens in state funded dental schools be 
increased by 20% to help address the shortage of dentists in Ireland. 
 
Ms. S. Horgan stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 

 
25 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
Cllr. Paul Daly expressed concern that while the population is increasing the number 
of dentists is decreasing leaving it very difficult for both public and private dentists to 
operate effectively. Many of the non-EU dentists that train in Ireland, return home and 
called on the number of places to be increased to alleviate the problem.  
 
Cllr Tommy Griffin seconded this motion and moved Notice of Motion no 27. 
 
27. Call on HSE to Provide additional Resources to the Orthodontic Service 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Griffin proposed 
That Kerry County Council will call on the HSE to provide additional resources to the 
HSE Orthodontic Service in the County to address the five and half year waiting list 
for braces for children. 
 
Ms. S. Horgan stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr.Tommy Griffin said the current waiting list isn’t acceptable given that early 
intervention is crucial for young people.  He explained there are situations where 
school children are not getting appointments until they are in secondary school which 
is very concerning given that they are only covered until the age of 16 years under the 
HSE dental scheme. If private dentists are required to help alleviate the waiting list, he 
called on the Government to provide the funding.    
 
Both Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald and the Cathaoirleach SECONDED this motion where 
the Cathaoirleach advised that he had previously raised this matter under the 
Regional Health forum.  
             
6. Re-evaluation of Mileage Rates and Travel Allowances for Community 
Healthcare Workers 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Robert Brosnan proposed 
"I bhfianaise an bhorrtha atá le déanaí ar chostais fuinnimh, go scríobhfadh KCC 
chuig an Aire, chuig an Roinn Sláinte, agus chuig an HSE ag iarraidh athluacháil 
práineach a dhéanamh ar rátaí míleáiste agus ar liúntais taistil d’oibrithe cúram 
sláinte pobail. 
 
Given the recent surge in energy costs, that Kerry County Council write to the 
Minister, the Department of Health, and the HSE requesting an immediate 
revaluation of mileage rates and travel allowances for community healthcare 
workers. 
Is ábhar é  seo atá le breithniú ag na Comhaltaí. 
Ms. S. Horgan stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan explained that currently there are four mileage bands and given 
the significant mileage travelled by community healthcare workers particularly in 
remote areas across the county, they find themselves in the lower band of mileage 
very early in the year which can result in a financial loss to them. He called on the 
HSE and Department of Health to allow these workers remain on the high rate of 
mileage or alternatively provide them with a HSE vehicle. The current cost of fuel 
and in addition to replacing tyres is no longer sustainable for these workers.   
 
Cllr. Niall Kelleher seconded this motion. 

 
26 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
 
It was highlighted that all civil servant employees operate under these mileage bands 
and questioned if a special rate should be introduced for the community healthcare 
workers.  Cllr. Brosnan asked that these cohort of employees would be given priority. 
  
8. Make Glenbeigh and Cahersiveen “Greenway-Ready” 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Cahill proposed 
In light of the tremendous success following the opening of the first two completed 
sections of the South Kerry Greenway in Glenbeigh and Kells and the high level of 
usage by the public, that Kerry County Council, in conjunction with Transport 
Infrastructure Ireland (TII), take the necessary steps to ensure that Glenbeigh village 
and Cahersiveen town are “Greenway-ready” and provide a detailed outline of the 
measures undertaken to date, along with future plans to further prepare both 
locations to fully maximise the economic and tourism opportunities presented by the 
South Kerry Greenway." 
 
The following reply issued:  
Several projects are underway in Cahersiveen town which will enhance the amenity 
value of the town and the tourist experience. The first of a number of pavement 
improvement contracts will be undertaken in the town in 2026. Further contracts will 
be undertaken in the coming years including Public Realm enhancements in the town 
core. The Statutory Process for these proposals will be undertaken in 2027 with works 
to follow subject to funding availability. 
 
The Council is progressing the Caherciveen regeneration project.  Construction of the 
Caherciveen Carnegie building is underway.  The development of a waterfront amenity 
and board walk from the South Kerry Greenway to the Marina along the Fertha River 
is expected to commence construction in Q2 2026.    Enhancement of the Fair Green 
amenity and introduction of a one-way system for greater connectivity to the town 
centre has planning approval in place. Detailed design is to be finalised by Q3 2026. 
 
In Glenbeigh, plans are being developed to provide additional parking for Greenway 
users near the trail head and enhanced facilities at the Trailhead. The N70 in the 
village has been surveyed and pavement improvement proposals are being developed 
to resurface the N70 through the village. The introduction of active travel and traffic 
calming facilities is also being examined where road space permits.  
 
The South Kerry Greenway will have significant economic benefits to those thinking of 
starting or developing businesses adjoining the greenway. Over the past months, a 
number of businesses have availed of funding from the Local Development 
Companies and the Fisheries Local Area Groups to develop additional activities. Kerry 
County Council (LEO) has previously delivered specific support programmes and 
mentoring to support potential or existing business along the Kingdom of Kerry 
greenways and a dedicated Greenway Start Business Offering will be delivered as 
part of the Local Enterprise training and mentoring initiatives in 2026. Current 
programmes are open to existing businesses and new businesses along the 
Greenway. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill welcomed the update and in particular the last paragraph. He said 
that he hoped that his previous commentary in relation to payment to landowners has 

 
27 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
been addressed. He asked for more co-ordination between Kerry County Council and 
TII. In relation to Caherciveen he requested basic infrastructure such as EV chargers, 
pedestrian crossing and traffic calming measures.  
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty SECONDED this motion and said that as a public representative 
she been involved in hours of negotiations with landowners. The public must 
understand that the payment cannot be processed until the final claim is submitted. 
She acknowledged that the South Kerry Greenway has seen significant investment, 
but it has been a longtime coming and will greatly benefit the area. 
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae said that no one is disputing the success of the greenway and 
acknowledged that some landowners cannot be paid until the final claim is submitted. 
However, the public is entitled to know the cost of the greenway and be provided with 
an explanation if necessary.   
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill agreed that the cost of the Greenway should be in the public 
domain, but the cost benefit analysis should also be documented.    
  
9. Re-introduction of the ICOB (Increased Cost of Business) Grant 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald proposed 
That Kerry County Council ask Simon Harris TD, Minister for Finance and Jack 
Chambers TD, Minister for Public Expenditure, Infrastructure, Public Services, 
Reform and Digitalisation for the reintroduction of the Increased Cost of Business 
(ICOB) grant for businesses due to rising energy prices. 
 
Ms. S. Horgan stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald said the current fuel crisis is affecting everyone and 
suggested that measures be re-introduced similar to the (ICOB) Increased Cost of 
Business Grant to help businesses alleviate the everyday costs and help bring 
money back into the public domain.  
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald SECONDED this motion and acknowledged the pressure 
businesses are currently under to operate.  
 
Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan agreed with the previous comments and added that, if the 
grant were to be reintroduced, the administrative process should be more straight 
forward. 
 
10. Kerry County Council to Pilot a Speed Control Measure 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Griffin proposed 
That Kerry County Council will pilot a speed control measure (average speed 
camera) on a county road similar to the N7 Dublin road. 
 
The following reply issued:  
The potential to introduce an average speed camera zone on a National Route in Kerry 
is currently being discussed with TII. A number of projects have been rolled out 
nationally and suitable locations in Kerry are currently being examined by TII in 
consultation with the Garda Traffic Corps. 
 

 
28 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin welcomed the response and said it has proven very effective on 
the N7 with an average 47 drivers a day being caught speeding. This would be also 
very effective on regional non-national roads. The introduction of the next speed limit 
review bringing down speed limits to 30km in urban areas will do nothing for road 
safety and will result in spending a significant amount of money on signage for nothing.  
He believed reducing the speed limit to 30 km on the Killarney to Milltown Road is not 
workable.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill SECONDED this motion.  
 
11. Road Condition Survey  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae proposed 
That Kerry County Council would carry out a survey on the condition of the surface 
of all roundabouts as the condition of the surface on some of them have been raised 
by motorbike clubs. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The majority of roundabouts in Kerry are located on the National Road Network. 
Kerry County Council, in conjunction with Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII), has 
undertaken surveys of the network and identified a number of roundabouts requiring 
repair. 
 
Up to five roundabouts (N71 & N22) have been included in this year’s programme of 
works, with additional locations identified for repair later in the year or as part of next 
year’s programme. 
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae referred to the roundabout at Lissivgeen National School 
citing the very poor condition of the roundabout and asked that it would be inspected.   
 
Cllr Maura Healy-Rae SECONDED this motion.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris called on the TII to review the roundabout at Ballygarry, Tralee, the 
surface is in a very poor condition.  
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae moved Norice of Motion no 28 
 
28. No Reduction on Price of Green Diesel and Kerosene 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Transport and the Minister for 
Agriculture to highlight the unfairness of no reduction on the price of green diesel and 
kerosene as this is very unfair. 
 
Ms. S. Horgan stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr Maura Healy-Rae SECONDED this motion.  
 
12. Dedicated Funding Scheme to be Introduced for Greenways 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Teddy O’Sullivan Casey proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Transport to ask for a dedicated 
funding scheme be introduced towards the maintenance of our Greenways. 

 
29 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
 
Ms. S. Horgan stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey said that following a response to a Notice of Motion at 
the Kenmare MD meeting regarding a dedicated maintenance crew for the new South 
Kerry Greenway, the reply stated there are currently no Maintenance Grants allocated 
to Greenways and the local authority is responsible for the maintenance of current 
greenways. The maintenance of the South Kerry Greenway will have to be undertaken 
by Kerry County Council.  
Cllr. O’ Sullivan -Casey said that Kerry County Council cannot be expected to cover 
the cost of maintaining the Greenways. The surface of the Greenway will need 
constant maintenance, vegetation will need to be cut back, the boundary fencing will 
need constant maintenance. He questioned how KCC can do this without putting 
pressure on existing services and asked that the Council write to the Department and 
ask Government to consider introducing a ring-fenced, multi annual funding scheme 
for the long-term maintenance of all Greenways in the county. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill SECONDED this Motion and asked if signage in connection with 
dog fouling will be erected on the South Kerry Greenway.  
 
In response Ms. B. Fitzgerald Acting DOS advised that signage is currently been 
erected on the Greenway.  
 
13. CCTV for Illegal Dumping 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Niall 'Botty' O'Callaghan proposed 
That CCTV be rolled out straight away to catch illegal dumpers. Legal restraints are 
ridiculous and dragging on. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council have initiated 37 Prosecutions for Litter and Waste offences 
since 2023. 
The legislation for CCTV for illegal dumping/littering has been updated to permit 
overt CCTV for illegal dumping and littering. Kerry County Council has developed a 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for Assessment of Sites for Overt CCTV 
Installation to comply with the relevant legislation. The SOP sets out a range of 
interventions to be considered, based on the frequency and scale of the illegal 
dumping or littering activity observed 
  
Furthermore, the SOP identifies a range of measures to be employed prior to a 
CCTV installation being considered including: - 
• Erect Anti-Dumping Signage  
• Increase frequency of patrols 
• Authorised officers inspect waste for evidence for potential prosecution in line with 
protocol 
• Limit/restrict access to area 
• Improve visibility of area – e.g. clear overgrowth 
• Improve public lighting provision as appropriate 
• Public realm enhancements e.g. murals, planting etc 
• Engage with local community/ Community Action Group/ Tidy Towns Group – 
Adopt a Bottle Bank Scheme / Adopt a Road Scheme 

 
30 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
• Engage with An Garda Siochana/JPC 
• Consult with local community to identify a multi target approach 
• Consider ADI (anti-dumping initiative) funding opportunities 
  
If the scale and the frequency of illegal dumping persist after all reasonable 
interventions have been employed, the suitability of CCTV shall be determined and a 
Local DPIA will be developed. 
The Council is aware of a number of locations where illegal dumping and littering 
have occurred, and these sites are currently being monitored by Kerry County 
Council staff. To date, none of the identified locations has met the certain thresholds 
required for the installation of CCTV. If the elected members are aware of additional 
sites that are subject to regular illegal dumping, the Environment Department will 
monitor these sites in line with current legislation. 
 
Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan expressed overall disappointment and frustration with the 
process and referred in particular to the Woodline Road where dumping is an issue. 
He stressed that any member of the public caught in the act of illegal dumping be 
prosecuted. The current thresholds are not enough; everyone is very frustrated with 
the situation and called on the council to carry out door to door assessment of how 
people are disposing of their refuse.  
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald SECONDED the motion and noted that he has previously 
raised the matter. The public need to be educated on their responsibility and duty to 
dispose of their litter responsibility. He noted that a some members of the public will 
not comply with the law and requested that the council maximise the measures 
available to them. 
 
The Cathaoirleach stated that all members have experienced issues with dumping. 
 
Cllr. Podge Foley also wished to support the motion and concur with the previous 
comments. 
 
Cllr. Teddy O Sullivan-Casey thanked the public for their recent efforts in the County 
Clean up and asked if any enforcement can be taken for litter that is thrown out of 
cars.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris said it appears that there is more justification for not erecting the 
cameras than putting the cameras in place. She too expressed frustration with the 
process and called on the Council to listen to the Members and address the issues 
at hand.  
 
Cllr. Michael Leane agreed with all previous comments and in particular the door to 
door household checks for disposing of rubbish.  
  
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae moved Notice of Motion no 32 
 
32. Update on CCTV scheme for towns in Kerry 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae proposed 
To ask Kerry County Council to provide an update on the CCTV scheme for our towns 
in Kerry. 

 
31 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council is currently a Data Controller for Community CCTV schemes in 
Tralee and Killorglin and has obtained Commissioners Authorisation for a Community 
CCTV Scheme in Killarney. 
 
The provision of CCTV is challenging with Data Protection Guidance outlining 
significant requirements relating to the purpose, lawfulness, necessity, proportionality 
and retention of data captured by CCTV cameras. Currently, Data Protection Impact 
Assessments are required for the schemes in Tralee and Killorglin, the installation of 
which pre-dated the requirement for a DPIA, but which the Data Protection 
Commissioner has identified as required.  
 
An assessment of the existing infrastructure associated with the Tralee scheme is 
currently being carried out to identify any remedial measures necessary to ensure its 
effective operation. 
In relation to the Killarney scheme, a DPIA has been completed and submitted to the 
Data Protection Commissioner, whose comments and observations have been 
included into the Killarney DPIA. Liaison with An Garda Síochána is underway to 
finalise these and the Joint Data Processing Agreement in order to allow the project 
to progress to tender stage.  
 
It is the intention of Kerry County Council to progress the development of an updated 
CCTV policy, which can be applied to all CCTV schemes in the county.  
In that regard An Garda Siochana are developing a National Code of Practice for the 
provision of Community CCTV as per requirements of legislation. This Code of 
Practice will inform the updated CCTV policy. 
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae said it is the same black spot locations and if there are ongoing 
issues, CCTV footage must be installed. She asked for an update on when the 
completed DPIA will move to the procurement process.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill SECONDED this motion and said the issues are long standing and 
both the Elected Members and public want to see progress.  
 
Cllr. Niall Kelleher said it appears that one assessment is completed and the second 
is awaiting completion. He called on the measures to be expedited.  
 
Mr. P. Neary DOS advised that in relation to Notice of Motion no 13 the legislation has 
been updated to permit CCTV however the Council is bound to the legislation and 
must adhere to the National Code of Practice. There are a number of measures that 
must be adhered to and following this a DPIA consultation with the public must be 
undertaken. He acknowledged that the process is onerous and advised that several 
locations across the county are being monitored. He confirmed that the Council has 
pursued prosecutions against members of the public.  
In relation to the Tralee and Killarney the Director advised that he has met both Chief 
Superintendents in the county. The Killarney scheme is currently being finalised, and 
it is hopeful that it will be brought to procurement stage soon. The Tralee Scheme is 
ongoing. He committed to provide an update on both schemes with specific dates in 
due course. 

 
32 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
 
Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan acknowledged that the blame should not be directed at Kerry 
County Council and is very confident that the residents at Woodline wouldn’t object to 
the erection of CCTV footage. He believed that the legislation is going to extremes to 
protect people who are breaking the law.  
 
7. Delays with Taking in Charge Applications 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Brendan Cronin proposed 
What steps need to be undertaken by Kerry County Council to progress Taking in 
Charge applications that have been made with a substantial period of time but have 
no surveys of services or assessments carried out to progress the application. Is there 
a funding or staffing shortage because the current delays are unacceptable. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council undertook a strategic review of the current Taking in Charge 
applications in Q3 and Q4 2025, to develop a works programme for 2026.  This 
programme is being finalised in conjunction with Uisce Eireann and is being 
supplemented by additional internal and external resources to complete the 
necessary inspections and develop the associated Site Resolutions Plans for the 
sites.  The completion of the works will be subject to the necessary funding being 
available within Kerry County Council and Uisce Eireann’s budget. 
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin asked for clarification on what is causing the delay, he advised 
that one estate received an acknowledgment over two years ago and is still awaiting 
a response to date. He expressed concerns regarding the last line of the response; 
the responsibility is with Kerry County Council to progress the applications and provide 
clarity to the applicants.  
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service advised an extensive survey of works has been 
undertaken and the Council is finalising a programme for 2026 in conjunction with 
Uisce Éireann.  
 
Cllr.Tommy Griffin SECONED this motion and said that he previously raised the issue 
at MD Level. He referred to two estates where the taking in charge applications were 
lodged six years ago and no progress in regard to a site resolution plan has been 
completed. He questioned the reason for the delays and the information deficit; the 
council needs to respond to the applicants.  
 
The Cathaoirleach left the meeting at this time, Cllr. Angie Baily took the Chair.  
 
14. Date for Reopening Expressions of Interest for Affordable Housing 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Aoife Kennelly proposed 
When will Expressions of Interest reopen for the delivery of affordable housing, and 
what areas of the county will be included in the next phase. 
 
The following reply issued: 
In 2024, following a notification from the Department of Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage inviting Affordable Housing Fund applications for towns with a population 
of more than 10,000, Kerry County Council made a submission for funding under the 
Affordable Housing Fund for the towns of Tralee and Killarney. This culminated in an 

 
33 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
Open Call for expressions of interest for developers to submit proposals for affordable 
homes being published in December 2025. 
 
The submissions received in this open call are being assessed. In parallel with the 
assessment of submissions, the Council is putting in place the necessary processes 
to offer affordable homes for sale, including the preparation of a Scheme of Priority for 
Affordable Dwelling purchase, which will be considered by the Members today. 
 
Once the initial pilot programme of Affordable Homes is completed, The Council 
anticipates that a further open call seeking expressions of interest will be published. 
At this point, the Affordable Homes Scheme continues to be restricted to the towns of 
Tralee and Killarney. The Council expects that the scope of the Affordable Housing 
Scheme will be expanded to meet the objectives of Delivering Homes, Building 
Communities 2025-2030 Housing Action Plan and national advice in this regard is 
awaited.  
 
In addition to the existing Affordable Housing Scheme being rolled out in Tralee and 
Killarney, the Council intends to roll out the ‘Croí Cónaithe Ready to Build scheme’ for 
sites which will enable applicants who qualify for the scheme to purchase serviced 
sites in regional towns and villages at a discount of up to €30,000 to build their own 
homes. 
 
The Cathaoirleach returned to the meeting and took the Chair.  
 
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly welcomed the update and thanked the staff and engagement 
through the Housing SPC. This is a very positive scheme for families who do not 
qualify for social housing.  
 
This motion was SECONDED by Cllr.  Angie Baily.  
 
15. Fines for Hospital Operation/Appointment No-Shows 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Podge Foley proposed 
To ask Kerry County Council to write to the Minister for Health to introduce a fine of 
€100 for hospital appointment/operation no shows. 
 
Ms. S. Horgan stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Podge Foley said with significant hospital waiting lists for outpatient appointments, 
the responsibility should rest with the public to cancel their appointments or face a fine.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris firstly stated that she was an HSE employee working in UHK. She 
argued that the fault may not always rest with the patients who for many reasons can’t 
cancel or change their appointments in advance. It may be down to the postal service, 
or some people may already be in hospital and don’t realise that they need to cancel 
their appointment. The number of missed appointments will not dictate the waiting lists; 
the motion must provide greater clarity on what constitutes missing an appointment. 
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald agreed with the sentiments voiced by Cllr. Ferris and said he 
was aware of people who couldn’t attend a hospital appointment for personal reasons.  
 

 
34 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
It was agreed to amend the motion as follows 
 
To ask Kerry County Council to write to the Minister for Health to introduce a fine of 
€100 for hospital appointment/operation no shows, where there is no valid reason and 
taking into consideration that a patient could not attend at an appointed time. 
 
This was SECONDED by Cllr Fionnán Fitzgerald. 
  
16. Introduce Workshops/Webinars for Grants and Supports Available for 
Housing and Renovations of Properties 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Norma Moriarty proposed 
That Kerry County Council does a series of workshops and webinars on the various 
grants and supports available for housing and renovations of properties to facilitate as 
much accurate information is available to prospective applicants and agents as 
possible. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Following the recent announcement of the expansion of the existing Vacant Property 
Refurbishment Grant, Kerry County Council are developing a targeted information 
and engagement programme to support and encourage the restoration and reuse of 
vacant and derelict properties, comprising both in-person workshops and online 
webinars, supported by the development of an information leaflet. 
 
These workshops, webinars, and accompanying materials are designed to provide 
comprehensive and up-to-date information on the full range of schemes and 
supports available, ensuring prospective applicants receive clear and accessible 
information. 
 
The Council is currently advancing preparatory arrangements for the delivery of this 
programme, with a view to its imminent rollout. 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty welcomed the response and noted that she had previously 
submitted a similar notice of motion aimed at helping applicants access accurate 
information to support their applications. She added that any available opportunity to 
address these issues should be fully utilised. 
 
Cllr. Angie Baily SECONDED the motion and said the applicants should be provided 
with a step-by-step guide.   
 
17. Delays to Killarney Community Nursing Unit 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Health and the HSE expressing our 
total disappointment with the ongoing delays regarding the opening of the new 
Killarney Community Nursing Unit and the recent revelation that the HSE have not 
discussed additional staffing requirements with the INMO since May 2025. 
 
Ms. S. Horgan stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 

 
35 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
Cllr Maura Healy-Rae said the issue is ongoing where previous dates given to open 
the unit have now passed. She expressed disappointment that a new building remains 
closed. The extra beds are urgently needed.  
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin seconded the motion, stating that the facility was reported as 
completed twelve months ago and that the statement provided by the HSE is wholly 
inadequate. He added that the public should be updated on the timeline for transferring 
staff from St. Columbanus to the new facility. 
 
18. Extension of Listowel Community Hospital 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Liam ‘Speedy’ Nolan proposed 
To write to the Minister for Health to extend the Listowel Community Hospital.  It is in 
serious need of respite beds for the North Kerry area. 
 
Ms. S. Horgan stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Liam Nolan said that some patients have been transported as far as Dingle and 
Macroom and called on the HSE and Minister for Health to extend the facility sooner 
rather than later.  
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae SECONDED this motion.  
 
20. Review and Update Road Safety Signage 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Angie Baily proposed 
That Kerry County Council review all road safety signage in the county which displays 
the number of fatalities on specific roads and amend or update such signage where 
necessary. 
 
The following reply issued: 
A review with regard to updating these signs in conjunction with the relevant transport 
authority will take place. 
  
The Road Safety Officer will liaise with NTA and An Garda Síochána in order to update 
the statistics boards at Ballyseedy and the county bounds/Cork border. 
 
Cllr. Angie Baily said of these signs stem from campaigns led by bereaved families 
and local communities, who invest significant time and emotional energy to raise 
awareness and prevent further tragedies. It is essential that this effort is respected and 
supported by ensuring that all signage remains current and reflective of reality.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill SECONDED this motion and referred to signage he recently 
witnessed in another part of the country, outlining the number of road deaths over the 
next 25 kms of road. He said the signage is very effective and called on the Council to 
utilise these statistics if they are available.  
 
21. Extend Lifeguard Provisions During Summer Months 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Paul Daly proposed 
That Kerry County Council extend the provision of lifeguards at our beaches in Kerry 
by a minimum of 2 weeks during the summer months. 
 

 
36 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
The following reply issued: 
Beach lifeguards are recruited for seasonal employment each year and assigned to 
all Blue Flag beaches in the county. Applicants for the position are required to 
possess the national Beach Lifeguard Award as administered by Water Safety 
Ireland, or an internationally recognised equivalent award. All eligible applicants are 
further required to participate in open water assessment. 
 
It is a requirement that Kerry County Council have beach lifeguards assigned to 
beaches at weekends during the month of June and early September, and on a full-
time basis during the traditional bathing season of July and August. In addition to 
these requirements, traditionally Kerry County Council has provided full-time 
employment for all beach lifeguards available to take up duty from the beginning of 
June and assigned those resources as appropriate pending the employment of our 
full complement in late June/beginning of July. Given the age profile of beach 
lifeguards and their involvement in full-time education or other employment (in some 
cases overseas) it would not be feasible to provide a lifeguarding service outside of 
the existing arrangements. Beach lifeguards are employed on a wholetime basis, 
over six days, and required to attend work on weekends and Public Holidays during 
their period of employment.  
 
Reviews are conducted on an annual basis regarding the lifeguard requirements 
prior to the bathing season. 
 
Cllr. Paul Daly called on the Council to extend the presence of lifeguards during the 
summer months. They provide greater safety for everyone. Sea swimming has 
become very popular since Covid and as a result they are more people using the 
beaches.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded the motion and said in Ireland the hot weather can arrive 
outside the main summer months which brings a lot of traffic to beaches. She called 
on the Council to provide additional amenities to support the increase numbers that 
visit the beach all year round.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahil asked for an update on the lifeguard hut in Glenbeigh as it is not 
substantiable where it is currently positioned.  
  
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue Director of Service advised that recruiting lifeguards is a very 
challenging issue and that the Council relies heavily on students in full time education 
to fulfil the vacancies. The Council has promoted lifeguard positions as secure and 
well paid- jobs, but the recruitment process remains very challenging. He stated that 
the recruitment of these positions is fully reviewed every year.  
  
He undertook to revert to Cllr Tommy Cahill in regard to the lifeguard hut at Rossbeigh 
beach.  
 
22. CBL Time Frame to Extend to three Weeks 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Robert Brosnan proposed 
Go síneofaí tréimhse ama reatha an chórais CBL le haghaidh fógraíocht maoine go 3 
seachtaine. 
 

 
37 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
That the current CBL system time period for advertising properties be extended to 3 
weeks. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Is ionann an tréimhse seachtaine amháin ina bhfógraíonn Comhairle Contae Chiarraí 
réadmhaoine ar an tairseach ar líne CBL agus cleachtas formhór na n-údarás áitiúil 
eile. Chomh maith le fógraí a chur ar an tairseach ar líne CBL, cuireann Comhairle 
Contae Chiarraí fógraí faoi réadmhaoine CBL atá ag teacht suas ar na meáin sóisialta 
chomh maith. Ceann de na buntáistí a bhaineann le CBL ná go dtugann sé deis 
d’iarratasóirí tairiscint a dhéanamh ar réadmhaoine ag an seoladh ina mbeadh spéis 
acu cónaí ann. Chun a chinntiú go bhfanann iarratasóirí gníomhach sa phróiseas, tá 
sé tábhachtach go gcuirtear réadmhaoine ar an gcóras go rialta. Cuireann an tréimhse 
ama reatha ar chumas próiseáil éifeachtach a dhéanamh ar leithdháiltí. Bheadh gá le 
tuilleadh 
machnaimh 
a 
dhéanamh 
ar 
aon 
síneadh 
ama. 
 
The period of one week which Kerry County Council advertise properties on the CBL 
online portal is in line with most other local authorities. In addition to advertisements 
through the CBL online portal, Kerry County Council communicate notices of 
upcoming CBL properties through its social media channels. One of the benefits of 
CBL is that it allows applicants a choice to bid on properties in a location that they may 
be interested in living. To ensure that applicants remain engaged with the process, it 
is important that properties go up on the system on a regular basis. The current 
timeframe provides for efficient turnaround times regarding allocations and the 
implications of extending the timeline would need to be considered further.  
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan said that the current timeframe is not sufficient and doesn’t allow 
for applicants who may be away, unwell or cannot access the system for one week.  
 
Cllr. Deridre Ferris SECONDED this motion and said she believed that the current 
CBL system disadvantages people who are not “tech savvy”. In some cases, 
individuals are unclear about what they are bidding on and end up accepting properties 
they do not want, which can result in their removal from the CBL system for a year. 
 
Ms. N. O’ Sullivan Director of Service said the Council will review and look at the 
implication of extending the timeline.  
   
23. Identify Funding Source for full time Access and Inclusion Officer 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Brendan Cronin proposed 
That Kerry County Council identifies a funding source for the appointment of a 
dedicated full time and fully resourced Access and Inclusion Officer. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Under the Disability Act 2005 (Section 26) Kerry County Council is required to have 
a designated officer (Access Officer) to provide for and co-ordinate the provision of 
assistance and guidance to persons with disabilities in accessing its services. The 
Council has met its obligations in appointing Sean Scally, AO Corporate Services as 
Access Officer.   
 
In addition in areas like Housing for example specific additional structures are in 
place. Kerry County Council’s Housing & Disability Steering Group meet on a 

 
38 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
quarterly basis. The purpose of this group is to facilitate integrated and timely 
responses to the housing needs of people with physical, intellectual, mental health 
and sensory disabilities by the various statutory and voluntary organisations working 
with the disability sector in Kerry. The work of the Housing & Disability Steering 
Group is supported by the Housing Agency. The work of this committee is 
underpinned by the National Housing Strategy for Disabled People and the Kerry 
County Council’s Strategic Plan for Housing People with a Disability.  
 
Within the Municipal Districts & Capital Infrastructure teams accessibility is a key 
consideration in the design and delivery of improvements to the public realm. Where 
Access groups are in place in towns, engagement takes place with the Municipal 
District team. This is to support safe, inclusive access to our towns and villages. 
 
The need for an additional dedicated full-time post holder was not identified during the 
workforce planning process during 2025 but, similar to other work areas, this will be 
kept under review by Corporate Services during the period of the current Strategic 
Workforce Plan 2025-2029. The Council is happy to meet with the IWA to explore what 
precise support they are seeking. 
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin welcomed the response and the appointment of Mr. Sean Scally 
as Access Officer.  He noted in Killarney there is an excellent Access group who liaise 
directly with the Elected Members.   
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald SECONDED this motion and moved his Notice of Motion no 
29. 
 
26. Identify Funding Source for full time Access and Inclusion Officer 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald proposed 
That Kerry County Council seek Government funding for the appointment of a 
dedicated, full-time and fully resourced Access and Inclusion Officer. 
 
 
The following reply issued: 
This is a matter for consideration by the members.  
 
Under the Disability Act 2005 (Section 26) Kerry County Council is required to have 
a designated officer (Access Officer) to provide for and co-ordinate the provision of 
assistance and guidance to persons with disabilities in accessing its services. The 
Council has met its obligations in appointing Sean Scally, AO Corporate Services as 
Access Officer.   
 
In addition, in areas like Housing for example specific additional structures are in 
place. Kerry County Council’s Housing & Disability Steering Group meet on a 
quarterly basis. The purpose of this group is to facilitate integrated and timely 
responses to the housing needs of people with physical, intellectual, mental health 
and sensory disabilities by the various statutory and voluntary organisations working 
with the disability sector in Kerry. The work of the Housing & Disability Steering 
Group is supported by the Housing Agency. The work of this committee is 
underpinned by the National Housing Strategy for Disabled People and the Kerry 
County Council’s Strategic Plan for Housing People with a Disability.  

 
39 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
 
Within the Municipal Districts & Capital Infrastructure teams accessibility is a key 
consideration in the design and delivery of improvements to the public realm. Where 
Access groups are in place in towns engagement takes place with the Municipal 
District team. This is to support safe, inclusive access to our towns and villages. 
 
The need for an additional dedicated full-time post holder was not identified during the 
workforce planning process during 2025 but, similar to other work areas, this will be 
kept under review by Corporate Services during the period of the current Strategic 
Workforce Plan 2025-2029. The Council is happy to meet with the IWA to explore what 
precise support they are seeking. 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald SECONDED this motion and said he previously raised a 
similar notice of motion and called on all organisations involved to ensure that these 
meetings go ahead.  
 
Suspend Standing Orders 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Brendan Cronin and SECONDED by Cllr. Tommy Cahill, 
it was agreed to suspend Standing orders as it was 1.30p.m. 
 
24. Additional Funding for Local Link Services in Kerry 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Cahill proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the National Transport Authority and the Minister 
for Transport seeking additional funding for Local Link services in County Kerry, in 
order to enhance connectivity, increase service frequency and expand routes to better 
serve our rural communities. 
 
Ms. S. Horgan stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill commended the work of Mr. Alan O’ Connell and the Local Link 
service, he said it is a real success story.  He said from discussions with the public 
there is a demand for services and connections that must be pursued between 
Glenbeigh, Glencar and Dromid; the Gap of Dunloe, Beaufort and Killarney; 
Glenbeigh, Cromane and Dooks; and improved links from Killarney to Mallow across 
to Kilcummin and Beaufort, which would include extending the hugely successful 
ANSEO service. He called on the provision of additional funding to extend this service 
to accommodate the above-mentioned routes. The Local Link service allows people 
live in rural areas and helps businesses to operate. 
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerld SECONDED the motion and said it is vital service for the elderly 
and very convenient.  
 
Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan agreed with the sentiments of the motion. In Killarney the 
ANSEO Service has been a real success story and said he is hopeful that this pilot 
scheme will be extended.  
 
Cllr. Maura Helay-Rae concurred with the comments expressed and said 
notwithstanding the success of the ANSEO service it is been operated as a taxi service 
with no scheduled timetable. The service maybe more effective with a scheduled 
timetable. 

 
40 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
 
25. Update on Review of School Wardens 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae proposed 
Can Kerry County Council provide an update on the review of School Wardens 
throughout the county. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The review of the School Warden / Crossings across the county is progressing with a 
number of areas assessed and minor works carried out. These works have included 
new road markings, refreshed lineage, and improved road surfacing. Traffic, 
pedestrian and parking surveys have been conducted at some school locations in 
the county. 
 
Furthermore, the review covers a range of key criteria, including: 
• Crossing types and locations 
• Existing crossing conditions 
• Potential upgrades and improvements 
• Number and frequency of students using each crossing 
• Requests for new school crossings 
• Considerations for relocation of existing crossings 
 
Initial findings indicate that the majority of current school crossings are expected to 
remain in place. However, some locations will require physical works to provide 
safety measures and crossing points and funding applications will be prepared for 
these areas. 
 
Any new requests for additional school warden crossings continue to be assessed as 
part of the overall process. 
 
Cllr. Liam Nolan SECONDED this motion. 
 
29. Seek Additional Funding to Expand LIS 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Aoife Kennelly proposed 
That Kerry County Council seek additional funding from the Department in 2026 to 
expand the Local Improvement Scheme. 
 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council is working continuously with the Department of Rural and 
Community Development and the Gaeltacht (DRCDG) on the Local Improvement 
Scheme (LIS). Approval has been given to proceed with 20 schemes, provided that 
the required local contribution is paid and the scheme criteria are met, according to 
the 2026 funding allocation. 
 
Kerry County Council has also notified the DRCDG that it can deliver additional 
schemes if extra funding becomes available later in the year. 
 
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly expressed concerns that it will be another twenty years before the 
list is exhausted at the current rate. This is unacceptable for current applicants and for 
a rural county like Kerry the provision of additional funding is essential. She referred 

 
41 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
to an elderly individual who has been on the waiting list since the LIS scheme 
commenced.  
 
Cllr. Angie Baily SECONDED this motion. 
 
The Cathaoirleach supported this motion and said every Elected Member has raised 
this matter previously.  
 
30. Ask Min for the Environment to make River-side walkways 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Podge Foley proposed 
To ask Kerry County Council to write to the Minister for the Environment to make all 
land beside rivers available for walkways or cycling tracks. It would take a lot of cyclists 
off roadways and it would bring tourists to more rural parts of Kerry. 
 
Ms. S. Horgan stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Podge Foley called for the provision of a walking track to be completed in smaller 
towns such as Killorglin from the Laune River across to Beaufort.  
 
Cllr Maura Healy-Rae stated that she could not support the motion. She noted that the 
Minister for the Environment does not own the land and expressed the view that 
imposing such an objective on the landowners would be unfair, adding that preliminary 
discussions with them should take place first. 
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald concurred with the comments expressed by Cllr. Maura Healy-
Rae. There are already a number of Blueways across the county. What is being 
proposed in the motion is significant and would involve consultation with landowners. 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty referred to the walking initiatives currently operated by SKDP and 
said she believed that mechanism already exists.  There can be many restrictions for 
the provision of walkways such as SAC’s (Special Areas of conservation).  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris said she could not agree to public money been spent on flood risk 
areas.  
 
Cllr Podge Foley asked that the smaller towns in Kerry would be considered for the 
walkways.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris agreed that smaller towns can sometimes get less funding and said 
if you want to take cars off the road, we need to build more infrastructure.  
  
It was agreed to amend the notice of motion as follows  
 
“To ask Kerry County Council to write to the Minister of the Environment to prioritise 
funding for walkways and cycling tracks along our riverbanks” 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill SECONDED this motion.  
 
31. Secure Funding for Fire Stations County-Wide 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Norma Moriarty proposed 

 
42 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
While we all welcome the capital investment into the fire stations in Killarney and 
Kenmare, I ask that we redouble our efforts to secure much needed funding to upgrade 
the facilities in other Fire Stations which are not adequate and requires refurbishment. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry Fire Service also welcomes the recent capital investment funding allocated to 
the county. 
 
In recent years significant investment has taken place in fire station repairs, 
maintenance and modernisation. Working in partnership with the National 
Directorate for Fire and Emergency Management (NDFEM), substantial ongoing 
works continue across the County to enhance and upgrade our infrastructure. 
 
The fire service regularly reviews proposed capital upgrade projects.  Any necessary 
works to fire stations will be prioritised subject to available funding. 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty welcomed the response and called on the Council to work with 
the HSE in regard to the provision of a HSE Ambulance Base adjacent to the fire 
station in Killorglin. This would potentially mean there would be two funding streams.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahil SECONED this motion and asked if a location for the Kenmare Fire 
station has been confirmed.  
 
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue Director of Service advised that the Council is open to entering 
discussions with the HSE.  
 
20.04.2026.14 Correspondence – Conferences and Seminars 
(a) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney and SECONDED by Michael Leane it 
was agreed to authorise the attendance of Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Michael Foley at the 
National Day of the Netherlands - King’s Day Reception to be held in Dublin on 
Monday 27 April 2026. 
 
(b) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Tommy Griffin and SECONDED by Breandán 
Fitzgerald it was agreed to authorise the attendance of the Cathaoirleach and 
Members, on an official visit to Newfoundland.  
 
(c) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Podge Foley and SECONDED by Jimmy Moloney it 
was agreed to get retrospective approval for the attendance of Cllr. Breandán 
Fitzgerald to attend the IPI Annual Training Conference 2026 held in the Radisson Blu, 
Athlone from 16 – 17 April 2026. 
 
(d) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and SECONDED by Bobby O’ Connell 
it was agreed to approve the attendance of all Elected Members to the Safe Talk 
Training which will be held in the following locations.   
 
SafeTALK – HSE Suicide Alertness Training  
 
Wednesday 29 April  6:30pm - 9:30pm 
 
Kenmare Further ETC Centre 
Thursday 30 April 
 
 6pm - 9:30pm 
 
Tralee  -TBC 
Thursday 21 May 
 
10am - 1:30pm 
 
Killarney Torc FRC 

 
43 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
Tuesday 26 May 
 
 3pm - 6pm  
 
Caherciveen South West FRC 
Thursday 25 June 
 
 1:30pm - 5pm 
 
Listowel FRC 
 
(e) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Norma Moriarty and SECONDED by Fionnán 
Fitzgerald it was agreed to authorise the attendance of Cathaoirleach Michael Foley 
to attend the Daniel O’ Connell Commemorative Lecture at Glasnevin on Sunday 17 
May 2026. 
 
 
20.04.2026.15 Correspondence General 
 
 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were circulated: 
 
List of correspondence circulated at the April 2026 
Meeting of Kerry County Council 
  
Date 
From 
Description 
 1. 
19/03/2026 
Minister for 
Health   
Response to a resolution by the Members to 
provide the Shingles Vaccine to over 50’s and to 
individuals who are immune compromised. 
 2. 
25/03/2026 
Minister for 
Special 
Education
Response to a resolution by the Members in 
relation to the loss of special needs assistants  
3. 
25/03/2026 
Minister For 
Agriculture 
Food and 
Marine
Response to a resolution by the Members to 
support Irish fishing industry. 
4. 
26/03/2026 
Minister For 
Agriculture 
Food and 
Marine
Response to a resolution by the Members to 
request the Government to bring back the Irish 
Sugar and Flax Industries to Ireland. 
5. 
26/03/2026 
National 
Ambulance 
Service
Response to a resolution by the Members in 
relation to the tirage of ambulance service.  
6. 
31/03/2026 
Minister for 
Housing  
Response to a resolution by the Members to 
request the Minister to intervene in regard to the 
mass eviction of tenants and families from Loreto 
Convent, Killarney
7. 
31/03/2026 
Minister for 
Justice 
Response to a resolution by the Members to 
request the Garda Vetting system to be reviewed. 
8. 
31/03/2026 
Dept of Justice Response to a resolution by the Members to 
repopulate the Garda numbers in rural Ireland. 
 
Cllr Deirdre Ferries referred to correspondence No 6 from The Minister for Housing in 
relation to Loreto Convent, Killarney. She expressed disappointment with the response 

 
44 
April Ordinary Meeting – 20 April 2026 
and said that everything that has been suggested by the Minister has already been 
done.  
 
20.04.2026.16 Minutes arising from the minutes as confirmed 
 
20.04.2026.17 Any Other Business 
 
Coastal Protection works Rossbeigh / Cromane 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill requested an update on the application submitted for the Coastal 
Protection works at Rossbeigh and Cromane.  
 
 
Erosion at Derrymore Srand 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris asked for an update following the recent damage at Derrymore 
Beach where a significant drop – off has developed at the entrance to the beach, 
resulting in a four-foot drop in the stand.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald advised that he had visited the beach today where Kerry 
County Council staff were on site carrying out remedial works.  
 
Ballyheigue Beach 
Cllr. Michael Leane voiced concerns in regard to erosion and coastal protection 
works at Ballyheigue Beach.  
 
The Chief Executive advised that these concerns can be referred to the 
Environment, Climate Action, Marine & Emergency Planning SPC.  
  
The meeting concluded at 2.04 p.m. 
 
Eileen O’ Donoghue     
_________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator 
Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
