Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
1 of 66 
 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect 
putting them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is 
available on request. 
 
 
 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ CRUINNITHE BHUISÉID DE COMHAIRLE CHONTAE CHIARRAÍ, 
A THIONÓLADH AR-LÍNE/FÍORÚIL AGUS I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN 
CHONTAE, TRÁ LÍ, AR AN LUAN, 24 SAMHAIN 2025 
 
MINUTES OF THE BUDGET MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL HELD 
ONLINE AND IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE, ON 
MONDAY, 24 NOVEMBER 2025 
 
 
 
APOLOGIES/LEATH SCÉAL 
Johnny Healy-Rae  
 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Mr. F. Reidy Chief Executive               
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue, Director of Corporate Services and People Development 
Ms. A. McAllen Director of Finance
Ms. N. O’ Sullivan, Director of Housing         
Mr. P. Neary, Director of Community, Climate Action and Operational Services 
Mr. J. Nolan, Director of Active Land Management & Economic Development 
Mr. F. Hartnett Director of Capital Delivery, Climate Resilience and Culture 
Ms. K. Moriarty S.E.O. Finance 
Ms. C. Roberts Financial Management Accountant  
Mr. S. Scally Meetings Administrator  
Mr. O’ Shea Press Officer 
Ms. C. Fitzgerald S.S.O. Corporate Services  
Ms. O’ Shea A.S.O. Corporate Services
 
 
The meeting commenced at 10.30 a.m. 
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley took the Chair and welcomed everyone. 
 
Protocols for Meetings 
Angie Baily                            
Tom Barry  
Robert Brosnan 
Tommy Cahill                          
Brendan Cronin 
Paul Daly                            
Charlie Farrelly                        
Deirdre Ferris 
Breandán Fitzgerald 
Fionnán Fitzgerald                  
Michael Foley (Cathaoirleach) 
Podge Foley 
Martin Grady 
Tommy Griffin                      
Jackie Healy-Rae                 
Maura Healy-Rae                
Niall Kelleher                             Aoife Kennelly   
Michael Leane 
Sam Locke   
Dan McCarthy
Jimmy Moloney
Marie Moloney 
Norma Moriarty
Liam Speedy Nolan
Terry O’Brien                       
Niall O’ Callaghan
Bobby O’Connell                    
John O’Donoghue   
Anne O’ Sullivan                  
Teddy O’Sullivan-Casey        
Mikey Sheehy      
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
2 of 66 
Mr. S. Scally, Meeting Administrator, referred Elected Members to the Protocols for 
Remote Meetings of Kerry County Council and took a roll call. 
 
 
24.11.2025.01 Cathaoirleach’s Report on the Budget CPG Meeting 
The Cathaoirleach’s Report on the Budget CPG Meeting held on 14 October 2025 was 
noted. 
 
 
24.11.2025.02 Consideration of the Local Authority Budget for the Local 
Financial Year ending 31 December 2026 
 
The Chief Executive advised members on the Draft Budget prepared for Kerry County 
Council for the financial year ending 31st December 2026 in accordance with the Local 
Government Act 2001, the Local Government Reform Act 2014 and Local Government 
Rates and Other Matters Act 2019 together with regulations, circulars and guidance 
issued under the auspices of both Acts for consideration by the Members at the Budget 
Meeting fixed for Monday, 24th November 2025. This report outlines the provisions of 
the Draft Budget 2026. 
 
Background 
 
I enclose herewith the draft budget 2026 prepared for Kerry County Council for the 
financial year ending 31st December 2026 in accordance with the Local Government 
Act 2001, the Local Government Reform Act 2014, and the Local Government Rates 
and Other Matters Act 2019, together with regulations, circulars and guidance issued 
under the auspices of both Acts for consideration by the Members at the Budget 
meeting fixed for Monday, 24th November 2025. This report outlines the provisions of 
the draft budget. The proposed draft revenue budget for 2026 is €248.45 million, an 
increase of 9.7% over 2025. As set out in this letter this will be used to deliver over 
1,000 services with significant increase in expenditure in key priorities of housing, 
transport, climate resilience, job creation and community services.  
 
The final stage of the budget process commences during the prescribed draft budget 
period at the Annual Statutory Budget Meeting of 24th November 2025.  The current 
year continues to present significant and emerging challenges on many levels 
impacting on the preparation of the Council’s budget and have informed Budget 
Strategy for 2026.  This draft budget is framed in increased borrowing costs and an 
uncertain global economic backdrop.  While inflation levels have eased in relation to 
the high levels experienced in recent years, elements of inflation remain high, with 
expected continuing cost implications for the coming year. 
 
As outlined to Members during development of the budget strategy in October, the 
Council faced a number of challenges in preparing a balanced draft budget. 
Presentation of a balanced budget for 2026 is largely enabled by the Local Property 
Tax allocation reflecting the property tax revaluation process, along with enhanced 
local income streams, critical review of expenditure headings, efficiencies and 
confirmation received on many government grants/allocations. 
 
Primary considerations for Draft Budget 2026 
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
3 of 66 
The draft budget 2026 is set in the context of the Kerry County Council Corporate Plan 
which was adopted earlier this year and the advancement of a number of national and 
local policies and priorities as set out below. This Budget will support a number of 
programmes and initiatives ensuring that funding opportunities available are leveraged 
and maximised. The identification of a sustainable funding model in the longer term, to 
ensure delivery of a pipeline of projects across all Municipal Districts aligned to these 
plans is also a key priority for this draft budget 2026. 
 
Housing  
 
 The draft budget includes an increased allocation to housing maintenance 
reflecting a planned maintenance approach to housing stock and an increased 
allocation to routine maintenance.  This increased allocation is funded by 
anticipated income from housing rents, following the rent review in 2025. 
 
 The continuation of housing programmes into the future requires acquisition of 
additional lands. The Council services loans on existing lands and newly 
acquired lands from the revenue budget. With the development of lands under 
the housing programme significant costs have been recouped on the overall 
original land costs.  
 
Municipal Districts  
 
 The Municipal District Budgetary Plans have been considered in the context of 
the overall budget and the General Municipal Allocation has been provided for 
each Municipal District. This is made available to advance critical community 
initiatives and projects in each of the five Municipal Districts and maintains the 
increased amount for Councillors allocations for 2026. Total allocation in this 
area is €2.17m for draft budget 2026. 
 
Economic Development 
 
 To provide for future development options the Council intends to purchase lands 
to provide options for development in the County as set out in the Local 
Economic Community Plan and the Regional Enterprise Plan (LECP). Provision 
has been made to fund loan charges in this area in the Council’s Revenue 
Budget for 2026. 
 
 The amalgamation of the planning policy team, economic development unit, 
the Town Centre First team and the derelict site and vacant property team within 
the Active Land Management & Economic Development Directorate, ensures 
that the relevant policy framework is provided and implemented within the same 
directorate and will allow for a more streamlined approach to active land 
management and the economic growth of the county.  The revised structure 
allows the directorate to draft and implement policy and provide associated 
financial incentives to tackle vacancy, combat dereliction and breathe new life 
into the county’s town centres in an efficient and coordinated manner. The draft 
budget provides for the payment of Residential Zoned Land Tax (RZLT) – of 
€703,000, this is reflected as a contra item for draft budget 2026.  A number of 
masterplans are advancing for all sites. 
 
 
Climate Change and Environment  

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
4 of 66 
 
 The Climate Action Plan 2024 – 2029 was adopted in January 2024 and an 
implementation plan is underway. The Council remains committed to further 
energy savings and emissions reductions in its lighting network, buildings and 
fleet stock to achieve our 2030 targets. A Community Climate Action Officer is 
in place and working with communities on the delivery of projects of the Local 
Community Climate Action Fund. Provision is included in the Council’s budget 
to support the delivery of the Climate Action Plan objectives. 
 
 A development/works/improvement programme is in place for the county’s 
burial grounds, public conveniences and beaches. These programmes will be 
brought to the Strategic Policy Committees in early 2026 for consideration. 
Provision for loan charges have been made in the budget to support these areas 
and loan approval will be sought from Members in 2026. In addition, a review of 
the opening hours of the public conveniences in the county is underway. A 
provision is included in the budget to support recommendations following this 
review. 
 
Fire Services 
 
 Provision is included for increased costs for fire fighters and additional 
operational and training costs for the Fire Service to comply with the WRC 
Agreement and operational costs. It is expected that some funding will be 
provided by Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage to meet the 
additional costs arising and the budget reflects this. 
 
Cyber Security / I.T. Resilience  
 
 There has been significant expenditure over the last number of years to protect 
the IT systems from the ever-increasing risk associated with cyber-attacks. This 
will continue in 2026 with a number of significant projects underway to improve 
resilience and to meet the very high standards that are being set for public 
bodies by the National Cyber Security Centre and to meet insurance 
requirements. Work is ongoing in the implementation of a disaster recovery 
program in conjunction with the upgrade of servers and associated technology 
that will greatly assist with the protection of the I.T. infrastructure.  
 
Pay & Pensions  
 
 The draft budget includes a phased planned approach to the implementation of 
the Workforce Plan subject to affordability.  The impact of National Pay 
Agreements between the government and unions has resulted in increased 
payroll costs for Budget 2026. Pay increases under the Public Service 
Agreement 2024 – 2026 have been provided for staff across the Council 
services. Recoupment of payments made under various Pay Agreements have 
been notified by the Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage for 
2026. Pensions have continued to increase, continuing the trend of recent years 
and an increased provision of €1 million has been provided for in 2026. 
 
Coroner Fees  
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
5 of 66 
 An increased provision is made for coroner fees based on anticipated 2025 
Outturn. 
 
Local Property Tax   
 
 The 10% raised by the Local Property Tax for Budgets 2025, 2026 and 2027 
provides certainty for funding current budgets and programmes of work across 
the Council’s services for the three-year period. In addition, it enables the ring-
fencing of funding to contribute to the own resource element required for many 
countywide capital projects for 2026 and enables the pipeline of new projects to 
progress. The Local Property Tax allocation for 2026 has been confirmed by the 
Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage at €17,639,874 - this 
includes an additional €900,000 allocation to reflect the revaluation process.   
 
Commercial Rates  
 
 This is a significant source of Council income contributing to almost 22% of 
overall income. Kerry County Council is aware of cost pressures facing 
businesses. The cost of the Council’s operations experiences similar pressures. 
Every effort has been made to keep the commercial rate (Annual Rate on 
Valuation) proposed for 2026 the same as the 2025 rate.  However, the 
revaluation of the counties commercial properties has resulted in a total of 273 
appeals and applications for revisions of rateable valuation.  Currently 81 
appellants have received their final revaluation resulting in an overall net 
reduction in commercial rates for 2026 to €54.7m. In anticipation of this Tailte 
Éireann calculated a “G Factor” which was provided for in Budget 2025.  An 
adjusted provision is included for 2026 to provide for the remainder of appeals 
and revisions following the 2023 revaluation of all commercial properties.  This 
will be kept under review during 2026, given the significance of commercial rates 
income to the Council and the downward trend of the tribunal decisions. 
Provision is included for the draft Rates Waiver scheme to be launched in 2026.  
Provision is also included to continue 100% rates abatement for qualifying 
vacant commercial properties, which we intend to review in 2026. Whilst there 
is no proposed change to the ARV for 2026 this must be kept under review to 
ensure that we can effectively deliver services in the future.  
 
Capital Programme  
 
 Members will be aware of the Council’s significant three-year capital programme 
for the county of almost €772m with a pipeline of investment of €1.5billion of 
schemes progressing through design, planning and delivery phases. There are 
a wide range of projects underway within the county for which grant funding has 
been received with a total project cost of €94.5m. These include projects under 
the Urban Regeneration and Development Fund Programme and the Rural 
Regeneration and Development Programme, Outdoor Recreation Infrastructure 
Scheme, Town & Village, Town Centre First, Thrive and CLÁR programmes 
across the county. There is an own resource requirement of almost €42m to 
match exchequer funding for year one of the three-year capital programme for 
2026. 
 
 
 
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
6 of 66 
Draft Budget 2026 
 
Income 
 
The Draft Budget 2026 provides for expenditure of €248.45m. The proposed budget 
expenditure is funded as follows: - 
 
Sources of Income 
Draft Budget 2026
Grants and Subsidies 
 
€120.58m 
Rates
€54.73m
Local Property Tax Allocation
€17.64m
Rents & Loans (inc. RAS) 
€16.72m 
Irish Water recoupment 
€ 7.69m 
Parking Charges and Fines 
€  3.87m 
Civic 
Amenities 
Sites 
and 
Refuse 
Charges 
€  3.28m 
Other Recoupable Income 
€ 4.89m 
Other Misc Income 
€19.05m 
Total 
€248.45m
 
Commercial Rates 
 
Kerry County Council has reflected income for the collection of Commercial Rates 
of €54.73m for Draft Budget 2026.   This includes revisions for Global Account 
Valuations received from Tailte Éireann and adjustments following revaluation appeals 
to the rates tribunal. The budget also includes within expenditure a provision for the 
Rates Waiver Scheme, vacant commercial property and irrecoverable rates. This 
Council, while making all efforts to optimise collections, will continue to engage 
constructively with all rate payers to enable them to manage the rate demand for their 
business.  
 
 
Housing  
 
Kerry County Council, through its Housing Programmes and in conjunction with its 
Approved Housing Body partners is a significant contributor to construction industry 
activity level in the county. This includes new construction, refurbishment / 
maintenance programmes, improvement grant schemes and energy retrofitting 
programmes.  This programme forms a key and significant part of overall activity in this 
sector of the economy.  
 
The Government has, this month, introduced a new housing plan called ‘Delivering 
Homes, Building Communities’ 2025-2030: An Action Plan on Housing Supply 
and Targeting Homelessness which aims to speed up the delivery of new homes and 
tackle homelessness. The plan targets the construction of 300,000 homes, including 
72,000 social homes and 90,000 affordable housing supports. Building on the progress 
of Housing for All, which has already delivered 137,000 homes since 2021, and 
informed by the Housing Commission’s work, this plan will see the state take a bigger 
role while also encouraging the private sector to play a key part in delivery. The plan 
provides for a range of initiatives to increase housing supply and it is anticipated that 
revised targets will apply to Kerry.  
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
7 of 66 
The Council works in partnership with Approved Housing Bodies to deliver units as 
part of the overall Capital Programme. Since the establishment of the AHB-
Acquisitions Unit, the team has endeavoured to build strong working relationships with 
AHBs and has adopted a collaborative approach to social housing delivery, tenancy 
allocations and tenancy management.   AHBs in Kerry provide and manage general 
needs social housing, complemented by AHBs who provide and manage housing and 
supports to special need groups such as those experiencing homelessness, older 
persons, persons with physical or intellectual disabilities or households experiencing 
mortgage difficulties.     
 
There has been a substantial increase in the number of homes being delivered by the 
voluntary housing sector in Kerry in recent years. Currently, 26 AHBs who are 
registered with AHBRA (the Approved Housing Bodies Regulatory Authority) are 
engaged with Kerry County Council and have and continue to deliver homes and 
manage tenancies.   
 
The Council has a portfolio of land purchased for the construction of housing. The 
Council is obliged to service the loans on these lands from the revenue budget. The 
continuation of programmes into the future requires the acquisition of additional lands, 
this work is ongoing.  
  
There has been an increase both in presentations and those availing of emergency 
accommodation during 2025. Whilst some expenditure is recouped under established 
arrangements, however, the Council supports this service area with staff resources 
and the use of Council properties for emergency accommodation interventions. 
 
The Council continues to actively participate in the Government’s Energy Efficiency 
Retrofit Programme, a key national initiative aimed at enhancing the sustainability and 
comfort of existing local authority housing stock. Funding is provided to upgrade social 
housing with a range of energy-efficient measures such as improved insulation, high-
performance windows and doors, modern heating systems, and renewable energy 
technologies such as heat pumps. These works not only contribute to significant 
reductions in carbon emissions and household energy consumption but also lead to 
tangible benefits for tenants, including lower fuel bills, healthier indoor environments, 
and an overall improvement in quality of life. 
The Council is committed to the delivery of ‘A’-rated energy-efficient housing for all 
new developments. By integrating sustainable design principles, the Council is helping 
to future-proof housing stock against rising energy costs, climate risks, maintenance 
issues and support the transition to a low-carbon economy.  
 
Kerry County Council has a housing portfolio of 4,526 houses and activity levels in the 
housing area continue. This is reflected in the budgetary approaches for 2026.  In 2025, 
a full review of the maximum rent cap in the ‘Differential Rents Scheme’ was 
undertaken based on the principles of, affordability and equity and the delivery of the 
housing programme. The removal of the rent cap which is in line with recommendations 
received from the Local Government Auditor and the value for money unit of the Local 
Government Audit service, will result in a fairer application of the differential rent 
scheme. Balancing rent income with the cost of maintaining and managing housing 
stock is challenging. Maintenance costs are increasing due to a rise in housing stock 
numbers, an aging housing stock and ongoing increases in materials and labor. The 
additional financial yield generated from the removal of the rent cap will support the 
development of a more robust maintenance fund which will protect the long-term value 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
8 of 66 
of the Council’s housing assets. The additional revenue will also support estate 
enhancements and estate management initiatives. 
 
Roads & Transport 
 
National Roads 2040 aligns with the National Investment Framework for Transport 
Infrastructure and uses the four priority areas for investment of:  
 Decarbonisation  
 Protection & Renewal 
 Mobility of People & Goods in Urban Areas 
 Enhanced Regional & Rural Connectivity 
These will be reflected in the exchequer funding for roads. They also detail 
considerable investment that will be identified for active travel, public transport and 
private transport. The budget for national roads will also consider the balance of 
maintenance, optimisation and improvement of existing road network before new road 
projects will be considered. The highest priority for investment in regional and local 
roads is to maintain the asset through the protection and renewal of the existing 
network countywide.  
The impact of these policies and strategies will influence the level of grant funding in 
2026, details of which will only be available in early 2026. 
Significant investment into the road network across the county will progress over 2026, 
coupled with the recent opening of the Ballyvourney – Macroom By-Pass and the 
progression of the Limerick – Foynes dual carriageway, heralds a major boost to the 
social and economic development of the county with improved connectivity with Cork 
and Limerick. Increased funding for the design phase of the N22 Farranfore to Killarney 
is vital for 2026 to complete the connectivity of the Kerry-Cork strategic corridor. 
The Draft Budget 2026 figures for the Roads Grant Schemes are prepared on the 
outturn of the 2025 national and non-national road allocations from the Department of 
Transport and Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII). Kerry County Council also expects 
significant funding from the NTA in order to progress Active Travel projects, including 
Safe Routes to Schools Projects and the Bus Stop Enhancement Programme 
throughout the County. 
 
Development of the Kingdom of Kerry Greenways 
Following the opening of the Tralee to Fenit and Listowel to Abbeyfeale Greenways, 
further works are ongoing to improve the parking and trail head facilities. The South 
Kerry Greenway construction works continued over three sections and several 
advance contracts were undertaken ahead of the main contract. Public Consultations 
were undertaken on Route Options for the Cahersiveen to Renard extension to the 
South Kerry Greenway and the Tralee to Listowel Greenways.  An increased own 
resource provision is included to meet unfunded elements of road programme. 
Active Travel  
The Government has committed significant investment in the revised NDP, to the 
development of a sustainable mobility system which will provide a viable alternative to 
private car use, where feasible, not only in our major urban centres but across the 
country. This includes the development of Active Travel Plans for Tralee, Killarney, and 
the regional county towns. 
 
Urban/Rural Regeneration & Capital Infrastructure 
A major programme is underway for urban and rural regeneration programmes across 
County Kerry. Kerry County Council has been successful in applications for grant 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
9 of 66 
funding across a number of schemes during the year. Draft Budget 2026 provides an 
element of own resource funding for these projects. Projects include:  
 €7m Ashe Memorial Hall in Tralee under Thrive  
 €0.9m was secured through the Rural Regeneration Development Fund (RRDF) 
for the Dingle Phoenix Cultural Village Project.  
 
ORIS funding has been allocated for three projects: improving infrastructure in 
Killarney walks and trails, Slí na Sionainne and Ballyseedy Wood with a funding value 
of €900,000. 
 
Public consultation stage includes Killorglin town centre public realm, the Castleisland 
Masterplan, Ballybunion “Platforms for Growth” Beach Facility (South Beach) is at 
planning stage and development of the Kenmare Convent is under review. 
 
 URDF Kenmare Place and 2 Main St Killarney 
 URDF/CRF funded Multi-purpose Community Space and Boxing Club Tralee 
 URDF Tralee Pavements Phase 3 Stage including Staughton’s Row, New 
Roa, Island of Geese Rd, Bridge Place and lower Rock Street 
 Fenit “Platforms for Growth” project 
 Trail Head Public Conveniences at the Neo Data Site Listowel   
 RRDF Caherciveen Carnegie Building (due on-site Dec 2025) 
 Fáilte Ireland – Bray Head/WAW Signature Discovery Point 
 TVR – Repurposing of former craft units at Blennerville Windmill under Town & 
Village Renewal 
 Active Travel Infrastructure, Park Road, Killarney 
 Kilderry Loop Walk 
 
Water Services 
 
This draft budget is framed in the context of “Framework for future delivery of Water 
Services” (2022) and assumes full cost recovery for 2026.  Uisce Éireann assumed full 
responsibility for the delivery and direction of Water Services in Kerry under a Master 
Co-operation Agreement, effective from September 13th, 2023.  There are some 
residual services that Kerry County Council will continue to provide in support of Water 
Services in Kerry which are included in a separate Support Services Agreement, which 
was signed 2024. 
 
This division only reflects service areas retained directly by Kerry County Council and 
includes the operation of public conveniences and the administration of the Rural 
Water Programme. During 2024, the Department announced a new Multi-Annual Rural 
Water Programme 2024-2026 and invited Kerry County Council to make submissions 
for funding under the new programme. An allocation of €3.59m was approved in 
November 2024 and a further €3.295m was approved in July 2025 under Measure A6 
of the Rural Water Programme - Taking in charge of Group Water and Sewerage 
Schemes.  
The Budget maintains an allocation for the funding of loan charges for a public 
convenience development programme and a review of opening hours. 
 
Planning, Active Land Management and Town Centre First  
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
10 of 66 
The planning policy team will finalise and oversee the adoption of the new Planning 
Policy Frameworks for the Killarney, Castleisland-Corca Dhuibhne and Listowel 
Municipal Districts, and the development and implementation of the associated 
masterplans.   
The masterplans will seek to ensure that our strategic sites are developed to support 
our economic growth ambition and deliver quality urban environments for both existing 
and new communities. In addition, the team will work with key state and private 
stakeholders to ensure that enterprise, economic and residential lands are primed for 
future development, by examining the infrastructure requirements and leveraging 
funding supports to facilitate investment and delivery.   
The planning control team will continue to improve and optimise our development 
management systems to ensure that we support the delivery of sustainable 
communities within our county.   
The Town Centre First Team will progress the implementation of the Integrated Urban 
Strategies and Masterplan developed and finalised in 2025 and will complete a number 
of Health Checks for other settlements within the county, with a view to progressing 
further Masterplans in 2026.  This team will also implement initiatives to address 
dereliction and vacancy.  
The development of a vibrant and diverse economy is crucial for our continued growth 
and is supported by the Local Enterprise Office, and Tourism teams.   
 
Economic and Tourism Development 
 
A priority for the directorate in 2026 is to animate communities and accelerate 
investment and innovation to reinforce Kerry’s position as a destination of choice for 
tourism and business investment. 
A new Tourism Strategy and Implementation Plan is also under development which 
will be finalised and implemented in 2026.  The plan will support the delivery of strategic 
actions that will facilitate the development of a high-quality, regenerative and 
sustainably focused tourism offering. A key element of the strategy will also focus on 
business tourism and improved connections with diaspora communities. Continued 
support for the Ambassador Programme, and the Kerry Convention Bureau in 
promoting the county’s strengths as a business event destination will therefore be 
continued in 2026; this will include representation at various trade shows and 
exhibitions, international events such as the ‘Big E’ in West Springfield, the ‘Joining the 
Dots’ series and as location partner for events such as the 2026 Global Economic 
Summit. 
 
In addition, the team is formulating a Campervan and Motorhome/RV policy/framework 
to meet the current demand and diversify the tourism accommodation offering within 
the county.  This policy/framework will be complemented by a review of the appropriate 
Byelaws.  
Kerry County Council will work with agencies and key stakeholders to promote Kerry 
as a location for film and to advance Kerry County Council’s competitive positioning for 
film /tv and screen content during 2026. 
Kerry County Council is also committed to delivering high level actions in the 
Destination Experience Development Plans (DEDP’s). A key project for the Council 
will be the progression of the UNESCO application for the Valentia Island Transatlantic 
Cable Station.   
The Discover Kerry platform will require ongoing enhancement, with a focus on 
promoting the Kerry brand across the three core pillars, enterprise, innovation and 
lifestyle and driving visibility among target audiences at home and abroad. 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
11 of 66 
The Local Economic and Community Plan adopted in May 2025 sets out the ambition 
for County Kerry for the period 2025 to 2030 designed to support economic growth and 
social development across our communities. 
The budget also includes initiatives that will promote Kerry as a destination for direct 
foreign investment while also enhancing efforts to support domestic businesses and 
companies to thrive through the Local Enterprise Office. The development and 
enhancement of key economic and enterprise projects in the county and within the 
region therefore remains a priority for 2026. The Economic Unit will continue to support 
cluster organisations and maximise digital enterprise and innovation hubs in the 
county. 
 
Library Services  
 
The development of the Kerry Library service will include the provision of reading 
material to all sectors of the community with literacy support as mainstream part of its 
services offering. Kerry libraries support communities countywide, and they provide 
meeting, study and social spaces for people from all generations, demographic groups 
and backgrounds, reflected in the usage patterns across the nine Kerry libraries.  
Community  
The Community budget has been framed in the context of a continued need to improve 
community infrastructure that will support a growing and ageing population which will 
also benefit future generations. 
In 2026, Local Community Safety Partnerships (following formation in December 2025) 
will continue in their role and will be managed through the Community Department. 
The LCSP’s are responsible for developing a Community Safety Plan, where a 
provision is included in the budget to support the work of this committee and the 
delivery of actions identified in the Plan. 
In 2026, Kerry County Council will be leading out on the implementation of a number 
of key strategic documents such as the Local Economic Community Plan (LECP), Play 
and Leisure Policy, a new Migrant Integration Strategy and a new Age Friendly 
Strategy, where investment will be required to meet the objectives and actions agreed 
as part of the policy development process. Supporting the LCDC in its role as the Local 
Action Group in the implementation of the LEADER Local Development Strategy is 
also a priority for 2026. Co-ordinating and monitoring the implementation of the Social 
Inclusion and Community Activation Programme 2024-2028 (SICAP), where both 
programmes are ensuring greater coordination of funding programmes and greater 
efficiencies. 
Placemaking Fund  
Provision is made to provide a fund for voluntary groups who enhance their local areas 
through artistic/greening/sustainable interventions which is aimed to improve the 
overall presentation of their area.  
 
Arts and Culture  
 
A significant amount of funding secured from the Arts Council and Creative Ireland 
delivered the work programme in the Arts Unit. Opportunities through the percent for 
Art Scheme will also be explored in 2026; in addition to other grant initiatives, such as 
Artists Workplace Scheme. The Arts Strategy was adopted in 2024, and the budget 
reflects the priorities for delivery in 2026.  There is also a provision to support other 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
12 of 66 
arts programmes including Listowel Writers Week, the Carnegie Arts Centre, Kerry 
International Film Festival among others.  
 
Environmental Services  
The Budget Allocation for 2026 provides for the costs of operating the five Civic 
Amenity Sites in the County in Coolcaslagh (Killarney), Milltown, Kenmare, 
Cahersiveen and Ionad Athchúrsála agus Dramhaíola Chorca Dhuibhne. This includes 
the costs associated with the operation and maintenance of the facilities, the costs of 
the transport, disposal of the waste deposited and the cost of operating the recycling 
facilities at the Civic Amenity Sites. Significant improvements have been carried out in 
recent years by Kerry County Council at our landfill site at Muingnaminnane in 
accordance with our obligations under our EPA waste licence. The impact of aftercare 
costs associated with our waste infrastructure and necessary upgrading works in our 
civic amenity sites and bring banks will require further investment during 2026 to 
ensure high quality customer service. 
This budget provides for the maintenance of 158 Burial Grounds countywide and 
includes provision for additional expenditure in respect of the costs associated with the 
Burial Ground Development Programme. Included also is an allocation to community 
organisations in recognition of their ongoing involvement and valuable assistance in 
maintaining our burial grounds and also includes increased loan charges provision to 
support Burial Ground Development countywide. 
 
 
Fire Services 
 
Kerry Fire Service continues to provide a critical service throughout the County, with 
retained and whole-time firefighters strategically stationed in the 10 fire stations around 
County Kerry, providing an emergency response to 1078 incidents up to the end of 
September 2025. The full-time and retained firefighters stationed in the ten fire stations 
throughout Kerry receive continuous training to the highest national standards and the 
Draft Budget reflects the increased number of firefighters in the county on a result of 
the WRC recommendation.  In addition, fire personnel provide fire safety programmes 
to communities and schools around the county, which link in with Fire Safety week and 
other national fire safety programmes. As we move forward it is hoped to increase fire 
crews in each station as recently agreed following a Workplace Relations Commission 
proposal. Our building control section is also seeing substantial levels of activity, and 
we are meeting or exceeding our inspection requirements in this regard.  
 
Miscellaneous Services  
 
The amount provided in this draft budget 2026 for the General Municipal Allocation is 
€2.170m. This is comprised of the €0.85m for Municipal District allocation and is for 
the purpose of supporting Community Support/Community Initiatives, Town 
Development Projects and provides for an allocation for strategic element which seeks 
to maximise the opportunities provided by alternative sources of funding. In addition, 
the Councillor Specific Municipal Operations District has been increased to €1.320m 
as agreed at the Local Property Tax meeting held on October 2nd 2024.  
 
Also included is the cost of Local Representation and Civic Leadership. 
 
Cyber Security / I.T. Resilience / Information Technology 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
13 of 66 
 
This remains a significant area with continuing work required to ensure Council 
systems are protected from the ever-increasing risk associated with cyber-attacks.  
 
Expenditure will continue in this area in 2026 with ongoing work to improve resilience 
and meet the high standards that are being set for public bodies by the National Cyber 
Security Centre and NIS2, the EU-wide legislation on cybersecurity. Work is ongoing 
in improving our Disaster Recovery capabilities. There has been significant capital 
investment over the last number of years in IT infrastructure which is a critical part of 
our disaster recovery plan. There is also a provision for the rollout of digital solutions 
to ensure that opportunities being presented by the increased digitalisation of services 
as provided for in the Digital Local Government Working for Everyone strategy 
published in July 2024. 
 
 
The Local Government Operational Procurement Office, Killarney  
 
This Council is established as the National Procurement Office provides procurement 
initiatives on a shared service basis on behalf of all local authorities and other state 
agencies. Draft Budget 2026 reflects the income and expenditure arising from this 
initiative.  The cost for this office is fully recouped from the Local Government Sector 
in 2026. 
 
Capital Investment Plan  
 
The Council will continue to invest in the infrastructure of the County aiming to 
maximise grant funding. The Capital Programme for the three-year period 2026-2028 
prepared in accordance with Section 135 of the Local Government Act, 2001, is set 
out in Schedule 1 at the end of the Chief Executive’s Report on Draft Budget 2026 and 
commented upon in the course of the details of each of the Division Budgets. The 
Capital Programme must have regard to the General Government Balance (GGB) 
requirement and the available resources, which have diminished in recent years due 
to limited borrowing capacity and development contributions.  The Housing Capital 
Programme will lead to significant capital activity over the period. The Council will 
continue to ensure that all sources of capital funding, including government and EU 
grants, are fully explored and maximised. 
 
Development Contributions  
 
A statement regarding the amount of Development Contributions on hands, the 
estimated income expected for 2026 and an indicative statement of the proposed 
application of the funding available is included in Schedule 2 at the end of the Chief 
Executive’s Report on Draft Budget 2026.  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
My appreciation is expressed to the Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Michael Foley, to, Cllr. 
Breandán Fitzgerald, the previous Cathaoirleach, the Members of the Council, the 
Corporate Policy Group and the Strategic Policy Committees for their support, co-
operation and application during the year. 
 
I wish to acknowledge the hard work and dedication of all Council staff to the county 
over the 2025 period. I wish to thank Angela McAllen, Director of Finance, Kathleen 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
14 of 66 
Moriarty, Senior Executive Officer, Caitriona Roberts, Financial Management 
Accountant and the Finance Team for their professionalism and strong work ethic in 
planning and delivering the draft budget.  
 
The Chief Executive recommended the Budget for adoption.  
 
The Cathaoirleach invited Ms. A. McAllen, Head of Finance, to present her overview 
on the Budget. 
 
Ms. A. McAllen, Director of Finance, referred members to pages 16-46 of the Chief 
Executive’s Report which sets out the principal services and their objectives and 
priorities for delivery in 2026. Each Directorate Report identifies the principal services 
to be provided, priorities for the delivery of these services and the performance 
standards to be met in the delivery of these services, including those performance 
indicators prescribed by NOAC. These are consistent with the overall objective for the 
Corporate Plan.   
 
The Chief Executive Report supports the budget tables and includes supporting 
schedules for 3-year Capital Programme and schedule development Schedule 
combined with a copy of the rates waiver scheme. Budget and explanatory tables. The 
Director of Finance referred Elected Members to page 49 of the Chief Executive’s 
Report. The revenue expenditure proposed amounts to €248,450,608. This represents 
9.7% increase on the projected outturn for 2025. As usual, the 2026 expenditure 
reflects an estimated provision for Road Grant related works as the Council has not 
received any notification from the Department of Transport and Transport 
Infrastructure Ireland for 2026 to date.  The actual expenditure on the Road Works 
Grants Programmes will be based on the allocations to be notified later.  
 
Revenue Expenditure  
 
The graph on page 49 shows the spread of the proposed expenditure amongst the 
divisions for 2026. The combined expenditure of the Divisions titled Housing and 
Building, Road Transport & Safety, Water Services, Environmental Services and 
Development Management accounts for 83% approx. of the Council’s overall Revenue 
Budget in 2026. 
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
15 of 66 
 
 
 
The distribution of expenditure across various headings, with payroll representing 41%, 
reduced with recoupments as said in previous meetings, meeting with fixed cost of 
payroll, loan charges, insurance. The Council is limited with the resulting operational 
costs subject to pressure from budget inflationary measures over the past number of 
years.   
 
28%
24%
6%
13%
12%
5%
1%
11%
Total Estimated Expenditure 2026 
by Programme (%) 
A. Housing & Building - €68.8m, 28%
B. Road Transport & Safety - € 59.6m, 24%
C. Water Services - € 14.5m, 6%
D. Development Management - € 33.1m, 13%
E. Environmental Services - €30.4m, 12%
F. Recreation & Amenity - € 12.9m, 5%
G. Agriculture, Education, Health & Welfare - € 3.2m, 1%
H. Miscellaneous Services - € 26.0m, 11%

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
16 of 66 
 
 
 
 
REVENUE INCOME  
The graph on page 51 represents ongoing reliance on locally sourced income at 41% 
and of course state grants which have increased by 3% over the last few years to 49%. 
 
 
41%
37%
2%
1%
2%
17%
Expenditure - Key Expense Elements 2026
Payroll Costs - € 102.0m, 41%
Contra/Recoupable Non-Pay Costs - € 90.7m, 37%
Loan Charges (excl IW) - €6.0m, 2%
Energy - €3.9m, 1%
Insurances - € 4.4m, 2%
Operational Costs - € 41.2, 17%

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
17 of 66 
 
Director of Finance referred Elected Members to page 53 of the Chief Executive’s 
Report.  
The following is a summary of the main income streams included in the Draft Budget 
2026. State sector grants have increased to €120,579,387M, majority  headings seeing 
an increase particularly Housing, Roads Grants, water and Development Management 
which are linked to specific areas of expenditure.   
 
Specific Purpose State Sector Grants – 2026 
 
 
  €120,579,387 
 
                             € 
Housing & Building 
40,809,777
49%
7%
22%
3%
19%
Estimated Sources of Income 2026 (%)
1. State Sector Grants for Specific Purposes - €120.6m, 49%
2. Local Property Tax - €17.7m, 7%
3. Commercial Rates - €54.7 m, 22%
4. Uisce Éireann  - €7.7m, 3%
5. Other Local Income - €47.8m, 19%

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
18 of 66 
Road Transport & Safety 
33,198,939
Water Services 
5,775,754
Development Management 
14,695,705
Environmental Services 
4,400,445
Recreation & Amenity 
751,405
Agriculture, Education, Health & Welfare 
380,200
Miscellaneous Services 
20,567,162
Total 
120,579,387
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local Property Tax  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    €17,639,874 
 
Confirmation has been received from the DHLGH, in Circular Fin 12/2025 of 17th 
October 2025, that the revised LPT allocation for 2026 has been calculated, taking 
into consideration the increase in the basic rate of LPT as approved by the 
Members in the LPT Budget Meeting on 2nd of October 2024. The revised 
allocation is €17,639,874. The amount includes an allocation of €1,545,624m from 
the Baseline Funding Review in 2024. 
 
LOCAL INCOME 
Housing & Building
34%
Road Transport & 
Safety
27%
Water Services
5%
Development 
Management
12%
Environmental 
Services
4%
Recreation & 
Amenity
1%
Agriculture, Education, 
Health & Welfare
0%
Miscellaneous Services
17%
Specific Purpose State Sector Grants by Service Division

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
19 of 66 
RATES ON COMMERCIAL PROPERTY 
€54,732,218 
After revaluation, there have been a large number of appeals to the revaluation 
process submitted to Valuation Tribunal by Kerry ratepayers which are currently 
ongoing, the final outcome is expected on these appeals is expected by mid-2026. 
Typically downward trend, down nearly net €200K. 
This Council, while making all efforts to optimise collections, will continue to engage 
constructively with all rate payers during 2026 to enable them to manage the rate 
demand for their business.   
 
In relation to vacant properties, the current rate of abatement in Kerry County 
Council is 100%. Analysis would indicate that this source of revenue would provide 
a very low collection rate, given the type of properties that qualify. It is accepted that 
some potential income may exist in the larger towns in the county and this will be 
examined in 2026. It is considered that any financial provision in the area of Rates 
Abatement would be unwise at this point, in the context of  Rates Revaluation in the 
County, implementation of the new Rates Waiver Scheme and other Central 
Government Schemes targeted to address areas of vacancy/dereliction.  
 
Adoption of the Annual Rate of Valuation (ARV) forms part of the Adoption of the 
Council’s Budget in November and the 2025 rate is proposed again for 2026. 
 
 
C0701 – UISCE ÉIREANN RECOUPMENT  
 
 
 
   €7,691,352 
 
Reduced amount of Water Services as we work our way through the Uisce Éireann 
national  process.    
A0101 - HOUSING RENTS  
    €16,225,342 
 
This sum represents income expected from housing tenants, inclusive of rents paid 
in respect of RAS and Social Leasing rents. It reflects increased rents for each of 
the headings for RAS, Social Leasing and Local Authority Housing rents and 
includes increased subscriptions as a consequence of the removal of the maximum 
rent cap, additional tenancies in 2025 and 2026 and the continuing emphasis on 
collections and reduction in arrears outstanding. The Council will continue to 
promote all payment options available to tenants and engage with those 
experiencing difficulties. A collection rate of 92% was achieved in 2024. 
 
As with all income streams, balances are monitored carefully by Revenue Collectors 
and staff to prevent arrears building – early intervention is critical. 
 
Balancing rent income with the costs of maintaining stock can be challenging 
therefore, the additional financial yield built into the budget will support the 
development of a more robust maintenance fund which would include the delivery 
of a preventative planned programme of maintenance and retrofitting which would 
be more cost effective and protect the long-term value of the councils housing 
assets. It would also support estate enhancements and estate management 
initiatives, strengthening a number of headings across the housing Directorate. 
 
A0801 - HOUSING LOAN REPAYMENTS  
€497,579 
 
Interest remains strong with the Home Loan Scheme with 161 up to 30th 
September 2025 received.  

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
20 of 66 
 
 
B0903 - PARKING FINES AND CHARGES  
€3,870,927 
Parking Revenue is a critical source of local income for the Council. Parking meters 
accept payment by Card and by Android / Apple Pay via phone as well as by coin. This 
investment in parking infrastructure will help in sustaining this source of income into 
the future.  
 
 
D0201 - PLANNING APPLICATION FEES/CHARGES  
€820,000 
 
 
D0801 - FIRE SAFETY CERTIFICATES, DISABILITY ACCESS  
CERTIFICATES & INSPECTION FEES  
€435,500 
 
 
 E0101 - USE OF WASTE DISPOSAL SITES  
€2,502,614 
 
A Waste Recovery levy of €10 per tonne came into effect in September 2023; and 
waste collection and management fees have continued to increase throughout 2025 
in line with inflation. Continued provision of waste disposal services means that 
costs must be kept under constant review. The cost of operating the recycling 
facilities at each location is not included in this allocation as they are shown 
separately (E02). 
 
E0201 & E0202 - RECYCLING FACILITIES               
   €668,831 
 
While acknowledging the significant importance of these facilities countywide, there 
is a substantial cost in running and operating them. Like our waste disposal 
charges, costs and income from these facilities are kept under constant review. 
New contract rates came into place from 1st November 2025, resulting in a 
significant increase in costs which has prompted a review of our Ecosense bag 
charges (for dry recyclables) to the public in accordance with the Polluter Pays 
Principle. As a consequence of increased costs, the cost of a pack of 4 Eco Sense 
Bags will increase from €10.00 to €12.00 in 2026. 
 
E0901 - BURIAL FEES  
€470,000 
 
E1101 - CHARGES FOR ATTENDING AT FIRES  
€372,000 
 
 
G0404 & G0405 - DOG LICENCE, HORSE & POUND FEES  
€371,700 
 
 
Division A – Housing & Building 
Ms. McAllen referred members to Pages 10-12 of the Budget Tables and Pages 59-76 
of the Chief Executive’s Report.  She referred members to page 59-63 which outlines 
the extensive capital programme underway by the Housing Department and to page 
63 to deal with the Housing Revenue Budget.  
 
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
21 of 66 
Maintenance/Improvement of LA Housing Units (A01) 
 
 
Maintenance of L.A. Units (A0101) 
€7,879,000 
(Housing)   
 
On 1st January 2025, Kerry County Council had a housing stock of 4,526 units. 
This is a significant housing stock and requires substantial resources to maintain 
on an annual basis. The proposed Housing Maintenance budget is an account for 
the everyday maintenance of the housing stock in addition to addressing the 
increasing cost of materials and contractors in undertaking maintenance works. The 
re-structuring of the housing increased for 2026. The allocation will provide for the 
cost of maintaining these assets, labour costs for maintenance and repair crews, 
purchase of materials, hire of plant and payments to contractors for specialist 
services. In the period January - September 2025, a total of 3,200 individual repairs 
were carried out. 
 
There is a substantial increased sum of €3.75m included in the 2026 for the purpose 
of carrying out pre-letting works to vacant properties,  
 
The Voids Refurbishment Programme each year is partly funded by an annual 
Department Allocation. KCC Housing is currently addressing a backlog of high 
value legacy voids and is making considerable progress in returning these 
properties to the KCC social housing stock. The planned maintenance works 
programme continued in 2025. This programme predominately includes heating 
system upgrades/replacement and roof repairs/replacement. As discussed, this 
investment for 2026 supplemented by anticipated increased rent receipts during the 
year.   
 
An overall increased allocation has been provided in the budget for housing 
maintenance to ensure high standards of service delivery and service delivery 
demands are maintained and taking account of NOAC Performance Indicator 
outcome. Included also is an allocation for planned maintenance programme and 
energy efficiency works to Local Authority houses in recognition of the increased 
demands on the Housing Budget.  
 
Maintenance & Management of Traveller Accommodation 
(A0102 & A0103) 
€364,600 
(Housing)  
 
 
Estate Maintenance (A0104) 
€260,000 
(Housing)    
 
 This funding allocation is used to contribute to the running costs of Residents 
Associations in enhancing the general overall appearance of estates, with an 
increased allocation of €120,000.  
In 2026, this budget area is increased and supported through the additional 
revenue generated because of the removal of the rent cap. This initiative will 
enhance council estates by improving communal spaces, where the tenancy 
management officers will work with resident associations to help with the upkeep 
of estates, creating a sense of shared responsibility within council estates.  
 
Service Support Costs (A0199) 
€3,479,764 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
22 of 66 
 
 
Housing Assessment, Allocation and Transfer (A02) 
 
Assessment of Housing Needs, Allocations and Transfer (A0201) €1,587,500 
(Housing)   
 
This allocation is in respect of the administrative cost of employing Housing 
Investigation Officers and administrative support staff engaged in offering housing 
advice, liaising with the Department Social Protection (DSP), the HSE, other 
relevant statutory and non-statutory agencies, assessing housing need and making 
recommendations/nominations on the allocation of individual tenancies. 
 
This allocation also reflects the continued implementation and the support services 
charge of the Choice-Based Letting System (CBL). The Council’s Choice Based 
Letting system went live in October 2023, and available properties are advertised 
on a weekly basis for applicants to bid on. Since its implementation, 579 properties 
have been advertised on the system for qualified applicants to express their interest 
in. Engagement levels, currently recorded at 80%, continue to be assessed and the 
Council continues to work with those who have yet to register/login on the CBL 
system. In this regard, Council staff continue to work with the service provider with 
a view to putting in place reporting structures designed to provide data which will 
help tackle non engagement.  
 
Assessment of Housing Need 
The Department has directed that the 2025 summary be prepared on 3rd 
November 2025, the count day for the SSHA 2025. SSHA 2025 will be finalised 
and submitted to the Department by 1st December 2025. 
 
Inspection of Private Rented Dwellings 
The Department inspection target for Kerry for minimum standards private rental 
inspections in 2025 increased to 1,857. KCC have currently exceeded this target 
for 2025.  
 
Debt Management and Rent Assessment (A0301)  
 
   €1,486,800 
(Housing) 
 
This allocation covers costs associated with the collection of rent and tenant 
purchase annuities and the implementation of the differential rent assessment 
scheme. The Council continues to work with tenants to assist them in the 
management of their rent payments and offers a variety of payment methods 
including Household Budget, Bill Pay, Standing Order, Direct Debit, Cash, or 
payment directly to the Revenue Collector. Approximately 81% of tenants regularly 
use electronic or ‘non-cash’ payment methods.   
In the larger towns of Tralee, Killarney and Listowel, a significant number of tenants 
continue to make cash payments at Municipal District Offices and to Revenue 
Collectors. The Council continues to encourage customers who are not utilising 
electronic options, to do so where feasible.   
 
Housing Estate Management & Tenancy Management    
      €401,800 
(A0401 & A0402) 
 
(Housing)  
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
23 of 66 
Homeless Grants, Other Bodies & Homeless Service  
€1,841,200 
(A0501 & A0502) 
 
(Housing) 
 
 
National policy provides for a regional approach to homelessness and emergency 
accommodation needs - Kerry forms part of the Southwest region. The Housing 
Department was involved in the preparation and adoption of the Southwest 
Regional Homeless Action Plan for 2025-2030 alongside our collaborating partners 
within the Southwest Region and this Homeless Action Plan was adopted by Kerry 
County Council in May 2025. The progression of the Housing First Programme to 
Kerry in conjunction with our partners in the Southwest Region (HSE and 
Focus/Cork Simon), continues to expand and, as of the 30th September 2025, Kerry 
County Council has successfully tenanted 26 properties under this programme, 19 
of which are currently active. 
 
Support to Housing Capital Programme (A06)     
 
Technical and Administrative Support (A0601) 
€1,482,000 
(Housing)    
 
RAS & Leasing Programme (A07) 
 
RAS Operations (A0701) 
€7,889,600 
(Housing)  
 
The Rental Accommodation Scheme (RAS) continues to be a vital delivery stream 
for the Council, in many cases as a homeless prevention measure. In 2025, Council 
staff have made positive efforts to improve the promotion of the scheme through 
established contacts with local landlord’s and agents. The inaugural meeting of the 
RAS Practitioners Forum was attended in July 2025; this forum will provide a 
collaborative space for all RAS personnel to share learnings, discuss challenges, 
and shape the future development of the RAS with a view to improving the RAS 
service provided by all Local Authorities.   
 
Social Housing Leasing Initiative 
Long-Term Leasing / Availability Agreements (A0702) 
€4,408,900 
(Housing)  
 
AHB Payment & Availability Agreements (A0703) 
€14,199,900 
(Housing)   
 
Housing Loans (A08) 
 
Loan Interest and Other Charges (A0801) 
€3,162,200 
(Housing)   
Mortgage Loans 
The sum of €589,049 is provided to cover the repayment of the interest on loans 
raised by the Council to fund various housing loan schemes.  
 
As referred to earlier, application activity has remained consistent in 2025.  
 
Land Purchase Service 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
24 of 66 
Provision has been made in 2026 Budget for repayment of both principal and 
interest due on existing land loans.  
 
Debt Management Housing Loans (A0802) 
€178,400 
(Housing)  
 
Housing Support Grants (A0901, A0903, A0904 & A0905) 
€14,144,900 
(Housing)  
 
This area has an increased allocation for 2026. Kerry County Council continues to 
administer 3 grant schemes listed below, on behalf of the DHLGH –  
 Mobility Aids Grant  
 Housing Adaptation Grant for Disabled People  
 Housing Aid for Older Persons Grant 
 
Funding methodology changed in 2025. In the first 9 months of 2025, the Council 
approved 683 new grant applications (a 6.2% increase on this time last year) 
which, together with the committed grants brought forward from 2024, will fully 
account for the 2025 funding allocation. The 2025 approved grants to date consist 
of: - 
 Mobility Aid Grants (211). 
 Housing Aid for Older People grants (332).  
 Housing Adaptation Grant for Disabled people (140). 
 
Up to 30th September 2025, the Council has paid out €2.3m under the 3 schemes.  
 
Kerry County Council recognises the immense benefit to be gained from these 
schemes as living conditions of eligible elderly and disabled household members in 
the county are improved. While the availability of suitably qualified Contractors, 
along with supply chain issues associated with the current economic operating 
environment has impacted on activity in this area during 2025, the Council hopes 
to draw down the full allocation for 2025 before the end of the year. This is 
dependent on works being completed by private homeowners and their prompt 
submission of claims for payment. 
 
Service Support Costs (A0999) 
€699,500 
 
Housing Assistance Programme (A12) 
 
Housing Assistance Payment Programme (HAP) (A1299)                   €483,569 
 
 
Efficiencies Achieved During 2025   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ongoing use of the Minor Building procurement Works Residential Public 
Services Bodies Framework, Plumbing Services Framework and the Electrical 
Services Framework for the engagement of housing maintenance and pre-
letting repair services, continues to ensure value for money in this programme.  
 The continued targeting of the voids refurbishment programme in dealing with 
legacy voids has catered for economies of scale in keeping a pipeline of works 
delivery.  

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
25 of 66 
 Ongoing early identification of dwellings vacated and securing their return, in 
accordance with revised void management procedures, has and will continue to 
ensure streamlining of the voids process. 
 Centralising of the Housing Maintenance area - The re-structuring of housing 
maintenance areas for maintenance works has allowed for a more efficient and 
extensive delivery of services in dealing with requests across the county. 
 
Division B – Roads, Transport & Safety 
Ms. A. McAllen referred members to Pages 13-15 of the Budget Tables and Pages 77-
92 of the Chief Executive’s Report for details on this Division. Pages 77-81 cover the 
extensive Capital Programme underway. 
 
The Roads Budget is largely grant driven. The Revenue Budget is mainly concerned 
with the overall own resources element of this programme. The Directorate has actively 
managed costs in these areas during 2025 and will continue to do so for 2026.   
 
Pages 78, 79, and 80 cover the Capital Programme for this Directorate.  
 
Page 81-86 deal with the National, Primary, Secondary, Regional and Local Road 
Improvement Scheme.  
 
 
Public Lighting operating and improvement costs maintained  
 
Public Lighting - Operating Costs (B0501)  
€2,706,000 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) This is largely maintained due 
to the use of Office of Government (OGP)procurement.   
 
The strategy going forward is to minimise costs by using energy efficient lighting 
and, to this end, Kerry County Council is participating in the Public Lighting Energy 
Efficiency Project (PLEEP) – Southwest Region, led by Cork County Council. This 
project involves changing outdated public light fittings in the Council’s stock to more 
energy efficient LED fittings.  
 
Public Lighting – Improvement (B0502)     
                   €584,000 
 
Publicity and Promotion Road Safety (B0802)                                              
€115,500 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
This allocation provides for the costs of the Road Safety Officer and the associated 
Road Safety Programme. Community, public and stakeholder engagement are key 
aspects of this important role.  The Road Safety Officer (RSO) will deliver road 
safety education and training programmes to students in primary and secondary 
schools, in addition to promoting road safety at various festivals and events 
throughout the County increasing road safety awareness, improving road safety 
behaviour and reducing road deaths and serious injuries on our roads. 
 
 
Essential to the role is community, public and stakeholder engagement which 
enables Kerry County Council, and other key road safety stakeholders to improve 
and deliver on road safety actions and initiatives for safer roads and safer journeys. 
A success of this partnership was the inaugural ‘Safer Roads’ road safety 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
26 of 66 
conference hosted by Kerry County Council in May of this year which was a 
resounding success. 
 
Maintenance and Management of Car Parks (B0901)                                   €437,500 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
Operation of Street Parking (B0902)                                                            €233,000 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services)  
 
Parking Enforcement (B0903)                                                                      €1,286,000 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
Support to Roads Capital Programme (B10) 
 
 
Administration of Roads Capital Programme (B1001)                               
€1,891,000 
 
The Road Design Team, based in Áras an Chontae, provides design and 
procurement for all Specific Improvement Schemes and overlay contracts on the 
non-national road network, together with road safety measures, traffic management 
initiatives and other capital works. It also provides for design and procurement for 
overlay contracts on several national roads.  
 
Agency and Recoupable Service (B1101)                                                 
 
€713,500 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
This area caters for non-core services carried out by the Local Authority including 
permitting, licensing, agency works, road openings and administration/advertising 
of road closures, primarily for festivals and rallies.  This programme also includes 
a salary provision to support this work.   
 
Ms. A. McAllen referred to the Council’s Own Resources on page 92, it represents 
a significant portion of the budget and includes the Councillors allocation of €1.32m, 
which was increased to €40,000 per Councillor in 2025. 
 
The amounts combined with the provision for street cleaning show in Division E of 
€2.859m is a considerable Budget allocation. 
 
The Own Resources allocation in Roads that has increased for 2026 enables Kerry 
County Council to continue to attract grant funding throughout the year. As 
previously advised to Members the plant and machinery account is reflected in the 
Revenue Budget again for 2026 and is reflected as self-financing for Budget 2026, 
page 91 outlines a number of efficiencies and VFM initiatives taken by the 
Operations Department in 2025 continuing into 2026 to maximise this Budget’s 
allocation. 
 
 
Efficiencies/Value for Money is outlined on page 91 of the Chief Executive report.  
 
Division C Water Services – Irish Water Operations  
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
27 of 66 
Ms. A  McAllen referred members to Pages 16-17 of the Budget Tables and Pages 93-
95 of the Chief Executive’s Report for details on this Division.  
 
Irish Water Operations 
 
The expenditure of Uisce Éireann funded and recouped by the Local Authority is 
reflected in the Budget for 2026. 
 
C01 
        Water Supply   
 
 
 
 
 
 €6,811,892 
C02 
        Waste Water Treatment  
 
 
 
 
 €2,355,426 
C03            Collection of Water/ Waste Water Charges                          €141,797 
C06             Support to Water Capital Programme 
 
 
    €632,216 
C07 
        Agency and Recoupable Services   
 
               €475,405 
 
The Council continues to be responsible for Group Schemes and small private 
supplies.  
 
Operation & Maintenance of Public Conveniences (C0401)                    €1,145,000 
(community, Climate Action & Operational Services)  
 
Kerry County Council owns and operates public conveniences at 37 locations 
throughout the county.  
 
The operational arrangements for these facilities are varied. Nine facilities, located 
at Ballybunion (2 Facilities), Portmagee, Sneem, Waterville, Cromane, Kells, Cuas 
Crom and Knightstown, are operated by local community groups on behalf of the 
Council. The Council is most appreciative of the outstanding work of these local 
groups and provision is made in Budget 2026 to continue with this cooperative 
approach. This partnership represents good value for money as the service is 
provided to a high standard at a relatively low cost.  
 
In 2025 significant progress was made in developing new public conveniences with 
works carried out in Listowel at the Greenway Trailhead, Staigue Fort, and the 
Maharees and statutory consent successfully achieved for the proposed new Public 
Convenience facility in Dingle. A financial provision for a programme of upgrade, 
improvement and development of public conveniences is provided for in 2026, 
which will also utilise any available grant opportunities. 
As referred to earlier the Public Convenience Budget provides for a review of 
opening hours during 2026.  
 
 
Rural Water Programme (C05) Is provided for on a recouperation basis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
28 of 66 
Development Management 
 
Ms. A. McCallen referred to the Budget Tables Pages 18-20 and pages 96-116 of 
the Chief Executive Report  
 
Forward Planning 
 
Planning Control 
 
Planning Enforcement 
 
Housing Estates Unit 
 
 
Statutory Plans and Policy including Local Area Plans (D0101)     
   
€2,082,000 
(Active Land Management & Economic Development)  
  
This allocation covers salaries and other costs associated with the preparation and 
adoption of Land Use Plans and other Statutory Plans and Policy, principally the 
Tralee Municipal District Settlements’ Plan, the Killarney Municipal District 
Settlements’ Plan, the Castleisland-Corca Dhuibhne Municipal District Settlements’ 
Plan and the Listowel Municipal District Settlements’ Plan, as well as the delivery 
of masterplans identified in the these Settlement Plans which include 
Oakpark/Rahoonane Landbank, Tralee Innovation District, St Finans Campus 
Killarney, JJ Sheehy Road district, Racecourse Lands Tralee and Deerpark 
Technology Park Killarney. The RZLT (Residential Zoned Land tax) commenced in 
2022 and is an ongoing annual process which involves the publication of the 
Residential Zoned Land Tax Annual Report and associated maps. In 2025, the cost 
of RZLT to the Council was €703,000 - this is a contra item in the budget. 
Additionally, a Strategic Environmental Assessment of all the Statutory plans will be 
undertaken.  These works will be carried out in-house by the Council’s highly trained 
Planning staff, leading to significant cost savings.  
 
Other work carried out by the Forward Planning Unit in 2025 included the 
preparation of 
 Detailed statistical analysis reports in response to Notice of Motions  
 Briefs to procure Consultants for Master planning of key sites in Tralee and 
Killarney including the Oakpark/Rahoonane landbank, the Tralee innovation 
district, the JJ Sheehy Road district and the St Finians campus. 
The preparation of an updated / replacement planning policy framework for the 
Shannon Estuary replacing the Shannon Integrated Framework Plan (as 
recommended in the Shannon Estuary Taskforce Report) is at present being 
considered in conjunction with LA’s adjacent to the estuary, Shannon Foynes Port 
Company, Shannon Commercial Properties and Shannon Airport Group. It is 
considered prudent to make provision for the Councils share of costs associated 
with the preparation of this framework while awaiting a department decision on 
support for a Designated Maritime Area Plan for the Estuary.  
 
A sum of €250,000 is being transferred into Revenue from Capital to support this 
programme. 
 
 
Planning Control (D0201)  
 
 
 
 
           €3,264,000 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
29 of 66 
Reflecting Irelands current resilient and growing economic climate, to date in 2025, 
there has been a slight increase in activity levels within the area of planning control. 
It is estimated that approximately 1,450 valid planning applications will be received 
countywide during 2025.  
  
Enforcement Costs (D0301)    
 
 
 
 
             €1,282,000                              
(Active Land Management & Economic Development) 
  
This allocation includes salaries and other costs in this area.    
 
Enforcement Activity Levels 
(Annualised projection based on 01/01/2025 to 
30/09/2025 activity) 
2025 
Total number of New Complaints files opened 
329 
Warning letters served 
225 
Enforcement Notices Served 
27 
Legal Proceedings initiated  
7 
 
The Director of Finance advised that Housing Estates Unit is provided for in this 
area.   
 
2. Tourism Development (D05) 
 
General Economic Promotion (D0501)      
 
 
 
 €1,435,000 
(Active Land Management & Economic Development)  
 
One of the five strategic themes under the new Corporate Plan for Kerry County 
Council is Economic, Enterprise and Tourism.  It is a priority of Kerry County 
Council to promote sustainable economic development, support enterprise and 
innovation and build strategic partnerships and collaborations to maximise the 
County’s potential. Supporting Programmes & strategies in the Corporate Plan 
include: 
 Lead economic development and maximise the county’s economic potential and 
broaden Kerry’s economic base in a sustainable manner. 
 Ensure consistent marketing and promotion of Kerry as a destination of choice 
to live, work, visit and do business. 
 Raise the international profile of Kerry nationally and internationally.  
 Work with communities to regenerate towns and villages as vibrant and inclusive 
hubs for commercial, social, cultural and community activity. 
 Work collaboratively to ensure Kerry is a world class sustainable tourism 
destination. 
 Partner with the tourism sector to extend the tourist season and dwell time by 
enhancing the visitor experience and tourism products and encouraging visitor 
dispersal across the county in a sustainable manner.  
 Promote and support economic development that is inclusive by enabling 
employment and entrepreneurship across the diversity of our communities and 
sectors.  
 
 
Tourism Development 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
30 of 66 
For the 2026 budget, Kerry County Council will continue to prioritise the sustainable 
development of tourism infrastructure, with a strong emphasis on enhancing the 
visitor experience. The planned programme of works reflects a balanced approach 
that aligns with the objectives of the Kerry County Development Plan and the 
Destination Experience Development Plans (DEDPs) supported by Fáilte Ireland.  
 
In addition to infrastructure and planning, the Council is actively exploring innovative 
tourism opportunities, including international collaborations, and the potential to 
host signature events of international scale. These initiatives aim to position Kerry 
as a leading destination for cultural and experiential tourism. The 2026 budget will 
support the delivery of these strategic actions of the County VEDPs. 
 
Current initiatives in progress include the implementation of the Greenway 
Interpretation plan, enhancements at Bray Head and initiatives supporting the 
Valentia UNESCO designation. In parallel, strategic investment will be directed 
toward feasibility studies to build a robust pipeline of tourism projects, ensuring 
long-term growth and sustainability in the sector. Complementing these efforts, the 
county will also prioritise the development of its film and festival sectors, recognising 
their growing role in cultural tourism and regional economic development.  
Some of the key projects for 2026 include: 
 
Kingdom of Kerry Greenways   
The development of the Kingdom of Kerry Greenways remained a key undertaking 
in 2025.  Kerry County Council, along with Fáilte Ireland finalised the Way Finding, 
Signage and Interpretation Plan for Tralee to Fenit & Listowel to Abbeyfeale, which 
will result in implementation of infrastructure and signage to enhance the visitor 
experience on both Greenways.  Funding will be required for the implementation of 
the Interpretation Plan for these Greenways in 2026. In addition to the two 
Greenways already in use, it is anticipated that the South Kerry Greenway will at 
least partially open to the public in 2026.   
 
An Outdoor Recreation Infrastructure Scheme (ORIS), which has been used to 
support the marketing of the greenways, concluded in June 2025. Further ORIS 
funding has been secured to support the promotion of activity tourism, which will 
include Greenways.  This grant funding has been allocated to existing tourism 
amenities.  With the expected launch of the South Kerry Greenway, additional 
provision for marketing will be required.  
 
Adventure Activity Tourism 
Some of the initiatives currently underway include developing shared beach 
facilities for water sport activities at Fenit, Ballybunion and Maharabeg to enhance 
the visitor experience. The facility in Fenit was opened in June 2025 and the 
remaining facilities will be progressed further in 2026. 
 
Kerry County Council also secured funding under the Outdoor Recreation 
Infrastructure Scheme (ORIS) for the provision of recreational support facilities at 
three Blue Flag Beaches - Ballyheigue, Banna and Rossbeigh.  
 
Bray Head Signature Discovery Point 
 
Four Edges of Ireland  
An Dún Mór/Dunmore Head.  
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
31 of 66 
Transatlantic Cable Ensemble Nomination – World Heritage – UNESCO  
 
Kerry International Dark Sky Reserve 
 
Tralee and Dingle Light Railway 
 
Festival Development 
The unit manages the Festival and Participative Events scheme on behalf of Failte 
Ireland.  There was a 30% increase in applications for funding in 2025 and local 
community festivals will continue to be supported in 2026.  The Council also 
maintains its support towards promoting Feile Thrá Lí and the Rose Festival, Feile 
na mBláth, Other Voices event in Dingle and has increased its co-funding of 
Killarney St. Patricks Day Programme – Failte Ireland. Kerry County Council was 
one of only 5 Local Authorities to be successful in its application for competitive 
funding under Fáilte Ireland’s Samhain program. 
 
Film Development 
A Film and Festivals Officer has been appointed and a strategy developed for 
promotion of the County as a prime filming location. Support for film incentives for 
the upcoming year has been included in the budget and will be vital to delivering 
on the strategy. 
 
Strategic Economic Project Development             
An approach is taken and includes 
 Strengthening of engagement with education sector through enhanced 
collaboration, for example in skills development, joint-promotional opportunities, 
and supporting companies to scale;  
 Supporting the sustained development of economic infrastructure within the 
county including innovation hubs and clusters;  
 Supporting initiatives that progress Kerry’s journey towards increased 
environmental and economic sustainability in partnership with Sustainable 
Energy Communities and the Dingle Hub. A provision has been made in Draft 
Budget 2026 to make a contribution towards initiatives by the Dingle Hub. 
 Developing Kerry’s investment and enterprise proposition. 
 
Tourist Facilities Operations (D0502)  
         
                  €381,000 
(Active Land Management & Economic Development) 
 
It is a priority of Kerry County Council to develop and maintain tourism-built 
infrastructure, such as the Blennerville Windmill in Tralee and the Tralee Bay 
Wetlands.  
 
Tralee Bay Wetlands 
 
Blennerville Windmill 
 
3. 
Community Development  
 
Community (D06) 
 
General Community Expenses  
(D0601 & D0603) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 €11,907,000 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
32 of 66 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
The Community, Climate and Operational Services Unit is comprised of many 
functions which require significant interagency collaboration and engagement with 
internal sections within Kerry County Council.  
The Chief Executive referred to the Local Economic and Community Plan earlier. 
Community manages a number of projects and initiatives on page 106 and 107 on 
the Chief Executive Report. 
 
Placemaking Fund 
Provision is made to provide a fund, in 2026, from capital, for voluntary groups 
who enhance their local areas through artistic/ greening/ sustainable interventions 
which is aimed to improve the overall presentation of their area.  
Local Authority Integration Team  
 Delivery of Kerry Age Friendly Strategy 
 Delivery of Actions in the Healthy Kerry Framework 
 Delivery of Actions in Kerry Recreation & Sports Partnership Strategy 
 Delivery of Actions in County Outdoor Recreation Plan  
 Delivery of Actions in Local Sports Plan 
  Management of the Community Support Fund 
 Rural Grant Schemes 
 Local Community Safety Partnerships. 
 Comhairle na nÓg 
 PPN 
 
Building Control Inspection & Enforcement Costs  
(D0801 & D0802)       
€657,000 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
Urban and Village Renewal (D0901) 
      €489,000 
 
Economic Development and Promotion (D0905) 
€2,525,000 
(Active Land Management & Economic Development) 
 
Economic Development 
 
 
Marketing & Promotion 
An overall brand with guidelines has been developed for the County and with the 
appointment of a Marketing Officer in 2024, the immersion of this brand is in train 
through engagement with the enterprise and community sector and is supported 
by a coherent branding and communications plan to give substance to the brand 
and elevate the economic and tourism development of the county.  
 
To support the consistent promotion of Kerry as destination for enterprise, 
innovation and investment, ongoing marketing and communications campaigns 
will remain essential at local, national, and international levels. These efforts will 
target key opportunities including second-site investment, work/live initiatives, and 
the broader promotion of the county as a dynamic and connected region. 
Strengthening engagement with the global Kerry diaspora will also remain a 
priority, leveraging their potential as ambassadors and collaborators. This will 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
33 of 66 
include active participation in, and promotion of, key diaspora events and 
opportunities both at home and abroad. 
  
The Discover Kerry digital platform will require ongoing enhancement, with a focus 
on fresh, impactful written and visual content that reflects Kerry’s evolving value 
proposition in tandem with the strategic use of social media.  
 
Business Tourism 
Business Tourism is prioritised as well as Strategic Regional Economic Projects to 
promote Kerry as a business tourism destination for meetings. 
 
Strategic Regional Economic Projects 
A new Southwest Regional Enterprise Plan from 2025 will be developed by the 
Steering Committee, with actions and projects that will continue into 2026 and 
beyond, supporting cluster organisations and enterprise hubs and strengthening 
the enterprise ecosystem.  The Unit will continue to develop the relationship with 
the Tech Industry Alliance through joint initiatives and events that organise, 
promote and host learning, sharing & networking for the tech sector across the 
region and strengthen supports for the tech industry around sustainability, 
digitalisation and internationalisation. 
 
The Atlantic Economic Corridor (AEC) work plan for 2025 will continue into 2026. 
Ongoing drawdown from successful URDF and RRDF grant applications will 
continue during 2026. Budget provisions are critical to fund the Own resource 
elements of these grants. 
 
 
Town Centre First Heritage Revival Scheme (THRIVE) 
Secured a significant grant funding of €7M during the year.  
DRCDG Capital Delivery Team  
The Department of Rural and Community Development and the Gaeltacht funded 
Capital Delivery Teams which will assist in expediting the delivery of critical 
infrastructural and community projects.  
 
Local Enterprise Office (D0906)                                                                   €2,135,000 
(Active Land Management & Economic Development) 
 
This unit continues to deliver on the service level agreement with Enterprise Ireland 
in relation to grant and training support for micro-business in the county.  
The LEO provides a resource to new and existing business in respect of training, 
mentoring and grant assistance, as well as promotion of the county as a location 
for business.  Core grant includes Feasibility, Priming, Business Expansion and 
Tradeshow Grants. 2026 will see ongoing emphasis on business initiatives 
supporting Green, Digitalisation and LEAN Programmes.  
 
Key Programmes of Work to be delivered in 2026. 
 
Heritage & Conservation Services (D1101 & D1103) 
 
                  
€946,000 
(Active Land Management & Economic Development)  
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
34 of 66 
The Council’s Biodiversity, Built Heritage & Conservation Services Office works to 
promote awareness, interest, and pride in the abundant built and natural heritage 
assets to be found in the county. County Kerry’s natural heritage environment 
includes a wealth of features that encompass the character of the County.  
 
Built Heritage/Conservation Office – Projects/Achievements in 2025 
Extensive list of projects/ achievements in 2025 for these work programs, to 
optimise the number of grants available. Page 112 
 
Archaeology – projects achievements 2025 
  
Environmental Assessment Unit /Biodiversity-projects achievements 2025 
 
Key Projects for 2026 
  
Architecture Kerry (Sept 2026) 
   
Funding/ Grants 
The Built Heritage Office is involved in the administration of the 2026 conservation 
grants on behalf of the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage. 
The biodiversity officer will continue to source and maximise funding applications 
and initiatives around the all-Ireland Pollinator Plan , the Local Biodiversity Action 
Fund and other funding streams. 
 
National Heritage Week (August 2026). 
 
Biodiversity Week (May 2026) 
 
Development of a Countywide Heritage Forum  
 
Division E - Environmental Services 
 
Ms. McAllen referred members to Pages 21-23 of the Budget Tables and Pages 117-
140 of the Chief Executive’s Report for details on this Division. 
 
The operations of this section are diverse and specialised, ranging from technical 
laboratory analysis to clean-up of illegal dumping sites and educational campaigns.  All 
elements contribute to ensuring our environment is maintained to the highest 
standards.  The operation of the dog pound, and the management of the county’s burial 
grounds are also coordinated through the Environment Section. From an operational 
perspective, the section is managed as 5 distinct business units: - 
 Waste Management. 
 Environmental Regulation and Environmental Awareness. 
 Laboratory. 
 Animal Welfare. 
 Burial Grounds. 
 
 
Laboratory 
The laboratory continues to provide an in-house service to both the Environment and 
Water Services Departments. The laboratory is ranked second in Ireland in having the 
greatest number of drinking water tests, which we report as accredited (84%). 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
35 of 66 
Due to its achievements in accreditation and niche specializations in such areas as 
metal testing and Phytoplankton assessment, KCC lab is in an excellent position to 
greatly increase its service not only to Kerry but also to other Local Authorities as we 
consider the impact of Uisce Éireann potentially in this area. 
 
Civic Amenity Sites Operations (E0101)                                                      €3,189,200 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
The budget allocation for 2026 provides for a portion of the cost of operating 5 Civic 
Amenity Sites - Killarney, Milltown, Kenmare, Caherciveen and Ionad Athchúrsála 
agus Dramhaíola Chorca Dhuibhne.   
 
There is an ongoing programme of upgrade works at these facilities and a sum of 
this includes replacement of original waste bins at four Civic Amenity Sites; traffic 
management improvements; ancillary siteworks and ongoing improvements to the 
wastewater treatment systems.    
 
The budget provision also provides for the aftercare cost of North Kerry Landfill. 
 
Significant expenditure has been incurred during the last number of years in 
complying with our EPA waste licence requirements. Leachate management 
continues to be an expensive cost element for the North Kerry Landfill. While the 
cost of disposal for leachate is due to increase in late 2026, creating additional 
budgetary pressures, these are somewhat mitigated by works undertaken in the 
recent years which have reduced the volume of leachate on site. An Expression of 
Interest exercise is currently ongoing for future use of the landfill site at 
Muingnaminnane. 
 
The bottom of page 119 and 120 refers to ongoing grant funded works for historic 
landfills. 
 
Bring Centres Operations (E0202)  
 
€488,000 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
The Environment Section maintains over 90 Bring Banks, located at various 
locations around the county. The usage of these recycling facilities resulted in 
approximately 3,956 tonnes of recyclables being accepted in 2024, compared to 
4,077 tonnes in 2023. The impact of the Deposit Re-Turn Scheme has resulted a 
significant decrease in the tonnage of aluminium cans deposited at our Bring Banks. 
There continues to be a great need to maintain and service the Bring Bank Network 
at the various locations throughout the county. KCC will continue to monitor the 
impacts of the Deposit Re-Turn Scheme on the levels of usage at these sites 
through 2026 and may undertake to rationalize the number of banks provided at 
each site accordingly.  
 
As a measure to counteract illegal and indiscriminate dumping at these sites, the 
Council has the co-operation of 45 Community Groups to participate in our "Adopt 
a Bring Bank" scheme. This involves the local community helping to police the Bring 
Bank site to limit the illegal dumping and help enhance the site. The Environment 
Section pays an annual contribution to the local community and provides a 240L 
wheelie bin and gives collection credit for their disposal.  
 
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
36 of 66 
Provision of Waste Collection Service (E04)   
The following provisions in this area relate to the provision of the refuse service in 
the former Killarney Town Council area.  
 
 
Litter Management (E05) 
 
Litter Warden Service (E0501)                                                                         €259,000 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
Statistics relating to Enforcement Activity: - 
 
Year 
No. of cases of illegal 
dumping investigated 
under the Litter 
Pollution Act 
No. of Penalty Notices (on-
the-spot fines issued) 
01/01/25 – 30/9/25 
477 
53 
2024 
566 
92 
2023 
669 
95 
2022
720
109
2021 
885 
121 
2020 
1,041 
93 
 
Litter Control Initiatives (E0502)                                                                       €228,500 
 
Environmental Awareness Services (E0503)                                                  €171,000 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
This area provides for a broad range of initiatives which address issues on waste 
management, energy conservation, water protection and other issues related to 
sustainable living.  
 
The following are some examples of the many environmental awareness raising 
activities undertaken during 2025: - 
 A number of campaigns to ensure dog owners are aware of their responsibility 
to pick up after them were supported, including working with the Green Schools 
Programme and community groups and advertising in local print media to 
highlight the issue. 
 In 2024/25 academic year, 21 schools renewed their flags on themes such as 
Litter and Waste, Water, Energy Conservation, Travel and Biodiversity and 
Global Citizenship for the Green Schools Programme.  
 School initiatives and support,  
 The Council supported various environmental activities on each of the 13 Blue 
Flag Beaches.  
 The Council continued to work closely with Tidy Town groups, and the annual 
Tidy Towns seminar took place on March 19th 2025 with a focus on Theme –
‘Doing more with less’ for the competition. 
 National Spring Clean campaign.  

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
37 of 66 
Contribution to Street Cleaning Service (E0601)                                         €2,859,000 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
Given the importance of street cleaning to the county, an increased provision of 
€245,872 has been provided for in 2026. The allocation is in respect of 
salaries/wage costs and other costs which include waste disposal charges, repairs 
and maintenance of vehicles, fuel, cleaning materials and insurance. This amount 
is a significant provision from our own resources each year. The level of service 
that can be provided, having regard to the available budget, will be set out in the 
Annual Schedule of Municipal District Work Plans.  
 
Monitoring of Waste Regulations (incl. Private Landfills) (E0701)              €206,000 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
Enforcement of Waste Regulations (E0702)                                                  €302,400 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
 
Waste Management Planning (E08) 
 
Waste Management Plan (E0801)                                                                      €48,115 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
The allocation refers to the contribution to the Southern Region Waste 
Management Office.  
 
 
Operation and Maintenance of Burial Grounds (E0901)                            €1,298,700 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
                            
There are currently 158 burial grounds in the county. Kerry County Council 
continues to work closely with community organisations who undertake excellent 
maintenance works in an increasing number of graveyards throughout the county 
and the Council is highly appreciative of their support and assistance. This 
cooperation, with such groups, builds and strengthens the Council’s relationships 
with local communities and assists in the maintenance and upkeep to a high 
standard of Burial Grounds in Kerry.  
 
The Budget maintains a provision to fund loan charges to support a development 
and upgrading programme for burial grounds throughout the county which will be 
brought to the Strategic Policy Committee in early 2026 for consideration.  
 
In 2025, the Council made financial contributions to 50 community group 
organisations, to the value of €60,000 in recognition of their voluntary work in over 
88 burial grounds.  
 
Burial Ground Capital Works 
Carried out in 2025, along with a number of Minor Improvement Works. The 
Council carried out works at several burial grounds as part of an ongoing 
Improvement Programme.   
 
Operation Costs Civil Defence (E1001)    
  €315,300 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
38 of 66 
   
Kerry County Council acknowledges the many Volunteers who joined Civil Defence 
through the local authority for their area and, in time, having undergone training and 
gained experience at local level, may progress and qualify as Instructors. In the 
day-to-day management of Civil Defence training and operations at local authority 
level, the CDO is assisted by a key team of Instructors, qualified in a range of 
disciplines. Civil Defence members make themselves available for training, 
exercises or operations on a voluntary basis. 
2024 was a very busy year for Kerry Civil Defence. With a total of 123 taskings 
completed throughout the year.  
 
Emergency Planning (E1003)                                                                            €83,600 
(Community, Climate & Operational Services) 
 
Derelict Sites (E1004)                                                                                       €190,500 
(Active Land Management & Economic Development) 
  
The Derelict Sites Unit forms part of the Vacant Homes Unit with a strategic 
approach to dereliction and vacancy across the County in the context of 
Government Policy on Town Centre First, the CPO Activation Programme and the 
policies under the Housing for All Programme, including grant schemes for the 
activation of vacant and derelict properties. In 2026 it is planned to continue to adopt 
a proactive, planned and systematic approach to the identification and activation of 
derelict properties.  
 
Water Safety Operation (E1005)                                                                       €695,700 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
The allocation includes salaries, travel, equipment, refurbishment of lifeguard 
stations and other costs associated with this programme.  The Council will continue 
to provide a Lifeguard Service in 2026 at all our Blue Flag beaches where the Blue 
Flag Criteria or a Water Safety Risk Assessment requires us to do so. Voluntary 
Rescue Services at Ballybunion, Ballinskelligs, Banna and Derrynane, together with 
Irish Water Safety and R.N.L.I., will again receive financial support in 2026.  
Under European and Irish Law, submissions from the public are invited in respect 
of new locations to be considered for identification as designated bathing areas.  
There are currently 16 designated bathing areas in the county.  Any additional 
bathing area designated will require monitoring to ensure it meets the stringent 
microbiological water quality standards suitable for bathing. The EPA has published 
guidelines to advise the general public on the information required to support 
submissions for the identification of new bathing waters. No new submissions were 
received from the public in 2025. 
 
 
Operation of Fire Service (E11) 
 
 
The following is a summary of number of incidents responded to over the last 10 years: 
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
39 of 66 
 
 
The Council operates 10 fully equipped Fire Stations. 
 
The Fire Service has responded to 1,078 incidents up to the end of September 
2025. Road Traffic Collisions, Gorse Fires and Chimney Fires are the major 
incident types requiring fire brigade mobilisation. They also attend a significant 
quantity of ambulance assist calls where the ambulance personnel require 
assistance in moving critically ill patients. 
 
 -
 200
 400
 600
 800
 1,000
 1,200
 1,400
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Incidents 2015 - 2024

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
40 of 66 
 
 
Fire Services Investment Programme 
 
It is the Council’s policy to provide modern quality Fire Station accommodation 
throughout the county. All stations are being equipped with modern facilities, 
incorporating up-to-date equipment, and facilities for fire-fighters and state of the 
art communication systems. The Fire Service are currently training additional fire-
fighters to comply with the WRC agreement. Many of our fire stations require 
upgrading to cater for the increased fire-fighter numbers and works are currently 
being progressed on a station by station basis.  
 
Upgrading Existing Fleet 
During 2024, two new Class B appliances have been ordered for delivery in 2026.  
 
Operation of Kerry Fire Service (E1101)                                                      €8,557,800 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
The increased allocation provides for additional costs anticipated due to the 
additional firefighters required, price inflation in goods, services, and materials 
together with rising energy costs.  
 
Kerry Fire Service Department’s contribution to the Munster Regional 
Communication Centre (MRCC) in 2026 is also included here at a cost of €272,186. 
The MRCC, hosted by Limerick City & County Council, is responsible for emergency 
call-taking and mobilisation services for the 7 Local Authority Fire Services within 
the Munster region.   
 
Fire Services Training (E1103)                                                                     €1,177,000 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
41 of 66 
This allocation provides for ongoing weekly drill training and specialist training 
courses, provided to our 118 Retained and 3 Whole-time firefighters, to ensure that 
their levels of firefighting expertise are maintained to the appropriate standards for 
Health and Safety requirements.  It also provides for the training of new recruits to 
the Fire Service and the provision of ongoing Refresher Training Courses for 
existing firefighters.  
 
 
Fire Safety Control Cert Costs (E1201)                                                          €180,500 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
Fire Prevention and Education (E1202)                                                          €618,200 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
Inspection/Monitoring of Commercial Facilities (E1203)                              €138,500 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
Water Quality Management (E1301)                                                             €1,085,500 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
Operation of the Council Laboratory 
More detail is included on page 133, 134 and 135 of the chief Executive Report.  
 
Climate Change & Flood Management (E1501)                                           €1,667,600 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
Kerry County Council’s Climate Action Plan 2024-2029, which has been adopted 
by the Council, will be the guiding document for Climate Action in the county and 
includes actions aimed at influencing, facilitating, co-ordinating and advocating for 
climate action with external stakeholders in line with the various sectoral climate 
plans. Kerry County Council’s Climate Action Team, including dedicated staff and 
senior staff from each section, will drive the objectives and actions of the LACAP 
2024-2029. The allocation under this heading provides for the delivery of initiatives 
to support the Climate Action Plan and the Community Climate Action Officer will 
work with communities to avail of the Local Community Climate Action Fund. 
 
Energy  
Kerry County Council has a dedicated Energy Officer, which is part of the Climate 
Action Unit, but is deployed across a number of services to promote energy 
conservation, monitor energy consumption, procure energy, meet legislative 
requirements relating to energy reporting and work with other business units to 
develop energy efficient solutions when purchasing equipment or upgrading 
buildings with overall savings to the budget.   
 
Achievements in 2024 and 2025 include: 
 
 
Flood Management – Catchment-based Flood Risk Assessment & 
Management (CFRAM) is included in this budget allocation funded by the 
OPW. 
 
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
42 of 66 
Recreation and Amenity 
 
 
The objective of this Division is to ‘Enhance the lives of the citizens of Kerry, 
through provision of leisure and recreational facilities and support to cultural and 
educational activities. 
 
Ms. A. McAllen referred to page 24-25 of the Budget Tables and page 141-150 of the 
Chief Executive report.  
 
Leisure Facilities Operations (F01) 
 
Leisure Facilities Operations (F0101) 
   €425,000 
 
Contribution to External Bodies Leisure Facilities (F0103) 
     €95,000 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
This allocation includes financial support from the Council to Ballybunion Swimming 
Pool.  It also includes an increased contribution for financial support to Tralee Sports 
and Leisure Centre. 
 
Library Service Operations (F0201)                                                              €3,464,000 
Kerry libraries continue to support communities countywide and they also provide 
a public meeting place for people from all generations, demographic groups, and 
backgrounds. The service has nine full time branch libraries throughout the county 
- Ballybunion, Caherciveen, Castleisland, Dingle/Daingean Uí Chúis, Kenmare, 
Killarney, Killorglin, Listowel and Tralee. The library website www.kerrylibrary.ie 
provides a wide range of information and free online resources while two mobile 
libraries serve 73 locations on a fortnightly rota. A Kerry local history and archives 
service operates from Library Headquarters.  
 
The library service is supplemented by the provision of quality book stock, strong 
opening hours and trained library staff. All libraries have full day opening on 
Saturdays and have a level of opening at lunchtime. Five of the nine libraries have 
late opening hours until 8.00p.m. on Thursdays while Tralee, Killarney and Listowel 
libraries also open late each Tuesday.  
 
The Library is the Place: Information, Recreation, Inspiration, is the current five-year 
libraries national strategy designed to support and strengthen the public library 
network. This together with the Kerry Library Development Plan 2024 - 2028 
underpins ongoing government and local authority investment in library services, 
infrastructure, technology and programmes. 
 
Demand for meeting, study and social spaces is reflected in the 8% increase in the 
number of individual visits to the Kerry branch and mobile libraries during 2024 - 
428,343 individual visits were recorded. 315,667 visits took place in the period 
January to September 2025. Among the services now in place are:   
 Free library membership. 
 A national book reservation and delivery system that offers library members the 
option to reserve items online from any library in the country. 
 Free public access to computers and WiFi at all Kerry libraries.  
 A wide range of free online services including e-books, e-audio books, e-
newspapers, e-magazines and online language and training courses. 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
43 of 66 
 24/7 access to the library catalogue via www.kerrylibrary.ie . 
 No fines on overdue items. 
 Provision of a range of equipment and programming to support excluded and 
disadvantaged communities including children and adults with additional needs.  
 An annual events programme including exhibitions, children’s activities, historical 
lectures, literacy support and lifelong learning initiatives. 
Online Resources & I.T. Provision 
Online resources are now a mainstream service offering, with increasing usage of 
the free resources available. These include nationally provided e-books, e-
magazines, e-learning courses, e-newspapers and e-language learning sessions.  
 
Events Programme 
The library service supports national culture events including Seachtain na Gaeilge, 
Cruinniú na nÓg, Heritage Week, Culture Night and the Bealtaine Festival for older 
people. Exhibitions are held in libraries from time to time, particularly those that 
support local initiatives together with events highlighting Children’s Book Festival, 
Science Week, Architecture Kerry, Library Ireland Week, Kerry Mental Health 
Week, Space Week, Biodiversity Week, Poetry Ireland Day and the Ireland Reads 
initiative.  
 
Libraries liaise on an ongoing basis with schools, pre-schools, family resource 
centres and local organisations.  
 
Children’s Services 
Kerry Library continues to prioritise the national Right to Read programme which 
during 2025, the fourth year of the national First Five ‘Little Library Bag’ initiative, a 
free library book pack was made available to all 4/5-year-olds starting school in 
September. Children and their parents/guardians were invited to collect these bags 
in person at their local library, thus introducing them to the library service for the 
first time.  
 
Kerry libraries also participate in the national Little Library at Bedtime initiative. 
Aimed at 0–4 year-olds, it offers a free bedtime book, a library card wallet and 
reading tips for parents. This is jointly funded by the Department of Rural, 
Community Development and the Gaeltacht and the Department of Children, 
Disability and Equality. 
 
Libraries continue to engage extensively with primary schools throughout the 
county.   
 
Sustainability 
Libraries provide Home Energy Kits for lending to the public and partnered with the 
Heritage Council and Biodiversity Officer to provide ESKER [Environmental 
Science Kits for Ecological Recording]  
 
Purchase of Books, CDs etc. (F0204) 
€290,000 
(Capital Projects, Climate Resilience & Culture) 
 
Parks, Pitches and Open Spaces (F0301) 
€1,921,500 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
44 of 66 
Playgrounds (F0302) 
€247,500 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
The Council manages and maintains 45 playgrounds, 10 MUGA’s, 19 Exercise 
Areas and 2 Skateparks throughout the County. In the next 12 months 4 further 
playgrounds are scheduled to be opened. Further upgrades to existing public 
amenities are planned to increase inclusivity and accessibility, including Sneem, 
Cahersiveen, Listowel, Killorglin and Lixnaw playgrounds. It is anticipated that a 
further 4 to 6 approx. community playgrounds will be developed in 2026 in 
conjunction with local community groups. The Council’s new Play & Recreation 
Policy, adopted in 2025, ensures that infants, children, and young people have 
opportunities to access high value play and recreation activities across the 
County. This Policy provides a framework by which Kerry County Council can work 
with communities and other partners to enhance play facilities for all. 
 
Beaches (F0303) 
€819,500 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
The cleaning and collection of litter on Blue Flag Beaches is a function that is carried 
out in each area by the Municipal District Area staff. Kerry County Council received 
13 Blue Flag for its beaches with a blue flag for Fenit Marina and Portmage  
Pontoons. They were 5 Green Coast awards, Béan Ban, Litter, Ballinskelligs, 
Waterville town Beach and Castlegregory.   
 
This service also contains a provision for funding of Municipal District Enforcement 
Officers. The role and function of these officers is to address issues arising within 
each Municipal District, resulting in increased focus and activity on matters such as 
hedge cutting enforcement, signage, beach by-laws, casual trading and burial 
ground by-laws. The Enforcement Officers also liaise directly with Elected 
Members.  
 
 
Community Grants (F0401)                                                                                
€37,000 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
Recreational Development (F0404) 
€291,000 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
Kerry Recreation & Sports Partnership (KRSP)  
 
Operation of Arts Programme (F05) 
 
 
Administration of Arts Programme (F0501 & F0502) 
€1,074,700 
(Capital Delivery, Capital Resilience & Culture) 
 
The Arts Service works to develop arts and creative practice in Kerry. This includes 
providing support to artists, art festivals & events and to arts venues and involves 
working with organisations, agencies, communities, schools, and with sections of 
the Council to deliver a work programme that is largely supported by the Arts 
Council, the Department of Culture, Communication and Sport and Creative Ireland.  
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
45 of 66 
Budgets are maximised through leveraging national funding to support the Arts 
sector. In 2025, the Arts Service delivered an extensive Arts Programme where 
strategic arts partnerships were supported through initiatives that include: -   
 Artist Bursaries & Awards, Arts Act Grant:  
 Contributions to Voluntary Organisations: In recognition of Siamsa Tire as a 
National Folk Theatre and a unique and important cultural facility, which serves 
the people of Tralee and the county, the Council is supporting a new programme 
of events and community activities outlined in Siamsa Tire’s Strategic Plan. This 
is reflected in the contribution to Siamsa Tire. Other contributions include the 
Kerry International Film Festival, St Johns Theatre and Arts Centre, Tech 
Amergin, Cill Rialaig, Kenmare Carnegie Arts Centre, Listowel Writers Week, 
and Kerry Writers Museum.  
 Music Generation Kerry: 
 
In 2025, Creative Ireland funding of €267,419 was secured which facilitated 56 
projects throughout the County. 
 
Museums Operations (F0503)                                                                         €597,500 
(Active Land Management & Economic Development) 
 
Agriculture, Food and The Marine 
 
 
Mr. A. McAllen referred to page 26-27 of the Budget Tables and pages 151-154 of 
the Chief Executive Report 
 
  
Maintenance of Land Drainage Areas (G0101)                                              €120,000 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
This increased budget allocation is required to ensure continued drainage of the 3 
key tidal areas maintained by the Council – Akeragh, Banna and Lough Gill.     
 
 
 
Operation and Maintenance of Piers/Harbours (G0201)                               €467,000 
(Capital Projects, Climate Resilience & Culture) 
 
The Council has responsibility for the operation of 57 piers and slipways located 
around the county. The allocation covers the cost of routine maintenance and safety 
works and energy costs associated with the operation of the piers, provision of 
tourist moorings and aids to navigation, pontoon maintenance and pay costs for the 
Harbour Constables, as well as acquiring appropriate licences for proposed works 
and communication costs associated with this programme.   
 
Operation 
& 
Maintenance 
of 
Piers/Harbours, 
Fenit 
(G0203)                     
€1,186,500 (Capital Projects, Climate Resilience & Culture) 
 
The Council has responsibility for the operation and promotion of Fenit Harbour.  
Dredging is necessary. It is expected that the next dredging campaign will take 
place in 2029/2030. 
 
The continuing development of Fenit Harbour is of strategic importance to economic 
growth in the county. Kerry County Council will develop an economic strategy for 
the future use and development of Fenit Pier and Harbour which will examine the 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
46 of 66 
potential future recreational, commercial and tourism opportunities. This will ensure 
that ongoing investment in Fenit Harbour is underpinned and supported by 
commercial and economic activity.  
 
Planned Protection of Coastal Regions (G0302)                                           €228,000 
(Capital Projects, Climate Resilience & Culture) 
  
This funding is provided to cover the requirements that arise for coastal protection 
works around the Kerry coastline.  
  
Two separate Coastal Flood and Erosion Risk Management (CFERM) Studies at 
Tralee Bay (Ballyheigue to Brandon), Daingean Uí Chúis/Dingle Bay East - 
Castlemaine Harbour are substantially complete. The Council is liaising with the 
OPW for final approval. Based on these studies, the Council will make funding 
applications for coastal works as set out in the management plans for these 
coastal areas. 
  
Veterinary Service (G04) 
 
Provision of Veterinary Service (G0401)                                                     
  
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
The following local Authority Veterinary functions officially transferred from Kerry 
County Council to Department of Agriculture, Food and Marine (DAFM) from 1st 
January 2025: -  
 The supervision of local abattoirs. 
 The supervision of SMMPs (Small Meat Manufacturing Plants). 
 The supervision of premises registered under the Dog Breeding Establishment 
Act 2010. However, until legislation is changed, Local Authorities are still the 
designated regulatory authorities under the Act. 
 The transfer of both veterinary officers and Temporary Veterinary Inspectors 
(TVIs) from KCC to DAFM. 
The cessation of the Service Contract between KCC and the Food Safety 
Authority of Ireland (FSAI), will see no further funding for veterinary services being 
channelled through the FSAI.    
 
Inspection of Abattoirs, etc (G0402)                                                                 €15,500 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
While the supervision of small abattoirs has transferred to DAFM, the Council 
continues to pay temporary veterinary officers and recoup this cost, plus an 
additional administrative fee, until such time as the DAFM has completed contract 
negotiations with Temporary Veterinary Officers.  
 
Operation of Dog Warden Service (G0404)                                                    €318,000 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
This provides for costs associated with the implementation of the Control of Dogs 
Act, 1986 and associated regulations.  The allocation provides for 2 Dog Wardens 
and 1 Supervisory Pound Keeper, together with the cost of operating the Council 
Dog Pound and Shelter in Tralee.  
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
47 of 66 
 
Miscellaneous Services 
 
 
Mr. A. McAllen referred to page 28-30 of the Budget Tables and pages 155-161 of the 
Chief Executive Report. 
 
 
Administration of Rates Office (H0301) 
€729,000 
(Finance) 
 
Debt Management Service Rates (H0302) 
€415,500 
(Finance) 
 
Refunds and Irrecoverable Rates (H0303) 
 €10,316,000 
(Finance) 
 
The allocation provided by the Finance Directorate relates to the provision for 
refunds arising from vacant and to-let properties, derelict or disused properties, 
exempt properties, provision for the ‘G Factor’ Revaluation Tribunal refunds and 
irrecoverable rates. Given current economic conditions, there remains a risk of 
increased business closures and property vacancies. The provision in this area 
has been adjusted to reflect current anticipated collection levels. 
 
Provision has been made for a Rates Waiver Scheme for 2026 of €125,000. The 
scheme, as circulated for 2026, is endorsed by the Economic SPC and is 
presented with the budgetary provision for 2026. 
 
As part of a national revaluation programme, Tailte Éireann completed the 
revaluation of all rateable properties in County Kerry during 2023, with the revised 
valuations taking effect from 1 January 2024. In 2023, 273 appeals were lodged 
with the Valuation Tribunal. To date, 81 appeals have been finalised — 54 resulted 
in a decrease in valuation, giving a total reduction of €941,353 annually, while 27 
were withdrawn with no change to valuation. There have been no increases in 
valuation to date.  
 
The remaining 192 appeals are currently under consideration by the Valuation 
Tribunal, with the majority expected to be determined by 31 December 2025. The 
combined annual commercial rates value of properties under appeal is €3,215,303. 
Where appeals are successful, reductions are backdated to 1 January 2024 and 
remain in effect thereafter, resulting in a permanent reduction in income. Adjustment 
has been made to reflect completed appeals and it is necessary to make a reduced 
provision of €1,916,015 for ‘G Factor’ revaluation Tribunal refunds and revaluation 
revision applications for 2026. 
 
For the Draft Budget 2026, Kerry County Council has projected income of €54.732 
million from the collection of Commercial Rates. This includes a positive revision to 
six Global Account Valuations received from Tailte Éireann (with Meteor and Eircom 
now consolidated, reducing the number of global accounts by one) and an overall 
negative revaluation following appeal, the overall level of commercial rates will be 
monitored closely over the course of 2026 
  
The Council remains committed to maximising rate collections while maintaining a 
constructive and supportive relationship with all ratepayers. Efforts continue to 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
48 of 66 
focus on both optimising current collections and actively managing the recovery of 
outstanding arrears. 
  
Rates on Vacant Properties    
Section 9 of the Local Government Rates and Other Matters Act 2019 makes 
specific provision that elected members of a local authority may make a scheme 
providing for the abatement of rates in respect of vacant properties, and that such 
a scheme shall be approved at the local authority budget meeting, concerning the 
local financial year to which the scheme shall apply. 
Kerry County Council is proposing a 100% vacancy abatement for 2026 i.e., 
providing a full rates credit or refund in respect of properties where the bona-fide 
ability of landlords to obtain a suitable tenant, at a reasonable rent, is proven or the 
property is vacant due to the execution of repairs/alterations. All landlords must fully 
satisfy the Council regarding these requirements, prior to any credit/refund. A public 
consultation was undertaken during October to ascertain the public’s view on this 
scheme. No submissions were received. It is proposed to review this scheme in 
2026, in context of local and national schemes underway presently. 
Register of Electors Costs (H0401)                                                        €344,000 
 
Coroner Fees and Expenses (H0501)                                                                  €511,000 
(Corporate Services & People Development) 
 
The Draft Budget includes the costs associated with the administration of the 
Council’s obligations under the Coroners Act. This includes the salaries of Coroners 
covering this county and the fees and expenses incurred resulting from the holding 
of post-mortems and inquests.   
 
 
Local Representation/Civic Leadership (H09) 
 
 
Representation Payments (H0901)                                                              €1,165,000 
 
Cathaoirleach/Leas Cathaoirleach/Mayor/Cathaoirligh                                   €72,000 
MD Allowances (H0902) 
 
Annual Allowances - Local Authority Members (H0903)                               €375,500 
(Corporate Services & People Development) 
 
Expenses Local Authority Members (H0904) and various Expenses Headings                           
€137,000 
(Corporate Services & People Development) 
  
 
General Municipal Allocation (GMA) /  
Community Support Fund (H0909)                                                               €2,170,000 
(Community, Climate Action & Operational Services) 
 
The General Municipal Allocation as presented to members during the MD 
Budgetary Plan Meetings in October are included in this allocation.  
 
Administration & Management of the Community Support Fund 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
49 of 66 
2026 is the 12th year of operation of the Community Support Fund which provides 
an annual allocation of €850,000 from the General Municipal Allocation to support 
community groups active across the county, and, since 2017, a portion of the fund 
has been ring-fenced to target strategic projects in the 5 Municipal Districts and to 
co-fund projects which are in receipt of grants from other sources.  
 
Motor Taxation (H10)  
 
Motor Taxation Operation (H1001)                                                               €1,006,000 
(Finance) 
 
 
Agency and Recoupable Services (H1101) 
€5,229,601 
(Finance) 
 
Included in this Budget are the general expenses of courthouses such as 
insurances, rent of premises, heating, lighting, furniture and general maintenance 
and repairs.  This sum is recoupable from the Department of Justice, Home Affairs 
and Migration.  Provision is made for recoupable salaries, together with the costs 
of Agency work carried out, which again is a recoupable item. 
  
The Local Government Operational Procurement Centre (LGOPC) 
The LGOPC, which is based in Killarney, is a national shared service with 
responsibility for managing, developing and promoting procurement best practice.  
 
Central Management Charges 
 
 
The allocations provided for Central Management Charges are shared out to the 
various services using the appropriate cost drivers that are determined at national 
level. 
 
 
Corporate Building Costs (J01)  
 
Maintenance & Upkeep of Corporate Buildings (J0101)                            €2,952,047 
(Corporate Services & People Development) 
 
Castleisland Area Services Centre.  
 
The file storage facility located at Monavalley,  
 
The Area Services Centre in Killorglin  
 
The Town Hall at Princes Quay, Tralee  
Locations in Tralee include Manor West, Maine Street, 24 Denny Street and 51/52 
Moyderwell.   
 
Provision has been made towards the cost of the Property Management Unit, which 
provides services in this area.  Salaries of the staff of the Facilities Management 
Unit (FMU) are also included in this allocation.  
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
50 of 66 
The FMU works with the Office of Government Procurement (OGP) and utilises 
National Contracts and Frameworks to achieve savings across a range of 
commodities in the purchase of stationery, paper, office supplies and janitorial 
consumables.   
 
The FMU continues to identify areas where the running and operational cost of 
corporate facilities can be reduced, by carrying out upgrade works and renovations.  
In 2025, significant works including the Roof and Wall Replacement & Installation 
of Solar Photovoltaic Panels at Machinery Yard Building were carried out. Other 
works completed by the FMU include Eastern Carpark extension at Aras an 
Chontae Campus and safety works to Eastern & Western Car Park areas, Second 
floor & Conference room refurbishment at County Buildings, painting of main 
common area Ground to Second Floor & Conference Room to Council Chambers 
at County Buildings, upgrade works to main electrical distribution board at County 
Buildings,  electrical upgrade works to Dingle Courthouse and roof repair to Dingle 
Courthouse Building, refurbishment works to Pauline Bewick Collection at Killorglin 
Area Services Centre, roof repair works to Dingle Area Office Building, Ballybunion 
Library, Kenmare Carnegie Building, Blennerville Windmill & Princes Quay roof, 
refurbishment of staff toilets at Killarney Depot, upgrade works at Caherciveen 
Library Building & Caherciveen Courthouse Building for Daniel O’Connell 
Commemoration and installation of lift at Princes Quay building.  
  
General Corporate Services (J02) 
 
Corporate General Policy (J0201)                                                                 €2,658,994 
(Corporate Services & People Development) 
 
 
Contribution to Local Government Management Agency (LGMA) 
  
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)  
 
Freedom of Information 
 
Media, Communications and Customer Relations 
 
Insurances / Risk Management  
A provision has been included to cover the salaries and associated costs of the 
Insurance Unit.  This unit proactively administers and manages litigant risk to the 
Local Authority in respect of its various insurance policies, particularly in relation to 
Public Liability risk. The overall estimated insurance cost provided by the Council 
for 2026 is €4.367m . 
 
Oifig na Gaeilge/Seirbhísí Gaeilge 
 
Audit Services (J0202) 
 
 
 
 
 
                  €339,283 
(Corporate Services & People Development) 
 
  
Following the Local Elections in May 2024, a new Audit Committee was 
established.  
  
Information Technology (Communication Costs) (J0203) 
 €1,198,123 
(Corporate Services & People Development)  

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
51 of 66 
 
This heading reflects provision for the data communications links and related 
services which the Council is heavily reliant on. This includes primary and 
secondary links to Municipal District and Area Offices, Libraries and a growing 
number of Council facilities, plant, and mobile fleet, including Uisce Éireann 
locations.  
 
Information and Communication Technology (J03) 
In 2026, we will continue to increase our information security resilience and 
recovery capabilities in light of growing cyber security risks, advisories from the 
National Cyber Security Centre and the Network and Information Security Directive 
(NIS2) (EU) directive.  
 
Digital, Smart Technology and Broadband Unit 
In 2026, the draft budget allocation will support salaries and associated costs to 
continue the implementation of the funded Digital programme, to aid the delivery of 
the National Broadband Plan (NBP) in the County and to advance the Digital 
Strategy for the county.  
 
 
The Local Government Sector is about to embark on a significant multi-annual 
Digital journey to meet the Governments “Harnessing Digital” strategy objectives.  
 
Maintenance of Networks and PC’s (J0301) 
 €3,940,823 
(Corporate Services & People Development) 
 
This provision supports the on-going maintenance and repair of the Councils 
devices, including computers, servers and printers, as well as the server and 
storage infrastructure which is critical to support the delivery of council services.  
 
The development of disaster recovery capability is ongoing.  
 
Applications (J0305) 
€1,056,322 
(Corporate Services & People Development) 
 
Provision has been made for the support, implementation and development of 
systems across the range of Local Authority activities. 
 
Human Resources Function (J05) 
 
 
Human Resources Administration (J0501) 
€2,788,541 
(Corporate Services & People Development) 
 
The Human Resources & People Development Unit continues to meet the needs of 
the Council in achieving our corporate priorities and is responsible for all aspects of 
HR and organisational development in respect of our entire workforce in delivering 
an extensive range of local authority services and functions. 
 
The various business teams manage Recruitment and Selection, Industrial 
Relations, Staff Welfare, Equality and Diversity, Child Protection, Workplace 
Partnership, 
Personnel 
Management, 
Training 
and 
Development 
& 
Superannuation. 
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
52 of 66 
Also, throughout the year, the HR Department has been very active in the 
recruitment area.  In total 52 separate recruitment competitions were held in 2025, 
up to 30th September.  
 
Health & Safety and Staff Welfare (J0502) 
 
                           
      
€439,517 
(Community Climate and Operational Services) 
 
 
The Council’s Safety Team provided training, advice and guidance to staff 
throughout the organisation. Training will continue in 2026, ensuring high safety 
standards amongst staff in the workplace. 
 
 
 
Financial & Management Accounting (J0601, J0602 & J0603) 
€2,906,391 
(Finance) 
 
This provision relates to the administration of the finance function, including salaries 
and office administration costs. Functions covered by this budget include 
Budgetary, Financial and Treasury Management, Financial Control and 
Management, Payroll and Accounts Payable. This provision also includes a sum as 
part of the contribution to the annual fees to the LGMA.   
 
Pensions & Lump Sums (J0701) 
€13,730,399 
(Finance) 
 
 
Area Offices Costs (J0801)                                                                               €429,350 
(Corporate Services & People Development) 
 
This concluded the presentation from the Head of Finance on the Revenue Budget 
for 2025. 
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley thanked the Director of Finance for the overview.  
 
All Elected Members collectively thanked the Director of Finance and the Finance staff 
for compiling this document and acknowledged the significant level of work involved.  
 
Cllr Bobby O’ Connell:  
 Noted that it is important that Affordable Housing is prioritised to provide housing 
for young working people that don’t qualify for social housing. He called on the 
turnaround time for voids to be reduced and suggested that the Council 
introduce an apprenticeship program to ensure that the council will have its own 
skilled labour force.  
 He expressed concerns with casual trading, particularly during festival events 
and said that existing rate payers need to be prioritised.  
 Called on the Council to employee a School Traffic warden to accommodate 
500 school children on College Road, Castleisland.  
 Acknowledged the work of the Playground committee in Brosna.  
 Asked for an update on how vulnerable the Council I.T. system is.  
 Queried if saving have been seen on buildings that have been retrofitted? 
 Called for an update on the Coroners review. 
 Asked for an update on the rates revaluation appeals and if they will be 
beneficial to businesses? 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
53 of 66 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty: 
 Concurred with a number of comments expressed by Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell.  
 Asked for an update on the rates revaluation appeal as many businesses are 
still waiting for the outcome of their appeals. 
 She supported the comments regarding the introduction of an apprenticeship 
program, as it may help increase the turnaround time for voids.  
 She asked for an update on the Housing Capital side for Waterville. 
 She commended the Housing Grants scheme and the staff who process the 
grant. 
 In relation to land banks and housing, she stated that the Council needs to 
secure housing, and highlighted the need to be cognizant that the Council is 
losing properties to the Tenant Purchase Scheme. 
 She supported the proposal for Single Rural Dwellings. 
 Called on the Council to upgrade Public Conveniences.  
 In regard to Festival grant applications, she asked if funding is available to 
support the increased number of festival events? 
 Requested an update on Abbey Island Graveyard, Derrynane.  
 
Cllr Robert Brosnan 
 The Councillor commended Kerry County Council on facilitating Irish classes for 
Elected Members and staff.  
 He referred to the Roads Programme and asked if funding would be used to 
improve footpaths in Dingle Town? 
 He referred to Dingle’s transitioning into a flagship low-carbon region 
designation and asked that the Council would provide funding for walking routes 
in the town? 
 Welcomed the recent funding for Brandon and Camp Junction and asked if an 
update would be provided for the safety review in Lispole? 
 He expressed disappointment at the increase cost of Eco Sense Bags from 
€10.00-€12.50 and said that it is only punishing people who are trying to do 
good. He noted that this is the second increase since 2022 and suggested it 
would be more effective to impose litter fines in black spots to source additional 
funding. 
 
Cllr Niall O’ Callaghan  
 He appealed to rate payers and businesses that are currently struggling to 
contact the Finance Department who are always very approachable.  
 Welcomed the work undertaken by the LEO office. 
 He concurred with comments in regard to introducing an apprenticeship scheme 
in the Council. 
 Asked for an update on what measures are being introduced to market Kerry 
for Ryder Cup 2027.  
 Asked that twinning Kerry with other towns and cities would be expanded.  
 
Cllr. Marie Moloney  
 Called for the introduction of a waiver rate scheme. 
 Requested an updated on the “Park and Ride” system for the Christmas season.  
 She referred to page 5 of the Chief Executive report and asked for clarification 
on the recoupable income and Misc. Income. 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
54 of 66 
 She referred to the abolishment of the Housing Rent Caps and said that the 
increase in rent receipts should reflect an increase in housing maintenance 
works.  
 She referred to the call out fee for Chimney Fires and asked for an update all 
Fire Services fixed rates.  
 She referred to the Tenant in Situ Scheme and asked if the Council could assist 
the residents in Loreto Convent Estate? 
 In relation to figures presented for illegal dumping which she noted were very 
high, she asked that additional enforcement be considered? 
 She noted that substantial work is required to rectify the Register of Electors 
and said that she believed the Council needs to reinstate Enumerators.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris 
 Concurred with comments expressed in regard to the Tenant Purchase Scheme 
and said the Council is renting ex-Council owned properties.  
 She noted in addition to the published homeless figure; there are an additional 
number of people who are couch surfing that are not deemed homeless and 
said they should be included in the homeless figures.   
 As private housing rents continue to increase, she called on the Council to make 
increased provision for HAP and RAS payments.  
 She stated there is currently no crane on Fent Pier and asked that this would 
be reviewed?  
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy Rae: 
 He noted that the proposed new Housing Rent Caps will result in higher rents 
and additional funding and called on the Council to increase the funding in 
estate management and maintenance works for Council properties.  
 Acknowledged that the commercial rates appeal is still ongoing and said that 
everything must be done to promote small businesses in the County. 
 Called for a review of school wardens to be undertaken across the county.  
 He referred to the €2.75M for public lighting and said that the current contract 
timelines are currently not being adhered to. 
 Requested an update on RZLT provision. 
 In relation to the allocation for Corners, he stated as a Council the funding could 
be put to better use, such as marketing the County in advance of the Ryder Cup 
in 2027. 
 He asked for clarification on the Placemaking Fund, he felt the current 
information is a bit vague. 
 He too asked for an update on the measures been undertaken by the Register 
of Electors Office to reflect the increase in budget allocation for the service.  
 
Cllr. Sam Locke 
 Welcomed the increased provision of funding for Housing Support grants.  
 He asked for an update on the provision of funding for Tralee Sports and 
Leisure Cantre and asked that the Council would examine the playground area 
in Spa Road, Tralee with a view to upgrading the facility.  
 
Cllr. Tom Barry: 
 In relation to public car parks, he asked if funding has been made available, 
there appears to be no funding for surface dressing.  

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
55 of 66 
 Welcomed the €7.8M for housing maintenance. In relation to the funding 
allocated for the 57 voids he said that hopefully other properties will be 
renovated in the future.   
 In relation to the funding for Tenancy Management, he expressed concerns 
that the funding allocated for is insufficient. He called on the Council to have 
better alliance between the Housing Department and An Gardai Síochána for 
Tenancy Management.  
 He asked for additional Mattress Amnesty days to be held across the county.  
 Expressed concerns in regard to public lighting and said there appears to be 
ongoing issues and asked for an update on the targets for LED lighting 
upgrades.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin: 
 In relation to the Town Centre Plans he asked if there is a separate allocation 
for Derelict Sites? 
 
Cllr Angie Baily: 
 In relation to Greenways, she asked for an update on funding for Safe Routes 
to School Programme. She said this safety issues need to be highlighted and 
called for more social media exposure. 
 Called on the Council to provide Affordable Housing in the County.  
 Welcomed the allocation for the Community Support Fund. 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly: 
 Welcomed the provision of funding for plant and machinery but expressed 
concerns that some of the machinery is too expensive to operate within the 
Municipal Districts and asked that this would be reviewed? 
 Asked for clarification on what the €100,000 has been used for in North Kerry 
Landfill. 
 Expressed ongoing frustration that Kerry County Council continues to fund the 
Corners Fees.  
 He concurred with previous comments in relation to the provision of a School 
Warden for College Road, Castleisland and asked following the review, if a 
traffic warden is warranted, where the funding will be allocated from?  
 
Cllr. Niall Kelleher: 
 Requested an update on the opening times for Transfer Stations.  
 He asked what the long-term situation in regard to the School Meal programme 
funded by Kerry County Council.   
 In relation to Tourism Services, he said he believed that the Council needs a 
strategic plan and to keep links with Kerry Tourism Industry Federation (KTIF) 
and Fáilte Ireland. He commended the work of KTIF and called on Kerry County 
Council to invite KTIF to give a presentation to the Council on the work they 
undertake.  
 Enquired whether the current insurance bond for developers would be sufficient 
to cover the rising costs due to inflation. 
 He referred to the transfer of the County Veterinary Officers to Department of 
Agriculture, Food and Marine (DAFM) and the impact it has on the operations 
of animal welfare services and asked if any further services will be transferred?   
 Concurred with previous comments in regard to the introduction of an 
apprenticeship programme for housing maintenance.   
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
56 of 66 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald: 
 Called on all businesses that are struggling to engage with the Finance 
Department. 
 Commended the work of the Housing Grants office and emphasised how 
important these grants are to keep people living in their homes.  
 Welcomed the funding for existing works on the N86 and asked for an update 
for the provision of additional funding for this national route. 
 
Cllr. Podge Foley: 
 Welcomed the investment in Arts and called on the Council to open an Arts 
facility in Mid Kerry.  
 He welcomed the Town Centre Realm for Killorglin and called on the Council 
to CPO the Bianconi Car Park.  
 Called for additional disability services for Cromane Beach. 
 In relation to public lighting, he asked if the street lighting in Castle Harbour 
View estate would be addressed.  
 
Suspend Standing Orders 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Niall Kelleher and SECONDED by Norma Moriarity it was 
agreed to suspend Standing Orders as it was 1.30p.m. 
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin: 
 Welcomed the increase in funding in all departments and stressed the 
importance of additional income. 
 Welcomed the engagement by the Council in regard to derelict housing.  
 He stressed that the current legislation for Short Term Letting is causing 
problems across the county and noted that a number of property owners are 
leaving the scheme.  
 He said the changes to the Rental Rules from March 2026 are concerning as 
many people don’t qualify for social housing.  
 He expressed frustration with the lack of affordable housing in the County and 
said the Council needs to engage with local developers.  
 Complimented the work undertaken by the Taken in Charge Unit and said many 
of the issues in the older estates is down to legacy issues with Uisce Éireann.   
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue: 
 Asked that provisions put in place for Budget 2026 to include the rising costs 
as a result of inflation.  
 Concurred with previous comments calling for the provision of affordable 
housing and said we need to provide housing for the middle-income 
households. 
 He too expressed frustration that the Council are administrating payment for 
Coroners services.  
 Called on Insurance Bond payments for housing development to be reviewed 
to coincide with inflation. 
 He complemented the work of the Library Services. 
 
Cllr. Fionnan Fitzgerald:  
 He referred to Page 95 of the Chief Executive’s Report in regard to Kerry County 
Council’s Master Co-operation Agreement with Uisce Éireann’s and asked that 
Councilors would be briefed on the context of the contract.  
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
57 of 66 
 In relation to page 118 of the Chief Executive Report, he noted the significant 
cost to maintain the landfill and asked if it would be possible for the site to be 
taken over by another entity? 
 
 In relation to page 130 of the Chief Executive Report, he referred to the increase 
in Road Traffic Incidents and asked if the Fire Service or the Ambulance is the 
Primary Response Unit.   
 
Cllr Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey: 
 Welcomed the Housing provision but noted that there was no planned housing 
for Kenmare.  
 He welcomed the increased allocation for funding to festivals in Kerry. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill: 
 He advised that at the next Housing SPC, discussions will commence in regard 
to the Affordable Housing Scheme for Tralee and Killarney.  
 Called on all housing stock to be brought up to a satisfactory standard.  
 While he welcomed the increase in the Roads Maintenance fund, he asked that  
additional funding is provided for the Ring of Kerry Road, which he believed is 
currently substandard.  
 He concurred with previous comments in relation to the survival of businesses 
and said that everything should be done to help businesses to survive.  
 
 
 
Cllr. Terry O’ Brien  
 Welcomed the retention of the rates value and called on the public to make 
every effort to shop local. 
 He called on the Housing Department to regulate the Affordable Housing 
Scheme.  
 
Cllr. Dan McCarthy 
 Called on the Council to cut the hedging on the Tousist Road.  
 Concurred with previous comments in regard to a shop local campaign.  
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley 
 He welcomed the increase in funding for the grants and welcomed the 
preparation of an updated / replacement planning policy framework for the 
Shannon Estuary replacing the Shannon Integrated Framework Plan (as 
recommended in the Shannon Estuary Taskforce Report). 
 
The Director of Finance replied to the queries as follows.  
 She advised that the Council is currently upgrading a number of its facilities 
across the county. This includes public conveniences, a program of works has 
been introduced for burial grounds, in addition to upgrade works to the Civic 
Amenity sites and ongoing upgrade of waste water treatment plants.   
 The Director advised that the budget includes an increased allocation to housing 
maintenance in regard to a planned maintenance approach to housing stock. 
 The Budget includes a significant allocation to the Arts Programme and festival 
events which the Council will continue to support in 2026.  
 In relation to energy efficiency the Director advised that there has been slight 
reduction in energy consumption in Council owned buildings that have been 
upgraded and referred Members to page 136 of the Chief Executive Report 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
58 of 66 
which provides an update on energy conservation and upgrading Council 
building across the County.  
 
 The Rates appeals process is currently ongoing. An allocation has provided in 
the budget for appeals that maybe be successful.  
 
 The Director confirmed that the allocation of €2.7M for public lighting includes 
the maintenance contract.  
 
 Kerry County Council will continue to engage with the community in regard to 
playgrounds.  
 
 The Director confirmed that there is a provision in the budget for public 
conveniences  
 
 She confirmed that funding towards initiatives for the Dingle Hub has been made 
available in the budget which includes decarbonisation schemes to support 
initiatives towards increased environmental and economically sustainability. 
This funding has been provided for under different headings across the budget.   
 
 She confirmed that the increase in the Eco Sense bags is aligned to the polluter 
pay principal and the Local Authority must pass on the fee.  
 
 In relation to Litter fines, the Council is bound by Government legislation.  
 
 The Director advised that while contracts are currently being finalised between 
Temporary Veterinary Officers and the Department of Agriculture, Food and 
Marine (DAFM), the Council will continue to pay a small number of temporary 
veterinary officers which is recoupable.  
 
 She referred to the sources of Income on page 5 of the Chief Executive Report 
in particular Other recoupable Income and Other Misc Income and said that a 
detailed breakdown is provided under the Income Chapter of the Report.  
 
 The Fire Service call out fee of €100 has been fixed for the last number of years. 
 
 The crane will commence construction on Fenit Pier in January 2026.  
 
 There has been an increase of €140,000 to support residents’ association. 
 
 The Director confirmed that service supports are provided to every service 
division to accommodate I.T. equipment in accordance with the Code of 
Practice. She confirmed that the Register of Elector is funded by grant support.  
 
 She confirmed that €250,000 has been allocated under the Placemaking Fund 
to support local groups and to enhance their locations.  
 
 The Director confirmed that there is a provision in the Budget for land charges 
for sites and Council owned lands.  
 
Cllr. Niall Kelleher asked if there are provision to maintain the North Kerry Landfill 
including the management of leachate? 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
59 of 66 
 
Ms. N. O’ Sullivan Director of Housing confirmed  
 
 The Council is making progress in regard to Affordable Housing which includes 
the provision of a dedicated unit. The Council will be advertising for Expression 
of Interest for the provision of housing which will include Affordable Housing. 
She undertook to keep Councillors updated on the process. 
 
 Undertook to review the request for apprenticeship programme in conjunction 
with Solas.  
  
 The Director acknowledged the significance of the voids programme and 
welcomed the increased provision in the budget. 
 
 The Director acknowledged the work undertaken by the Housing team in regard 
to the Energy Efficient retrofitting works.  
 
 She asked if Councillors have a query on specific disability grants, that they 
would contact her directly.  
 
 She confirmed that the Tenants Handbook will be brought before the SPC for 
review.  
 
The Chief Executive confirmed that the Residential Zoned Land Tax (RZLT) is 
applicable to any serviced vacant lands including land in the ownership of the Local 
Authority. This must be considered in regard to the acquisition of land for risk 
assessment.  
 
Mr. J Nolan Director of Service confirmed  
 
 A Shop Local Campaign will be advertised this week. 
 
 The Economic Development unit will update Members on events proposed for 
the Ryder Cup 2027 Marketing campaign   
 
 The Director confirmed that the Vacant Homes Unit will oversee derelict and 
vacant properties across the Country under the Town Centre First programme. 
There are number of properties with legacy issues that must be addressed. 
 
 In relation to the Development Bonds the Director confirmed that these have 
been put in place for insurance purposes to complete housing estate if the 
builder becomes insolvent.  
 
Mr. P. Neary Director of Service confirmed 
 
 Casual Trading will be reviewed in the context of a review to the Casual Trading 
Bye-Laws in 2026.  
 
 The Council will be meeting the public lighting contractors and will discuss how 
the scheme can be improved and address the concerns raised by the members. 
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
60 of 66 
 The provision of a traffic school warden in College Road will be reviewed 
however; it may be more beneficial to implement a traffic calming scheme. 
 
 He undertook to provide an update for Abbey Island Graveyard. Waterville 
 
 The opening times for public convenience will be reviewed.  
 
 The footpath restoration works will be undertaken as part of the Municipal 
District works plan.  
 
 In response to a query from Cllr. Marie Moloney on Development Property 
Infrastructure, (DPI) the Director confirmed that there is a National Steering 
Group which is made up of the Department of Climate, Energy and the 
Environment, Uisce Éireann and Local Authority Representatives, who are 
considering all issues pertaining to DPI’s in the country.   
 
 The Director confirmed that there are different fees for Fire Service Call outs 
depending on the time of the day or evening. 
 
 Upgrading to car park surface will form part of the Municipal District Works Plan.  
 
 The Mattress Amnesty scheme will be reviewed subject to the Dumping 
Initiative Fund.  
 
 The Road Safety Officer will undertake a social media road safety campaign for 
2026 in conjunction with Local Community Safety Partnership.   
 
Mr. M O’ Donoghue Director of Service confirmed that  
 
 The Franchise office will form part of a shared service centre as part of the move 
to a new National Electoral Registration System. The funding made available in 
the budget is for the provision of resources.  
 
 The Director confirmed that the official language Act targets that 20% of all new 
public sector recruits must be Irish- competent by 31st December 2030. This will 
be brought back to the SPC for discussion.  
 
 The Director confirmed that that the Council have been very proactive in regard 
to cybersecurity. The IT Department have a very active control and compliance 
programme underway to improve the efficiency and security of the Council’s 
devices. There is an extensive contingency plan underway with a number of  
staff working on the security support. 
 
 
Following a query from Cllr. Martin Grady on footpath restoration programme and 
Coroners fees, Ms. A. McAllen Director of Finance confirmed that the footpath 
programme will form part of the Service Delivery Plan in conjunction with Municipal 
District for 2026 as outlined on page 85 of the Chief Executive report. She confirmed 
that corners fees are non-recoupable from the Department.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald asked that the Council would review Service Sites for other 
Municipals Districts within the county. He asked for an update on funding applications 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
61 of 66 
for Piers and Harbours. He stressed the importance to facilitate conference and training 
events within the county such as the Road Safety Conference held in September and 
said that these events benefit the local economy.  
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae asked if the Placemaking and Community Activation Grant Fund 
will be allocated from the Councils’ own resources; he stressed it is substantial monies 
when there is no budget for school wardens and said the council needs to prioritise 
road safety.  
 
The Chief Executive confirmed that Road Safety is a priority for Kerry County Council 
and said the current Roads Safety Enhancement programme is underway. The school 
warden review is underway however if approved the school warden will not be in situ 
until September. The Placemaking and Community Activation Grant is an excellent 
programme which will help to benefit the visual impact of communities within Kerry.  
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan stressed that he can’t vote to adopt the proposed budget. He 
opposed the increase on the Eco Bags and said that people are getting punished for 
doing the right thing and again asked that the fines for illegal dumping be increased. 
In relation to the R560 he said he can’t accept that funding cannot be sourced for the 
Conor Pass Road.  
 
Ms. A. McAllen reiterated her previous comments that the Council must pass on the 
cost to the public for polluter pay principle under national legislation.  
 
Folllwing a query from Cllr. Charlie Farrelly in relation to the Castleisland facility, Mr. 
M. O’ Donoghue Director of Service said the building is to accommodate Kerry County 
Council staff. 
 
Cllr. Deridre Ferris asked for an update on the application submitted for coastal 
protection works for Tralee Bay under CFRAM. She asked for further clarification on 
Estate Enhancement fund.  
 
Mr. Frank Hartnett said the CFRAM is funded by the OPW, the application has been 
completed and undertook to revert to Cllr. Ferris with an update.  
 
Mr. N. O’ Sullivan Director of Service said the Estate Enhancement Fund will be rolled 
out in conjunction with the Tenancy Management Officers. It will provide funding for 
small scale grant support to resident’s association operating within Kerry County 
Council built housing estates.  
 
Following commentary from Cllr. Marie Moloney on the operation of the Community 
Support Fund, the Director advised that the concerns raised will be referred to the 
Community Department.  
 
Following a number of queries from Cllr. Deirdre Ferris, Ms. A McAllen advised that 
funding for Music Generation Kerry has been maintained for 2026. In addition, she 
advised that the sum of €75,000 transferred into Revenue from Capital to support 
Strategic Tourism Projects is included in the €1.4M under Tourism development.  
 
24.11.2025.03 To adopt, with or without amendment, the Local Authority Budget 
for the Local Financial Year ending 31 December 2026, subject to 
the provisions of Section 103 of the Local Government Act 2001, 
as amended.  

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
62 of 66 
 
Mr. S. Scally, Meetings Administrator, said a vote would now be taken on the following: 
 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Sam Locke, SECONDED by Cllr. Charlie Farrelly that that 
we the members of Kerry County Council hereby resolve that pursuant to the 
provisions of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended by the Local Government 
Reform Act 2014, the Local Government (Financial and Audit Procedures) Regulations 
2014, Local Government Rates and Other Matters Act 2019 and the Local Authority 
Accounting Code of Practice and Accounting Regulations, the Draft Budget for the 
financial year ending 31st December 2026 as presented by the Chief Executive and as 
set out in Tables A and B be and is hereby adopted. 
 
 
The result of the vote was as follows: 
 
For: 
Cllrs. Angie Baily, Tom Barry ,Tommy Cahill, Paul Daly, Charlie Farrelly, 
Deirdre Ferris, Breandán Fitzgerald, Fionnán Fitzgerald, Podge Foley, Martin Grady, 
Tommy Griffin, Jackie Healy-Rae, Niall Kelleher, Aoife Kennelly, Michael Leane, Sam 
Locke, Dan McCarthy, Jimmy Moloney, Marie Moloney, Norma Moriarty, Liam Speedy 
Nolan, Terry O’Brien, Niall O’ Callaghan, Bobby O’Connell, John O’ Donoghue, Anne 
O’ Sullivan, Mikey Sheehy, Michael Foley (28) 
 
Against: 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan (1) 
 
 
Absent: 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin, Johnny Healy-Rae, Maura Healy-Rae, Teddy 
O’Sullivan-Casey. (4) 
The vote was carried.  
 
24.11.2025.04 To determine, in accordance with the said adopted Budget, the 
annual rate on valuation to be levied for the Local Financial Year 
ending 31 December 2026. 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
63 of 66 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
64 of 66 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Niall Kelleher, SECONDED by Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan that 
we the members of Kerry County Council hereby resolve that  pursuant to the 
provisions of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended by the Local Government 
Reform Act 2014, the Local Government (Financial and Audit Procedures) Regulations 
2014, Local Government Rates and Other Matters Act 2019 and the Local Authority 
Accounting Code of Practice and Accounting Regulations, and in accordance with the 
Local Authority Budget for the Financial Year ending 31 December 2026, as adopted, 
the annual rate on valuation as set out in Table A be the annual rate on valuation to be 
levied for the said Financial Year.  The Annual Rate to be levied shall be €0.245. 
 
 
The result of the vote was as follows: 
 
For: 
Cllrs. Angie Baily, Tom Barry, Robert Brosnan, Tommy Cahill, Brendan Cronin, 
Paul Daly,  Charlie Farrelly, Deirdre Ferris, Breandán Fitzgerald, Fionnán Fitzgerald, 
Podge Foley, Martin Grady, Tommy Griffin, Jackie Healy-Rae, Niall Kelleher, Aoife 
Kennelly, Michael Leane, Sam Locke, Dan McCarthy, Jimmy Moloney, Marie Moloney, 
Norma Moriarty, Liam Nolan, Terry O’Brien, Niall O’ Callaghan, Bobby O’Connell, Anne 
O’ Sullivan, Mikey Sheehy, Michael Foley (29) 
 
Against: 
Cllr. (0) 
 
Absent: 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae, Maura Healy-Rae, John O’ Donoghue, Teddy 
O’Sullivan-Casey (4) 
 
The vote was carried.  
 
24.11.2025.05 To renew, the scheme for the abatement of rates in respect of vacant 
properties in accordance with the provisions of Section 9 of the Local   
Government Rates and Other Matters Act 2019, as amended. Such a 
scheme in respect of vacant property provides for a 100% abatement 
of rates due to Kerry County Council by a liable person as provided 
for in Section 9 (1) of the Local Government Rates and Other Matters 
Act of 2019 for the financial year ending 31st of December 2026.   
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Niall Kelleher, SECONDED by Cllr. Angie Baily that we the 
members of Kerry County Council makes a scheme for the abatement of rates due to 
it by liable persons, or classes of liable persons, in respect of vacant properties in 
accordance with the provisions of Section 9 of the Local Government Rates and Other 
Matters Act 2019, as amended. Such a scheme will provide for a 100% abatement of 
rates on vacant premises as provided for in Section 9 (1) of the Local Government 
Rates and Other Matters Act of 2019 for the financial year ending 31st of December 
2026.  
 
The result of the vote was as follows: 
 
For: 
Cllrs. Angie Baily, Tom Barry, Brendan Cronin, Charlie Farrelly, Breandán 
Fitzgerald, Fionnán Fitzgerald, Podge Foley, Martin Grady, Tommy Griffin, Niall 
Kelleher, Aoife Kennelly, Michael Leane, Sam Locke, Dan McCarthy, Jimmy Moloney, 
Marie Moloney, Norma Moriarty, Terry O’Brien, Niall O’ Callaghan, Bobby O’Connell, 
Anne O’ Sullivan, Mikey Sheehy, Michael Foley (23) 
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
65 of 66 
Against: 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan, Paul Daly, Deirdre Ferris, Jackie Healy-Rae, Liam 
Nolan, (5) 
 
Absent: 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill, Johnny Healy-Rae, Maura Healy-Rae, John O’ 
Donoghue, Teddy O’Sullivan-Casey (5) 
 
The vote was carried. 
 
24.11.2025.06 To determine by resolution a scheme and funding for the waiver of 
rates due to Kerry County Council, in respect of relevant properties 
in accordance with the provisions of Section 15 of the Local 
Government Rates and Other Matters Act 2019, as amended, for the 
financial year ending 31st of December 2026. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Norma Moriarty and SECONDED by Cllr. Breandán 
Fitzgerald that we the Members determine by resolution a scheme and funding for the 
waiver of rates due to Kerry County Council, in respect of relevant properties in 
accordance with the provisions of Section 15 of the Local Government Rates and Other 
Matters Act 2019, as amended, for the financial year ending 31st of December 2026. 
 
The result of the vote was as follows: 
 
For: 
Cllrs. Angie Baily, Tom Barry ,Robert Brosnan, Tommy Cahill ,Brendan Cronin, 
Paul Daly, Charlie Farrelly, Deirdre Ferris ,Breandán Fitzgerald, Fionnán Fitzgerald, 
Podge Foley, Martin Grady, Tommy Griffin, Niall Kelleher, Aoife Kennelly, Michael 
Leane, Sam Locke, Dan McCarthy, Jimmy Moloney, Marie Moloney, Norma Moriarty, 
Liam Nolan, Terry O’Brien, Niall O’ Callaghan, Bobby O’Connell, Anne O’ Sullivan, 
Mikey Sheehy, Michael Foley (28) 
 
Against: 
(0) 
 
Absent: 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae, Johnny Healy-Rae, Maura Healy-Rae, John O’ 
Donoghue, Teddy O’Sullivan-Casey (5) 
 
The vote was carried. 
 
24.11.2025.07 To consider Report on the Capital Programme 2026-2028 
Cllr.  Angie Baily PROPOSED that the Chief Executive’s Report on the Capital Programme 
2026-2028 as incorporated into the Report on the Budget be noted. 
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald SECONDED this proposal, and it was unanimously agreed. 
 
24.11.2025.08 To approve additional expenditure in accordance with the details 
set out in the column titled Estimated Out-Turn 2025 in the Local 
Authority Budget, as circulated. 
 
Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell PROPOSED that we the members of Kerry County Council 
resolve that the additional expenditure for 2025 as set out in the Column titled 
“Estimated Outturn 2025” on Table F of the Local Authority Budget, as circulated, be 
and is hereby approved 
 

Budget Meeting – 24 November 2025 
66 of 66 
Cllr. Niall Kelleher SECONDED this proposal, and it was unanimously agreed. 
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley thanked the Chief Executive, Director of Finance and staff 
of the Finance Department for their work in compiling the Budget 2026. He thanked all 
Elected Members for their co-operation. 
 
The Chief Executive thanked the Elected Members and the staff across all sections for 
compiling the budget.  
 
 
The meeting concluded at 3.19 p.m. 
 
 
 
Eileen O’ Donoghue 
 
_________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator 
Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
