 
1 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
 
 
 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect putting 
them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is available on 
request. 
 
 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ AN CRUINNIÚ DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH 
I HALLA AN PHARÓISTE, BÉAL ÁTHA LONGFOIRT, AGUS AR-LÍNE/FÍORÚIL AR AN 
AOINE, 12 NOLLAG, 2025 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN THE 
PARISH HALL, BALLYLONGFORD AND ONLINE ON FRIDAY, 12 DECEMBER 2025 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
Angie Baily                            Tom Barry  
Robert Brosnan 
      
Tommy Cahill                        Brendan Cronin 
Paul Daly                            
Charlie Farrelly                      Deirdre Ferris 
Breandán Fitzgerald  
Fionnán Fitzgerald                 Michael Foley (Cathaoirleach) Podge Foley       
       Martin Grady 
       
   Tommy Griffin                     Jackie Healy-Rae  
      Johnny Healy-Rae                  Maura Healy-Rae               Niall Kelleher                                          
Aoife Kennelly                       Michael Leane                     Sam Locke 
Dan McCarthy                       Jimmy Moloney 
 
     Marie Moloney                      
Norma Moriarty                     Liam Speedy Nolan               Terry O’Brien                       
Niall O’Callaghan                  Bobby O’Connell                   John O’Donoghue                
Anne O’ Sullivan                   Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey       Mikey Sheehy 
 
ABSENT/ AS LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Mr.  F. Reidy Chief Executive              Mr. M. O’ Donoghue, Dir H.R. & Corporate Affairs                 
Mr. G. O’ Brien S.E.O. Housing           Mr. P. Neary Dir Com, Climate Act& Oper Serv     
Ms. A. McAllen Dir Finance                 Mr. F. Hartnett Dir. Cap Deliver, Climate Resil & Culture       
Ms. B. Fitzgerald Meetings Admin      Mr. J. Nolan Dir Act Land Mgt & Econ Dev                             
Mr. B. Looney Head of Dig, Smart Prog & BB  Mr. S. Scally A.O. Corporate Affairs               
Ms. C. Fitzgerald S.S.O. Corporate   Ms. O. O’Shea, A.S.O. Corporate   
Mr. A. Cantwell Press Office                                           
 
 
 
The meeting commenced at 11.00 a.m.   
 
Cllr. Michael Foley took the Chair and welcomed everyone to Ballylongford Parish Hall 
in particular the students of St. Oliver’s National School and Leanmore National 
School. 
 
 
12.12.2025.01 
Protocols/Induction 

 
2 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald, Meeting Administrator, referred Elected Members to the Protocols 
for Meetings of Kerry County Council and took a roll call.  
 
12.12.2025.02 
Cathaoirleach’s Report on CPG Meeting 
The Cathaoirleach’s report on the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 08 
December 2025, was noted by the Members. 
 
12.12.2025.03 
Confirmation of Minutes 
(a)  Minutes of the Special Planning Meeting of Kerry County Council held on 
21 July 2025. 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly, SECONDED by Cllr. Jimmy Moloney, it 
was resolved that the minutes of the Special Planning Meeting of Kerry County Council 
held on 21 July 2025 be confirmed. 
 
(b) Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Kerry County Council held on 17 
November 2025. 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Niall Kelleher SECONDED by Cllr. Aoife Kennelly, it was 
resolved that the minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Kerry County Council held on 17 
November be confirmed. 
 
Munster Football Championship 
The Elected Members congratulated An Daingean Men’s Football Team, An Gaeltacht 
Men’s Football Team and Ballymacelligott Men’s Football Team on their recent 
success in the Senior, Intermediate and Junior Munster Club Finals.  
  
12.12.2025.04 
Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
The Chief Executive’s Report to Council for the month of December 2025 which had 
been circulated was noted by the Members.  
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley congratulated Kerry County Council in the Excellence in 
Local Government Awards which they achieved two category wins in the Blas Beo 
(Irish Language and Cultural Award) and Island of Geese – New Urban Quarter – 
Tralee (Urban Revival Award). He also congratulated Declan Keogh Road Safety 
Officer who received a special recognition award for Road Safety Conference held in 
Co. Kerry.  
 
The Chief Executive referred to page 2 of the Chief Executive report under Housing 
and confirmed that the dated for public call for expressions of interest has been 
amended to 18 December 2025 with the closing date amended to 13 February 2026.  
Cllr. Robert Brosnan asked that the car park in Green Street Dingle would be reviewed 
following complaints from the public that there was nowhere to park during the “Other 
Voices” events. He said that this needs to be reviewed for future events.  
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald welcomed the announcement of the Community Support Fund 
2026 and asked that the closing date could be extended beyond the 19 January 2026. 
He said following the Christmas break the current closing date can leave applicants 
with very little time to complete and gather relevant documentation.   

 
3 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
This request was supported by Cllr. Charlie Farrelly, while other Members expressed 
difficult in drawing down the funding.  
Cllr Martin Grady asked for further information on what is the Killarney Strategic Link Project.  
A number of Elected Members welcomed the funding announced for the N22 Farranfore to 
Killarney Road bypass and thanked the council staff for their efforts. They said that the 
finished scheme should mimic the Macroom / Ballyvourney bypass.  
Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan asked that a Project Manger would be appointed to specifically 
manage the N22 Project to ensure that the timelines are adhered to and all works are 
completed efficiently. He also asked if Kerry County Council will have a  representative at 
the Professional Golfers’ Association (PGA) show which will take place in Orlando in 
January 2026.  
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly welcomed the CE report and in particular the CLÁR funding of €63,000 
for Knockngoshel. He took the opportunity to wish Mr. Frank Hartnett Director of Service all 
the best in his upcoming retirement. These comments were echoed by all Elected Members.  
Cllr. Marie Moloney welcomed the Community Support Fund but stated that many of the 
applicant groups would be better served if the funding could be allocated to operational costs 
rather than capital cost. She asked that an update would be provided to the Elected 
Members on the recent staff changes, in particular the Killarney MD.  
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly welcomed the success of the online marketing for the Kingdom of Kerry 
Greenways. She stressed the importance of the blue ways in Ballylongford and asked that 
investment is inputted into the bridge infrastructure. Currently there is no lights on the bridge 
and asked that this could be addressed.  
Cllr. Niall Kelleher asked that the timelines for the Part V houses be reviewed. Due to the 
current list of queries the applicants will not get their keys before Christmas. He 
acknowledged that the schedules are done with the best of intentions but said the timelines 
must be reviewed. 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty asked that the Council revert to the unsuccessful applicants of the CLÁR 
programme with constructive feedback on why there were not shortlisted. She asked if there 
will be a call for Turnkey housing across the county. She welcomed the opening of the South 
Kerry Greenway and asked that the Council will continue to keep mediation opened with the 
landowners. She referred to the Blue Dot and LAWPRO initiatives and noted that it will come 
before the Environment, Climate Change and Emergency Planning SPC for consideration 
and asked that it will also be presented at an upcoming Full Council meeting.  
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan asked that all future housing builds will accommodate people with 
disabilities. She congratulated all involved in the Blás Beo and Island of Geese projects and 
said it was an honour to represent Kerry County Council at the Excellenc in Local 
Government awards.  She concurred with the comments expressed by Cllr. Norma Moriarty 
in relation to the unsuccessful CLÁR applicants and said it is important that the applicants 
receive feedback.   
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald welcomed the donation from Fr. Tony Gaughan’s Archive and said 
that the County needs a full time Archivist to ensure that memorabilia of this kind is 
maintained and manged correctly. He thanked Oifig na Gaeilge and in particular the Irish 

 
4 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
Officer Mr. Aodán McGearailt for facilitating the Irish classes for both staff and Elected 
Members.  He stressed the importance to continue to promote the Irish Language.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris supported the comments expressed by Cllr. Niall Kelleher in relation to 
the Part V Housing allocation and said that some people are waiting 12 weeks since they 
were notified, to receive their keys. The whole purpose of Choice Based Lettings is to 
accelerate the housing allocation process. She asked for an update on the CFERM studies 
(cell studies) for Banna, she said there has been no progress since 2023. Kerry is a coastal 
county, and these works should be prioritised. She asked for clarity on the Affordable Housing 
process. 
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin stressed the importance to the get the N22 Farranfore to Killarney 
bypass to assessment stage. He asked that everything is done to expediate the works. In 
relation to the Affordable Housing, he said that there are many people on good incomes who 
will still be unable to afford to purchase these properties. 
 
A number of Elected Members concurred with the comments expressed by Cllr. Brendan 
Cronin in relation to the cost of Affordable Housing and said that “Affordable” needs to be the 
key word in regard to provision of housing. The Elected Members stressed the importance to 
commence a scheme urgently and to ensure that it is expanded beyond Tralee and Killarney.  
    
Cllr Tommy Cahill welcomed the opening of the South Kerry Greenway and the staff who 
worked with the landowners in particular Mr. Paul Curry and Mr. Sean O’ Sullivan. He asked 
that a pilot housing scheme would be introduced for the Iveragh Peninsula  
 
Cllr. Angie Baily welcomed the Comhairle na Nóg Annual Youth Conference and thanked 
everyone involved in organising the event.  
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy- Rae said that discussions took place at the recent Housing SPC meeting 
on the Affordable Housing and said we need to get to a stage where there is land available 
outside of Tralee and Killarney for Affordable Housing.  
 
Cllr Jimmy Moloney concurred with the comments expressed by Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald in 
relation to a full time Archivist for the county.  
 
Cllr. Podge Foley asked that everything would be done to address coastal protection works 
in Cromane.  
 
Cllr. Dan McCarthy welcomed the opening of the South Kerry Greenway, he said it will a 
huge success for the county and asked that the council continued to engage with the 
landowners.  
 
The Chief Executive welcomed the students from St. Oliver’s National School to the meeting 
and responded to the queries raised by the Elected Members. 
  

 
5 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
He confirmed that Kerry County Council has made a submission on the consultation process 
of the Government’s rural development strategy “Our Rural Future”   
 
Kerry County Council will facilitate a Housing Workshop in early 2026 to address the Elected 
Members concerns in regard to Housing across the county. 
 
He congratulated Mr. Frank Harnett on his upcoming retirement and said that he has had an 
excellent working relationship with Frank since his arrival as Chief Executive. Frank has 
always prioritised the people of Kerry in the delivery of services across the county.  
 
Mr. F. Hartnett Director of Service said it is fantastic to see the funding announced for the 
N22 and said the timelines appear to be in accordance with the schedule.  He acknowledged 
the works of Mr. Paul Curry and his team on bringing the project to this stage.  
 
The Killarney Strategic Link Road is also known as the ABC road and is situated between 
the roundabout of the existing bypass and McDonalds in Killarney.  The council is currently 
awaiting a feasibility study from the Department of Transport.  
 
In relation to the query on the CFRAM study, Cllr. Tommy Cahill agreed to move Notice of 
Motion no 22.  
 
22. Submission to the OPW on flood protection works and coastal erosion mitigation 
across the county. 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Cahill proposed. 
That Kerry County Council outlines, in full, all submissions it has made to the Office of Public 
Works (OPW) relating to proposed or required flood protection works and coastal erosion 
mitigation across the county, and that a comprehensive progress report be provided on each 
submission. 
 
The following reply issued: 
CFERMS (Coastal Flooding & Erosion Risk Management Scheme):  
 2no. CFERM studies (cell studies) have been funded by the OPW and carried out 
for both Tralee Bay and Castlemaine Harbour with each study recommending 
projects to be undertaken in each area.  
 Kerry County Council has reviewed these recommended projects based on their 
‘Time to Risk’ and is taking steps to progress these projects accordingly.    
 
CFRAMS (Catchment Flood Risk Assessment Management Scheme):  
 
Major Schemes: 
Kenmare Flood Relief Scheme  
 Option assessment, Scheme Development & Design (Stage 1) due to be 
completed in Q3 2026. The preferred option will progress through the necessary 
consent process. Estimated cost is €5.4m with completion expected in 2031. 
Tralee Flood Relief Scheme  

 
6 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
 Option assessment, Scheme Development & Design (Stage 1) due to be 
completed in Q3 2026. The preferred option will progress through the necessary 
consent process.Estimated cost is €33m with completion expected in 2032. 
Clievragh Flood Relief Scheme (advanced under the main Listowel FRS) 
 Phases 1 and 2 completed. Phase 3 scheduled for completion in December 2025 
(short-term flood defence works in the Listowel Town Park and Killocrim). 
Estimated cost is €2.15m with completion and hand-over of the project expected 
in 2026. 
Minor Schemes 
Abbeydorney  
 Outcome of a Scheme Viability Review (SVR) completed by the OPW is expected 
by end of 2025, which will determine next steps to be taken.  
Banna 
 There is no viable scheme currently outlined in the CFRAM Study. Kerry County 
Council intend to engage a consultant to develop the scheme pending approval of 
same by OPW.  
 
Mr. Frank Hartnett said in relation to the CFRAM Study study for Banna, the Council 
is in the process of appointing a consultant.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill welcomed the update and asked that the Council would submit an 
application for Kenmare if not already done and include the areas of Glosha, Cromane 
and Rossbeigh.  
 
Cllr. Deirde Ferris seconded the motion and acknowledged that Kerry County Council 
will appoint a consultant. She said that Banna is a priority area and expressed 
concerns that the dunes will fully erode  if works are not undertaken.  
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley said that flooding has caused a lot of damage to area in 
the county and in Ballylongford, more defence works are required to prevent against 
future flooding.  
 
Cllr. Michael Leane concurred with the previous comments in regard to the submission of an 
application for flood defence works. He acknowledged that works were recently undertaken 
in the car park in Ballyheigue. However, he stressed that the sand dunes are eroding and 
asked that a promenade is built in Ballyheigue to combat coastal erosion.  
 
Mr. P. Neary Director of Service replies to the following queries: 
 
The closing date for the Community Support Fund can be reviewed in January 2026.  
 
Information will be fed back to the unsuccessful applicants of the CLÁR Programme.  
 
In relation to the Ryder Cup events, Mr J. Nolan Director of Service confirmed that the Council 
has been liaising with the relevant bodies, and a programme of works will be put in place for 
2026.  

 
7 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
 
 
 
12.12.2025.05 
To consider the disposal of the following: 
 
 It was agreed to defer this agenda item until a future meeting of Kerry County Council.  
 
12.12.2025.06 Note reports from SPC Chairs: 
 
(a) Cllr.  Sam Locke, SPC Chair, on the meeting of the Environment, Climate      
Change and Emergency Planning held on 16 October 2025 was noted.  
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris referred to the SPC report and in relation to the Dog Park and asked 
that all commentary from other Local Authorities who have existing dog parks would 
be circulated.                  
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae concurred with the comments expressed by Cllr. Deirdre Ferris 
and said that the reasons given were not sufficient. He said he has visited counties 
and referred in particular to county Monaghan, where the Dog Parks are working very 
well. He acknowledged that there may be behavioural issues, but this can be policed 
by the dog owners. He asked that the request would be reconsidered.  
Mr. P. Neary Director of Services said that previous research in 2022/2023 noted that 
Dog Parks are more suited to city settings. However, all commentary can be brought 
back to the SPC.  
(b) Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae, SPC Chair on the meeting of the Roads and 
Transportation SPC held on 27 November 2025 was noted. 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin asked that the Casual Trading laws review would be completed by 
March 2026. He welcomed the draft Traffic Calming Policy Measures and suggested 
that tabletops would be located to slow traffic in relevant areas such as outside of 
schools.  
Mr. P. Neary Director of Service acknowledged the support of the SPC in relation to 
the Traffic Calming Policy. He advised that the Council apply for the funding which 
must be in accordance with National Guidelines. 
He confirmed that the Council is currently reviewing the Byelaws, however March 2026 
may be a bit ambitious to have them completed.  
Cllr. Norma Moriarty noted that the taking in charge of amenities was defeated but 
acknowledged the support of the SPC Chair in regard to the issue.   
 
12.12.2025.07 To note the opening of tenders for: 
 
(a) 
On the proposal of Cllr. Tom Barry and seconded by Aoife Kennelly it was 
agreed to get retrospective approval to open the tender for Listowel Town Park 
Playground and exercise Area Upgrade (CFT 5970841) – Closing date Friday 18 
July 2025.  
 
(b) 
On the proposal of Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan and seconded by Deirdre Ferris it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tender for Consultancy Services for the 

 
8 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
Ballyseedy Wood Amenity Trail Phase (RFT 7047356) - Closing date Friday 12 
December 2025. 
 
(c) 
On the proposal of Cllr. Liam “Speedy Nolan” and seconded by Aoife Kennelly 
it was agreed to approve the opening of tender for Engineering Consultant Led 
Design Team Services for Development of Ballybunion Beach Facility (RFT 
7026447) – Closing date: Tuesday 23 December 2025. 
 
(d) 
On the proposal of Cllr. Tommy Cahill and seconded by Marie Moloney it was 
agreed to approve the opening of tender for Kenmare Relief Road Phase 2 (RDT 
7077794) Closing Date Monday 12 January 2026. 
 
(e) 
On the proposal of Cllr. Tommy Cahill and seconded by Norma Moriarty it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tender for Employer's Representative 
Engineering and Project Management Consultancy Services for the Connection of 
the Kells GWS to the Mountain Stage PWS in County Kerry and Taking in Charge 
by Uisce Eireann (RFT 136880) - Closing Date: Friday 06 February 2026. 
 
12.12.2025.08 Notices of Motion 
 
Emergency Notice of Motion  
Cllr. Sam Locke submitted the following Emergency Notice of Motion. 
 
That Kerry County Council would write to the Minister for Department of Climate, 
Energy and the Environment to allow the continuation of angling as it is, as the new 
proposals will prevent anglers of a certain age and/or disability to continue their 
membership with the clubs and will deter incoming tourism anglers from fishing the 
rivers and lakes.  
 
Mr. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
 
Cllr. Sam Locke said the extension of the worm fishing will have a significant impact 
on the Angling industry and will impact anyone with a disability. In addition, he said 
the seasonal limit for salmon fishing will be reduced from 10 to 3 per angler for the 
period between June 1st and August 31st. He said that it will impact on the number 
of angling licenses purchased and angling tourism in this county.  
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty seconded this motion and said that the proposed guidelines is 
to conserve fish stock but believed that the damage has been done by offshore 
fishing and not by anglers in rivers.  
 
The Executive and Elected Members welcomed the pupils of Leanmore National 
School to the Meeting who joined the meeting.  
 
 
1. Request for a masterplan for Transport Hub in Farranfore  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae proposed. 
That Kerry County Council write to Irish Rail and the National Transport Authority 
requesting that a comprehensive Masterplan be developed for a new integrated 
Transport Hub in Farranfore. This Masterplan should examine the relocation of 

 
9 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
Farranfore Train Station further along the existing rail line towards Kerry Airport, with 
a view to providing a direct pedestrian link to the terminal and the development of an 
adjoining bus interchange. The aim is to create a pilot project demonstrating how rail, 
air, and road transport can be fully integrated in a rural regional setting, enhancing 
accessibility, increasing public transport connectivity, and strengthening Kerry’s 
strategic transport infrastructure. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae said the masterplan should be in conjunction with realigning 
the train tracks and bring it adjacent to Kerry Airport. He said that Farranfore Airport is 
very unique and asked that the Government would make it a pilot programme. The 
Airport should be a walking distance to the train station; it will facilitate everyone and 
in addition will remove the bus stop from the side of the road.   
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill seconded this motion and suggested that a shuttle bus would be 
provided in the interim. 
 
2. letter to Bus Éireann re timelines for Bus Service.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jimmy Moloney proposed. 
That Kerry County Council contact Bus Éireann about the constant lateness of buses 
from Cork and Limerick to Listowel. Buses are not running on time which are causing 
passengers to miss connections in Tralee. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
 
Cllr. Jimmy Moloney said that this is an ongoing issue, it appears that the bus times 
are too tight resulting in many people missing their bus and connecting bus. Many 
passengers rely on the bus service for hospital appointments. He asked that the 
schedule is reviewed.  
 
Cllr. Michael Leane seconded this motion. 
 
3. Request to purchase Property Marking Machines 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tom Barry proposed.  
That Kerry County Council will purchase property marking machines to aid an Gardai 
Sìochana in reducing property crime in Kerry. We are one of the few authorities yet to 
do so. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council Community Department have recently begun discussions with 
Muintir na Tire, who are currently operating a pilot, for the use of property marking 
machines within communities.  Feedback from this process will inform Kerry County 
Council’s future actions in this area in line with previous commitments. 
 
Cllr. Tom Barry said the initiative helps with crime prevention and criminal activity. He 
advised that there is a funding scheme where the relevant company will provide 
training to An Garda Siochana.  
 

 
10 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
Cllr. Angie Baily seconded this motion and said that this is a very simple system to 
introduce that works effectively.    
 
Cllr. Niall Kelleher said that a previous commitment was made through the Joint 
Policing Committee (JPC) and should be adhered to. 
 
The Chief Executive referred to the reply and said that discussions have commenced 
which will be considered in line with previous commitments.  
 
4.Letter to the Min for Health re Medical Card under 25 years 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Angie Baily Proposed. 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Health requesting immediate 
changes to the current medical card system, which currently requires individuals under 
25 years of age to be assessed based on their parent’s income. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Angie Baily said at 17, people can even enlist in the Defence Forces and yet, 
when it comes to accessing healthcare, the state insists that these very same young 
people, are still deemed to be financially dependent on their parents until the age of 
25. This simply does not reflect the reality of modern life. If a young adult can make 
every major legal, financial, and social decision for themselves, then they must be 
recognised as independent in the healthcare system as well. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded this motion.  
   
5. To investigate the sluice valves in North Kerry. 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Liam “Speedy” Nolan Proposed. 
To request Kerry County Council to work with the OPW to find a solution for the 
ongoing issue in relation to sluice valves that are continuously opened and are not 
operational.  They should open and close automatically. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council will examine these sluice valves in the north of the county to 
determine what the issues are and will develop a plan for any necessary 
repairs/refurbishments. 
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley seconded this motion. 
 
6.To call on the Government to plan and prepare for Irish unity . 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Robert Brosnan Proposed. 
Ag aithint go sainaithníonn Bunreacht na hÉireann aontú na hÉireann mar aidhm 
náisiúnta, go n-iarrann Comhairle Contae Chiarraí ar an Rialtas pleanáil agus ullmhú 
d'aontacht na hÉireann trí na gníomhartha seo a leanas: Tionól nó Tionóil Saoránach 
ionadaíoch Uile-Éireann a bhunú, chun díospóireacht eolasach a éascú, agus 
Comhchoiste Oireachtais um Aontacht na hÉireann a bhunú chun pleanáil chúramach 
a chumasú. Plean i dtreo Aontacht na hÉireann a chur le chéile agus a fhoilsiú i 
gcomhar leis an tsochaí shibhialta agus le príomhpháirtithe leasmhara. 
 
Recognising that the reunification of Ireland is an objective of Bunreacht na hÉireann, 

 
11 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
that Kerry County Council calls on the Government to plan and prepare for Irish unity 
through the following actions: Establish an All-Island Representative Citizen’s 
Assembly or Assemblies, to allow for informed debate, and a joint Oireachtas 
Committee on Irish Unity to enable careful planning.  Produce and publish a plan 
towards Irish Unity in conjunction with civic society and key stakeholders. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan said that he was proud to call himself a United Irelander and that  
the Sinn Fein party, have always had the ideal as the foundation stone and believed 
that this is something the people would  support in Kerry.   
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris supported this motion and said it outlines what a United Ireland 
would establish.  
 
7.Appoint a Housing Officer to deal solely with Housing Transfers. 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Paul Daly Proposed. 
That Kerry County Council will appoint a Housing Officer to deal with transfers so that 
applicants do not go to the bottom of a list when they need to downsize or upsize. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The process for dealing with Housing Transfer Applications is set out in Kerry County 
Council’s Social Housing Allocation Scheme, adopted in November 2021.  
 
Priority may be given to a household in receipt of social housing support in a property 
that is not owned by the Council and the house is no longer available to them through 
no fault/act of their own, i.e., rental accommodation availability arrangements, 
availability agreements, long term leasing initiatives etc.  
 
All efforts are made to expedite transfer requests as efficiently as possible in the 
context of suitable available stock and competing demands from applicants. Transfer 
applications are assessed by our housing investigation officers, who deal effectively 
with such requests for downsizing.  
 
The Housing SPC will be looking at the development of a rightsizing policy for local 
authority properties as part of its work programme for 2026. 
 
This approach will be kept under review subject to demand for this particular service 
and available resources. 
 
Cllr. Paul Daly said that this has been brought to his attention by a number of 
applicants who have experienced this issue. He asked that dedicated personnel is 
appointed to deal solely with transfer requests and try to alleviate the current 
situation.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded this motion and said the current situation is very 
frustrating for Elected Members and tenants who want to downsize. She said some 
people have been living in hostels for a number of years.  
 

 
12 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
8.Call on Government to introduce immersive simulator experience for scenic 
locations. 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Griffin Proposed. 
That Kerry County Council liaise with Fáilte Ireland, the Department of Tourism, and 
all relevant stakeholders to investigate the feasibility of developing a state-of-the-art 
immersive simulator experience, enabling visitors to feel as though they are flying 
through and experiencing Kerry’s most iconic scenic locations and visitor attractions 
similar to ultra-modern versions available in other parts of the world. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council acknowledges the proposal and recognises the potential value 
of exploring innovative ways to enhance the visitor experience in the county. The 
Council is open to engaging with Fáilte Ireland, the Department of Tourism, and 
relevant stakeholders to consider the concept further and to gain a better 
understanding of what such a project might involve.  
 
Kerry County Council’s Economic Development and Tourism Unit has engaged with a 
specialist company to create a virtual tour as part of the UNESCO Transatlantic Cable 
Ensemble Nomination Bid for Valentia Island. A virtual tour was created which 
captures content mapping out the entire island virtually including the Transatlantic 
Cable station and Valentia Island Lighthouse. 
 
The Unit is also progressing a project to capture content to develop a virtual tour of 
the Kingdom of Kerry Greenways from the Limerick Border to Listowel and separately 
Tralee to Fenit. 
  
As assets are added and captured from various public authorities (NPWS / OPW) the 
option to develop and market a virtual Kerry County wide tour will be explored as part 
of the Discover Kerry Platform where potential visitors could select to view various 
virtual tours to help inform their itinerary planning or provide insights to people unable 
to travel.  
 
There are also a number of private commercial entities currently developing and 
exploring virtual reality content / tours. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill said that such an experience can showcase the many locations 
across the county. He commended that some aspects of the reply are very positive 
and in particular the Valentia Island Lighthouse and Transatlantic Cable station.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald seconded this motion.  
 
9.Reuest to meet with UE re Developer Provided Infrastructure (DPI) 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Marie Moloney proposed  
That Kerry County Council would request a representative with Uisce Éireann to meet 
with members to discuss the problems that exists where there is Developer Provided 
Infrastructure (DPI) in estates which is prohibiting connection to sewerage schemes 
and taking in charge of estates. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 

 
13 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
Cllr. Marie Moloney said that almost all Elected Members have experienced this 
problem. For many residents they have to purchase land so they can connect to the 
infrastructure. She referred to Mountain View Estate in Kilcummin where the sewerage 
scheme is in front of the estate but has  no connection to any of the houses in the 
estate.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded the motion and said the lack of communication with Uisce 
Éireann is very frustrating, we have no representative from UE to speak to on behalf 
of the constituents.  
 
12. Request to review the Development Contribution Scheme  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Griffin proposed 
That Kerry County Council will review the Development Contribution Scheme 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council will review the Development Contribution Scheme in Q1 2026. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin welcomed the response and said he tabled the motion to address 
a loophole in the in the scheme and as a result there can be very little investment in 
the estates.  
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty seconded this motion.  
 
13. Provide support details on Grant Schemes 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Norma Moriarty proposed 
That Kerry County Council compiles a series of precise webinars/ explanatory videos 
on the various housing support grants that it administers e.g. Derelict/Vacant, Repair 
and Lease, etc. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has contacted the Vacant Homes Unit in the Department of 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage to explore the potential for a nationally 
coordinated approach to communicating the range of housing support schemes, 
including those currently in place and any additional measures that may be introduced 
under the new Housing Plan - Delivering Homes, Building Communities 2025–2030. 
In addition, Kerry County Council will deliver a tailored online and in-person 
information sessions in Kerry. 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty welcomed the response.  
 
Cllr. Jimmy Moloney seconded this motion.  
 
14. Letter to UE retake over of wastewater infrastructure 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Brendan Cronin proposed 
To ask Uisce Éireann to clarify what progress has been made on the Government's 
recently announced decision that Uisce Éireann must facilitate and take over newly 
constructed wastewater infrastructure in small developments being built in rural areas 
and small villages. When does UE expect this decision to be implemented as the 
construction of small housing estates of 5 to 10 houses has stopped completely in 
Kerry for the last number of years. 

 
14 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin said he was referring to comments made by An Taoiseach 
Micheál Martin and asked when does Uisce Éireann expect this initiative to be 
implemented. He said there is a housing crisis in the county and the  current structure 
is impeding on planning applications.  
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley seconded this motion.  
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin moved Notice of Motion no 26. 
 
26. Update from UE re Birchhill and Old Killarney Village 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Brendan Cronin proposed 
To ask Uisce Éireann to clarify when will the remedial sewerage works begin in 
Birchhill and the old Killarney Village, Aghadoe. Substantial money has been allocated 
for some time but no works have been done and there is an urgent need to progress 
this work and connect these estates to the Killarney Sewerage Scheme. 
 
The following reply issued: 
This is a matter for consideration by the Members. 
  
However, Kerry County Council are exploring options with the Department and Uisce 
Eireann regarding the full funding plan for this project. 
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin said that there are significant problems with sewerage schemes 
nationally.  He explained that funding was allocated for the works in 2024, but it 
appears that the works are been held up by a request by UE for the Local Authority to 
make a contribution towards the works. He acknowledged that negotiations have 
commenced between the council and UE and asked that that talks be expedited so 
the works can commence.  
 
Cllr. Martin O’ Grady seconded this motion.  
 
15. Review National Homeless Figures  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Deirdre Ferris proposed 
That Kerry County Council supports a call for the Department of Housing to include 
families that have fled the family home/tenancy because of domestic violence, who 
are staying in refuges and with family and friends due to lack of capacity in refuges, in 
the national homeless figures. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris said that people who are staying with friends and families due to 
domestic violence are not included in homeless figures. She asked that this anomaly 
would be addressed by the Department of Housing.  
 
Cllr. Angie Baily seconded this motion and said the inclusion of such families will 
allow them to be included in homeless figures and may help to alleviate hem out of 
their current situation.  

 
15 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
  
16. Call on Min for Transport and TII to allocate funding for the N86 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald proposed  
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister of State for Transport and the TII to 
allocate funding for the completion of the N86 Tralee Dingle Road scheme as it is a 
road project that is ready to proceed immediately and sections like Lios Póil to Dingle, 
Camp to Derrymore are deteriorating daily. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald said that the Judge in his ruling on the case stated that the 
project needed to be done not for potential tourists in future but for all those that are 
travelling and using the roads now. The N86 Tralee–Dingle road is the lifeline. 
Sections of it are crumbling. From Lios Póil to Dingle, from Camp to Derrymore, the 
road is deteriorating daily. Every bend, every pothole, every collapse is a danger. He 
said that this is an emergency and funding is required to do urgent repairs to these 
sections immediately. The €1.25 million allocated this year is very welcome but it does 
not solve the problem between Lios Póil and Dingle, or Camp and Derrymore. TII 
needs to acknowledge this and get the work completed as soon as possible. Dingle is 
one of Ireland’s six Fisheries Harbour Centres, a hub of our seafood industry. It is the 
gateway to the Corca Dhuibhne Gaeltacht, where our language and culture thrive. And 
now, it stands at the heart of Ireland’s first National Marine Park, Páirc Náisiúnta na 
Mara, Ciarraí.  
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan seconded this motion and said it is critical that the works are 
completed.    
 
17. Letter to Min for Road Safety re High Vis garment. 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Charlie Farrelly proposed 
That Kerry County Council to write to the Minister responsible for Road Safety 
requesting that the Government make it mandatory for pedestrians and cyclists to 
wear a high viz garment when using the public road between the hours of darkness 
and sunlight. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly said there has been a number of fatalities on the road in 2025 of 
which 40 were pedestrians. The wearing of high vis garments should be compulsory.  
 
Cllr. Marie Moloney seconded the notice of motion but asked that the notice of motion 
would be amended to make it mandatory to wear high vis garment during the hours of 
daylight and darkness. 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly agreed to amend the notice of Motion as follows.  
 
That Kerry County Council to write to the Minister responsible for Road Safety 
requesting that the Government make it mandatory for pedestrians and cyclists to 
wear a high viz garment when using the public road during the hours of daylight and 
darkness.  
 

 
16 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
18.Update on Fenit Wast Water Infrastructure Project   
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Mikey Sheehy proposed 
That Kerry County Council writes to the Minister for Housing and Local Government 
and to Uisce Éireann to request an urgent update on the upgrade of the Fenit 
Wastewater Infrastructure project. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Mikey Sheehy said the delay in the upgrade of the wastewater plant is delaying 
the construction of housing in Fenit Village. He asked that an update be provided as 
soon as possible. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded this motion and said that a proposal to construct 40 
houses is being delayed until the wastewater scheme is updated. The residents and 
businesses in Feint have no capacity.  
 
19. update on the Bus Enhancement fund   
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae proposed 
In 2024 and 2025 Kerry County Council was allocated €500,000 each year under the 
Bus Stop Enhancement Fund. How much of this funding has been drawn down, what 
locations have benefitted and please explain the reason for the delays in progressing 
these works. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has used €266,057 to date under the Bus Stop Enhancement 
Programme. The following works have been completed. 
 
1. Rathmore Eastbound with shelter 
2. Mission Road Killarney with larger urban Bus stop and shelter  
3. Fossa westbound bus stop and shelter and eastbound bus stop  
4. Rock Road Killarney, inbound bus stop and outbound bus stop and shelter. 
 
Bus stop to commence in Q1 2026 as follows: 
5. Milltown -Killarney Road. Bus stop on eastbound and westbound 
6. Beaufort Village Bus stop 
7. Chapeltown Bus Stop 
  
Bus stops at Design Stage which require TII approval and will be subject to section 38 
process. A number of pedestrian crossings will be required at these locations. 
  
8. Lispole - N86 – Eastbound and West bound  
9. Inch - R561- Eastbound and West bound  
10. Castlemaine N70 – Northbound and Southbound  
11. Milltown N70 - Northbound and Southbound  
12. Killorglin N70 (Astellas)- Eastbound and West bound 
13. (Glenbeigh N70 Eastbound and West bound 
14. Waterville - Northbound and Southbound  
15. Caherdaniel N70 (Near National school) – Northbound and Southbound   
16. Sneem (Sportsfield Road) - 1 Bus stop  
 

 
17 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
A number of pedestrian crossings will be required at these locations which are being 
incorporated into the designs. Following receipt of TII approval, these bus stop will 
progress through section 38 process and onto construction in Q3 2026.  
 
The following Bus stops will progress to design stage in Q2 2026 are:  
  
17. Kilgarvan – Northbound and Southbound  
18. Kenmare – one stop upgrade 
19. Baile an Fheirtéaraigh – Eastbound and West bound  
20. Ceann Trá – Eastbound and West bound 
21. Dún Chaoin – Eastbound  
22. Camp Junction – Eastbound and West bound  
23. Brandon – one stop 
24. Knightstown – One stop  
25. Portmagee – One stop  
26. Killorglin Square - existing stop to be upgraded for extra bus room  
 
Kerry County Council are also currently preparing tender documents to appoint a 
consultant in Q1 of 2026 to advance the Bus Enhancement Programme. This project 
will progress bus stop locations through the following stages, preliminary design, 
statutory process, detail design and contract documents with the view on commencing 
construction in Q4 of 2026. Some of these bus stops given their location on National 
Roads will require input from the TII. Bus Stops in the following Towns and Villages 
under consideration are,  
 
27. Abbeydourney 
28. Ballylongford   
29. Blennerville 
30. Castleisland  
31. Listowel 
32. Lixnaw  
33. Tarbert   
34. Tralee MTU North 
35. Tralee MTU South 
 
Once the above locations are under construction the Local Authority will advance 
additional bus stop locations.  
Kerry County Council has completed the design for Ballybunion Bus Stop and expect 
to commence the Section 38 process in early in 2026, to complete construction before 
summer season of 2026. 
Kerry County Council in conjunction with NTA are currently rolling out a pole and 
signage programme at the following 16 locations. The sockets are in ground, and the 
appointed contractor is awaiting delivery of the poles and signage. 
 
No. 
Bus Stop 
ID
SCN. Ref 
MD 
Socket 
Pole & 
Signage
1 
637291 
Cahersiveen 
Kenmare 
Installed 
Awaiting 
Delivery

 
18 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
2 
635631 
Daingean Uí Chúis 
CI, CD 
Installed 
Awaiting 
Delivery
3 
635921 
Daingean Uí Chúis 
CI, CD 
Installed 
Awaiting 
Delivery
4 
335761 
Farranfore 
CI, CD 
Installed 
Awaiting 
Delivery
5 
357701 
Farranfore 
CI, CD 
Installed 
Awaiting 
Delivery
6 
350001 
Kerry Airport 
CI, CD 
Installed 
Awaiting 
Delivery
7 
350811 
Fossa 
Killarney 
Installed 
Awaiting 
Delivery
8 
350821 
Fossa  
Killarney 
Installed 
Awaiting 
Delivery
9 
255611 
Kenmare 
Kenmare 
Installed 
Awaiting 
Delivery
10 
335751 
Killarney Rock 
Road
Killarney 
Installed 
Awaiting 
Delivery
11 
335741 
Killarney Rock 
Road
Killarney 
Installed 
Awaiting 
Delivery
12 
335541 
Listowel Arms 
Listowel 
Installed 
Awaiting 
Delivery
13 
635081 
Tralee Hospital 
Tralee 
Installed 
Awaiting 
Delivery
14 
11947 
Tralee Princes 
Street
Tralee 
Installed 
Awaiting 
Delivery
15 
  
Fossa Cross 
Killarney 
Installed 
Awaiting 
Delivery
16 
134691 
Rathmore Church 
Killarney 
Installed 
Awaiting 
Delivery
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae queried why only a portion of the funding has been spent in two 
years and said the Castleisland Corca Dhuibhne MD are awaiting the provision of two 
bus stops. 
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley seconded this motion and said he has raised this issue 
on numerous occasions within the Listowel MD. 
 
Mr. F. Hartnett Director of Service said the NRA introduced the scheme in 2024 and it 
will take time to roll out the programme in full. The works include a footpath 
programme, Section 83 process and the provision of a pedestrian crossing.  
 
Cllr. Jackie- Healy said he appreciated the comments expressed but said that 
unfortunately the public don’t see it like this and see it as a delay on Kerry County 
Council’s part. 
 
20. Introduce measures to address misuse of ambulance service 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Angie Baily proposed  

 
19 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Health, Minister for Justice, the 
HSE, and the National Ambulance Service (NAS) calling for the development and 
implementation of stronger measures to address the misuse of emergency ambulance 
resources. Specifically,  and in line with recent HIQA recommendations, this should 
include the establishment of a dedicated national telephone service for acute, non-
urgent medical needs as a means of redirecting non-emergency cases away from 
frontline ambulance crews. In addition, I request that the Minister for Justice, in 
conjunction with the NAS, introduce national guidelines and legislation enabling the 
sanctioning of deliberate or negligent misuse of ambulance services, while ensuring 
the protection of individuals who call in good faith. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Angie Baily said this motion is in light of the misuse and abuse of ambulance 
resources, whether through hoax calls, nuisance calls, or the growing number of non-
urgent medical requests, has a very real and very serious impact on people in genuine 
need. Nationally, the HSE and the National Ambulance Service have said that every 
hoax or inappropriate call can take an ambulance out of circulation for up to forty 
minutes, delaying response times and putting lives at risk. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded this motion.  
 
21.Call on the Government to commence a comprehensive review in regard to  
reserved / executive functions amongst Elected Members.   
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Robert Brosnan proposed  
Go scríobhfaidh Comhairle Contae Chiarraí chuig an Aire agus chuig an Roinn Rialtais 
Áitiúil ag iarraidh orthu athbhreithniú cuimsitheach a dhéanamh gan mhoill maidir le 
feidhm/cinntí forchoimeádta chomhaltaí ball tofa na comhairle agus  
feidhm/cinnteoireacht na comhairle feidhmiúcháin. 
 
 
That Kerry County Council writes to the Minister and the Department of Local 
Government requesting that a comprehensive review be undertaken without delay, 
regarding elected council members reserved function/ decisions and executive council 
function/ decision making. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Ar an gceathrú lá de Mheitheamh 2025 d'aontaigh an Rialtas bunú Tascfhórsa um 
Dhaonlathas Áitiúil, lena gcuirfear bailchríoch ar chlár chun an rialtas áitiúil in Éirinn a 
athchóiriú agus a neartú. Eagrófar obair an Tascfhórsa i gceithre phríomhcholún, sin 
iad 
Struchtúr, 
Airgeadas, 
Feidhmeanna 
agus 
Rialachas/Cuntasacht, 
agus 
breithneofar cumhachtaí na gComhairleoirí faoi gach colún. Breithneoidh an 
Tascfhórsa prionsabal na coimhdeachta agus scrúdóidh sé an bhféadfaí tuilleadh 
cumhachtaí cinnteoireachta a thiomnú do Chomhairleoirí. Scrúdóidh an Tascfhórsa 
freisin conas creat agus cumhachtaí na gCeantar Bardasach agus na gCoistí Ceantair 
a neartú. 
 
Is ábhar é seo atá le breithniú ag na Comhaltaí. 
 
On 4 June 2025, the Government approved the establishment of a Local Democracy 

 
20 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
Taskforce, which will finalise a programme for the reform and strengthening of local 
government in Ireland. The Taskforce’s work will be organised into four key pillars of 
Structure, Finance, Functions and Governance/ Accountability, with Councillors’ 
powers being considered under each pillar. The Taskforce will consider the principle 
of subsidiarity and examine the possibility of devolving more decision-making powers 
to Councillors. The Taskforce will also examine how to strengthen the framework and 
powers of Municipal Districts and Area Committees. 
 
This is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan said that we as councillors get a mandate from the constituents 
to make changes within the Local authority and said that after all it is public money. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded this motion.  
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae moved Notice of Motion no 10 and 23 on behalf of Cllr. 
Johnny Healy-Rae 
  
10. Update on Housing builds for 2026.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae proposed  
That Kerry County Council would outline how many houses it hopes to build in 2026 
and where these will be.  
 
The following reply issued: 
In 2026, Kerry County Council will support the delivery of 332 homes.  This is made 
up of 166 units to be delivered by Kerry County Council and a further 166 to be 
delivered through the AHB sector.  This is broken down as follows: 
 
Kerry County Council: 
 
Kerry County Council aims to complete 166 units in 2026, 80 units through the direct 
build programme and a further 86 units through Turnkey and Part V delivery in 2026. 
Details as follows: 
  
The direct build projected completions include: 
•             19 units in Garryruth, Tralee 
•             27 units in Matt Talbot Rd, Tralee 
•             34 units in Ballybeg, Dingle 
  
The Turnkey projected completions include: 
•             46 units Ballyoughtragh, Milltown 
•             6 units The Sands, Ballybunion 
•             12 units Farrantorreen, Killorglin 
•             10 units Hunters Lodge, Tralee 
  
The Part V projected completions include: 
•             2 units Ballyoughtragh, Milltown 
•             1 unit The Sands, Ballybunion 
•             6 units Meadow Park, Tralee  
•             1 unit Meadow Park Tralee, 

 
21 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
•             2 units Heather Grove, Barraduff 
 
While these Turnkey and Part V acquisitions are confirmed for 2026, it is anticipated 
that further acquisitions will emerge through both the Part V and Turnkey 
Expressions of Interest processes during 2026. In this regard, the Council anticipates 
that a further call for Expressions of Interest for Turnkey acquisitions will be 
published by year end. 
 
AHB Sector:  
The AHB sector aims to complete a further 166 units in 2026 in the following 
locations, bringing the total delivery on social housing units to 332 units. 
30 units, Banshagh, Killorglin 
 
• 132 units, Cronin’s Wood, Killarney  
• 4 units, Killorglin  
  
Workshop: 
The Government has recently published “Delivering Homes, Building Communities 
2025-2030 – An Action Plan on Housing Supply and Targeting Homelessness”. This 
Plan will require Local Authorities to develop new Housing Delivery Plans in 2026. A 
workshop will be organised for members on the new Housing Action Plan and on the 
process for developing a new Housing Delivery Plan in quarter one 2026. 
 
23. Letter to ComReg re phone coverage.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae proposed  
That Kerry County Council would contact the Communications Regulator (ComReg) 
with regard to the decreasing phone coverage in our county 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
The motion was seconded by Cllr. Jimmy Moloney.  
  
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae moved Notice of Motion no 11 and 24 on behalf of Cllr. 
Maura Healy-Rae  
 
11. KCC to access funding for retrofitting of social housing stock 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae proposed  
To ask Kerry County Council to outline the parameters in accessing funding from the 
Department of Housing in relation to retrofitting and general maintenance. Also, can 
Kerry County Council provide details of the level of funding drawn down for both 
retrofitting and general maintenance for the past 5 year 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council accesses funding from the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage (DHLGH) for retrofitting of its social housing stock through 
the Energy Efficiency Retrofit Programme.  
 
Parameters: 

 
22 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
 The objective of the EERP programme is to upgrade the energy efficiency of 
social housing units, targeting a Building Energy Rating (BER) of at least 
B2/Cost Optimal.  
 The DHLGH allocates a specific budget to each local authority annually. Kerry 
County Council was allocated over €2.8 million in 2025 to retrofit 80 units.   
 The programme focuses on deep retrofitting, including fabric upgrades such 
as external wall insulation, window and door replacement and installation of 
energy efficient heat pumps.   
 Funding is allocated annually based on a number of factors such as stock 
number, LA targets, and proven ability to complete projects and draw down 
funds. Where a local authority can retrofit more homes than their initial target, 
the Department will consider additional funding requests. 
 
 
EERP Department Drawdowns 2021 – 2025 
Kerry County Council  
Year 
Value of Drawdown 
2021
€48,531
2022
€99,999
2023
€374,000
2024
€921,324
2025*
€3,027,663*
*(Claim submitted to the  Dept on the 21st of Nov 2025, recoupment amount TBC) 
 
Kerry County Council funds general maintenance from the Revenue Budget. Although 
the Department does not fund general maintenance costs, it does provide some 
funding for voids, planned maintenance works, and stock condition surveys. 
 
24. Letter to the Min for Health re improving services to deal with eating 
disorders 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae proposed  
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister of Health regarding the significant and 
worrying increase of young people presenting with eating orders to request that 
services be improved to address this. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
25.Update on request to erect a commemorative statue to honour the role 
women played in the revolutionary period.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Norma Moriarty proposed  
Following from the joint motion of all female Kerry County Council members on 
erecting a commemorative statue to honour the role women played in the revolutionary 
period, can we please have a detailed update on progress and a potential date for 
installation. 
 
The following reply issued:  
The Artist delivering the Kerry Women’s Revolutionary Period Commemorative 
Sculpture, has completed the sculpting and the artwork is now going to the foundry for 

 
23 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
casting in bronze. Fabrication is to commence in Q1 2026. Casting the artwork takes 
approximately two months. Installation is due in Q2 2026. 
 
Cllr. Jimmy Moloney seconded this motion. 
 
27. Call on UE to make provide investment in wastewater infrastructure 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Breandan Fitzgerald proposed  
That Kerry County Council call on Uisce Éireann to make it a priority for investment 
in water and wastewater infrastructure in our Corca Dhuibhne Gaeltacht, Uíbh 
Ráthaigh Gaeltacht and all our Rural Areas and to outline its plans to do so. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Breandan Fitzgerald said that Water and wastewater services are the foundation 
of every community. Yet across our Corca Dhuibhne Gaeltacht, our Uíbh Ráthaigh 
Gaeltacht, and rural Kerry, this vital infrastructure is not there. he said these need clear 
plans, real investment, and urgent action. This is about homes, jobs, and the future of 
our communities. Protect our Gaeltachts and our rural communities. he called on all 
Councillors to support his call on Uisce Éireann to make the  Gaeltachts and rural 
areas a priority. 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan seconded this motion.  
 
28. letter to Iarnród Éireann to introduce a See It, Say Something” scheme. 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Mikey Sheehy proposed  
That Kerry County Council write to Iarnród Éireann requesting that they examine the 
feasibility of introducing a discreet passenger-alert system, similar to the “See It, Say 
Something” scheme used in other jurisdictions. Such a system would allow 
passengers to confidentially report concerns — including instances of anti-social 
behaviour — via text message or other non-intrusive means, without feeling 
threatened or intimidated. The aim is to enhance passenger safety, support rail staff, 
and improve the overall travel experience on the rail network serving Kerry 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Mikey Sheehy asked that following a number of incidents that had been brought 
to his attention, he called on Iarnród Éireann to introduce a text system where people 
can discreetly report an incident.  
 
Cllr Jimmy Moloney seconded this motion.  
 
12.12.2025.09 Correspondence – Conference and Seminars 
(a) On the proposal of Cllr. Angie Baily and seconded by Niall O’ Callaghan it was 
agreed to approve the Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Michael Foley at the All-Ireland Community 
& Council Awards (LAMA) taking place on 28 February 2026 in the Dublin Royal 
Convention Centre. 
 
(b) On the proposal of Cllr. Angie Baily and seconded by Charlie Farrelly it was agreed 
to approve the attendance of Cllr. Bobby O’Connell and Cllr. Niall Kelleher on the 
“Audit and Risk Committees: Roles and Responsibilities for New and Existing 

 
24 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
Members” to be held in the Grand Canal Hotel, Dublin on Thursday 11 December 
2025. 
 
(c) On the proposal of Cllr. Liam “Speedy” Nolan and seconded by Charlie Farrelly it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Councillors to “The Finance Act 2025” 
Conference to be held in Co. Louth between Friday 09 and Sunday 11 January 2026. 
 
(d) On the proposal of Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan and seconded by Michael Foley it was 
agreed to approve the attendance of all Elected Members to the LAMA Spring 
Seminar: to be held in Galway between Wednesday 28th and Thursday 29th January 
2026. 
 
 
12.12.2025.10 Correspondence General 
 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were circulated: 
List of correspondence circulated at the December 2025 
Meeting of Kerry County Council 
  
Date 
From 
Description 
 1. 
14/11/2025 
Minister for 
higher 
Education 
Response to a request from the Members in relation 
to a request to review the SUSI Grant. 
 2. 
14/11/2025 
Minister for 
Finance 
Response to a request from the Members in relation 
to review the basic income for the Arts Grant.
3. 
14/11/2025 
Minister for 
Health  
Response to a request from Members requesting a 
Walk in Clinic in Listowel.  
4. 
17/11/2025 
Department of 
Health 
Response to a request from the Members in relation 
to an update on CAMHS Lookback view. 
5. 
18/11/2025 
HSE  
Response to a request from the Members in relation 
to an update on bed facility been offered to patients 
outside of the county.
6. 
18/11/2025 
Min For 
Transport 
Response to a request from the Members in relation 
to increasing Bus capacity  
7. 
27/11/2025 
OPW  
Response to a request from the Members to secure 
landing licences in Skellig Michael  
8. 
27/11/2025 
OPW 
Response to a request to seek earlier opening 
times for Skellig Michael for the 2026 season.   
9. 
04/12/2025 
Min For 
Justice 
Response to a request regarding rollout of a CCTV 
system in Killarney Town and Garda resources in 
Listowel.  
10. 
26/11/2025 
Donegal 
County 
Council 
Elected Members request the Executive to run a 
public campaign requesting homeowners to have 
their electrical systems checked. 

 
25 
Dec Ordinary Meeting – 12 December 25 
11. 
27/11/2025 
Limerick City 
& County 
Council 
Elected Members request that letter to Min for 
Culture Communication and Sport and Min for 
Justice to hold a formal 150th commemoration for 
the Catalpa rescue. 
 
 
 
12.12.2025.11 Minutes arising from the minutes as confirmed 
 
12.12.2025.12 Any Other Business 
 
Ardfert Village 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris asked for an update could be provided by Uisce Éireann on the 
pipe replacement works for Ardfert village.  
 
The Cathaoirleach Michael Foley thanked everyone for attending the meeting and 
wished everyone a Happy Christmas.  
 
The meeting concluded at 2.15 p.m. 
 
Bridget Fitzgerald 
 
_________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator 
Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
