Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
1 of 47 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect 
putting them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is 
available on request. 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ  NA  CRUINNITHE  MHIOSIÚIL  DE  COMHAIRLE  CONTAE 
CHIARRAÍ  A  THIONÓLADH  I  SEOMRA  NA  COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS  AN  
CHONTAE, TRÁ  LÍ, AR  AN  LUAN , 20 FEABHRA, 2017 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL 
HELD IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE ON 
MONDAY, 20TH FEBRUARY 2017 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
R. Beasley 
P Connor-Scarteen          B. Cronin 
 
       
           
J.J. Culloty 
P. Daly 
T. Ferris                                         
J. Finucane                       S Fitzgerald 
N. Foley 
 
                           
M. Gleeson 
D. Grady 
J. Healy-Rae 
                      
M. Healy-Rae 
N. Kelleher 
M. Kennelly  
                          
S. Locke 
J. Lucid 
D. McCarthy  
                             
P. McCarthy 
T. McEllistrim 
J. Moloney  
                         
N. Moriarty 
D. Nolan 
T. O’Brien 
 
                                 
B. O’Connell                      M. O’Shea 
 L. Purtill 
 
                         
D. Quigg 
J. Sheahan 
 G. Spring 
 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Ms. M. Murrell, Chief Executive              Mr. J. Kennelly, A/Dir. Water Services     
                
Mr. C. O’Sullivan Dir. Ops H & S             Ms. A. McAllen, Head of Finance 
  
Mr. M. Scannell, A/Dir. Job Cr/Sust. ED Mr. M. O’Donoghue, A/Dir.H.&Corp.Supp.                   
Mr. L. Quinlan, Meetings Admin. 
  Ms. H. O’Carroll, Kerry County Museum             
Mr. O. O’Shea, Press & Comm. Off.       Ms. K. Moriarty, AO Human Resources                        
Mr. M. Ó Coileáin, Env. Aware. Officer   Ms. B. Reidy, SSO Corporate Support           
Ms. C. Carrig, Sports Co-ordinator 
  Ms. O. O’Shea, CO Corporate Support            
 
 
The meeting commenced at 10.30am. 
 
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. M O’Shea took the Chair. 
 
At the outset the Cathaoirleach PROPOSED that a Civic Reception would be 
held at a meeting of the South & West Kerry MD to honour Glenbeigh/Glencar 
football team who won the AIB All-Ireland Junior Club Football Championship 
the previous day. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson SECONDED this proposal. 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
2 of 47 
17.02.20.01 Cathaoirleach’s Report on the CPG meeting held on 14th 
February 2017 
 
The Cathaoirleach read the following report into the record of the meeting: 
 
“Item 1  
Agenda for the February Council Meeting 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan briefed the meeting on the Agenda for the February Meeting. 
 
Item 2 
Training and Development Programme for Councillors 2017 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated a letter issued to all members setting out the requirement to 
adopt a Training and Development Programme for Councillors each year.  
Members were requested to submit their comments/suggestions on the 
Programme.  The Draft Programme will be brought to March CPG Meeting 
following which it will be presented to full Council at the March Meeting for 
adoption. 
 
Item 3  
Update from the Chairs of SPCs 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley briefed the meeting on the items considered at the Tourism, 
Culture, Arts and Recreation SPC held on the 31st January 2017 under the 
following heading: 
• Use of Irish in Gaeltacht areas 
• Language Planning Process 
• Arts activities 
• ‘Creative Ireland’ initiative 
• Update on 2016 Commemorations 
• County Museum accreditation 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher briefed the meeting on the items considered at the Quality of Life 
SPC meeting held on the 19th January 2017 and stated his report would be 
circulated to all members for the February Meeting. 
 
Item 4  
Requests for Civic Receptions 
 
The CPG agreed that a Civic Reception would be hosted by the Listowel MD for 
the Listowel RFC U18 Girls team on Monday 22nd May 2017. 
 
Having regard to Kerry County Council’s Adopted Protocol for Civic Honours 
Conferral the CPG also agreed that the Marian Players Rathmore Panto Group 
and the Spa GAA Dance Team would be honoured either by way of   Certificates 
of Recognition at the proposed Killarney MD Annual Awards Event later in the 
year or the hosting of separate Municipal District Civic Receptions. A decision by 
the CPG in that regard will be made in light of other proposals which may be 
received later in the year. 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
3 of 47 
 
Item 5 
Any other business 
 
Kerry Airport 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane welcomed the flights to and from Berlin which were recently 
announced.  He asked that Kerry County Council would have a presence at Kerry 
Airport for the inaugural flight from Berlin and that a meeting would be arranged 
between Kerry County Council, Kerry Airport and the Ryanair Operations 
Manager with a view to promoting these flights.  Cllr. Finucane also asked that 
consideration would be given to the Cathaoirleach and officials meeting with 
Berlin City Council. 
 
The Chief Executive stated that she and Cllr. T. O’Brien represent Kerry County 
Council on the Board of Kerry Airport and one of the most important 
developments has been the assignment of a Route Manager. She welcomed the 
new route from Berlin and highlighted that senior officials in our Tourism Unit 
went on a promotional visit to Germany recently.  She agreed there should be 
enhanced promotional advertising from a Kerry tourism perspective at the airport.   
 
Non National Roads Grants 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan stated the non-national Road Grants were announced in late 
January and details were circulated to members.  It is intended to bring a report 
to the Operations SPC in the next 2 weeks following which a Schedule of 
Municipal District Work Plans will be presented to members before the end of 
March. 
 
Standing Orders 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan highlighted that a letter issued to members in relation to Standing 
Order No. 30 as a number of motions continue to be submitted to full Council 
which appear more appropriate to Municipal District meetings.  In the 
correspondence he set out Standing Order No. 30 and reminded members, in 
accordance with the Standing Orders to discuss with him, as Meetings 
Administrator in advance of submitting any proposed Notice of Motion which may 
be more appropriate for consideration or had already been considered at MD 
Meetings.   
 
Kerry County Councils’ Treasurer 
 
In response to an enquiry from Cllr. J. Finucane, the Head of Finance advised 
that a review was undertaken in 2014 following the amalgamation of the Town 
Councils and while existing arrangements are very competitive they are kept 
under constant review. 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
4 of 47 
Hosting of a Conference on the Wild Atlantic Way 
 
Members of the CPG requested that a Conference on the Wild Atlantic Way 
would be held preferably in Kerry which the CE agreed to advance.    
 
Non domestic water billing 
 
Ms. A. McAllen advised the meeting that non domestic water bills have migrated 
to Irish Water and Irish Water intend to issue bills in the coming weeks. 
 
Mr. J. Breen stated that officials from Irish Water would be in County Buildings to 
deal with members queries on Monday next. 
 
Civic Reception 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated that a Civic Reception would be held at 1.30pm on Monday 
20th February for the Defence Forces.  This Reception was approved by CPG 
and full Council prior to the adoption of the Civic Honours Conferral Protocol.” 
 
17.02.20.02 Confirmation of Minutes 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Foley, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Gleeson it was 
resolved that the minutes of the following meetings be confirmed: 
 
(a) 
Meeting held on the 12th September 2016 to consider the Report of the 
Chief Executive on the setting of a Local Adjustment Factor for Local 
Property Tax for 2017 and the Council’s Budget Strategy for 2017. 
 
(b) 
Budget Meeting held on the 14th November 2016. 
 
(c) 
January Ordinary Meeting held on the 23rd January 2017. 
 
17.02.20.03 Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
 
The Chief Executive read the following report into the record of the meeting: 
 
“Introduction 
 
Section 136(2) of the Local Government Act 2001, as inserted by Section 51 of 
the Local Government Reform Act 2014 places an obligation on the Chief 
Executive to prepare a report, to be known as the Management Report, in 
relation to the performance of his or her Executive Functions during the 
preceding calendar month, including implementation of policy or other matters 
required by the Council in the exercise of its Reserved Functions and the 
provision of services by the Council. 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
5 of 47 
As agreed by the Members, the report will be forwarded to you on a monthly 
basis along with the documentation for the ordinary monthly meetings. 
 
Members will also be aware that an update report is provided at each Municipal 
District Meeting on the work of the Directorates within Kerry County Council.  
These very detailed reports, the templates of which have been recently revised,  
provide updates on the main activities per directorate at Municipal District level 
on such matters as the Housing Programme, the Roadworks Programme, Water 
and Wastewater projects, , Environmental Services etc. Please note in particular 
that the revised Municipal District Housing Report presented at the Municipal 
District Meetings includes updates across all social housing activity at municipal 
district level for the information of Municipal District members. As previously 
advised in order to avoid duplication of reporting, updates on these matters are 
not included in the Chief Executive's Report. 
 
The report below has been prepared for the February 2017 Council Meeting. 
 
Finance Directorate 
 
As agreed with the Members, a Financial Report for Members will be provided on 
a quarterly basis in line with the Quarterly Reporting Process for Income and 
Expenditure already in place to the Department of Housing, Planning Community 
& Local Government. The Qtr 4 Financial report will be set out in the Chief 
Executive’s Report presented at the April Council Meeting. 
 
Infrastructure, Operations, Health & Safety Directorate 
 
Non- National Road Funding 
The Department of Transport Tourism and Sport announced the 2017 Road 
Allocations for Regional and Local Roads on the 24th January 2017 and copy of 
the correspondence was circulated to you. The overall allocation is €15.273 m 
which is an increase of €3.3m (approximately 18% on last year’s allocation). In 
particular, I welcome the funding of €400,000, for improvement works on the 
Tralee to Fenit route and a commitment of €25,000 to recommence the design of 
the Tralee Northern Relief Road, following my meeting with the Department, on 
which I briefed you in my last report. As I have previously highlighted these 
routes are of strategic importance in the growth of Fenit port and to support the 
economic development of the county.  
 
A funding commitment of €550,000 for Rossbeigh Coast road in 2016 has been 
re-affirmed and we are now in a position to award the contract for the works. 
€500,000 has been allocated for the Dingle Relief Road Phase 4. The €7.737 m 
allocated under the Restoration Improvement Grant, represents an 11% increase 
on last years allocation. The Department has allowed some discretion in the 
transfer of some of this allocation towards Discretionary Maintenance, which is 
being considered, given the damage caused to bridges in the Cahersiveen area 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
6 of 47 
as a result of the storm in October 2016. The Operations SPC will be consulted 
before the draft roadworks programme is complete. When the work programme is 
finalized, we are targeting the presentation of the schedule of Municipal District 
Work to the MD members before the end of March.    
 
South Kerry Greenway 
We have initiated the CPO process by making the application to the board to 
confirm that an EIS is required for the scheme. The Board has advised that a 
decision will be made by the 29th May 2017. We are proceeding on the basis that 
the EIS is required and subject to confirmation by the Board, we intend to seek a 
meeting with them and to progress the submission of the final CPO and EIS 
documentation as soon as possible after we get the direction.     
 
Tralee Active Travel - Redevelopment of The Mall 
The contract for the redevelopment of The Mall in Tralee was signed on Friday 
10th February, with John Craddock Ltd., who previously carried out works on the 
Square. These works are grant aided the Department of Transport, Tourism and 
Sport, under the Active Travel Towns Scheme, with matching funding from Kerry 
County Council.  Advance works are on-going at present to allow for the 
implementation of two way traffic flow on Denny Street by early April.      
 
Housing Directorate 
 
Minister Simon Coveney’s Visit to Kerry 
As the members are aware Mr Simon Coveney T.D., Minister for Housing, 
Planning, Community and Local Government, visited Kerry on 23rd January, 
2017 in order to further promote the Government’s Rebuilding Ireland Action 
Plan for Housing and Homelessness & launched the next phase of the Mitchel’s 
Regeneration Project in Tralee which consists of the construction of 15 houses.   
 
Housing Capital Construction Programme 
As part of the Council Capital Construction Programme two projects have now 
progressed to construction in Killarney & Lixnaw within the last week.  
 
The Park, Killarney 
The Park project will deliver 20 x 3bed, 2 storey semidetached units with 
associated site works at the Park, Killarney. This development is due for 
completion in February 2018.  
 
Lixnaw 
The Lixnaw project will deliver 4 x 2bed semi-detached units with associated site 
works at Ballingarry, Lixnaw and is within an existing Local Authority estate. This 
development is due for completion in December 2017. 
 
 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
7 of 47 
Balloonagh Land Purchase 
Kerry County Council has agreed the purchase of 1 hectare of land from St. 
Brendan’s Trust at Balloonagh, Tralee.  This is a very central location and it is 
intended to use the land for the provision of social housing for the elderly and 
people with disabilities. 
 
Transitional Properties For Homeless Persons 
As part of our strategy to deal with homelessness, Kerry County Council has 
designated a number of properties throughout the County as Transitional 
Properties. These properties will only be used as a short term measure for 
families and also for those who have been in long term emergency 
accommodation for the past number of years.  These properties will be viewed as 
‘half way houses’ to a degree with a short term stay of 3-6 months at the very 
most.  The properties are fully furnished and are well maintained.   
  
Additionally there is need to identify properties for young people who are coming 
out of long term care and who will be seeking accommodation in their own right.  
We are in the process of identifying specific short term transitional properties for 
these people and will need to work very closely with other agencies to ensure 
that the needs of these young people are met and that they are assisted greatly 
in the transitional phase of moving from a care background to independent living.   
 
If these transitional properties are to be a success, continuous outreach support 
from all necessary and required Agencies will be vital to assist tenancy 
sustainment and to provide wrap around support to the clients going forward.    
Inter Agency Homeless Action Teams have been established and meetings have 
now also commenced and are proving to be very beneficial in identifying potential 
solutions for specific clients who have been in long term emergency 
accommodation. This continues to be a very complex and difficult area to secure 
long solutions but some progress is being made.  
 
Traveller Accommodation Plan 2014 -2018 review 
The draft mid term review up to the end of 2016 was considered at the December 
Council Meeting. The final mid term review report is being forwarded separately 
to Members & the Quality of Life SPC members.   This report is a review of 
progress under the plan up to the 31st of December 2016. Kerry County Council 
is committed to working with the Local Traveller Accommodation Consultative 
Committee, Traveller households, the Department of Housing, Planning, 
Community and Local Government and the wider community in providing housing 
for Travellers in accordance with the Traveller Accommodation Programme. 
 
Economic & Community Development Directorate 
 
Development Contribution Scheme 
Work continued on the Development Contribution Scheme. It is proposed to bring 
the draft DCS to SPC in early March.  

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
8 of 47 
 
Two Year review of the County Development Plan  
Section 15(2) of the Planning Act requires that a report be prepared outlining the 
progress achieved in securing the objectives contained in the Plan. This review is 
presently underway.  
 
Killarney Municipal District Plan 
Planning policy relevant to the Killarney Municipal District is at present contained 
in the following Plans:  
1. 
Killarney Town Development Plan. 
2. 
Castleisland Functional Area Plan. 
3. 
Tralee / Killarney Hub Functional Area Plan. 
4. 
Rathmore Local Area Plan. 
 
The preparation of a local Area plan for Killarney Municipal District has 
commenced with the initial phase of public consultation in December 2016 
seeking pre-draft submissions.  
 
Approximately 40 submissions have been received. Preparation of Environmental 
reports has also commenced including:  
• 
Strategic Environmental Assessments.  
• 
Habitats Directive Assessment.  
• 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment.  
 
Kerry County Heritage Plan 
A review of the Kerry County Heritage Plan has commenced. This plan is due for 
completion by the final quarter of 2017. It is envisaged that there will be 
significant interaction between the Council and local interest groups during the 
preparation of this plan.  
 
South Kerry Innovative & Research Centre- WEAVE Project 
A satellite University Innovative & Research Initiative is advancing for the Iveragh 
area. Cliodhna O’Callaghan, UCC has been seconded to develop the project and 
she is based in the Kerry County Council Library in Caherciveen. A launch will be 
advised in due course. 
 
Invest in Kerry Promotion 
Kerry County Council & the IDA have completed the Kerry Welcome Promotion 
and Members will be circulated with details shortly 
 
Dingle Creativity & Innovative Hub 
Kerry County Council supports and continues its involvement in this project. 
Members will be updated on its progress. 
 
 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
9 of 47 
Kerry Local Enterprise Office  
 
Promotion and advertising 
The Local Enterprise Office continued to run a promotional campaign in January 
on radio, newspapers and social media. This targeted individuals thinking of 
starting a business and those expanding their businesses. Further contacts have 
been made with accountants and banking officials highlighting the services of the 
office. The office is presently engaging with the main banks also.  
 
Training  
The 2017 Programme has commenced and 4 courses commenced in January 
including “Start Your Own Business” and “Digital Marketing” for small 
businesses. Recruitment is ongoing for the 2017 Food Academy Programme and 
the Killarney Retail Programme. 
 
Kerry’s Best Young Entrepreneur  
The office is pleased to report that one local winner has progressed through the 
Regional Finals and will now participate in the national Final scheduled for 
Google HQ in Dublin on March 5th. Derek Counihan of the business “Harpoon 
Connect” will represent the Mid West region and Co. Kerry. His business 
monetises online marketing and is a strong prospect. 
 
Kerry Enterprise Month 
March has again been designated as Kerry Enterprise Month and the office is 
working closely with enterprise parties in drawing up the schedule of events. The 
first week of the Enterprise Month is designated Local Enterprise Week running 
from the 5th-10th March with the Kerry County Council LEO events. 
 
Trading Online Voucher Scheme  
Work continues on the Trading Online Voucher Scheme and a new allocation of 
59 vouchers has been confirmed. Information sessions are being developed. 
 
Evaluation Meetings 
The first evaluation Meeting of 2017 was held on 9th February and 5 projects 
were evaluated. These projects have the potential to generate up to 15 new jobs 
in the short term. 
 
Grads for Micro Scheme 
The LEO has been approved funding support for a Grads for Micro Scheme 
where undergraduates will be placed within participating microbusiness with 
funding approved for the placement. Recruitment of interested businesses is 
ongoing. 
  
LEO Work Plan 2017 
The LEO Work Plan has been completed and a draft has been submitted seeking 
2017 funding allocation. 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
10 of 47 
Community Development  
 
Community Support Fund 
The closing date for the 2017 Community Support Fund was the 13th of January 
2017. A total of 462 applications were received: 
 
The following are the proposed dates for the Special Meetings with the Elected 
Members to consider & approve allocations from the 2017 Community Support 
Fund: 
 
Killarney MD -  
1st March  
Tralee MD -   
6th March  
Listowel MD - 
 9th March  
South & West MD - 10th March  
 
Social Inclusion and Community Activation Programme (SICAP)  
The LCDC, as the contracting authority, continues to oversee the delivery of the 
Social Inclusion Community Activation Programme (SICAP) and established a 
subgroup specifically to assist in this process. As previously advised, the 
Programme is being delivered at a local level by three Local Development 
Companies; SKDP, NEWKD and IRD Duhallow (i.e. SICAP Programme 
Implementers).  
 
2016 was both a challenging and productive year in terms of delivering 12 
actions across three Goals supporting SICAP target groups. Each PI met the 
targets for the key performance indicators and also demonstrated a strong 
performance in relation to the other 13 Headline Indicators. All budget 
parameters were adhered to and all financial information was in order. The entire 
2016 budgets were spent in all cases. The PIs indicated that their working 
relationship with the LCDC has been enhanced by regular strategic discussions 
with the LCDC SICAP Subgroup and the relationships built with the Local 
Authority Staff. A total of €1.6 million was invested in social inclusion activities in 
2016. 
 
LEADER 2014-2020  
The closing dates for the first call for project submissions under LEADER were 
Friday 20th January and Friday 27th January for areas covered by South Kerry 
Development Partnership (SKDP) & North, East & West Kerry Development 
(NEWKD) respectively.  At the Local Action Group meeting of 16th January the 
evaluation committees for the three implementing partners SKDP, NEWKD & IRD 
Duhallow were ratified. The evaluation committees bring experience from 
business, tourism, agriculture, environment, local government and the community 
sectors.    
 
 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
11 of 47 
Tourism Development Unit 
 
Taste Kerry 
The Taste Kerry Food Trail, which includes several food and drink producers, 
bars, restaurants, accommodation providers, retailers, farmers markets and food 
festivals throughout the county, where local Kerry produce can be enjoyed, will 
be officially launched on the 8th March 2017.   The Tourism Unit has worked 
closely with Taste Kerry on their re-branding, website launch and food trail 
development to ensure an enhanced experience for visitors to the county. 
 
Skellig Coast Visitor Experience Development Plan  
The Skellig Coast Visitor Experience Development Plan and Skellig Coast 
Tourism Network were launched in Ballinskelligs in January 2017.  Kerry County 
Council’s Tourism Unit will be working closely with the network to develop a 
strategic plan to broaden appeal and increase dwell time in the region by 
developing compelling and motivating attractions/experiences for our national 
and international visitors.   
 
Water, Environment, Fire & Library Services Directorate 
 
Water Services 
 
Breanlee Water Supply Scheme 
In January Irish Water approved funding of €900,000 to replace 7.5Km of 150MM 
diameter old and deficient water mains from Glencuttane to Ardmoniel on the 
Breanlee Water Supply Scheme.  
 
Kilcummin Sewerage Scheme  
Irish Water have lodged a planning application to develop a new Sewerage 
Scheme for the village of Kilcummin, Co Kerry which will have major benefits for 
the local environment whilst also facilitating future development in the area.  
 
The project involves the construction of a new pumping station and all of the 
additional infrastructure needed to connect Kilcummin to the Killarney 
Wastewater network at Derreen. This project will ensure that the local 
environment is protected by improving the quality of groundwater and facilitating 
an improvement in the quality of water in the River Deenagh and Lough Leane. It 
will also allow for future residential and commercial development within the area.” 
 
In conclusion the Chief Executive highlighted that works are ongoing at Plunkett 
Street, Killarney.  This involves a significant investment from own resources by 
the Council. She advised members that Kerry County Council is acquiring a 
hectare of land from St. Brendan’s Trust at Balloonagh for the provision of social 
housing for the elderly and people with disabilities. 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
12 of 47 
Cllr. D. Quigg extended his good wishes to the Glenbeigh/Glencar football team 
on their All Ireland success.  The construction of 12 houses at Ardmoniel, 
Killorglin was included in the Housing Capital Programme and it was decided to 
add an additional 2 houses and this has delayed construction.  He expressed 
concern that this development is not mentioned in the Chief Executive’s Report 
as there are a large number of people in Mid Kerry on the housing waiting list.  
Cllr. Quigg then referred to the South Kerry Greenway which is vital for South 
Kerry and stated he hoped it would be fast tracked as this area needs 
regeneration. 
 
1Cllr. P. Daly welcomed the purchase of land for social housing at Balloonagh 
and added he understood there would be a housing element to the development 
of the Denny site.  He welcomed the transitional properties for homeless persons 
as some people have been living in Arlington Lodge for between 5 and 8 years 
and this is not suitable accommodation for more than 6 months. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady welcomed the increase of €3.3m in funding allocated for non-
national roads together with the commencement of construction of the 20 houses 
in Killarney and the transitional properties for the homeless.  He asked that 
appropriate accommodation would be provided in Killarney to ensure when 
families become homeless children do not have to be taken out of school.  In 
conclusion Cllr. Grady welcomed progress on Kilcummin Sewerage Scheme. 
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen welcomed the increase in funding for local and regional 
roads and he called on the Department to allow local authorities to use 
discretionary funding to repair bridges.  He asked that Killowen Bridge and the 
bridge at Caherciveen in particular would be repaired as they were damaged by 
flooding.  Cllr. Connor-Scarteen welcomed progress on the South Kerry 
Greenway and he asked that the CPO process would be accelerated if possible. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley welcomed the acquisition of land at Balloonagh for social housing 
and the funding of €400,000 for the Tralee/Fenit route.  Progress on Taste Kerry 
has been hugely important and she acknowledged the commitment to it.  Cllr. 
Foley stated the recent Annual Awards Event was a fantastic success and she 
acknowledged the substantial work by the staff of Corporate Services that went 
into it. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin welcomed the contract signing for the 20 houses at Park, Killarney 
as these houses are vital for the Killarney MD.  He welcomed progress on the 
Kilcummin Sewerage Scheme and noted that the planning application was 
lodged with the Planning Department the previous week.  He understood from 
official for Irish Water that it is planned that this project will be completed by 
February 2018.  Cllr. Cronin asked that any homes on the route would be given 
the opportunity to connect to the new scheme.  In conclusion Cllr. Cronin 
                                                 
1 See Page 9 of March Minutes for clarification 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
13 of 47 
complimented the elected members for the Killarney MD on approving the Part 
VIII for the new cemetery for Killarney. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae welcomed the progress on Kilcummin Sewerage Scheme and 
she asked that the road would be improved once the scheme is completed.  She 
welcomed the signing of the contract for the 20 houses in Killarney where there is 
a serious housing crisis and it is virtually impossible to get houses to rent. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher welcomed the proposed 20 houses for Killarney and the fact that 
construction will commence shortly as it is very difficult to get rental properties in 
Killarney.  He asked when the new Killarney MD Plan would be presented to 
members and will it be brought to MD or full Council. 
 
Mr. M. Scannell stated the Killarney MD Plan will involve a variation of the Kerry 
County Development Plan and the Draft Killarney MD Plan must be adopted by 
members of Killarney MD.  It is planned to bring the Draft Plan to members in 
May. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson welcomed the allocation of €120,000 from Government for the 
Cultural Centre in Killarney and the matching funding from Kerry County Council.  
This facility together with Áras Phadraig will bring great enrichment to the town. 
He also welcomed the proposed enhancement works to Plunkett Street which will 
add to the enjoyment of the town and he asked that these works would be 
completed as speedily as possible with the minimum disruption.  In conclusion 
Cllr. Gleeson stated he hoped the South Kerry Greenway would progress 
speedily.   
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan congratulated Glenbeigh/Glencar on their fantastic victory in the 
AIB All-Ireland Junior Club Football Championship the previous day.  He 
welcomed progress on Kilcummin Sewerage Scheme and stated he hoped it 
would proceed without delay.  Cllr. Sheahan welcomed the signing of the contract 
for the 20 houses at Chestnut Drive and added that a lot of social housing is 
required in Killarney to meet demand.  He asked if the Council owns other land in 
Killarney.  The granting of permission for the new burial ground at Knockeenduv 
is welcome but he believed there is still scope to have a burial ground at 
Aghadoe. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae asked when the LCDC will meet to allocate the first round of 
LEADER funding as applications were submitted a number of months ago and 
applicants want to know if they have been successful or not.  He asked when 
work will commence on the road in Rossbeigh.  Cllr. Healy-Rae stated his views 
on the South Kerry Greenway are well known and in Waterford and Mayo they 
did not resort to CPO.  In his opinion the CPO could delay the project for a long 
time and the project will not have the good will of the landowners. 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
14 of 47 
Cllr. R. Beasley welcomed the construction of four houses at Lixnaw but 
highlighted that more houses are needed as there are over 600 qualified 
applicants on the housing list in the area.   
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty welcomed the additional allocation of €3.3m for local and 
regional roads even though it falls far short of what is required.  He asked if any 
additional funding was received for bridges.  Cllr. Culloty also welcomed the 
funding for the Tralee/Fenit route which will accommodate Liebherr Cranes.  The 
preparation of the new Killarney Municipal District Plan is welcome and the fact 
that it will be presented to members by May.  There is a serious shortage of 
housing in Killarney and the 20 houses at Park will go some way to addressing 
this problem.  Cllr. Culloty thanked St. Brenan’s Trust for their dealings with the 
Council to-date.  In conclusion Cllr. Culloty welcomed the proposed enhancement 
works at Plunkett Street. 
 
The Chief Executive confirmed that the construction of houses at Ardmoniel, 
Killorglin is included in the Capital Programme and it is hoped to go to tender 
early in 2018.  Progress on the South Kerry Greenway has been significant and it 
is being given priority due to its importance for the county.  She advised 
members that it was a difficult decision to proceed to CPO.  She welcomed the 
passing of the Part VIII for the new burial ground in Killarney which is very 
important for the Killarney MD.   
 
17.02.20.04 Dates for Meetings 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Moloney, SECONDED by Cllr. J.J. Culloty it 
was agreed to hold the March Ordinary Meeting on Monday 27th March 
2017. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. P. McCarthy, SECONDED by Cllr. B. Cronin it 
was agreed to hold the April Ordinary Meeting on Monday 24th April 2017. 
 
17.02.20.05 2015 Performance Indicator Report for Kerry County Council 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue referred members to his detailed report dated 13th February 
2017 on this item which was circulated. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Moloney it was 
agreed to note the 2015 Performance Indicator Report for Kerry County Council. 
 
17.02.20.06 Change to nominee to the Regional Health Forum South 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan referred members to his report dated 14th February 2017 on this 
item which was circulated. 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
15 of 47 
On the PROPOSAL OF Cllr. N. Kelleher, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Moloney it was 
agreed that Cllr. J.F. Flynn would replace Cllr. M. Kennelly on the Regional 
Health Forum South. 
 
17.02.20.07 Change to nominee to the Southern Regional Assembly 
Mr. L. Quinlan referred members to his report dated 14th February 2017 on this 
item which was circulated. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Gleeson, SECONDED by Cllr. N. Kelleher it was 
agreed that Cllr. T. McEllistrim would replace Cllr. M. O’Shea on the Southern 
Regional Assembly. 
 
17.02.20.08 Kerry Recreation and Sports Partnership Draft Strategic Plan 
2017 – 2022 
Mr. M. Scannell referred members to the Kerry Recreation and Sports 
Partnership Draft Strategic Plan 2017 – 2022 which was circulated.  This 5 year 
Plan sets out the structure of Kerry Local Sports Partnership and he added that it 
is a sub structure of the LCDC.  He briefed the meeting in detail on the Draft Plan 
under the following headings: 
 
• Structure 
• Vision 
• Role 
• Strategic themes and goals 
• Actions 
• Key principles 
• Partnership 
• Key strengths 
 
In conclusion Mr. Scannell informed the meeting that Mr. Jimmy Deenihan was 
recently appointed Chair of the Kerry Recreation and Sports Partnership and the 
Draft Plan is presented to Council for approval. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson welcomed Mr. J. Deenihan as Chair of the Kerry Recreation and 
Sports Partnership and stated he has a life long commitment to sport.  He 
referred to Page 13 of the Draft Plan where it stated it aims “To assist primary 
school children to learn how to cycle on road in a safe and appropriate manner” 
and he highlighted that the vast majority of roads outside schools are dangerous.  
He called on all Sports Partnerships in the country to address this problem.   
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty complimented Ms. C. Carrig and Ms. M. Lane who manage the 
Kerry Recreation and Sports Partnership and he welcomed Mr. J. Deenihan as 
its Chair who is very enthusiastic and appreciates the importance of the work 
done by the Partnership. 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
16 of 47 
Cllr. P. Daly stated the Swim a Mile programme represents excellent value for 
money and the run in the Park which they organise is very successful with over 
500 people taking part each week in the Town Park.  Cllr. Daly called for the 
development of additional walkways around the town for the benefit of the local 
community. 
 
17.02.20.09 Approval of strategic policies and plans for Kerry County 
Museum for accreditation purposes 
 
Mr. M. Scannell referred members to the report, policies and plans for the Kerry 
County Museum which were circulated. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Gleeson, SECONDED by Cllr. R. Beasley it was 
agreed to approve the strategic policies and plans for Kerry County Museum 
which were presented for accreditation purposes under the Museum Standards 
Programme. These are the Mission Statement, Collection Policy, Disposal Policy, 
Loan Policy, Strategic Management Plan, One Year Implementation Plan and 
Two Year Financial Plan, Disaster Plan, Care of Collections Strategy, Exhibition 
Policy and Education Policy. 
 
17.02.20.10 Report on the Quality of Life SPC 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Kelleher, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Kennelly it was 
agreed to note Cllr. N. Kelleher’s written report on the Quality of Life SPC which 
was circulated. 
 
17.02.20.12 Summary of proceedings at Conferences/Seminars and 
Training Events 
 
On the PROPOSAL OF Cllr. J. Moloney, SECONDED by Cllr. S. Locke it was 
agreed to note the following reports on behalf of the Kerry County Council 
delegates that attended in accordance with Section 142(5)(f) of the Local 
Government Act 2001: 
 
(a) 
Conference on the theme “Auditing & Governance in Local Government 
Part 2” which was held in Clonakility, Co. Cork from 10th to 12th June 2016 
by Cllr. N. Kelleher. 
 
(b) 
Meeting of the Policing Authority & Chairpersons of Joint Policing 
Committees held in Dublin on the 13th July 2016 by Cllr. N. Kelleher. 
 
(c) 
Meeting of the Policing Authority held in Dublin on the 8th September 2016 
by Cllr. N. Kelleher. 
 
(d) 
Annual Meeting of the Irish Public Bodies Insurance Forum held in 
Kilkenny on the 5th October 2016 by Cllr. N. Kelleher. 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
17 of 47 
 
(e) 
Tourism Economic Forum held in Killarney on the 25th November 2016 by 
Cllr. N. Kelleher. 
 
17.02.20.13  
Approval for the opening of Tenders 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Kelleher, SECONDED by Cllr. P. McCarthy 
it was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for Dingle 2017 – Adult 
Exercise Equipment at Dingle Harbour – Closing date: Friday 3rd February 
2017 at 4pm. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. McCarthy, SECONDED by Cllr. P. 
McCarthy it was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for Kenmare 
2017 – Outdoor Fitness Equipment at Kenmare Pier – Closing date: Friday 
10th February 2017 at 4pm. 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. T. O’Brien, SECONDED by Cllr. T. Ferris it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for the construction of 
Housing Scheme (15 units) as Part of the Mitchel’s Boherbee 
Regeneration Area, Tralee – Closing date: Monday 20th February 2017 at 
12 noon. 
 
(d) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. R. Beasley, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Lucid it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for the Supply, installation 
and commissioning of pipe network and ancillary works at Clanmaurice 
GWS at Feeans, Causeway – Closing date: Monday 20th February 2017 at 
1pm. 
 
(e) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Quigg, SECONDED by Cllr. P. McCarthy it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for Tenant Purchase 
Scheme Programme 2016 – Panel of Valuers – Closing date: Friday 24th 
February 2017 at 4pm. 
 
17.02.20.14 Notices of Motion 
 
The Cathaoirleach called on Cllr. R. Beasley to move Notice of Motion No. 27. 
 
27.  
Availability of respite care in North Kerry 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. R. Beasley PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council to call on Minister McGrath, to immediately address 
the issues facing families in the North of the County, who have neither access to 
residential nor respite care for their loved ones. This Council also calls on the 
HSE to immediately make available respite at a property purchased for that 
purpose last July. 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
18 of 47 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley called on all members to support his motion regarding the lack of 
respite services in North Kerry for people with an intellectual learning disability.  It 
is beyond comprehension that in 2017 parents are still experiencing emotional, 
mental and physical exhaustion due to the lack of respite services.  Parents who 
feel they are getting older and are worried about their children who need 24 hour 
care 365 days a year need facilities while buildings are lying idle because staff 
have not been employed.  This will not solve this problem and if it was not for the 
volunteers, all the voluntary services provided in this country and those who 
fundraise and provide services which the statutory services have never provided 
the situation would be worse.  HIQUA are closing down older facilities that need 
renovation and these are never replaced.  These facilities should never be closed 
until alternative accommodation is provided.   
 
Many parents are still very concerned regarding what will happen with St. Mary of 
the Angels in the coming years.  Cllr. Beasley called for the staffing and opening 
of all premises that are available from funding that has been collected by 
volunteers and voluntary groups.  All Kerry TDs were meeting with Minister 
Finian McGrath the following day to impress on him the importance of providing 
more respite beds in Kerry as this affects all of Kerry and not just North Kerry.  In 
conclusion Cllr. Beasley asked what plans the HSE have for St. Mary of the 
Angels in the long term. 
 
Cllr. Kennelly SECONDED the motion and stated Kerry Parents and Friends who 
deal with people with intellectual disabilities across the county have recently held 
public meetings to demonstrate that the lack of funding in the respite sector is 
causing unreal heart break for these families.  In Kerry there are currently only 12 
respite beds and this is not enough.  In Killarney alone there is only one respite 
bed available over the weekends and 20 people are looking for this one bed.  In 
July 2016 the HSE bought a 4 Bed house in Kilmeany, Kilmorna in Listowel but 
they cannot operate this wonderful service due to a lack of State funding.  This 
house would alleviate the issues that these people face.  At a recent meeting 
parents wept while expressing their fears for their loved ones into the future.  The 
meeting held the previous Thursday night was very emotional and very moving.  
These people are being cared for at home by their families saving the State large 
amounts of money.   
 
Minister Finian McGrath has acknowledged that there is a problem with respite 
care in Kerry.  Cllr. Kennelly called for the support of all members for this motion 
and that Kerry County Council would call on Minister McGrath and the Minister 
for Health, Simon Harris to provide emergency funding for this 4 Bed house in 
Listowel to operate as a Respite Care Centre for the whole of Kerry.  He asked 
that a letter would issue to the Ministers immediately as all TDs were meeting 
with Minister McGrath the following day in Dublin.  The correspondence from 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
19 of 47 
Kerry County Council will show that the members and management of Kerry 
County Council fully support that funding has to be secured for this vital service. 
 
The Cathaoirleach also supported the motion and commended both councillors 
on their motions. 
 
1. 
Provision of a Stroke Unit at Kerry University Hospital 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Gleeson PROPOSED: 
That the HSE would inform the Council if University Hospital Kerry has, in 
compliance with the National Clinical Programme, put in place a Stroke Unit in 
order to standardise care provision for patients and that it would further inform if 
the full complement of Geriatricians and Allied Health Profession resources are in 
place. As I have been highlighting the need for a fully developed and adequately 
staffed Stroke Unit for well over a decade it is high time that the HSE put in place 
a Unit capable of affording equality of treatment for Stroke sufferers in Kerry that 
is on a par with what is available elsewhere in Éire. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson read the following into the record of the meeting: 
 
“For many years I have been seeking to have a Stroke Unit established in 
University Hospital Kerry. I have been doing so because Stroke is an ever- 
present reality and one in 5 of the population will endure Stroke. The effects of 
Stroke can be devastating for an individual and for the person's immediate 
relatives. 
 
It is only fair to state that there has been considerable advances made in that 
regard in Kerry University Hospital since I first spoke on the matter over a decade 
ago. But there is still some way to go before the ideal is achieved. 
 
The long- term effects of Stroke can very often be determined by 3 factors [1] the 
speed in which the victim is got to hospital and [2] the speed with which treatment 
begins plus and [3] the nature of the treatment available in the hospital. 
Depending on Stroke type the availability of Thrombolysis clot bursting capacity 
in the hospital then much possible long- term damage can be prevented. 
 
I am by way of this motion asking the HSE and Kerry University Hospital the 
following: 
A: Has the Hospital got the required number of Geriatricians? 
B: Has the hospital got a Clinical Nurse Manager for Stroke? 
C: Has the hospital got all of the necessary Allied Health Professionals namely 
Occupational Therapists and Speech and Language experts? 
D: Are the there adequate Physiotherapy services? 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
20 of 47 
E: Has the Median Time from presentation to admission significantly improved to 
nearer the National average? How many patients over the past year have waited 
longer that 3 hours for the commencement of treatment i.e. from the time the 
Stroke was suffered- presuming fairly prompt admission time? 
 
Has Staffing Resource levels reached the required level to allow for the 
establishment of a Dedicated Stroke Unit? If not are there any real prospects of 
that becoming a reality. 
 
Colleagues Stroke will unfortunately be a personal reality for at least 7 of us and 
of our community. It is important that that we have standards of care in our 
county that accord with the very highest International Standards. 
We in Kerry are entitled to a level of post Stroke care that is on a par with the 
very best that is available elsewhere in the country and we have to continue to 
strive to ensure that it is available 24 hours per day and 365 days per year.” 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion. 
 
Notice of Motion No. 3 was moved by Cllr. J.J. Culloty. 
 
3. 
Compilation of a skills database 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Foley PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council under the leadership of our Economic Development 
Officer and in co-operation with any other necessary agencies, seek to compile a 
skills database unique to the towns and villages in our County to be used as part 
of a marketing tool to attract potential companies and businesses to our County. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The availability of a suitably skilled workforce is one of the key drivers in 
attracting employers to cities and regions throughout the world. It is also 
one of the major attractions of major cities which have a large existing pool 
of talent employed in similar industries and which have a pipeline of new 
graduates from universities within the area. The compilation of a skills 
data-base has been used to good effect in both Sneem and Dingle and has 
resulted in attracting employers to look at these areas as potential 
locations for home working or as a more significant base of employment. 
Starwood Hotels is an example of how the existence of a skills audit 
attracted an industry initially to Sneem, which eventually found a 
permanent base in Kenmare. Kerry County Council continues to work with 
the Sneem community together with SKDP in the provision of a permanent 
hub for future employment opportunities.  
 
The development of comprehensive current skills data-bases across the 
County is extremely challenging and will require significant inputs across a 
range of agencies. The Council are exploring, through the local interagency 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
21 of 47 
task group in conjunction with ITT, Kerry ETB, the Local Development 
Agencies, the IDA and EI, all the avenues that can be pursued in identifying 
potential talent available to employers.  
 
There are significant programmes currently underway in the county in 
ensuring that the necessary skills are available to existing employers 
within the county, through partnerships between employers and both the 
ITT and Kerry ETB. These training programmes are essential to ensure the 
continued growth of established industry in the county. The Regional Skills 
Forum, covering both Cork & Kerry, currently being chaired by Brid 
McElligott from ITT is working in partnership to facilitate structured 
dialogue between enterprise sectors & education & training providers 
focused on identifying skills requirements and building customised 
solutions responsive to regional business needs.  
 
Kerry must use this model to market itself not only on a village, town or 
even county basis but as a regional location, that has access to a 
comprehensive regional skills base, which includes the graduates of 
Universities and Institutes of technology both in Cork and Limerick as well 
as the Institute of Technology Tralee. Equally important for the long term 
sustainable development of the County is attracting graduates back to the 
county, who may have Kerry links, or a wish to live in a high quality 
environment. The establishment of the Kerry SciTech portal to showcase 
science and technology jobs and employers in County Kerry is an 
important tool in this area. The marketing campaign for the County in 
conjunction with the IDA will also be a critical in both attracting skills and 
companies to the county. 
 
4. 
Call to suspend consideration of all solar farm applications until 
regulations or specific planning guidelines are in place 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.J. Culloty PROPOSED: 
That this Council write to the Minister for Housing, Planning, Community & Local 
Government, Simon Coveney, to suspend consideration of all solar farm 
applications, until regulations or specific planning guidelines are put in place. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty stated it is unfair that guidelines for solar farm developments are 
not in place so that if there are problems it can be proved whether or not the 
development meets the criteria set out in the Guidelines. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly SECONDED the motion. 
 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
22 of 47 
5. 
Lodging of applications for planning permission for proposed urban 
walkways 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Daly PROPOSED: 
That this Council will appoint an Engineer immediately to lodge applications for 
planning permission for proposed urban walkways in the County. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Capital Infrastructure Unit within Kerry County Council is the section 
responsible for the design, planning and procurement of walkways 
throughout the County including the urban areas. The section is currently 
involved in progressing the South Kerry Greenway, Tralee Smarter Travel, 
The North Kerry Line from Listowel to the County Bounds and also Tralee 
to Fenit. Once these projects are completed through the design and 
planning stage other identified projects will be progressed and subject to 
identified national funding programmes. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly noted that a decision on the CPO for the South Kerry Greenway will 
not be made until 29th May 2017 and he asked in the interim that planning 
applications for proposed urban walkways would be prepared and lodged.  Local 
communities want walkways and pupils attending secondary schools should be 
encouraged to use exiting walkway to travel to school.  The planning applications 
for the Tralee Fenit walkway, the walkway to Ballyseedy and also the Big River 
walkway have not been lodged but there is huge demand in the area for these 
facilities. 
 
Cllr. D. Nolan SECONDED the motion. 
 
6. 
E-Parking in Kerry 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B. O’Connell PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council introduce E-Parking in Kerry whereby motorists can 
pay for parking by using their phones.  
 
The following reply issued: 
It is proposed to examine alternative options for the payment of parking 
charges, including by mobile phone, in 2017. 
 
Cllr. B. O’Connell welcomed the reply and pointed out that it has been rolled out 
by other local authorities and it is a success. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED the motion. 
 
 
 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
23 of 47 
7. 
Call to introduce a national Taking in Charge Scheme for estates 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Finucane PROPOSED: 
To call on the Minister to reintroduce this year a National Taking in Charge 
Scheme for estates which are critically in need of being fully finished and 
completed. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has made substantial progress over the last number 
of years in addressing issues identified in unfinished housing estates 
across the County.  Works have been carried out in the most problematic 
estates which have greatly improved the quality of life for the residents 
living in these estates.  We will continue to work with developers and 
pursue outstanding bonds in order to address issues in the remaining 
estates. 
 
The introduction of a National Taking in Charge Initiative for Residential 
Estates (NTICI) in 2016 to accelerate the taking in charge process was most 
welcome.  Kerry County Council spent our allocation of €362,652 to carry 
out works on 18 estates under this initiative in 2016. 
 
We are currently preparing a submission for funding for 2017 should such 
a fund become available again this year.  In addition to this we  work with 
developers and bondsmen to ensure that works continue to be carried out 
in estates and that they are brought up to the required acceptable standard. 
It is expected that a further 15 estates will be taken in charge during 2017. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane welcomed the reply and added that the county benefitted from 
the €362,000 received in 2016.  This was not seen as a roll on scheme but it is 
important that it is continued.  He called on the Department to provide funding for 
this scheme in 2017 and to notify details of allocations early in the year. 
 
Cllr. L. Purtill SECONDED the motion. 
 
8. 
Call to make Kerry the safest county in which to drive 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Kennelly PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council’s Management and Members would take the lead and 
put in place initiatives to make Kerry the safest County in which to drive on the 
roads, to work to radically reduce the number of road accidents and fatalities and 
to work closely with all other agencies to make the County’s roads the safest in 
Ireland. 
 
 
 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
24 of 47 
The following reply issued: 
The Council adopted a Road Safety Strategy 2016-2020 at the December 
meeting, which is an inter-agency plan, targeted at reducing the number of 
serious injuries and fatalities from road traffic accidents in the county. The 
Council is the lead authority on 28 of the 49 actions identified in the Plan 
for implementation, in conjunction with An Garda Siochana, the Road 
Safety Authority, the T.I.I. and the H.S.E. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly read the following into the record of the meeting: 
 
“I am asking that Kerry County Council would initiate a media campaign either on 
our own or with all other stakeholders to make Kerry’s roads the safest in Ireland.   
Everyday we meet all different kinds of road users, car, bus, trucks, motor 
cyclists, cyclists and pedestrians and all of these are vulnerable road users.  In 
our own Road Safety Plan 2016 – 2020 our Mission Statement is to reduce the 
incidence and severity of crashes, road user fatalities and injury on Kerry roads 
by education, engineering, enforcement and evaluation. 
 
From 2011 to 2015, 49 people died on our roads in Kerry.  This number is just 
too high, so with a media campaign lets get every person that goes on our roads 
in Kerry AWARE of all the dangers facing them.  We need to highlight the most 
common distractions that cause accidents.  Driving a vehicle is a lot of 
responsibility especially where there are passengers and other road users at risk.  
Mobile phone usage is now one of the highest causes of distraction-related car 
accidents, speed, drink driving and one of the top distractions is actually eating 
and having a beverage while driving. 
 
In relation to speed camera signs I am proposing that these signs be painted in 
highly florescent and reflective colours.  The object of this exercise is to make it 
really obvious that there is a Camera there so there is no excuse for speeding 
through that area.  Overall we as drivers need to understand that we are not the 
best drivers around, that we do make mistakes and that we share the roads with 
others that also make mistakes.  Anything we can do to make the results of these 
mistakes less fatal is a good thing.  These are a few statistics that if addressed 
by all road users in this county we can become the safest county in Ireland for all 
our road users.” 
 
Cllr. L. Purtill SECONDED the motion. 
 
9. 
Call for installation of noise monitors near windfarms 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Moloney PROPOSED: 
In light of the High Court ruling made late last year in favour of the residents 
affected by noise pollution from wind turbines in Banteer Co. Cork will Kerry 
County Council be installing noise monitors near windfarms in Kerry. 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
25 of 47 
The following reply issued: 
All planning permission granted for wind farm developments contain a 
condition that requires the carrying out of noise monitoring by the 
developer.  Members have recently been circulated with a copy of our 
newly developed protocol for dealing with noise complaints.  This has been 
prepared having regard to the National Protocol for Dealing with Noise 
Complaints for Local Authorities.  Any complaints received in respect of 
noise pollution from wind farms will be dealt with in accordance with this 
protocol. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney stated in Banteer residents took a case against a developer who 
admitted liability.  He asked if Kerry County Council has equipment and 
personnel to monitor these developments.  There are a lot of wind farm 
developments in Kerry and he hoped the Council is in a position to protect local 
residents. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly SECONDED the motion. 
 
Mr. M. Scannell stated it is a condition of planning that all operators of wind farms 
are required to monitor noise and to make the information available to the local 
authority.   
 
10. 
Call for the provision of facilities for skate boarders 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. T. Ferris PROPOSED: 
Considering the numbers of young Kerry teenage skate boarders travelling to 
Cork and Limerick each month to make use of facilities provided by Local 
Authorities there, can Kerry County Council commit itself to developing 
appropriate facilities in this County. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has been actively involved with local community 
groups in identifying potential sites and funding opportunities for Skate-
Board Parks at a number of locations throughout the county.  The costs 
associated with the development of these parks are considerable. It is 
proposed to submit an application under the current round of sports capital 
funding for a feasible project. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris stated over 20 years ago a plan for a skate park was developed 
and funding of €150,000 was allocated yet it was not developed.  She met a 
representative group of young people from the county on this issue recently and 
they outlined that there are 20 skate boarders in Killarney, 20 in Tralee and a 
further 15 in Ballybunion who are pursuing their interest in this sport even though 
they don’t have a suitable facility.  They practice in underground car parks until 
they are moved on and they travel to Limerick and Cork to pursue their sport.  
Cork plan to develop their third such facility and she forwarded an image of what 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
26 of 47 
the young people are looking for to management.  They met with the Manager of 
the Sports Complex and the young people want an out of town centre venue.  
The Sports Complex has been identified by them as being a suitable location as 
there is a sports facility there already.  They estimate it would cost €20,000 to 
€30,000 to develop a small facility and she asked that this would be actively 
pursued this year.  There are a lot of facilities for young children and adults but 
there is nothing for teenagers.   
 
Cllr. R. Beasley SECONDED the motion. 
 
The Chief Executive stated the facility she had suggested would cost 
approximately €250,000 but if the young people want to develop a smaller facility 
she suggested they should apply for LEADER funding. 
 
Cllr. Ferris stated the standard price for a skate park is €150,000 to €200,000 but 
Phase 1 could be a smaller project costing in the region of €30,000.  If such a 
facility was in place they could then apply for LEADER funding as they could 
quantify the demand as it is difficult to quantify that when those involved use 
private property. 
 
11. 
Provision of adequate facilities at Inch Beach 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. O’Shea PROPOSED: 
To ask the Operations Department are there any contingency plans in place for 
Inch Beach for 2017 in relation to:  
 
a) Increased parking  
b) Recreation and Amenity facilities  
c) A full time caretaker to observe the toilets and clean the beach on a daily 
basis. 
 
The following reply issued: 
As previously advised at the South & West MD meetings, parking facilities 
are being reviewed at Inch beach in advance of the 2017.   
 
We are currently drafting a Beach Management Plan for Inch Beach, which 
will include optimizing existing car parking facilities, whilst complying with 
our requirements under the Blue Flag designation. This will also examine 
facilities for pedestrians gaining access to the beach, and measures to 
consolidate the existing sand dune system.  
 
Options for the development of additional car parking will also be examined 
but members will be aware that there are significant constraints with the 
designation of the surrounding lands under the EU Habitats Directive.   
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
27 of 47 
The toilets on Inch beach will be open daily from the 21st March 2017 to the 
23rd October 2017, as well as from the 16th to the 19th March (St. Patrick’s 
Bank holiday weekend), over the October bank holiday weekend and from 
the 19th December to the 1st January 2018. Outside of this 33 week period 
and the 2 bank holiday weekends, the facilities will be opened on Sundays. 
The staffing requirements to manage the facility over this period are 
considered adequate.  
 
Given the large number of such facilities in the county and other services 
that have to be provided, any proposals to extend such services can only 
be considered where it is cost effective, possibly with community 
engagement. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea stated Inch beach is utilised every day of the year and in the 
summer adequate parking is not available making it dangerous.  He called on 
management to liaise with the local community to put a plan in place for the 
beach.  There is a lot of rubbish on the beach from the back wash and Cllr. 
O’Shea asked that a full time caretaker would be assigned to Inch for the 
summer season.   
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy SECONDED the motion. 
 
12. 
Call to make public services more user friendly 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council call upon Government Agencies to make their 
services more user friendly, especially for older citizens. People also have 
concerns about the implementation of a multitude of services online in terms of 
confidentiality and fraud. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen stated it is great to see progress in technology and 
innovation; however it should not come to the detriment of people that have 
difficulty coping with the changes.  Older people often call to him seeking 
assistance in getting through to Government Departments or registering online 
for state services.  Some people are embarrassed that they cannot cope with the 
technological changes and some get confused and forget Passwords etc.   
 
So many services are now being pushed online it can be difficult to get to speak 
to an operator to resolve a problem over the phone.  He was aware from his own 
work if he has an IT problem and he rings for assistance he is put through to a 
call centre in India and it is difficult to understand them and for them to 
understand him which is very frustrating.  Whether it is to pay Motor Tax, LPT, 
ESB or accessing the services of various Government Departments he asked 
that public services are more mindful of service users and customers.   

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
28 of 47 
Cllr. Connor-Scarteen also called on organisers of the Dublin Tech Summit, 
which brings together global leaders in innovation technology and business, to 
make participants aware of the need to make their innovations more user friendly 
especially for older people. 
 
13. 
Call to provide specialised footwear for a disabled constituent 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. R. Beasley PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council call on the HSE and Minister for Health to grant 
without further delay, the necessary shoes for (details with Kerry County Council) 
which will significantly improve her quality of life having regard to her ongoing 
disability. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley stated he submitted this motion out of desperation at the failure 
of the HSE to supply custom made shoes for a 62 year old lady who applied for 
them in 2015.  This specialized footwear is required by this lady to help with her 
mobility in carrying out everyday tasks. Cllr. Beasley called on the Minister for 
Health and the HSE to ensure these shoes are provided to this lady immediately. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris SECONDED the motion. 
 
14. 
Call to implement a “National Post Office Support Week” 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
That the Government implement a "National Post Office Support Week" where 
everybody would be encouraged to visit their local Post Office on that week and 
explore the services that are available to the public. This Council in conjunction 
with An Post should lead the way by establishing one in Kerry this year. I suggest 
the week before St. Patrick's Day. 
 
Mr. L.  Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy stated Post Offices are businesses and they survive on 
turnover and this depends on their customers.  He asked if members and staff 
support their local Post Office as much as they can or indeed as much as they 
should.   A National Post Office Support Week would allow people to familiarise 
themselves with the services provided by their local Post Office and with a 
publicity campaign it would bring more people into Post Offices and help maintain 
employment.  Cllr. McCarthy called on all members to support his motion and he 
asked management to liaise with An Post to progress it. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane SECONDED the motion. 
 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
29 of 47 
 
15. 
Call for a percentage of the National Broadcasting Licence to be ring 
fenced for local Radio Stations 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council write to the relevant Minister to request that a 
percentage of the money collected for the National Broadcasting License be ring 
fenced for local Radio Stations. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy stated it is unfair that local Radio Stations do not get a 
percentage of the income from licence fees as they provide a vital service. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED the motion. 
 
16. 
Granting of planning permission in rural areas 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council to review and rectify the Planning process that's 
constantly depriving applicants from getting Planning Permission in rural areas 
even though they are renting or living in the same area for a number of years. 
These people want to build a home which would be their permanent place of 
residence. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The assertion that the planning process is constantly depriving applicants 
from getting Planning Permission for dwellings in rural areas does not 
reflect the position on the ground.  
 
In 2016 Kerry County Council granted Planning Permission for 193 out of 
216 applications for one off rural housing. The remaining 23 applications 
were refused for a number of reasons including: traffic, visual amenity, 
effluent disposal and lack of local need.  
 
As outlined in previous replies to similar notices of motion, the Planning 
Authority implements the rural settlement policy in the County 
Development Plan in accordance with the Sustainable Rural Housing 
Guidelines issued by the Minister. The rural settlement policy as outlined 
previously characterises the county into three rural area types which reflect 
the ability of these areas to absorb additional one off houses. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae outlined the details of two cases she was familiar with and 
asked that the issues she raised would be reviewed having regard to the length 
of time the applicants were resident in the area. 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
30 of 47 
Mr. M. Scannell advised members as stated in the reply 23 applications were 
refused in 2016 for a number of reasons including traffic, visual amenity and 
effluent disposal but just 3 of these related to the Settlement Policy.  In weaker 
rural areas applicants must confirm that the house will be their permanent place 
of residence whereas there are stricter criteria for areas under strong urban 
pressure and these areas must be retained for people who need to live in the 
area. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae advised that the applicant was from the area yet he could not 
get permission. 
 
The Cathaoirleach asked Cllr. Healy-Rae to discuss these cases further with Mr. 
Scannell after the meeting. 
 
The Chief Executive highlighted that Mr. Scannell made an important point in that 
just 3 applications were refused on settlement grounds in 2016 and that the 
Settlement Policy had been debated at length by Council. 
 
17. 
Call to open discussions with property/landowners in rural towns 
and villages to provide housing 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B. Cronin PROPOSED: 
Following the recent visit of Minister Simon Coveney, can the Management of 
Kerry County Council open discussions with property/landowners in our rural 
towns and villages with suitable qualified people in order to provide 
housing/apartments from vacant properties, particularly to cater for the vast 
amount of single applicants on our housing waiting lists. 
 
The following reply issued: 
At the recent Stakeholder Event the Minister outlined details of a ‘Repair 
and Lease Scheme’ which is currently on pilot In Waterford and Carlow 
County Councils. This Scheme is not yet available in Kerry but Government 
have committed to a national roll-out of this scheme at an early date in Q2 
of 2017. 
The final terms and conditions of the scheme remain to be determined so it 
is premature at this point to engage with potential property owners. When 
the Scheme is launched in Kerry appropriate advertisement of the Scheme 
will take place. 
 
Currently there are a number of Schemes available to property owners who 
may have properties available - RAS (Rental Accommodation Scheme), 
Leasing and HAP.    
 
 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
31 of 47 
The Council is willing to examine any property that may be available to 
Kerry County Council to use under the Leasing or RAS Schemes.  However, 
currently these houses must satisfy the Minimum Standards for Private 
Rented Dwellings and the property owner must be able to provide a current 
Tax Clearance Certificate, BER Cert and relevant insurance.  Any property 
owner who is interested in considering any of these options can telephone 
Ciara Keenan at 087-2258919 to discuss the matter further.   Further details 
are also available under the Housing Section of our website.    
 
 
The Housing Department is also interested in persons contacting us who 
have properties for sale throughout the County and these will be assessed 
on a case by case basis depending on our housing need in the area, the 
Purchase Price of the House and the cost of any repairs required to bring it 
up to our current standards.  The Department of Housing, Planning and 
Local Government has set unit ceiling costs for the acquisition of 1, 2 3 & 4 
bedroom properties in Kerry and the Council cannot exceed these costs. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin stated existing properties should be renovated and this presents 
an opportunity to provide social housing in rural towns and villages.  There is a 
substantial number of single applicants on the housing waiting list yet there is no 
construction programme to facilitate them.  At the meeting with Minister Coveney 
he believed there was a strong possibility his Department would consider such a 
proposal to renovate derelict/unused houses and suitable serviced sites also.  He 
asked what exactly is involved with the Repair and Lease Scheme and how can 
people benefit from it. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson SECONDED the motion. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue advised members that the Repair and Leasing Iniative is an 
integral delivery mechanism and will enable local authorities, having identified 
appropriate vacant privately owned properties in their functional area, to enter 
into long-term lease arrangements with property owners.  The RLI will be a new 
mechanism for local authorities to provide up-front grant aid to prospective 
landlords to meet reasonable renovation works to upgrade the properties to 
current rental standards.  In return, such landlords will enter into cost efficient 
contractual arrangements under the Social Housing Current Expenditure 
Programme (SHCEP). 
 
18. 
Call to introduce a Pension Scheme for CE Scheme supervisors 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Moriarty PROPOSED: 
That we call on Minister Varadkar in the Department of Social Protection to 
ensure that there is a long overdue Pension Scheme introduced for CE Scheme 
supervisors. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
32 of 47 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty stated the Labour Court recommended that CE Scheme 
supervisors should benefit from a Pension Scheme but this recommendation was 
not implemented.  This is a critical issue for supervisors and should be pursued. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher SECONDED the motion. 
 
19. 
Call to reinstate a Dura Patcher to each Engineering Area 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council urgently reinstate a Dura Patcher to each Engineering 
Area. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Council currently has 3 Dura – Patchers in operation, which are over 20 
years old. Two other units have been taken out of operation in recent years, 
due to the significant repair costs required. The 3 units are used on a 
county wide basis but are not cost effective for use in some parts of the 
county, due to issues with bitumen storage and relatively long haulage 
distances, particularly in the south west.  
 
We are carrying out an efficiency review of the Machinery Yard Operations, 
which includes a review of some of our ageing plant and our patching 
operations. It is envisaged that the review will be completed by March 2017. 
 
The replacement of plant will require a substantial capital investment, with 
modern self propelled velocity patchers costing in excess of €250,000, and 
any investment will be subject to the procurement and operation of such 
equipment offering effective value for money. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae stated there was a dura patcher in each engineering area up to 
a few years ago and having regard to the needs in the areas and current 
practices due to lack of dura patchers he called on management to purchase 
additional dura patchers. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan SECONDED the motion and Cllr. Healy-Rae’s proposal. 
 
The Chief Executive advised that an additional allocation of €700,000 was 
received for regional and local roads in 2017 and a dura patcher costs €250,000.  
She would like to be in a position to have a dura patcher for each engineering 
area but that is not possible.  She highlighted that not withstanding this, the 
Council has always completed the Roads Programme.  While it would be 
desirable to repair all roads we must remain within Budget.  In 2016 additional 
staff were employed from the additional €4m storm damage allocation but that 
was a once off allocation.  Kerry County Council maintained its own resource 
contribution over the past number of years even though central Government 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
33 of 47 
funding was reduced significantly.  She also advised that adequate time must be 
given for the completion of the review of the Machinery Yard. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae acknowledged the good work done by the staff in the 
Operations Department but stated management should acknowledge the issues 
presented by elected members. 
 
20. 
Condemnation of the trafficking of human organs 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. Quigg PROPOSED: 
That this Council condemns the trafficking of human organs and calls for 
increased international co-operation to combat this. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg stated there is a black market for human organs.  The EU has a 
policy on it yet the stories about vulnerable people being targeted and their 
organs being taken against their will are shocking.   
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson SECONDED the motion. 
 
21. 
Call for further improvements to the N22 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Gleeson PROPOSED: 
As the TII has recently excellently completed 3.5 Kms of resurfacing on the N22 
from Darryraeg to the County Bounds, that it would now turn its urgently needed 
attention to the section of the N22 westwards from Glenflesk village to the turn off 
for Loughquittane [L.3015] where the surface continues to unravel rapidly and 
dangerously. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The selection of national road sections for pavement overlay is done by TII 
directly using a Pavement Condition System relying on test results to 
select priority areas. The TII will be contacted to establish where this 
section of road features on the priority list and every effort will be made to 
highlight the deficiencies in the current pavement with a view to expediting 
improvement works at this location. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson stated at the May 2016 Council Meeting he presented 
photographs showed the poor condition of the N22.  Following this 3½ km of the 
road was improved.  However as you approach Killarney after the improved 
section the road is disintegrating and is a danger to all traffic and in particular 
cyclists.  He called on TII to undertake improvements to the remaining 4km of the 
N22 as it is a vital link between Kerry and Cork/Waterford and Rosslaire. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher SECONDED the motion. 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
34 of 47 
22. 
Call to reinstate the second emergency ambulance in Killarney 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.J. Culloty PROPOSED: 
That this Council write to the HSE, and the Minister for Health, Simon Harris, to 
request that the second emergency ambulance be reinstated in Killarney. At 
present, the ambulance service is constantly overstretched, and as a result, is 
putting people’s lives at risk. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty stated as a result of having just one emergency Ambulance in 
Killarney lives are being put at risk.  The Killarney Ambulance covers Millstreet 
and Kenmare etc and while there is an Ambulance in Millstreet by day the 
Killarney Ambulance must cover North Cork by night.  The Kenmare Ambulance 
is sometimes used for Killarney but that is too far away and as a result patients 
are waiting too long for an ambulance. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson SECONDED the motion. 
 
23. 
Provision of safe drop off and collection at College Road, 
Castleisland 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B. O’Connell PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council would prepare an application for 2017 Clár Funding 
for a Traffic Management Plan and provision of safe drop off and collection at 
College Road, Castleisland. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Unfortunately, Castleisland is not within the CLÁR designated area and 
therefore we are unable to make a submission for funding under this 
programme. However, we can examine the area to ascertain whether any 
specific measures can be utilised to improve traffic movements at school 
times in the area, and this will considered in the development of the 
Municipal District Work programme for the coming year. 
 
Cllr. B. O’Connell welcomed the reply and added that there is significant 
congestion in particular when the morning is wet at College Road.  The Traffic 
Warden is not present at this time and he should be asked to be there at drop off 
and pick up times for the schools.  He requested that a solution would be agreed 
with Gaelscoil Aogán where it maybe possible to recess the wall.  There are 3 
schools within 150m on this road and it is imperative that the safety of children 
and parents is addressed at this location. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane SECONDED the motion. 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
35 of 47 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae then moved Notice of Motion No. 32 as it also relates to this 
issue. 
 
32. 
Call for funding for a Traffic Warden for the three schools at College 
Road, Castleisland 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council are they going to provide the funding for a Traffic 
Warden which has been promised for a long time for the three schools on 
College Road, Castleisland. 
 
The following reply issued: 
As previously advised to the members at the Killarney MD meetings, an 
additional traffic warden is being provided in the Killarney Municipal 
District, over the peak tourism season, particularly having regard to the 
effective management of parking in Killarney town and on the basis that 
such measures will be self financing. There are no plans to provide 
additional traffic wardens in Castleisland although a commitment was 
made to the Killarney MD members that consideration may be given to 
some random enforcement in the town, when the current traffic warden is 
not available.  
 
Potential funding options for an extended traffic warden service in 
Castleisland can be considered and presented at a future MD meeting but 
this will require a commitment, in principal initially, from the members for 
the introduction of paid parking, as in Killarney town. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae stated in excess of 500 children attend the three schools on 
College Road and the speed of traffic on this road is frightening.  In a reply to a 
notice of motion at a Killarney MD Meeting a commitment was given to provide a 
Traffic Warden. 
 
Cllr. B. O’Connell SECONDED the motion. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan highlighted there is a Traffic Warden in Castleisland. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae again reiterated that a commitment was given to provide a 
Traffic Warden for the three schools. 
 
Cllr. B. O’Connell stated it would be helpful if the existing Traffic Warden could be 
deployed to College Road in the mornings and afternoons. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan undertook to consider this option. 
 
 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
36 of 47 
25. 
Demountable Units 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. T. Ferris PROPOSED: 
That Management would confirm how many demountable units have been 
provided in the last two years and explain why such units remain as an option on 
Housing application forms when they are not being approved even where they 
are the most suitable solution. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has provided no new Demountable Units in the last 
two years.  
 
The Council has replaced 2 Demountable Units from existing stock in this 
period.  
 
Kerry County Council has a number of demountable units in use in 
predominantly rural areas throughout the county. These have traditionally 
been used to meet a specific housing need in a particular area. They were 
generally used where no viable alternative housing option was available. 
 
The principle of Social Housing is to provide sustainable social housing, to 
a specific standard, to meet the need of all our housing applicants and we 
continue to seek alternative long term solutions in all cases for occupants 
of demountable units provided by the Council.  
 
Therefore, the provision of new demountable units, while they remain an 
option, are deemed appropriate only in very exceptional and limited cases. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris disagreed where there are exceptional needs that a demountable 
unit is provided.  Because of the application form she felt she had misled people 
and they applied for a demountable unit when they are not available.   If that is 
the case the option should not be included on the application form.  Demountable 
units suit applicants of a certain age who will not move into a town or village yet 
they are living in properties that are below an acceptable standard.   
 
Cllr. D. Nolan SECONDED the motion.   
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue stated he did not disagree with the views expressed by Cllr. 
Ferris.  He pointed out that only in exceptional circumstances will a demountable 
unit be provided yet he agreed that in some cases it is the only option.  Central 
government are not in favour of demountable units and as the funding for them is 
reduced they are not the ideal solution.  He asked Cllr. Ferris to let him have the 
details of the specific case she was referring to. 
 
 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
37 of 47 
26. 
Call to amend the Mortgage to Rent Scheme 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Finucane PROPOSED: 
To request the Minister for Housing, Mr. Simon Coveney to amend the Mortgage 
to Rent Scheme to ensure that no further evictions take place. This amendment 
to entail the compelling of all financial institutions to offer the home to the Local 
Authority at a discount price (minimum 25%) thus enabling the family to stay in 
their own homes, becoming Council tenants and if their circumstance change that 
they could purchase their home back under the Tenant Purchase Scheme. The 
discounted price would save these institutions legal costs but would give security 
of tenure to families in distress.  
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane stated for the months of December and January 88 applications 
for possession were before the Courts.  He believed there was no need for 
repossession as the Banks sell the property for any price while an eviction costs 
the State €7,000.  Even if the property was sold at a discounted price it would 
save the financial institutions legal costs.  This represents an opportunity for the 
State to at least own an asset. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty SECONDED the motion. 
 
28. 
Funding for the Emergency & Hardship LIS 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. O’Shea PROPOSED: 
To ask the Director of Operations to make €150,000 available for the Emergency 
& Hardship Local Improvement Schemes and for this to be divided equally 
among the four Municipal Districts. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The allocation of funding for various work programmes is a matter for the 
members in the adoption of the annual Budget. There is no specific funding 
for such a programme and prior to the suspension of the Local 
Improvement Scheme in 2012, the monies were provided from the specific 
grant aid from the Department of Transport towards improvement works to 
private roads.  
 
The current Emergency and Hardship scheme adopted by Council has been 
funded from Councillor’s Allocations, initially because of the non provision 
of state funding in 2012, and since 2013, because of the very limited 
funding provided under the grants.  
 
 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
38 of 47 
Taking into consideration the poor condition of the public road network, 
with over 52% of our local roads needing substantive grant aid to bring 
them up to a reasonable standard, and the very significant reduction in 
grant monies since 2008 (approximately 50% reduction), we are only in a 
position to provide €100,000 per annum towards the LIS programme.  
 
The options that can be considered is to suspend the LIS scheme and 
allocate the funding for Emergency & Hardship cases only or for members 
to provide the funding from the Councillor’s allocation, either at MD level or 
through a county wide provision.  
 
This issue will be considered by the Operations SPC, where a more detailed 
report on the implications can be presented to the members. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea stated there is no other source of funding for the Emergency and 
Hardship Scheme other than from discretionary funding and Councillors can no 
longer fund it.  Improvement to some roads under this scheme cost upwards of 
€40,000.  He called on the Director of Operations to make funding available for 
this scheme and if funding is not available that the Scheme would be suspended. 
 
In response Mr. C. O’Sullivan clarified that the allocation of funding for the 
various roads programmes is a matter for the members.  In the past funding was 
received under the LIS when a number of roads were improved each year.  
When this scheme was suspended the Transport SPC considered it and 
members agreed to fund the Emergency and Hardship Scheme from Councillors 
Allocations on a county wide basis as Dingle just had 3 members at that time.  
Mr. O’Sullivan undertook to bring this issue to the Operations SPC for further 
consideration.  If members wish they can suspend the LIS and maintain the 
Emergency and Hardship Scheme but he highlighted that over half of local roads 
are in a bad condition. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea agreed to refer this matter to the Operations SPC for review. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady supported the motion and this suggestion.   
 
Cllr. T. Ferris pointed out that some funding has already been committed for 
2017. 
 
Mr. O’Sullivan confirmed that is the case in some areas for Emergencies and 
Hardship only.   
 
Cllr. B. Cronin suggested that the existing LIS should be suspended. 
 
 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
39 of 47 
29. 
Delegation to meeting Minister for Justice and Court Services to 
demand the retention of a working Courthouse in Ashe Street 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Daly PROPOSED: 
That this Council will lead a delegation, including some local business 
representatives and lawyers, to meet the Minister for Justice and Court Services 
in order to inform them that we demand the retention of a working Courthouse in 
Ashe Street, because we consider that the vibrancy of Tralee Town Centre is a 
priority for the whole County. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly stated Tralee Town Centre is improving and there was excellent 
feedback following the Mayo Kerry game recently.  The new Lidl Store will open 
in Edward Street shortly which will revitalise that area.  The Courthouse should 
remain in Ashe Street as it has been there for 160 years.  He PROPOSED that 
council officials would enter into discussions with local users/businesses with a 
view to arranging a meeting with the Minister for Justice regarding this very 
important issue. 
 
Cllr. S. Locke SECONDED the motion. 
 
30. 
Clarification on the regulations in place for tourists who travel to 
Ireland for hunting and shooting 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council seek clarification from relevant Government Bodies 
regarding the regulations that are in place for tourists who travel to this Country 
for hunting and shooting. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy clarified that he was not opposed to hunting or shooting but he 
wanted clarification on the regulations governing tourists who come to the 
country for hunting and shooting.  What can they shoot, what is prohibited and 
who regulates it. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED the motion. 
 
31. 
Call to accommodate Cremation Urns in burial grounds 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council accommodate Cremation Urns in burial grounds 
throughout Kerry. 
 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
40 of 47 
The following reply issued: 
It is an objective of the Kerry County Development plan 2015 - 2021 to 
"Facilitate a special section for ashes, such as a garden or a wall of ashes 
type of development in burial grounds." 
 
Facilities for Cremation Urns can be considered in any new graveyard 
developments in the County. 
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen stated he wanted Kerry County Council to provide 
memorial walls in burial grounds in the main towns of the county given the 
increase in demand for cremation nationally and the shortage of burial spaces.  
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan stated it was intended that the Operations SPC would 
undertake a fundamental review of burial grounds and this proposal can form part 
of the review. 
 
33. 
Request to officials of the NPWS to attend a Council Meeting 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B. Cronin PROPOSED: 
In light of the danger which deer from the National Park are causing on our public 
roads, and damage being done to fencing and property both in rural and urban 
areas, can I ask Kerry County Council to immediately request the Officials of the 
NPWS to attend a Council meeting. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin stated the situation is gone out of control in Fossa which is a 
national road and deer are causing accidents.  The fencing at Tomies is 
destroyed and they are eating the grass in silage ground and damaging 
properties.  He asked that officials from the NPWS would be invited to attend the 
March Council Meeting to account for the out of control deer numbers.   
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion. 
 
The Cathaoirleach stated if the Officials from the NPWS will not attend a Council 
Meeting they should be requested to meet with a deputation from the Council. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin agreed with this suggestion. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae stated he wanted to be on that deputation. 
 
 
 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
41 of 47 
34. 
Call for the OPW to address Council 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Moriarty PROPOSED: 
That the OPW be invited to address us in the Chambers and that we have an 
opportunity to engage with them on the many aspects of their work in the County 
that impact on the economic and social life of all. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty stated the OPW website is good but councillors or the general 
public have no input into decision making by the OPW.  They should take the 
views of elected members on board as they represent the people of the county.   
 
Cllr. B. Cronin SECONDED the motion. 
 
35. 
Call for follow up with the Minister for Housing in relation to the 
Tenant Purchase Scheme 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council write to Minister Simon Coveney, to follow on from our 
meeting with him about the Tenant Purchase Scheme, where over 80% of 
applicants do not qualify. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Department recently opened a public consultation process on the 
operation of the Tenant Purchase Scheme.  The closing date for 
submissions was Friday 10th February. 
 
The Council has made a submission to this Public Consultation Process. 
This submission was based on the views of the Housing SPC and 
submissions made by individual Members. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae welcomed the making of a submission by Kerry County 
Council and he added that he also made a submission.  Some tenants have the 
finance to buy their local authority house but because of the criteria they do not 
qualify. 
 
Cllr. S. Locke SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady suggested that a deputation should be sought with Minister 
Coveney on this issue. 
 
 
 
 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
42 of 47 
36. 
Implications of BREXIT 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. Quigg PROPOSED: 
In light of Brexit, and what it may and may not mean for Ireland as a Country, that 
this Council supports a non return to hard border controls on this Island and calls 
on the Minister for Foreign Affairs to adopt a tough stance in this regard going 
forward and to hold an open conference where discussions can be held about 
uniting this Island that our friends, neighbours, relations and fellow Irish men and 
women laid down their lives for throughout the course of history to try and 
achieve. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg highlighted that he grew up in a border town where British soldiers 
patrolled the streets.  That was not a normal childhood and children could not 
wear their GAA club colours.  He asked that a Conference would be held around 
talks on a united Ireland.   
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen SECONDED the motion. 
 
The Cathaoirleach informed members that he proposed to invite MEPs and 
Senators to attend a Council meeting and they can be asked to comment on the 
potential impact of BREXIT on the country. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson asked that MEPs from Northern Ireland would also be invited to 
attend the meeting. 
 
17.02.20.15 Correspondence – Conferences and Seminars 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. B. Cronin, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Finucane it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. N. Moriarty at the SICAP 
event held in Cork on Tuesday 14th February 2017. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. B. Cronin it 
was agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllr. J. Sheahan at the 
Conference on the theme “Civic Leadership and the Councillor” to be held 
in Wexford from 24th to 26th February 2017. 
 
 
Cllr. Sheahan was nominated to report back to Council on this 
Conference. 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. B. Cronin, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Lucid it was 
agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllrs. Beasley, Spring, O’Brien, 
Kennelly, P. McCarthy, Sheahan, Cronin, Culloty, Moriarty, Grady and 
Lucid at the Conference on the theme “The Fair Deal Scheme – What’s 
the deal with Nursing Home Care” to be held in Carlingford, Co. Louth 
from 10th to 12th March 2017. 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
43 of 47 
 
 
Cllr. Kennelly was nominated to report back to Council on this Conference. 
 
17.02.20.16 Correspondence General 
 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were 
circulated: 
 
Letter dated 22nd December 2016 from the HSE in response to a resolution from Kerry 
County Council in relation to St. Finian’s Campus, Killarney. 
 
Email dated 18th January 2017 from An Post in response to a request from Kerry County 
Council to reopen the Post Box at Listry Cross. 
 
Letter dated 19th January 2017 from the Department of Social Protection in response to 
resolutions from Kerry County Council in relation to proposed changes to the Rural Social 
Scheme. 
 
Letter dated 23rd January 2017 from Iarnród Éireann in response to a resolution from 
Kerry County Council in relation to the direct Kerry Dublin train service. 
 
Letter dated 23rd January 2017 from the DHPCLG in response to a resolution from Kerry 
County Council in relation to guidelines for solar farms. 
 
Email dated 13th February 2017 from the Minister for Communications, Climate Action & 
Environment in response to a resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to the 
delivery of high speed broadband services. 
 
Letter dated 5th February 2017 from the Office of the Minister for Arts, Heritage, Regional, 
Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs in response to a resolution from Kerry County Council in 
relation to LEADER funding. 
 
Letter dated 20th January 2017 from Tipperary County Council in relation to a resolution 
adopted by that authority calling on the Department of Housing, Planning, Community and 
Local Government to amend/increase the planning exemptions for Solar Photovoltaic 
energy production for residential and non residential buildings etc. 
 
Letter dated 9th February 2017 from Sligo County Council in relation to a resolution 
adopted by that authority calling on the Taoiseach and Finance Minister to make a 
statement setting out a work programme on how it will implement its commitments to 
Credit Unions. 
 
Letter dated 10th February 2017 from Donegal County Council in relation to a resolution 
adopted by that authority backing proposals to have the Irish Coast Guard recognised the 
same as the other main emergency services. 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
44 of 47 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson referred to the reply from the HSE in relation to the buildings and 
the lands at St. Finians in Killarney which states “In relation to the remainder of 
the campus, the HSE has asked Kerry County Council if it offers any strategic 
opportunities to them in relation to Kerry County Council requirements.”  Cllr. 
Gleeson stated this merits a full discussion at a Council meeting. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty stated he submitted a notice of motion on this to the HSE. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue advised members that Ms. McAllen and he met the HSE in 
the past two weeks.  They must consolidate their plans but there will be 
opportunities for Kerry County Council in relation to parts of the portfolio.  He 
undertook to revert to the Killarney MD with an update in due course. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty stated he requested the HSE to provide a facility for Alzheimer 
patients on these lands and he presumed the remainder of the land would be 
sold. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin welcomed the update and stated the lands at St. Finians would be 
very suitable for housing.  It is important that negotiations are progressed. 
 
17.02.20.18 Any other business 
 
Cllr. P. Daly moved the following Emergency Motion in support of Tesco workers 
who are on strike: 
 
“That this Council fully supports Tesco workers who are on strike at present”. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris SECONDED the motion. 
 
Problem with water supply from Ballymalis Cross on the N72 towards Listry 
Cross 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin stated there is a problem with a section of the water pipe from 
Ballymalis Cross on the N72 towards Listry Cross around the Woollen Mills and 
there has been ongoing disruption to the water supply.  He asked that this issue 
would be pursued with Irish Water. 
 
Mr. J. Kennelly undertook to contact Irish Water on it. 
 
Assistance at Revenue Offices 
 
Cllr. S. Locke stated there is no longer assistance for members of the public at 
Revenue Offices in relation to the claiming of medical expenses, tax credits etc.  
He asked that a letter would issue to Revenue insisting that support for 
individuals would continue to be provided at all Revenue offices. 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
45 of 47 
 
Aghadoe Burial Ground 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae asked that the skip at Aghadoe Burial Ground is removed as 
there is illegal dumping at it and it should not be there. 
 
17.02.20.11 Presentation by Foodshare Kerry 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson stated he moved the following Notice of Motion at the November 
2016 Council meeting: 
 
“That all retailers would be encouraged to refrain from dumping surplus 
perishable food and food approaching its Use By Date and that they would 
donate it to worthy causes. That Government would actively promote this 
project.” 
 
Arising from this motion Mr. Robert Carey and Mr. Mícheál Ó Coileáin were 
present on behalf of Foodshare Kerry to make a presentation to members. 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed Mr. Carey and Mr. Ó Coileáin to the meeting and 
invited Mr. Carey to address the meeting. 
 
Mr. Carey stated the proportion of children living in consistent poverty increased 
from 6.8% in 2008 to 11.5% in 2016 and the percentage of low paid workers is 
the 4th highest of the 29 OECD countries.  Kerry has one of the lowest disposable 
incomes in the country.   
 
Food poverty is defined as “inability to afford or access healthy food”.  It impacts 
most on children, lone parent families, the unemployed, ill, people with disabilities 
and low income households.  Food Poverty is on the rise in Ireland with over 
600,000 people being affected in 2013.  Affordability is a key issue with low 
income households spending up to a quarter of their income on food.   
 
Food surplus occurs as a consequence of modern food production and 
distribution process and the cost of this waste is significant for the economy and 
environment.  As outlined in the Southern Regional Waste Management Plan, the 
preferred strategy in terms of dealing with waste is prevention and with a 
particular emphasis on food waste.  Foodshare Kerry is a not-for-profit 
organisation set up to help combat food poverty and food waste.  They rescue 
surplus food from supermarkets and food producers and make it available to 
those in need.    Kerry Foodshare has prevented 9 tons of food from entering 
landfill.   
 
 
 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
46 of 47 
Foodshare Kerry is the only project in the County preventing this amount of food 
waste.  The project delivers to 22 charities, collects from a number of suppliers 
and rents a fully equipped warehouse near the old Denny Site in Tralee.  In 
further developing its Food poverty strategy the project has increased its food 
supply through the delivery of Food through the European Aid for the Most 
Deprived Fund (FEAD) which gives access to a range of staple food products 
free of charge.  Foodshare Kerry is not one the biggest distributors of FEAD in 
the country.  The project involves Saint Vincent de Paul, North East & West Kerry 
Development and Kerry County Council and has received funding through a 
range of sources including the Bon Secours Hospital and the EPA.  However 
Foodshare Kerry has no core funding and it is staffed through schemes and 
volunteers.  Therefore in acknowledgement of its contribution Foodshare Kerry 
are asking the Council to allocate €10,000 per year over three years from the 
Waste Prevention Fund towards running costs of the project. 
 
All members commended Mr. Carey on his excellent presentation. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson congratulated Foodshare on their work and stated it is a terrible 
indictment on our country that food poverty exists.  Cllr. Gleeson strongly 
encouraged all other businesses who do not make food available at present to do 
so.  He called on the Press to send out a strong message to ensure good food 
does not go to landfill.  Cllr. Gleeson called on the Chief Executive and the Head 
of Finance to meet Mr. Carey and his colleagues with a view to making financial 
support available to Foodshare Kerry.   
 
Cllr. S. Locke stated he has seen first hand the difference Foodshare Kerry 
makes to peoples lives in particular at Christmas.  He called on shops not to 
waste food but to give surplus food and food nearing its shelf life to Foodshare 
Kerry.  Cllr. Locke also called on Kerry County Council to provide financial 
support to them.   
 
Cllr. T. Ferris stated the figures presented by Mr. Carey are stark and she added 
she had first hand experience of food poverty when a mother had to make a 
choice between turf for the fire and food.  Almost 3,000 people in Kerry benefit 
from the work of Foodshare Kerry and they are seeking a contribution of €10,000 
from Kerry County Council which is not a major commitment.  This project is 
driven by volunteers and Cllr. Ferris requested that a letter would issue to the 
relevant Minister seeking funding to sustain this project with a view to creating at 
least one full time position.  Cllr. Ferris congratulated all involved and she 
suggested that members could make a contribution to Foodshare Kerry at MD 
level.  Too many children go to school hungry and because they do not achieve 
as a result career opportunities are closed to them. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady stated Mr. Carey’s presentation gave members a greater insight 
into what is happening with food poverty and Foodshare Kerry’s efforts to 
address it.  He commended them on their excellent work. 

Minutes February 2017 
20th February 2017  
47 of 47 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane concurred with the views expressed by previous speakers and 
he said the request for funding from Kerry County Council is very modest.  He 
suggested that each Municipal District could allocate €2,500 each from their 
Community Support Fund.   
 
The Chief Executive welcomed the presentation which was informative and 
added between the various bodies, LEADER and perhaps the Community 
Support Fund it maybe possible to support the project. 
 
Mr. Carey thanked members for their support and added that any funding would 
be very much appreciated.  Nationally funding is not available for the project and 
it is important to get this message out there. 
 
The meeting concluded at 1.10pm. 
 
 
Liam Quinlan                                       _________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator                     Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
