 
1 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ AN CRUINNIÚ DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH 
I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRÁ LÍ, AGUS AR-LÍNE/FÍORÚIL 
AR AN LUAN, 16 FEABHRA, 2026 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN THE 
COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE AND ONLINE ON MONDAY, 16 
February 2026 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
Angie Baily                            Tom Barry  
Robert Brosnan 
      
Tommy Cahill                        Brendan Cronin 
Paul Daly                            
Charlie Farrelly                      Deirdre Ferris 
Breandán Fitzgerald  
Fionnán Fitzgerald                 Michael Foley (Cathaoirleach) Podge Foley       
       Martin Grady 
       
   Tommy Griffin                     Jackie Healy-Rae  
      Johnny Healy-Rae                  Maura Healy-Rae               Niall Kelleher                                          
Aoife Kennelly                       Michael Leane                     Dan McCarthy                       
Jimmy Molone 
Marie Moloney            
    Norma Moriarty                     
Liam Speedy Nolan               Terry O’Brien                       Niall O’Callaghan                  
Bobby O’Connell                   John O’Donoghue                Anne O’ Sullivan                   
Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey       Mikey Sheehy      
 
ABSENT/ AS LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
Sam Locke 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Mr.  M. O’ Donoghue Deputy Chief Executive          Ms. N. O’ Sullivan Dir Housing                   
     
Mr. P. Neary Dir Com, Climate Act& Oper Serv       Ms. A. McAllen Dir of Finance                       
Ms. B. Fitzgerald A/Dir Cap Deliver,                         Mr. S. Scally Meetings Admin 
Ms. K. Kennelly Arts Officer 
 
      Ms. E O’ Donoghue A/ S.E.O. Cor Services      
Mr. J. McCann I.T. Dept                              
      Mr. K. O’ Connor I.T.                                          
Ms. C. Fitzgerald S.S.O. Corp Ser                           Ms. O. O’Shea, A.S.O Corp Services                
 
 
 
The meeting commenced at 11.30a.m.   
 
Cllr. Michael Foley took the Chair and welcomed everyone.  
 
 
16.02.2026.01 
Protocols/Induction 
Mr. S. Scally, Meeting Administrator, referred Elected Members to the Protocols for 
Meetings of Kerry County Council and took a roll call.  
 

 
2 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
Civic Reception  
The Deputy Chief Executive advised that the issue of Civic Reception was discussed 
at the February CPG Meeting where the executive again reminded members of the 
protocols adopted in 2019. The Deputy Chief Executive said that it is the role of the 
executive to advise Councillors on the protocols adopted and said that the Civic 
Reception protocol is a reserved function, a policy put in place by the Elected 
Members. He advised should the Members wish to break this policy it must be done 
by a vote of the Elected Members. He also advised Councillors that due to health and 
safety with thin the Council Chambers, the numbers for each team will have to be 
restricted.  
 
It was agreed that Notice of Motion No 4 , 5 and 14 who all had the same response.    
 
4. Request to give Civic Reception to Ballymacelligott, An Gaeltacht and 
Dingle GAA Football teams 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Angie Baily proposed 
 
That Kerry County Council host a Civic Reception to the Ballymacelligott, An 
Gaeltacht and Dingle GAA Football teams in recognition of their All-Ireland victories 
in the Junior, Intermediate and Senior Club Championships respectively. These 
Clubs’ achievements are recognised nationally and internationally as an historic 
achievement for Kerry and have brought great honour to the entire country. This is 
the first time in Gaelic Football that three club teams from the one county have 
achieved this accolade, the highest honour in Gaelic Sports for a club. Given the 
unique and historical nature of these victories, in recognition of the commitment and 
dedication of these three rural clubs, we ask that the three teams be afforded the 
highest honour of a Civic Reception by Kerry County Council. 
 
 
5. Request to give Civic Reception to Ballymacelligott, An Gaeltacht and 
Dingle GAA Football teams 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Charlie Farrelly proposed 
To ask Kerry Council to hold a Full Civic Reception for the 3 All-Ireland winning club 
teams, Dingle, (All-Ireland Senior Club Champions), Àn Gaelthacht (Intermediate 
Champions) and Ballymacelligot (All-Ireland Junior Champions). This is a huge 
historic achievement by our 3 Champions, and it has never before happened in the 
history of the GAA in Ireland. 
 
14.Request to give Civic Reception to Ballymacelligott, An Gaeltacht and 
Dingle GAA Football teams 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Anne O'Sullivan proposed 
That Kerry County Council host a Civic Reception to the Ballymacelligott, An Gaeltacht 
and Dingle GAA Football teams in recognition of their All-Ireland victories in the Junior, 
Intermediate and Senior Club Championships respectively. These Clubs’ 
achievements are recognised nationally and internationally as an historic achievement 
for Kerry and have brought great honour to the entire country. This is the first time in 
Gaelic Football that three club teams from the one county have achieved this 
accolade, the highest honour in Gaelic Sports for a club. Given the unique and 
historical nature of these victories, in recognition of the commitment and dedication of 

 
3 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
these three rural clubs, we ask that the three teams be afforded the highest honour of 
a Civic Reception by Kerry County Council. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members in 
the context of the procedures for civic receptions agreed by the members of 
Kerry County Council. 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly said that the protocol states that there is an agreement for two full 
Council Civic Receptions per year with a possibility of a third civic reception under 
exceptional circumstances. Cllr. Charlie Farrelly said that he has no doubt that the 
success of these three teams’ merits exceptional circumstances.  
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan called on her fellow councillor to support the proposal for the 
three teams as a joint Full Council Civic Reception. This is the first time this has been 
achieved in this county and is exceptional. It is a very unique situation that has 
received international coverage. Ballymacelligott stretches over two Municipal Districts 
and if necessary, said an alternative venue should be sourced if the Council Chambers 
is unable to cater for the numbers.  
 
Cllr. Angie Bailly said that these events have been history in the making of three rural 
clubs where numbers are declining. This is what community is about and supported 
the request to honour these three wonderful achievements at the highest civic level.  
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae concurred with the previous comments expressed and said that 
there should be no restrictions put in place for the numbers invited. He called on the 
Civic Honour protocol to be reviewed by the extended CPG.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan and Seconded by Cllr. Angie Baily it was 
proposed to amend the procedures for civic receptions and hold a Full Civic Reception 
for the 3 All-Ireland winning club teams, Dingle, (All-Ireland Senior Club Champions), 
Àn Gaelthacht (Intermediate Champions) and Ballymacelligot (All-Ireland Junior 
Champions).   
 
A vote was taken on the proposal as follows  
 
For: Cllrs. (30) Angie Baily, Tom Barry, Robert Brosnan, Tommy Cahill, Brendan 
Cronin, Paul Daly,  Charlie Farrelly,  Deirdre Ferris, Breandán Fitzgerald, Podge 
Foley, Martin Grady, Tommy Griffin, Jackie Healy-Rae, Maura Healy-Rae, Niall 
Kelleher, Aoife Kennelly, Michael Leane, Dan McCarthy, Jimmy Moloney, Marie 
Moloney, Norma Moriarty, Liam Speedy Nolan, Terry O’Brien, Niall ‘Botty’ O’ 
Callaghan, Bobby O’ Connell, John O’ Donoghue, Anne O’ Sullivan, Teddy O’ 
Sullivan-Casey, Mikey Sheehy, Michael Foley (Cath)                                               
 
Against: (0) 
Absent: Cllr. (3) Fionnán Fitzgerald, Johnny Healy-Rae, Sam Locke 
  
Mr. S Scally Meetings Administrator said the vote was carried.                
 
 
 

 
4 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
Vote of Sympathy  
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley proposed a vote of sympathy to the family of David O’ 
Brien Kerry County Council. The Cathaoirleach said that David was very devoted 
public servant. He will be sadly missed by his wife Mary and his daughters Sadie and 
Chloe and his many friends and colleagues at Kerry County Council.  
 
All Elected Members wished to be associated with the sympathies expressed. The 
Members recalled David’s many different roles in public office in particular being 
Listowel Town Clerk. David understood the role of County Councillors. He was deep 
rooted in his town of Listowel and was at the heart of the community along with his 
involvement in the GAA and Listowel Celtic.   
 
The Deputy Chief Executive also wished to be associated with the sympathies 
expressed for former colleague David O’ Brien. He said that emotions were very sad 
in Kerry County Council following the news of David’s passing. The Deputy Chief 
Executive said that David was a fantastic colleague and a wonderful human being.   
Ar dheis Dé go a anam.   
 
Suspension of Meeting  
On the proposal of Cllr Jimmy Moloney and seconded by Cllr. Aoife Kennelly it was 
agreed to suspend the meeting at 1.30p.m. and resume at 3.00p.m. to allow everyone 
to attend the funeral of David O’ Brien.  
 
16.02.2026.02 
Cathaoirleach’s Report on CPG Meeting 
The Cathaoirleach’s report on the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 10 February 
2026, was noted by the Members. 
 
16.02.2026.03 
Confirmation of Minutes 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell SECONDED by Cllr. Norma Moriarty, it 
was resolved that the minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Kerry County Council held 
on 19th January 2026 be confirmed. 
 
16.02.2026.04 
Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
The Chief Executive’s Report to Council for the month of February 2026 which had 
been circulated was noted by the Members.  
 
Cllr Robert Brosnan said that recent signage erected on the N86 was removed by 
Kerry County Council citing the Litter Act 2026. He requested clarification on who 
requested the signage’s removal?. He welcomed the recent visit to the County by 
Uachtarán na hÉireann Catherine Connolly.  
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae welcomed the update on Affordable Housing and asked how 
many expressions of interest have been received by the Housing Department. He 
asked if the variations to the County Development Plan will have to be revisited as part 
of the County Development Plan process which will commence in two years.  
 

 
5 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae also requested details on the expression of interest for the 
Affordable Housing and asked if any details have been received from the regulator in 
relation to the Killarney Variation Plan.  
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly noted that the Pretty Polly site in Killarney has recently been 
cleared out and asked if the bridge on the site could be used in Castleisland? 
 
The Deputy Chief Executive advised as part of the next County Development Plan 
process all elements of the plan will be reviewed including the variations.   
 
Ms. N. O’ Sullivan Director of Service advised that three expressions of interest have 
been received for Killarney and two for Tralee. As the deadline was only on Friday 13th 
February, the details are still being reviewed and undertook to forward an update to 
the Elected Members of all applications received. The Housing Department is very 
satisfied with the process. The matter will come before the SPC for discussion, 
however future progress will be subject to approval by the Department.  
 
Mr. P. Neary Director of Service undertook to revert to Cllr. Brosnan in relation to the 
signage issue on the N86. 
 
16.02.2026.05 
Disposal of Land  
On the proposal of Cllr. Marie Moloney and seconded by Cllr. Niall Kelliher it was 
agreed to approve the disposal of land measuring 0.01 hectares, at 6 St. Mary’s 
Terrace, St. Mary Road’s Road Killarney. Co. Kerry situated in the townland of 
Inch,(ED Killarney Urban) District Electoral Division Killarney Urban to (Name withheld 
for data protection purposes. A paper copy of unedited Minutes available on request), 
in accordance with the term of the notice issued on  19th  January 2026, pursuant to 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001,(as amended) and Section 211 of the 
Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended). 
 
16.02.2026.06 
Kerry Self Catering Association to make a presentation to 
Full Council regarding the potential impact to its members and tourism from 
upcoming proposed changes to legislation 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed Ms. Noelle Casey Chairperson Kerry Self Catering 
Association Ms.  Lisa Argue of Dream Ireland.  
 
Ms. Noelle Casey gave a presentation to the meeting under the following headings.   
 
• Is Kerry County Council prepared to be the ‘fall guy’ when hundreds of SME’s 
in the self-catering sector close this spring? 
• What will this mean for Kerry and who will get the blame? 
• So what’s the answer? 
• Exemptions 1 - Specific Tourism Accommodation Lets (TAL)  
• Exemption 2 -National Quality Assurance Framework  
• Exemption 3- Extend the B&B planning 
• Exemption 4- Farming  
• Exemption 5 -Regenerative Tourism  
• Exemption 6 - Thatch Cottages  

 
6 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
• Exemption 7 - Heritage buildings 
• Glamping Guidelines for Regenerative Tourism Heritage Properties (not 
Exemptions) 
 
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin agreed to move Notice of Motion no 1 as follows  
 
1. Exemptions for Self-Catering Providers in Tourism 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Brendan Cronin proposed 
That Kerry County Council call on the Government to implement exemptions for self-
catering providers in the tourism industry, rather than retrospective planning 
requirements. This would allow all existing self-catering to be identified giving time to 
meet with local planning guidelines. This would also require a national planning 
statement to give clarity for new built self-catering farm diversification projects, 
glamping and what can be allowed, so planners have confidence and clarity in what is 
permitted going forward. This needs to be realised before the 2026 tourism season. 
 
Mr. Sean Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin thanked both Noelle and Lisa for a very detailed presentation 
and said it highlights to the members the issues that the self-catering industry is 
facing. The proposed legislation needs to be reviewed in advance of the summer 
season. This industry is providing a vital service to the county which is heavily 
reliable on tourism and referred to the survey undertaken by Mr. Jim Power who 
outlined that the tourism industry is worth €75M in this county. He said the 
amendment to the act will focus on towns with a population over 20,000 people and 
said that these providers have been wrongfully targeted who have worked very hard 
to keep their businesses in operation. He questions the comments expressed by 
Failte Ireland that 12,000 properties will be made available under the new legislation 
and said that a number of these properties will never enter into long-term leasing. 
He said that number of people granted planning permission is very small with many 
others afraid to apply as they are fearful of the outcome.  
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr Podge Foley and offered his support to Kerry Self 
Catering Association. 
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae moved Notice of Motion no 16 
 
16. Update Members on Recent Department Circular Re: Short Term Letting 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae proposed 
To ask Kerry County Council to provide an update to members on the implications 
of a recent department circular regarding short-term letting. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Circular SPI 01/2026 from the Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage provided clarity on the current legislative and policy framework for the 
regulation of short-term letting of houses and apartments and other residential 
accommodation in the planning system.  In addition, the circular provided an 
overview of the EU Short-Term Letting Rental Regulation and the associated 
timelines for implementation.   

 
7 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
 
In respect of planning, in summary the circular notes that to ensure compliance with 
statutory planning requirements, namely planning permission for short-term letting 
use is required in any location where: 
 
• a house or apartment that is a person’s principal private residence (i.e. main 
home), is used for short-term letting for a cumulative period of more than 90 days 
per annum where the host is not present; or,  
• a house or apartment that is not a person’s principal private residence (i.e. is a 
second or subsequent property), is used for short-term letting for any period, and   
• the house or apartment that is being used for short-term letting, does not have 
planning permission for that use. 
 
Therefore many short-term letting hosts are required to make a planning 
application to the relevant local authority.  This should be for change of use in the 
case of a new proposal for short-term letting, or retention of change of use in 
seeking to continue an existing short-term letting operation, in accordance with the 
regulations. In assessing any such planning applications, planning authorities must 
make a planning decision on the merits of the particular application, having regard 
to any relevant policies set out in the local authority development plan for the area 
in question.   
 
The circular noted that there is currently no statutory national-level planning policy 
in place with regard to short-term letting, but there is a commitment to issue a 
National Planning Statement (NPS), to set out policy and provide guidance for 
planning authorities. 
 
In respect of the Short Term Rental Regulation from May 20, 2026, all STL units to 
be registered with Fáilte Ireland and display a unique registration number online. 
The circular mandates that properties in Rent Pressure Zones (RPZs) used as 
second homes or entire principal residences for more than 90 days annually will 
generally need change-of-use planning permission. 
 
Cllr. Maura Heraly-Rae said that no clarify or guidance has been received leaving a 
great deal of uncertainty amongst the industry before the season commences. The 
whole country has been deemed a rent pressure zone with a number of entities 
conflicting with each other. Guidance needs to be given to towns up to 20,000 on 
whether they still need planning permission. In recent times South Kerry has seen 
the development of the Greenway but planning permission for a hotel was refused, 
she said if we want tourist to stay in Kerry, we need to be able to accommodate 
them. She said the policies don’t have the desired effect; this county will always need 
short-term letting.  
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae seconded this motion and said it will be impossible for many 
of these properties to secure planning permission and questioned where the visitors 
to this county will source accommodation. The largest urban centres will be under 
pressure to provide bedding.  He said while the 20,000-population ruling is very 
welcomed, it won’t solve the problem for everyone, in particular in South Kerry where 
the population continues to decrease.  
 

 
8 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae said he had an issue with the word “Air BnB” and said this 
buzz word has taken over the conversation. He said the whole planning issue needs 
clarity and referred to a recent festival event in Kerry where festival organisers were 
asking people to provide rooms to accommodate visitors.  
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald offered his support to the Kerry Self Catering Association 
and said he was aware that many of these people involved in short-term letting are 
using it to supplement family income. He said the whole concept needs to be 
changed and questioned the long-term consequences of changing the planning 
permission of a property.  
 
Cllr. Deridre Ferris said that she has spoken to property owner who don’t trust the 
process. She noted that over a quarter of properties in Dingle for letting are Air BnB’s 
which contributes to the wider housing problem.  
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan said that a balance must be struck and a substantial number of 
properties in Dingle are short-term lets. The 66% rule on Irish speakers living in the 
Gaeltacht areas has been breached. He expressed concerns that this country will 
lose a generation of people if the Irish Language criteria isn’t enforced.    
 
Cllr Dan McCarthy concurred with the comments expressed and offered his support 
to Kerry Self Catering Association. 
 
Following a query from Cllr. Marie Moloney on the provision of insurance for Short-
Term Letting properties, Ms. Noelle Casey advised that insurance is not an issue for 
these properties. 
 
Cllr. Paul Daly said there should be balance between short term letting properties 
and the provision of housing in Kerry.  
 
In response Ms. Noelle Casey suggested that the solution maybe to build more 
properties. She said she is part of a small family whose income is supplemented by 
short-term letting. There should be an allowance made between people who 
purchase five properties for STL and those who want to supplement their income. 
She said that people who are currently engaging in short-term letting will not re-let 
properties under long-term letting.  
 
The Leas-Cathaoirleach took the Chair and said it was now 1.30p.m. and as agreed 
the meeting would break and resume at 3.00p.m. 
 
The meeting resumed at 3.00p.m. the Leas - Cathaoirleach took the Chair and  Mr. 
Sean Scally Meetings administrator did a roll call as follows.  
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
Robert Brosnan                      Tommy Cahill                    Paul Daly                            
Charlie Farrelly                      Deirdre Ferris 
Breandán Fitzgerald  
Fionnán Fitzgerald                 Podge Foley 
 Martin Grady 
 
     
Tommy Griffin                      Jackie Healy-Rae 
Johnny Healy-Rae                  

 
9 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
Maura Healy-Rae                  Niall Kelleher                
Dan McCarthy                           
Marie Moloney (Leas-Cathaoirleach)                         
Norma Moriarty                    
Liam Speedy Nolan           Niall O’Callaghan             
John O’Donoghue                 
Anne O’ Sullivan                Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey       Mikey Sheehy      
 
ABSENT/ AS LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
Angie Baily,   
        Tom Barry,  
                              Brendan Cronin,  
Aoife Kennelly,                Michael Leane,  
 
        Sam Locke,  
Jimmy Moloney,              Terry O’Brien,         
 
        Bobby O’Connell,  
Michael Foley (Cathaoirleach)                                           
 
16.02.2026.07 
Kerry County Council’s proposed Public Art Policy & 
Procedures 2026 for consideration and approval.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Angie Baily and seconded by Cllr. Niall Kelleher it was 
agreed to approve Kerry County Council’s proposed Public Art Policy & Procedures 
2026. 
 
16.02.2026.08 
To agree a date for the holding of Special Municipal District 
Meetings to consider and approve allocations from the 2026 Community 
Support Fund - suggested dates. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Niall Kelleher and seconded by Cllr. Angie Baily it was 
agreed to approve the following dates. 
 
Kenmare Municipal District– Thursday 12 March 2026        
10:00am – 11:30am – Council Chambers, Tralee 
 
Castleisland-Corca Dhuibhne Municipal District– Thursday 12 March  
12:30pm – 2:00pm – Council Chambers, Tralee 
 
Tralee Municipal District – Friday 13 March 2026  
10:00am-11:30am - Council Chambers, Tralee 
 
Listowel Municipal District Friday 13 March 2026   
12:30pm – 2:00pm – Council Chambers, Tralee 
 
Killarney Municipal District  - Friday 13 March 2026 
 
 
3:00pm – 4:30pm – Council Chambers, Tralee 
 
16.02.2026.09 
To agree dates for the following Meeting(s)  
 
(a) On the proposal of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and seconded by Cllr Angie Baily it was 
agreed to approve the date of the Special Meeting of Kerry County Council to 
consider Variation No 3. of the County Development Plan 2022-2028 on Friday 27 
February @ 2.00.p.m.                                                                                                                      
 

 
10 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
(b) On the proposal of Cllr. Brendan Cronin and seconded by Cllr. Deirdre Ferris it was 
agreed to reschedule the date March 2026 Ordinary Council Meeting to Monday 23 
March 2026 @ 10.30 a.m.  
 
(c) On the proposal of Cathaoirleach Michael Foley and seconded by Cllr. Deirdre 
Ferris it was agreed to approve the date of Housing Workshop on Delivering 
Homes, Building Communities 2025-2030: An Action Plan on Housing Supply and 
Targeting Homelessness on Monday 30 March 2026 @ 10.30a.m. 
 
 
16.02.2026.10 
To note reports from SPC Chairs: 
 
(a) Cllr. Deirdre Ferris, SPC Vice Chair, on the meeting of the Environment, Climate 
Change and Emergency Planning SPC held on 23 January 2026 was noted. 
 
In response to a query from Cllr. Robert Brosnan in regard to the provision of mobile 
saunas, the Deputy Chief Executive advised that as previously committed the matter 
will be dealt in advance of the summer season.  
 
(b)  Cllr. Tommy Cahill, SPC Chair, on the meeting of the Housing SPC held on 29 
January 2026 and 3 February 2026 was noted.   
 
              
16.02.2026.11 
Summary of proceedings at the following events on behalf 
of the Kerry County Council delegates that attended in accordance with 
Section 142(5)(f) of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended: 
(a) The Conference Report on Celtic Conferences – Irish Health Services 
Entitlements held in Co. Louth between 05 – 07 December 2025 by Cllr. 
Tommy Cahill was noted.  
 
 
16.02.2026.12 
To note the opening of tenders for: 
 
(a) On the proposal of Cllr. Liam Speedy Nolan and seconded by Cllr. Norma 
Moriarty it was agreed to approve the opening of tender for Landfill Gas Management 
Services at North Kerry Landfill (7402771). Closing Date: Friday 20 February 2026. 
 
(b) On the proposal of Cllr. Norma Moriarty and seconded by Cllr. Dan McCarthy it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for Cahersiveen Boardwalk and 
Amenity Area (RFT 7395971). Closing Date: Monday 23 February 2026. 
 
(c) On the proposal of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and seconded by Cllr. Robert Brosnan it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tender for the Market and Promotion of County 
Kerry’s outdoor amenities and infrastructure (7483502). Closing Date: Monday 02 
March 2026. 
 
(d) On the proposal of Cllr. Podge Foley and seconded by Cllr. Liam Nolan it was 
agreed to approve the opening of tender for Consultancy Services for Foildarrig 
Bridge, Duagh (7404633). Closing Date: Monday 09 March 2026. 
 

 
11 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
(e) On the proposal of Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae and seconded by Cllr. Maura Healy-
Rae it was agreed to approve the opening of tender for Kerry N22, N70, N71 & N86 
Bridge Replacement, Strengthening and Rehabilitation (TO 338). Closing Date: 
Wednesday 11 March 2026. 
 
16.02.2026.13  Notices of Motion 
 
Emergency Notice of Motion (1) 
 
Calls for Chairman of Bord Bia to aside from his role 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey proposed 
To call on the Taoiseach, Tánaiste and Minister for Agriculture to intervene and ask 
the Chairman of Bord Bia, in the interest of fairness to our farmers, to step aside 
from his role. 
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey said that he recently attended the Annual General 
Meeting of Kerry’s IFA where the anger and frustration of the situation with Brod Bia 
was palpable.  The farmers produce top class food under difficult conditions, and it 
is incredible that Bord Bia can deny a farmer a certificate of approval for something 
as simple as cobweb in a milking parlour or a broken mirror in a tractor.   
 
The improper use of antibiotics and hormones and lack of traceability, tagging and 
identification of cattle is widespread in Brazil. Food safety and security is imperative 
and has to be protected at all costs. He questioned how the Chairman of Bord Bia 
can justify his position when his company is importing beef from a country that has 
no regulation and at the same time, Bord Bia is  breaking everyone’s hearts with red-
tape and regulation. He called on the support of his fellow Councillors for all the 
reasons outlined in this motion. 
 
Cllr. Dan McCarthy seconded this notice of motion and proposed to move the 
following emergency Notice of Motion 
 
Emergency Notice of Motion (2) 
 
Chairman of Bord Bia reconsider his position 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Dan McCarthy proposed 
That the Chairman of Bord Bia reconsiders his position 
 
Cllr Dan McCarthy said that his notice of motion is very similar. He called on Bord 
Bia to provide clarity and bring labelling up to standard and ensure that all Brazilian 
beef is up to standard.  
 
Cllr Fionnán Fitzgerald seconded this motion and said the Bord Bia trademark stamp 
of approval is a very important guideline coming out of this country. It is a standard 
that all farmers want to maintain on a daily basis. He said that good name of Bord 
Bia has been tarnished.  
 
A very detailed discussion took place in regard to this matter where the Elected 
Members expressed their disappointment following recent events. They said that 
Bord Bia is about promoting food and ensuring high quality standards. Farming is a 

 
12 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
huge part of the Irish industry and farmers are very concerned. The Councillors 
questioned how the Chairperson of a food Authority is allowing a product that has 
no quality control be in place. They believed that a guarantee should be in place that 
food imported into this country meets the same standards as Irish products.  
 
Emergency Notice of Motion (3) 
 
Write to the NCSE and the Minister for Education to express our deep concern 
in relation to the loss of Special Needs Assistants.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae proposed 
That we the members of Kerry County Council write to the NCSE and the Minister for 
Education to express our deep concern to a recent decision of the NCSE that would 
result in Fossa National School losing 40% of its special needs assistants. This is an 
exceptionally regressive step in terms of vital educational support for the student 
population.  
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae said the recent events in regard to SNA support in Fossa 
National School appears to be part of a national issue.  She said it is a very worrying 
for schools and in particular the parents of these children who reply on SNA’s so that 
their children can attend school. She said that a reduction in 40% of the provision of 
SNA’s is very worrying. SNA’s are a vital part of any school, they provide academic 
and emotional support for children. The reduction of these supports will undo all the 
good work previously done by the SNA. She questioned who will benefit from these 
proposed changes.  
 
Cllr. Martin Grady seconded the notice of motion.  
 
A number of Elected Members wished to support the notice of motion and 
emphasized the vital role that SNA’s play in the schools. They believed that these 
cuts would impact on every single child in the classroom and expressed 
disappointment that these decisions were made following a short visit to the school.  
 
It was agreed that the Emergency Notice of Motion would be amended to reflect all 
schools in the county as follows.  
 
That we the members of Kerry County Council write to the NCSE, the Minister for 
Education and the Minister for Disability to express our deep concern to a recent 
decision of the NCSE that would result in a number of National School in Kerry losing 
special needs assistants. This is an exceptionally regressive step in terms of vital 
educational support for the student population.  
 
2. CCTV at Dumping Black Spots Update Request 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae proposed 
What is the current update regarding the rollout of CCTV in dumping black spots 
throughout the county. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Further to the issuing of Codes of Practice (CoPs) by the Minister for the use of CCTV 
and drones for the detection of illegal dumping and littering, additional guidance issued 
from the Waste Enforcement Regional Lead Authorities (WERLA) to assist local 

 
13 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
authorities in this area. The code and guidance state that CCTV scheme should only 
be introduced where it is clearly established that it is necessary to address/resolve an 
identifiable, specific and significant problem with serious and/or repeated alleged 
breaches of the Act and not to be used for surveillance. The local authority must clearly 
demonstrate that all other measures including enforcement have been implemented, 
exhausted and have failed to resolve the issue before considering CCTV and the 
associated DPIA. 
 
Kerry County Council Environment Services section have developed a Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) for Assessment of Sites for Overt CCTV Installation to 
assess and determine the necessity, proportionality, and suitability of use of CCTV in 
any given area. A number of sites throughout the county have been considered in the 
context of this SOP and some have resulted in interventions being undertaken, none 
have resulted in CCTV installation being determined as being proportionate.  All 
complaints of illegal dumping received by the environment section are recorded, 
logged and investigated and where repeated incidents of dumping is identified these 
will be considered in the context of the SOP. Where suitable evidence is identified 
following the investigation of dumping complaints, fines are issued. Since 2023 Kerry 
County Council have commenced prosecutions proceedings for 37 cases for waste 
and litter offences. 
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae said that the public is wating for CCTV cameras to help combat 
dumping in black spots and expressed disappointment that where the CCTV maybe 
considered for installation, there will be signage in place advising that the cameras are 
present. He said he didn’t agree with this policy.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded the motion and said in regard to dumping black spots, if 
the public know there are cameras on site, they will move on to another location to 
undertake illegal dumping.  
 
The Deputy Chief Executive acknowledged the comments expressed and said the 
frustration has also been evident on the Council’s side. The Council must show clear 
evidence that all avenues have been exhausted before the installation of CCTV 
footage can be considered.   
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris requested an update on all Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) 
in operation including the cost associated with site visits etc.  
 
The Deputy Chief Executive undertook to revert to Cllr. Deirdre Ferris with the 
requested information. 
 
3. Shingles Vaccine Fee Waived for Over 50’s and Those With Health 
Conditions 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Martin Grady proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Health requesting that the fee for 
the shingles vaccine be waived for those aged 50 years and over, and for people 
under 50 who have an underlying health condition or a weakened immune system, 
due to the serious health risks of shingles and the need for fair access to 
preventative healthcare. 
 

 
14 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Martin Grady said that one in three people will develop shingles in their lifetime, 
with the risk increasing after the age of 50 and for those with underlying conditions 
such as cancer and diabetes. The vaccine is not covered by the medical card or drug 
payment schemes. At a high cost of €500, its unaffordable for many pensioners and 
those on Disability Allowance. Providing this vaccine free of charge would reduce 
suffering, prevent long-term complications, ease pressure on GP services and 
hospitals, and deliver better value for public money. 
 
Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan seconded this motion.  
 
6. Feasibility of Dog DNA Database to Reduce Anti-Social Behavior, Attacks on 
Livestock, and Support Reasonable Dog Ownership and Enforcement 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Aoife Kennelly proposed 
That Kerry County Council examine the feasibility of introducing a dog DNA 
database throughout the county, as a measure to address ongoing issues of dog 
fouling, attacks on livestock and wild animals and to support responsible dog 
ownership and enforcement. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council notes the proposal and acknowledges the concerns raised in 
relation to responsible dog ownership in the County. It is noted that there are currently 
more than 13,100 licensed dogs within County Kerry. In addition, the county 
accommodates a significant number of visitors who bring dogs into the area on a 
temporary basis. In this context, the introduction of a dog DNA database at a County 
level would be of limited effectiveness. 
 
For a dog DNA database to be effective, equitable and enforceable, it would need to 
be implemented on a national basis. The introduction of such a scheme would require 
national coordination, amendments to existing legislation, the provision of 
enforcement mechanisms and the allocation of appropriate funding to support the 
establishment and ongoing operation of the database. 
 
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly explained that when a dog is licenced a piece of their DNA can be 
collected. The database can be used to address ongoing issues and ensure that dog 
owners are accountable for their dogs. She said that the process can be rolled out 
over a number of years .  
 
The Deputy Chief Executive advised that there is no directive in place from the 
department to implement such a scheme.  This would have to be rolled out in line with 
national guidelines in conjunction with a national programme.  
 
A debate on this notice of motion took where Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae argued that the 
proposal was unworkable.  
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald advised that he had previously tabled a notice of motion to 
introduce a mapping system in the county outlining where dog attacks are high and 
said that Cllr. Kennelly’s proposal may be able to work in accordance with mapping 
system.  

 
15 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
 
7. Streamlining the Garda Vetting Process 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Paul Daly proposed 
That Kerry County Council calls on the Minister for Justice to review and simplify the 
Garda vetting process, with a view to making it more streamlined for individuals 
applying for multiple roles requiring vetting. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Paul Daly said the current process calls for an individual to apply for garda 
vetting for each voluntary role. If an individual is garda vetted it should cover all roles 
for a three-year period.   
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded this motion. 
 
8. KCC to Publish Emergency Flooding Control Plans 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Robert Brosnan proposed 
Go bhfoilseoidh CCC a phleananna reatha um rialú éigeandála tuilte, agus go 
bhfoilseoidh sé pleananna fadtéarmacha chun cosaintí tuilte a sholáthar i gcomhar 
leis an OPW do cheantair den Chontae atá aitheanta mar áiteanna a bhfuil  riosca 
ann . 
 
That Kerry County Council publish its current emergency flooding control plans, and 
publish long-term plans to provide flood defenses in conjunction with the OPW for 
areas of the County that are identified as places at risk. 
 
The following reply issued:  
De réir mar atá leagtha amach i bPlean Freagartha Drochaimsire Chomhairle 
Contae Chiarraí, buaileann Foireann Measúnaithe Drochaimsire Chomhairle Contae 
Chiarraí le chéile roimh agus le linn foláirimh drochaimsire chun ullmhúchán agus 
freagairt d’aon imeachtaí tuilte ar fud an chontae a chomhordú. Tá an t-eolas 
ábhartha agus na sonraí teagmhála cuí foilsithe ag Comhairle Contae Chiarraí ar a 
suíomh Gréasáin maidir le himeachtaí aimsire agus éigeandálaí aimsire. 
 
Tá an Clár Náisiúnta um Mheasúnú agus Bainistíocht Riosca Tuilte Dobharcheantair 
(CFRAM) faoi stiúir Oifig na nOibreacha Poiblí (OPW), chun rioscaí tuilte ó 
aibhneacha agus ó chóstaí a aithint, a mhapáil agus a bhainistiú. Tá Scéimeanna 
Faoisimh Tuilte Thrá Lí agus Neidín sainaitheanta ag Scéim CFRAM Tráinse 1. Tá 
na scéimeanna seo á gcur chun cinn trí na céimeanna dearaidh faoi láthair i 
gcomhairle 
le 
hOifig 
na 
nOibreacha 
Poiblí. 
Faoin Scéim um Mhaolú Beag ar Thuilte agus um Chosaint Cósta, tá roinnt 
scéimeanna curtha i gcrích ag Comhairle Contae Chiarraí faoin sruth maoinithe seo. 
 
As per Kerry County Council’s Severe Weather Response plan, Kerry County 
Council Severe Weather Assessment Team meets before and during severe 
weather alerts to coordinate preparation and response to any flooding events across 
the county.  Kerry County Council have published relevant information and contact 
details on their website regarding weather events and weather emergencies. 
 
The National CFRAM (Catchment Flood Risk Assessment and Management 

 
16 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
Programme is led by the Office of Public Works (OPW), to identify, map, and manage 
flood risks from rivers and coasts.  Tranche 1 CFRAM Scheme has identified Tralee 
and Kenmare Flood Relief Schemes. These schemes are currently being progressed 
through 
the 
design 
phases 
in 
consultation 
with 
the 
OPW. 
Under the Minor Flood Mitigation and Coastal protection Scheme, Kerry County 
Council has completed several schemes under this funding stream. 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan said that outside of Tralee and Kenmare no other area has 
been identified in the report. He said in 2025 Kerry was recorded as being the wettest 
county in the country and with high levels of rainfall in previous years it is having a 
cumulative effect. He thanked the staff for their recent efforts. He said the rivers must 
be dredged to combat flooding.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded this motion.  
 
9. Timeline for Flood Defence Works 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae proposed 
When will Kerry County Council make applications for flood defence works in places 
in South & Mid Kerry like Cromane, Glenbeigh and Kenmare. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council are currently in the process of drawing up a specification for 
consultancy services to be engaged to progress the recommendations of the 
CFERM (Coastal Flooding and Erosion Risk Management) studies for both Tralee 
Bay and Castlemaine Harbour, which will include areas such as Cromane, 
Glenbeigh and Kenmare. 
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae referred to the Minister for the OPW Mr. Kevin Boxer Moran’s 
T.D. recent visit to Kerry where the Minister advised that the Council must submit 
flood relief applications and asked when will the Council process these applications. 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae expressed concerns that areas such as  Cromane and 
Rossbeigh will be washed away. 
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae seconded this motion and asked if any funding applications 
for flood relief works had been submitted to date.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris said that Councillors have been advised that there are further 
delays to coastal protection works and expressed concerns for further flooding.  
 
The Deputy Chief Executive explained that the Notice of Motion concerns larger 
schemes, which involves an extensive process. The Council is currently awaiting 
guidance in relation to the smaller schemes, which have very limited funding 
capacity. He undertook to review the applications for smaller schemes submitted and 
revert to Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae.  
 
10. Consider making the Senior Alert Scheme More Widely Available 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Teddy O'Sullivan Casey proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Rural and Community 
Development to consider making the Senior Alert Scheme available to any person 

 
17 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
that requires it regardless of age. Currently this scheme is only available to people 
over the age of 66. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey said that currently the scheme is only available to 
people over 66 years, however they are many people under this age bracket that 
have health conditions and require an alarm. There appears to be no flexibility for 
emergency cases.  
 
Cllr. Dan McCarthy seconded this motion.  
 
11.Re-Examine Carers Benefit and Allowance’s Tax Levels 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. John O'Donoghue proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Finance and the Minister for Social 
Protection and ask that taxation levels on Carers Benefit and Carers Allowance be 
re-examined, and that if possible these be excluded from being considered an 
income. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue said that this issue has hit the headlines recently as many 
carers received letters from Revenue stating that they have tax liabilities. While he 
absolutely accepts that whether carers realised it or not, their allowance was always 
taxable, this is a good time to seek to have the system revised and if possible that 
carers allowance be exempted from income tax. Revenue themselves have said that 
less than 10% of carers will be affected, but since the number is so small, and it in all 
likelihood wouldn’t affect the public finances that much, he called for the allowance to 
be exempted.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded this motion and said that carers do a fantastic job, and 
the benefit shouldn’t be taxed. 
 
12. Shortage of Beds for those with Profound Disabilities 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Cahill proposed 
To request the Minister for Children, Disability and Equality to address the chronic 
shortage of respite beds for children and adults with profound disabilities in Kerry. 
 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill commended the service provided by St. Mary of the Angels and 
St. Francis Special school in Beaufort.  He said it very hard for families who are at 
complete burnout and respite service should be in place. He said he was deeply 
saddened to hear that “BUMBLEance” children ambulance service maybe closing 
down.  
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey seconded this motion.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill moved Notice of Motion no 33 

 
18 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
 
33. Greater Flexibility in Rural Housing 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Cahill proposed 
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage to amend national planning policy to allow for greater flexibility in rural 
housing, including permitting housing on by-roads and laneways outside 60km 
speed limit zones, facilitating appropriate backland development, reconsidering 
restrictions on ribbon development, and allowing housing in areas currently 
designated as being under significant urban influence, in order to address the 
housing crisis. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill said that current planning legislation is very restrictive and called 
on the Minister to introduce legislation to allow more flexibility within the policy..  
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald seconded this motion.  
 
13. Why KCC has Highest Rate of Enforcement Action Regarding Part Vs 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Marie Moloney proposed 
To ask Kerry County Council why it has the highest rate in Ireland of enforcement 
action against private developers who have failed to deliver on Part Vs. 
 
The following reply issued:  
The role of the Planning Enforcement Office is to address unauthorised development 
and non-compliance with conditions attached to the granting of planning permission.  
Part V of the Planning & Development Act 2000 requires developers to enter into an 
agreement with local authorities to provide a portion of social housing as part of new 
housing developments. The Part V condition would be a pre-commencement 
planning condition. 
 
The Planning Enforcement Section are notified when a Commencement Notice for 
Housing developments are lodged with the Fire Service. Following this notification, 
the Housing Estates Unit will go through the pre commencement conditions of the 
said development to ensure compliance has been met. 
 
Where it is apparent that certain planning conditions are still outstanding following 
communication with the developer, the file is then referred to the Enforcement 
section to address the non-compliance issues.   
 
The high enforcement activity by Kerry County Council reflects the proactive work of 
the Council and its strong commitment to ensuring compliance with planning 
legislation & the conditions attached to the grant of Planning. 
 
Cllr. Marie Moloney said that Kerry and Galway represent 80% of the enforcement 
activity with Kerry being the highest. She questioned how the developers are 
showing such disregard to the Council. 
 
Cllr. Martin Grady seconded this motion.  
 

 
19 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
Following a request from Cllr. Marie Moloney, the Deputy Chief Executive undertook 
to forward the figures to Cllr. Marie Moloney.  
 
15. Request to give Civic Reception to Ballymacelligott, An Gaeltacht and 
Dingle GAA Football teams 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald proposed 
That Kerry County Council host a Civic Reception to the Ballymacelligott, An 
Gaeltacht and Dingle GAA Football teams in recognition of their All-Ireland victories 
in the Junior, Intermediate and Senior Club Championships respectively. These 
Clubs’ achievements are recognised nationally and internationally as an historic 
achievement for Kerry and have brought great honour to the entire country. This is 
the first time in Gaelic Football that three Club teams from the one county have 
achieved this accolade, the highest honour in Gaelic Sports for a club. Given the 
unique and historical nature of these victories, in recognition of the commitment and 
dedication of these three rural clubs we ask that the three teams be afforded the 
highest honour of a Civic Reception by Kerry County Council. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members in 
the context of the procedures for civic receptions agreed by the members of 
Kerry County Council. 
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald said the success of these clubs has been acknowledged 
globally and captured the attention of the whole county.  
 
17. Remove Rural Settlement Policy Requirement For Cluster Development 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Griffin proposed 
That Kerry County Council will carry out a material alteration of the Kerry County 
Development Plan to remove the rural settlement policy requirement of a connection 
to the area for cluster development in small rural villages and settlement nodes. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Objective KCDP 5-9 of the Kerry County Development Plan 2022-2028 seeks to 
facilitate the development of small-scale residential cluster developments in villages 
and small village settlements listed in Table 5.1 served by individual onsite 
wastewater treatment systems where there are no plans to provide a capital 
wastewater scheme and where the design, layout and scale of the residential cluster 
is commensurate with the scale and layout of the existing settlement. Occupancy 
shall be restricted to persons who have spent a substantial period of their lives living 
in the local rural area. These dwellings shall be permanent places of residence.  
 
The current policy is in line with National Policy documents including the National 
Planning Framework (NPO 15 & 19), the Sustainable Rural Housing Guidelines for 
Planning Authorities, 2005 (DoEHLG), RSES and Circular PL 2/2017.  It would be 
contrary to national planning policy to change the existing policy requirement and 
would not be in accordance with the principles of proper planning and sustainable 
development. 
 
The new Housing Plan contains an action to publish their revised guidelines for rural 
housing. 
 

 
20 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin stated that rural Ireland is seeing a decline in population with a 
number of football clubs having to amalgamate. Many people that want to live in rural 
areas are prohibited from doing so because of the occupancy clause. He said if this 
planning condition remains, it will be very difficult to develop areas such as  
Ballyfinnane.  
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey seconded this motion.  
 
18. EIR Connectivity Issues  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Norma Moriarty proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to EIR on behalf of the many customers that have 
been waiting longer and longer for repairs to be carried out to have their land line 
connectivity restored. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty said that there has been an increase in the number of 
households experiencing difficulties with their landlines. She said it appears that 
many of the parts are outdated and can no longer be sourced. Connections to the 
landlines must be resolved especially for people who are living on their own.  
 
The Motion was seconded by Cllr. Dan McCarthy. 
 
19. Improvement Works to Ballyheigue Promenade Request 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Michael Leane proposed 
That Kerry County Council would write to Fáilte Ireland to carry out improvement 
works to Ballyheigue Promenade in line with the recent jobs done in Ballybunion and 
Fenit Beach Facilities. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Mr. Michael Leane called on Fáilte Ireland to carry out similar works to the 
promenade in line with the works carried out at Fenit and Ballybunion.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald seconded this motion.  
 
20. N69 Road Speed Measures 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Liam 'Speedy' Nolan proposed 
Can prevention measures for speed be put in place on the N69 Road, Tarbert side 
of Listowel as it has been subjected to many accidents in the past. 
 
The following reply issued:  
The N69 near the Amber Filling station is being examined as a Safety Improvement 
Scheme.  Improvement measures proposed will include improving sightlines, 
introduction of a solid white line to prohibit overtaking in this location as well as 
introducing no overtaking signs. The N69 junction with the L1020 (250m north of the 
filling station) is also being included in this scheme to increase safety on this stretch 
of road.  This scheme is subject to TII approval and if such approved is forthcoming, 
then the Council would proceed with the statutory Section 38 process. 
 

 
21 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
Cllr. Liam Nolan welcomed the response and said there is CCTV in place at the filing 
station which captured a number of instances. He advised that the filing station are 
willing to negotiate with Kerry County Council. In addition, he requested that the pole 
outside the funeral home would be removed as part of the proposed works.   
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey seconded this motion. 
 
21. Reconsider Prescription Method for Animals 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Dan McCarthy proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Department of Agriculture to reconsider their 
prescription method for animals. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Dan McCarthy asked that the Minister reconsider the new regulations 
introduced. Farmers will now have to acquire prescriptions for all antiparasitic 
medicines for food producing animals. 
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae seconded this motion.  
 
22. KCC Liaise with Kerry ETB to Establish a Formal Memorandum of 
Understanding 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Deirdre Ferris proposed 
That Kerry County Council liaises with Kerry ETB about establishing a formal 
Memorandum of Understanding between the two public bodies to support further 
education learners with work experience across all necessary grades including 
apprenticeships within the Local Authority. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council facilitates structured education and training-based 
apprenticeships under the Governments Public Service Apprenticeship Plan and 
there are currently 4 no. Apprentices employed (Cyber Security and Accounting 
Technician) who commenced their apprenticeships in 2025.  These are 2-year 
programmes combining learning in in the workplace with learning via education or 
training facility, on successful completion of which the participants will obtain a 
qualification recognised under the National Framework of Qualifications (NFQ).  The 
Council intends to increase the number of Apprenticeships being facilitated this year 
in line with sectoral targets and are currently examining suitable roles both in the 
traditional craft areas (Standards-Based Apprenticeships) and newly identified 
apprenticeship areas as provided for under the Public Service Apprenticeship Plan. 
  
The Council also continues to facilitate work placements each year for Third-Level 
students under long established arrangements with Munster Technological 
University, University of Limerick, and Mary Immaculate College.  Students from 
Kerry College of Further Education & Training, operating on behalf of Kerry ETB, 
have also been engaged in placements for specific IT work experience in recent 
years. 
  
Kerry County Council is an active participant in the National Graduate Recruitment 
Programme providing employment opportunities in a number of business areas for 

 
22 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
graduates with specific academic qualifications, and also continues participation as 
an employer under the Willing Able Mentoring Programme providing paid and 
mentored work placements for graduates with disabilities. 
 
The Council are willing to meet with the ETB and explore potential in this area subject 
to the normal constraints under established protocols under Workforce Planning 
(including established terms & conditions, recruitment and IR agreements). 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris welcomed the response and asked that the Council would provide 
work placement for ETB students and not only Third-Level students.  
 
The Deputy Chief Executive advised that the Third-Level requirement refers to the 
job specification but undertook to review the matter  
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan seconded the motion.  
 
23. Repopulate Gardaí Force in Rural Ireland 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Podge Foley proposed 
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister for Justice to repopulate the numbers 
of Gardaí in rural Ireland. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Podge Foley said in Kery there isn’t sufficient number of Gardaí to keep Garda 
station opened and called on the Minister to increase the numbers in rural Ireland.  
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly seconded this motion and said currently there is no Gardaí 
available in the Garda station in Castleisland if an instance occurs during the night.  
  
24.Funding and Completion of N86 Tralee Dingle scheme 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald proposed 
That Kerry County Council request a meeting with TII to discuss the funding and 
completion of the N86 Tralee Dingle scheme. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald said that the request to meet with the T.I.I.is  to ensure that 
funding will be provided to complete the N86, which is a very important tourism 
destination in Kerry and on route to one of the counties National Parks. He said the 
completion of the road is for the residents firstly and not just the tourists. He 
welcomed the works that have previously been carried out and acknowledged that 
there is a funding announcement enroute.  
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan seconded this motion and said the N86 is the only route to 
access West Kerry.  
 
25.Motorhome Tourism in Kerry 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae proposed 
What if any progress has been made with regards to making Kerry more welcoming 
for motor homeowners ahead of the 2026 tourist season. 

 
23 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council is finalising the draft framework for campervan and motor 
homes which will outlining clear, consistent, and sustainable guidelines for the 
overnight parking of motorhomes and campervans in County Kerry, which will be 
presented to the SPC at their March Meeting. The proposed framework aims to 
support tourism, safeguard local communities, and protect the natural environment.  
In parallel, Kerry County Council will deliver a pilot campervan facility in the county. 
Kerry County Council is also engaging with the County and City Management 
Association and Fáilte Ireland on a review of a national campervan policy for the 
sector. 
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae acknowledged that guidelines would go before the SPC but 
asked that further details be provided.    
 
The Deputy Chief Executive advised that the process must proceed on a stage-by-
stage basis and that the guidelines would first be brought before the SPC for 
disposal. 
 
Cllr. Paul Daly seconded this motion. 
 
Cllr. D. Ferris moved Notion of Moton no 26 on behalf of Cllr. Angie Baily.  
 
26. Plans to recruit a Twinning / EU Liaison / International Affairs Officer in late 
2026 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Angie Baily proposed 
To ask Kerry County Council, noting the response to my previous MD motion which 
indicated plans to recruit a Twinning / EU Liaison / International Affairs Officer in late 
2026, to urgently review and expedite this timeline in light of current economic 
pressures and the growing need to diversify Kerry’s trading and business 
relationships. I further call on the Council to put interim arrangements in place, 
pending the recruitment of a dedicated International Affairs Officer to commence 
discussions with interested towns and cities in China and to develop a clear, 
transparent framework for good practice ensuring that any relationships pursued are 
grounded in reciprocity, and tailored to the specific economic and social needs of 
Kerry’s local businesses and communities. 
 
The following reply issued:  
The importance of continuing the development of mutually beneficial twinning and 
international partnership arrangements between Kerry County Council and overseas 
partners is acknowledged. Responsibility for managing such matters rests with the 
Community Department, with resources being augmented in this area if approved 
under the workforce plan. Additionally, a dedicated email address will be established 
to receive and coordinate enquiries of this nature. This contact point will be circulated 
shortly and will be managed by a staff within the Community Department. Where 
timely engagement or responses are required, these will be facilitated in advance of 
a dedicated officer being put in place. 
 
The current structure ensures continued engagement on international and twinning 
matters, while maintaining appropriate oversight and supporting the development of 

 
24 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
future relationships that are aligned with the economic and social needs of Kerry’s 
communities and businesses. 
 
27. Up-to-Date List of CIS Schemes in Order of Qualification 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Charlie Farrelly proposed 
To call on Kerry County Council make an up a 'to date list' of all current CIS Schemes 
in order of qualification available to all Councillors as soon as possible. 
 
The Following reply issued: 
Please find hereunder, the current Kerry County Council Community Involvement 
Scheme list, on hand. The list is prioritised on a first come first served basis. 
Projects will progress subject to funding and the fulfilment of local contribution 
conditions. 
 
Road 
Class
Road 
Number
Location 
Engineering 
Area
LT
L-10592
Maugha, Lyrecrompane
Castleisland
LT
L-10690 
Tonbwee, Castleisland, Co. Kerry 
Castleisland
LS
L-6055
Ballyhorgan East, Lixnaw
Listowel
LT
L-10063
Moyvane South
Listowel
LT
L-10029
Ballyline West, Ballylongford
Listowel
LT
L10553
Derra East, Listowel, Co. Kerry
Listowel
LT
L10935
Laccabawn, Castleisland
Castleisland
LT
L10456
Braumadra, 
Lyreacrompane, 
Co. 
Kerry
Listowel
LT
L11637
Coomastow, Caherciveen
Caherciveen
LT
L11057
Toornanoulagh, Currow
Castleisland
LT
L-10018
Ballingower, Lisselton, Urlee, Co. 
Kerry 
Listowel
LT
L10066
Kilbaha South, Moyvane, Co. Kerry
Listowel
LT
L12179
Derrymore East, Tralee, Co. Kerry
Tralee
LT
L-10679
Gurraunmore, Ballymacelligott
Castleisland 
LT
L11048
Killeens, Currans, Farranfore, Co. 
Kerry
Castleisland
LT
L-11099
Knockacorrin, Currow, Co Kerry  
Castleisland 
LT
L-10704
Boula, Knocknagoshel West, Co. 
Kerry
Castleisland
LT
L-12270
Cagerfealane, Kerry 
Dingle  
LT
L-12271
Castledrum, Castlemaine-Farranfore 
Road 
Dingle  
LT
L-10940
Maglass, Ballymacelligott  
Castleisland
LT
L-10598
Muingavrannig, Kielduff 
Castleisland
LT
L-10594
Ballynahinch, Kielduff  
Castleisland
LT
L11042-0
Gortalassa, Firies  
Castleisland
LT
L72330
Gortahoonig, Muckross, Killarney
Killarney
LS
L-7056
Rathbeg, Rathmore
Killarney
LT
L-11182 
Cummeenavric, Killarney 
Killarney

 
25 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
LT
L-10257
Graffa, Ballyline West, Ballylongford, 
Listowel
Listowel
LT
L-10716
Carraigeenwood, Brosna
Castleisland 
LT
L-10684
Muingnaminnane, 
Castleisland 
Knocknagowna, Faha
Killarney 
 
28. Streamline Vacant Properties Grant Application following Final Inspection 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Aoife Kennelly proposed 
That Kerry County Council review and improve the length of time that it takes for 
applicants to draw down the Vacant Properties Grant following final inspection as 
wait times are currently up to 5 months. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County are undertaking a review of the drawdown procedure, with a view to 
streamlining the process, while ensuring compliance with the Departments 
requirements and appropriate governance and checks for public grant funding.   
 
It is noted that the Vacant Homes Office undertook a comprehensive review of the 
drawdown process for the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant in 2025, with the 
aim of identifying delays and opportunities for improvement. 
 
As a result of this review, a number of changes were implemented to streamline 
drawdown. These included seeking key documentation at an earlier stage in the 
application process, allowing drawdown to proceed more quickly once works are 
completed. In addition, the Vacant Homes Office and our Legal Department worked 
collaboratively to identify potential issues relating to title, burdens or rights of way at 
application and approval stage, enabling these matters to be addressed in advance 
of drawdown. 
 
While the Vacant Homes Office continues to work proactively to progress drawdown 
and arrange payment as soon as all requirements are satisfied, some elements of 
the process are outside the direct control of the Council. These include legal or title-
related issues that must be resolved, as well as instances where applicants have not 
yet submitted all required documentation necessary to progress drawdown. 
 
Drawdown of grants activity have almost double in the past 12 months. 
 
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly stated that the Vacant Homes Grant has been very positive 
across the county and welcomed the improvements implemented to expedite the 
process. She asked that the Council address the issues relating to final inspections, 
noting that waiting five months was not acceptable, and requested that a more 
reasonable timeframe be examined. 
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey seconded this motion.  
 
29. Support and Funding for Agreements around Children’s Use of Internet-
Enabled Devices 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Paul Daly proposed 

 
26 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
Go n-iarrfaidh Comhairle Contae Chiarraí ar an Aire Oideachais, an tAire Hildegarde 
Naughton, tacú le tionscnaimh a bhfuil sé mar aidhm acu comhaontuithe 
comhoibríocha a fhorbairt agus a chur i bhfeidhm maidir le húsáid gléasanna atá 
cumasaithe don idirlíon ag leanaí, agus maoiniú iomlán a chur ar fáil dóibh. 
 
That Kerry County Council calls on the Minister for Education, Ms. Hildegarde 
Naughton, to support and fully fund initiatives that seek to develop and implement 
collaborative agreements around children’s use of internet-enabled devices. 
 
Is ábhar é seo atá le breithniú ag na Comhaltaí. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Paul Daly said that the length of time children are spending on smart devices is 
continuing to increase.  He said that some of the game and programmes that children 
are using are designed to be addictive and not conducive to a healthy lifestyle. He 
said that Rathmore school have introduced initiatives which see time limits 
introduced and a total ban on social media.  He called on the Minister to provide 
funding to support these initiatives. 
 
Cllr. Deridre Ferris seconded this motion.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and Seconded by Breandán Fitzgerald it was 
agreed to suspend Orders as it was now 5p.m.   
 
30. KCC to Discontinue Use of X as Social Media Platform 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Robert Brosnan proposed 
Go stopfaidh CCC  á  úsáid X mar uirlis meán sóisialta chun cumarsáid oifigiúil a 
sholáthar don phobal. 
 
That Kerry County Council should discontinue its use of X as a social media 
platform for official communications to the public. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Usáideann Comhairle Contae Chiarraí ardáin éagsúla meán sóisialta chun eolas a 
chur ar fáil do bhaill den phobal agus chun teangmháil a dhéanamh leo. Déantar 
athbhreithniú tréimhsiúil ar ár mbeartais chumarsáide digiteach. Usáideann 
Comhairle Contae Chiarraí líon mór ardán malartach meán sóisialta, lena n-áirítear 
Mastodon 
agus 
Blue-sky, 
agus 
áirítear 
leis 
seo 
úsáid 
X 
freisin. 
 
Kerry County Council uses multiple social media platforms to provide information to, 
and engage with, members of the public. Our digital communications policies are 
periodically reviewed, and Kerry County Council uses a large number of other 
alternative platforms which includes Mastodon, Bluesky and the use of X also. 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan expressed serious concerns in relation to the use of the X 
Platform and called on Kerry County Council to draw a line through the use of the X 
Platform. He said that the citizens and parents all over Ireland are very concerned 
about the content being read and viewed on X and the terrible effects this content is 
having on our society especially on young people.  Cllr. Robert Brosnan questioned 

 
27 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
if such content was allowed on other forms of local media, would this impact on Kerry 
County Council’s use of these media outlets.  
 
The Deputy Chief Executive said this is a very difficult space due to editorial control, 
currently Kerry County Council has 17,000 followers on X which is a substantial 
platform. In time of adverse weather, it is an important medium to communicate 
messages and provide updates.  
 
Cllr Deridre Ferris supported the comments expressed by Cllr. Robert Brosnan and 
asked of the 17,000 followers on X, are they all legitimate users.  
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae stated that the Council could not be held accountable for 
users of the X platform. He noted that the platform is used by members of the public 
to source information, including updates during adverse weather events. 
 
Cllr Breandán Fitzgerald agreed with the sentiments expressed by Cllr. Jackie Healy-
Rae. it doesn’t solve the problem; it is up to the regulator to address the issues.  
 
Cllr. John O’Donoghue acknowledged the spirit of the Notice of Motion but agreed 
with the comments expressed by the Deputy Chief Executive and Cllr. Jackie Healy-
Rae. He stated that he uses the X platform himself to receive information but agreed 
that some of the content on the platform needs to be censored. 
 
Cllr. Johhny Healy-Rae said he didn’t use X but acknowledged that it is certainly a 
valuable source of information to the public.  
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald proposed that the Notice of Motion would be paused and 
reviewed. While he agreed with the principles outlined in the motion, he said that the 
social media needs to be regulated on a national level. If the council discontinues 
the use of X it will only be replaced by another social media outlet.    
 
Cllr. Roberty Brosnan agreed to put the Notice of Motion on hold and asked that 
Kerry County Council would review the use of X.  
 
The Deputy Chief Executive said that Kerry County Council will continue to keep all 
social media outlets under review and undertook to revert to Cllr. Robert Brosnan 
with the data collated on the Kerry County Council X account.     
 
31. Change TII Policy Objecting all Planning on National Secondary Roads 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae proposed 
That Kerry County Council would write to the Minister for the Environment with 
regards to the TII policy of objecting to all plannings on National Secondary Roads, 
as this is affecting our county massively over others. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae expressed frustration with T.I.I policy and said there appear 
to have a blanket ban by T.I.I on all planning applications on national secondary 
routes. It is impacting on businesses, livelihoods and having a knock-on effect on 
population and GAA clubs in South Kerry. He said that the members of the Kenmare 

 
28 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
Municipal District previously requested a deputation with the T.I.I and asked that an 
update would be provided on the request and if required that a letter would issue to 
the T.I.I. again requesting that a deputation would be received.     
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae seconded this motion  
 
32. Increase Budget for Burial Grounds Department 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Teddy O'Sullivan Casey proposed 
Can Kerry County Council commit to increasing the budget for the Burial Grounds 
Department in future budgets to allow for footpaths in our cemeteries to be tarred or 
concreted to allow for wheelchair users and people with other disabilities to be able 
to visit their loved ones final resting places. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council’s Burial Grounds Unit is charged with the management and 
maintenance of 158 Burial Grounds across the county. An annual programme of 
maintenance and minor capital work is funded through own resources with the 
provision of footpaths and creating additional capacity within existing Burial Grounds 
prioritised. Kerry County Council work in close partnerships with approximately 50 
community organisations to carry out essential maintenance across 87 burial 
grounds. This collaborative approach has proven to be an efficient and effective way 
to maintain these facilities, building meaningful connections between the burial 
grounds and their communities and encouraging a sense of ownership and pride 
while maximising outcomes from the budget. 
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey acknowledged the response and firstly thanked the 
Burial Ground unit for the work they have done with limited funding. He called on the 
Council to allocate additional funding for future budgets; there are many graveyards 
that aren’t tarred or have no footpaths which comprises the use of wheelchair users. 
He asked that the Council liaise with various graveyard committees to secure CLÁR 
funding.    
 
Cllr. Dan McCarthy seconded this motion.  
 
34. Social Housing 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Anne O'Sullivan proposed 
Regarding Social Housing Applicants in Kerry County Council: 
(a) What number of current applicants are not engaging with the CBL process  
(b) What reason(s) is/are given and what efforts are being made to support these 
applicants 
(c) With regards new RAS and HAP applications, what is the current timeframe for 
completion of the RAS/HAP process for a Kerry County Council Social Housing 
applicant who has secured a RAS/HAP agreement with a property owner. 
 
The following reply issued:  
(a) Based on current available data, approximately 20% of applicants are not 
engaging with the CBL process. 
(b) There can be different reasons given as to why applicants do not engage with 
the process, generally the properties may not meet their needs or the location may 
not be their preferred location.  

 
29 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
 
The Supports currently in place include:  
• IT equipment with internet access available at all Kerry County Council Public 
Libraries. In addition, there is a CBL kiosk in County Buildings, Housing 
Department. 
• Dedicated CBL support team available via in-person (County Buildings), email 
and telephone to assist with all CBL queries. Detailed information guide supplied to 
all those with access to CBL. 
• The Housing Departments Housing Investigation Officers continue to engage and 
monitor qualified applicants via pre. CBL methods (iHouse).  
 
(c) Once a property owner agrees to enter the scheme, the property is logged for 
inspection. Once the property is compliant, the RAS tenancy can commence.  In 
2025, the average processing time for completed HAP applications was 46 days. 
The processing of these forms was dependant on receipt of all required 
information, from both the tenant and the landlord. Payments are backdated to the 
date that a validated HAP application is received. 
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan expressed concerns that one in five people are not engaging 
in the CBL process. She commenced the work of the housing staff but questioned 
why people were not engaging. She asked that Housing staff contact these people 
to establish why there are not engaging in the process. In regard to the HAP tenants, 
she asked for clarification on when the payments for applicants commence and are 
they back dated.  
 
Ms. Niamh O’ Sullivan Director of Service undertook to revert to Cllr. Anne O’ 
Sullivan in regard to the HAP payments.  
 
Cllr. Breandan Fitzgerald seconded the motion. 
 
Cllr.  Robert Brosnan seconded this motion and called on the Council to assist 
individuals to complete CDL applications.  
  
35. Social Media Course for Primary & Secondary Education 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald proposed 
That Kerry County Council writes to the Minister for Education and Skills asking them 
that a course be designed for Primary & Secondary Education educating pupils and 
students on the issue of 'Truth in media and social media'. How to identify it or the 
lack of it etc. As it stands we are asking too much of our youth to do this on their 
own. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald said that it is becoming extremely difficult for secondary 
school students who are continually exposed to social media content to decide what 
is factual. Students are no longer tuning into mainstream media. This will impact on 
the future generations and called on the Minister to intervene and design a course 
to educate students on social media content. 
 

 
30 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
Cllr Breandán Fitzgerald seconded this motion and concurred with the previous 
comments. He said the devices should be regulated. It is time that the onus is put 
back on the manufactures to make the devices safe for children.  
 
Cllr. Paul Daly supported the comments expressed and said many of these apps are 
designed to be additive for children, we need to protect our children.   
 
36. Update on N22 Kerry-Cork Economic Corridor Scheme 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae proposed 
To ask Kerry County Council for an update on the progress of the N22 Kerry-Cork 
Economic Corridor Scheme. 
 
The following reply issued:  
The Phase 3 design and environmental evaluations work is underway and will 
progress throughout 2026 ahead of the statutory application to An Coimisiún 
Pleanála in 2027, subject to the necessary approvals. The fieldwork for ground 
investigation and the topographical survey contracts is underway. Engagement with 
landowners is ongoing as the work progresses. The preliminary design for the N22 
Farranfore to Killarney Project is being progressed by our appointed consultants and 
will be further informed by the above-mentioned surveys once completed. The 
Environmental Impact Assessment is being undertaken as the design is being 
developed and is being informed by environmental surveys currently being 
undertaken. 
The motion was seconded by Councillor Marie Moloney. 
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae asked whether the project was still on track for planning in 
2027. 
 
The Deputy Chief Executive confirmed the Council’s commitment to the project and 
that all avenues will be pursued to meet the identified timelines. The council will 
continue to provide updates to members. 
 
37. Incentives for Starting Wet Trades for Apprentices 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Griffin proposed 
That Kerry County Council will call on the Minister for Further Education, 
Apprenticeships, Construction and Climate Skills, Marian Harkin, TD to introduce 
incentives to encourage apprentices to take up wet trades such as block laying, 
plastering and stone masonry given the huge disparity between the numbers being 
trained as electricians and plumbers. 
 
Mr. S Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Tomy Griffin provided statistics in relation to the numbers in September 2025 
undertaking wet trades such as plasterers (170) and brick layers (220) versus 
electricians (11,000). 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald seconded the motion. 
 
38. Kerry Women Monument Update 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Marie Moloney proposed 

 
31 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
To ask Kerry County Council for an update on the provision of the monument 
commemorating Kerry Women during the revolutionary period as proposed by the 
female members of this Council. 
 
The following reply issued:  
The artist delivering the Kerry Women’s Revolutionary Period Commemorative 
Sculpture has completed the sculpting and the artwork is with the foundry for casting 
in bronze. Preparatory work is underway for the foundation works. Installation is due 
at the end of Q2 2026. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded the motion.  
 
Cllr. Marie Moloney and Cllr. Deirdre Ferris highlighted the importance of the 
monument and the pride felt that a fitting commemoration will be in place for Kerry 
women active during the revolutionary period. The Councillors thanked all female 
members of the Council for the collaborative work undertaken in delivering the 
sculpture. 
 
39. Update on Resurfacing Works on N69 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Liam 'Speedy' Nolan proposed 
Can the resurfacing works on the N69 from Tim Kennelly roundabout up to the speed 
limit on the Tarbert side be addressed and can we get assurance that this road will 
be done this year. 
 
The following reply issued:  
The condition of this section of road has been brought to the attention of the TII and 
an application for funding has been made to TII for pavement improvement works 
along this section of the N69. The 2026 allocations are due to be announced shortly. 
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey seconded the motion.  
 
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly supported the motion and identified this as having been 
previously raised this at Municipal District level. 
 
40. Extension of the Hedge Cutting Season 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Dan McCarthy proposed 
To ask Kerry County Council to write to the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to extend the hedge cutting season. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey seconded the motion.  
 
Cllr. Dan McCarthy enquired as to the numbers prosecuted by Kerry County Council 
and highlighted the impact of uncut hedges on taxi drivers and damage to cars. 
 
41. Gov’t to Intervene to Prevent Mass Eviction at Loreto Convent, Killarney 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Deirdre Ferris proposed 
That Kerry County Council calls on the Government to immediately intervene to 
prevent the mass eviction of tenants and families from Loreto Convent, Killarney, 

 
32 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
on the following grounds: 
 • These evictions are exceptional in scale and impact and should be addressed 
through a single, comprehensive Government resolution rather than fragmented, 
case-by-case approaches 
 • Any resolution must be prioritised allowing tenants and their families to remain in 
their homes, in order to preserve the Loreto Convent community, protect children 
from the social and psychological harm of displacement, and prevent significant 
loss of pupils from Scoil Bhríde Loreto National School. 
 • Affordable and suitable housing alternatives within the Killarney area are 
extremely limited; failure to prevent these evictions risks forced relocation or 
emigration, resulting in the loss of workers and contributors to the local and 
national economy. 
 • The Government must act decisively to avert these evictions, as any attempt at 
forced removal would pose serious risks to the mental wellbeing of tenants, their 
families, and the wider community, and must be avoided entirely. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris highlighted the impact of this eviction, due to take place at the 
start of next month on individuals and the community. Cllr. Deirdre Ferris called on 
the government to intervene and provide supports. Currently there are significantly 
more properties available for short term let rather than available for long term 
tenancies in Killarney. Councillor Ferris acknowledged a member of the tenant’s 
union in attendance at the meeting. 
 
Councillor Marie Moloney seconded the motion 
 
Councillor John O Donoghue and Councillor Maura Healy Rae supported the motion 
and highlighted the impact of such an action on communities and schools. 
 
42. Return of Irish Sugar and Flax Industries 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Podge Foley proposed 
That Kerry County Council call on the Government to bring back the Irish Sugar and 
Flax Industries to Ireland. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Dan McCarthy seconded the motion. 
 
43. Resolve Mail Delivery Issues in West Kerry 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald proposed 
That Kerry County Council calls on the Minister for Culture, Communications and 
Sport, Patrick O'Donovan TD to ask An Post to resolve the problems that are 
preventing the daily delivery of mail in the West Kerry area. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald highlighted the significant issues encountered in West 
Kerry since the sorting of mail moved from Dingle to Tralee. The Councillor called 

 
33 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
on the minister to put contingency plans in place for when staff are on leave to ensure 
consistency of service. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded the motion and highlighted issues where members of 
the public did not receive notification of appointments in time due to postal issues.  
 
Councillor Farrelly also confirmed issues in Castleisland in regard to the post and 
repairs to post boxes. 
 
It was agreed that Notice of Motion would be amended as follows  
 
That Kerry County Council calls on the Minister for Culture, Communications and 
Sport, Patrick O'Donovan TD to ask An Post to resolve the problems that are 
preventing the daily delivery of mail in Kerry. 
 
16.02.2026.14 Correspondence – Conference and Seminars 
 
(a) On the proposal of Cllr. Dan McCarthy and seconded by Fionnán Fitzgerald  it was 
agreed to authorise the attendance of Cathaoirleach Cllr. Michael Foley on a visit to 
the US for St. Patrick's Day, March 2026. 
 
(b) On the proposal of Cllr. Dan McCarthy and seconded by Fionnán Fitzgerald it was 
agreed to authorise the attendance of Leas-Chathaoirleach Cllr. Marie Moloney on a 
visit to London for St. Patrick's Day, March 2026. 
 
(c) On the proposal of Cllr. Michael Leane and seconded by Marie Moloney it was 
agreed to authorise the attendance of the Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Michael Foley at the 
‘Celebrating MTU as an Arts Rich Technological University on Friday 27 February, 
Cork. 
 
(d) On the proposal of Cllr. Dan McCarthy and seconded by Cllr. Marie Moloney 
it was agreed to authorise the attendance of all Elected Members to the AILG 
event on Module 1 2026 – From Policy to Practice, What Local Authorities in 
Ireland can offer to support Disabled people & Ageing Population to be held in 
Kilkenny on Saturday 21 February 2026 (Southern Region) –  
(NWEM Region). - to be held in Dundalk on Thursday, 19 February 2026  
 
(e) On the proposal of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and seconded by Cllr. Marie Moloney it was 
agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald, Cllr. Podge Foley, 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae, Cllr. Michael Leane, Cathaoirleach Michael Foley, Cllr Tommy 
Cahill. Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell, Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan, Cllr. Mikey Sheehy, Cllr. Martin 
Grady, Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae and Cllr. Charlie Farrelly to the AIR (Association of Irish 
Regions), in conjunction with the Northern & Western Regional Assembly training 
seminar which will take place in Co. Donegal from Wednesday 25 February to 
Thursday 26 February 2026. 
 

 
34 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
(f) On the proposal of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and seconded by Cllr. Marie Moloney it was 
agreed to authorise the attendance of the Elected Members at a Workshop on 
Delivering Homes, Building Communities 2025-2030: An Action Plan on Housing 
Supply and Targeting Homelessness in Tralee on Monday 30 March 2026.  
 
(g) On the proposal of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and seconded by Cllr. Marie Moloney it was 
agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell to the Celtic Conference 
“The Evolving Role of AI in Public Relations” which will be held in Co. Louth from 
Friday 06 March and Sunday 08 March 2026. 
 
(h) On the proposal of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and seconded by Cllr. Marie Moloney it was 
agreed to authorise the attendance of all Elected Members to the AILG Module 2 2026 
– Training Briefing on New Housing Plan – ‘Delivering Homes, Building Communities 
2025 – 2030’ – to be held in Limerick on Thursday 19 March 2026 (Southern Region) 
and in Sligo on Saturday 21 March 2026 (Outside Region) 
 
(i) On the proposal of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and seconded by Cllr. Marie Moloney it was 
agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllr. Michael Leane, Cllr. Michael Foley, Cllr. 
Jackie Healy-Rae and Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell to the IPI Annual Training Conference 
at the Radisson Blu Hotel, Athlone, from 16 & 17 April 2026. 
 
(j) On the proposal of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and seconded by Cllr. Marie Moloney it was 
agreed to authorise the attendance of all Elected Members to the AILG 2026 Annual 
Training to be held in Clonmel on Wednesday 22 April and Thursday 23 April 2026. 
 
(k) On the proposal of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and seconded by Cllr. Marie Moloney it was 
agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllr Bobby O’ Connell, Cllr. Charlie Farrelly and 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan to the Conference on the “Drogheda Civic Trust Summer School’ 
to be held in Drogheda between Friday 08 May and Sunday 10 May 2026. 
 
(l) On the proposal of Cllr. Deirde Ferris and seconded by Cllr. Marie Moloney it weas 
agreed to seek retrospective approval for Cllr. Niall Kelleher to attend the Local 
Community Safety Partnership Network and Engagement Event held at the 
Department of Justice, Home Affairs and Migration on Thursday 05 February 2026. 
 
 
16.02.2026.15 Correspondence General 
 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were circulated: 
1. 
06/01/2026 
Bus Eireann 
Reply in response to a request from the Elected 
Members to review Bus timetables. 
 2. 
13/01/2026 
Office of An 
Taoiseach 
Reply in response to a request from the Elected 
Members to establish an All-Island Representative 
Citizen’s Assembly or Assemblies

 
35 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
3. 
15/01/2026 
Department of 
Housing  
Reply in relation to a request from the Elected 
Members to request an update on the Fenit 
Wastewater Infrastructure Project.   
4. 
20/01/2026 
Minister for 
Rural and 
Community 
Development 
and Gaeltacht
Reply in relation to a request from the Elected 
Members to request to provide a defined calendar 
for Grant applications. 
5. 
26/01/2026 
Dept of 
Agriculture 
Reply in relation to a request from the Elected 
Members to provide compensation to farmers who 
are affected by positive outbreaks 
6. 
23/01/2026 
HSE 
Reply in relation to a request from the Elected 
Members to provide an update on the publication of 
the CAMHS review. 
7. 
06/02/2026 
Dept of 
Transport  
Reply in relation to a request from the Elected 
Members to provide funding for Foildarrig Bridge 
8. 
06/02/2026 
Dept of Justice Reply in relation to a request from the Elected 
Members to provide information on IPAS centres 
9. 
10/02/2026 
Dept of Justice 
Reply in relation to a request from the Elected 
Members to review the terms and conditions of Free 
Legal Aid. 
10. 
10/02/2026 
Dept of Justice
Reply in relation to a request from the Elected 
Members to introduce mandatory sentences for 
assaults on front line workers
11. 
 15/01/2026 
Sligo County 
Council 
Sligo 
County 
Council 
notes 
deep 
concern 
Government decision to ratify CETA and Investor 
Court System
12. 
10/02/2026 
Clare County 
Council  
Clare County Council calling on 
the Irish 
Government to respond to the appeal from Irish 
Beekeepers.
13 
10/02/2026 
Wexford 
County council 
Wexford County Council calling on the Government 
to fast track and publish legislation re social media 
anonymous accounts. 
 
 
16.02.2026.16 Minutes arising from the minutes as confirmed 
 
16.02.2026.17 Any Other Business 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald congratulated Josie Knight European Gold medallist in 
track cycling, who won two gold medals and two world records for Team GB. 
 
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly followed up in relation current status to a Section 183 which was 
due to come before members in December. The Executive confirmed the matter is 
currently under review. 
 
The meeting concluded at 6.15 p.m. 

 
36 
Feb Ordinary Meeting – 16 February 2026 
 
Sean Scally 
 
_________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator 
Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
