July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
1 of 48 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect 
putting them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is 
available on request. 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ NA CRUINNITHE MHIOSIÚIL DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE 
CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN  
CHONTAE, TRÁ  LÍ, AR  AN  LUAN , 17 IÚIL, 2017 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL 
HELD IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE ON 
MONDAY, 17TH JULY, 2017 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
R. Beasley 
M. Cahill 
P Connor-Scarteen         
B. Cronin 
J.J. Culloty 
T. Ferris                             
J. Finucane                       S. Fitzgerald 
J.F. Flynn 
 
        
N. Foley 
M. Gleeson 
D. Grady 
 
        
J. Healy-Rae 
M. Healy-Rae 
N. Kelleher  
        
S. Locke 
J. Lucid 
D. McCarthy  
         
P. McCarthy 
T. McEllistrim 
J. Moloney  
        
N. Moriarty 
D. Nolan 
T. O’Brien 
 
        
B. O’Connell                      M. O’Shea 
 L. Purtill 
 
         
D. Quigg 
J. Sheahan 
 G. Spring 
 
        
A. Thornton 
 
APOLOGY/LEATH SCÉAL 
M. Kennelly 
 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Ms. M. Murrell, Chief Executive    
  Mr. J. Breen, Director Water Services             
Ms. A. McAllen, Head of Finance 
  Mr. M. Scannell, A/Dir. Job Cr/Sust. ED          
Mr. M. O’Donoghue, A/Dir.H.&Corp.S.   Mr. C. O’Sullivan, Director of Operations          
Mr. L. Quinlan, Meetings Administrator Ms. K. Lynch, SEO Finance 
                        
Mr. D. Ginty, A/SE Planning 
  Mr. D. O’Malley, SEP, Planning 
             
Ms. B. Conway, AO Corporate Support Mr. O. O’Shea, Press & Comm. Officer   
    
Mr. G. O’Brien, A/SEO Envir. Serv.         Mr. L. Brosnan, AO Planning  
Mr. D. Burke, A.P. Planning 
  Mr. M. Brosnan, SO Revenue  
 
  
Ms. B. Riordan, AO Housing 
  Ms. B. Reidy, SSO Corporate Support            
Ms. O. O’Shea, CO Corporate Support  Ms. K. Horgan CO  Finance  
 
 
The meeting commenced at 10.35am. 
 
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Sheahan took the Chair. 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
2 of 48 
17.07.17.01 Cathaoirleach’s Report on the CPG Meeting held on the  
11th July, 2017 
 
The Cathaoirleach read the following report into the record of the meeting: 
 
“Agenda for the July Council Meeting 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan briefed the meeting on the Agenda for the July Council Meeting. 
 
The CPG recommended that the Briefing on the Council’s Budget 2018 would be 
held on Monday 11th September from 10.30am to 12.30pm and this would be 
followed by the September Ordinary Meeting. 
 
The CPG highlighted the time consuming nature of the number of presentations 
being made to full Council and they agreed that in future consideration will be 
given to referring certain presentations to the relevant SPC if appropriate. 
 
In response to a query from Cllr. N. Kelleher the Chief Executive advised that a 
report will be presented to Council with a proposed income stream arising from the 
implementation of the Draft Development Contribution Scheme. Mr. M. 
O’Donoghue confirmed that the Draft Scheme went through a statutory public 
consultation process and there is provision in legislation for members to amend it 
which may impact on this proposed income stream.   
 
The CPG recommended that the Draft Budgetary Meetings for the four Municipal 
Districts should be held on the same day and the suggested date is Monday 23rd 
October.   
 
Ms. K. Lynch referred to the LPT public consultation process and highlighted that 
advertisements would appear in the local papers on the 26th/27th July and the 
closing date for receipt of submissions/observations will be Tuesday 29th August.  
Details of the public consultation will also be on social media. 
 
Update from the Chairs of SPCs 
 
No SPC meetings were held since June. 
 
Request for a Civic Reception 
 
The CPG agreed that St. Brigid’s Presentation Secondary School Killarney Junior 
A Basketball Team would be honoured for winning the All-Ireland Title at the 
Killarney MD Annual Awards Event to be held later in the year. 
 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
3 of 48 
Revised Household Waste Collection charging arrangements 
 
Mr. J. Breen briefed the meeting on the recently announced household waste 
collection charging arrangements and he outlined the implications for Kerry as 
follows:  
 
 
Kerry County Council presently operates a waste collection system in 
Killarney which is a pay by weight system so there are no implications for this 
waste collection service.  The Council has carried out various inspections 
over the past number of months of the household waste collection operators 
based in County Kerry.  These inspections have focused on the weighing 
mechanisms in place and the back-office systems in use.  The majority of 
collectors in County Kerry currently operate on the basis of a pay-by-weight, 
or a weight-band averaging system.  To date our inspections have confirmed 
that all operators based in Kerry are compliant with the current household 
waste collection regulatory requirements.   
 
 
However, given the changes in policy which have now been announced, he 
would expect that a new regional inspection regime will be put in place by 
WERLA (Waste Enforcement Regional Lead Authorities). 
  
 
Regarding the roll out of the brown-bin, inspections in relation to this issue 
have also been coordinated at a regional level by the WERLA, however, the 
focus to date has been on population centres in excess of 1500.  It is 
generally accepted that the percentage roll-out of bins in Kerry is one of the 
highest in the Southern Region.  The newly announced waste charging 
regime will not impact on the current arrangements at our Civic Amenity 
sites.  
 
Proposed visit to Brussels 
The Chief Executive advised that it is proposed to commence a 3 year 
programme with visits to Brussels each year.  In the initial visit proposed for the 
autumn it is planned to focus on 2 specific areas (a) Innovation Hubs and pursue 
funding opportunities including the Enterprise Ireland Regional Enterprise 
Development Fund and (b) Coastal protection works and EU policy & funding 
opportunities in this area.  The delegation will comprise councillors and relevant 
officials and it is hoped the first visit will take place before the end of the year with 
additional issues identified in subsequent years of the programme.” 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris referred to the proposed visits to Brussels and suggested that it 
would be more beneficial if the relevant staff attended and report back to Council.  
She added that each MEP is entitled to pay the expenses of a number of 
delegations to Brussels each year and she called on management to liaise with 
the MEPs on this to ensure there is minimal cost to the local authority. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty concurred with the views expressed by Cllr. Ferris. 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
4 of 48 
The Chief Executive clarified that the visit to Brussels would focus on 2 specific 
areas as outlined in the Cathaoirleach’s Report.  It is a matter for council who will 
travel on the delegation but it would be desirable that delegates would have an 
understanding of the specific areas.   
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea complimented the Chief Executive on the proposed visits to 
Brussels and added that at virtually every Council meeting issues involving the 
EU are raised by members. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson welcomed the proposed visits to Brussels.  He referred to the 
Transfer Stations and added that he recently filled a bag with paper and it is so 
heavy it is unfair to expect staff at the Transfer Station to lift it.  He asked that 
discussions would take place with staff at the Transfer Stations to resolve this 
issue. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin welcomed the proposal to review future requests for presentations 
to full Council as they are very time consuming.  He agreed that it is important 
that a delegation would travel to Brussels to put the case for Kerry to EU officials.  
Cllr. Cronin expressed frustration at the lack of a response from the Public 
Lighting Section in relation to complaints submitted and he asked that it would be 
addressed to ensure members receive a response.  
 
Cllr. J. Finucane asked that representatives from the three or four major 
industries in the county would be invited to travel to Brussels as there maybe 
opportunities for them to expand.  He asked that a meeting would be arranged 
with the EU Energy Commissioner in relation to the Shannon LNG project.  There 
is a new advance unit in the county and it is vital that a tenant is secured that will 
create 300 to 400 jobs there.   
 
Cllr. M. Cahill welcomed the two areas to be pursued on the visit to Brussels both 
of which are very important for the county.  Coastal erosion caused significant 
problems in Rossbeigh, Cromane etc and in Rossbeigh 1 mile of sand dunes was 
washed away.  This is now having repercussions for family members wanting to 
build on their own land and he knew one young family who are seriously 
considering availing of the relocation fund.   
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen welcomed proposals by the CPG to review 
presentations before they are approved.  While presentations are very good there 
should be a time limit on them.  He concurred with the views expressed by Cllr. 
Cronin in relation to the Public Lighting Department as he submitted a lot of 
correspondence to them last year but did not get a response.  Cllr. Connor-
Scarteen welcomed the proposed visit to Brussels and the targeting of coastal 
protection works.   
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae highlighted that he allocated funding for public lights at two 
locations two years ago and they have not yet been provided.  There is an issue 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
5 of 48 
with this Department that needs to be addressed and he requested a response 
from management on this issue.  Civic Amenity sites are of the utmost 
importance to the county.  At a recent meeting he requested comparison figures 
between 2016 and 2017 since the new charges were introduced.  He understood 
there is 60% less recycling since the charges were introduced.  The charges 
were a retrograde step and the amount of illegal dumping is increasing.  Cllr. 
Healy-Rae requested the details of the amount of recyclable materials taken in at 
Transfer Stations for the first half of 2016 in comparison to 2017. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher confirmed he raised the problems with the Public Lighting 
Department on many occasions at MD level.  The Council must live up to the 
expectations of the Operational Plan.  Members are not being advised if the 
delay in the repair of lights is because civil works are required or not.  This issue 
must be seriously addressed. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan confirmed he was aware there were issues with public lighting 
as this was highlighted when the Operational Plans were presented to the MDs.  
A dedicated line has been set up to report faults and he advised members that he 
would follow up on particular issues on their behalf. 
 
Cllr. T. O’Brien asked if a new tender for the maintenance of public lighting would 
be advertised in the near future as the level of service at present is not 
acceptable. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan advised members that contracts are in place with two 
companies for the maintenance of public lighting and a new tender will be 
advertised shortly.  The problem is that a lot of the lighting stock is old and the 
maintenance contract is for the replacement of bulbs but if civil works are 
required it takes longer.  There will have to be investment in the existing 
infrastructure.   
 
Cllr. B. Cronin highlighted that the problem is the lack of a response from the 
Public Lighting Department which is a separate issue. 
 
Mr. O’Sullivan undertook to revert to members on that issue. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley requested a phone number that members can ring to report faults in 
the public lighting system.  She asked that an action plan would be presented to 
members following the visit to Brussels rather than a general report. 
 
The Chief Executive advised members that she intended travelling with the 
delegation to Brussels and she would ensure value for the visit.  She advised 
members that where they are not getting responses in relation to public lighting 
that it should have been raised separately with her.  The Chief Executive referred 
to Cllr. J. Healy-Rae’s comments on the reduction is recycling and she called on 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
6 of 48 
him to correct the 60% figure for a reduction in the amount of materials recycled 
as she did not understand this figure to be correct. 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae advised that refuse collections are reducing around the county. 
 
17.07.17.02 Confirmation of Minutes 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Gleeson, SECONDED by Cllr. P. McCarthy it was 
resolved that the minutes of the June Ordinary Meeting of Kerry County Council 
held on the 19th June 2017 be confirmed. 
 
17.07.17.03 Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
 
The Chief Executive read the following report into the record of the meeting: 
 
“The report below has been prepared for the July 2017 Council Meeting. 
 
Finance Directorate 
 
As agreed with the Members, a Financial Report for Members will be provided on 
a quarterly basis in line with the Quarterly Reporting Process for Income and 
Expenditure already in place to the Department of Housing, Planning Community 
& Local Government. The Qtr 2 Financial report will be included in the September 
CE report. 
 
Infrastructure, Operations, Health & Safety Directorate 
 
CLÁR – Local Authority Measures  
In early May a submission was made to the Department of Arts, Heritage, 
Regional Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs for funding of 20 schemes in CLÁR areas 
throughout the county.  Details of the schemes submitted were advised to all 
Members. In June the Department announced funding of €134,188 for 3 
schemes in Kerry. 
 
OPW – Minor Flood Mitigation Works & Coastal Protection Scheme: 
Following an application to the OPW for funding of €118,907 under the Minor 
Flood Mitigation Works & Coastal Protection Scheme to construct a new 
embankment and associated works to protect a number of properties at risk of 
flooding at Incheree, the OPW has allocated 90% funding towards the works.  
 
County of Kerry Road Safety Plan 2016-2020: 
The County of Kerry Road Safety Plan was launched by An Cathaoirleach, Cllr. 
Michael O’Shea, on Thursday, 29th June 2017. The successful implementation of 
the Plan, which focuses on implementing the four “Es” – Education, Engineering, 
Enforcement and Evaluation, will be dependant, not only on the principle 
organisations charged with responsibility for road safety, but by all road users in 
the County of Kerry. 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
7 of 48 
Economic & Community Development Directorate 
 
Kerry Local Enterprise Office  
 
A further 5 projects were approved funding at July Evaluation Meeting. This 
brings approvals to €239,588 for the year. 
 
Over 400 individuals have participated in training initiatives and 4 business 
bootcamps are presently being delivered for early stage business start ups due to 
ongoing demand.  
 
The Food Academy Programme has concluded and the office is presently 
organising an overseas mission for a number of participants to explore export 
potential and opportunities. 
 
Demand for mentoring is strong with over 55 mentoring assignments and 28 
Trading Online Vouchers approved. 
 
The Local Enterprise Office has now launched a new “Lean Programme for 
Microbusinesses” which has now commenced. 
 
The office has completed it’s branding of the customer services area with good 
feedback from customers. 
 
Economic Development Unit 
 
E-Hubs Workshop 
The Action Plan for Jobs 2017 has as one of its aims  to promote the 
development of a network of ‘eHubs’ throughout the regions to support remote 
working, entrepreneurship and small business growth, developed through local 
enterprise initiatives, local authorities, LEOs and the enterprise development 
agencies. The Department of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation held an E-Hubs in 
Ireland Workshop in June 2017.   
 
Tourism Department 
 
Kerry Promotion in Frankfurt 
County Kerry was chosen as international partner for the 2017 Frankfurt-Hoechst 
Castle Festival in Germany.  Cllr. Michael O’Shea, as Mayor of Kerry, joined the 
Mayor of Frankfurt, Herr Peter Feldmann, to officially open the event on June 
24th.   There has also been considerable coverage of Kerry as a holiday 
destination in the Frankfurt regional media.  Germany continues to be Ireland’s 
and Kerry biggest Continental source market and numbers continue to grow.  
The new Ryanair Berlin-Kerry service should boost visitor numbers in the 
shoulder season.  
  

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
8 of 48 
Killarney House 
Ms. Heather Humphreys, T.D., Minister for Arts, Heritage, Regional, Rural and 
Gaeltacht Affairs, officially opened Killarney House to the public on July 3rd 
following a 4 year restoration programme and a state investment of €10m by 
Fáilte Ireland and the National Parks & Wildlife Service.  
 
FLAG funding for Kerry 
€270,000 has been allocated to the coastal regions of Counties Kerry and 
Limerick under the new BIM administered FLAG (Fisheries Local Action Group) 
Scheme. Projects that may be supported range from Marine Tourism, Seafood 
Development and Production, Community Initiatives and supports for Small Scale 
Coastal Fishermen.  The Tourism Unit is working with FLAG to identify local 
tourism actions from the Tourism Strategy that may be supported.  The FLAG 
Scheme is co-funded by the Exchequer and the EU under Ireland’s European 
Maritime and Fisheries Fund (EMFF) Operational Programme 2014-20. 
 
Community Department  
 
LEADER RDP (2014-2020) 
A further meeting of the Kerry Local Action Group was convened on the 5th of 
July to consider project applications for funding under the LEADER RDP 
Programme (2014-2020) under the sub-thematic theme area of ‘Rural Tourism’ 
for the North East & West areas of the county. It is expected that further monthly 
meetings of the Local Action Group will be convened to assess further 
applications for the other sub-thematic theme areas as they are rolled out.  
 
Planning and Sustainable Development  
 
ADAPT Northern Heritage 
Kerry County Council was invited to become the Irish associated partner in a 
major European study, funded by the European Union through INTERREG, of 
the effects of climate change on built heritage assets.  The study involves regions 
from north-west Europe and will look at the effects of climate change with a view 
to creating policies, strategies and models that will enable the effects to be 
assessed and mitigated. The study in Kerry will focus on Ballinskelligs Bay with 
particular reference to Ballinskelligs Castle, Abbey and Graveyard and will run for 
three years. 
 
Water, Environment, Fire & Library Services Directorate 
 
Environment 
 
Anti-Litter and Anti-Graffiti Awareness Grant Scheme 
Kerry County Council has recently been notified of a grant allocation of €26,000 
to co-fund local public education and awareness initiatives in relation to litter and 
graffiti.  The grant allocation covers up to 70% of the cost with the balance being 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
9 of 48 
met by way of local contribution.  Projects submitted for funding this year include 
ongoing support for our adapt a road and bottle bank schemes, purchase of 
equipment to support Community and Tidy Towns groups, litter awareness and 
increasing awareness of responsible dog ownership in relation to dog fouling 
issues. 
 
Housing Directorate  
 
Assessment of Housing Need 2017 
As Members are aware the Council is now required to prepare on an annual 
basis an assessment of Housing need – whereas previously this assessment 
was undertaken every three years. The Minister has directed that the summary 
for 2017 be prepared on 28 June 2017. The form of the 2017 summary is as 
prescribed in the Social Housing Assessments (Summary) Regulations 2016. 
 
The purpose of the Summary of Social Housing Assessments is to capture the 
total number of households qualified for social housing support across the 
country whose social housing need is not being met, in order to understand the 
level of need for such support. The number of qualified persons on our Housing 
waiting list as at the 28 June 2017 is 3248. This figure has seen a reduction over 
the last two annual assessments.  The Housing Department has conducted an 
intensive rigorous exercise to ensure all previous qualified applicants were 
contacted (over 10,000 letters issued and 1500 phone calls were made).  
 
In respect of previously qualified applicants who have failed to engage with the 
Council and who are no longer on the list, should they re-establish contact, within 
a reasonable time, then the Housing Department will on a case by case basis 
review whether that application will be reactivated without affecting the original 
date of qualification.” 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea stated the Frankfurt visit was very important and he hoped links 
would be forged with communities in Germany.  
 
Cllr. J. Moloney highlighted that while approach roads to towns and villages are 
well maintained there is littering of roads out in the country and he asked that an 
advertising campaign would be undertaken and he suggested that the Adopt a 
Road Scheme could be expanded to address this issue.  In conclusion Cllr. 
Moloney acknowledged the work of the Council and in particular the Tourism 
Department since Listowel was nominated for the International Communities in 
Bloom competition.   
 
Cllr.  A. Thornton concurred with the words of thanks extended to the Council by 
Cllr. Moloney and added there has been a concerted effort by the Tidy Towns 
Committee and the Council.  She expressed concern that no project from North 
Kerry was submitted for FLAG funding and she asked that a project such as a 
Blueway would be submitted to ensure North Kerry gets its fair share of funding. 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
10 of 48 
The e-Hubs arose from the Action Plan for Jobs and she understood there was a 
proposal for Listowel. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris welcomed the funding of €118,907 under the Minor Flood Mitigation 
Works & Coastal Protection Scheme but added that it is much too small given the 
nature of the county.  She welcomed the CLÁR funding for the three projects and 
she asked that everything possible would be done to secure funding for St. 
Francis’s School in Beaufort.  Cllr. Ferris asked if there is anything Kerry County 
Council can do to cater for the families that are about to become homeless.  The 
HAP limit of €550 per month is too low while in Cork the limit is €925 per month 
and that is unfair.  In Limerick the limit is €700.  She expressed concern that over 
the coming weeks a large number of families would be homeless and properties 
are not available to them to rent.  There must be a change at a national level to 
HAP to set the cap for Kerry at a more realistic level and she asked that this 
would be brought to the attention of the Department. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson highlighted that when roadside grass is strimmed it causes 
problems for volunteers as items are shredded.  If they were advised in advance 
of the strimming they could arrange the collection of roadside litter.  Graffiti is 
endemic in all parts of the county and he suggested that Transition Year students 
could paint these areas as part of an Art Class.   
 
Cllr. D. Grady commended Council staff for cleaning up the litter on the streets in 
Killarney on the weekend of the Munster Final.  The town was very clean after 
three major days.  Cllr. Grady expressed concern that there was no mention of 
the provision of a homeless facility in Killarney.  He understood, however, that 
funding has been allocated for it and this is welcome.  The reduction in the 
numbers on the Housing list was also welcome.  In conclusion Cllr. Grady 
welcomed the opening of Killarney House and thanked Mr. J. Deenihan for 
allocating funding for it when he was Minister. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill welcomed the funding for coastal protection works at Incharee and 
he asked when the works would commence.  He welcomed the FLAG 
Programme and he asked why the members of the Council were not invited to 
the launch of this Programme.   He welcomed the flights to Kerry Airport from 
Germany and added they will be a major boost to tourism in Kerry.  He asked if 
there are plans for a marketing campaign to promote these flights.  Cllr. Cahill 
highlighted that he is contacted on a daily basis by tenants who are getting 
Notices to Quit from their landlords as they want to sell their properties and as a 
result he believed the housing crisis would get much worse.  He asked how well 
prepared the Council is for this situation. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher welcomed the Kerry Berlin service and stressed the importance 
of EU connections in light of BREXIT.  He welcomed the OPW funding for 
Incharee and he asked that the application for funding for Foiladuane would be 
finalised as soon as possible.  Cllr. Kelleher asked how many housing applicants 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
11 of 48 
were removed from the list as they did not respond to correspondence.  While he 
acknowledged it is the applicant’s responsibility to notify the local authority of a 
change of address etc. he asked if efforts were made to contact the applicants by 
phone before they were removed from the list.   
 
Cllr. N. Foley welcomed the Kerry Berlin flights which are important both for 
tourism and business.  The Anti-Litter and Anti-Graffiti Awareness Grant Scheme 
Funding is very limited and she asked that cameras would be purchased.  She 
suggested that a campaign could be run with the owners of premises whereby 
they would dress their windows with anti littering as the theme.  Cllr. Foley asked 
how many house sales have been finalised under the Tenant Purchase Scheme.  
The limits under the HAP Scheme in Kerry are a disgrace and they put Kerry at a 
geographic disadvantage.  She called on the Chief Executive to take this matter 
up with the Department immediately. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley suggested that the moratorium on the recruitment of staff has 
impacted on the level of littering.  This has also impacted on the amount of grass 
cutting being undertaken and the situation would be worse but for the work of the 
Tidy Towns Groups.  Beaches that do not have Blue Flags used to have refuse 
bins but that is no longer the case and he called on the Council to provide bins 
rather than depend on voluntary groups to clean up the litter on beaches.  Cllr. 
Beasley asked that hedges at junctions would be cut in the interest of road 
safety.  The beach cleaning machine was used in Ballybunion on two occasions 
only over the past two weeks due to staff shortages and that is not acceptable.  
Dog fouling continues to be a problem.  In conclusion Cllr. Beasley stated in his 
opinion the reported housing need in the county is understated. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane echoed the sentiments expressed by previous speakers in 
relation to the Kerry Frankfurt and Kerry Berlin flights.  All those involved in the 
tourism industry in Kerry should be encouraged to have leaflets available in 
German and it would be beneficial to have literature and signage aimed at this 
market.  On a number of occasions he called on the Council to host a 
Conference on the Wild Atlantic Way as it needs to be developed and a working 
group of Chief Executives and officials should be established to plan for its 
expansion.  Cllr. Finucane then moved Notice of Motion No. 8. 
 
8. 
Signage at Kerry Airport 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Finucane PROPOSED: 
That full signage be erected at the junction at Farranfore to target airport traffic, 
highlighting the Tralee/Dingle route and all its attractions.  
 
The following reply issued: 
The current signage at the N22/N23 junction at Farranfore directs traffic 
towards Dingle along the R561 through Castlemaine as it is the shortest 
route by 10km. Consideration will be given in consultation with the TII to 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
12 of 48 
providing additional signage which highlights the alternative albeit longer 
route via Tralee and Camp. Consideration will also be given to improving 
the tourist attraction signage at this junction and at Kerry Airport. 
 
Cllr. Finucane highlighted there is no signage for West Kerry at the junction at 
Kerry Airport and he asked that it would be provided to encourage visitors to 
explore this area. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. S. Locke referred to the Housing list and highlighted there will be a problem 
going forward as landlords are selling their houses.  He complimented the 
volunteers who clean the roadside to ensure that Tralee retains its Gold medal 
status.  However, the problem is with other roads where the hedges are 
overgrown and this facilitates illegal dumping.  The Bottle and Clothes Banks 
should be inspected daily to ensure they are emptied when full. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin endorsed the comments of previous speakers in relation to the 
Kerry Frankfurt and Kerry Berlin flights and he asked that the number of flights 
from Kerry Airport would be expanded further.  Illegal dumping has increased on 
the quieter roads and there should be a campaign to establish how people 
dispose of their household waste.  Cllr. Cronin highlighted the problem with 
graffiti at Ballydribbeen and Doireann Aileann and he asked that it would be 
addressed.  There are photos of young people running along the roofs of Council 
houses and this was brought to the attention of management prior to the 
Community Centre being handed over. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae stressed that the caps are too low under the HAP Scheme.  
While houses can be leased to the Council landlords can get out of the lease and 
she asked if this could be addressed.  She called for the provision of a safety 
barrier from Farranfore to the Airport. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty stated she presumed all members support the CLÁR funding 
application by St. Mary of the Angels as this facility serves people from the four 
Municipal Districts.  She asked that an interim report would be presented on 
Ballinskelligs so that the learning can be of benefit to all areas and that a funding 
stream can be secured for these sites.  In conclusion Cllr. Moriarty agreed that 
multi lingual signage should be provided around the county. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty highlighted that the funding required to prevent flooding at 
Glenflesk/Foiladuane is not substantial but these works would make a big 
difference to this area.  As house prices improve landlords want to sell their 
property and this will result in an increase in the number of people on the housing 
waiting list.  A number of turnkey developments in Killarney were submitted and 
he requested an update on them.   
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
13 of 48 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae did not agree that applicants should be taken off the list if they 
did not reply to correspondence.  Once they are removed they must commence 
the application process again and this is not the way to reduce the numbers on 
the housing list. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg welcomed the funding for coastal protection works at Incharee.  In 
recent times funding of €62m for housing was announced for Kerry and he asked 
where the money is being spent.  12 new houses were promised for Killorglin yet 
construction has not commenced and he asked when they will be built.   
 
Cllr. A. Thornton advised there have been complaints that the beach in 
Ballybunion is not being cleaned and she asked that it would be cleaned daily for 
the months of July and August. 
 
The Cathaoirleach PROPOSED that Kerry County Council would ask the 
Department to review HAP for Kerry. 
 
This proposal was unanimously agreed. 
 
The Chief Executive confirmed that members moved Notices of Motion on HAP 
levels and housing officials will engage with the Department on it.  A large 
number of properties have been secured under the RAS and Leasing Schemes 
and more recently under HAP.  The figure of 3,248 is the actual number of 
people on the housing list and there was huge engagement with applicants 
during the review process.  There were 376 new tenancies in 2016 and she 
acknowledged the huge level of activity by the Housing Department.  The Chief 
Executive confirmed it was her intention to form a working group following the 
WAW Conference.  She agreed it is important that a project from North Kerry is 
submitted for FLAG funding in the next round and NEWKD and Kerry County 
Council will promote this.  In relation to CLÁR funding she understood it is a new 
call for applications and enquiries will be made to ascertain if the application 
numbers need to be amended.  A tourism brochure is available in German and it 
is very popular.  In relation to Ballybunion Beach the Chief Executive advised that 
she would have to ascertain what provision was made in the adopted MD Plan 
but it maybe possible to identify funding from other sources if that is a priority. 
 
17.07.17.04 Draft Development Contribution Scheme 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane highlighted that there is a tremendous amount of detail in the 
proposed Draft Development Contribution Scheme and he PROPOSED that a 
Special Meeting in committee would be convened to discuss this item.   
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae opposed this proposal and asked that members would be 
provided with the list of existing levies before they make a decision on the new 
Scheme. 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
14 of 48 
Cllr. B. O’Connell highlighted that the contentious issue is the proposed levy on 
agricultural buildings and he PROPOSED that these charges would be deferred. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae SECONDED this proposal. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris asked if those who have a conflict of interest must excuse 
themselves from any discussions. 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy stated members should be afforded the opportunity to ask 
questions on the Draft Scheme and he called for the holding of a meeting in 
committee for this purpose.  This would then be followed by a public meeting. 
 
Cllr. O’Connell asked that his proposal would be put to a vote. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin advised he was opposed to discussing the Draft Scheme in 
committee and he wanted it discussed fully prior to a decision being taken on it. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris highlighted that the making of a Development Contribution Scheme 
is one of the few powers left to members and she agreed the Draft Scheme 
should be considered at a Special Meeting. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley agreed that a Special Meeting should be convened to consider 
the Draft Development Contribution Scheme. 
 
On behalf of the Fianna Fáil Party Cllr. N. Foley stated her party would be happy 
to discuss the Scheme either at that meeting or at a Special Meeting in public. 
 
Cllr. T. O’Brien confirmed that the Labour Party agreed with this stance. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris advised if the information requested by Cllr. J. Healy-Rae was 
provided to members she would be happy to proceed with consideration of this 
item. 
 
The Chief Executive informed members that a proposed Scheme was circulated 
and it is a fair and balanced scheme.  Members have 6 weeks to consider the 
proposed Scheme and they may amend it.  If it is not adopted within the 6 weeks 
the old Scheme remains in place.  It is a matter for the members to decide if they 
want to consider the item at that meeting or to hold a Special Meeting.   
 
Cllr. J. Finucane confirmed there was consensus that there would be an open 
discussion on the Draft Scheme and he PROPOSED that a Special Meeting 
would be held as soon as possible. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae again pointed out that members are entitled to see the current 
Scheme before they make a decision on the new Scheme.    
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
15 of 48 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. M. O’Shea it was 
agreed to hold a Special Meeting on Tuesday 25th July at 10.30am to consider 
the Draft Development Contribution Scheme. 
 
17.07.17.05 Dates for meetings/briefing 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Foley, SECONDED by Cllr. J.F. Flynn it 
was agreed that the Briefing on the Council’s Budget 2018 would be held 
on Monday 11th September 2017 from 10.30am to 12.30pm. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. R. Beasley, SECONDED by Cllr. N. Moriarty it 
was agreed that the September Ordinary Meeting would be held on 
Monday 11th September 2017 at 12.30pm. 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. P. McCarthy, SECONDED by Cllr. N. Kelleher 
it was agreed that a Special Meeting to consider the Draft Budget Policy / 
Strategy and consideration of setting a local adjustment factor in relation 
to LPT would be held on Monday 25th September 2017 at 10.30am. 
 
(d) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Nolan, SECONDED by Cllr. P. McCarthy it 
was agreed to hold the Draft Budgetary Meeting for the four Municipal 
Districts on Monday 23rd October 2017 at the following times: 
 
 
 
Tralee  
 
 
9.30am 
 
Killarney 
 
 
11am 
 
South & West Kerry  
2pm 
 
Listowel 
 
 
3.30pm 
 
17.07.17.06 Summary of proceedings at events 
 
It was agreed to note reports on the following events on behalf of the Kerry 
County Council delegates that attended in accordance with Section 142(5)(f) of 
the Local Government Act 2001 as amended:- 
 
(a) 
Irish Planning Institute Conference held in Westport from 5th to 7th April 
2017 by Cllr. R. Beasley. 
 
(b) 
Road Safety Authority Conference 2017 held in Dublin on the 1st June 
2017 by Cllr. M. Kennelly. 
 
17.07.17.07 Approval for the opening of Tenders 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Gleeson 
it was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for the Management of 
Invasive Alien Species (IAPS) on National Routes – Closing date: 
Wednesday 19th July 2017 at 12pm. 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
16 of 48 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.F. Flynn, SECONDED by Cllr. B. Cronin it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for the Collection and 
processing of Dry Mixed Recyclables Waste (Eco Sense Bags) – Closing 
date: Thursday 27th July 2017 at 4pm. 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.F. Flynn, SECONDED by Cllr. N. Moriarty it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for Market Sounding and 
Expressions of Interest – Cahersiveen Enterprise Units – Closing date 
Monday 31st July 2017 at 11.30am. 
 
(d) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.J. Culloty, SECONDED by Cllr. N. Kelleher it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for the Supply and 
Installation Standby Generator and Automatic Changeover Panel at Áras 
an Chontae, Rathass, Tralee – Closing date: Monday 31st July 2017 at 
2.30pm. 
 
(e) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. P. McCarthy, SECONDED by Cllr. N. Foley it 
was agreed to approve the opening of any tender that may arise up to the 
September Council Meeting. 
 
17.07.17.08 Notices of Motion 
 
1. 
Former Saint Finan’s Hospital building 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Gleeson PROPOSED: 
That the CEO would update the Council on the progress of the talks regarding 
the future of the former Saint Finan’s Hospital building. That the HSE would be 
requested to inform the Council and the public of its short and medium term 
intentions for the lands adjoining the former hospital building. 
 
The following reply issued: 
As Members will be aware the Council has met with the relevant staff in the 
HSE on a number of occasions in relation to the availability of surplus HSE 
lands. 
 
By way of follow up at the end of June the Council received formal 
correspondence from the HSE in respect of the campus at St Finans. 
 
At this point the Council has formally indicated a strategic interest in land 
at the St Finans campus and engagement is on-going in respect of 
advancing this. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson read the following statement into the record of the meeting: 
 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
17 of 48 
“Since 1852 this splendid building has dominated the landscape and played a 
huge role in the economic life of the entire area. 
Now before it is too late, it is imperative to determine a new and vibrant life for it 
and its attached lands. 
 
There are many options of how it could best serve the area and the county. 
It could be subdivided into apartments for single people who comprise a sizable 
and largely un-catered section of our housing applicants. It could be re-designed 
internally to cater for elderly couples who would wish to move to live near the 
town. 
 
It most certainly has enormous potential to serve as the centre for All the public 
services such as health, citizens information, Alzheimers’ Unit etc 
Indeed there are many people in and around Killarney who are very anxious that 
a unit similar in excellence to the Rockmount Centre in Kilgarvan for the day care 
of Alzheimer sufferers would be developed in the immediate future. 
 
There are very few who would wish to see the building transfer to private 
ownership. 
 
From its foundation to the present day the upkeep of the building has been 
maintained by the Taxpayer and I believe that there is an almost moral obligation 
to ensure that it remains in use for the public’s benefit. 
 
The attached lands are so very strategically situated in an area where the 
availability of land for development is at a premium. We cannot afford to allow 
this land escape into the hands of speculators. It’s great potential must be 
maximised for the overall benefit of the community. 
 
It has potential for housing development, both private and public. Part of it could 
be used for recreational purposes. It may allow the Council and TII the scope to 
solve the ongoing horror that is the Lewis Road/ By Pass junction. 
 
I am pleading on behalf of the people of Killarney and indeed of a much wider 
area to the HSE and to this Council to promptly decide on the future ownership of 
the building and land and for the Council thereafter to ensure that its vast 
potential is maximised for the public’s benefit.” 
 
In conclusion Cllr. Gleeson asked that the Council would express a strategic 
interest in St. Finans building as it could serve as a Centre of Excellence for 
Alzheimer patients as well as other groups. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin SECONDED the motion. 
 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
18 of 48 
2. 
Private Health insurance customers admitted to Kerry University 
Hospital 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
That this Council write to Kerry University Hospital Management and ask them 
(a) does every private insurance customer have to sign private insurance patient 
forms at admissions. (b) Will the hospital Management then give them the same 
treatment as if they did sign it. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy highlighted that people who have health insurance with Irish 
Life Health received a leaflet titled ‘Public Hospital Access know your rights’.  
This leaflet states ‘if you are admitted into a public hospital through A&E you will 
be asked to sign a Private Insurance Patient form.  This form asks you to waive 
your right to public treatment in a public hospital.  If you sign the form unless you 
can be guaranteed a private or semi-private room, your treatment will be exactly 
the same but you will be charged, through your health insurer €813 per day.   If 
you do not sign the form you will be charged, through your health insurer €80 per 
day”. Cllr. McCarthy highlighted that everyone is shocked at the increases in 
health insurance and he asked that the motion would be referred to Kerry 
University Hospital management for a specific reply. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane SECONDED the motion. 
 
3. 
Call to reduce Booking.com commission 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Cahill PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council request the Irish Government, the Northern Ireland 
Government, Failte Ireland and Tourism Northern Ireland to lobby Booking.com 
vigorously to reduce their commission of 15% to a more realistic rate, as it is 
having a negative impact on Tourism by (A) forcing businesses to pass on the 
commission to the client (B) it is making accommodation very expensive (C)it 
gives Ireland a name of not being good value for money and (D) it is more 
important now than ever before to have competitive prices, especially with Brexit 
imminent. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill stated Killarney has the largest number of beds outside of Dublin 
and the commission for Air B&B is 4% as against 15% by Booking.com.  It is 
important for the tourism industry in Kerry that this rate is reduced. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. Cahill then moved Notice of Motion No. 20. 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
19 of 48 
20. 
Provision of training for the hospitality sector 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Cahill PROPOSED: 
In view of the fact County Kerry is the premier Tourist county in Ireland, I propose 
that Kerry County Council in conjunction with the Minster for Tourism, Minister for 
Jobs, Minister for Education, Failte Ireland and all relevant Government 
Departments carry out (A) An audit of all the Culinary/Hospitality/Tourism 
Programmes and Training being offered in the county to assess the following 
levels of certification/success rate/retention and transfer into the Hospitality 
Industry. (B) Implement an action plan as a matter of extreme urgency to 
coordinate training/training needs which are matched to Industry requirements. 
(C) Provide the necessary funding to promote careers in the Culinary/Hospitality 
and the Tourism Sector at a National level. (D) Carry out a feasibility study from a 
financial view point to assess if those currently on the live register and completing 
relevant training programmes can afford to secure employment within the 
Hospitality Industry and (E) As in other areas make Springboard funding 
available to those currently working in the Hospitality sector who wish to gain up 
skill and gain relevant qualifications. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill highlighted that the profile of the tourism industry in Kerry needs to 
be improved and a Centre of Excellence should be established in the county.  IT 
Tralee, the National Learning Network and the Brehon School etc. should be 
amalgamated and a Tourism Education Officer appointed to visit all schools in 
the county to encourage students to consider this industry for their future careers.  
An Apprentice Chef Programme was launched last October and this brought 900 
students to the industry.  Cllr. Cahill asked that the motion would be referred to 
Minister Griffin, Mr. O. Murphy Tralee IT, Mr. C. McEvoy KETB and to the Kerry 
County Council Tourism Department. 
 
Cllr. D. Nolan asked that the motion would be amended to refer to a living wage 
rather than the minimum wage. 
 
Cllr. Cahill agreed to this amendment. 
 
4. 
Development levies on wind farms 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. A. Thornton PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council consider the development levies that are imposed with 
respect to wind farms going directly back to local communities affected by wind 
farm construction. 
 
 
 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
20 of 48 
The following reply issued: 
Section 48 of the Planning & Development Act 2000 (as amended) enables 
the Planning Authority when granting planning permission to include 
conditions requiring the payment of a financial contribution in respect of 
public infrastructure and facilities benefiting development in the area of the 
Planning Authority, and that is provided, or that is intended to be provided, 
by or on behalf of the Local Authority. 
 
Costings for transport, community, and amenity projects have been 
prepared by the relevant Council Directorates and are listed as an appendix 
in the draft Development Contribution Scheme for consideration, at today’s 
ordinary monthly meeting.  These strategic projects are located throughout 
the County.   
 
The benefit of these transport, community, and amenity projects are not 
confined to specific communities, rather they benefit large sectors of the 
population and economy, county wide. Development levies collected are 
therefore expended on projects listed in the Development Contribution 
Scheme and not in the specific location where the developments, subject to 
levies, are located.   
 
The minister’s recent press release on the “Preferred Draft Approach” to  
the revised windfarm guidelines includes measures for a “Community 
Dividend” as follows; 
 
Community dividend (or benefit) will be a core component of future wind 
farm development.  This may encompass a range of measures and will vary 
according to the nature and scale of a project.  However, it is proposed that 
developers will need to offer a form of community dividend that will ensure 
the project will be of enduring economic benefit to the communities 
concerned. 
 
The detail of how this will be calculated or agreed has yet to be announced. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton advised in the light of the planning briefing later that day she 
agreed to deal with the motion at the briefing.  She highlighted that in Asdee 
bridges have been undermined by heavy vehicles transporting wind turbines but 
there is no funding to repair them.  Cllr. Thornton referred to Page 13 of the Draft 
Development Contribution Scheme where there is specific reference to wind farm 
development and it states “Development contributions shall apply to energy 
developments (non-renewable) at a rate of €20,000 per MW (or part thereof). 
This contribution shall be split 30/70 between the Roads & Transport and 
Community & Amenity” and she asked what this breakdown was in the last 
Scheme, what levies on wind farm developments were in the previous Scheme 
and should this funding be referenced in the Budget. 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
21 of 48 
 
In response Mr. M. Scannell stated that the Development Contribution Scheme is 
a countywide Scheme and there is scope for the local authority to apply a special 
contribution where there is an impact on specific infrastructure in the area.  This 
can be considered for future applications when a detailed analysis of the impact 
of the development on the infrastructure can be undertaken and a levy applied to 
enable repair work to be carried out. 
 
Cllr. Thornton asked what would happen the infrastructure that has already been 
adversely impacted by wind farm developments. 
 
Mr. Scannell advised that any repair works would have to be funded from the 
existing budget. 
 
Cllr. Thornton highlighted that many wind farm developments have already taken 
place and if levies are imposed on them in the future will the levies be specific to 
the development or will they go to a general fund. 
 
Mr. M. Scannell advised that a special contribution has been applied to individual 
applications.  When assessing future applications a critical analysis of the impact 
of the development on local infrastructure will have to be undertaken. 
 
Cllr. Thornton expressed concern that funding is not available to repair the local 
infrastructure in North Kerry. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan advised members that developers will have to meet with the 
Area Engineer to get access to the site to be developed and in most cases the 
necessary road improvements are achieved at a local level.  Charges generally 
apply for road opening etc. and it will be necessary to follow up on repair works 
post planning.   
 
Cllr. J. Moloney asked what is the position when Kerry County Council refuses 
permission but An Bord Pleanála grant it, must the levy be by MW. 
 
It was agreed that these issues would be considered at the Special Meeting to 
consider the Draft Development Contribution Scheme. 
 
5. 
Provision of funding to repair existing footpaths and to create new 
footpaths 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council please set aside extra money to repair existing 
footpaths and create new footpaths in the County. 
 
 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
22 of 48 
The following reply issued: 
The 2017 Service Delivery Plan, which has details on all road improvements 
in the county, was adopted in April by Council.  A Footpath Programme of 
€200,000 is included in this years’ Service Delivery Plan. We will review an 
Annual Footpath Programme and will discuss it with the Members in the 
context of the Councillor Allocations to accommodate this programme.  
The Chief Executive will engage further with the Members in relation to this. 
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen highlighted while there has been an increase in funding 
for footpath repairs it is still not adequate.  Many footpaths are dangerous and in 
some instances there are no footpaths leading to Council estates.  Cllr. Connor-
Scarteen asked that the footpaths at Droumnevane and Killowen would be 
repaired.   
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion. 
 
6. 
Certification of external insulation on Council houses 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. T. Ferris PROPOSED: 
In light of recent tragic events and the concern of some residents in properties 
recently externally insulated/cladded can Kerry County Council confirm that the 
materials used have been properly tested and are fire resistant? 
 
The following reply issued: 
Following the recent tragic events of the Grenfell Tower Tragedy a number 
of reviews are underway by Government. 
 
Firstly it should be stated that the nature of that complex and the 
circumstances of the tragic events are not comparable with any residential 
complex we have in County Kerry. 
 
Following those tragic events, Government have requested that Local 
Authorities conduct a review of Social Housing in multi-unit/ multi storey 
developments (individual residential units are not covered by the review). 
The review covers exclusively Council owned or leased Social Housing in a 
multiunit/ multi storey setting to ensure that common areas have 
appropriate fire safety measures. Kerry County Council is currently 
inspecting and reviewing such locations to ensure such measures are in 
place. 
 
In addition the review seeks to identify Social Housing Units in privately 
owned building where responsibility rests with the Management Company 
or Owner of such buildings. In such cases the Council will be writing to 
Management Companies / Owners reminding them of their responsibilities. 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
23 of 48 
In addition the Residential Tenancies Board is writing to all landlords for 
registered tenancies reminding them of their responsibilities. 
 
 A further phase of the review requires identification of residential buildings 
exceeding 6 floors or 18 m and separately non-residential buildings of this 
type. 
 
These reviews and assessments are on-going but it is important to stress 
that no significant issues have arisen to date. 
 
In relation to the specific question, Kerry County Council has a number of 
properties which have been insulated using external insulation methods. 
This is not cladding and the insulation is fixed directly to the external of the 
building. 
 
Kerry County Council has externally insulated properties in Tralee as part 
of the Mitchel’s Regeneration project and Listowel Town Council had 
externally insulated a number of their properties. 
 
Kerry County has received the Irish Agrèment Board Certificates for these 
projects and the external insulation used conforms to the current Fire 
Regulations. 
 
Kerry County Council has purchased some properties in Tralee with 
external insulation but these properties were insulated as part of the 
regeneration project and the aforementioned agreement cert applies to the 
material used. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris expressed disappointment at the second part of the reply as she 
would have expected greater detail.  She wanted confirmation that the materials 
used are suitable and are not flammable.  When she researched this material she 
found that all materials used except one, rockwool, are combustible.  Cllr. Ferris 
requested a more detailed reply either at the September Council Meeting or next 
MD Meeting. 
 
The Chief Executive highlighted that she was in discussions with the Chief Fire 
Officer who is undertaking a review on a risk basis.  Grenfell was a unique 
situation and other buildings do not have the shared spaces it had.  There are not 
many high rise buildings in the county.  The reply is based on the information 
available from the Chief Fire Officer.  The Chief Executive assured members 
where houses were insulated they comply with current standards. 
 
Cllr. Ferris confirmed she did not believe there is an issue but she would be more 
assured if rock wool was used to insulate the houses.   
 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
24 of 48 
7. 
Call to speed up the abolition of water charges in the Dáil 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. Quigg PROPOSED: 
That this Council call on legislation to be speeded up in the Dáil in relation to the 
abolition of water Charges as people who refused to pay this stealth tax are 
currently excluded from the Tenant Purchase Scheme. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg highlighted it is a prolonged process to get these stealth charges 
removed and he called on the Government to speed up the legislation to remove 
water charges. 
 
Cllr. S. Locke SECONDED the motion. 
 
The Chief Executive advised members this is a matter of national policy. 
 
Cllr. Ferris asked that applications under the Tenant Purchase Scheme would be 
processed at a local level and valuations carried out to ensure these applications 
can be progressed once water charges are abolished. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue agreed with this suggestion. 
 
9. 
Inspection of all bridges on secondary roads used excessively by 
heavy goods vehicles 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council inspect all bridges on secondary roads that have been 
used excessively by heavy good vehicles particularly after the felling of forestry. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The bridges on national roads are regularly inspected by Transport 
Infrastructure Ireland (TII) Issues identified from these inspections are 
funded by the TII. Kerry County Council has carried out detailed 
inspections on 330 bridges on our regional roads over the last 3 years. 
Issues identified on these regional road bridges are submitted for funding 
to Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport under the Bridge 
Rehabilitation Programme.   
 
There are approximately 3,500 bridge structures on the non-national road 
network. Inspections of bridges are prioritised based on traffic volumes on 
these roads with approximately 100 bridges being inspected on an annual 
basis.   Each Municipal District will continue to carry out inspection on 
bridges on local roads where they have knowledge that heavy goods 
vehicles are operating. 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
25 of 48 
Cllr. D. McCarthy highlighted that large lorries transport timber from forestries 
and over the past two months the road where he lives in Kenmare has been 
damaged.  He thanked the Council for repairing the bridge and added that 
bridges were not built to carry the weight of these lorries.  Cllr. McCarthy called 
on the Council to inspect roads and bridges prior to the commencement of the 
transporting of timber and also when the work is complete.   
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris moved Notice of Motion No. 10 in Cllr. Beasley’s absence. 
 
10. 
Opposition to any attempt to re-route the proposed motorway link 
between Limerick and Cork through Tipperary 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. R. Beasley PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council opposes any attempt to re-route the proposed 
motorway link between Limerick and Cork through Tipperary as this would further 
isolate North Kerry. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The statutory process (CPO/EIS) for a previous M20 Motorway proposal via 
Mallow and Buttevant was published  but subsequently withdrawn in 2011 
by Cork County Council at the request of the Minister. 
The scheme is currently suspended and is not in the current Capital 
Investment Plan. It is understood that the Minister is/ will be undertaking a 
midterm review of the Plan and that no decision on the resumption of the 
scheme will be taken until the midterm review is complete. 
Kerry County Council is therefore unaware of any statutory process or 
consultation period where a re-routing of the proposed motorway link 
between Limerick and Cork through Tipperary is being proposed. 
 
11. 
Call to deploy the Fire Service to all emergencies 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. Grady PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council agree to deploy the Fire Service to all emergencies as 
there has been undue delays with the Ambulance Services attending the scene 
of either emergencies or road traffic accidents over the past two years. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Fire Service in Kerry currently is deployed to every emergency, 
including medical emergencies, to which it is called. 
 
Matters of interagency policy (matters of common interest to the Fire 
Service and/or the National Ambulance Service and/or An Garda Siochána) 
are normally raised at national level through the National Directorate for 
Fire and Emergency Management for the Fire Service. 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
26 of 48 
 
Cllr. D. Grady highlighted there can be delays with ambulances and Kerry does 
not have an adequate number of ambulances.  The ambulance at Millstreet is 
gone and this area must be serviced by the Killarney ambulance which is putting 
further pressure on the service.  The Fire Service has defibrillators and are fully 
equipped and trained.  Cllr. Grady stated he understood a draft report has been 
compiled recommending that the Fire Service would be utilised in emergencies 
and he would welcome this.   
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion and added that members should strive 
to secure a second ambulance for Killarney. 
 
12. 
Vat rate on bottled water 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Sheahan PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister of Finance to re-evaluate and 
reform the VAT rates on bottled water which is currently taxed at 23%, while 
chocolate milk which contains 50% sugar is taxed at the Zero rate of VAT (0%). 
This anomaly is not helping to curb the rising obesity levels within our society.  
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan stated that good habits are to be encouraged from a young age 
and it is no help that our taxation system is not on the same side.  A healthy body 
and lifestyle are a bonus in all our lives.  Obese children can turn into obese 
adults.  The short term effects can be breathing difficulties, problems with bone 
health and psychological issues and the long term effects being cancer, heart 
disease and Type 2 diabetes.  In conclusion Cllr. Sheahan asked that the 
resolution would also be forwarded to the Minister for Health. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty SECONDED the motion. 
 
13. 
Improvement Works in Lieu Scheme 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council to address the issue with the Improvement Works in 
Lieu Scheme where applicants are being refused entry to the Scheme when their 
house does not have a cavity wall, people are not being advised of this before 
they apply. Furthermore, this is depriving people of improving older houses with 
stone walls from accessing the Scheme and thus contributing to the housing 
crisis.   
 
The following reply issued: 
The main trust of the Improvement Works in Lieu scheme was seen as the 
improvement of properties so as to provide an alternate to the direct 
provision of a social housing unit for approved local authority applicants. 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
27 of 48 
The works, when completed, should, in essence, result in a residence 
comparable with other units provided under social housing schemes.  
  
It is a requirement of the scheme that on completion of the works the 
building is structurally sound and free from damp and meets other normal 
standards such as fire safety. Houses of masonry and mass concrete 
construction can have difficulty meeting the requirements of the scheme. In 
particular it can be difficult to make such properties “free from damp and 
weather tight” in a manner which achieves value for money standards of 
the scheme. All of these issues are considered in the technical assessment 
of the property.  
  
The Housing Department will review the information currently provided to 
applicants and if necessary will provide additional information to 
applicants of this scheme so as to clarify further the technical requirements  
so that potential applicants can determine if they should proceed with an 
application.  
  
In all cases, applicants who are qualified for social housing are always 
guided and advised of the full suite of Housing supports/ schemes and 
grants that are available to them. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae pointed out that the application form for the Improvement 
Works in Lieu Scheme does not state that a house that does not have a cavity 
wall will not qualify under the Scheme and this is misleading applicants.  The 
Minister for Housing informed Deputy Danny Healy-Rae that it is not a stipulation 
in the Scheme and she asked who implemented it.  She further asked what will 
happen applicants who were refused and treated unfairly. 
 
Cllr.  J. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue advised members that following the works the building must 
be structurally sound, free from damp and must meet other normal standards 
such as fire safety.  It can be difficult to bring some houses up to the required 
standard.  It is only when the house has been technically examined that this can 
be determined. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris asked when was the last time Kerry County Council approved an 
application for Improvement Works in Lieu funding. 
 
Mr. O’Donoghue highlighted that an application for €0.75m is presently with the 
Department for approval.  A number of schemes can be used to make a house 
habitable. 
 
 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
28 of 48 
14. 
Amounts for Housing Grant Scheme from 2014 – 2017  
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.J. Culloty PROPOSED: 
To ask this Council, to provide amounts received for housing aid for the elderly, 
mobility aid grants, and housing adaptation grants for people with disabilities for 
years, 2014, 2015, 2016 and 2017. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The grant allocation for the various schemes for each year is as follows:  
 
2014  
2015  
2016  
2017  
1,631,022  
1,788,778  
2,096,050  
2,220,979  
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty welcomed the report and asked if the 2017 funding has been 
fully allocated. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue advised that the processing of grant applications is relatively 
up to-date.  Funding received in 2017 enabled the funding of Priority 2 and 3 
applications and he advised Cllr. Culloty to contact him if he wished to discuss a 
specific application. 
 
15. 
Call for a proactive approach to deal with overgrown roadside 
hedges 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Lucid PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council please take a proactive approach to deal with 
overgrown roadside hedges so that our roads are safe for all those that use 
them. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Council’s policy and procedures on hedgecutting were reviewed in 
2015, to address the concerns expressed by the members with compliance 
by landowners in maintaining hedgerows. These procedures included a 
more pro-active approach by Council staff in ensuring compliance and we 
also established a database to manage and monitor complaints.    
 
Notwithstanding the restrictions imposed under Section 40 of the Wildlife 
Act 1976 (as amended), which prohibits the cutting of hedges between the 
1st March and the 31st August, the Council has powers to cut a hedge 
where an immediate traffic hazard exists.  
 
Since the Council established the position of a Roads Enforcement Officer, 
in 2003, the Council has been proactive in promoting the statutory 
obligations of landowners, providing advice, and investigating complaints 
from the public. This includes the issuing of an advice note to almost 6,000 
landowners last year.  

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
29 of 48 
 
This year to date, we have received 79 complaints in relation to alleged 
overgrown hedges, which are recorded on our database - 8 of which were 
through representations made by Elected Members. All of these are fully 
investigated by our Roads Enforcement Officer. Additional inspections are 
also carried out by our Roads Enforcement Officer and by Area Staff.  
Furthermore, each of the Engineering Areas has a database of roads where 
lands are in our ownership, as well as critical junctions to be inspected 
annually. 402 km of hedges were cut by the Council in the past year. The 
Council recently commenced its hedgecutting programme and will be 
undertaking targeted cutting on safety grounds of national, regional and 
local primary roads with a particular focus on tourist routes. This work will 
concentrate on junctions and bends on these routes. 
 
Cllr. J. Lucid called on Kerry County Council to take a proactive and selective 
approach to dealing with overgrown hedges to improve road safety at this time of 
year.  He understood fully that the Council does not have the resources to cut 
back every hedge in the County.  However, his concerns are around road safety, 
in particular at junctions and in relation to road signage. 
 
At the moment, at many junctions where minor roads join main roads the ditches 
and hedges are overgrown.  Drivers have to move out too far to see if there is 
oncoming traffic and they are putting themselves and other road users at risk. 
 
On the outskirts of many villages speed limit signs are now obscured.  Other road 
safety signs similarly cannot be seen rendering them totally ineffective.  He 
noticed Wild Atlantic Way signs while out walking which are not visible in a car 
yet these signs were put in place at a financial cost to the taxpayer.  In the first 
instance the signs were put in place because it was deemed necessary for road 
safety and it does not make sense that they cannot be seen.  It does not make 
sense that drivers have to take risks at road junctions.  Therefore, he asked that 
a programme be put in place to tackle these issues and that it is followed through 
annually.  
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion and she asked why the Council waits 
until the 1st September to write to landowners.  She suggested that the Council 
should buy tractors and hedge cutting machines and cut the hedges themselves. 
 
16. 
Call for the use of up to-date census information to inform the next 
SICAP Programme 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Moriarty PROPOSED: 
That we write to the new Minister of State responsible for Communities, Minister 
Sean Kyne seeking the use of the up to date census information in informing the 
next SICAP programme which will be up for tender shortly. The use of the Pobal 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
30 of 48 
Deprivation Index is flawed and results in an inaccurate reflection of the real level 
of Social Inclusion Issues in dispersed areas. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty advised that budgets are about to commence with the new 2018 
Programme.  The Department should be using a better means to establish 
disadvantage than the Pobal Deprivation Index and it is unfair that good work is 
being hampered due to lack of funding.   
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion. 
 
17. 
Call on Irish Water to open an office in Kerry 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council request Irish Water to open an office in Kerry to deal 
with all issues especially people who have difficulty with their bills and are being 
overcharged. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae highlighted that Irish Water do not have an office in Kerry.  
When bills are issued they include arrears outstanding from 2012 and 2013 and 
he asked if they are entitled to collect these arrears when Kerry County Council 
was responsible for the collection of water charges at that time.  When the 
arrears amount is queried they cannot guarantee that it was not paid.   
 
Ms. A. McAllen confirmed that Irish Water are entitled to collect outstanding 
arrears because when they took over water charges they also took over existing 
debt.  The Revenue Department deals with these queries directly with Irish 
Water. 
 
Cllr. Healy-Rae again stated the Irish Water has issued bills including arrears and 
when they are asked if they are satisfied that the customer owes the money they 
are not sure.  He was aware of one customer who paid his water charges yet he 
is now being billed for arrears.  Irish Water should be in a position to prove that 
the arrears are outstanding. 
 
18. 
Completion of a design and projected costing for the widening or 
replacing of Listry Bridge 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B. Cronin PROPOSED: 
To ask have Kerry County Council completed a design and projected costing for 
the widening or replacing of Listry Bridge on the R563 as it has now been 
confirmed that the Department of Transport have never received a design 
proposal or costing to replace the bridge from Kerry County Council. 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
31 of 48 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Council will submit an application to the Department of Transport, 
Tourism and Sport for funding to engage a Consulting Engineer to prepare 
a design proposal for a new bridge on the R563 at Listry.  This application 
will be submitted to the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport by the 
end of August 2017. 
 
Safety and structural works were completed on this bridge in 2016. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin highlighted it has been a long running campaign to sort out Listry 
Bridge and after almost 18 years an application is to be submitted to prepare a 
design.  When Minister Ross was in Killarney recently he asked him to check the 
status of Listry Bridge and he replied that no application for funding was received 
for it.  Minister Griffin has the same response.  He welcomed the fact that it is 
now progressing and he asked how long the process would take before funding 
would be sought. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan SECONDED the motion. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan advised members that following on from the motion moved at 
the April Meeting he informed members there was no funding stream to repair or 
replace this bridge.  He subsequently spoke to Department officials who advised 
that a Feasibility Study should be submitted together with a request for the 
appointment of consulting engineers.  There is no guarantee that funding will be 
provided as very limited funding is available for this type of work. 
 
Cllr. Cronin stated a 120yd single lane bridge is unacceptable. 
 
19. 
Responsibility for the maintenance and upkeep of the road to the 
Upper Torc car park and the road from Derrycunnihy Church 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Gleeson PROPOSED: 
That the Council would in conjunction with the NPWS seek to clarify where legal 
responsibility rests for the maintenance and upkeep of [a] the road to the Upper 
Torc car park at Cloghereen Upper, on the Old Kenmare road and [b] the road 
from Derrycunnnihy Church that links with the Old Kenmare Road. The condition 
of these prime tourist roads leaves much to be desired. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The road to the Upper Torc car park at Cloghereen Upper is not in the 
charge of Kerry County Council.  The Council will contact the NPWS to 
determine whether or not they maintain this road. The road from 
Derrycunnnihy Church that links with the Old Kenmare Road is in the 
charge of Kerry County Council.  This road forms part of the Kerry Way 
which is a walking trail. 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
32 of 48 
Cllr. M. Gleeson read the following statement into the record of the meeting. 
 
“I placed these roads on the agenda because one is the Killarney electoral area 
and the other is in the South and West electoral area. 
 
I also placed them on the agenda because I am almost weary from year after 
year seeking to find out where responsibility lies for their upkeep and from trying 
to have the potholes filled in order that locals and visitors can travel in safety to 
behold great beauty. 
 
Yesterday we travelled as far as the car park of the road known as the Old 
Kenmare Road. Thank heavens after months of pleading the potholes were filled 
and travel was easy.  
But for how long I wonder and when will I have to start all over again going from 
the NPWS to the Council. 
 
It would be wonderful if an arrangement or agreement similar to that which 
existed in the past where the Council filled the potholes and was compensated by 
the NPWS was put in place. 
 
We are a tourist county. Visitors are our lifeblood. We must not only facilitate our 
visitors but we must ensure that their visitor experience is of the very highest 
order. 
 
We can’t have dirt tracks where there should be roads. We can’t have danger 
where there should be safety. We must have the very highest standards. 
 
Yesterday CEO the N71Torc car park was overflowing onto to the road with cars 
parked in unsafe places. Yesterday the so- called car park for Cardiac Hill was 
overflowing onto the road with cars parked very dangerously by the narrow 
roadside. 
 
We have a paradise to showcase we must ensure safety, security and respect for 
all who come to be enriched.” 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy SECONDED the motion. 
 
The meeting adjourned for lunch at 1.30pm. 
 
The meeting resumed at 2.30pm. 
 
21. 
Legislation to eradicate Japanese Knotweed 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council call upon the Government to enact legislation similar 
to other countries to help eradicate Japanese Knotweed. 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
33 of 48 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Council is committed to managing Japanese Knotweed and prevent its 
spread on our own lands or through our own activities. We have received 
funding from the TII to manage it on the national road network over the past 
few years and have worked with local communities on pilot projects in a 
number of other locations. However, the responsibility for managing the 
species on private lands is the responsibility of the landowner. A leaflet 
outlining the potential risk of structural damage by the species and 
measures to address same is included each year with the correspondence 
issued to landowners regarding their responsibility for hedgecutting on 
their property.  
 
It is not feasible to eradicate Japanese Knotweed and other invasive 
species found in the county without significant financial aid but the Council 
will continue to work with communities in raising awareness and educating 
landowners on its management. 
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen complimented the Council on taking the eradication of 
Japanese Knotweed seriously and highlighted that additional funding is required.  
Where Japanese Knotweed is present in a property the owners cannot get a 
mortgage.  Section 14 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 states “if any 
person plants or otherwise causes to grow in the wild any plant which is included 
in the Schedule they shall be guilt of an offence.”  While the Environmental and 
Protection Act 1990 relates to the disposal of controlled waste.  In 2014 
legislation was enacted making it a criminal offence under anti-social behaviour 
laws for home owners who fail to control Japanese Knotweed on their property.  
This must be handled with sensitivity and property owners should first receive 
warning notices.  Cllr. Connor-Scarteen asked that a letter would also issue to 
the Department of Education calling on them to create greater awareness among 
children who in turn will educate their parents on the dangers of this weed.  Other 
jurisdictions should be consulted to establish how they dealt with this problem.  In 
conclusion he agreed with Cllr. Moloney’s suggestion that an App should be 
developed which would allow the mapping of all locations where Japanese 
Knotweed is growing. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson SECONDED the motion. 
 
22. 
Call for the provision of a Nurse and Physiotherapist at St. Francis 
School, Beaufort 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. Quigg PROPOSED: 
That this Council call on the Minister for Health to provide a Nurse and a 
Physiotherapist at St Francis Special needs School in Beaufort immediately. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
34 of 48 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg advised he recently visited St. Francis’ School and met some 
parents.  One child can only attend school 3 days a week as a nurse is not there 
5 days.  The onus is on the State to provide care and ensure a child can attend 
school 5 days a week.  The physiotherapist is on leave and a replacement is 
urgently needed.  
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty SECONDED the motion. 
 
23. 
Provision of road signs in multiple languages to remind people to 
drive on the correct side of the road 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
Ask Kerry County Council erect signs on the outskirts of towns and villages in 
multiple languages to instruct/ remind people the correct side of the road to drive 
on. 
 
The following reply issued: 
There are a number of signs at key locations throughout the county to 
advise tourists/motorists to drive on the left hand side of the road. It is not 
feasible to provide similar signs on the approaches to all towns and 
villages. Kerry County Council will write to car hire companies to request 
them to advise tourists who hire cars, to drive on the left hand side of the 
road. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy stated he believed these signs could save lives.  The message 
should also be promoted in hotels; guesthouses etc and he called on all tourist 
accommodation providers to provide signs inside their doors to remind tourists to 
drive on the left hand side of the road. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED the motion. 
 
24. 
Evaluation of waste water treatment plants in advance of the 
expected Capital Investment Programme 2017 – 2021 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. A. Thornton PROPOSED: 
Has Kerry County Council conducted an evaluation of waste water treatment 
plants in advance of the expected Capital Investment Programme 2017 to 2021. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Prior to the publication of Irish Water’s Emerging Capital Investment Plan 
2017-2021, Kerry County Council, in conjunction with the DECLG, 
commissioned a comprehensive and detailed assessment of urban 
wastewater requirements , for every settlement , including unsewered 
villages in Co. Kerry in the “County Kerry Wastewater & Sludge Strategy”.  
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
35 of 48 
Kerry County Council made a submission to Irish Water in February 2016 
on the Emerging Capital Investment Plan 2017-2021.  
 
The submission was in accordance with, and followed from, the Irish Water 
Capital Investment Plan for priority Water and Wastewater Infrastructure 
which is referenced in the Kerry County Development Plan 2015 – 2021.  
 
The priority areas, as identified by Kerry County Council in this submission 
included:  
 
• Ensuring sufficient Water Quality and Capacity for all our water 
supplies, but particularly for those supplies that will be of critical 
importance to the economic development of the county (e.g. the 
Central Regional water supply), to be achieved through investment in 
new infrastructure and water conservation measures.  
 
• The preparation of Drainage Area Plans aimed at identifying and 
“bottlenecks” in our sewer networks which could potentially limit 
development, particularly for the larger towns of Tralee, Killarney and 
Listowel.  
 
• Ensuring a regional approach within the county to the proposal to 
rationalise the number of water supplies within Kerry so that it does 
not inhibit economic development.  
 
• The emerging CIP should take account of the existing Wastewater & 
Sludge Strategy for Kerry, which assessed all of the wastewater 
needs for every settlement in the county, including unsewered 
villages.  
 
• The emerging CIP should look to advance more projects through the 
Planning and Design stages of development in order to have a 
sufficient number of projects ready to advance through the next 
funding cycle.  
 
• The plan should make provision for the small number of water 
schemes in Kerry that remain vulnerable without adequate treatment 
being in place.  
 
• A strategic plan is required to ensure security of supply through the 
provision of a minimum of 24 hours storage to all supplies in Kerry  
 
• A strategic plan is required to look at the capacities of all schemes in 
Kerry to ensure that sufficient capacity is in place to facilitate future 
development  
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
36 of 48 
• The emerging CIP should clarify the status of certain schemes that 
have funding approval but are not listed in the Plan as well as those 
schemes that were approved in previous Water Services Investment 
Programmes (WSIP) and are not listed in the emerging Plan.  
 
• That Irish Water’s capital investment priorities take account of other 
important environmental and economic assets in Kerry, e.g. blue flag 
beaches, designated shellfish waters, and the entire coastline of the 
county, which has the largest portion of the Wild Atlantic Way of any 
county. Investment priorities should not simply be confined to the 
narrow set of parameters set out in the licenses and certificates of 
each wastewater scheme.  
 
Cllr. A. Thornton highlighted that different villages have different requirements for 
sewerage treatment facilities.  She understood it was proposed to provide a 
Wetland facility in Lixnaw which would be welcome.  She asked if plans are in 
place for rural villages. 
 
Mr. J. Breen advised that Irish Water has a business plan and there is also the 
Rural Water Programme.  Any unsewered villages are brought to the attention of 
Irish Water by his Department. 
 
Cllr. Thornton requested that a letter would issue to both the Department of 
Environment and Irish Water pointing out that villages are not catered for in the 
existing Schemes. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg SECONDED the motion. 
 
25. 
Recording of meetings 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. T. Ferris PROPOSED: 
How much was spent during the refurbishment of the Council Chamber to 
provide the new audio system? Considering the expense to the tax payer and the 
fact that other local authorities are moving to live streaming of council meetings, 
Kerry County Council should at the very least use that system to record all 
meetings. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The amount paid in relation to the installation of the Delegated Conference 
System & Audio/Visual Equipment at the Council Chambers was €102,420 
ex VAT. The system installed provides enhanced sound facilities for 
meetings and includes audio & visual aids for presentations etc. as well as 
facilitating the video streaming of events in the Council Chamber which is  
currently primarily used for civic receptions and certain presentations to 
full Council. Also it facilitates bilingual translation including an interpreter 
booth.  

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
37 of 48 
 
The live streaming of Council meetings was considered previously by CPG 
at its meeting in February 2015 where issues around defamation and 
potentially exposing the Body Corporate and members’ privilege were 
considered and was included in the Cathaoirleach’s report to the February 
full Council meeting. It is proposed to further consider this request by 
convening the members of the Corporate Policy Group   and additional 
members as required to ensure cross party & independents representation. 
As part of its remit, it is proposed that this wider group, which previously 
considered and inputted significantly  into our adopted Protocol for Civic 
Honours Conferral, will examine the experience of the limited number of 
local authorities which provide a live streaming service in respect of their 
Council meetings and any other relevant matters and potential issues its 
introduction could cause. It is proposed that the findings of this group, 
including recommendations and any proposed amendments to the existing 
Standing Orders to facilitate proposals in this regard if required, would be 
considered and decided by CPG and full Council. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris stated it was a substantial amount for the rate payers of the county 
to fund for the system yet it is not used to record meetings.  Despite the fact that 
Louth County Council does not have the funding to put equipment in place they 
have committed to live stream meetings.  Cllr. Ferris asked why meetings are not 
recorded for future generations and they could be used where the minutes do not 
accurately reflect what was said at a meeting.  She PROPOSED that from 
September there would be an audio recording of all Council Meetings. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney SECONDED this proposal. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue highlighted if a member does not turn on their microphone 
their comments will not be recorded.  Supplementary equipment would be 
required to record meetings as there maybe issues regarding the sound quality.  
There were complaints from the media that they could not hear members but with 
the new system all contributions can be clearly heard.  There is also a facility for 
a translation service but the existing system was not designed for audio 
recordings.  A review of the system will be undertaken to establish what is 
required to record meetings. 
 
Cllr. Ferris pointed out despite the fact that the amplification system is in place 
the reporting of proceedings at Council Meetings is not always accurate.  It would 
be preferable to record some of the proceedings at meetings and to enhance the 
system later.   
 
The Chief Executive advised members there was agreement to refer this issue to 
the CPG and following consideration they decided to live stream Civic 
Receptions.  This issue should be referred back to the CPG for further detailed 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
38 of 48 
consideration as there are considerations and concerns that must be taken into 
account before a decision can be reached. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris pointed out that members do not have privilege and this only 
applies to the Houses of the Oireachtas. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley PROPOSED that this matter would be referred back to the 
extended CPG Group for consideration. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED this proposal. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady asked what will be gained from recording meetings. 
 
The Chief Executive reiterated that a full assessment and review must be 
undertaken by the CPG before a decision is taken to record meetings. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue advised that Standing Orders prohibit the recording of 
meetings and proper processes must be followed. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan suggested that the extended Group, to include CPG and cross 
party and independent representatives, as was convened when drawing up the 
now adopted Civic Honours Protocol, could consider the request to record 
meetings and depending on the outcome Standing Orders may have to be 
reviewed also. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris pointed out there would be no potential liability to the Council 
unless the recordings were published. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley asked that members would be furnished with a detailed report so 
they can make an informed decision. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae stated while he had no objection to the live streaming of 
meetings he believed the Group as set out by Mr. Quinlan should consider the 
request to record meetings in the first instance and then full Council can make a 
decision. 
 
A vote was then taken on Cllr. Foley’s proposal which resulted as follows: 
 
For: 
Cllrs. Connor-Scarteen, Cronin, Culloty, Foley, Grady, J. Healy-
Rae, M. Healy-Rae, Kelleher, Lucid, Moriarty, Sheahan, Thornton 
(12) 
 
Against: 
Cllrs. Ferris, Moloney, Nolan, Quigg (4) 
 
Not Voting: None (0) 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
39 of 48 
The Cathaoirleach declared the proposal CARRIED. 
 
26. 
Recommendation that all future road developments along major 
routes within Kerry to include a cycle lane 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Sheahan PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Transport to negotiate with the 
TII and recommend that any future road developments along major routes within 
Kerry will have the inclusion of a cycle lane. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan stated while he accepted it is all down to finance we as a 
Council must insist that the way forward is the inclusion of cycle lanes. 
 
We are encouraging people to leave their cars at home and avail of the cycle to 
work schemes but we can’t offer them safe passage the way our roads are 
currently designed.   
 
The N22 from Killarney to Killorglin, a very popular route being on the Ring of 
Kerry, has been recently overlaid to a very high standard but this same road is a 
dangerous road for cyclists.  Cllr. Sheahan added that he would like to see Kerry 
leading the way as pioneers of cycle lanes being incorporated on all major 
routes. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion. 
 
27. 
Call to ban the advertising of alcohol 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.J. Culloty PROPOSED: 
As excessive consumption of alcohol in this country contributes to unnecessary 
social, human and economic costs, I ask that this Council call on the Taoiseach, 
Leo Varadkar, to begin the process of banning the advertising of alcohol on all 
media outlets. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty read the following statement into the record of the meeting: 
“As someone who enjoys a couple of pints one or maybe two times a week, I see 
the benefits of socialising in our public houses which are run in the main in a very 
professional manner.  They are very important to our tourist industry, 
unfortunately today, many teenagers have easy access to alcohol and there is a 
tendency for these teenagers to binge drink.  This easy access is facilitated by 
the large number of off-licences and supermarkets which can sell any amount of 
spirits and beers to anyone over 18 years of age.  I believe that advertising by 
alcohol companies influences children from a young age.  I consider it 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
40 of 48 
inappropriate to have advertisements at anytime which glamorises alcohol 
consumption which can be viewed by children.   
I talked to a guard in Killarney the day after St. Patrick’s Day and he spoke on the 
drink related incidents in the Kerry division. 80% of cases are alcohol related and 
work time is  lost as a result. 
 
1,200 cases of cancer are diagnosed every year owing to alcohol, such as 
cancer of the liver, pancreas, mouth, throat, oesophagus and large intestine.  1 in 
every 8 breast cancers diagnosed are caused by alcohol.  Men and women in 
their twenties and thirties are presenting with sclerosis of the liver, in previous 
decades it would only be men in their fifties and sixties who would be diagnosed 
with this condition.  In Ireland, one person dies every seven hours from alcohol 
related illness. There are 900 new alcohol related cancer cases every year.  
1,500 beds occupied every night out of approximately 11,000 beds in our system 
are related to alcohol.  That equates to 547,500 bed nights every year.  Alcohol 
plays a huge part in obesity.  Alcohol is a contributing factor in at least 50% of 
suicides.  Excessive consumption of alcohol contributes to domestic violence. 
 
Drink Related Incidents in Kerry Division 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2014  
2015  
2016  
Total 
Drink Driving  
 
 
313 
 
328 
 
318 
 
959 
Public Order S4 Drunkenness 
481 
 
609 
 
565 
          1655 
Public Order S6 Violent/Threaten 859 
 
905 
 
769 
          2533  
Assaults S3 Serious 
 
125 
 
123 
 
110 
 
358 
Assaults Section 2 Minor  
290 
 
313 
 
340 
 
943 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          6448” 
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae stated he did not want to be associated with the motion.  He 
was born and reared in a bar and he believed if a ban on the advertising of 
alcohol was introduced it would not solve the problem of alcoholism.  He 
PROPOSED that a letter would not issue to the Government on this motion. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae SECONDED this proposal. 
 
Cllr. Culloty accepted that a ban on the advertising of alcohol would not solve all 
the alcohol related problems. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris asked if a letter issues to the Taoiseach that he would be asked to 
outline the implications of an outright ban on advertising alcohol as she was 
concerned at the impact this may have. 
 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
41 of 48 
Cllr. A. Thornton stated she represents Kerry County Council on the Southern 
Regional Drug and Alcohol Task Force and she suggested that their evidence on 
the impact of advertising would be considered prior to referring the motion to the 
Taoiseach. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris concurred with this suggestion. 
 
The Cathaoirleach advised the meeting that clarification would be sought from 
this Task Force before a decision is taken on the motion. 
 
Cllr. Culloty asked that this matter would be revisited at the September Meeting. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris moved Notice of Motion No. 28 in Cllr. Beasley’s absence. 
 
28. 
Call to continue with Phase 2 of the Ahabeg road 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. R. Beasley PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister for Transport to continue with 
Phase 2 of the Ahabeg road from Ballinclogher to Abbeydorney which is in a 
deplorable state. 
 
The following report issued: 
This motion has been moved on a number of occasions in the past and 
submissions made to the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport for 
funding.    
  
A 2.5km section of the road, north of Ballinclogher Cross, was improved in 
2009 under a Specific Improvement Grant, at a cost of approximately €3 
million. Similar grant funding is required to address the 2.2km section of 
road south of Ballinclogher Cross. The Specific Improvement Grant funding 
available to Kerry County Council for such schemes, was suspended in 
2014.  
  
Some safety works were undertaken in 2015, specifically, some verge 
strengthening and the provision of extra warning signage and road 
markings.  
  
We also raised the need for a Specific Improvement Scheme or similar 
source of funding, with senior officials in the Department of Transport, 
Tourism and Sport to address the Dale Road, but they were unable to 
commit to such funding given the overall level of monies available to the 
Department. 
 
 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
42 of 48 
29. 
Support the IDA in their bid for Kerry as a location for the Amazon 
and Apple style data centres 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council to support the IDA in their bid for Kerry as a location 
for the new Amazon and Apple style data centres and to put in place a policy that 
will support an application for planning as it will obviously have to be built in an 
area that is classified as rural general. This is exceptionally important to promote 
jobs in our county. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council supports job creation proposals through policies 
contained in the Current County Development Plan 2015 – 2021, the Local 
Economic and Community Plan 2015 – 2021 and the Tourism Strategy.  
 
In order to further facilitate job creation proposals Kerry County Council 
offers a pre-planning service pursuant to Section 247 of the Planning and 
Development Act. Where a developer or entities such as the IDA seek to 
discuss a significant proposal involving job creation, it is normal practice 
that a multi-disciplinary team will be made available at pre-planning stage 
through the Director of Job Creation and Economic Development and the 
Planning Department.  
 
This team will consist of representatives from all relevant business units 
within Kerry County Council. All necessary information in relation to 
consents both pre-and post development will be outlined to the prospective 
applicant and all relevant Planning matters including, where relevant, 
zonings, will be discussed and clarified.  
 
The Council has met with the IDA on a number of occasions and has 
provided details of strategic sites throughout the county that are suitable 
for economic development and commercial investment.  Details of 
infrastructure, services, access, connectivity and other relevant 
information regarding the suitability of theses sites has also been 
researched and provided.   
 
The Council will continue to engage with the IDA, Enterprise Ireland and 
other relevant agencies to ensure that the planning process is supportive 
of economic development and job creation in the county. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae welcomed the positive reply and added that the IDA places 
advertisements for expressions of interest.   
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae asked if Kerry County Council has provided a list of suitable 
locations for development to the IDA. 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
43 of 48 
The Chief Executive confirmed that Council officials engaged with the IDA on the 
list of strategic sites that are included in the County Development Plan.   
 
30. 
Legal Aid Board Office in Caherciveen 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Moriarty PROPOSED: 
That we write to the Minster for Justice, Mr. C. Flanagan to make the case for the 
Legal Aid Board Office in Caherciveen to be the administrators of the provisions 
that will arise following the passing of the proposed Criminal Justice - Legal Aid 
Provision currently working its way through the Houses of the Oireachtas. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty highlighted that the passing of the Criminal Justice – Legal Aid 
Provision will require administrative work and could result in 6 to 10 additional 
jobs.  She called for the support of all members for this proposal. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris SECONDED the motion. 
 
31. 
Details of Group Schemes not taken over by Irish Water 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B. Cronin PROPOSED: 
To request the details and location of all group schemes in Kerry that are not 
taken over by Irish Water and to clarify what the situation is when a break occurs 
on one of these schemes where the water flowing through the system is supplied 
by Irish Water and there are no longer active group members in the community, 
is there a system to fix these breaks. 
 
The following reply issued: 
There are a total of 272 Group Schemes in Kerry, 128 of which are served 
by public water supply. A total of 69 Group Schemes have applied for 
takeover by Kerry County Council (prior to January 2014) and/or Irish 
Water, 62 of which are served by public water supply.  
 
A list of 42 larger Group Schemes, which are subject to the Drinking Water 
Regulations, is provided by Municipal District below. A total of 32 of these 
larger group schemes have applied for takeover.  
 
A National Working Group has been established to develop an agreed 
approach to the takeover of Group Schemes by Irish Water. This National 
Working Group comprises representatives from the DHPCLG, Irish Water 
and the Local Authority sector. Early clarification on the outcome of the 
working groups work would be welcome.  
 
 
 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
44 of 48 
Municipal District of Killarney 
Ardaneanig 
Ardteegalvin  
Ballagh-Beaufort  
Ballinahulla no.4  
Cloghavoola  
Cloonagh  
Cordal Kilmurray  
Corran  
Currow Hill  
Inch-Foildaun  
Shanera No. 2  
Spa/Tiernaboul  
 
Municipal District of Listowel 
Asdee  
Ballymacaquim/Abbeydorney  
Ballynoneen No 2  
Bedford / Knockane  
Brosna / Knocknagoshel  
Clanmaurice  
Coolkeragh  
Lyreacrompane  
Pilgrim Hill  
Saleen  
Trieneragh no.2  
 
Municipal District of Tralee 
Curraheen 
Kilcusnan  
Knockeen  
Laccabawn  
Meenbannivane - Clar  
Reamore  
Tonevane Slieve  
 
Municipal District of South & West Kerry 
Bonane 
Castlequin No2  
Cillin Liath  
Commaun  
Darrynane  
Dawros  
Dromin Kilderry  
Inchiboy – Clar  

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
45 of 48 
Kells  
Muingaphuca  
Rossdohan/Tahilla  
Tuosist  
 
Cllr. B. Cronin PROPOSED that a letter would issue to Irish Water calling on 
them to take over the 69 group schemes that have applied to be taken over 
forthwith as they do not have the funding for repairs.  He further asked that where 
Irish Water provides the water to the group scheme and breaks occur on the 
network that Kerry County Council would be given the resources to carry out the 
repairs.  Cllr. Cronin advised that some group schemes were formed 30 or 40 
years ago and some of the founding members have passed away.  He wanted to 
ensure that those on group schemes would not be left without a water supply. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion. 
 
32. 
Call for a meeting the RSA 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council look for a meeting with the R.S.A. regarding the 
ridiculous situation of people especially elderly people having to present in Tralee 
in person to get a driving licence. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae highlighted if applicants for a driving licence live in South Kerry 
and they are over 80 years they must get a drive or a taxi to Tralee.  If they don’t 
have all the correct documentation there is no leeway and inevitably many of 
elderly people must return a second time to get their licence.  Cllr. Healy-Rae 
requested that a meeting would be arrange with the relevant Department and the 
RSA with a view to ensuring that a community travelling driver licence facility 
would be put in place. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris stated given the significance of a driving licence she understood 
why they are so particular to ensure all documentation is in order before a licence 
is issued.  For this reason she did not agree that a mobile driver licence facility 
would be a good idea but she suggested that a postal service should be 
considered similar to the system in place for a Passport. 
 
It was agreed that the resolution would be referred to the Department of 
Environment and the RSA for consideration. 
 
 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
46 of 48 
33. 
Number of disabled car parking spaces in the county 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Lucid PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council outline the number of disabled car parking spaces in 
the County and state what if any funding was received from central government 
to upgrade or introduce new disabled car parking spaces over the last five years, 
and finally how many new spaces are planned for the next twelve months. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The total number of accessible parking spaces on public roads and car 
parks in the county is 308. No funding has been provided by Central 
Government for accessible car parking in Kerry over the past five years. 
 
The Council has an adequate number of accessible parking spaces in the 
scheduled towns.  If specific requests are made to the Municipal Districts 
for additional accessible spaces these will be considered and provided if 
they are required. 
 
Cllr. J. Lucid welcomed the reply. 
 
17.07.17.09 Correspondence – Conferences and Seminars 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Foley, SECONDED by Cllr. B. Cronin it was 
agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. N. Moriarty, Chair of the LCDC, 
at the Leader Forum Meeting held in Dublin on the 17th May 2017. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Foley, SECONDED by Cllr. D. Grady it was 
agreed to approve the attendance of Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Sheahan at the 
National Day of Commemoration held in Cork on the 9th July 2017. 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Grady, SECONDED by Cllr. J.J. Culloty it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen, Leas-
Chathaoirleach at the National Day of Commemoration Ceremony held in 
Dublin on the 9th July 2017. 
 
(d) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Foley, SECONDED by Cllr. J.J. Culloty it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen, Leas-
Chathaoirleach, at the Museum Standards Programme for Ireland 10th 
Anniversary Celebration and Accreditation Ceremony held in Dublin on the 
11th July 2017. 
 
(e) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.J. Culloty, SECONDED by Cllr. N. Foley it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of the Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. 
Sheahan at the Disability Inclusion Event held in Dublin on the 12th July 
2017. 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
47 of 48 
(f) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Foley, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Moloney it 
was agreed to authorize the attendance of all Councillors at the National 
Tourism Conference 2017 on the theme “Working as One on the Wild 
Atlantic Way – Building Sustainable Communities” to be held in Listowel 
on the 6th September 2017. 
 
(g) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Lucid, SECONDED by Cllr. D. Quigg it was 
agreed to authorize the attendance of Cllr. J. Moloney at the 2017 
Communities in Bloom Awards to be held in Ottawa, Canada from 12th to 
18th September 2017. 
 
(h) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Kelleher, SECONDED by Cllr. J.J. Culloty it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of the Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. 
Sheahan on a visit to Rhode Island from 6th to 8th July 2017. 
 
(i) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. A. Thornton, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Moloney it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. N. Moriarty, Chair of the 
LCDC, at the SICAP Regional Support Workshop held in Limerick on the 
4th July 2017. 
 
(j) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Moloney, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Lucid it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. N. Kelleher at the JPC 
Meeting of Chief Executives and Chairpersons of JPCs held in Dublin on 
the 5th July 2017. 
 
17.07.17.10 Correspondence General 
 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were 
circulated. 
 
1.  
Letter dated 8th June 2017 from the Office of the Minister for Foreign Affairs in 
response to a resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to Brexit. 
 
2.  
Letter dated 14th June 2017 from the Department of Social Protection in response to 
a resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to pensions for CE Supervisors. 
3.  
Email dated 15th June 2017 from the Office of the Minister for Justice and Equality in 
response to a resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to grants for house 
alarms for the over 66s. 
4.  
Letter dated 13th June 2017 from Tipperary County Council in relation to a resolution 
adopted by that authority calling on the Minister for Health to take the necessary 
measures to make Regional Health Forum Committees relevant. 
5.  
Letter dated 13th June 2017 from Tipperary County Council in relation to a resolution 
adopted by that authority calling on the government to extend children’s allowance 
for parents who have children in Third Level Education but have no access to grants 
due to their before tax earnings. 
 

July Ordinary Meeting 
17th July 2017  
48 of 48 
6.  
Letter dated 16th June 2017 from Sligo County Council in relation to a resolution 
adopted by that authority calling on the AILG to provide a briefing for elected 
members on “The role, funding and activities of the Local Government Management 
Agency”. 
 
 
The meeting concluded at 3.35pm. 
 
 
 
 
Liam Quinlan                                       _________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator                      Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
