Annual Meeting 
30th June 2017  
1 of 6 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect 
putting them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is 
available on request. 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ  AN CRUINNITHE  BLIANTIUIL  DE  COMHAIRLE  CONTAE 
CHIARRAÍ  A  THIONÓLADH I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN 
CHONTAE, TRÁ LÍ, AR AN AOINE 30 MEITHEAMH, 2017. 
 
MINUTES OF THE ANNUAL MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL HELD 
IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE ON FRIDAY 
30th JUNE 2017. 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
R. Beasley 
M. Cahill 
P. Connor-Scarteen          
B. Cronin 
J. J. Culloty                     J. Finucane  
          
S. Fitzgerald                      J.F. Flynn 
N. Foley 
 
       
M. Gleeson 
D. Grady 
J. Healy-Rae 
       
M. Healy-Rae 
N. Kelleher 
M. Kennelly  
        
S. Locke 
J. Lucid 
D. McCarthy  
         
P. McCarthy 
T. McEllistrim 
N. Moriarty                    
D. Nolan 
B. O’Connell                      M. O’Shea  
         
L. Purtill 
D. Quigg 
J. Sheahan  
                
G. Spring 
A. Thornton 
 
ABSENT/LEATH SCÉAL 
 
P. Daly 
T. Ferris 
J. Moloney  
        
T. O’Brien 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Ms. M. Murrell, Chief Executive 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue, A/ Dir. Corp. Servs/Hsg. 
Mr. J. Breen, Director of Water Serv. 
Mr. M. Scannell, A/Director of Planning             
Mr. T. Sheehy, A/Dir. Of Operations 
Ms. A. McAllen, Head of Finance 
 
           
Mr. L. Quinlan, Meetings Admin.           Ms. B. Reidy, S.S.O. Corporate Affairs            
Ms. O. O’Shea, C.O. Corp. Support 
 
The meeting commenced at 12.15pm. 
The Cathaoirleach Cllr. M. O’Shea took the Chair.   
 
The Cathaoirelach welcomed the Sheahan Family, Senator Paul Coghlan and 
Minister for State Brendan Griffin to the meeting.  During his term as 
Cathaoirleach he wanted meetings to be constructive and concise as all 

Annual Meeting 
30th June 2017  
2 of 6 
members have very busy schedules.  It was a fantastic honour for him to serve 
not only as Cathaoirelach of Kerry County Council but also as Chair of the 
Regional Assembly over the past twelve months.  There were a number of 
highlights during the year including the launch of the Local Economic and 
Community Plan, the meeting with TII when the single item discussed was the 
critical funding required for the Macroom By-Pass and they were the first group to 
get a positive response from TII.  He welcomed the advance work which has 
commenced on the Macroom By-Pass.  His first task as Cathaoirleach was to 
attend a ceremony to mark the centenary of the laying of the transatlantic cable 
from Valentia and he hoped this project would achieve UNESCO status.  The 
Cathaoirleach congratulated Mr. P. Curry of the NRDO in Castleisland and Mr. P. 
Moran of TII on securing funding for Kilderry Bends.  He spent years lobbying for 
funding for improvements to these bends and he now hoped work would 
commence before the end of the year.  Kerry County Council received a housing 
allocation of €62m and the Housing Department has been most pro-active in 
delivering this programme.  No houses were built for a number of years but 
construction has now commenced.  In 2015/2016 he proposed that the 
Community Support Fund be established and it has been very successful in 
delivering funding to local communities.  The lack of job creation has been one of 
the biggest disappointments over the past 12 months.  Kerry has a lot to offer 
prospective investors including an excellent quality of life, top class education 
system etc.  The IDA was amazed at how successful Liebherr, FEXCO, Astellas 
and Dairymaster are in Kerry and Kerry can deliver if job opportunities are made 
available.   
 
The late Timothy ‘Chubb’ O’Connor TD was his wife’s grandfather and he saw 
tough times in mid and south Kerry.  However he travelled to Germany on a 
number of occasions and delivered four excellent factories for the county in the 
1960s.  That was some achievement and perhaps a similar strategy should be 
considered for Kerry now.  The Cathaoirleach stressed the importance of 
travelling abroad to seek opportunities for the county.  During his travels to the 
US he met very influential diaspora who are interested in delivering for the 
county.  He recently travelled to Frankfurt for a Festival that sought to launch a 
tourism market with Kerry.  700,000 Germans travel to Ireland each year and he 
met those involved in the tourism industry there.  On the Sunday he cycled a 
dedicated cycle track that was surfaced in asphalt and it went on for miles.  
During discussions with the Mayor of Franfurt he asked him about the success of 
the cycleway and he confirmed the cycleway goes almost as far as Berlin and it 
has changed midland Germany with restaurants, shops etc. booming since it was 
launched.  The people of Kerry should realise the positive impact the South Kerry 
Greenway will have on the economy of the county and it will result in job creation 
and increased tourism.  He called on all involved in the South Kerry Greenway to 
co-operate to ensure the success of this project.   
 
 

Annual Meeting 
30th June 2017  
3 of 6 
The Cathaoirleach wished Danny Tim O’Sullivan of London and Glenbeigh a 
speedy recovery from his illness.  Danny Tim is a tremendous man who has 
helped thousands of young Kerry people who travelled to London for work.  The 
Cathaoirleach thanked his wife Susan and his three sons for their support during 
the year.  He also thanked Leas Chathoirleach Cllr. L. Purtill for his assistance 
during the year and the Chief Executive who is pro development and is very 
dedicated to improving Kerry and he was sure she would deliver.  He thanked the 
staff of the Corporate Services Department and all Council staff for their support 
and assistance during his term as Cathaoirleach together with the Press who are 
very fair to members.  During the year he invited the TDs, Senators and MEPs to 
Council meetings and he hoped the incoming Cathaoirleach would continue with 
this initiative.  In conclusion the Cathaoirleach thanked members for affording him 
the opportunity to serve as Cathaoirleach for the past 12 months. 
 
All members welcomed the O’Shea and Sheahan families to the Chamber 
together with the Minister for State Brendan Griffin and they wished him every 
success in his new role.  They commended the Cathaoirleach on an excellent 
year in office and wished him well for the future.  He represented the county 
conscientiously and with distinction both at home and abroad. 
 
On behalf of management and staff the Chief Executive thanked the 
Cathaoirleach for his commitment during his term of office.  He had an 
exceptional year and represented the county with distinction.  The Cathaoirleach 
was very progressive and supported every initiative presented to him. 
 
17.06.30.01 Election of Cathaoirleach 
 
On behalf of his colleagues Cllr. J. Finucane PROPOSED Cllr. J. Sheahan for the 
position of Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council.  Cllr. Sheahan was co-opted 
to Kerry County Council in 2007 and was re-elected in 2009 and 2014 to 
represent the people of the Killarney MD.  He is committed and hard working and 
has the capability to lead the county over the next 12 months. 
 
Cllr. L. Purtill SECONDED this proposal. 
 
As there were no other proposals Cllr. O’Shea declared Cllr. J. Sheahan elected 
Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council for 2017/2018.   
 
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Sheahan then took the Chair. 
 
Cllr. Sheahan paid tribute to his predecessor and assured him he would continue 
to invite Oireachtas members to Council meetings as he would it beneficial.  He 
then read the following statement into the record of the meeting. 
 
“Fellow councillors, Chief Executive, members of the press, family and friends, it 
is an enormous honour and privilege for me to have been elected Cathaoirleach 

Annual Meeting 
30th June 2017  
4 of 6 
of Kerry County Council. Before I go any further, I would like to thank my 
councillor colleagues for supporting me today and for giving me the opportunity to 
serve the people of Kerry in this role over the next twelve months. 
 
To become Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council is indeed a great privilege. It 
is one which I am humbled to take on. I am very conscious that this is a role 
which relatively few people have occupied since Kerry County Council was 
established in 1899 so it is a position which I come to with great humility and 
respect for the role. 
 
I would like to begin by paying tribute to my immediate predecessor, Cllr Michael 
O’Shea. I certainly have big shoes to fill. Michael has been a very effective 
chairperson and a great ambassador for the county at events around the country 
and abroad and I thank him for his service as Cathaoirleach over the past year. 
 
I would like to welcome the members of my family here today and many friends 
who are with me for this special occasion. Thank you all for coming. 
 
For those of you might not know me as well as the members of my family, I have 
been a councillor now for ten years. I joined the Council in 2007 following the 
election of my brother, Tom, to the Dáil. Since then, I have been fortunate to 
represent the people of the Killarney Municipal District and was re-elected in the 
local elections of 2009 and 2014. Today, I would like to thank my supporters and 
my party team in the Killarney area for giving me the honour of representing them 
over the past ten years. 
 
I am a native of Glenbeigh and I know live in Killarney. Before entering politics, I 
ran a butchering business. I am married to Máiread and have two sons, Denis 
and Daniel. I want to thank them especially for their support in reaching this 
milestone in my life today. 
 
As a councillor over the years, I have raised many issues of importance in this 
Chamber and elsewhere and over the coming year, there are many issues that I 
hope to see progressed. There are three matters, in particular, that I would like to 
prioritise, and which will be to the fore in my year as Cathaoirleach: 
 
• Roads and road safety: 
 
Kerry County Council, along with the government, are investing significant 
amounts of money in the upgrading of our road network in Kerry – last 
year, €13m was allocated for the roads programme in the county. But I 
regret to say that many of our roads are still not at the required standard 
and we will need to continue to lobby national government for increased 
funding in this regard. 
 

Annual Meeting 
30th June 2017  
5 of 6 
In relation to roads, one observation I would like to make is about the 
edges or the verges of our roads. I have been involved in Tidy Towns all 
my life and one of the areas where I regularly collect rubbish is along the 
Tralee road in Killarney near my home. I have noticed that a lot of the 
edges of our main roads are in a poor and dangerous condition and this is 
something I would like to see addressed. 
 
As well as the need for improved road conditions for motorists, I believe 
we need to enhance our road network for cyclists. I would very much like 
to see more cycle lanes being provided across the county for the safety of 
both motorists and cyclists. I think all future major road projects should 
allow for as many cycle lanes as possible. 
 
• Access into the county 
 
The second major issue I would like to prioritise is access into the county, 
particularly progress on the Adare and Macroom bypasses. I know that 
there has been progress in relation to the N22 at Macroom and 
Ballyvourney and I will be hoping for further progress on this very soon. 
There is a momentum behind the project now but we must not be 
complacent. Travelling to Cork from Killarney or vice versa should only 
take about an hour and instead it can take up to two – that should not be 
the case so we will continue to pursue TII and the Minister for Transport 
for the early delivery of this project. 
 
Also, in relation to national and international access into the county, I 
believe strongly that air access is key to our economic progress locally. In 
that respect, ongoing support for Kerry Airport is critical. I would also like 
to see us working with the likes of the local authorities in Cork on air 
routes for emerging economies like China and elsewhere so that we can 
help to attract international visitors and investors into the county. 
 
• Housing 
 
The third and final major issue I will see to further progress on is the 
delivery of our housing programme in Kerry. It is great to see that the 
Council is now building houses again with the support of the Rebuilding 
Ireland programme and we now have new homes under construction in 
Tralee, Killarney and Lixnaw with further developments to be announced 
over the coming months. But we still have up to 4,000 applicants on our 
housing waiting list and this is a concern. I welcome the funding 
announced recently to progress the renovation of vacant Council 
properties and I will be working with management to ensure that there is 
further progress on all elements of the Housing Programme. 
 

Annual Meeting 
30th June 2017  
6 of 6 
Finally, I would like to assure my colleagues here that I will be fair to all of them in 
the year ahead. You have all been elected to represent the people of your 
respective areas and you all deserve to be heard and to be given the opportunity 
to bring issues to the floor of the Council Chamber. 
 
I would like to say to our Chief Executive, Moira Murrell, and all of her 
management colleagues, that I will work closely with you in the year ahead to 
advance the various issues of importance to the people of Kerry. I look forward to 
all of us working together to improve the lives of the people of the county. 
 
I hope I will serve as a fair and effective Cathaoirleach for the twelve months 
ahead and I am sure, that with your support, we can achieve a lot in the coming 
period.” 
 
In conclusion the Cathaoirleach wished Danny Tim O’Sullivan a speedy recovery 
and added that members’ thoughts and prayers were with him at this time. 
 
All members congratulated the Cathaoirleach and his family on his election and 
added that it was a very proud day for him.  They wished him every success for 
the coming year. 
 
On behalf of management and staff the Chief Executive congratulated the 
Cathaoirleach and his family on his election.  She assured him of the full support 
and commitment of staff during his term as Cathaoirleach. 
 
17.06.30.02 Election of Leas Chathaoirleach 
 
Cllr. B. O’Connell PROPOSED Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen for the position of Leas 
Chathaoirleach.  Patrick was co-opted to Kerry County Council in 2008 and has 
served the people of South and West Kerry since then.  His family have been 
involved in local and national politics since the foundation of the state. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly SECONDED this proposal. 
 
The Cathaoirleach declared Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen elected Leas Cathaoirleach 
of Kerry County Council and he congratulated him on his election. 
 
The meeting concluded at 1.40pm. 
 
 
Liam Quinlan                    
     _________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator           Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
 
 
