June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
1 of 49 
 
 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect 
putting them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is 
available on request. 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ NA CRUINNITHE MHIOSIÚIL DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE 
CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN  
CHONTAE, TRÁ  LÍ, AR  AN  LUAN , 19 MEITHEAMH, 2017 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL 
HELD IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE ON 
MONDAY, 19TH JUNE, 2017 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
R. Beasley 
M. Cahill 
P Connor-Scarteen         
B. Cronin 
J.J. Culloty 
P. Daly 
T. Ferris                             J. Finucane                       J.F. Flynn 
 
        
N. Foley 
M. Gleeson 
D. Grady 
 
        
J. Healy-Rae 
M. Healy-Rae 
N. Kelleher  
        
S. Locke 
J. Lucid 
D. McCarthy  
         
P. McCarthy 
T. McEllistrim 
J. Moloney  
        
N. Moriarty 
B. O’Connell                      M. O’Shea   
        
L. Purtill 
D. Quigg 
J. Sheahan  
        
A. Thornton 
 
APOLOGY/LEATH SCÉAL 
G. Spring 
 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Ms. M. Murrell, Chief Executive    
  Mr. J. Breen, Director Water Services             
Ms. A. McAllen, Head of Finance 
  Mr. M. Scannell, A/Dir. Job Cr/Sust. ED          
Mr. M. O’Donoghue, A/Dir.H.&Corp.S.   Mr. T. Sheehy, A/Director of Operations          
Mr. L. Quinlan, Meetings Administrator Ms. J. Maher, Fin. Mgmt. Accountant              
Mr. M. Boyce, SEE Environment 
  Ms. K. Lynch, SEO Finance 
                        
Mr. O. O’Shea, Press & Comm. Officer  Mr. G. O’Brien, A/SEO Envir. Serv.                               
Ms. B. Reidy, SSO Corporate Support   Ms. M. Galvin, CO Corporate Support            
Ms. J. O’Sullivan, CO Corp. Support         
 
 
The meeting commenced at 10.30am. 
 
17.06.19.01 Cathaoirleach’s Report on the CPG Meeting held on the  
13th June, 2017 
 
The Cathaoirleach read the following report into the record of the meeting: 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
2 of 49 
 
 
 
“Agenda for the June Council Meeting 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan briefed the meeting on the Agenda for the June Council Meeting. 
 
Update from the Chairs of SPCs 
 
No SPC meetings were held since May. 
 
Requests for Presentations to full Council 
 
It was agreed that the Central Statistics Office, IDA & Enterprise Ireland would be 
invited to make presentations to full Council 
 
The CPG agreed to request a meeting with the Minister for Communications, 
Climate Action & Environment to discuss the Shannon LNG project. 
 
Renewable Energy Guidelines 
Cllr. M. Kennelly advised that the members for Listowel MD requested an update 
on the issues raised at the Planning Briefing on wind energy. 
 
In response Mr. M. Scannell, A/Director of Services advised that at the briefing 
on 29th May, clarity was provided in relation to the publication of the Renewable 
Energy Guidelines by the Department of Housing, Planning, Community and 
Local Government.  The final guidelines which will be subject to SEA will be 
published before the end of June. He received further reassurance before the 
CPG meeting that the Guidelines will be issued in the coming week and these will 
provide clarity in relation to set back distances and more detailed criteria in 
relation to noise impact. 
  
The Council has committed to assess the impact of these Guidelines in the 
context of the current Renewable Energy Strategy for County Kerry and to bring 
back a full report to Council in respect of same.  This will include a mapping of 
the Guidelines on the current areas designated as either “open to consideration” 
or “strategic sites” in the context of windfarm development. 
 
In the consideration of the Renewable Energy Strategy local authorities were 
required to prepare an evaluation of the landscape and its sensitivity to wind 
energy developments.  This was undertaken through stakeholder involvement in 
sensitivity mapping and also through the carrying out of field work. The County 
was divided into 46 character area field study sheets and detailed descriptions 
and analysis was provided in respect of each in the context of the provision of 
windfarm developments. The final analysis also considered the amenity 
designations within the county plan of prime and secondary amenity, protected 
views and the national and European statutory designations SPA, NHA and SAC.   
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
3 of 49 
 
 
The extracts distributed to the Council were incomplete in relation to the overall 
description and analysis and excluded maps, development capacity summary 
etc.  The Landscape Character Assessment was prepared in 2010 and 
recognising that there has been significant development throughout the county 
and that the extent of tourist impact has extended beyond the more traditional 
areas, a review of the Landscape Character Assessment in 2018 as a precursor 
to inform the County Development Plan review in 2019.    
 
The Director of Services advised the meeting that the impact on the current 
zonings and policy would be mapped and assessed. The Council would be then 
in a position to view the final draft guidelines in the context of the current policy 
and identify as to the impact on location.  Following this mapping exercise it was 
agreed that the full Council would be further briefed within a suggested proposed 
4 weeks from receipt of the guidelines. 
 
Renaming of Library Place, Killorglin 
The Cathaoirleach put forward this proposal and Mr. L. Quinlan undertook to 
revert to the Cathaoirleach in relation to it. 
 
Zoning in industrial estates 
Members highlighted the need for a re-examination in relation to zoning and 
permitted uses in industrial estates. The CE advised that any consideration of 
alternative uses would require the full assessment of the planning policy & zoning 
within that area to ensure that proper planning would be achieved on the ground.   
 
Enterprise Ireland Regional Enterprise Development Fund 
Mr. M. Scannell & the CE briefed the meeting on the Enterprise Ireland Regional 
Enterprise Development Fund and advised members that details of the Fund will 
be included in the Chief Executive’s Report for the June meeting. There was 
further discussion around attracting increased investment to the county and the 
Members acknowledged the significant emphasis and strategies put in place by 
the Council in relation to investment and job creation in the county and the 
significant interagency linkages which have been established for this purpose.  
 
Town and Village Renewal Scheme 
The Chief Executive briefed members on the scheme and advised that it would 
be referenced in the monthly Chief Executive’s Report at the June Council 
meeting.” 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty highlighted that it is not appropriate that wind turbines would be 
located near houses.  He asked that the County Development Plan would be 
reviewed as soon as possible and that the areas Open to Consideration would be 
amended. 
 
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
4 of 49 
 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney asked if the new draft Guidelines would be taken into account in 
assessing planning applicants on hand and what is the current status of the new 
Guidelines and the Landscape Character Assessment.  He expressed the view 
that the Renewable Energy Strategy cannot be reviewed without also reviewing 
the Landscape Character Assessment and called for the holding of a Special 
Planning Meeting prior to August to review the impact of the new Guidelines on 
the county. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton asked if councillors would be afforded the opportunity to have 
an input prior to the Guidelines being finalised.  She also asked as to the current 
status of the Landscape Character Assessment and why the Landscape 
Character Assessment is cited in decisions from An Bord Pleanála when officials 
state it does not form part of the County Development Plan. 
 
Cllr. Ferris requested that amendments be made to the County Development 
Plan in light of the new Guidelines and further asked that development levies in 
respect of wind farms be reviewed. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady concurred with the views expressed by previous speakers. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher asked when the Guidelines would come into effect.  He 
expressed concern at the proposed set back in the Guidelines which is not 
adequate.  Provision should be made in the Guidelines for community support 
funding.  Cllr. Kelleher seconded Cllr. Culloty’s proposal that the County 
Development Plan would be reviewed as soon as possible. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae highlighted that the proposed set back from turbines is 600m 
and added that this is not acceptable and expressed there is concern among the 
public that the Guidelines wont bring any change.  Proposals in relation to 
community funds are vague in the Guidelines and this is also a cause for 
concern.   
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson advised that if the countryside is damaged it cannot be undone.  
Kerry is spoken of glowingly and if the landscape is damaged it will never be 
forgiven.  There is a moral responsibility on behalf of the people of the county to 
protect the environment and if it is harmed it would be unethical.  The new 
Guidelines should apply to permission granted where the development has not 
taken place.  Kerry is a treasure of immense tourism value and it must be 
protected. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley supported the concern expressed by previous speakers and asked 
as to the timeframe for implementation of the Guidelines.  She agreed that the 
proposed set back in the draft Guidelines is insufficient and she asked how soon 
would a new Landscape Character Assessment be drawn up. 
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
5 of 49 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach advised that sufficient energy is being produced from existing 
wind farms in Kerry to supply energy to industries in the county, It is 
unreasonable to expect Kerry to produce energy for industries in Dublin.  He 
suggested that consideration should be given to locating wind turbines in the Irish 
Sea to service the Dublin area as most recent job announcements were for 
Dublin.   
 
The Chief Executive highlighted that the members of Kerry County Council 
adopted a positive County Development Plan.  Members want to commence a 
review of this Plan and this is possible now that the Guidelines on Renewable 
Energy Strategy have issued by the Department.  On the 13th June the Draft 
Guidelines were published and a Press Release issued.  However Kerry County 
Council has not yet received the Guidelines or a Circular on them.  She 
presumed the Guidelines would be received in the next week or two.  Firstly it will 
be necessary to map wind farms that have been developed and also those where 
permission has been granted but have not yet been developed.  The Guidelines 
will then be assessed to establish their impact on the county.  The mapping will 
be carried out over the coming weeks following which members would be 
updated.  She understood that an SEA will have to be undertaken on the draft 
Guidelines and this will involve a public consultation process.   
 
Mr. M. Scannell advised that the preferred draft approach to the review of the 
Wind Energy Development Guidelines specify that there must be a 500m set 
back which was not in the previous Guidelines.  The new setback will be mapped 
in terms of permissions granted to establish the impact on area open to 
consideration.  He also advised that Kerry has a strong County Development 
Plan and at present the Killarney MD Plan is being finalised while it is intended 
that the remaining MD Plans will follow later in the year.  This is a significant 
workload and it is in that context that the Landscape Character Assessment and 
Renewable Energy Strategy will be reviewed. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton welcomed the update and added as Cathaoirleach of Listowel 
MD she did not want to see sterilisation or infiltration of the county but it is 
important to be careful going forward.  The assessment that must be carried out 
is very complex and some areas will not be suitable.   
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty stated Kerry already has its fair share of wind farm 
developments.  Companies apply for permission where ever they like and the 
Bord grants permission.  While wind farm developments would be welcome in 
some areas there are parts of the county where the designation ‘open to 
consideration’ should be removed.  Cllr. Culloty asked that priority would be given 
to the mapping following which management would revert to members. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley asked if it was a fact that after 20 years wind turbines are 
obsolete and he asked who must remove them.  He asked what the value of 
rates on wind turbines is.   

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
6 of 49 
 
 
 
Cllr. P. Daly stated there has been an increase in the number of jobs in the hotel 
industry, restaurants and mobile food service.  The new gas pipeline is being 
brought to Listowel for Kerry Group and the road to Fenit will be improved to 
facilitate Liebherr.  There should be substantial rates and levies on wind turbines.  
In conclusion Cllr. Daly referred to the Tobar Naofa heating system and called on 
management to consider providing other district heating systems. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney highlighted the importance of protecting the scenic value of the 
county and added that the Landscape Character Assessment is contradicting 
this.  He expressed concern at the way An Bord Pleanála has granted permission 
for wind farm developments and is opening up the whole county to this type of 
development. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane pointed out that the Guidelines are subject to an EIA and that 
can be a way of protecting the county. 
 
Cllr. J.Healy-Rae stated that the set back distance has been increased by just 
100m.  He asked if the new Guidelines will apply to the current planning 
application for a proposed development in East Kerry. 
 
The Chief Executive advised that the Draft Development Contribution Scheme is 
out for public consultation and would be presented to members at the July 
Meeting.  The County Development Plan is the adopted policy of the Council and 
while the planning authority decides on applications a different view may be 
taken by the Bord.  Any discretion must comply with the Guidelines.  The impact 
of the Guidelines on existing developments must now be assessed. 
 
Mr. M. Scannell advised that the residual value of wind turbines will be worth 
more than the cost of removing them and the developer will be responsible for 
their removal.   
 
At the conclusion of this discussion it was advised to Members that a special 
planning briefing on wind energy policy, in the light of the preferred draft 
approach by the DHPCLG on the review of the Wind Energy Development 
Guidelines, would be held following the conclusion of the full Council meeting on 
17th July. 
 
17.06.19.02 Confirmation of Minutes 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D McCarthy, SECONDED by Cllr. M Gleeson it was 
resolved that the minutes of the May Ordinary Meeting of Kerry County Council 
held on 15th May, 2017 be confirmed. 
 
 
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
7 of 49 
 
 
17.06.19.03 Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
 
The Chief Executive read the following report into the record of the meeting: 
 
Introduction 
 
Section 136(2) of the Local Government Act 2001, as inserted by Section 51 of 
the Local Government Reform Act 2014 places an obligation on the Chief 
Executive to prepare a report, to be known as the Management Report, in 
relation to the performance of his or her Executive Functions during the 
preceding calendar month, including implementation of policy or other matters 
required by the Council in the exercise of its Reserved Functions and the 
provision of services by the Council. 
 
As agreed by the Members, the report will be forwarded to you on a monthly 
basis along with the documentation for the ordinary monthly meetings. 
 
Members will also be aware that an update report is provided at each Municipal 
District Meeting on the work of the Directorates within Kerry County Council.  
These very detailed reports provide updates on the main activites per directorate 
at Municipal District level on such matters as the Housing Programme, the 
Roadworks Programme, Water and Wastewater projects, , Environmental 
Services etc. Please note in particular that the  revised Municipal District Housing  
Report presented at the Municipal District Meetings includes updates across all 
social housing activity at municipal district level for the information of Municipal 
District members. As previously advised in order to avoid duplication of reporting, 
updates on these matters are not included in the Chief Executive's Report. 
 
The report below has been prepared for the June 2017 Council Meeting. 
 
Finance Directorate 
 
As agreed with the Members, a Financial Report for Members will be provided on 
a quarterly basis in line with the Quarterly Reporting Process for Income and 
Expenditure already in place to the Department of Housing, Planning Community 
& Local Government. The Qtr 1 Financial report is included as an appendix in this 
report. 
 
Infrastructure, Operations, Health & Safety Directorate 
 
Listowel By-Pass 
The CPO and the EIA for the Listowel By-Pass have been submitted to An Bord 
Pleanala. All documentation is available for inspection in County Buildings, the 
NRDO office and in the Listowel MD Offices. The closing date for receipt of 
submissions is the 7th July 2017. 
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
8 of 49 
 
 
Economic & Community Development Directorate 
 
Kerry Local Enterprise Office  
Four projects were approved funding worth €67,400 at the May meeting of the 
evaluation committee. This brings approvals to €183,000 in the year to date. 
Four additional bootcamp courses have been organised for early stage business 
start ups due to demand.  
 
The Food Academy Programme is concluding and the Cathaoirleach presented 
certificates to 13 participants on 30th May. 
Demand for mentoring and Trading Online Vouchers remains strong.  
The National Enterprise Awards took place in the Mansion House on 25th May 
and the Kerry entrant Irish Host Family (Antoinette Butler) won the regional 
award for best business. 
 
The new marketing export grant scheme was launched in May and three new 
applications have been processed. Eligible businesses can receive up to €2,500 
towards trade show attendance and other marketing activities. 
 
The LEO has secured additional funding to develop a “Lean for Microbusiness” 
initiative and a new programme will commence in June with five participating 
businesses. 
 
Economic Development Unit (EDU) 
The Enterprise Ireland Regional Enterprise Development Fund (REDF) was 
launched on Monday 29th May 2017. This competitive funding has been provided 
by the Department of Jobs, through Enterprise Ireland and is a key action to 
support the Regional Action Plan for Jobs and the Action Plan for Rural 
Development. The Fund is aimed at accelerating economic recovery in every part 
of the country by delivering on the potential of local and regional enterprise 
strengths. The Fund will support significant collaborative regional initiatives to 
build on specific industry sectoral strengths and improve enterprise capability, 
thereby driving job creation. 
 
Under a competitive process, Enterprise Ireland is now seeking applications for 
funding under four streams with varying investment levels:- 
 
Stream 1 - Major Change Projects - €2m up to €5m per project, 
Stream 2 - Regionally Significant Projects - €250,000 up to €2m per project, 
Stream 3 - Local & Community Enterprise Development Projects - €50,000 up to 
€250,000 per project, 
Stream 4 - Industry Clusters - €50,000 up to €250,000 per project. 
 
Competitive feasibility funding of 50% of the cost up to maximum grant of 
€22,500 to support the development of high quality regional projects is also 
available as part of this initiative. 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
9 of 49 
 
 
 
Full details of the scheme are available on the Enterprise Ireland Website 
www.enterprise-ireland.com/REDF 
 
Island of Geese 
Work on the development of a masterplan for the former Denny factory site at the 
Island of Geese in Tralee is progressing well with initial engagement with 
councillors in the Tralee Municipal District and many local stakeholders already 
underway. The contract for the demolition of the buildings and the clearance of 
the site has been advertised in the past week. 
Reddy Architecture + Urbanism have been tasked with identifying a masterplan 
for this strategic site.  
 
Tourism Department 
Tourism Conference – ‘Working as One on the Wild Atlantic Way’ 
As agreed by members, the Tourism Unit is currently working on the programme 
for the Wild Atlantic Way Conference which will take place on the 6th and 7th 
September 2017 in the Listowel Arms Hotel.  ‘Save the date’ promotional material 
will issue to all Local Authorities in the coming weeks 
 
Community Department 
 
2017 Town and Village Renewal Scheme 
Kerry County Council is presently in the evaluation process in relation to this 
scheme. It is intended that the maximum of 15 projects will be selected for 
submission to the Department of Arts, Heritage, Regional, Rural and Gaeltacht 
Affairs and the CSF strategic fund will be used to co-fund these important 
initiatives, as agreed at budget time 
 
LEADER RDP (2014-2020) 
A Special meeting of the Kerry Local Action Group was convened on the 7th of 
June to consider project applications for funding under the LEADER RDP 
Programme (2014-2020) under the sub-thematic theme area of ‘Rural Tourism’. 
This is one of the nine sub-thematic theme areas under the LEADER 
Programme. 
 
Age Friendly Initiatives – Call for proposals under the Community Facilities 
Capital Grant Scheme. 
A total of €64,000 is available under this fund to support local age friendly 
initiatives and projects in Kerry. The maximum grant available to local groups is 
€1,000 per project.  The Community Department have notified community groups 
and will be issuing further press releases to remind groups that the closing date 
for receipt of completed applications is June 30th 2017. Information and 
application forms are also available on Kerry County Councils website or groups 
can contact the Community Department directly on 066 7183680. 
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
10 of 49 
 
 
Community Awards 
The Kerry Community Awards Committee is a non-profit community support 
organisation and since 2003 has raised in excess of €350,000 in voluntary 
contributions for the purpose of funding the Annual Kerry Community Awards. 
Kerry County Council is a member of the Community Awards Committee Group 
and is also one of the main sponsors. The award ceremony which was held in the 
Dromhall Hotel, Killarney in May 2017  honoured 20  separate community 
organisations with the overall prize winner for 2017 being the Kerry Social 
Farming Project. 
 
Planning and Sustainable Development  
On 1st June 'Listowel Heritage and Community Led Regeneration Strategy' was 
launched at the Lartigue Monorail Museum, Listowel. The strategy aims to 
environmentally, economically, and socially regenerate the historic town of 
Listowel.   
 
Creative Ireland Kerry 2017  
Kerry County Council has produced the Creative Ireland Kerry 2017 Activation 
Plan which was launched last month by the Taoiseach at Muckross House. Key 
deliverables of this plan for 2017 include seven projects promoting citizen 
engagement with creativity, as well as consultation for a five year Cultural 
Strategy. 
 
Water, Environment, Fire & Library Services Directorate 
 
Water Services 
Irish Water has recently approved funding of €95,000 to replace the Watermain in 
Anglont, Killorglin, primarily along the N72 Killarney-Killorglin road. This is a 
highly problematic watermain, which has burst 10 times already in 2017. Kerry 
County Council’s Direct Labour crews will carry out this work and it is anticipated 
that it will be completed by the end of June and will vastly improve the reliability 
of supply to affected customers. 
 
Housing Directorate  
Kerry County Council has been notified of a capital allocation for the payment of 
Housing Adaptation Grants for Older People and People with a Disability 
Schemes, in 2017 of €2,220,979 of which €444,196 is to be provided from own 
revenue resources. The funds are targeted at essential works in order that 
optimum benefit is received from the available resources.   As set out in the 
guidelines, local authorities must ensure that applications are prioritised on the 
basis of the medical needs of the applicant.   
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
11 of 49 
 
 
K e rr y  C o u n t y  C o u n c il
1
M a j o r E x p e n d itu re  &  In c o m e  b y  D iv i si o n  w it h  20 1 7  A d o p te d  B u d g e t
D a te  a s  a t  e n d  o f Q u a r t e r  1  (M a rc h  2 0 1 7 ) in  a c c o rd a n c e  w it h  E U  /  IM F  r e t u r n  o n  e x p e nd it u r e  a n d  I n c o m e  m a d e  to  D O E C L G  o n  25 t h  M a y  2 01 7
S e rv ic e
T o t a l E xp . T o  
d a t e
B u d g e t
B u d g e t  
R e m a in i n g
%  B u d g e t  
S p e n t  to  
d a t e
T o t a l In c . t o  
d a t e
B u d g e t 
N o t R e c 'd
%  R ec 'd
D iv i si o nD e s c ri p t io n
2 0 1 7
2 0 1 7
2 0 1 7
2 0 1 7
2 0 1 7
2 0 1 7
2 0 1 7
2 0 1 7
A
H o u sin g  a n d  B u ild in g
6 ,5 1 3 ,5 8 1
2 4 ,1 6 0 ,8 6 8
1 7 ,6 4 7 ,2 8 7
2 7 %
6 ,3 2 0 ,1 62
2 3 ,5 2 5 ,8 4 6
1 7 ,2 0 5 ,6 8 4
27 %
B
R o a d  T r a n sp o rt  &  S a f e t y
5 ,6 0 6 ,5 4 1
3 1 ,1 4 4 ,6 3 6
2 5 ,5 3 8 ,0 9 5
1 8 %
2 ,5 0 3 ,5 46
1 9 ,0 9 0 ,0 6 6
1 6 ,5 8 6 ,5 2 0
13 %
C
W a te r  Se r vic e s
3 ,2 6 0 ,2 1 7
1 4 ,4 6 6 ,6 8 7
1 1 ,2 0 6 ,4 7 0
2 3 %
2 ,8 6 3 ,7 25
1 3 ,6 9 0 ,8 4 7
1 0 ,8 2 7 ,1 2 2
21 %
D  
D e v e lo p m e n t M a n a g e m e n t
2 ,8 0 4 ,3 9 9
1 0 ,8 9 6 ,4 6 7
8 ,0 9 2 ,0 6 8
2 6 %
1 ,3 7 7 ,1 89
2 ,6 9 7 ,9 1 2
1 ,3 2 0 ,7 2 3
51 %
E
E n viro n m e n t a l Se r v ic es
4 ,0 5 2 ,9 1 8
1 7 ,5 6 6 ,5 8 6
1 3 ,5 1 3 ,6 6 8
2 3 %
7 5 3 ,3 04
3 ,9 1 5 ,9 8 6
3 ,1 6 2 ,6 8 2
19 %
F
R e c r e a tio n  a n d  A m e n ity
1 ,7 4 9 ,0 1 0
8 ,0 4 2 ,4 8 7
6 ,2 9 3 ,4 7 7
2 2 %
1 4 1 ,2 44
5 0 7 ,9 7 1
3 6 6 ,7 2 7
28 %
G
A g r ic u lt u r e , E du c a tio n ,  H e a lth  &  W e lfa r e
5 2 7 ,3 0 3
2 ,6 3 3 ,0 4 2
2 ,1 0 5 ,7 3 9
2 0 %
3 6 8 ,2 37
1 ,9 9 3 ,3 3 2
1 ,6 2 5 ,0 9 5
18 %
H
M isc e lla n e o u s  S er v ic e s
4 ,2 8 4 ,2 7 3
1 7 ,8 1 9 ,2 3 3
1 3 ,5 3 4 ,9 6 0
2 4 %
7 8 4 ,1 88
6 ,3 7 5 ,0 7 0
5 ,5 9 0 ,8 8 2
12 %
L o c a l G o v e rn m e n t F u n d /G e n e r a l Pu r p o s e  G r a n t
3 ,4 4 4 ,1 91
1 3 ,7 7 6 ,7 6 1
1 0 ,3 3 2 ,5 7 0
25 %
P e n sio n  L e vy *
0
0
0
R a te s
1 0 ,2 8 3 ,3 2 3
4 1 ,1 5 6 ,2 1 5
3 0 ,8 7 2 ,8 9 2
25 %
G r a n d  T o t a l
2 8 ,7 9 8 ,2 4 2
1 2 6 ,7 3 0 ,0 0 6
9 7 ,9 3 1 ,7 6 4
2 3 %
2 8 ,8 3 9 ,1 0 9
1 2 6 ,7 3 0 ,0 0 6
9 7 ,8 9 0 ,8 9 7
23 %
* N o t e  a t  B u d g e t 2 0 1 7  t h e  P en sio n  L e v y w a s a m a lg a m a t e d  w ith  t h e  L o c a l  G o v e r n m e n t  F u n d
2
P e rfo r m a n c e o f  L o c a l  A u t h o ri ty  R e v e n u e  C o lle c tio n  L e v e ls
M a jo r  so u rc e s  o f  R e v e n u e  In c o m e  - C o lle c tio n  lev e ls  a s  a t 3 1 st M a y  2 0 1 7
T o t a l  fo r 
C o lle c t io n
C o l le c te d
%  c o lle c t e d
C o m m e rc ia l R a te s
4 9 ,5 6 8 , 5 8 7
€   
1 2 , 2 5 8 , 5 1 4
€      
2 5 %
T ot a l f or  C olle c tio n -  F u ll ye a r  ra t e  d e m a nd  plu s  a rr e ar s
R a t e s  d e m an d s w e re  is su e d  o n  2 n d  M a rc h 2 0 1 7
H o u s in g  R e n t &  L o a n s :
R e n t s
5 ,8 7 9 , 5 0 0
€      
4 , 8 2 4 , 8 8 5
€         
8 2 %
L o a n s
6 1 8 , 6 5 0
€         
3 9 9 , 7 7 1
€            
6 5 %
R e nt a nd  loa n s: T o ta l fo r C o lle c t io n  - Y e a r t o  d a t e  b ille d p lus  ar re a rs
3
R e c o u rs e  t o  O v e rd ra ft  F a c ili t y
N o n e
4
E m e rg e n c y  C a p it a l  w o rk s n o t p ro v id e d  fo r in  th e  B u d g e t
N o n e
F in a n cia l R e p o r t
E X P E N D I T U R E
IN C O M E

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
12 of 49 
 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin asked if a voluntary group could apply for Clár funding to provide a 
playground or is it only schools that can avail of this funding.  There has been some 
mention of MD boundary changes and he asked if management are aware of an 
independent boundary committee that has been set up and will members be 
entitled to make a submission on it. 
 
Cllr. S. Locke asked if windows could be included under the Housing Adaptation 
Grant Scheme. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn welcomed the funding for Curraheen NS and the re-opening of Two 
Mile National School. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill welcomed the €95,000 allocated by Irish Water to replace the water 
main in Anglont, Killorglin.  He asked if an application for funding was submitted for 
Callinafercy.  Cllr. Cahill then referred to the Repair to Lease Scheme and 
highlighted that the €40,000 loan is not adequate and many properties would 
require an investment of up to €100,000.  He asked that this would be pursued with 
the new Minister for Housing.  Cllr. Cahill welcomed the funding for Curraheen NS 
in Glenbeigh for a new handball alley.  St. Mary of the Angels applied for Clár 
funding and he asked if that category was adjudicated upon.  Cllr. Cahill called for 
the setting up of a centralised grants office for the county and in the past he 
proposed that it would be based in Killorglin.   
 
The Chief Executive advised that members were circulated with a list of projects 
submitted for funding under the Clár Programme.  She understood there would be 
a further call for projects in the near future and any application that was not 
successful in the last round can be resubmitted.  The Chief Executive advised that 
she understood a boundary review was being undertaken but she did not have any 
further details.  The replacement of windows is not a priority and would not qualify 
as essential / critical works. 
 
17.06.19.04 
Draft River Basin Management Plan for Ireland (2018-2021) 
 
Mr. M. Boyce, SEE Environment Department made a PowerPoint presentation on 
what is contained in the River Basin Management Plan under the following 
headings: 
 
• Water Framework Directive (WFD) 
• Key Learning from 1st Cycle 
• River Water Quality: Past, Present, Future? 
• EPA Characterisation 
• River Basin District 
• Catchments / Sub-Catchments 
• Water Quality Trends 
• High-Status Sites 
• Water Bodies “at risk” of not meeting their objective  

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
13 of 49 
 
 
• Draft River Basin Management Plan /Objective & Priorities 
• Programme of Measures /Implementation Strategy 
• Community Waters Officer Locations 
• National Water Forum 
• Proposed Implementation Structure 
• Role of Local Authorities 
• Communication & Engagement 
• How can people input to plan? 
 
Members thanked Mr. Boyce for his detailed presentation. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly then moved Notice of Motion No. 6. 
 
6.  
Explore opportunities to improve the amenity and water quality of the 
Big River in Tralee 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Daly PROPOSED: 
In light of the current public consultation on the River Basin Management Plans 
that Kerry County Council would explore opportunities to improve the amenity and 
water quality of the Big River in Tralee 
 
The following reply issued: 
The public consultation phase of the Draft River basin management is 
presently underway with public meetings facilitated in Kerry by our 
Communities and Water officer, Dr Bláthín Ni Ainín.   A single river basin 
district approach has now been taken with a much improved evidence base 
to underpin decision making. Implementation structures have been 
strengthened to ensure more effective and coordinated delivery of measures, 
and the approach to public consultation and engagement has been 
improved. Work will continue throughout 2017 in completing the 
characterisation of River Basin Districts and on further developing the 
proposed measures outlined in the draft plan, informed by the views of 
respondees to the consultation process. It is intended to publish the final 
River Basin Management Plan by December 2017 following approval by the 
Minister. Closing date for submissions is 31st August next.  
 
The draft river basin management plan makes provision, through the Waters 
and Community Office, for assistance and funding to further develop the 
amenity value of the rivers for residents and visitors and the water quality of 
our rivers.  Discussions will be undertaken, as requested, with the office 
regarding measures to improve the quality of the Big River in Tralee and we 
will revert to Council with the details. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly welcomed the reply.  The development of an amenity trail along the 
Big River would be an attractive walkway into the centre of the town and a link to 
the Tralee to Fenit walkway.  It is not possible for the river to have a good 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
14 of 49 
 
 
ecological status when untreated sewage is getting into it.  The growth of algae 
and Japanese knotweed is also an issue. He asked that Kerry County Council 
liaise with Irish Water to improve the quality of water in the Big River. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty asked why the quality of water had deteriorated from 2007–2009. 
 
Cllr. M Cahill said that water quality is important but the cleaning of rivers and the 
removal of gravel and vegetation which blocks the arches of bridges must also be 
addressed.  He acknowledged that the cleaning of rivers is under the remit of the 
OPW. 
 
Mr. M. Boyce acknowledged the points made by the members and he advised that 
the Tralee Sewerage Scheme is licensed by the EPA and advised that the 
management of rivers needs a structure. The River Basin Management Plan 2018 
- 2021 will take an integrated approach to the protection, improvement and 
sustainable management of the rivers. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn welcomed the Draft River Management Plan 2018 -2021 and said 
that a group should be assigned responsibility for its implementation. 
 
17.06.19.05 
Nominee to the Southern Regional Drug & Alcohol Task Force 
 
Cllr. N Foley PROPOSED that Cllr. JF Flynn be nominated to the Southern 
Regional Drug & Alcohol Task Force. 
 
Cllr. JJ Culloty SECONDED this proposal. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg PROPOSED that Cllr. D Grady be nominated to the Southern 
Regional Drug & Alcohol Task Force. 
 
Cllr. S. Locke SECONDED this proposal. 
 
Cllr. JF Flynn then withdrew his name from the nomination. 
 
The Cathaoirleach declared Cllr. D Grady to be nominated to represent Kerry 
County Council on the Southern Regional Drug & Alcohol Task Force. 
 
17.06.19.06 
Change to one of Kerry County Council’s nominees to the 
Southern Regional Assembly 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan referred members to his report dated 13th June 2017 on this item 
which was circulated. 
 
It was agreed to note that Cllr. R. Beasley would replace Cllr. D. Nolan on the 
Southern Regional Assembly. 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
15 of 49 
 
 
17.06.19.07 
Change in the Chair of the Tourism, Culture, Arts and 
Recreation SPC. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan referred members to his report dated 13th June 2017 on this item 
which was circulated. 
 
It was agreed to note that Cllr. S. Locke would take over as Chair of the Tourism, 
Culture, Arts and Recreation SPC with effect from 1st July 2017. 
 
17.06.19.08 
Senators and MEP briefing 
 
On behalf of the members Cathaoirleach, Cllr. M. O’Shea welcomed Mr. Sean 
Kelly, MEP, Ms. Liadh Ní Riada MEP, Senator Ned O’Sullivan and Senator Mark 
Daly to the meeting.  He added that he looked forward to hearing their 
contributions on the impact of Brexit on the county.  As Mr. Kelly had to leave the 
meeting early to rush to the airport he called on him to address the meeting. 
 
Mr. Kelly thanked the Cathaoirleach and members for the opportunity to address 
them.  There are a lot of developments in Europe at present that will affect Kerry 
including BREXIT which is a very delicate situation.  BREXIT negotiations must be 
finalised by March 2019.  For the next European Elections Britain will no longer be 
a member of the EU.   Mr. Kelly advised, in his opinion, BREXIT was not voted on 
in an objective manner and the focus was only on issues around immigration and  
sovereignty.  The biggest issue in BREXIT negotiations is Britain’s commitments to 
the EU up to 2020.  Future funding of CAP and other projects must be addressed 
by the EU.  There is a genuine understanding of Ireland’s position.  He recently 
brought the EU Peoples Party to Wicklow when he used the occasion to bring the 
chief negotiator to Ireland and our border with Northern Ireland.  The Government 
and businesses will plan for the best and worst case scenarios. 
 
Mr. Kelly then referred to Renewable Energy and Climate Targets and advised that 
he was one of a few MEPs involved in this.  Europe has a target to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by 40% by 2020 but it is now evident that this target 
may not be met.  A resolution was passed by the EU Commission last week to 
include managed forests in the targets but he organised a split vote and as a result 
he hoped there would be some flexibility on this.  Fossil fuels are bad for the 
environment and we must reduce our use of them.  He is a raconteur for the EU 
and it is important to get buy in from people to decarbonise.  Agriculture has done 
more than other sectors in this area.  There is a dilemma in that enough food must 
be produced in a sustainable way.  More could be done to ensure buildings are 
passive and a policy is need to get 1 or 2% of public buildings adapted to being 
passive each year.   
 
Mr. Kelly agreed that the securing of Technological University status of ITT is vital 
for Tralee and for foreign investment.  At the recent Borg Warner job 
announcement it was stated they came to Tralee rather than Dublin because the 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
16 of 49 
 
 
talent was available.  Shannon LNG could be huge for Kerry and he was aware it 
was part of the Programme for Government.  However a lot more needs to be 
done to progress it.  Unlike renewable energy the Shannon LNG project has local 
buy in and it could result in other industries.  When the Corrib gas line runs out the 
Shannon LNG plant would give security of supply.   
 
Cllr. J. Finucane welcomed the recognition of the potential of the Shannon LNG 
project.  Kerry needs a game changer and this could be it.   All industrialists that 
visit the county mention access and we need to ensure better access to the 
county.  As a result of BREXIT a number of companies will want to relocate and 
Kerry should be targeting these companies with a view to attracting them to the 
county.  There should be a co-ordinated approach to try to attract the European 
Medical Agency to Ireland. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty agreed that BREXIT could have a huge impact on Ireland and he 
expressed concern at the outcome of the negotiations.  A number of people and 
companies plan on leaving the UK and coming to Dublin but Dublin could not cope 
with them due to a shortage of housing etc.  Cllr. Culloty suggested that a grant 
should be provided to enable new houses to be fitted with air to water heating 
systems and to allow existing houses to be converted.  There is a lack of 
communication between MEPs and the ordinary person and this needs to be 
bridged. 
 
Cllr. S. Locke asked what is the Irish Government and MEPs doing to protect the 
Irish fishing fleet in the context of BREXIT.  He asked if existing jobs in this industry 
will be secured. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae acknowledged the importance of Renewable Energy but 
expressed concern that it is being rushed and concerns and worries are not being 
addressed.   The current guidelines are not adequate.  Wind turbines are permitted 
very close to houses in particular in East Kerry and he emphasised the need to 
protect communities. 
 
Mr. S. Kelly MEP highlighted when Britain leaves the EU the budget will be 
reduced and the net contributors will have to pay more if existing payments are to 
be maintained.  Mr. Kelly confirmed it would be beneficial for the Council to travel 
to Brussels.  Good access to the county is vital and a direct connection with 
Schiphol Airport would be very beneficial.  Efforts are ongoing in relation to the 
European Medical Agency.  Mr. Kelly agreed that air to water heating systems 
should be encouraged by the Government.  The Irish Government must negotiate 
a good deal for our territorial waters in the context of Brexit.   
 
Cllr. A. Thornton highlighted that renewable energy projects have had a major 
impact on communities in North Kerry.  There are no national guidelines in relation 
to solar farms and they should be put in place immediately.  When they are being 
compiled there should be a public consultation process.  The bridge in Asdee has 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
17 of 49 
 
 
been damaged by the large vehicles accessing the wind farm development site 
and there is no funding to repair it.  This development will not directly benefit the 
local community yet they are inconvenienced and she asked that greater 
consideration would be given to the views of communities in assessing future 
applications. 
 
Mr. Kelly agreed that an overall strategy is required on renewable energy.  Wind 
farm developments are not the only form of renewable energy and other options 
such as solar, bio mass and offshore turbines should also be considered.  Mr. Kelly 
advised that he hoped to discuss these issues with Minister Naughten on this 
shortly. 
 
Ms. Liadh Ní Riada outlined her background and advised she is on a number of 
committees in the EU including Fisheries and Culture.  She believes that Ireland is 
not getting sufficient funding from the EU and there is a huge gap between 
knowing what is available and how to access it.  There are huge funding 
opportunities with the EU Investment Bank and Ireland could draw down more 
funding.  Britain is committed to contributing €60bn to the EU up to 2020 and they 
must honour this commitment.  Very little funding is drawn down under the 
LEADER Programme in the past 18 months.  It is a very bureaucratic programme 
and should be more accessible.  Pobal administer the LEADER Programme and it 
does not seem to have the capacity to deal with it.  Ms. Ní Riada stated she 
believed local authorities should have more autonomy to deliver services.  Credit 
Unions offered funding to the government for housing but it was not taken up.  
Public banking works well in Germany and it only requires a licence.  The fishing 
industry in Ireland has been let down over the years and negotiations on BREXIT 
cannot be just about our own quotas as we must comply with the principles of 
sustainable yield.  The fishing industry in Killybegs does very well but not the rest 
of the country and other countries are getting a bigger percentage of available 
quotas.  She highlighted that there has been limited uptake of FLAG funding. 
 
She expressed the view that the abolition of the Town Councils was detrimental for 
towns and many people feel they are not longer represented.  The granting of 
permission for renewable energy projects has lead to a lot of anger in communities 
as they feel the process is not inclusive.  With the advent of BREXIT the budget 
will be cut and the first area to be affected is the Common Agriculture Policy.  80% 
of the EU Budget goes on CAP and this will be impacted from 2019. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy highlighted the proposed new regulations that will no longer allow 
farmers to use flat plates for the spreading of slurry.  All farmers have these 
machines and it will cost €8,000 to €10,000 to ensure they comply with the new 
regulations.  This is a serious concern for the farming community and he asked if 
MEPs could influence this proposal. 
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
18 of 49 
 
 
Cllr. T. McEllistrim asked how badly is the agriculture and food sector exposed to 
BREXIT.  Direct payments are keeping many farmers in business and it accounts 
for ⅔ of their income. 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy stated businesses and investors may move their business to 
Ireland when BREXIT is finalised.  Every European country will try to attract 
businesses to their country and he asked what the government should do to 
secure some of this business for Ireland. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan asked if it would be possible to negotiate an increase in fishing 
quotas.  He also asked if there could be any discretion allowed to farmers to 
spread slurry when the weather is suitable rather than the present restrictions.   
 
Cllr. D. Grady stated that significant funding is available in the EU but many local 
authorities and communities do not know how to access it.  He asked if funding is 
available to address flooding. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin agreed that there is concern regarding the consequences of 
BREXIT on agriculture and tourism.  Britain is a net contributor to the EU and when 
they leave it will have an impact.  Irish agriculture has benefitted from the EU and 
he asked MEPs if they envisage a significant impact on agriculture post BREXIT.  
There has already been a reduction in the number of British tourists coming to 
Ireland and this is due to the exchange rate.  Cllr. Cronin concurred with the views 
expressed by Cllr. D. McCarthy in relation to splash plates and added that the cost 
will have a devastating impact on farming.  In conclusion Cllr. Cronin asked the 
MEPs if they envisage the EU will ban the use of turf and timber for heating. 
 
In response Ms. Ní Riada agreed that the new regulations will impact on farmers.  
Legislation is proposed by the Commission and MEPs can respond to it.  While 
every country must comply with the EU Habitats Directive not all countries apply it 
to the same extent as other countries.  While they can lobby for amendments they 
have no control over the legislation passed by the EU.  Funding for CAP will be cut 
and the present regime of form filling is unfair on farmers.  Forms must now be 
completed online but the lack of a reasonable broadband service is an issue in 
many areas.  Farmers should still have the option to complete a hard copy of their 
application.  While she would welcome FDI there are ongoing problems with 
infrastructure and plans should be in place for crèches, schools etc. to ensure that 
Ireland is an attractive place to settle in or to return to.  Additional structural funds 
are required to provide adequate infrastructure, schools etc.  Private investors 
have been refused loans but co-operatives can apply for funding.  She was in the 
process of producing a booklet on this in order to share the relevant information 
with communities etc.  The fishing quota will not be increased and there are 
depleted fish stocks in our rivers.  It is estimated that 5% of salmon return to rivers.  
There needs to be radical changes to address this.  Fish quotas are set by an 
international company who decide on a scientific basis what current stocks are.  
She was the first Irish MEP to seek a meeting with them.  Their findings are then 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
19 of 49 
 
 
debated by the Council of Ministers but the stakeholders should be at those 
meetings.  Funding for farming /flooding is available from the Solidarity Fund but 
this funding is not availed of and applications must be submitted by the 
government. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty advised that the LEADER Programme should be revisited.  He 
called on MEPs to inform councillors on the implementation of regulations and the 
way they are implemented in France and Germany in comparison to other 
countries.   
 
Cllr. P. Daly highlighted there is frustration in relation to the LEADER Programme 
and Pobal.  There is a lot of concern regarding BREXIT.  He called on MEPs to 
advise Kerry County Council on how to access funding under the various EU 
Programmes. 
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen stressed the need for good access to the county.  He also 
supported the call for a direct service with Amsterdam from Kerry Airport and he 
asked that other routes to Northern Italy and France would be considered.  
LEADER funding is reduced by 50% and this should be addressed as it is very 
beneficial for rural areas.  Cllr. Connor-Scarteen asked that pair trawling would be 
investigated as it is having a negative effect on fishermen and he asked how other 
countries deal with this problem. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton stated there are a lot of funding opportunities available and she 
called on the Chief Executive to investigate these.  The current rules on the 
spreading of slurry in accordance with the Nitrates Directive is wrong as farming 
cannot be controlled by the calendar and there should be a balanced approach to 
it.  Cllr. Thornton asked if there are funding opportunities for the North Kerry 
Greenway. 
 
Cllr. J. Lucid asked if EU funding is available for coastal erosion. 
 
The Cathaoirleach asked what is likely to happen in relation to the border with the 
North and is it likely tariffs will be introduced. 
 
Ms. Ní Riada highlighted that the EU directed that Apple owe the Irish government 
€13bn but the main thrust of the political argument is that the jobs in Cork are vital.  
Our low corporate tax rate will not be of benefit post BREXIT as it is likely that 
Britain will reduce their corporate tax rate to compete with Ireland.  BREXIT will 
affect all industries including the transport industry.  The President of the 
Commission has indicated there will be a border with the north but until a definition 
of a soft border is clarified the future is unknown.  Funding is available for coastal 
erosion under the Solidarity Fund.  The severe flooding a few years ago may have 
qualified for funding if all the costs were combined.  In conclusion Ms. Ní Riada 
undertook to provide a copy of her new booklet to members. 
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
20 of 49 
 
 
Senator Ned O’Sullivan then addressed the meeting and thanked members for the 
support given to him over the past 10 years.  The real concern about BREXIT is 
the British approach to the negotiations.  Tourism from Britain is down 7.5% in 
2017 and it is evident that BREXIT will impact on tourism into the future.  The other 
concern is the North of Ireland which is unsettled.  There is no national voice in 
Westminster and it is up to the DUP to broker an agreement with the Prime 
Minister.  Senator O’Sullivan highlighted that if the Shannon LNG project becomes 
a reality it could transform North Kerry but it needs state equity to succeed.  He 
complimented the Council on the new approach to working with communities and 
funding them.  All Tidy Towns Groups need the Councils support.  Senator 
O’Sullivan then referred to the proposed repeal of the 8th Amendments and stated 
he looked forward to a sensible debate on it.   
 
Senator Mark Daly welcomed the opportunity to hear members views on issues of 
concern to them.  He thanked members for their support at the last Senate 
election.  BREXIT will impact on all issues that impact on funding.  He is a member 
of all committees on BREXIT and in his opinion British MPs do not understand the 
complexity of BREXIT.  They must renegotiate 56 trade agreements and usually 
one agreement can take up to 5 years to conclude.  If agreement cannot be 
reached it would be a disaster for Kerry as World Trade rules would then apply.  
Kerry Airport is vital for the county but there are moves to include airlines under the 
‘Open Skies’ policy.  Enterprise Ireland have an online test that companies can 
take to see if they are ready for BREXIT and they provide assistance to those who 
are not ready.  A company in Wicklow sold 90% of their products to the UK and 
their trade collapsed but they are now targeting Denmark.   
 
Cllr. J. Moloney highlighted that the Renewable Energy Strategy is a major issue 
for Kerry and he asked the Senators to look after the interests of Kerry in this 
regard.  The proposed setback distance is not adequate and should be increased.  
The role of An Bord Pleanála in overturning decisions of Kerry County Council and 
its own Inspectors is also a cause of frustration.  In 2014 Shannon Development 
Company ceased to exist and their role was taken over by Shannon Properties.  
They own Clieveragh Industrial Estate but it appears that the sole focus of 
Shannon Properties is to run Shannon Airport.  There are vacant units at 
Clieveragh Industrial Estate but members do not know who to contact about them. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton concurred with the views expressed by Cllr. Moloney in relation to 
Shannon Properties.  At Shannon Airport there is no WAW sign for North Kerry 
and members asked on a number of occasions that such a sign would be provided 
but to no avail.  Ms. S. King of Fáilte Ireland stated she could not see why the sign 
would not be provided.  Carrigafoyle Castle and Listowel Castle are not getting 
reasonable opening hours from the OPW and members called for them to remain 
open until the end of September or October.  At a minimum they should remain 
open until after Listowel Races.  Cllr. Thornton asked the Senators if they could 
assist in getting a commitment from government on the new guidelines for solar 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
21 of 49 
 
 
farms.  In conclusion Cllr. Thornton stressed that additional funding is required for 
infrastructure as national funding was reduced over the past number of years. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley acknowledged the excellent service given by the two Senators to 
councillors.  Kerry is dependent on tourism and in the context of BREXIT she 
asked that a campaign would be undertaken to promote the county.  Specific 
funding and a strategy is required for this purpose given that Kerry is so dependent 
on tourism.  Cllr. Foley also highlighted the case of Irish students studying in 
Britain and added that she hoped BREXIT would not impact on them.  The 
importance of Kerry Airport and the PSO cannot be overstated as the Airport is 
critical infrastructure for the county. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty advised he recently heard Senator Daly being interviewed about 
the possible unification of Ireland and the justification for it and as a result he had a 
greater understanding of the benefits that accrue from it.  An Bord Pleanála was 
set up for a different time.  Kerry County Council makes a planning decision that is 
subsequently appealed to An Bord Pleanála.  The Inspector supports the decision 
of the Council yet the Bord overturns it.  In conclusion Cllr. Culloty stated the right 
to life is the most important human right. 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy PROPOSED in light of the discussion that Kerry County Council 
would establish an all party committee to research EU funding opportunities with 
the MEPs. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg stated he grew up in a border town and he witnessed the impact of 
job losses, the troubles and emigration.  Factories closed down and moved to India 
but Asda set up in border towns and created employment.  There is a real concern 
now for cancer patients from Monaghan and Donegal who are receiving treatment 
in the North.   
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae highlighted that the road network in Kerry is deteriorating.  
While she acknowledged the excellent work done by staff the number of road 
crews in the Killarney area has reduced from 6 to 2 despite the fact that 
Castleisland is now in the Killarney area.   
 
Cllr. D. Grady agreed that it is important to protect the tourism industry in Kerry.  
Tourism is down 7.5% and he believed this is because the tourism product in 
Dublin is too dear. 
 
Suspension of Standing Orders 
 
The Cathaoirleach stated it was 1.30pm and it would be necessary to suspend 
Standing Orders. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. J. Moloney, SECONDED by Cllr. P. McCarthy it was 
agreed to suspend Standing Orders to allow the meeting to continue. 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
22 of 49 
 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan agreed that while BREXIT is a cause for concern we must 
maintain a positive attitude.  Wind farm developments are permitted too close to 
family homes and it is unfair.  He asked if there have been any developments in off 
shore wind energy.  The ‘Open Skies’ is a cause for concern for Kerry Airport and 
he asked that they would secure new routes if possible and that they would work 
with Ryanair to this end. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy welcomed the MEPs and Senators to the meeting and wished 
them well for the future. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley referred to the abstention policy and stated he was delighted to be 
associated with a party that supports this policy and will continue to do so. 
 
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. M. O’Shea stated it is hard to hear job announcements 
every month but none coming to Kerry.  Access is a major issue for Kerry and 
Kerry can offer an excellent quality of life.  FEXCO now employs 2,900 across the 
world while Liebherr employs 1,000 and Dairymaster hundreds more.  It is very 
frustrating for parents who educate their children to see them have to go abroad for 
employment.  If Dublin Airport is permitted to build a third terminal it will adversely 
impact on the rest of the country.  There is a need for balanced regional 
development but that is not happening in Kerry.   
 
Cllr. N. Foley highlighted that the SDLP was founded by John Hume who was a 
Nobel Peace Prize winner.   
 
Senator N. O’Sullivan agreed that the abolition of Shannon Development Company 
was a serious set back for Kerry.  He represented Kerry for 16 years on the 
Shannon Estuary Port Company and they got great support from Shannon 
Development.  Senator O’Sullivan stated he did not realise the lack of signposting 
for North Kerry at Shannon Airport.   
 
Senator Daly agreed that there is no legislation in place to regulate the 
development of solar farms and he stated now is the time to do the research and to 
input the parameters in relation to solar farms.  Some people suffer as a result of 
noise emitted from wind turbines and this is not acceptable.  Senator Daly 
undertook to discuss the opening times of Carrigafoyle and Listowel Castles with 
the Minister of State for the OPW. 
 
Cllr. Thornton asked that a counter would be put in place at Carrigafoyle Castle to 
establish visitor numbers. 
 
Senator Daly stated the case of students studying in Britain will form part of the 
common travel area negotiations.  An Bord Pleanála should meet with people and 
communities to explain their decisions.  The ‘Open Skies’ policy will also form part 
of future negotiations.  Senator Daly outlined the issues to be dealt with at various 
stages of the BREXIT negotiations.  In relation to roads Senator Daly stated 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
23 of 49 
 
 
Ireland has not applied for all the funding we should.  The government did not 
apply for funding for flooding following the major flooding event a few years ago.  
The EU negotiates trade agreements on behalf of all its members. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill acknowledged the work of the Senators.  He also acknowledged the 
role of FEXCO and the McCarthy family and their loyalty to Killorglin and the Mid 
Kerry area.  A major issue in Ireland is the cost of insurance and insurance fraud.  
The South Kerry Greenway is the single biggest project for Kerry but politically it is 
not getting the support it deserves.   
 
The Chief Executive referred to Cllr. P. McCarthy’s proposal to set up a Committee 
to research funding available from the EU and she suggested that the best option 
is to refer this proposal to the Economic SPC. 
 
The Cathaoirleach thanked the MEPs and Senators for their presentations. 
 
17.06.19.09 
Presentation by Ms. J Cregan on Iranród Éireann Reorganisation 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed Ms. J. Cregan and Mr. Andrew Roche from Iranród 
Éireann to the meeting and he invited Ms. Cregan to address the meeting. 
 
Ms. Cregan informed members that Iarnród Éireann are taking an overview of the 
company to see how it interacts with its customers and how it can adapt its services 
to best meet the needs of its customers.  She briefed the meeting under the 
following headings: 
 
• Overview 
• Context for change 
• New systems 2017  
• On-Board Customer Services 
• Future design for customer services 
• Station Customer Services 
• Next Steps 
 
All members welcomed the presentation. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley highlighted that the service provided by Iarnród Éireann is hugely 
important for Kerry.  She acknowledged the improved online service and the 
different fares on offer.  However she was conscious that some people may not be 
able to use the online service and while it is important to progress it is also important 
to facilitate others.  She acknowledged the presence of staff on the station platform 
and on the train.  When a customer books a seat online their name should appear 
over a seat but sometimes that is not the case and this must be addressed.  Cllr. 
Gleeson mentioned recently that the lift at Mallow is not always working and it is 
important to be conscious of those with a disability.  Recent reports mentioned that 
the direct service from Tralee to Dublin would not continue and members made a 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
24 of 49 
 
 
submission on this.  In fact not only should the direct service continue but there 
should be more than one direct service daily. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson stated he has a great affinity with the railway as he grew up beside 
it.  Visitors to Killarney are amazed that the office at the railway station is not always 
staffed and the office lies idle during the day.  He welcomed the presence of the 
onboard staff member to sell tickets and to intervene when there is undesirable 
behaviour on the train.  He then moved Notice of Motion No. 1. 
 
1.  
Pedestrian bridge to directly link the Bus Station and the Railway 
Station in Killarney 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M Gleeson PROPOSED: 
That this Council, as a matter of great urgency and out of respect for individuals 
dignity, calls on Bus Éireann and Iarnród Éireann to provide a Pedestrian Bridge, 
incorporating Lifts [elevators], to directly link the Bus Station and The Railway 
Station in Killarney. 
 
The following report issued: 
A similar motion was moved at a meeting of Killarney MD on the 12th 
February 2016 and the following reply was received from Bus Éireann. 
 
"I wish to advise that both Bus Éireann and Iarnród Éireann received capital 
grants from the National Transport Authority or Department of Transport, 
Tourism and Sport for a specific project where a defined business case has 
been presented and approved. 
 
I am sure you will appreciate that the demand for such investment has 
significantly exceeded the funding available, therefore, projects are allocated 
funding on a priority basis.  I regret to advise that whilst there is merit in 
connecting the two stations, funding restrictions prevent us from developing 
this project in the short term." 
 
A similar motion was also moved at a meeting of Killarney MD on the 14th 
September 2016 at which it was noted that a reply to the original motion was 
not received from Iarnród Éireann and it was agreed to again write to Iarnród 
Éireann.  A reply is still awaited from them. 
 
Cllr. M Gleeson read the following statement into the record of the meeting:  
 
“At the outset I wish to acknowledge that Killarney is fortunate to have excellent 
train and bus services. Both are invaluable for the welfare of both locals and 
visitors to and from Kerry.  The bus and train stations are contiguous and yet they 
are far apart. And that fact becomes a considerable problem for many commuters.  
A high percentage of commuters on both services are elderly and some are 
coming from or going to hospitals.  

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
25 of 49 
 
 
Having to walk, sometimes on a tight schedule, from one station to the other, can 
be both physically difficult and mentally distressing.  Frequently this walk involves  
carrying heavy luggage.  All the interconnectivity problems could be fairly readily 
resolved if both companies co-operated in the development of a pedestrian 
walkway incorporating lifts. Such a facility would greatly convenience all 
commuters, particularly the sick and the elderly. 
 
The Access group in Killarney is most anxious that its members and all others who 
are at present being inconvenienced would be shown appropriate respect by both 
companies. 
 
I call on Bus Éireann and Iarnród Éireann to undertake the requested development 
and thus help make travel as pleasant as their Advertisements suggest that it is”. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED the motion and stated when customers ring Killarney 
Station there is no one to answer the phone.  Some customers cannot book online 
and they should be facilitated.  Tourists also need assistance occasionally.  A 
deputation from Killarney met with Minister Varadkar in the past and he assured 
them the position would improve and it did.  The service provided by Iarnród 
Éireann is excellent but a staff member should be available at Killarney station. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly stated he uses the train service to Dublin once a month and he 
supported the views expressed by Cllr. Foley in relation to the direct service to and 
from Dublin.  He asked if Iarnród Éireann would consider removing the wall in front 
of the station in Tralee to open up the station.  While he acknowledged the 
intention in providing an online service it is beneficial to speak to a member of staff 
who could advise on the cheapest option available.  The online service should 
direct a customer to deals and best options available. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher stated while he welcomed the increased customer services it is 
important to retain as much customer services as possible.  He asked how the 
plans would impact on smaller stations like Farranfore, Rathmore etc.  He 
highlighted the importance of maintaining existing services into and from the 
county.  The early morning train does not stop in Farranfore or Rathmore and 
these are important stations for the people of South Kerry.  He asked if this train 
could stop at these stations.  Cllr. Kelleher referred to the 12.22 train out of 
Killarney on a Sunday and said extra carriages are required to facilitate visitors 
returning home from Killarney as the train is usually packed.  He understood this 
also applies to the Friday afternoon train.  He asked that Ms. Cregan’s 
presentation would be circulated to members.  In conclusion Cllr. Kelleher thanked 
the Rathmore community for the plaque to honour Capt. Patrick O’Connor who left 
Rathmore to serve in the British Army and who never returned. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy stated the importance of the train service to Kerry cannot be 
overstated and it contributes to the success of the county.  People who have trains 
available to them should use them. 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
26 of 49 
 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae stressed the importance of the train service to the county and 
asked that it would be maintained into the future.  The online service is excellent 
but a percentage of commuters are computer literate.  He asked that the early 
morning train would stop at Rathmore and he welcomed the recent agreement by 
Iarnród Éireann to repair the level crossing at Minish.   
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae asked that the current rail service in and out of the county would 
be maintained.  Some times there is no personnel at the station in Killarney and 
this is very inconvenient.  She asked that the Balldribbeen By-Pass would be 
opened up for pedestrians as it is a very busy road.  She welcomed the proposed 
work at Minish in September as this section of road is dangerous for cyclists.   
 
Cllr. M. Cahill advised that the train service is very important both for people living 
in Kerry and for the tourism industry.  The problem is there are times when no staff 
member is on duty to answer the phone. 
 
The Cathaoirleach highlighted that 1.6m tourists come to Kerry annually and he 
asked if an hourly rail could be provided from Tralee to Mallow during the summer 
months.  He also asked that a direct service would be provided with Kerry Airport. 
 
In response Ms. Cregan confirmed that those who cannot book online can do so 
over the phone.  She acknowledged that reservations are not always perfect but 
having a staff member on board should help.  She was not aware of the problem 
with the lifts at Mallow and Mr. Roche would address that issue.  If there is a 
change in the timetable there is public consultation around it.  Having a staff 
member on board should also be of benefit if there is a problem with anti social 
behaviour.  Ms. Cregan referred to Cllr. Gleeson’s request for a bridge connecting 
the rail station to the bus station in Killarney and stated that the company is fully 
funded by the Exchequer and while they do not have funding for this bridge the 
Department of Transport have an accessibility fund and this issue can be 
discussed with them.  The customer service agents will also assist customers with 
the ticket vending machines and will advise customers of offers and best value.  
Family tickets are not available online and are only available at stations.  No 
decision has yet been taken on what stations will be self service.  Each year a 
survey of the number of passengers using each station is carried out on the same 
day and the outcome informs the service to be provided.  Unfortunately the rolling 
stock is not available to allow the flexibility to increase the number of carriages 
during the summer months and it takes 5 years from the start of the procurement 
process to get a train.  Ms. Cregan advised that there is no suggestion of station 
closures but staffing levels are being reviewed.   
 
Ms. Cregan stated it is envisaged that there will always be a presence in the 
station at Killarney and a staff member should be there full time at present.  If a call 
to the station is not answered it is diverted to a call centre.  From an operation 
point of view it is not practical to have an hourly service from Kerry.  The provision 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
27 of 49 
 
 
of a station and rail line to Kerry Airport would require significant investment.  The 
addition of more stops on a service lengthens the journey time. 
 
Cllr. T. McEllistrim complimented Ms. Cregan and Mr. Roche on the 1916 service 
organised by Iarnród Éireann and he asked if they plan to have such an event to 
mark the War of Independence. 
 
Mr. A. Roche thanked members for the opportunity to address the meeting.  He 
acknowledged there was an issue with the lifts at Mallow and stated that the 
contract for the maintenance of them was awarded to a private company.  
Occasionally a part must be ordered from outside the country and this can result in 
a delay.  Mr. Roche referred to the query regarding the 12.22 train out of Killarney 
and the demand for that service can be reviewed.  However people who book 
online get priority.  When there is a specific event the trains are changed for that 
day.  If one additional stop is added to the early morning service the train would 
miss the connection to Dublin at Mallow.  Consideration will be given to the 
removal of the wall at the Tralee Station or what can be done to improve it.  
Presently there are 26,000 seats for sale between Tralee and Mallow with 16 trains 
between Tralee and Killarney.  In conclusion Mr. Roche advised that the capital 
cost of moving the station to Kerry Airport would be prohibitively expensive. 
 
17.06.19.10 
Approval for the opening of Tenders 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M Cahill, SECONDED by Cllr. B Cronin it was 
agreed to approve the opening of Tenders for the Dennys Demolition 
Contract – Closing date: Friday 23rd June, 2017 at 3pm. 
 
(b)      On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M Cahill, SECONDED by Cllr. JF Flynn it was 
agreed to approve the opening of Tenders for Eirspan Bridge Management 
– N70 Waterville Footbridge – Closing date: Friday 30th June 2017 at 3pm. 
 
17.06.19.11 
Notices of Motion 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan moved Notice of Motion No. 2 on behalf of Cllr. J. Finucane. 
 
2.  
Hosting of a “Development Function” for the Kerry Diaspora 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J Finucane PROPOSED 
 
That this Council would host a “Development Function” where the Members of the 
Kerry Diaspora would be invited to attend. 
 
The following report issued: 
Kerry County Council is actively engaged in promoting investment in the 
County and through this process recognises the important potential of the 
Diaspora in raising the profile of the County abroad, in directly investing in 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
28 of 49 
 
 
the county or in influencing others to do so. Kerry County Council in 
partnership with the IDA has developed the website including promotional 
videos around the concept “Invest in Kerry”. 
 
The Council is currently preparing a submission under the Regional 
Enterprise Development Fund 2017 in association with industry leaders, to 
develop a professional marketing strategy for the county to both attract 
investment and the necessary skills to Kerry. Building the relationship with 
the Diaspora will be central to this campaign.  Kerry County Council will be 
required to make significant financial resources available in the event of a 
successful grant application for this project. 
 
4.  
Support the Life Saving Equipment Bill 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Foley PROPOSED: 
The Life Saving Equipment Bill is currently being drafted and is due to be 
published shortly. The legislation, if enacted, introduces a specific new offence of 
interfering with life saving devices. I ask that this Local Authority wholeheartedly 
support such legislation including a significant penalty for those found guilty of 
such an offence. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. N Foley advised that she wanted to highlight that The Life Saving Equipment 
Bill will be published shortly.  Thirteen people die every day due to cardiac arrest 
and the role of the automatic external defibrillator is critical for saving lives.  Two 
people die every week from drowning due to the loss/unavailability of a lifebuoy 
and we need to be proactive in protecting this life saving equipment.  She 
PROPOSED that interfering with life saving equipment would be a specific offence. 
 
Cllr. JJ Culloty SECONDED the motion. 
 
7.  
Call to ring fence "retained earnings distribution fund (2017-2019)" for 
infrastructure in towns and villages 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Kelleher PROPOSED: 
Given the allocation of €187m by the Irish Public Bodies to county councils across 
Ireland under the "retained earnings distribution fund (2017-2019)" for the purpose 
of investing this money in the infrastructure of towns and villages in order to 
prevent accidents on footpaths that Kerry County Council ensure this payment is 
ring-fenced explicitly for this purpose and not subsumed into general income by the 
Finance Department. 
 
 
 
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
29 of 49 
 
 
The following report issued: 
IPB has indicated to its Members that, as its reserves are in excess of the 
regulators requirements, it is in a position to release a proportion of those 
reserves to its Members.   
 
IPB has recommended to use a significant proportion of the cash reserve 
releases on; 
 
• Removing uncertainty by moving to flat rated insurance cover,  
• Reducing cost by clearing historic retro balances and 
• Stabilising future premium by investing in risk improvements. 
 
KCC currently has a retro rated policy in place for its Public Liability (PL) 
programme. In respect of the retro rated policy IPB charges a minimum 
premium to KCC and depending on claims settlement activity will collect 
additional premium in subsequent years to meet these costs. 
  
Kerry County Council closely manages the risks associated with its 
insurance portfolio. The Management of the Insurance Risk Assessment Unit 
work with the IPBMI Ltd to ensure all claims are thoroughly investigated and 
reported on. 
 
In the short and medium term there is a significant risk associated with the 
cost of insurance premium given claims activity and the recent years’ 
upward price increases, particularly in Employer’s Liability, Public Liability 
and Motor Vehicles cover. 
  
The current model of retro insurance for Public Liability claims, and the 
consideration of moving from this model to a flat rated premium, requires 
prudent financial analysis of claims and outcomes and impact on future 
years’ budgets. 
  
The final amount of the reserve allocation for Kerry County Council will 
require extensive analysis and negotiation with IPBMI in light of the 
recommendations above. 
 
Cllr. N Kelleher highlighted that he represents Kerry County Council on IPB.  A 
presentation was made to the members on the retained earnings distribution fund.  
There is €800m in reserve and it has been decided to release €210m back to their 
clients with €187m to be allocated to Local Authorities around the country.  It was 
pointed out that some legacy issues with local authorities must be addressed.  He 
was well aware of the rising cost of insurance but believed that a significant 
amount would be received by Kerry County Council from this fund.  He asked that 
a programme for footpaths for the Killarney Municipal District be prepared in 
advance of this funding becoming available and he requested a commitment that 
this would be provided for in Budget 2018. 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
30 of 49 
 
 
The Chief Executive expressed surprise that funding would be made available to 
local authorities from this fund.  There has been discussion in relation to the 
increase in premiums and the clearing of retro balances.  Because of the approach 
to insurances a fundamental review will have to be undertaken as it will have a 
significant impact on the cost to the Council.    
 
Cllr. N Kelleher referred to the presentation made to the members of IPB and said 
that it was indicated that there is a surplus  which would be made available to 
Local Authorities for the purpose of investing in footpaths in towns and villages in 
order to prevent accidents.    
 
The Chief Executive reiterated that it will be some time before the issue of a 
surplus can be considered.  The council is facing significant costs and there are 
considerable demands on funding and this will be considered in the context of the 
Budget.   
 
8.  
Shortage of chemotherapy treatment for cancer patients 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. R. Beasley PROPOSED: 
That this Council query the situation with the HSE on the shortage of 
chemotherapy treatment for cancer patients. How long was the HSE aware of this 
problem and is it possible that they were only dealing with one company to provide 
the drug. Has there not been any contingency plan in place? Patients are in a 
situation where they are receiving half doses and others are being put on palliative 
treatment. How long is this going to continue? 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. R Beasley stated it is difficult enough for cancer patients to deal with treatment 
and it is unacceptable that the drugs are only being provided by one company. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly SECONDED the motion. 
  
9.  
Current housing application process 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. A. Thornton PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council confirm the current housing application process. Please 
include the various stages involved and those staff members that can be contacted 
at those stages. 
 
The following report issued: 
When an application for social housing supports is received it is first 
checked to ensure that the household is eligible to apply for social housing 
supports. There are four eligibility criteria:- 
i. 
Household Income less than €30,000 - €36,000 depending on 
household composition 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
31 of 49 
 
 
ii. 
Residency status 
iii. 
Alternative accommodation available 
iv. 
Rent arrears 
 
If the application fails to meet any of the above criteria then the application is 
closed and the applicant(s) advised accordingly. 
 
• Once the application has been entered on our records it is then assessed 
by the Housing Investigations Officer in order to qualify and categorise the 
household's housing need in accordance with our adopted Social Housing 
Allocation Scheme 2011. This scheme sets out the manner in which 
dwellings will be allocated and the order of priority that shall apply to same. 
 
• All qualified applicants are then placed on the appropriate housing waiting 
list as per their household need and areas of choice.  
 
• The applicant(s) are notified of the council's decision as to whether they are 
qualified for inclusion on the housing waiting lists. All information provided 
by the applicant(s) including application form etc. is placed in their housing 
file and stored in the housing office.  
 
• When a property becomes available for letting/re-letting in an area, the 
Housing investigations Officer will consider all qualified applicants, having 
regard to our Social Housing Allocation Scheme, in that area of choice. A 
recommendation based on the household with the most need for the 
property is then forwarded to Housing management for consideration and 
decision. A request for a Garda check is simultaneously submitted for all 
adult members of that applicant household. 
 
• When the decision to allocate is approved by management an offer letter is 
then issued, subject to the applicant household having a clear Garda Check, 
by registered post. 
 
• However, if any member of the household fails to pass the Garda check 
then the offer is not issued and the application is placed on stand-by. 
 
• The applicant(s) are normally given five working days to respond. 
 
• All queries relating to any aspect of the above housing application process 
can be sent to the following email address housing@kerrycoco.ie where they 
are logged and acknowledged. A detailed response will then issue in due 
course. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton stated at present she understood when a person is allocated a 
house all the councillors in the MD are notified.  However she believed the 
notification should only issue to the Councillor who made representations on behalf 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
32 of 49 
 
 
of the applicant.  She asked that this issue would be referred to the CPG for 
review. 
 
Cllr. J Sheahan SECONDED the motion. 
 
The Cathaoirleach indicated that Notices of Motion Nos. 10, 15, 19 and 20 would 
be taken together. 
 
10.  
Proposed ban on night-time shooting 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Cahill PROPOSED: 
I propose that Kerry County Council make a strong detailed submission to the Fire 
Arms Consultative Panel of the Department of Justice and Equality and the 
Minister vigorously opposing the introduction of the proposed ban on night-time 
shooting and hunting between the hours of 12:00am and 6:00am, from September 
1 to March 3, as such a ban will ensure that the fox population will increase 
dramatically to the detriment of sheep farmers who will have enormous difficulty 
protecting young and new born lambs. This proposal if implemented, will also have 
huge repercussions for those involved in poultry, chickens, ducks, turkeys, etc. as 
up to 90% of foxes hunted are killed at night. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M Cahill highlighted that hunting and lamping is one of the oldest traditions.  
Many people do it on a voluntary basis and many farmers hire people to shoot 
vermin in order to protect their life stock.  Decisions such as this are made in 
Dublin by people who do not understand the impact of loosing lambs and poultry 
on farmers.  The proposed ban is being opposed by the Irish Farmers Association 
(IFA). Cllr. Cahill asked that Kerry County Council would make a submission to the 
Fire Arms Consultative Panel of the Department of Justice and Equality opposing 
the introduction of the proposed ban on night-time shooting. 
 
Cllr. D McCarthy moved Notice of Motion No. 15 as it related to the same issue. 
 
15.  
Review the proposed curfew on lamping at night 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
 
To ask Kerry County Council to write to the relevant Minister to review the situation 
with the curfew on lamping at night. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D McCarthy said that since becoming a member of Kerry County Council, this 
is the first occasion that he has seen four Councillors submitting notices of motion 
on the same issue.  As a sheep farmer himself he is very aware of the importance 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
33 of 49 
 
 
of protecting lambs from foxes.  If the proposed ban is implemented it will have a 
devastating effect on farmers financially and will ultimately result in reduced 
incomes for marts. 
 
19.   
Proposed ban on night time hunting/shooting 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.F. Flynn PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister to object to the recent proposal to 
ban shooting between the hours of 12.00am and 6.00am. This will cause serious 
implications for farmers trying to protect their livelihoods. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn concurred with previous speakers and said that it is important to 
support farmers on this issue.  Many sheep farmers stay up at night to protect their 
lambs from foxes.  He is aware of a sheep farmer who lost sheep valued at €2,000 
in one year as a result of attacks by foxes. 
 
20.  
Proposed ban on night time hunting/shooting 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Healy Rae PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council would strongly oppose any notion of a shooting ban by 
night which would greatly hurt farmers trying to protect their livelihood. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J Healy Rae stated that the proposed ban on night time shooting would have a 
devastating effect on the livelihoods of sheep and poultry farmers.  In his opinion 
some people would like County Kerry to be made a National Park.  The people 
who make this type of proposal are not acknowledging the amount of deer that are 
carriers of TB in the National Park in Killarney.  How can farmers be expected to 
stand back and watch their lambs being attacked by foxes and a concerted effort 
must be made to protect the livelihoods of these people. 
 
Cllr. JJ Culloty SECONDED the motions and highlighted that some of his 
neighbours are sheep farmers and he was aware that the proposed ban on night 
time shooting would have a negative impact on them personally and financially. 
 
11.  
Call to amend the sections of the County Development Plan, which 
are in conflict with articles 43 and 56 of E U Regulations 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B. Cronin PROPOSED: 
To request that Kerry County Council amend the sections of the County 
Development Plan, which are in conflict with articles 43 and 56 of E U Regulations 
specifically, regarding people who when applying for planning permission were 
having to prove to planners that they were " from the local area/ townland or family 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
34 of 49 
 
 
members" and are Kerry County Council open to legal action as a result of they 
refusing planning permission to applicants on these grounds. 
 
The following report issued: 
Current planning policy in respect of rural housing is contained in Chapter 3 
Settlement Strategy of Kerry County Council Development Plan 2015 - 2021, 
which was adopted at Full Council on the 16th of February 2015. Chapter 3 
was prepared having regard to the Ministerial guidelines issued under 
Section 28 of the Planning and Development Acts 2000 – 2016, Sustainable 
Rural Housing, Guidelines For Planning Authorities.  
 
A high level working group has been established by the Department of 
Housing, Planning Community and Local Government to examine a recent 
European Courts of Justice ruling, and to ascertain, if any, the implications 
on planning policy nationally and we await their conclusions.  
 
The department has also advised in a Circular Letter PL 2/2017 dated the 
31st of May 2017 that until the report of the working group is complete and 
any revised guidelines under section 28 of the Planning & development Act 
as amended are issued Local Authorities should defer amending their rural 
housing policy / local need criteria presently contained in their County 
Development Plan. 
 
Cllr. B Cronin stated in accordance with the provisions of the County Development 
Plan a planning applicant must be from the area before they will be considered for 
permission and applicants from neighbouring parishes are advised that they will 
not be granted permission.  He asked if the Kerry County Development Plan 
complies with the outcome of the recent European Court of Justice ruling and does 
it impact on refusals already issued.  While the Kerry County Development Plan 
was being formulated the Department of Environment was aware of this ruling and 
did not bring it to the attention of local authorities and as a result local authorities 
could be in breach of these two sections of the regulations.    
 
When the County Development Plan was being formulated senior planners gave 
direction to Council and members depended on that advice.  He asked if the 
County Development Plan now contravenes European legislation, will it have to be 
amended and what changes will be required.  Cllr. Cronin asked when members 
are debating such important issues in future is there a requirement for them to get 
independent legal opinion. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the Motion and said that he was very concerned 
about this matter.  Members should be made aware of this ruling at the time.  
Applicants within a 5km radius who have ties to the area should be given 
favourable consideration.   
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
35 of 49 
 
 
The Chief Executive referred to the reply and said that this ruling is complex.  At 
the time the County Development Plan was made it was fully compliant with 
legislation in place at that time.  The Department of Housing, Planning Community 
and Local Government set up a high level working group to examine a recent 
European Courts of Justice ruling, and to ascertain the implications, if any, on 
planning policy nationally and their conclusions are awaited.  She said in the many 
cases the reasons for the refusal of planning permission are multiple and it is rarely 
due to a single issue. 
 
Cllr. JJ Culloty asked when the report on the conclusions of the working group will 
be available. 
 
The Chef Executive said that she understood that the report would be available 
within the next few weeks as this matter is a priority for the Department. 
 
Cllr. B Cronin said that many refusals are because the applicant is not from the 
area.   
 
Cllr. B Cronin then moved Notice of Motion No. 26. 
 
26.   
Proposed introduction of development charges for agricultural units 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B. Cronin PROPOSED: 
That we the members of Kerry County Council continue to ensure that the status of 
agriculture sheds remain as "exempt" from development levies. 
 
The following report issued: 
A draft development Contribution Scheme was noted by the Council on the 
27th of March 2017 and placed on public display on the 5th of April. The 
Chief Executive is, at present preparing a report on the submissions 
received. It is intended to bring the draft Scheme together with the Chief 
Executive report to the July ordinary meeting for consideration by the 
members.  
 
Any amendments to the draft development contributions scheme should be 
considered in their entirety as they will have an impact on the overall level of 
potential income realisable under the scheme. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin said that if imposed this will have a detrimental effect on farming 
and he did not agree with the last paragraph of the response.  Agricultural sheds 
have never before been targeted for the payment of development levies and he 
recommended that they remain exempt. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton moved Notice of Motion No. 24 as it related to this topic. 
 
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
36 of 49 
 
 
24.  
Proposed introduction of development charges for agricultural units 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. A. Thornton PROPOSED: 
I am asking the members of Kerry County Council to support my opposition to the 
introduction of development charges under the new proposed Development 
Contribution Scheme for agricultural units. 
 
The following report issued:  
A draft development Contribution Scheme was noted by the Council on the 
27th of March 2017 and placed on public display on the 5th of April. The 
Chief Executive is, at present preparing a report on the submissions 
received. It is intended to bring the draft Scheme together with the Chief 
Executive report to the July ordinary meeting for consideration by the 
members.  
 
Any amendments to the draft development contributions scheme should be 
considered in their entirety as they will have an impact on the overall level of 
potential income realisable under the scheme. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton stated she was totally opposed to the introduction of development 
levies on agricultural units. 
 
12.  
Repair and Leasing Scheme  
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Lucid PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council provide the following information on the implementation 
of the Repair and Leasing Scheme in Kerry, what number of applications was 
received, what number of applications was approved and how many additional 
houses did the new scheme add to the system. 
 
The following report issued: 
Kerry County Council advertised on 17th May, 2017 for submissions from 
interested persons in providing their property for consideration under the 
Repair & Leasing Scheme in Kerry.  As at 1st June, 2017 we have 
approximately 60 applications received. These applications are currently 
being assessed. 
 
Cllr. J Lucid read the following into the record of the meeting: 
 
“As you are aware the principal objective of the Repair and Lease scheme is to 
deliver additional social housing units quickly using existing long term lease 
arrangements funded under the Social Housing Current expenditure programme.  
The scheme is also aimed to target remediation of vacant units and target urban 
renewal in parallel. 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
37 of 49 
 
 
The Scheme in conjunction with other schemes such as new buyers grant and the 
HAP scheme were an attempt to remedy a situation where we have a shortage of 
social housing supply. 
 
My fear, even though these schemes are well intended and are based on logic, 
they are not going to provide the level of additional supply required. 
 
My experience in dealing with people looking for housing is that houses are not 
available to rent.  The houses are not there.  Recently we are seeing an upswing in 
the price that houses are selling for. As a result of this some landlords are taking 
the opportunity to sell and get out of the business of letting property.  In some 
instances these are houses that were bought at the height of the boom and the 
current market gives owners an opportunity to get back most of their investment. 
The problem this raises of course is that tenants are being given notice to quit and 
they cannot find another property to rent. 
 
We need Central Government to recognise that the only viable solution to the 
current crisis is fund Local Authorities so that they can get back to building social 
housing”. 
 
Cllr. Lucid acknowledged that 60 applications for the Scheme have been received 
to-date but he did not think that this initiative would address the social housing 
shortage.  Many landlords who bought their properties during the housing boom 
are now selling due to improved house prices.  Central Government should make 
funding available to Local Authorities to address the current housing situation. 
 
Cllr. M Cahill SECONDED the motion and said that the Repair and Leasing 
Scheme has its merits. It is just one of many ways of addressing the current 
housing crisis.  In his opinion the reason only 60 applications for the scheme have 
been received is that the maximum cost of repairs allowable under the initiative is 
only €40,000 and this is not adequate.  Cllr. Cahill called on the Minister for 
Housing to consider increasing the funding to €100,000. 
 
13.  
Speed restriction zone of 50km at Beaufort Bridge  
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.  Sheahan PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council write to the TII to call for a speed restriction zone of 
50km to be implemented at the busy junction of Beaufort Bridge on the N22 
Killarney Killorglin Road. 
 
The following report issued: 
The national road network, including this section of the N72, has been 
assessed by Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) as part of the speed limit 
review. There are proposals for a reduction in the speed limit on various 
sections of the National Secondary Road network, particularly on the Ring of 
Kerry, from 100 kph to 80 kph.  

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
38 of 49 
 
 
 
Briefings will be provided to the members at MD level on the proposals in 
advance of the draft Bye-Laws going on public display. These briefing are 
being scheduled over the next 6 weeks and it is our intention to commence 
the statutory consultation process on the draft Bye-Laws in September. 
 
Cllr. J Sheahan said that the owner of a filling station is concerned that a fatal 
accident will occur at this location due to speeding traffic.  A reduction in the speed 
limit would have a positive impact on the local community, help a local business to 
survive and improve access to the N22 Killorglin/Killarney road.  He called for a 
reduction in the speed limit at this location. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney indicated he wanted to withdraw Notice of Motion 14 as he 
submitted it prior to the publication of the new Wind Energy Guidelines. 
 
16.  
Call to set up a County Committee of Agriculture in Kerry 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. T. McEllistrim PROPOSED.:  
Calling on Kerry County Council to set up a County Committee of Agriculture in 
Kerry for the enhancement of agriculture throughout Kerry. 
 
The following report issued: 
There is an existing strong influence in the development of policy from the 
Agricultural Sector throughout the remit of Kerry County Councils Activities. 
The sector is already represented on the following SPCs (1) Economic 
Development and Enterprise (2) Operations (3) Quality of Life.  The purpose 
of sectoral representation on SPCs is to allow the representative from 
specific sectors such as agriculture to input into policy formulation which 
affects or impacts on their sector. Similarly the sector is represented though 
the LCDC and the Local Action Group under the LEADER strategy, both of 
which have a strong influence on economic & community development 
within the county.  In parallel with these formal structures the Chief 
Executive and Senior Officials of the Council engage with representatives 
from the agricultural sector and discuss areas of concern and identify 
projects of mutual benefit where the sector and the Council can co-operate. 
 
Cllr. T McEllistrim read the following into the record of the meeting: 
“The agriculture sector is of significant importance to the economy in Co. Kerry 
with over 8000 farmers, and a farmland area in excess of 280,000 hectares. 
There are 9,500 people employed directly at farm level. 
 
Agriculture in Kerry supports 1,000’s of jobs in the rural economy, both directly in 
food and drink processing and also in the wider agri industry  including input- 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
39 of 49 
 
 
suppliers, agricultural contractors, jobs in auctioneering, transport and engineering, 
and in accountancy, legal, veterinary and other advisory services.  
 
The value of agricultural output in Kerry is €385 million and the value of agricultural 
exports arising from the agricultural output in the county is €564 million. Agriculture 
has a huge knock on effect in the wider economy, with every €100 of agricultural 
output producing a further €73 in the rest of the economy. 
 
Does Brexit affect agriculture? 
Brexit arguably poses one of the biggest risks to farmers, exporters and (agri-food) 
jobs, since the foundation of the state.  At the end of the separation period (March 
19) the UK for example may 
1. 
Impose tariffs, which tend to be quite high for foods like dairy and beef. 
2. 
Decouple from EU standard, adding many new regulatory checks, delays 
and costs. 
3. 
Remove tariffs from low cost regions like South America, making it 
extremely difficult for Irish farmers and producers to compete. 
4. 
Impose border controls around Northern Ireland making it harder, slower 
and costlier to move product North and South.  
 
How badly is the Agri-Food sector exposed to Brexit. 
 
It is the most exposed given that 37 % of all Irish food exports are exported to the 
UK (€4.1B in 2016), half of our Beef exports and a quarter of our dairy exports go 
to the UK! 
 
With almost 80% of its employment outside Dublin, the sector supports, 270,000 
jobs in rural communities. We have Kerry Group and Lee Strand here. 
 
Teagasc estimates that a 10% fall in EU funding to the Common Agricultural 
Policy, along with lower UK food prices due to tariffs, could reduce farm incomes in 
Ireland by 26%. 
 
The worst affected sector would be the low income beef sectors. Direct payments 
account for 2/3’s of total farm income across all sectors. 
 
Farming is a low income sector, with the average income in 2016 at €26,000. The 
average suckler farm income was €12,500 and the average sheep farm income 
was €15,000. 
 
Doing nothing is not an option with the potential problems coming down the tracks 
that we are facing with Brexit”. 
 
Cllr. D McCarthy then moved Notice of Motion No. 31 as it relates to this topic. 
 
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
40 of 49 
 
 
31.  
Call to set up an SPC for Agriculture 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council to set up an SPC for Agriculture to represent the 
views and issues for all those involved in agriculture in the County. 
 
The following report issued:  
There is an existing strong influence in the development of policy from the 
Agricultural Sector throughout the remit of Kerry County Councils Activities. 
The sector is already represented on the following SPCs (1) Economic 
Development and Enterprise (2) Operations (3) Quality of Life.  The purpose 
of sectoral representation on SPCs is to allow the representative from 
specific sectors such as agriculture to input into policy formulation which 
affects or impacts on their sector. Similarly the sector is represented though 
the LCDC and the Local Action Group under the LEADER strategy, both of 
which have a strong influence on economic & community development 
within the county.  In parallel with these formal structures the Chief 
Executive and Senior Officials of the Council engage with representatives 
from the agricultural sector and discuss areas of concern and identify 
projects of mutual benefit where the sector and the Council can co-operate. 
 
Cllr. D McCarthy said farming is an important industry in the county and should be 
encouraged.  An SPC for Agriculture would give farming organisations such as the 
IFA the opportunity to raise issues relevant to agriculture and food production. 
 
The meeting adjourned for lunch at 3.40pm 
 
The meeting resumed at 4.05pm. 
 
18.  
Call to increase the present threshold for single persons and families 
to qualify for social housing 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. O’Shea PROPOSED: 
We the members of Kerry County Council pass a resolution demanding that the 
Minister for Housing and the Government increase the present threshold for single 
persons and families to qualify for social housing. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. M. O’Shea said that middle Ireland is poor Ireland and people 
earning between €30,000 and €60,000 cannot get a mortgage.  People who find 
themselves in this situation are paying exorbitant rents and this issue must be 
addressed as soon as possible. The income threshold to qualify for social housing 
must be increased. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion. 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
41 of 49 
 
 
21.  
Call to increase the HAP payment for social housing tenants 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Healy Rae PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council to engage with the Minister for Housing to increase 
the HAP payment for social housing tenants as they are being deprived from 
private renting because rents are gone up. 
 
The following report issued: 
The Housing Directorate is in communication with the Department of 
Housing, Planning, Community & Local Government in relation to the 
thresholds on the HAP scheme and evidence based data is being gathered to 
prove that the thresholds are an issue in Kerry. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy Rae acknowledged the reply and said that the current payment is 
preventing people from taking part in the scheme.  It costs €900 per month to rent 
an apartment in Kerry while it is €950 to rent a 4 bedroom house in Cork.  The 
rental cap is €575. She said that it is difficult to understand how rental caps are 
decided.  
 
Cllr. J Healy Rae SECONDED the motion and welcomed that evidence based data 
is being gathered.  A considerable amount of student accommodation in Cork is no 
longer available as it has been converted to Air B&B.  The Government has not 
responded to this issue. 
 
Cllr. J. Lucid moved Notice of Motion No. 22 on behalf of Cllr. D. Nolan. 
 
22.  
Request 1916 commemorative Medals for members of the Fire 
Service who were employed during 2016 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. Nolan PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council request 1916 commemorative Medals for members of 
our Fire Service who were employed during 2016 in recognition of the important 
public service which they provide in the protection of our people. 
 
The following report issued: 
We have been advised by the Department of Defence that in honour of the 
role played by Civil Defence volunteers at the commemorative events 
throughout 2016, Mr. Paul Kehoe TD, Minister with responsibility for Defence 
has authorised that a commemorative medal be commissioned for Civil 
Defence. The medals will be awarded to all members of Civil Defence who 
were in active service with Civil Defence at any time during the year between 
1 January 2016 and 31 December 2016. 
 
We have not, to date, been advised of any such national initiative regarding 
the Fire Service. 
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
42 of 49 
 
 
23.  
Advertising on roadways 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Gleeson PROPOSED: 
Has the Council formulated a definite policy on [a] the placing of Advertising 
hoardings along the margins of roadways and [b] Advertising on portable Bill 
Boards and Trailers along the roadsides and in fields adjoining roadways? 
 
The following report issued: 
Local authorities have widespread powers under the Roads, Planning & 
Development and Litter pollution legislation in relation to the removal of 
unauthorised advertising hoardings both along the margins of roadways and 
in private property adjoining public roads. The proliferation of signage along 
our roadways particularly in the summer season is both a blight on the 
landscape and also may pose a potential serious road hazard.   
 
In recognition of the increase in unauthorised signage the council has 
agreed a strong enforcement campaign across the four municipal districts to 
be driven by the MD engineers supported by the MD planners and planning 
enforcement section. The actions being undertaken will include the 
immediate removal of signage, the serving of appropriate notices, 
subsequent prosecution and cost recovery. Unauthorised signage will be 
pursued vigorously by the Council. 
 
Cllr. M Gleeson acknowledged this response and said that it sums up what he is 
seeking.  He asked that Kerry County Council would ensure that this practice is 
stopped as roadsides into the county are diminished by illegal advertising. 
 
25.  
Provision of a dedicated Lyme Disease Treatment Unit in the 
Southern Region of the country. 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Cahill PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister for Health, Simon Harris TD, the 
HSE and the Department of Health to provide a dedicated Lyme Disease 
Treatment Unit in the Southern Region of the country as a matter of extreme 
urgency, as this horrible condition is becoming more prevalent, particularly in our 
own county and it is highly unacceptable to be sending more and more people 
abroad for treatment. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M Cahill stated that a presentation on Lyme Disease was made to the 
members at the last meeting.  This debilitating disease caused by ticks is not 
understood by the public or GP’s.  Dr John Lambert who specialises in the 
treatment of infectious diseases has said that he treats four new cases of Lyme 
Disease each week in his clinic in Dublin.  Lyme neuroborreliosis is the most 
widely known strain of the disease and false results can make recovery longer. 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
43 of 49 
 
 
The National Parks & Wildlife (NPWS) should erect signage in parks within their 
remit, warning of the risk of tick bites that may result in this disease.  Cllr. Cahill 
asked that a consultant who treats infectious diseases be based at University 
Hospital Kerry and that all blood tests taken by GPs be tested for Lyme Disease. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan moved Notice of Motion No. 27 on behalf of Cllr. J. Finucane. 
 
27.  
Direct air link between Farranfore and Amsterdam Schiphol Airport 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Finucane PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council in conjunction with Kerry Airport would endeavour to 
seek a direct air link between Farranfore and Amsterdam Schiphol Airport which is 
a world hub airport. 
 
The following report issued: 
Kerry Airport is currently assessing the feasibility of the proposed route, 
taking into consideration the economic drivers in the region, the potential 
take up of such a service and the existing regional services to Amsterdam. 
Kerry County Council is supportive of this initiative and will assist in 
progressing same. 
 
28.  
Billing of farmers for non domestic water that has not been utilized 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Sheahan PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council write to Irish Water to request that they discontinue their 
policy of billing farmers for non domestic water that has not been utilized. This 
practice needs to be reviewed and it’s time for a level playing field. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J Sheahan said that it is grossly unfair that farmers have to pay for non 
domestic water connections that are not being used.  This issue needs to be 
reviewed and he asked why these customers cannot be charged for usage only. 
 
Cathaoirleach M O’Shea SECONDED the Motion. 
 
Cllr. J. Lucid moved Notice of Motion No. 29 on behalf of Cllr. Beasley. 
 
29.  
Call to reject the proposals of TII in relation to connectivity between 
Dublin and the south of the Country 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. R. Beasley PROPOSED: 
That this Council reject the proposals of Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) in 
relation to connectivity between Dublin and the south of the Country. 
 
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
44 of 49 
 
 
The following report issued: 
This is a matter for consideration by Council. However Kerry County Council 
is not aware of any proposals published by the T.I.I. for a new road scheme 
connecting Dublin and the south of the country.  
 
The M20 Cork – Limerick route, for which a preferred route was previously 
identified, has been suspended since 2010, primarily due to a lack of funding 
to progress the scheme, and no provision was made for the scheme in the 
Government’s Capital Investment Plan 2016 – 2021. Given the strategic 
importance of this route to the south west region and east Kerry, the Council 
included for the provision of this route in our submission on the new 
National Planning Framework and the mid – term review of the Government’s 
Capital Investment programme.  
 
Following an announcement of funding in late 2016, the Council is aware that 
the scheme is currently under review. Should amendments to the preferred 
route of the scheme be identified in any such review, these can be assessed 
and consideration given to making a submission on any such proposals 
 
30.  
Assist residents in estates where the bond is in place 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Moloney PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council assist residents in estates where the bond is in place 
and the light and other services are not functioning. In some cases residents can 
not find out how or whose name the utility bills are in. 
 
The following report issued: 
Kerry County Council has made substantial progress over the last number of 
years in addressing issues identified in unfinished housing estates across 
the County.  Works have been carried out in many of the more problematic 
estates which has greatly improved the quality of life for residents living in 
these estates. In addition 124 Housing Estates have been taken in charge in 
the county since 2009. We have lodged 116 claims with Financial Institutions 
seeking payment of the proceeds of the bonds to complete outstanding 
works on unfinished estates and we are in continuous negotiations with 
these Financial Institutions to have the outstanding works addressed either 
by contractors retained by the Financial Institutions or through payment of 
the claimed bond.  
The Council is restricted on what assistance it can provide to residents in 
private estates.  As members are aware, when an estate is formally taken in 
charge by the Council, we take responsibility for the ongoing maintenance of 
the services. The responsibility for the maintenance of private estates rests 
with developer /management company/residents, until the estate is taken in 
charge.  
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
45 of 49 
 
 
However, the Council recognizes that there have been difficulties in a limited 
number of estates, where there is no outstanding bond in place and where 
the public lighting has been disconnected. Accordingly in the Public Lighting 
Policy, adopted by Council in May 2016, provision is made to consider a 
request for the taking in charge of the public lighting infrastructure in 
advance of the taking in charge of other infrastructure in exceptional 
circumstances. However, this is conditional on the developer and/or 
management company for the development providing certification as 
specified in the grant of permission for the development and Kerry County 
Council being granted explicit permission to enter on the lands of the 
development for the maintenance and upkeep of the lighting infrastructure. 
 
Cllr. J Moloney welcomed the reply and acknowledged the ongoing work on behalf 
of residents. 
  
Cathaoirleach M O’Shea SECONDED the Motion. 
 
32.  
Call on the government to immediately tackle the spiralling cost of all 
insurance 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. O’Shea PROPOSED: 
We the members of Kerry County Council pass a resolution to ask the current 
government to immediately tackle the spiralling cost of all insurance. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cathaoirleach M. O’Shea highlighted that the cost of vehicle insurance in this 
country is prohibitive.  A bus operator in Mid Kerry is now paying approximately 
€7000 to insure a bus for a year.  The judiciary must be held responsible for the 
substantial sums that are awarded to claimants.  He was concerned that people 
may drive without insurance as young drivers cannot afford the premiums.  This is 
solely an Irish issue and must be addressed. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy SECONDED the motion and said the amount paid out in 
insurance claims must be reduced as the rising cost of insurance is impacting on 
every household in the country. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy Rae stated that vehicle insurance has become unaffordable for 
many people and the Government has not intervened. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty supported the motion.  In the late 1990’s the cost of insurance had 
increased by 400% and lobby groups got involved and as a result insurance 
premiums were reduced. 
 
 
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
46 of 49 
 
 
33.  
Implications of Brexit for students studying in the UK 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.F. Flynn PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister of Education to highlight the issue 
of students that are studying in the UK and the implications that might face them 
over Brexit. There are many students from this county studying at present in the 
UK and we must make sure when the negotiations are going on that this issue will 
be raised. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn stated Kerry has huge connections with the UK with regard to 
education, the health system and the diaspora.  There is now an opportunity for IT 
Tralee to offer more courses to attract students who previously would have gone to 
the UK to study.  There is a shortage of accommodation for students at present 
and it is important that this is addressed. The Government must ensure that Irish 
people can avail of the health services in the UK post Brexit. 
 
Cllr. M Cahill SECONDED the motion. 
 
34.  
Delays in farmers receiving GLAS payments for last year 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Healy Rae PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council would write to the Department of Agriculture 
highlighting the fact that a large number of farmers have not received their GLAS 
payments for last year yet. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy Rae said that GLAS is an agri-environment scheme, to incentivise 
farmers to apply agricultural production methods compatible with the protection of 
the environment.  It was intended that participants would be paid by the end of 
February but 70% had not received payments by the end of June.  He asked that a 
letter issue to the Department of Agriculture advising that this scheme is not 
working.  In the case of the owners of commonage, if one owner’s payment is 
stopped the payments to all owners are also stopped. 
 
Cllr. D McCarthy supported the motion and stated that many farmers are in limbo 
with regard to GLAS payments. This is one of the reasons why he proposed that 
Kerry County Council should consider setting up an SPC for Agriculture. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
47 of 49 
 
 
35.  
Current planning policy in respect of rural housing 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Healy Rae PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council what they have done or will do following the EU ruling 
in relation to planning and various clauses which are preventing local people from 
putting a roof over their heads. 
 
The following report issued: 
Current planning policy in respect of rural housing is contained in Chapter 3 
Settlement Strategy of Kerry County Council Development Plan 2015 - 2021, 
which was adopted at Full Council on the 16th of February 2015. Chapter 3 
was prepared having regard to the Ministerial guidelines issued under 
Section 28 of the Planning and Development Acts 2000 – 2016, Sustainable 
Rural Housing, Guidelines For Planning Authorities.  
 
A high level working group has been established by the Department of 
Housing, Planning Community and Local Government to examine a recent 
European Courts of Justice ruling, and to ascertain, if any, the implications 
on planning policy nationally and we await their conclusions.  
 
The department has also advised in a Circular Letter PL 2/2017 dated the 
31st of May 2017 that until the report of the working group is complete and 
any revised guidelines under section 28 of the Planning & development Act 
as amended are issued Local Authorities should defer amending their rural 
housing policy / local need criteria presently contained in their County 
Development Plan. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy Rae stated that she wanted to highlight this matter as current 
planning policy in respect of rural housing is a serious concern for planning 
applicants in rural areas. She was aware of an applicant in Headford and another 
in Muckross who had acquired sites but were advised that they would not be 
granted permission as they did not comply with the Rural Settlement Policy even 
though they were renting in the area for a number of years. While she 
acknowledged that regulation is required this is having an adverse impact on local 
communities.  Rents are increasing and the social housing list is getting longer 
therefore clarity on this matter is urgently needed.  
 
Cllr. J. Healy Rae stated that planning should be opened up as he was aware of an 
applicant from Muckross who was refused permission because of urban pressure 
even though he was from the area.  Every effort must be made to retain people in 
rural areas. 
 
 
 
 
 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
48 of 49 
 
 
17.05.15.12 
Conferences and Seminars 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. JF Flynn, SECONDED by Cllr. D McCarthy it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. T O’Brien at meetings with 
the IDA and AIB held in Dublin on the 4th April, 2017. 
 
(b)  
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. JJ Culloty, SECONDED by Cllr. J Moloney it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of the Cathaoirleach at the UCC 
Annual Honorary Conferrings held in Cork on Friday 2nd June, 2017. 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D McCarthy, SECONDED by Cllr. J Lucid it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of   Cllrs. Fitzgerald and Sheahan 
at the iRoute Conference on the theme Integrated rural urban Transport 
Evolution to be held in Kilkenny on the 27th and 28th June 2017. 
 
Cllr. Fitzgerald was nominated to report back to Council on this 
Conference. 
 
(d)  
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J Moloney, SECONDED by Cllr. J Sheahan it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of   Cllrs. Cronin, Kelleher and 
Sheahan at the Douglas Hyde Conference 2017 to be held in 
Ballaghadereen, Roscommon from the 13th to 15th July 2017. 
 
Cllr. Kelleher was nominated to report back to Council on this Conference. 
 
17.06.19.13 
Correspondence General 
 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were circulated. 
 
1. 
Letter dated 10th May 2017 from the Office of the Minister for Communications, 
Climate Action & Environment in response to a resolution from Kerry County Council 
in relation to the ring-fencing of a percent of the income from National Broadcasting 
Licences for local Radio Stations. 
 
2. 
Letter dated 11th May 2017 from Revenue in response to a resolution from Kerry 
County Council in relation to the availability of assistance for members of the public 
in relation to claiming tax credits. 
 
3. 
Letter dated 11th May 2017 from the RSA in response to a resolution from Kerry 
County Council in relation to NCT for tractors. 
 
4. 
Email dated 23rd May 2017 from the Office of the Minister for Health in response to a 
resolution from Kerry County Council calling on the Government to tackle the rising 
number of suicides, especially in rural counties. 
 
5. 
Letter dated 24th May 2017 from the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport in 
response to a resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to the proposal to 
introduce an NCT/DOE for tractors. 

June Ordinary Meeting 
19th June 2017  
49 of 49 
 
 
6. 
Email dated 25th May 2017 from the Office of the Tánaiste & Minister for Justice in 
response to a resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to a review of the 
Free Legal Aid system. 
 
7. 
Letter dated 26th May 2017 from the Commission for Energy Regulation in response 
to a resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to a tariff review. 
 
8. 
Email dated 31st May 2017 from the Minister for Communications, Climate Action & 
Environment in response to a resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to the 
provision of high speed broadband. 
 
 
17.06.19.14 
Any other business 
 
Training Events 
Cllr. J Healy Rae requested that details of upcoming Training Events would be 
notified to members a month before they are held.  
 
Mr. L. Quinlan undertook to convey this request to the training provider.  
 
Overgrown hedges at junctions 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty asked management to arrange to have overgrown hedges at 
junctions cut to improve sight distance for road users. 
 
The meeting concluded at 5.15pm 
 
 
 
Liam Quinlan                                       _________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator                     Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
