Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
1 of 53 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect 
putting them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is 
available on request. 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ  NA  CRUINNITHE  MHIOSIÚIL  DE  COMHAIRLE  CONTAE 
CHIARRAÍ  A  THIONÓLADH  I  SEOMRA  NA  COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS  AN  
CHONTAE, TRÁ  LÍ, AR  AN  LUAN , 27 MÁRTA, 2017 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL 
HELD IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE ON 
MONDAY, 27TH MARCH 2017 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
R. Beasley 
M. Cahill 
P Connor-Scarteen         
B. Cronin 
J.J. Culloty 
P. Daly 
 
                                     
J. Finucane                       S Fitzgerald 
J.F. Flynn 
 
          
N. Foley 
M. Gleeson 
D. Grady 
 
         
J. Healy-Rae 
M. Healy-Rae 
N. Kelleher  
        
M. Kennelly 
S. Locke 
J. Lucid 
 
         
D. McCarthy 
P. McCarthy 
T. McEllistrim 
         
J. Moloney 
N. Moriarty 
D. Nolan 
 
         
T. O’Brien 
B. O’Connell                      M. O’Shea   
         
J. Sheahan 
 G. Spring 
A. Thornton 
 
ABSENT/LEATH SCÉAL 
 
D. Quigg 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan, Deputy Chief Exec.   Mr. J. Breen, Director Water Services     
                
Ms. A. McAllen, Head of Finance 
  Mr. M. Scannell, A/Dir. Job Cr/Sust. ED             
Mr. M. O’Donoghue, A/Dir.H.&Corp.S.   Mr. L. Quinlan, Meetings Admin. 
                 
Ms. K. Lynch, SEO Finance 
  Mr. O. O’Shea, Press & Comm. Off.        
     
Mr. G. O’Brien, A/SEO Envir. Serv.         Mr. D. Ginty, A/SE Planning 
   
 
     
Mr. D. O’Malley, Sen. Exec. Planner 
  Ms. B. Reidy, SSO Corporate Support    
        
Mr. D. Burke, Assistant Planner        
  Ms. O. O’Shea, CO Corporate Support           
Ms. J. O’Sullivan, CO Corp. Support         
 
 
The meeting commenced at 11.35am. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Foley, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Gleeson it was 
unanimously agreed that Cllr. J. Finucane would Chair the meeting in the 
absence of the Cathaoirleach and Leas Cathaoirleach. 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
2 of 53 
Votes of Sympathy 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley proposed a vote sympathy to the McGuinness Family in Derry on 
the death of Martin McGuinness. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady seconded this vote of sympathy. 
 
All members indicated they wanted to be associated with this expression of 
sympathy and they acknowledged Mr. McGuinness’s role in the peace process. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane proposed a vote of sympathy to the families of the crew of 
Rescue 116. 
 
Vote of Congratulations 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson extended a vote of congratulations to Dr. Crokes on winning the 
AIB All Ireland Senior Club Championship. 
 
All members stated they wanted to be associated with this vote of 
congratulations. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty congratulated Bryan Cooper and Jack Kennedy on their great 
success at Cheltenham. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan advised members that the hosting of a Civic Reception by the 
members of the Killarney MD for Dr. Crokes was agreed by CPG. 
 
17.03.27.01 Cathaoirleach’s Report on the CPG Meeting held on 21st March 
2017 
The Cathaoirleach read the following report into the record of the meeting. 
 
“Item 1  
Agenda for the March Council Meeting 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan briefed the meeting on the Agenda for the March Council Meeting 
and stated that the Taoiseach will visit Kerry on the 27th March and this may 
impact on the start time of the Council meeting.   
 
Following a discussion the CPG agreed that the March Council Meeting would 
commence at 11.30am. 
 
In relation to Item 4 on the Council agenda Mr. M. Scannell outlined that Kerry 
County Council’s submission on the National Planning Framework takes a 
strategic view of the issues relevant to the County including: 
 
• Connectivity to Cork and Limerick 
• Need for a strong internal economy 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
3 of 53 
• Proposals for a Regional Air Strategy for Shannon, Kerry and Cork 
• Connectivity within the county 
• The need to build on the global companies already in Kerry  
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan highlighted that the National Planning Framework will have a 
statutory basis and it is important that Kerry County Council makes a strong 
submission.   
 
Item 2 
Revised operating arrangements and charges at Kerry County 
Council’s Waste and Recycling Facilities 
 
Mr J. Breen outlined that Kerry County Council has recently entered into a new 
contract for the collection and disposal of waste from our 5 waste and recycling 
facilities.  Disposal costs have increased substantially compared to the previous 
contract.  Based on existing tonnages it will increase Kerry County Council’s 
disposal costs by approx. €500,000 per annum.  Accordingly, he advised that 
revised operating arrangements and charges needed to be introduced to address 
this increase in costs to the local authority.  
 
Mr. Breen also advised that for many years central government had provided a 
subvention grant towards the operating cost of recycling facilities; however this 
subvention has been reducing over time and was withdrawn in 2015.   Mr Breen 
outlined that these increased disposal costs combined with the withdrawal of this 
subvention and the fact that Kerry County Council incurs expenditure on an 
annual basis in removing newspapers and plastics from our sites with no income 
to cover this, means that unless the situation is addressed now the viability of 
these facilities into the future will not be sustainable.  Mr. Breen further advised 
that the setting of charges for waste services is an executive function under the 
Protection of the Environment Act 2003 and that the following revised charges 
and operating arrangements are being implemented from the start of April having 
regard to the above: 
 
• The charge for vehicles going over the weighbridge will increase from 
€300 to €350 per tonne.  
• Customers who recycle their newspapers and plastics will be required to 
purchase Eco Sense Bags to do so and the skips on sites for newspapers 
and plastics will be removed.  
• The cost of a pack of 4Eco Sense Bags will increase from €6 to €8. 
He advised that these charges are in line with charges presently in place by other 
local authorities and by private operators in Kerry and they will be effective from 
3rd April.  Notification will issue to customers and signage at Civic Amenity sites 
will be erected immediately.   
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
4 of 53 
Mr. Breen acknowledged and recognised the importance of these facilities and 
advised that the revised operating arrangements and charges were being 
implemented to safeguard their future viability.  
 
Members highlighted the need for a Recycling Facility in North Kerry and advised 
that regional and local roads in the area are littered with recyclable material.  
They asked that a Litter Awareness Campaign would be undertaken in the 
schools in the area. 
 
Mr. J. Breen pointed out that all existing facilities were provided when substantial 
state funding was available and while the Council has a site in the Listowel area 
there are no capital grants currently available to develop an Amenity Site.   
 
Members asked that private operators would be approached with a view to 
providing a Civic Amenity facility in North Kerry. 
 
Item 3 
Training and Development Programme for Councillors 2017 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan advised that members were invited to make submissions on the 
Training and Development Programme for Councillors 2017.  The Draft 
Programme reflects what was in the 2016 Programme and it will be circulated to 
all members for the March meeting. 
 
Item 4  
Taoiseach’s visit to Kerry on the 27th March 2017 
 
The CPG noted that this item was previously discussed. 
 
Item 5  
Update from the Chairs of SPCs 
 
The CPG noted that reports from the Tourism, Culture, Arts and Recreation SPC, 
the Operations SPC and Economic and Enterprise SPC would be considered at 
the March Meeting. 
 
Item 6  
Requests for Civic Receptions 
 
The CPG agreed that a Civic Reception would be hosted at full Council for Frau 
Liebherr. 
 
The CPG further agreed that the Dr. Crokes GAA Club would be honoured at a 
Civic Reception to be hosted by Killarney MD while Glenbeigh/Glencar GAA 
Team would be honoured at a Civic Reception to be hosted by the South and 
West Kerry MD. 
 
Having regard to Kerry County Council’s Adopted Protocol for Civic Honours 
Conferral the CPG also agreed that Ms. Paula Murrihy would be honoured at the 
proposed Tralee MD Annual Awards Event later in the year. 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
5 of 53 
Item 7 Any other business 
 
Beach By-Laws 
 
In response to a query from Cllr. Beasley, Mr. O’Sullivan advised that the Beach 
By-Laws for Banna were presented to the Tralee MD the previous day and they 
would be put out for public consultation in the coming days.  Following the public 
consultation they will be presented to a meeting of the Tralee MD for adoption.  It 
is also intended to undertake a more fundamental review of all Beach By-Laws 
but there is no demand at present for casual trading licences at the other 
beaches. 
 
Improvements to the N69 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly highlighted that sections of the N69 are in a very poor condition 
and he asked that an application for funding would be made to TII. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan stated the Council regularly puts forward a strong case to TII for 
funding for improvements to the N69.  No announcement has yet been made 
regarding allocations for Pavement Improvements on National Secondary Roads 
for 2017.  
 
Response from NPWS  
 
Mr. L. Quinlan advised that following a resolution of Council the NPWS were 
invited to attend a Council Meeting.  Mr. Pat Dawson responded and offered to 
meet the members of the Killarney MD at Muckross in April.  Mr. Quinlan 
suggested that the members for the South & West Kerry MD should also be 
included. 
 
CPG agreed to accept Mr. Dawson’s offer of a meeting and recommended that 
members from Killarney and South & West Kerry MDs should be invited to 
attend. 
 
Response from Gas Networks Ireland 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan advised that following a resolution of Council Gas Networks 
Ireland responded and offered to meet councillors. 
 
CPG agreed that a representative from Gas Networks Ireland would be invited to 
attend a meeting of Listowel MD. 
 
Upcoming events in the county 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan informed members of the following forthcoming events: 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
6 of 53 
• Minister Patrick O’Donovan will launch the 2017–2022 Kerry Recreation & 
Sports Partnership Strategic Plan on Monday 27th March at 7.30pm at 
Siamsa Tíre. 
 
• Launch of County Clean Up Day to be held on Monday 27th March at 
6.30pm in Ballygarry House followed by Tidy Towns Seminar to be held at 
7.00 at the same venue. 
 
• Proposed opening of Dingle Creativity & Innovation Hub by Minister Mary 
Mitchell-O’Connor on Friday 28th April.” 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson highlighted that Transfer Stations have been a major factor in 
the effort to keep the county looking good.  It is unjustified as we approach the 
County Clean Up Day to introduce charges.  As a regular user of a Transfer 
Station he believed the Council is making a mistake in introducing these charges.  
The cost of collecting illegally dumped material and CCTV in addition to the 
disillusionment of staff will far exceed the income the Council believes it will 
collect.  Cllr. Gleeson called on management to seriously reconsider their 
decision and to reverse these charges. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher concurred with the views expressed by Cllr. Gleeson and while 
he accepted that the cost of recycling is becoming a burden the Council will have 
to deal with increased illegal dumping as a result of the charges.  He suggested 
that a longer lead in time should be considered and he did not believe it was the 
right decision. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill stated the service provided by Kerry County Council is excellent.  
However the introduction of a charge will be detrimental and may result in the 
closure of the Transfer Stations.  It should be an objective to get as many people 
as possible using the service.  He believed the charges will lead to further illegal 
dumping even though it is already on the increase.  He called on management to 
reconsider their decision on these charges.  In conclusion Cllr. Cahill asked if the 
Civic Reception for Glenbeigh Glencar can be held at the next meeting of the 
South and West Kerry MD. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy expressed concern at the introduction of these charges and 
stated the Council must be realistic.  The survival of the Transfer Stations is vital 
for the county. 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed (Name withheld for data protection purposes.  A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request) and her students 
from the MOTE (My Opinion My Vote) class who were present in the public 
gallery to the meeting. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn strongly objected to the proposed charges and added that it will 
result in an increase in illegal dumping on the road sides.  He recently contacted 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
7 of 53 
the Council regarding the illegal dumping of in excess of 40 bags of rubbish at 
the top of Tralee Mountain and the Council took the bags away.  Cllr. Flynn called 
on management to reconsider their decision on these charges. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly stated illegal dumping is getting out of hand.  There is no 
Transfer Station in North Kerry yet there are 5 in the rest of the county.  While he 
accepted Kerry County Council owns a site outside Listowel he did not believe it 
would be acceptable to local residents that a Transfer Station would be located 
there.  In conclusion Cllr. Kennelly asked that a Civic Amenity site would be 
provided for North Kerry. 
 
As Chair of Tralee Tidy Towns Cllr. S. Locke advised it was incumbent on him to 
highlight the problem of illegal dumping.  Any increase in charges will result in an 
increase in the amount of illegal dumping and will cause further problems for Tidy 
Towns groups.  Kerry County Council must pay to dispose of material that is 
dumped illegally and he asked that the charges would not be increased. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady asked why members were not informed of these charges when the 
Budget was being adopted.  He expressed concern that the charges will result in 
an increase in illegal dumping.  
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae stated he understood Kerry County Council provides services 
for the people of Kerry but these charges will remove a service.  Management 
closed the landfill yet the ongoing maintenance costs are high.  Kerry County 
Council is at the mercy of a few operators to remove material from the Transfer 
Stations.  The amount of fly tipping has increased and these charges must be 
reviewed. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley stated illegal dumping is on the increase.  Kerry is home to a 
number of Tidy Towns Gold Medals thanks to the excellent work of volunteers to 
make the county aesthetically pleasing.  She expressed concern that the 
increase in charges will result in an increase in the level of illegal dumping.  Cllr. 
Foley welcomed the education programme in schools but pointed out that many 
young people are doing excellent work but the problem is with adults and this 
should be addressed.  In conclusion Cllr. Foley asked when the Banna Beach 
Bye-Laws would go on public display. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly highlighted that Kerry County Council does not have a Civic Amenity 
facility in Tralee.  When the public refuse service was outsourced profits were 
increased and the service reduced.  Some people choose not to pay and this 
inevitably results in illegal dumping.  The Tralee area needs a local authority 
refuse collection service similar to that in Killarney. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae expressed her opposition to the charges as they will be 
beyond the means of many people.  The charges will result in an increase in 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
8 of 53 
illegal dumping and will also have a negative impact on the volunteers in Tidy 
Towns groups. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton asked if members had to vote for the charges. 
 
The Cathaoirleach advised Cllr. Thornton that the charges are an executive 
function. 
 
Cllr. Thornton asked that an item would be included on the April Agenda on the 
North Kerry Landfill and she added that it is not acceptable that there is no facility 
in North Kerry. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson PROPOSED that Kerry County Council would not increase the 
charges at Transfer Stations. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae SECONDED this proposal. 
 
The Cathaoirleach again pointed out that this is an executive function. 
 
Mr. J. Breen, Director of Services advised that Kerry County Council is dealing 
with a commercial reality.  The new contract is €0.5m greater than the previous 
contract and the Council must comply with national policy.  It was intended that 
pay by weight would be implemented last year but that has not yet happened.  
While Mr. Breen acknowledged the views expressed by members in relation to 
Tidy Towns groups the economic reality is that the cost of the service must be 
passed on to the customer as user of the service.  This is provided for in the 
Protection of the Environment Act which transferred responsibility for these 
matters to the executive.  The Polluter Pays Principle must be applied.   
 
Mr. Breen acknowledged the concerns of members in relation to illegal dumping 
and he advised that the Council made an application for funding for anti dumping 
measures.  It is important to be mindful that Kerry is a tourism county and a 
hotline is available whereby the public can report illegal dumping.  Mr. Breen 
pointed out that refuse collection services are widely available.  The issue of a 
Civic Amenity site for North Kerry was raised at CPG and this will be reviewed.  
The private sector also provides Civic Amenity sites and the proposed charges 
are in line with other local authorities and those charged by the private sector in 
the county.  There is a legal requirement on the Council, in accordance with the 
EPA licence, to maintain and manage the landfill.  As a result of the new contract 
there is a €0.5m shortfall within Environmental Services and these costs must be 
recovered.  Mr. Breen confirmed that the decision on the charges is an executive 
function and an Order bringing the charges into effect from 3rd April was signed.   
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn stated as councillors do not have a say in these charges he 
PROPOSED that a letter would issue to the Minister highlighting members 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
9 of 53 
concerns regarding illegal dumping and calling on him to him to introduce further 
measures to subsidise recycling. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane SECONDED this proposal. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson asked that adequate staff numbers would be provided at 
Transfer Stations. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly stated the condition of the Listowel to Tralee road is 
deteriorating rapidly and many roads in North Kerry are in a very poor condition.  
He urged management to contact TII to seek funding for the road from 
Coolnaleen Cross to Mountcoal. 
 
17.03.27.02 Confirmation of Minutes 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. B. O’Connell, SECONDED by Cllr. J.F. Flynn it was 
resolved that the Minutes of the February Ordinary Meeting of Kerry County 
Council held on the 20th February 2017 be confirmed. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly referred to Page 12 of the February Minutes and clarified that at the 
February Meeting he said he understood there is a proposal to include a housing 
element in the Denny Site.  He requested that the February Minutes be amended 
accordingly. 
 
17.03.27.03 Chief Executive’s Report  
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan read the following report into the record of the meeting: 
 
Introduction 
 
Section 136(2) of the Local Government Act 2001, as inserted by Section 51 of 
the Local Government Reform Act 2014 places an obligation on the Chief 
Executive to prepare a report, to be known as the Management Report, in 
relation to the performance of his or her Executive Functions during the 
preceding calendar month, including implementation of policy or other matters 
required by the Council in the exercise of its Reserved Functions and the 
provision of services by the Council. 
 
As agreed by the Members, the report will be forwarded to you on a monthly 
basis along with the documentation for the ordinary monthly meetings. 
 
Members will also be aware that an update report is provided at each Municipal 
District Meeting on the work of the Directorates within Kerry County Council.  
These very detailed reports provide updates on the main activities per directorate 
at Municipal District level on such matters as the Housing Programme, the 
Roadworks Programme, Water and Wastewater projects, , Environmental 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
10 of 53 
Services etc. Please note in particular that the revised Municipal District Housing 
Report presented at the Municipal District Meetings includes updates across all 
social housing activity at municipal district level for the information of Municipal 
District members. As previously advised in order to avoid duplication of reporting, 
updates on these matters are not included in the Chief Executive's Report. 
 
The report circulated has been prepared for the March 2017 Council Meeting. 
 
Finance Directorate 
 
As agreed with the Members, a Financial Report for Members will be provided on 
a quarterly basis in line with the Quarterly Reporting Process for Income and 
Expenditure already in place to the Department of Housing, Planning Community 
& Local Government. The Qtr 4 Financial report will be set out in the  Chief 
Executive’s Report presented at the April Council Meeting. 
 
Infrastructure, Operations, Health & Safety Directorate 
 
South Kerry Greenway 
As I previously advised at the last meeting, the Council commenced the process 
in January by seeking a direction from An Bord Pleanála on the requirement for 
an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS). The Board responded on the 10th 
March, and have confirmed our initial determination that an EIS is required.  The 
preparation of the CPO and EIS is quite complex, given the nature, scale and 
characteristics of the scheme, the ecological sensitivity of the surrounding 
environment, and the architectural heritage of some of the structures.  The 
preparation of the CPO and the EIS has been significantly advanced, and I wish 
to put on record my appreciation for the support from the majority of the 
landowners who have allowed access on the lands for the various surveys 
required. There are a number of surveys and investigative works still on-going on 
the route at present. When complete, we intend to seek a meeting with An Bord 
Pleanála, in advance of the formal application being made.   
  
Tralee Active Travel - Redevelopment of The Mall 
The Contractor appointed to carry out the works started on site in mid February, 
and the works are on schedule. The Council has a full time Engineer on site, 
liaising with local businesses. Works on Denny Street, including the pavement 
overlay and realigning the parking are scheduled to be completed within the next 
5 weeks. The new taxi rank in the Abbey Car Park will be in place within the next 
2 weeks. The Council is proposing a road closure for vehicular traffic on the Mall 
from the 24th April to the 21st November, but the works will be progressed in 
phases to maintain access to local businesses. Discussions are on-going with the 
local businesses on the extent of the work stoppage over the summer period, 
which had been raised at a public meeting with the business sector.       
 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
11 of 53 
Listowel By-Pass 
The CPO and EIS for the Listowel By-Pass is substantially complete and in 
advance of the formal submission to An Bord Pleanála, we have made an 
application to the board for a pre-planning meeting.   
 
Plunkett Street, Killarney 
The street enhancement and improvement works on Plunkett Street commenced 
on the last week in February. Works are progressing on target and are scheduled 
to be completed and the road reopened to traffic before the Easter weekend. The 
Town Engineer is working with local businesses to ensure least disruption to 
trade whilst the works are on-going.    
 
Economic & Community Development Directorate 
 
Kerry Local Enterprise Office  
 
Promotion and Advertising 
The Local Enterprise Office did extensive online promotion of Enterprise Month 
which runs throughout March 2017. 
In addition, a four page brochure advertising Enterprise Month was included in 
both the Kerryman and Kerry’s Eye newspapers. 
 
Training  
Two new Business Growth Programmes commenced in February. These will run 
over 8 weeks and are taking place in Tralee in Killarney. Other half day 
workshops in social media were also held in February. Courses are continuing in 
Start Your Own Business and Digital Marketing 
 
Kerry’s Best Young Entrepreneur  
From nearly 2000 entries, Derek Counihan of Harpoon Connect reached the 
national final held in Google HQ in Dublin on March 5th. He was not ultimately 
successful but the judges commented very favourably on his business prospects. 
 
Kerry Enterprise Month 
March is designated as Kerry Enterprise Month. There are over 40 events 
scheduled throughout the County. The LEO office is the organiser of 12 of these 
events, with many of these taking place during Local Enterprise Week- the 5th-
10th March. 
 
Trading Online Voucher Scheme  
There continues to be very strong demand under this scheme and over 90 
businesses are scheduled to attend an informational seminar in March. 
Payments worth €33,000 were made to 16 businesses in January and February. 
 
 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
12 of 53 
Evaluation Meetings and Grant Payments 
€36,000 was paid in grants to businesses in January and February. Three 
projects were approved funding worth €45,000 at the February meeting of the 
evaluation committee. 
 
Grads for Micro Scheme 
This is a pilot programme being trialled by the Kerry and Cork Leo’s. Four Kerry 
businesses were approved funding in February to allow undergraduates and 
Masters Students undertake paid work placements on specialist projects in 
Micro-enterprises. The businesses should benefit from the technical knowledge 
of the students who themselves will gain valuable experience.  
  
LEO Work Plan 2017 
The LEO Work Plan is currently with Enterprise Ireland awaiting final sign off 
from them. This is expected in late March 2017. 
 
Economic Development Unit (EDU) 
 
Skellig Centre for Research and Innovation – Skellig CRI 
Skellig Centre for Research and Innovation is an outreach campus for higher 
education, research and entrepreneurship based in County Kerry, Ireland. This is 
a catalyst for the entire region and is a space that fosters collaboration, 
community building, research and an entrepreneurial spirit. 
 
This Centre is a unique higher education and community development 
partnership between Kerry County Council, University College Cork and South 
Kerry Development Partnership which promotes local level collaboration with 
national and international research communities emulating in a local context, the 
impact of a third level institution in a community.  
 
Kerry County Council hosted the SmartLab conference in Cahirciveen Library in 
February 2017.  This event is run in conjunction with SmartLab and UCD.  There 
were approximately 35 international and 4 local Phd students based in 
Cahirciveen library for the week.  This event is supported by Kerry County 
Council and NAISC the Skellig Coast Diaspora Network. 
 
Dingle Creativity & Innovative Hub 
Kerry County Council supports and continues its involvement in this project. The 
Dingle Iothon 2017 was held on the weekend of the 3rd March 2017 in Dingle. 
 
Community Department 
 
Arts 
Creative Ireland (www.creative.ireland.ie ) is a five year Government initiative, 
across departments, which aims to build on the power of cultural creativity to 
bring communities together.  

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
13 of 53 
Creative Ireland is the main implementation vehicle for the priorities identified in 
Culture 2025: 
 
•     Which states that arts and culture are intrinsic to the Irish State; 
•     Acknowledges the need to increase access to and participation in the arts; 
•     Boost our creative industries; 
•     And preserve our heritage with a particular focus on language, landscape 
and environment (ref page 7 Clár Éire Ildánach 2017-2022); 
 
This national Government initiative is interdepartmental including the Department 
of An Taoiseach, Department of Arts, Heritage, Regional, Rural and Gaeltacht 
Affairs, Department of Housing, Community and Local Government, Department 
of Finance and Department of Education etc. 
 
Each Local Authority is tasked with establishing a Cultural Team, and nominating 
a Creative Ireland Co-ordinator (Arts Officer). The Cultural Team will include but 
not be limited to Arts, Heritage, Irish language, Libraries, and Museums. In the 
short term KCC is tasked to deliver a 2017 Creative Ireland Activation Plan.  
 
This will comprise of actions from the existing work programme of the Cultural 
Team being linked directly to the delivery of the five pillars of Creative Ireland: 
1.            Enabling the Creative Potential of Every Child 
2.            Enabling Creativity in Every Community 
3.            Investing in our Creative and Cultural Infrastructure 
4.            Ireland as a centre of Excellence in Media Production 
5.            Unifying our Global reputation. 
 
The Activation Plan is to be compiled in the coming month to allow for translation 
in order to be printed for the National deadline of April 28th 2017. 
 
Creative Ireland is the Government’s Legacy Programme from Ireland 2016 
which places creativity at the centre of public policy.  Creative Ireland is a culture-
based programme designed to promote individual, community and national 
wellbeing.  The core proposition is that participation in cultural activity drives 
personal and collective creativity, with significant implications for individual and 
societal wellbeing and achievement. 
 
The programme is built around the themes of identity, culture and citizenship. 
The core operating principles are Collaboration and Communication, Community 
Empowerment, and Internationalisation. 
 
Local authorities have a crucial role in the overall local delivery of the entire 
Creative Ireland programme and are exclusively mandated, through their culture 
teams, to deliver Pillar 2 of the programme – Enabling Creativity in Every 
Community.  Each LA is asked to deliver free family friendly events for Cruinniú 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
14 of 53 
na Cásca on April 17th 2017. The Arts Officer has drafted a programme with an 
event in each MD. 
 
Community Support Fund 
Almost 350 projects and initiatives countywide will benefit from Kerry County 
Council’s Community Support Fund in 2017.  The number of projects supported 
in each of the four Municipal Districts is as follows: 
 
Listowel MD  
75 
 
Killarney MD  
79 
 
Tralee MD   
73 
South & West MD  128 
 
The Community Support Fund, which is now in its third year, supports a wide 
range of community, sporting and voluntary organisations across Kerry and a 
range of projects which are of benefit to local communities.  
It recognises the valuable contribution the community and voluntary sectors 
make to the overall wellbeing of the people of the county and the vital and 
beneficial work that such organisations do. 
 
This year, for the first time, some of the Community Support Fund will be used to 
target strategic projects in Municipal Districts and will be used to co-fund projects 
which are in receipt of grants from other sources. A portion of the fund is 
therefore being retained in each Municipal District.  
 
Social Inclusion and Community Activation Programme (SICAP) 
We are now in the final year of the current SICAP programme. The Department 
have initiated a comprehensive consultation process in relation to the successor 
programme. Ms. Catherine Byrne, T.D. Minister of State visited a ‘Social 
Farming’ SICAP funded project in Killarney on the 28th of February. 
 
LEADER 2014-2020  
The closing dates for the first call for project submissions under LEADER were 
Friday 20th January and Friday 27th January for areas covered by South Kerry 
Development Partnership (SKDP) & North, East & West Kerry Development 
(NEWKD) respectively.  Applications are currently being assessed by the 
evaluation committees for the three implementing partners SKDP, NEWKD & IRD 
Duhallow and will be presented to the Kerry Local Action Group for decision on 
the 10th of April 2017. 
 
Tourism Unit 
 
MEITHEAL 2017  
Meitheal is Failte Ireland’s biggest trade show, which allows overseas tour 
operators meet and make direct bookings with our tourism providers.  It acts as a 
dedicated and effective platform to engage with both industry and buyers and 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
15 of 53 
takes place in Punchestown Racecourse on the 29th and 30th March 2017.  The 
Tourism Unit has secured a stand to promote Co. Kerry, and a number of tourist 
attractions from all around the county will be represented on both days.   
 
Planning and Sustainable Development  
 
Killarney Municipal District Plan 
Further public consultation has taken place for the Killarney MD plan. An online 
survey held between 7/2/17- 3/3/17 resulted in 217 submissions. These are 
currently being collated and analysed by the Planning Dept.  
 
National Planning Framework 
This is a separate item on Council agenda. The proposed submission from Kerry 
County Council has been prepared following consideration by the Economic and 
Community Development SPC.  
 
Conservation 
Kerry County Council was allocated €50,000 under the Built Heritage Investment 
Scheme 2017.  
 
Water, Environment, Fire & Library Services Directorate 
 
2017 Anti-Dumping Initiative  
Kerry County Council has been notified by the Department of Communications, 
Climate Action and Environment of the 2017 Anti-Dumping initiative.  The aim of 
the initiative is to work in partnership with local community organisations in 
identifying high risk or problem areas, developing appropriate enforcement 
resources and carrying out clean up operations.   
 
The Department is making available an initial allocation of €650,000 from the 
Environment Fund to support this initiative which will be delivered through the 
Waste Enforcement Regional Lead Authorities (WERLA’s).  Funding will be 
allocated to support projects where community groups and other state agencies 
work in partnership to clean up and prevent illegal dumping and where 
appropriate enforcement actions are being taken by local authorities.  Kerry 
County Council has submitted proposals for funding under this initiative. 
 
Publication of draft River Basin Management Plan for Ireland 2018-2021 
The Minister for Housing, Planning, Community and Local Government has 
recently, published the draft River Basin Management Plan for Ireland 2018-
2021. The draft plan will now be subject to six months public consultation as 
required by the Water Framework Directive. 
  
The Department is now seeking the views and comments of all those interested 
in the draft River Basin Management Plan. This presents an opportunity for 
members of the public and interested parties in Kerry to make submissions on 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
16 of 53 
how they feel the rivers and watercourses in Kerry should be managed and to 
make suggestions about the future.   
  
Review of Ireland’s Nitrates Action Programme – Public Consultation  
The Minister for Housing, Planning, Community and Local Government has 
announced the opening of public consultation in relation to the review of Ireland’s 
Nitrates Action Programme.  
Ireland’s Nitrates Action Programme is given effect by European Union (Good 
Agricultural Practice for Protection of Waters) Regulations 2014 (S.I. No. 31 of 
2014). The regulations contain specific measures to protect surface waters and 
groundwater from nutrient pollution arising from agricultural sources. In 
accordance with the Nitrates Directive these regulations are due to be reviewed 
this year. 
 
The present public consultation process presents an opportunity for interested 
parties, environmental groups and members of the public in Kerry to make their 
views know and to suggest how the directive should be implemented.   
 
Further accreditation for Kerry County Council laboratory  
Kerry County Council laboratory has recently received confirmation from the Irish 
National Accreditation Board that following a successful application process that 
our scope of accreditation has been extended to cover testing for Clostridium 
Perfringens, Sodium, Zinc and ecoli for bathing waters. This follows on from the 
previous accreditation following successful applications in other significant 
chemical & microbiological parameters.” 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney noted that Waterford Greenway opened at the weekend and 
funding was allocated for it on the same day that funding was allocated for the 
South Kerry Greenway.  He hoped there would be no further delays in 
progressing the South Kerry Greenway.  At the recent meeting of the members of 
Listowel MD in relation to the Community Support Fund members were advised 
that €8,100 was being deducted from their allocation for county wide projects.  
This was a substantial sum and he PROPOSED in 2018 that the Community 
Support Fund would be divided equally between the four MDs or that the 
deduction for county projects would be on a pro rata basis.  Cllr. Moloney 
requested an increase in the allocation for the Listowel MD in 2018. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly SECONDED this proposal. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson requested the address to which submissions on the River Basin 
Management Plans can be sent.  Rivers in Kerry are short and any examination 
should be on the entirely of the river and not of just one area.  He noted that 
Waterford Greenway opened at the weekend and 30 years ago he proposed that 
the South Kerry Greenway would be developed.  Cllr. Gleeson pleaded with the 
landowners to come on board as this area has suffered population decline and it 
needs this initiative to boost the economy.  

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
17 of 53 
 
Cllr. D. Grady highlighted that the Community Support Fund is very important for 
the Killarney area.  He acknowledged the wonderful job being done on Plunkett 
Street and the excellent communication with businesses. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty concurred with the views expressed by Cllr. Gleeson in relation 
to the South Kerry Greenway and added that the executive are working hard to 
make it a reality.  This project is vital for South Kerry as it will re-invigorate the 
local economy and all areas on the route will benefit. 
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen welcomed the work on Skellig CRI and LEADER 
funding.  He then moved Notice of Motion No. 27. 
 
27. 
Update on the South Kerry Greenway 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council please give an update in relation to progressing with 
the South Kerry Greenway. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The preparation of the CPO and EIS for the South Kerry Greenway is quite 
complex, given the nature, scale and characteristics of the scheme, the 
ecological sensitivity of the surrounding environment, and the architectural 
heritage of some of the structure.    
 
In accordance with statutory provisions, the Council sought a direction 
from An Board Pleanála on the requirements for an Environmental Impact 
Statement (EIS) and the board confirmed, in correspondence dated 10th 
March 2017, the Council’s determination that an EIS is required.  
 
The preparation of the CPO and the EIS has been significantly advanced, 
with the appreciative support of the majority of the landowners who have 
allowed access on the lands for the various surveys required to comply 
with due diligence on the process. There are a number of surveys and 
investigative works on the route on–going at present.  
 
It is our objective to complete the process as speedily as possible. 
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen highlighted that this is the biggest tourism initiative in 
Kerry since Muckross House.  It is the only option to improve the economy of 
South Kerry.  It is important that the project progresses without further delay.  
Cllr. Connor-Scarteen complimented the Chief Executive on her recent radio 
interview when she clarified the facts on the Greenway. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson SECONDED the motion. 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
18 of 53 
Cllr. M. Cahill stated the South Kerry Greenway is one of the most important 
projects undertaken in the county for years.  South Kerry has been ravaged by 
emigration and landowners should be encouraged to use common sense to 
ensure the project becomes a reality.  Cllr. Cahill asked what process Waterford 
used to bring their Greenway to fruition.  He understood Minister Ross will meet 
with concerned landowners and he asked that Kerry County Council would also 
arrange a meeting with Minister Ross to highlight the importance of this project 
for South Kerry.  The Community Support Fund is very beneficial and he called 
on Kerry County Council to organise a major fund raising day to fund additional 
projects.  Cllr. Cahill requested an update on his proposal to have a cable car in 
the county.   
 
Cllr. P. Daly welcomed any progress on the South Kerry Greenway but added 
that Management prioritised this Greenway over all other walkways.     
 
Cllr. R. Beasley referred to the River Basin Management Plans and stressed the 
need to address the flooding problems in the Cashen and Ballyhorgan areas.  
These areas were flooded in the past and continue to be flooded.   
 
Cllr. N. Foley referred to the Community Support Fund and stated that from 2018 
countywide projects should be decided by full Council prior to going to the 
Municipal Districts.   
 
Cllr. A. Thornton asked if members were issued with a copy of the Draft River 
Basin Management Plan. 
 
Mr. J. Breen advised that it is available online and he would send on the details 
to her. 
 
Cllr. Thornton stated the problems with flooding in the Cashen in North Kerry 
must be addressed.  She asked what the closing date is for submissions on the 
Nitrates Action Programme. 
 
Mr. J. Breen stated the closing date is Friday 28th April. 
 
Cllr. Thornton requested an update on Listowel By-Pass and the Great Southern 
Trail. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae stated while he welcomed the LEADER funding applicants had 
to wait 2 years for it and funding was reduced by 50%.  Cllr. Healy-Rae stressed 
that he was always in favour of the South Kerry Greenway but he was opposed 
to the CPO.   
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan informed members that the Waterford Greenway was on a 
railway line that transferred to Waterford City and County Council but that is not 
the case in Kerry.  That is why it was necessary to go the CPO route.  The 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
19 of 53 
position regarding Listowel By-Pass is that the CPO and EIS are substantially 
complete and in advance of the formal submission to An Bord Pleanála, the 
Council made an application to the Board for a pre-planning meeting.  In relation 
to the Great Southern Trail consultants will be engaged to prepare the design 
and it hoped to advertise for consultants in the coming weeks. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly asked when the distribution of the Community Support Fund 
would commence and when are clubs likely to receive their allocation. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae asked if applicants for LEADER funding will be advised if they 
are successful or not in April. 
 
Mr. M. Scannell informed members that work on the distribution of the 
Community Support Fund has already commenced and will continue over the 
coming weeks.  A review of the Community Support Fund will be undertaken in 
the coming months and the countywide projects will form part of that review.   In 
relation to LEADER funding Mr. Scannell confirmed that once the Local Action 
Group has decided on the applications successful groups will be notified. 
 
17.03.27.04 Submission in respect of the National Planning Framework 
 
Mr. M. Scannell referred members to his report dated 27th March 2017 on Kerry 
County Council’s submission as part of the initial phase of consultation in the 
National Planning Framework development process.  With the aid of a 
PowerPoint presentation Mr. Scannell briefed members in detail on Kerry County 
Council’s draft submission. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan, Deputy Chief Executive highlighted that this is one of the most 
critical issues to come before Council.  Mr. Scannell’s Directorate compiled a 
comprehensive submission and developments in the next few years in the 
context of BREXIT and the US will have a significant impact on Ireland.  For the 
first time the National Planning Framework will be put on a legislative basis and 
for this reason it is important that a strong submission is made on behalf of the 
Council. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane stated as Chair of the Economic and Enterprise SPC this is a 
crucial document and the proposed corridor does not include Kerry and this must 
be addressed. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty stated the Taoiseach spoke earlier that day of the prospect of 
500,000 extra jobs therefore it is important that the south of the country secures 
as many of these as possible or they will all go to Dublin.  He knew a person who 
lives outside Killorglin who is considering moving to Dublin as the broadband in 
his area is inadequate. 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
20 of 53 
Cllr. D. Nolan welcomed the Draft Submission which is well thought out and 
balanced.  It introduces the idea of the internal economy and the possibilities for 
reaching outwards.  At the last meeting of the Southern Regional Assembly their 
Draft Submission was discussed and it was obvious that tourism and Tralee were 
omitted from the submission.  The Council’s submission is particularly strong and 
she hoped a wish list would be included in the Appendix to the new National 
Planning Framework.   
 
Cllr. J. Moloney stated it is proposed that Kerry would be excluded from the main 
economic corridors.  92% of international flights land in Dublin.  He asked if the 
idea of grouping Shannon, Kerry and Cork Airports will be supported by Clare 
and Cork. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill stated the IDA has failed Kerry over the last 20 years.  There is no 
point in having strategies if proper access via road, air and sea are not available.  
FEXCO acquired the Liebig Factory in Killorglin and they hope to create 300 to 
400 jobs there.  However the road leading to it is in a very poor condition and 
members and locals have been campaigning for a footpath for years.  Astellas 
were granted permission for a major extension but the road from the factory to 
Killorglin town is appalling. Cllr. Cahill called on TII to improve this road 
immediately.  When members visited the Liebherr facility they were informed that 
the Killarney factory is the only one the company has in the EU where there is 
room for expansion. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty welcomed the comprehensive submission and added that it is 
important that there is balanced development around the country.   
 
Cllr. G. Spring complimented Mr. Scannell and his staff on the excellent 
submission.  Following 10 years of being at a disadvantage in relation to regional 
aid Kerry is now entitled to the same grants as other counties.  Our competitive 
edge is that the cost of living is cheaper in Kerry.  Cllr. Spring emphasised the 
importance of the availability of a skilled workforce. 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy congratulated Mr. Scannell and his staff on the draft submission 
and added he hoped it would receive favourable consideration.  The submission 
mentions that access is critical and he requested an update on the Adare By-
Pass. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae complimented staff on the extensive submission.  Dublin 
airport is starving Cork Airport of business and this in turn is having an impact on 
Kerry.  The Bus strike is impacting on everyone and he called on the Minister to 
get involved with a view to resolving it.  In his opinion IDA Ireland and Connect 
Ireland are not working together and this is disappointing.  He approached the 
IDA regarding an investor who wanted to set up a business but they did not 
contact him.  Cllr. Healy-Rae stated there is a serious shortage of houses for 
letting and buying in the county.  Consideration should be given to the general 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
21 of 53 
area around Kilgobnet, Beaufort and also the reasons for refusals of permission 
in the Muckross area. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan informed members that he understood planning for the Adare 
By-Pass is progressing. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. B. O’Connell it was 
agreed to note and endorse the Kerry County Council submission in respect of 
the National Planning Framework. 
 
17.03.27.05 Implementation of Circular EL04/2017 (unwinding of FEMPI 
Legislation) and Circular LG 01/2017 (Expenses incurred by 
Elected Members) 
 
Ms. A. McAllen referred members to her report dated 16th March 2017 on this 
item which was circulated and she briefed them on the report. 
 
Cllr. B. O’Connell PROPOSED that we the members of Kerry County Council  
hereby approve the implementation of Circular EL04/2017 (unwinding of FEMPI 
Legislation) and Circular LG 01/2017 (Expenses incurred by Elected Members). 
 
Cllr. S. Fitzgerald SECONDED this proposal. 
 
A vote was taken on this proposal which resulted as follows: 
 
For: 
Cllrs. Connor-Scarteen, Culloty, Daly, Finucane, Fitzgerald, Foley, 
Grady, J. Healy-Rae, M. Healy-Rae, Kelleher, Kennelly, Locke, 
Lucid, D. McCarthy, P. McCarthy, Moloney, Moriarty, Nolan, 
O’Brien, O’Connell, Spring, Thornton (22) 
 
Against: 
None (0) 
 
Not Voting:  None (0) 
 
The Cathaoirleach declared the proposal CARRIED. 
 
17.03.27.06 Draft Development Contribution Scheme 2017 
 
Mr. M. Scannell referred members to his report dated 27th March 2017 on this 
item which was circulated. 
 
The Cathaoirleach informed members that the Draft Development Contribution 
Scheme was being put out to public consultation and it is for noting by members. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae asked that the existing Development Contribution Scheme for 
each Municipal District would be circulated to members. 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
22 of 53 
Cllr. P. Daly noted that Skate Parks are not included and neither is the big river 
walk. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. J. F. Flynn it was 
agreed to note the Draft Development Contribution Scheme 2017. 
 
17.03.27.07 Training and Development Programme for Councillors 2017  
 
Mr. L. Quinlan referred members to the Draft Training and Development 
Programme for Councillors 2017 which was circulated and he briefed them on 
the Programme. 
 
It was unanimously agreed to note the Training and Development Programme for 
Councillors 2017. 
 
17.03.27.08 Annual Report on the operations of Kerry Local Community 
Development Committee (LCDC) for the year ending 31st 
December 2016 
 
In introducing the LCDC Annual Report for 2016 Cllr. N. Moriarty, Chair of the 
LCDC paid tribute to all staff in the Community Department who do incredible 
work.  The changes have been well managed and good relationships 
established.  The programme implementers are the community development 
companies who are tried and trusted.  The time spent on nurturing these 
relationships has worked well.  In South Kerry a lot of good work is done with 
farmers etc.  In conclusion, Cllr. Moriarty highlighted there is a need to increase 
LEADER funding. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Moriarty, SECONDED by Cllr. S. Fitzgerald it was 
agreed to note the Annual Report on the operations of Kerry Local Community 
Development Committee (LCDC) for the year ending 31st December 2016. 
 
17.03.27.09 Date for a Special Meeting 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Moriarty, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Moloney it was 
agreed that a Special Meeting of Kerry County Council to consider the 2017 
Service Delivery Plan for the Operations Department incorporating the Roads 
Programme would be held on Monday 3rd April 2017 at 10.30am. 
 
17.03.27.10 Report on the Tourism, Culture, Arts and Recreation SPC 
 
It was unanimously agreed to note Cllr. R. Beasley’s written report on the 
meeting of the Tourism, Culture, Arts and Recreation SPC meeting held on the 
31st January 2017 which was circulated. 
 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
23 of 53 
17.03.27.11 Report on the Operations SPC 
 
It was unanimously agreed to note Cllr. M. Kennelly’s written report on the 
Operations SPC Meeting held on the 24th February 2017 which was circulated. 
 
17.03.27.12 Report on the Economic and Enterprise SPC  
 
It was unanimously agreed to note Cllr. J. Finucane’s written report on the 
Economic and Enterprise SPC Meeting held on the 14th March 2017 which was 
circulated. 
 
17.03.27.13 Summary of proceedings at events 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. S. Fitzgerald, SECONDED by Cllr. P. Connor-
Scarteen it was agreed to note the following reports on behalf of the Kerry 
County Council delegates that attended in accordance with Section 142(5)(f) of 
the Local Government Act 2001 as amended. 
 
(a) 
AILG Autumn Seminar held in Gorey, Co. Wexford on the 13th and 14th 
October 2016 by Cllr. M. Cahill. 
 
(b) 
Irish Council for Social Housing Conference held in Kilkenny on the 20th 
October 2016 by Cllr. B. O’Connell. 
 
(c) 
Conference on the theme “Rebuilding Ireland Action Plan for Housing & 
Homelessness” held in Carlingford, Co. Louth from 18th to 20th November 
2016 by Cllr. B. O’Connell. 
 
(d) 
Training on the theme “Audit Committees – Meeting Rising Expectations” 
held in Dublin on the 9th December 2016 by Cllr. B. O’Connell. 
 
(e) 
Conference on the theme “Rebuilding Ireland Action Plan for Housing and 
Homelessness” held in Carlingford, Co. Louth from 10th to 12th February 
2017 by Cllr. J. Finucane. 
 
17.03.27.14 Approval for the opening of a Tender 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Foley, SECONDED by Cllr. J.F. Flynn it was 
agreed to approve the opening of tenders for the supply of School Flashing 
Lights – Closing date: Thursday 6th April 2017 at 4pm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
24 of 53 
17.03.27.15 Notices of Motion 
 
1. 
Funding under the Coastal Protection Works Scheme 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Cahill PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council give a detailed breakdown of the specific areas in the 
County that they will be applying to the OPW in 2017 for funding under the 
Coastal Protection Works Scheme, the Minor Flood Relief Work Scheme and will 
the Council clarify what is the policy in regards to family homes that are prone to 
flooding and do not qualify under any of these Schemes. Will the Council 
consider introducing a specific budget to assist these families. 
 
The following reply issued: 
A dedicated business unit has been established to examine, assess and 
prioritize coastal protection works and flood relief works in the county, 
having regard to the flooding experienced in recent years, and to pursue 
funding options.  
 
To date, the Council has made an application to the OPW under the Minor 
Works Scheme for flood relief measures at Clieveragh, Listowel. The 
Council is currently completing the design for flood relief measures at 
Incherea, Currow and Foiladuane/Glenflesk and it is proposed that they will 
be submitted to the OPW shortly. The unit will also be assessing what 
works may be required to address the risk of flooding in Cahersiveen, 
following the heavy rainfall experienced last October.  
 
In relation to Coastal Protection Works, Consultants will need to be 
retained to undertake Coastal Risk Management Studies, with funding 
being sought from the OPW. The study areas will have to be prioritized 
having regard to a strategic risk assessment, particularly of those areas 
which have previously experienced coastal flooding and also where there 
is a potential risk of serious damage to strategic infrastructure. The 
procurement of the Consultants will require a detailed design brief, which 
will be prepared, when the designs for the flood relief measures above are 
complete. The Council is also engaging with NUI Galway and UCC, as 
partners in EU funding opportunities for various studies on coastal 
erosion.  
 
With regards individual properties that do not qualify under the above 
Minor Works Schemes, or indeed the CFRAMS level of economic 
justification, the two main options as highlighted in the CFRAMS Study are 
Individual Property Protection (IPP) or voluntary home-relocation. 
 
As part of this CFRAMS process, a national Inter-Departmental Flood Policy 
Coordination Group from a number of Government Departments was 
established to consider and develop these options. The government is 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
25 of 53 
expected to consider a report in tandem with the outcome of the draft Flood 
risk Management Plans in mid 2017. 
 
Minister of State with responsibility for the OPW, Mr. Seán Canney T.D., 
announced funding of €2m for the introduction of a once-off targeted 
Voluntary Homeowner Relocation Scheme in November 2016. This is a 
targeted humanitarian aid scheme for primary residential properties that 
flooded during the 2015 winter, and had flooded in previous years, to 
ensure those worst affected homeowners have a primary residence. The 
scheme is being piloted along the River Shannon. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill stated when the CFRAMS was presented to members he 
expressed his disappointment that areas such as Cromane and Incharee were 
not included as they have been highlighted on numerous occasions.  The land in 
these areas is low lying while the tides are getting higher.  Rossbeigh Spit was 
breached a number of years ago which resulted in a gap of over half a mile but 
now two other areas are on the verge of being breached.  Rossbeigh Spit is 
virtually gone and this will put huge pressure on low lying areas.  While he 
accepted that it is costly to address coastal erosion, Kerry is enduring more than 
most coastal counties.  Cllr. Cahill referred to the proposed Relocation Scheme 
recently announced by Minister Canney and he asked if the funding can be used 
for minor works to protect property.  There is also huge concern in the Maharees 
area.  Cllr. Cahill also requested an update on the Valentia Road, Caherciveen.  
The OPW Report on flooding is still awaited and he called on the Minister to 
provide additional funding.  He requested that a letter would issue to Minister 
Canney seeking a meeting with him. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn SECONDED the motion and the request for a meeting with 
Minister Canney and asked that the OPW would also be invited to attend. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan clarified that the recently announced funding was for relocation 
only. 
 
3. 
Human trafficking 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Gleeson PROPOSED: 
That any person convicted in an Irish Court of Law of involvement in human 
trafficking for the purpose of enslavement would receive a sentence of equal 
severity with that imposed on persons convicted of 1st Degree Murder. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson read the following statement into the record of the meeting: 
 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
26 of 53 
“March is probably a most appropriate month during which to propose this Motion 
as just 10 days ago we celebrated the feast day of our national saint, Patrick, 
who was a victim of both trafficking and enslavement.  So they are not new 
phenomenon. 
 
We may however be surprised to learn that both trafficking and enslavement are 
widespread in this so-called enlightened age.  It is believed that there are at least 
13,000 victims in Britain at this time. 
 
We recall fairly recently reading of a major court case in Britain where an 
extended Irish family were charged and found guilty of the enslavement of a large 
number of people. 
 
We have all heard of young females, quite often from poorer countries who came 
to this country in the belief that they were coming to be with family friends who 
had promised to secure them a respectable job.  They were to be sadly 
disillusioned on both counts.  In reality their Passports were seized, they were 
then most likely raped as a form of humiliation and subjugation and then 
condemned to a terrible life of prostitution which is probably the ultimate form of 
enslavement. 
 
Since 2009, 144 victims of human trafficking have been provided with legal 
services by the Legal Aid Board.  We can be quite certain that there are many 
others who have not been that fortunate and who continue to live sub human 
lives as slaves to pimps and selfish so-called clients.  Would we be shocked and 
surprised to learn that there are such victims in our very beautiful county!” 
 
In conclusion Cllr. Gleeson proposed his motion and asked that those found 
guilty of trafficking and enslavement would be most severely punished. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED the motion. 
 
4. 
Provide assistance to historical groups to document and preserve 
the oral, written and photographic history of our County 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council through its Library and Local Studies Service, would 
work with and assist local historical groups to document and preserve the oral, 
written and photographic history of our County. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has a dedicated Local History & Archives Section 
based at Library Headquarters, Tralee. This service provides support and 
guidance on an ongoing basis to several local historical groups and 
societies county wide, including the Kerry Archaeological & Historical 
Society which operates from Library HQ.  

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
27 of 53 
The library service continues to support study and research on the history 
of the county both through personal visits to libraries and by access to the 
growing range of online sources that continue to be made available. During 
2016, there were 5,289 visits to the Local History & Archives section while 
the various branch libraries deal with enquiries on a daily basis. The 
majority of the over 80 Kerry related publications during 2016 were 
researched to varying degrees through the Kerry library network. 
 
Over the past no. of years Kerry Library has enhanced public access to the 
archives collections it holds. Primarily among these is the digitisation of 
the majority of the 19th & 20th century Kerry newspapers and these are 
now accessible, fully searchable at each Kerry library. In addition the 
enhancement of the library catalogue and the ongoing development of 
finding aids to the sources already in the possession of Kerry Library 
assist local groups in a major way. 
 
Nationally, a range of sources, which were previously only available at the 
national institutions in Dublin or on microfilm at Library HQ in Tralee, have 
been made available online. These include the Tithe Applotment Books 
1820/30’s], the Griffith Valuations {1840’s], the 1901 & 1911 census and the 
1937/38 Schools Folklore Collection.  
 
There is an ongoing programme to digitise unique Kerry sources and thus 
further facilitate research and in 2017 for example it is planned to digitise 
The Taxpayers News newspaper [December 1957 – May 1961]. Further 
details of sources available at www.kerrylibrary.ie  
 
Kerry Library will continue to welcome local historical groups and 
societies, provide assistance in usage of relevant sources, view any 
relevant archives that are available for preservation and continue to add to 
the archive of the published history of the county. 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy stated based on the success of the initiative by the Killorglin 
Historical Society to archive the history of their area this could be extended to 
many towns and villages in the county.  He asked how his motion could be 
progressed. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn SECONDED the motion. 
 
Mr. J. Breen undertook to discuss the motion with the County Librarian and 
County Archivist to see how it can be progressed. 
 
 
 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
28 of 53 
5. 
List of Plant Hire and Haulage Contractors employed by Kerry 
County Council in 2016 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B. Cronin PROPOSED: 
To request that the Elected Members of this Council be provided with the full list 
of all Plant Hire and Haulage Contractors employed by Kerry County Council 
from January 1st 2016 to December 31st 2016 and the full amounts paid to each 
contractor. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The attached schedule provides details of the total payments made and 
accrued to Contractors in respect of the hire of plant/equipment and 
haulage services in the financial year 2016.  
 
The hire of plant and machinery for all Local Authorities is procured 
through a Multi-Party Framework Agreement (Tender process) for 2016 and 
a Dynamic Purchasing System for 2017. Following the evaluation of the 
tenders, only contractors who meet the requirements set out in the tender 
documentation are appointed to the Multi-Party Framework Agreement / 
Dynamic Purchasing System. Essentially this procurement arrangement 
takes the form of a short listing of qualifying contractors from which Local 
Authorities can look to award future contracts. In each Local Authority the 
available work is tendered among the qualified (shortlisted) framework 
contractors by means of mini-competition tenders via www.Supplygov.ie.  
 
When Kerry County Council purchasers (the “Buyer”) need to hire an item 
of plant, a mini-competition tender is created on www.Supplygov.ie  Once 
the tender is created and published, the SupplyGov system will generate an 
email to contractors who have been approved to the framework and 
expressed an interest in that type of plant e.g. Excavator. The request for 
tender includes specific information about the service required such as 
type of machine, pricing method (e.g. Rate per Hour with Driver) and will 
state the time limit available to Tenderers/Contractors to submit their 
response. It will also specify the selection criteria and the award procedure.  
 
The overall effectiveness of our works programme and the achievement of 
best return on the sizeable level of expenditure incurred, require that we 
carefully assess the plant hire on an ongoing basis, having regard to 
development of the SupplyGov Multi-Party Frameworks / Dynamic 
Purchasing System and effective use of the Financial Management System. 
Ongoing achievement of cost effectiveness/value for money and focus on 
achieving efficiencies in this expenditure area, as in all other activities, 
remains critically important to the Council.  
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
29 of 53 
As previously indicated to Council, it is planned during 2017 to centralise 
procurement across the County, with the initial pilot being plant hire 
expenditure.  
 
2016 Response 
 
PRIVATE - PLANT / EQUIPMENT HIRE AND HAULAGE SERVICES 2016:  
Name & Address  
Total  
Aska Sykes Ltd, Greenogue Business Park, Rathcoole, Co 
Dublin  
8,409.40 
Atlantic Cabins and Containers Ltd, Mount Mungret, Mungret, 
Co Limerick  
3,849.90 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
11,120.44 
BTM Drains Of Ireland Ltd ta Irish Drain Services, 4 Park 
Business Centre, Farranfore  
30,472.48 
Charleville Plant Hire (CPH), Kilmallock Road, Charleville, Co 
Cork  
24,135.06 
Clancy Plant Hire Ltd, Knockanure, Moyvane, Listowel, Co 
Kerry  
252,972.20 
Crean & McHugh t/a CMP, Grange, Killumney, Ovens, Co 
Cork  
57,550.00 
Cyril Wharton Plant Services Ltd, Lissataggle, Gortatlea, 
Tralee, Co Kerry  
3,542.40 
D & L Tool Hire Dingle, C/O D & L Tool Hire, Clash Industrial 
Estate, Tralee, Co Kerry  
7,198.57 
D and L Tool Hire, Clash Industrial Estate, Tralee, Co Kerry  
25,949.54 
Dan and John O'Driscoll Plant Hire Ltd., T/A O Driscoll Plant 
Hire, Tinnies, Valentia Island  
6,088.50 
Dave Power Plant Ltd, Owenacurra Business Park, 
Knockgriffin Road, Midleton, Co Cork  
34,855.74 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
54,597.50 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
2,228.23 
Dillons Waste Disposal, The Kerries, Tralee, Co Kerry  
104,897.57 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
5,169.06 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
174,306.07 
Eddie Stack, Agri and Plant Hire, Moyvane South, Moyvane, 
Co Kerry  
5,345.85 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
2,475.00 
Farran Plant Hire Ltd, Farran, Castleisland, Co Kerry  
70,979.64 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
30 of 53 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
167,570.85 
Frayden Haulage Ltd, Knocknaskeha, Killarney, Co Kerry  
12,982.67 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
15,557.70 
GPT Plant & Tool Hire (Cork), Little Island Ind Est, Little-
Island, Co Cork  
54,521.03 
GPT Plant & Tool Hire Commerical Estate(Galway), Tuam 
Road, , Co Galway  
9,168.15 
Healy-Rae Plant Hire Ltd, Main Street, Kilgarvan, Co Kerry  
183,049.35 
Higgins Waste & Recycling Services Ltd, The Kerries, Tralee, 
Co Kerry  
16,389.92 
Hireservices (I) Limited, T/A Hireservices, Plovervale, 
Castlebar, Co Mayo  
3,709.53 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
35,277.42 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
66,186.36 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
95,784.56 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
8,754.00 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
18,164.65 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
7,846.98 
Kelliher Crane & Hoist Ltd, Clashatlea, Ballymacelligott, 
Tralee, Co Kerry  
11,150.03 
Kerry Drain Services Ltd, Orchid House, Upper Park Road, 
Killarney, Co Kerry  
8,628.11 
Kerry Plant & Tool Hire Ltd, T/A Kerry Tool Hire & Allo Sales, 
Woodlands Ind Pk, Killarney  
5,180.12 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
70,406.59 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
48,637.87 
Killarney Waste Disposal Ltd, Aughacurreen, Killarney, Co 
Kerry  
104,839.53 
Kingdom Fast Hire Ltd, John Joe Sheehy Road, Tralee, Co 
Kerry  
27,860.98 
Leanes Tool Hire, Woodlands Industrial Estate, Killarney, Co 
Kerry  
41,811.82 
Lixnaw Plant Hire Ltd, T/A T McCarthy & Sons, 
Tullacremmin, Abbeydorney, Co Kerry  
91,723.15 
Mac Fuels & General Supplies Ltd, Ballylongford Road, 
9,424.80 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
31 of 53 
Clieveragh, Listowel, Co Kerry  
McSweeney Bros. Contracts Ltd., Mid Cork Tarmacadam, 
Manch, Ballineen, Co Cork  
6,600.00 
Michael F Quirke & Sons, Rangue, Killorglin, Co Kerry  
 
15,482.00 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
8,280.96 
Mike Cronin & Sons Limited, Coolnageragh, Currow, 
Farranfore, Co Kerry  
104,939.97 
ML Lynch Civil Engineering Ltd, Brewsterfield, Headford, 
Killarney, Co Kerry  
2,850.00 
Mr Patrick Lawlor t/a Green and Growing, Sackville, Ardfert, 
County Kerry  
3,632.00 
Murphy Tool Hire, Listellick North, Tralee, Co Kerry  
89,967.68 
Nicholas Browne & Son Limited, Clahananoe, Balinskelligs, 
Killarney, Co Kerry  
71,165.09 
Northgate Vehicle Hire Ltd, Norflex Ctr, 38 Rosemount 
Business Pk, Ballycoolin, Dublin 11  
42,649.23 
O Connor Kerry Haulage Ltd, 5 Clonmore Cottages, 
Boherbee, Tralee, Co Kerry  
2,595.30 
O Connors Hardware & Farm Supplies Ltd, Duagh, Listowel, 
Co Kerry  
100,390.31 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
54,053.84 
Pat O'Driscoll Civil Engineering Ltd, Woodfield, Castlefreke, 
Clonakilty, Co Cork  
29,009.00 
Randles Bros Fussa Kilgarvan Plant & Agri Hire Ltd, Fussa, 
Kilgarvan, Co Kerry  
29,587.19 
RT Hedge & Tree Cutting Limited, Mullin, Cordal, 
Castleisland, Co Kerry  
49,786.77 
Sandmore Ltd, Camp Cross, Tralee, Co Kerry  
122,490.00 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
53,643.76 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
3,874.50 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
24,083.40 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
27,535.12 
Name and address withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request.  
150,912.46 
Westpark Motor Co Ltd, Kylemore Park, West, Dublin 10  
7,232.40 
Miscellaneous Payments under €2,000 (25 Suppliers)  
16,247.60 
The Collector-General Reverse Charge Vat (Approx)  
243,215.10 
Total  
3,260,993.00 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
32 of 53 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin welcomed the reply. 
 
6. 
Call to simplify the Housing Application form 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Daly PROPOSED: 
That this Council will simplify the Housing Application form. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Part 2 of the Social Housing Assessment Regulations 2011 (S.I. No.84 of 
2011) states that all Housing Authorities are required to use the prescribed 
form of the housing application form.  
 
An Authority cannot amend the prescribed form but may add their own 
cover sheet or add an inset sheet which would allow them ask for some 
additional information.  
 
The information requested in the prescribed form is considered to be the 
minimum information that can be sought in respect of an application and 
this is the form that is in use by Kerry County Council. 
 
The Council will shortly be launching a new Easy Read Guide to 
Completion of Social Housing Support Applications. This Easy to Read 
Document was developed by Inclusion Ireland for the Housing Agency. The 
document was proof-read by men and women with a disability. This should 
assist those who may have difficulties with completion of the form. In 
addition the Housing Staff are available to assist any prospective applicant 
who may have difficulty completing the form. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly stated the Housing Application Form is 24 pages and a tenant 
applying for a Transfer or who wants to down size must complete this form.  They 
are also asked for a copy of their Birth Certificate even though they are already a 
tenant of the local authority.  Cllr. Daly requested that a shorter form would be 
permitted for those applying for a transfer. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley SECONDED the motion. 
 
8. 
Call on the Energy Regulator to review the application process 
regarding tariffs etc. for the Shannon LNG Project 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Finucane PROPOSED: 
In light of the recent statements by the Energy Regulator regarding the cost of 
energy in this country, that we ask him/her to review the entire application 
process regarding tariffs etc. of the Shannon LNG Project. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
33 of 53 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane stated the Office of the Energy Regulator has a number of 
Commissioners.  The cost of energy in Ireland is 49% more expensive that 
mainland Europe and this is because it is operated by a cartel.  There is now a 
change because of BREXIT and the majority of gas for the Irish market comes 
from Scotland and this will put extreme pressure on these companies who have 
over charged consumers for the past 8 or 9 years. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion. 
 
9. 
Call for an immediate restoration of funding for the Centre for 
Narcolepsy in St. James Hospital, Dublin 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Foley PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council calls on the Minister for Health, Mr. Simon Harris TD 
and the HSE to review, as a matter of urgency, the decision to cut funding for the 
Centre for Narcolepsy in St. James Hospital, Dublin and ensure the necessary 
financial support for such a vital service is put in place immediately. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley highlighted there is a large number of families who have family 
members who suffer from sleep issues.  Temple Street provides an excellent 
service but the problem arises when a child progresses to the adult service.  
There is insufficient staff with just 1 full time nurse specialist and 1 part time 
specialist in St. James Hospital.  She requested that a letter would issue both to 
the HSE and the Minister for Health outlining the urgent need for this facility. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion. 
 
10. 
Cost of the recount for the Listowel MD 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Moloney PROPOSED: 
What are the full costs involved in the recount in the Listowel Municipal District in 
February 2016. Have all costs been settled. 
 
The following reply issued: 
At this point not all Cost Accounts have been submitted for settlement. We 
are not in a position therefore to outline the final costs. When this matter 
has been concluded we will revert to Council with a report on the final 
position. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney welcomed the reply. 
 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
34 of 53 
12. 
Call for a grant for the installation of intruder alarms for over 66s 
living in rural areas 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.F. Flynn PROPOSED: 
To ask the Minister for Housing, Planning, Community and Local Government to 
review costing and feasibility for the provision of a grant to install monitored 
intruder alarms for over 66s living in rural areas, in light of the increase in rural 
crime and break-ins. The current senior alert scheme does not act as a deterrent 
to intruders and does not allay fears of older people who are vulnerable. I call on 
the Minister to make a statement on the matter. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn stated rural crime and burglaries increased substantially in 2017.  
The Community Alert system gives some peace of mind but adequate measures 
are not being taken to address this problem.  Cllr. Flynn called on the Minister to 
subsidise the installation of house alarms to give security to the elderly in their 
own homes. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill SECONDED the motion and stated the elderly living alone 
particularly in Killorglin and Mid Kerry need comfort. 
 
13. 
Call to address the social housing shortage 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. R. Beasley PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council take immediate steps to address the serious issue 
regarding the shortage of social houses in Ballybunion and throughout the 
County. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Details of the current Housing Construction Programme have been 
provided to Members at previous Meetings.  Following the completion of 
the most recent Housing Needs Analysis we are currently scoping the 
further phase of our Construction Programme for agreement with the 
Department. 
 
At this point it is proposed that the construction of a number of Units in 
Ballybunion will be included in those proposals. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley called for the construction of housing in Ballybunion as there is 
substantial demand there. 
 
Cllr. D. Nolan SECONDED the motion. 
 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
35 of 53 
14. 
Call to put a deer management plan in place for Killarney National 
Park 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.J. Culloty PROPOSED: 
That this Council call on the Manager of Killarney National Park to put a deer 
management plan in place immediately. Also to place information signage at 
entrances to the Park which would inform the public about staying safe in the 
Park. This information must include simple measures that can be taken to reduce 
the risk of Tick bites. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty stated there is a problem in Killarney National Park with the 
number of red deer and they should be culled as they are doing a lot of damage 
to the National Park.  It is important that this is carried out immediately.  Signage 
should also be put in place at the entrance to the Park to highlight the dangers of 
Lyme disease to visitors. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher SECONDED the motion. 
 
15. 
Plans for tourism promotion in 2017    
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen PROPOSED: 
What are Kerry County Council's plans in terms of tourism promotion in 2017? 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council’s Tourism Unit work through the Destination Kerry 
Tourism Forum and local tourism groups and businesses, to help promote 
Kerry at home and abroad.  
 
The Tourism Strategy contains several short, medium and long-term 
actions aimed at ensuring Kerry remains a market leader while 
differentiating itself in the crowded marketplace. Several of these actions 
are currently being progressed by the Tourism Unit including:  
 
• Attendance at international promotional events provides a great 
opportunity to create demand and engage with tour operators. 
Already this year, with the help of Failte Ireland and Tourism Ireland, 
some local businesses attended promotional events in Stuttgart in 
Germany and also at ITB Berlin - the worlds leading travel trade 
show. Later this month, a number of our tourism attractions will be 
represented at Meitheal 2017 – Failte Ireland’s biggest trade show 
exclusively for trade, where overseas tour operators can make direct 
bookings. Having a Kerry presence at these shows is extremely 
important and the Destination Kerry Tourism Forum and Kerry 
County Council recognise their potential to help sell the county as a 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
36 of 53 
must-see destination, with wide availability of authentic visitor 
packages.  
 
• The development of a new clear and compelling tourism brand for 
Kerry, based on our strengths and characteristics will be launched 
shortly and communicated to a diverse audience across all 
platforms.  
 
• Both Failte Ireland and Tourism Ireland work in close partnership 
with the Tourism Unit on the promotion of the Wild Atlantic Way, 
adventure tourism, heritage and culture, and events and festivals. 
The Tourism Unit are active partners in the Skellig Coast Visitor 
Experience Development Programme – a pilot project for the entire 
Wild Atlantic Way. The Skellig Coast Visitor Experience Development 
Plan and Skellig Coast Tourism Network were launched in 
Ballinskelligs in January 2017 by our Chief Executive along with Ms 
Orla Carroll, Director Failte Ireland. The Tourism Unit will be working 
closely with the network to develop a strategic plan to broaden 
appeal and increase dwell time in the region by developing 
compelling and motivating attractions/experiences for our national 
and international visitors.  
 
• Social media is now a key marketing tool for destination marketing 
and forms a key part of our marketing plan. The Tourism Unit’s 
facebook and twitter pages have a growing number of followers and 
our interactive events calendar ensures events and festivals 
throughout the county, both big and small, are promoted on our 
social media platform.  
 
• The Tourism Unit continues to work closely with the local 
community, UCC, CIT and Blackrock Observatory, Failte Ireland, 
Udaras na Gaeltachta and SKDP to ensure the potential of the Kerry 
Dark Sky Reserve in South Kerry is maximised and that this niche 
tourism opportunity is exploited. Following on the success of an 
accredited night sky guides course in 2016, further training 
opportunities will be provided in May this year. The feasibility of 
providing a mobile observatory for use throughout the reserve is 
also being investigated.  
 
• The Unit is liaising with the Kerry Convention Bureau, the Chambers 
and Failte Ireland to support and grow Business Tourism in the 
county. A Wild Atlantic Way Conference is to be held in Kerry in early 
Summer 2017, which will bring together representatives from both 
the public and private sectors in counties all along this 2,500 km 
touring route.  
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
37 of 53 
• The Tourism Strategy recognises the importance of food tourism and 
Kerry County Council in collaboration with Taste Kerry and Failte 
Ireland is working to ensure Kerry gains a reputation as a food 
experience region. The Taste Kerry Food Trail, which includes 
several food and drink producers, bars, restaurants, accommodation 
providers, retailers, farmers markets and food festivals throughout 
the county, where local Kerry produce can be enjoyed, was officially 
launched on the 8th March 2017. The Tourism Unit has worked 
closely with Taste Kerry on their re-branding, website launch and 
food trail development to ensure an enhanced experience for visitors 
to the county.  
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen welcomed the reply. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn SECONDED the motion. 
 
16. 
Call for a School Traffic Warden for Fossa National School 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council if they are going to provide the funding for a School 
Traffic Warden which has been promised for a long time for Fossa National 
School on the National Secondary Road. 
 
The following reply issued: 
No commitment was given on the provision of a school warden service at 
Fossa National School. A commitment was given that the Council would 
examine the location with An Garda Siochana, the T.I.I. and school 
management in relation to the concerns raised by the members of the 
Killarney Municipal District, which are on-going. A number of options have 
been examined including greater usage of the car park in the adjoining 
community centre.  
 
Further updates on the on-going discussions will be provided at the 
Killarney MD meetings. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae stated she understood a commitment was given that funding 
would be provided for a School Traffic Warden at Fossa National School.  She 
appreciated the engagement with An Garda Siochana and TII.  There is very 
heavy traffic on this road and it is dangerous. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson SECONDED the motion. 
 
 
 
 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
38 of 53 
17. 
Revised Casual Trading and Beach Bye-Laws  
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Lucid PROPOSED: 
Will Kerry County Council have the revised/updated Casual Trading and Beach 
Bye Laws ready for implementation ahead of the 2017 tourist season.  
 
The following reply issued: 
A report on Casual Trading throughout the County was recently presented 
to the members of the Operations SPC. In relation to our beaches, there 
has been very little demand for casual trading licences, though it is an 
objective of our Tourism Strategy and Action Plan to promote water sports 
and outdoor activities, The exception to this has been Banna beach, where 
there is a very strong demand for casual trading licences, particularly for 
water sport activities and the provision of refreshments. However, it is 
recognized that this has to be balanced with the needs of others using the 
car park and therefore requires regulation to ensure the safe use of the 
facilities by all visitors.     
 
The draft Banna Beach Casual Trading Bye-Laws were published last week, 
following a briefing to the Tralee MD members. The draft Bye-Laws provide 
for an increase in the casual trading area, allowing for additional service 
providers. Concerns raised by members in recent years have also been 
addressed in the new Byelaws. It is proposed to monitor the impact of the 
new Bye-Laws over the coming year and review how they may be applied in 
other areas of the county to promote the development of other activities.  
 
It is proposed to have a report on any submissions received, on the draft 
Bye-Laws, prepared for consideration by the Tralee MD members in May. 
 
Cllr. J. Lucid welcomed the reply and the public consultation on the Banna Beach 
Casual Trading Bye-Laws.  User needs must be taken into account when the 
Bye-Laws are being finalized.  He asked if the Car Park Bye-Laws would be 
reviewed to address the ongoing issue of camper vans parking overnight on 
beach car parks. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley SECONDED the motion. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan highlighted that the most pressing matter is the review of the 
Casual Trading Banna Beach Bye-Laws.  The issue of camper vans parking is a 
broader issue for the entire county.  A pilot programme has been put in place at 
Inch Beach for the summer and this will be reviewed and it will inform further 
proposals for other beaches. 
 
 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
39 of 53 
18. 
Call on the Road Safety Authority to reconsider the implementation 
of NCTs for tractors 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
To ask the Road Safety Authority to reconsider the implementation of NCTs for 
tractors. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy stated the requirement that tractors must undergo an NCT will 
cause further hardship for farmers.  He asked where the test centres will be 
located.  If a tractor must be brought from Lauragh to Killarney it will take a long 
time and will cause delays for other traffic on the road.  While it is intended that 
this will apply only to contractors initially he believed it will apply to all tractors in 
due course.   
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae then moved Notice of Motion No. 31 which also related to this 
topic. 
 
31. 
Proposal to introduce an NCT/DOE on tractors 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council writes to Minister Shane Ross with regards to the 
proposal to introduce an NCT/DOE on tractors, as this proposal is unrealistic. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae highlighted that the key issue is that tractors are agricultural 
vehicles and many do not leave the yard.  This proposal will have an adverse 
impact on the farming community and will put onerous restrictions on farmers.  
There is no Test Centre from Castleisland to Iveragh and back to Tralee and this 
is a large area.  Cllr. Healy-Rae stated he was opposed to this proposal. 
 
These motions were unanimously agreed. 
 
19. 
Acting positions in the Fire Service and the timeframe for filling 
these positions 
 
Cllr. D. Grady declared in accordance with Section 177 of the Local Government 
Act that members of his family are employed in the Fire Service and he would 
leave the meeting while Notice of Motion No. 19 was being taken. 
 
Cllr. Grady then left the meeting. 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
40 of 53 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. Nolan PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council confirm the percentage of acting positions by grade 
within our Fire Service and outline the time frame for filling these acting positions 
on a permanent basis. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Of the 108 positions within the retained fire service there are currently 19 of 
the positions being filled in an acting capacity. i.e.  17.6% of staff positions 
within the retained fire service. The permanent filling of these positions will 
be done on a staggered basis starting with the most senior acting positions. 
 
Cllr. Nolan asked what the timescale is for the filling of the acting posts. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill SECONDED the motion. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue stated arrangements will be made in the near future to 
advertise and fill these positions. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady then returned to the meeting. 
 
20. 
Charging of levies on masts 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
Mobile phone coverage mast operators are saying that Kerry County Council are 
one of 3 Counties charging levies on masts and that this is one of the main 
reasons our coverage has not improved. Are we charging levies and if so, how 
much. 
 
The following reply issued: 
There are, at present, four development contribution schemes in existence 
in County Kerry. Three of these apply to developments in the administrative 
areas of the former Tralee, Killarney and Listowel Town Councils. There are 
no development contributions for telecommunication masts specified in 
these three schemes.  
 
The fourth development contribution scheme, Kerry County Councils, 
applies to development outside of the administrative boundaries of the 
former Town Councils.  This scheme specifies the following levies for 
telecommunication masts:  
 
• Permission for new masts: €7000 for roads and €7000 for amenity, total 
contribution => €14,000 
• Retention of existing masts:  €14000 (for Amenity).  
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
41 of 53 
The proposed new Development Contribution Scheme replaces the four 
schemes currently in force with a single County wide scheme. This scheme 
proposes a levy for telecommunications masts as follows:  
 
• €5,000 for roads and transport + €5,000 for community and amenity, Total 
contribution => €10,000 
 
The proposed new Development Contribution Scheme also includes a full 
waiver for all masts which form part of the National Broadband Scheme 
(NBS) as defined by the Department of Communication, Energy and Natural 
Resources (DCENR) and the Community Broadband Scheme. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae acknowledged there must be development levies but he did 
not believe levies should be charged for masts as they are very small.  Kerry is 
one of just 3 counties charging levies on mobile phone masts.  He understood 
the Minister is about to publish a report but he will not insist on the 
implementation of the recommendations in the 3 counties that charge levies.  
Kerry needs more masts and he called on Management to review this charge.  
Cllr. Healy-Rae acknowledged that the charge is reduced to €10,000 in the new 
Scheme but he believed this charge is counter productive.  In conclusion he 
called on officials to contact mobile phone companies on this issue.  
 
Mr. M. Scannell brought members attention to the last paragraph of the reply 
which states that the proposed new Development Contribution Scheme includes 
a full waiver for all masts which form part of the National Broadband Scheme 
(NBS) as defined by the Department of Communication, Energy and Natural 
Resources (DCENR) and the Community Broadband Scheme. 
 
21. 
Inscription of the age of the deceased person on their headstone 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Gleeson PROPOSED: 
That next of kin would, in the interest of historical fact, favourably consider the 
inscription of the age of the deceased person on the headstone over her/his 
grave. Such information may in the future years be of considerable interest to 
historians and genealogists. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson stated very many people come to Ireland to trace their roots and 
to visit the ancestral homestead and the graveyard where their forebears lie.  It 
can be very disappointing for them on locating the grave to find that the dates of 
birth and death are not inscribed.  Inscribing facts on a headstone is not 
betraying a secret and it can and often does serve to inform and enrich.  The 
dates on headstones can and do also inform of how times past were from the 
perspectives of health and longevity.   
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
42 of 53 
The Franciscan Friary in Killarney has a little graveyard beside the Church in 
which 34 people are interred.  Of those born in the 19th century, 13 of the 24 died 
before the age of 50, ie 54%.  Of the 10 born in the 20th century, 3 died before 
age 50, ie 30%.  That little piece of history shows how life expectancy has greatly 
extended in 60 or 70 years.  It shows the impact of the introduction of Penicillin 
and other aspects of modern medicine and nutrition.  It also shows how 
inscriptions on headstones can reveal history. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher SECONDED the motion. 
 
22. 
Call for replacement of Listry Bridge 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B. Cronin PROPOSED: 
I am requesting the immediate allocation of funding and a timeline of works for 
the full replacement of Listry Bridge on the R563 tourist route where two vehicles 
cannot pass. Council Management informed the Killarney MD Members last year 
that there was no funding available for bridge replacement and recently €2m has 
been allocated to replace Dysart Bridge where two vehicles can pass. 
 
The following reply issued: 
This motion has been moved on a number of occasions at Killarney MD 
meetings. As previously stated, the cost of widening this bridge would be 
of the order of €750,000 and the cost of a new structure would be of the 
order of €2 million.  The only funding mechanism previously available for 
such works was through the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport’s 
Specific Improvement Grant Scheme.  
 
There is very limited funding available nationally under the Specific 
Improvement Grant programme and the Department have advised that for 
the foreseeable future, given the constraints on funding and the priority in 
improving the non-national road surface, any funding under this 
programme will only be on the basis of the strategic importance of the 
route. Kerry County Council made a strong case to the Department for 
improvement works on the access route to Fenit harbour, given its 
importance to Liebherr Container Cranes expansion proposals in Killarney 
and were successful in securing €400,000 towards necessary improvement 
works on the Tralee – Fenit road for this reason.  
 
In 2016 road safety works were carried out at Listry Bridge including 
kerbing, surfacing, signing and lining.  
 
There is adequate capacity on the bridge to accommodate the traffic 
volumes on this road, notwithstanding that the road safety works now 
require that traffic approaching the bridge give way to oncoming traffic on 
the bridge, similar to other locations in the county and nationally.   
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
43 of 53 
Dysert Bridge is located on the N23 National Primary Killarney to Limerick/ 
Dublin route, for which the T.I.I. are the funding authority, and which is of 
strategic importance, also providing access to Kerry Airport. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin stated this is a critically important issue.  Since he was first elected 
he has highlighted that just one vehicle can cross Listry Bridge at a time.  This is 
a major access route and funding of €750,000 has not been provided to widen 
the bridge while €2m was allocated for a new bridge at Dysart where two vehicles 
can pass safely.  He wrote to Shane Ross who advised him that Kerry County 
Council must make the decision to have a new design drawn up for Listry Bridge.  
Yet there is no indication that funding will be allocated for it.  Cllr. Cronin 
requested an explanation as to why funding was provided for Dysart Bridget but 
not Listry Bridge.   
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher SECONDED the motion. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan pointed out that two different funding authorities are responsible 
for the bridges.  Dysart Bridge was included in a programme for bridges compiled 
by TII on national routes.  Kerry County Council is leading out a programme of 
works on bridges on regional routes on behalf of a number of local authorities.  
The Department of Transport has clarified that the only funding available for 
bridges is the Specific Improvement Grant.  Kerry County Council is one of a few 
local authorities getting funding under this Programme for the Tralee/Fenit road.  
There is no point in preparing a design for Listry Bridge when the Department of 
Transport has clearly stated funding will not be available unless a strong strategic 
case can be made. 
 
24. 
Review of the Free Legal Aid System 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.F. Flynn PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Justice, Ms Frances Fitzgerald 
to look at a system for Free Legal Aid where if someone had over three 
convictions, they would not qualify for the Free Legal Aid or that after three 
convictions, they would have to pay it back in some way. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn stated where a person has in excess of three convictions the cost 
of the Free Legal Aid should be deducted from social welfare payments or taken 
from their assets.  It is the same people who are up in Court and the elderly are 
afraid to come out at night.  The law should be changed to ensure a fairer system 
which would discourage crime. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill SECONDED the motion. 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
44 of 53 
Cllr. P. Daly stated the motion is out of order as Free Legal Aid is a constitutional 
right.  In real life some people are charged when they should not be charged 
while others get convictions when they should not. 
 
It was agreed to refer the resolution to the Minister for Justice for consideration. 
 
Cllr. D. Nolan declared that in accordance with Section 177 of the Local 
Government Act 2001 that she is employed by the OPW Visitors Services and 
she would leave the meeting while Notice of Motion 25 was being considered. 
 
Cllr. Nolan then left the meeting. 
 
25. 
Call to acquire Daniel O’Connell, The Liberator’s Birthplace 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Cahill PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council make a very special case and call on the OPW and 
the Government to acquire, on behalf of the State and the Irish people, one of 
Kerry's remaining greatest treasures, Daniel O'Connell, The Liberator's 
Birthplace, Carhan, Caherciveen. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill stated Daniel O’Connell The Liberator was born at Carhen, 
Cahirciveen in 1775.  He was adopted by his wealthy uncle the hunting captain 
O’Connell of Derrynane and educated to Barrister level.  He was educated at St. 
Omer and Douai in France.  He entered Lincoln’s Inn in London and qualified in 
1794 and he qualified from King’s Inn in Dublin in 1796.   
 
Daniel O’Connell made a major speech opposing the Act of Union 1800.  He 
founded the Catholic Board in 1811 and the Catholic Association in 1823.  He 
was elected M.P. for Clare in 1828 when he forced new legislation to allow 
Catholics in to Parliament.  He was elected MP for Kerry in 1830 and was the first 
catholic Lord Mayor of Dublin in 1841.   
 
Cllr. Cahill PROPOSED that the ruins of the House at Carhen, Cahirciveen and 
the surrounding plot, the birthplace of the great Liberator Daniel O’Connell be 
purchased by the State before it deteriorates further and that it be preserved and 
made into a national visitor attraction.   
 
Cllr. Cahill stated the great interest in the life and work of Daniel O’Connell 
inspired great men like Martin Luther King and Mahatma Gandhi and others to 
fight for justice and equality by peaceful and non-violent means.  There is a 
growing and awakening interest in the life’s work of this great Irishman who was 
against discrimination of all kinds religious or otherwise and his active support 
against slavery in the United States and the discrimination against the Jewish 
community were testament to his international stature as a successful political 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
45 of 53 
pacifist.  The huge crowds of tourists now stopping daily at his birthplace and the 
establishment of the successful annual Daniel O’Connell Summer School at 
Cahirciveen, make a compelling case for this monument of his birthplace to be 
preserved by the nation.   
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. Nolan then returned to the meeting. 
 
28. 
Call to seek extra funding to repair roads in North Kerry 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Lucid PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council seek extra funding from the Department of Transport, 
Tourism and Sport towards the cost of repair of our roads especially in North 
Kerry where many of our roads are in an appalling condition and are in urgent 
need of repair. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The funding provided by the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport, 
for the non-national roads is allocated for the entire County. Funding for 
improvement works to the national road network, (including the N69 Tralee 
Listowel Limerick Road and the N67 Tarbert – Ferry Road) is provided by 
the TII, based on condition surveys carried out independently by the TII.  
 
A grant allocation of €15,273,049 was received from the Department of 
Transport, Tourism and Sport for the maintenance and improvement of the 
local and regional (non-national) road network. In this grant allocation, the 
Council received additional funding of €797,000 under the Restoration 
Improvement Programme in 2017. The Restoration Maintenance Grant of 
€1.95 m, which is for the surface dressing of roads is the same as last year.  
The grant funding allocated to Kerry is distributed across the Municipal 
Districts based primarily on the length of road in each Municipal District.  
 
However, the critical under funding of road maintenance and improvement 
is recognized by the Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport, in the 
framework strategy "Investing in our Transport Future - A Strategic 
Investment Framework for Land Transport", published in August 2015, in 
which it is acknowledged that a significant investment was required to 
maintain the road network in it's current state, notwithstanding any 
investment required to bring the condition of many of our roads up to an 
adequate standard.  
 
In a recent survey of the road network in Kerry, almost 50% of our local 
roads have been identified as being in a poor condition and requiring state 
funding for improvement works. 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
46 of 53 
Cllr. J. Lucid stated in 2017 the allocation for local road restoration and 
improvement was approx. 60% of the 2008 allocation.  In the mean time costs 
have increased e.g. tar, cost of machinery etc.  Therefore we are nowhere near 
achieving a proper maintenance in fact we are going backwards.  It is no wonder 
then that the roads in the county and particularly in North Kerry are consistently 
deteriorating and in decline and unless there is a significant intervention matters 
will get worse. 
 
This is totally unacceptable, for example the road from Lowe’s Cross, Ballyheigue 
to the Lodge Cross, Causeway is in a terrible condition.  Given that this road is 
part of the WAW makes the situation ridiculous.  It only seems logical that if Fáilte 
Ireland would spend money promoting a route that the roads on the route are 
maintained in a satisfactory condition.  There are other roads such as the Dale 
Road which has been spoken about on numerous occasions.  Then there is the 
road from Ballylongford to Ballydonoghue and sections of this road are so bad 
that one could question the fact that it is open at all.  This is the main road from 
Limerick to Ballybunion, Ballyduff, Causeway and Ballyheigue. 
 
In 2016 there were five deputations to the Listowel MD with groups pleading to 
have something done with their road but members were not in a position to help. 
 
Cllr. Lucid also asked why the LIS was not re-instated in 2017.  This Scheme 
gave support to people living on private roads and who were willing to make a 
contribution themselves.  Since 2011 these people have been totally neglected, 
abandoned and treated with utter disrespect by the State. 
 
Cllr. Lucid then referred to staffing levels.  Kerry County Council staff do an 
excellent job with the resources they have, but there is not enough staff on the 
ground.  Local knowledge has been lost and drains, gullies and inlets are not 
routinely cleared and opened.  Then in times of heavy rain there is severe 
flooding as happened on Friday 3rd March.  Significant investment is needed now 
or the situation will continue to get worse and the level of investment required will 
continue to increase. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley SECONDED the motion. 
 
29. 
Call to transport children from urban areas to rural areas to attend 
National Schools 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
To ask both the Minister for Transport and Minister for Education to consider 
transporting children from urban areas to rural areas to attend National Schools. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
47 of 53 
Cllr. D. McCarthy stated big schools in towns are looking for extensions while 
some rural schools have only 2 or 3 teachers.  He called on the Ministers for 
Transport and Education to pay the cost of transporting children to rural schools.  
This would help to sustain rural schools and would relieve the pressure on the 
larger schools in towns. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion. 
 
30. 
Types of social housing being considered by Kerry County Council 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council to explain if there are single bed, two beds or even 
four beds for larger families being considered for housing developments in the 
County. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Housing Programme includes the provision of various types of Units 
apart from the more traditional 3 bed units. The Housing Construction 
Programme has regard to the demand and need for units/ units types 
identified in our Housing Needs Analysis/ Housing Waiting List. 
 
Kerry County Council’s current Housing Construction Programme as 
outlined to Members previously includes multiple unit types as follows; 
 
8 No. four bedroom units (construction of one house has commenced)  
57 No. two bedroom units (construction of four units has commenced)  
12 No. one bedroom units 
 
In addition the Programme provides for the construction of a large multi-
bedroom unit responding to an actual specific need in a particular case. 
 
The Programme also provides 2 No. five bedroom units. 
 
Kerry County Council works in partnership with and supports and monitors 
Approved Housing Body Programmes – their current programme has 
committed to provide 25 No. two bedroom units and 20 No. one bedroom 
units and these projects are in progress. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae asked when construction of the 12 No. one bedroom units 
would commence.  The greatest demand for housing is from single people who 
cannot afford to rent in the private market and they must be catered for.  Single 
parents with a child also find it difficult to get a 2 bed house.  She asked when the 
57 No. two bedroom units will commence.  Cllr. Healy-Rae pointed out that the 
12 houses to be constructed in Killarney will all be 3 bed units. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher SECONDED the motion. 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
48 of 53 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue undertook to forward details of the Capital Programme to 
members. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady highlighted that he was totally opposed to 1 bed units. 
 
32. 
Table and Chair Tax 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. R. Beasley PROPOSED: 
That this Council will not follow other Local Authorities and start introducing a 
Table and Chair Tax for people eating and drinking outside bars and restaurant 
premises. 
 
The following reply issued: 
It is a statutory obligation to obtain a license under Section 254 of the 
Planning and Development Acts 2000-2016 to erect, construct, place or 
maintain specified structures on, under, over or along a public road.  
Article 201 of the Planning And Development Regulations 2001 - 2015 
specifies that a table and chairs outside a hotel, restaurant, public house or 
other establishment where food is sold for consumption on the premises 
are specified structures that are to be licensed under Section 254. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley asked how much does a license cost and he pointed out that 
these businesses are already paying rates. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher SECONDED the motion. 
 
Mr. M. Scannell informed members that the standard charge is €125 for a table 
and 4 chairs and this charge is set nationally. 
 
33. 
Dog License Renewals 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Kelleher PROPOSED: 
When Kerry County Council issues Dog License Renewals, that all options to 
renew are outlined with similar significance, not just promoting the online renewal 
as has been done. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The current Dog Licence reminders do outline with similar significance all 
options to renew.  Customers are asked to renew Dog Licence in one of the 
following ways: 
 
• On-line at https://payments.kerrycoco.ie 
• At your local Post Office 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
49 of 53 
For the benefit and convenience of customers wishing to use our on-line 
services, an additional instruction sheet is included with the reminders 
listing how to access the service on-line. The online system allows owners 
to include additional and amend existing information also without having to 
contact Kerry County Council directly. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher stated this is taking business from Post Offices.  His mother is a 
Post Mistress and the second page sent out with renewal notices is encouraging 
online renewal.  Both options to renewal a dog license should get the same 
prominence.  He asked that the second sheet would not longer issue with 
renewal notices. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy SECONDED the motion and added it is vital that Post Offices 
are supported.  It is important also that all dog owners would license their dogs. 
 
Mr. J. Breen undertook to comply with Cllr. Kelleher’s request not to send out the 
second instructions sheet with dog license renewal notices going forward. 
 
34. 
Broadband service in the county 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.J. Culloty PROPOSED: 
That this Council call on the Minister for Communications, Climate Action & 
Environment to explain when we can expect to have a modern broadband 
service in this County. The current level of service is unacceptable and is a 
barrier for many companies who wish to set up here. 
 
The following reply issued: 
While this is a matter of resolution by the Members Kerry County Council 
have appointed a broadband officer as recommended in the recent ‘Report 
of the Mobile Phone and Broadband Task Force’. The Broadband officer 
will act as a single point of contact for engagement with operators within 
the local authority and will assist with accelerated rollout of the National 
Broadband Plan. It should also be noted that   there is high speed 
broadband available in parts of the County. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty stated broadband is good in some towns but not in many rural 
areas.  Delegates at a recent conference were informed that in Europe 24% of 
people work from home but in Ireland just 5% of people work from home.  The 
lack of an adequate broadband service is stifling business.  In the context of 
BREXIT jobs may be gained but these are likely to be in Dublin.  A better 
broadband service is urgently required for rural Ireland. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion. 
 
 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
50 of 53 
Emergency Motion 
 
Cllr. D. Nolan then moved the following emergency motion. 
 
“That Kerry County Council call on the Minister for Transport to meet with Unions 
regarding the National Bus Strike as a matter of urgency for our rural county with 
a limited rail service this is a vital service.” 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley SECONDED the motion. 
 
17.03.27.16 Correspondence – Conferences and Seminars 
 
(a)  
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Kelleher, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Sheahan it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of the Cathaoirleach, Cllr. M. 
O’Shea at the Pride of Place Awards in Belfast on the 26th November 
2016. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Kelleher, SECONDED by Cllr. J.J. Culloty it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllrs. Cahill, Flynn and Quigg at 
the Conference “The Fair Deal Scheme” held in Carlingford, Co. Louth 
from 10th to 12th March 2017. 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.F. Flynn, SECONDED by Cllr. S. Fitzgerald it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllrs. O’Connell and Kelleher at 
the Conference on the theme “The Finance Act 2016” held in Clonakilty, 
Co. Cork from 24th to 26th March 2017. 
 
 
Cllr. Kelleher was nominated to report back to Council on this Conference. 
 
(d) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. B. Cronin, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Moloney it 
was agreed to authorise the attendance of the Cathaoirleach, Cllr. M. 
O’Shea at the Tourism Seminar to be held in Enniscorthy, Co. Wexford on 
the 29th and 30th March 2017. 
 
 
Cllr. O’Shea was nominated to report back to Council on this Seminar. 
 
(e) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.J. Culloty, SECONDED by Cllr. J.F. Flynn it 
was agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllrs. O’Connell, Kelleher, 
Beasley, J. Healy-Rae, M. Healy-Rae, Finucane, Lucid, Purtill, Fitzgerald 
and Sheahan at the IPI Conference on the theme “Reimagining Planning 
System” to be held in Westport, Co. Mayo from 5th to 7th April, 2017. 
 
 
Cllr. Beasley was nominated to report back to Council on this Conference. 
 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
51 of 53 
(f) 
No member expressed an interest in attending the Conference on the 
theme “Social Media Training for Councillors” to be held in Clonakilty, Co. 
Cork on the 19th and 20th April 2017. 
 
(g) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.F. Flynn, SECONDED by Cllr. J.J. Culloty it 
was agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllrs. O’Connell, Kelleher, J. 
Healy-Rae and M. Healy-Rae at the Conference on the theme “LGAS – An 
Overview of the work of Local Government Auditors Services” to be held in 
Clonakilty, Co. Cork from 21st to 23rd April 2017. 
 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae was nominated to report back to Council on this 
Conference. 
 
17.03.27.17 Correspondence General 
 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were 
circulated. 
 
1.  
Letter dated 20th February 2017 from Revenue in response to a resolution from 
Kerry 
County 
Council 
regarding 
excise 
duty 
applied 
to 
specific 
champagnes/sparkling wines. 
2.  
Letter dated 20th February 2017 from University Hospital Kerry in response to a 
resolution from Kerry County Council calling for a change to free parking at UHK 
from 20 minutes to at least 45 minutes. 
 
3.  
Email from the Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport in response to a resolution 
from Kerry County Council regarding the retention of Expressway Routes to Kerry. 
 
4.  
Email from the Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport in response to a resolution 
from Kerry County Council regarding the payment of a subsidy or tax relief scheme 
for taxi drivers in rural areas. 
 
5.  
Letter dated 21st February 2017 from the Office of the Minister for State at the 
Department of Arts, Heritage, Regional, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs in response to a 
resolution from Kerry County Council regarding the Post Office Network. 
 
6.  
Letter dated 21st February 2017 from the Department of Social Protection in 
response to a resolution from Kerry County Council regarding the closure of the 
Community Welfare Office in Ballyduff. 
 
7.  
Letter dated 1st March 2017 from the National Transport Authority in response to a 
resolution from Kerry County Council regarding Bus Éireann’s Expressway Services.
 
8.  
Letter dated 8th March 2017 from the Department of Finance in response to a 
resolution from Kerry County Council calling for the imposition of a social 
responsibility levy on banks and financial institutions. 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
52 of 53 
9.  
Letter dated 9th March 2017 from the Office of the Minister for Public Expenditure 
and Reform in response to a resolution from Kerry County Council regarding the 
Post Office Network in County Kerry. 
 
10.  
Email dated 10th March 2017 from the Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport in 
response to a resolution from Kerry County Council regarding local road signage. 
 
 
11.  
Letter dated 14th March 2017 from Revenue in response to a resolution from Kerry 
County Council calling for the introduction of a subsidy or tax relief for hackneys or 
taxis working in rural areas. 
 
12.  
Email dated 6th March 2017 from South Dublin County Council in relation to a 
resolution adopted by that authority calling for a debate on the case for a Basic 
Income as a means of addressing social and economic inequality. 
 
13.  
Letter dated 10th March 2017 from Kilkenny County Council in relation to a 
resolution adopted by that authority calling on the Minister for Health and the HSE to 
change the review on the standard of cancer care in Ireland. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae referred to the correspondence from the HSE in relation to the 
20 minutes free parking at University Hospital Kerry and stated it was 
disrespectful to vulnerable people. 
 
17.03.27.19 Any other business 
 
Food truck in the Fair Hill Car Park, Killarney 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin asked management if permission was given to a food truck to 
operate from the Fair Hill Car Park in Killarney in opposition to local businesses. 
 
Ms. A. McAllen undertook to make enquiries and to revert to Cllr. Cronin on this 
matter. 
 
Works on the Molls Gap Road 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy requested an update on the works to the Molls Gap Road 
which have been delayed by a month. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan stated the road had to be closed due to the nature of the works 
required following the collapse of a section of retaining wall. Whilst the works 
were ongoing, further stabilization of the retaining walls was identified by the 
Consulting Engineer engaged to oversee and certify the project, which 
necessitated an extension to the road closure to the 28th April. The road cannot 
be reopened until the works to stabilize the retaining wall are substantially 
complete, repairs carried out to the damaged road and certified by the Consulting 

Minutes March 2017 
27th March 2017  
53 of 53 
Engineer that the road can be re-opened taking into consideration the safety of 
road users. However, he gave an undertaking that the Council would seek to 
have road opened as soon as possible and hopefully in advance of the 
advertised date. He also confirmed that the Area Engineer would continue to 
liaise with any business that may be impacted by the road closure. 
 
Mid Kerry Water Supply Scheme 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill pointed out there has been a surge of water outages in the Mid 
Kerry Water Supply Scheme and he asked when this will end for customers. 
 
Mr. J. Breen highlighted that funding is being allocated for pipe replacement on 
this Scheme and work is ongoing. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue advised members that a meeting of the members of South 
and West Kerry MD would be held the following Friday and a report will be 
presented by Water Services. 
 
 
 
The meeting concluded at 2.35pm. 
 
 
 
Liam Quinlan                                       _________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator                     Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
