 
1 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
 
 
 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect putting 
them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is available on 
request. 
 
 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ AN CRUINNIÚ DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH 
I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRÁ LÍ, AGUS AR-LÍNE/FÍORÚIL 
AR AN LUAN, 23 MÁRTA, 2026 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN THE 
COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE AND ONLINE ON MONDAY, 23 
MARCH 2026 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
  
ABSENT/ AS LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
Sam Locke 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Mr. F. Reidy Chief Executive              
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue, Director of Corporate Services and People Development
Ms. N. O’ Sullivan, Director Housing         
Mr. P. Neary, Director of Community, Climate Action and Operational Services
Ms. A. McAllen, Director of Finance 
Mr. J. Nolan, Director of Active Land Management & Economic Development
Ms. B. Fitzgerald Acting Director of Capital Delivery, Climate Resilience and Culture
Ms. E. O’ Donoghue Meetings Administrator
Mr. O’ Shea Press Officer
Ms. C. Fitzgerald S.S.O. Corporate Services 
Ms. O’ Shea A.S.O. Corporate Services
 
The meeting commenced at 10.30a.m.   
Angie Baily                       Tom Barry 
Robert Brosnan 
Tommy Cahill                   Brendan Cronin
Paul Daly                      
Charlie Farrelly                 Deirdre Ferris
Breandán Fitzgerald
Fionnán Fitzgerald            Michael Foley(Cathaoirleach) Podge Foley
Martin Grady
Tommy Griffin                     
Jackie Healy-Rae
Johnny Healy-Rae            Johnny Healy-Rae                  Maura Healy-Rae         
Niall Kelleher                    Aoife Kennelly                       Michael Leane              
Dan McCarthy                  Jimmy Moloney
Marie Moloney           
Liam Speedy Nolan          Terry O’Brien                       
Niall O’Callaghan         
Bobby O’Connell              John O’Donoghue                
Anne O’ Sullivan           
Teddy O’Sullivan-Casey   Mikey Sheehy     

 
2 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
 
Cllr. Michael Foley took the Chair and welcomed everyone.  
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed the Leaving Certificate Economics students from Causeway 
Comprehensive School and Mr. Feidhlim Ginty a Transition Year student from Mercy 
Mounthawk to the meeting. 
  
23.03.2026.01 
Protocols/Induction 
Ms. E. O’ Donoghue, Meeting Administrator, referred Elected Members to the 
Protocols for Meetings of Kerry County Council and took a roll call.  
 
Congratulation to Jessie Buckley 
Cllr. Marie Moloney congratulated Killarney native Ms. Jessie Buckley on her recent 
success at the 2026 Oscars where she was awarded an Oscar for Best Actress.  
 
CBS The Green Tralee 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan paid tribute to Tralee CBS Football and Hurling Senior Teams 
for reaching the final of the Hogan Cup and Paddy Buggy Cup.  
 
Kerry Hurlers 
Cllr. Michael Leane congratulated the Kerry Hurling Senior Team who were promoted 
to Division to 1B. 
 
Vote of Sympathy  
Cllr. Marie Moloney proposed a vote of sympathy to the family of Mr. Ollie Favier on 
his recent passing.  
 
All Elected Members wished to be associated with the vote of sympathy.   
 
 
23.03.2026.02 
Cathaoirleach’s Report on CPG Meeting 
The Cathaoirleach’s report on the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 16 March 
2026, was noted by the Members. 
 
23.03.2026.03 
Confirmation of Minutes 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald SECONDED by Cllr. Charlie Farrelly, 
it was resolved that the minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Kerry County Council held 
on 16 February 2026 be confirmed. 
 
23.03.2026.04 
Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
The Chief Executive’s Report to Council for the month of March 2026 which had been 
circulated was noted by the Members.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill  
 Welcomed progress in relation to Affordable Housing and in particular the 
recent announcement that the Scheme of Priority for Affordable Housing had 
been approved by the Minister. 

 
3 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
 Called for the Affordable Housing Scheme to be extended to other areas of the 
county.  
 
A number of Elected Members supported these comments and requested a timeframe 
for the delivery of the Affordable Housing Scheme and if a price point had been 
identified 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly  
 Welcomed the figures for the Library Service 2025 and asked if the figure for 
the mobile library could also be provided.  
 Expressed disappointment in regard to the allocation of €900,000 for Bridge 
Rehabilitation Works and Community Involvement Scheme under Department 
of Transport grants 2026.  
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan  
 Requested clarification in relation to the Derelict Sites Register, the write off of 
€665k and the reduction in the number of properties on the register from 64 to 
29 in recent years.  
 Called on the Council to reintroduce a waste wavier scheme following the 
introduction of a levy on construction and demolition waste.  
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae  
 Welcomed the increase in allocation for the Roads Restoration Improvement 
Grants and noted the T.I.I. allocation was not included in the Chief Executives 
Report.  
 Welcomed the inclusion of additional areas to the Clár scheme, including 
Ballymacelligott and Scartaglin and asked when the scheme will open for 
applications.  
 
Cllr. Angie Baily  
 Referenced the successful visit of the Chinese Ambassador to Kerry, and 
requested the Council look at further engagement with China.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald  
 Referred to the successful visit of Minister Dara Callery to the County.  
 Welcomed the announcement of an Irish Family Officer for South Kerry  
 Congratulated the three secondary school students who received Irish 
Language awards as part of the Student Enterprise Awards.  
 Expressed concern regarding the condition of the N86 Lispole to Dingle Road. 
 
Cllr. Mikey Sheehy  
 Highlighted the importance of lending institutions in the rollout of affordable 
housing schemes.  
 Asked for clarification in relation to recent commentary suggesting financial 
rewards for Local Authorities that reach their housing targets.  
 Asked if an assessment was being undertaken into the impact the rising cost of 
fuel and energy will have on contracts and services.  
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald  

 
4 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
 Welcomed the roads funding and asked where the increase in discretionary 
funding of €120,000 be spent.  
 Suggested, if the price of fuel continues to increase, that a letter would issue to 
the Minister for Finance Mr. Simon Harris to introduce a rebate scheme for fuel 
cost.  
 Called on the Council to facilitate an information session in relation to Clár 
grants and welcomed the recent extension of the scheme to additional areas.   
 Thanked everyone who contributed to the St. Patricks Day parades across the 
county.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin 
 Asked if there was a timeline for the rollout of affordable housing to other towns 
 Looked for an update in relation to casual trading licences and the review of the 
bye laws. 
 
Cllr. Jimmy Moloney  
 Welcomed the numbers using the library service. 
 Expressed disappointment in relation to the section of the N69 Listowel Road 
which received no funding. 
 
Cllr. Niall Kelleher  
 Welcomed the extension to the Clár Scheme.  
 Expressed concern the Construction and Demolition Waste Recovery levy will 
contribute to an increase in building cost rather than benefit recycling.  
 Queried the impact increasing fuel costs will have on the roads programme.  
 
Cllr. Martin Grady  
 Commended all involved in the National Road Safety Conference  
 Commended the work of the Library service.   
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris  
 Welcomed the inclusion of Ardfert in the Clár programme  
 Called on the Council to invest more capital funding in Ardfert.  
 Expressed disappointment regarding funding for N86 (Curaheen/Annagh 
section).  
 Welcomed the draft beach bye-laws and asked that they would extend beyond 
blue flag beaches. 
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin  
 Requested clarification in relation to whether Listry Community Centre is 
included in the Clár area.  
 Expressed concern that only €21,000 was spent on Listry bridge over a number 
of years.  
 Requested an update on the report previously carried out by consultants in 
relation to Listry Bridge  
 
Cllr. Tom Barry  
 Expressed disappointment regarding the N69 funding.  
 Expressed frustration regarding the lack of funding available for public carparks.  

 
5 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
 
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan  
 Welcomed the students in attendance 
 Thanked all the volunteers and all those involved in the St. Patrick’s Day 
parades.  
 Welcomed the €700,000 for the Blennerville to Dingle Road N86.  
 Agreed with previous Councillors requesting an information session would be 
arranged for community groups in relation to the Clár programme.  
 Remined all that the county clean-up is scheduled for 11th April 2026. 
 
Cllr. Michael Leane  
 Asked that the draft Beach Bye Laws would be extended to other beaches. 
 Called on the council to revert to TII for additional funding for the N86. 
 
Cllr. Marie Moloney  
 Asked for an update in relation to the call for Expression of interest for 
Affordable Housing.  
 
Cllr. Podge Foley  
 Welcomed the provision of Clár funding and asked that consideration would  be 
given to the upgrade of facilities in Killorglin town.  
 Called on the council to upgrade the fire service fleet. 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty  
 Welcomed the start of works on the Carnegie building Caherciveen.  
 
The Chief Executive confirmed  
 Over €78M Department of Transport funding has been allocated to Kerry in 
2026, which includes over €9M for the South Kerry Greenway. 
 Significant oversight and governance procedures are in place in relation to 
spending and cost increases due to the impact of events in the Middle East are 
being monitored. The Council will work within the budgets allocated. 
 
Mr. Paul Neary Director of Service  
 Confirmed Clár measure 1 will be launched shortly by Kerry County Council. 
Applications in respect of measures 2 and 3 must be submitted directly to the 
Department. 
 Confirmed further information will be circulated to Elected Members regarding 
the Construction Waste byproducts considered as part of the Construction and 
Demolition Waste Recovery Levy,  
 Agreed to revert to Cllr. Cronin in relation to Listry Community Centre. 
 A study of the condition of public car parks will be undertaken in the near future 
 
Ms. Niamh O’ Sullivan Director of Service confirmed 
 The Scheme of Priority for Affordable Housing has been approved by the 
Minister. Detail in relation to the discount is not yet available but is expected to 
be in the range of €50,000 - €70,000. 

 
6 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
 The Council is not aware of any potential financial benefits for Local Authorities 
meeting their housing targets.  
 
Ms. Bridget Fitzgerald A/Director of Service  
 Advised 27,500 individuals visited the mobile library in 2025 and 34,000 items 
were borrowed.   
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service advised 
 A full review of all derelict site files and levies was undertaken in 2024. This 
review identified a number of issues on files and identified files which were 
unenforceable. The Councils Vacant Homes Office made the necessary 
amendments to the Derelict sites register. As part of this process unpaid levies 
of 665k were written off. A figure of €264,000 is included in the register in 2025 
for potential levies. 
 
23.03.2026.05 
Disposal of Land  
(a) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Mikey Sheehy and SECONDED by Cllr. Anne O’ 
Sullivan it was agreed to approve the disposal of land measuring 0.095 ha / 0.23 acres 
in Folio  KY75271F at O’Sullivan’s Public House, Main Road, Fenit Without ,Co. Kerry 
in the townland of Fenit Without , in the District Electoral Division of Ballynahaglish to 
(Name withheld for data protection purposes. A paper copy of unedited Minutes 
available on request) in accordance with the terms of notice issued on 02 March 2026 
pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 (as amended) Section 211 
of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and Article 206 of the 
Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended). 
 
(b) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Niall Kelleher and SECONDED by Cllr. Angie Baily it 
was agreed to approve the disposal of land measuring 0.005 ha / 0.013 acres in Folio 
at KY75271F Fenit, Co. Kerry in the townland of Fenit Without, in the District Electoral 
Division of Ballynahaglish to (Name withheld for data protection purposes. A paper 
copy of unedited Minutes available on request) in accordance with the terms of notice 
issued on 04 March 2026 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 
(as amended) Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended) 
and Article 206 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Marie Moloney and SECONDED by Cllr. Niall O’ 
Callaghan it was agreed to approve the disposal of property Former ‘Sara Lee’ site 
which consists of approximately 3 hectares (7.7 acres)  Folio No. KY64992F and 
contains a factory building along with a number of out buildings at Park, Killarney, Co. 
Kerry,situated in the townland of Park,  in the  District Electoral Division of Killarney, 
to Kerry Education & Training Board (Kerry ETB), Centrepoint, John Joe Sheehy 
Road, Tralee, Co Kerry, in accordance with the terms of notice issued on 09 March 
2026 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 (as amended)  and 
Section 211 and Section 211 (5) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as 
amended), and Article 206 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as 
amended).   
 

 
7 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
Cllr. Marie Moloney welcomed the disposal to Kerry ETB and acknowledged the work 
of Cllr. Norma Moriarty, Mr. Colm McEvoy, Ms Anne Dwyer and the late Mr. Jim 
Finucane to bring it to this stage.  
 
Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan concurred with the comments expressed by Cllr. Moloney and 
noted it was the late Cllr. Jim Finucane that drove the project from the start.  
 
Following a query in relation to the income from the sale of the site, Mr. M.O’ Donoghue 
Director of Service advised the funds from the sale of the land will be deposited back 
to Kerry County Council.   
 
 
 
 
 
(d) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell and SECONDED by Cllr. Charlie 
Farrelly it was agreed to approve the disposal by way of lease of property, 395m2 of 
office accommodation located in the Castleisland Area Services Centre Building, 
Station Road, Castleisland, Co. Kerry,situated in the townland of Castleview,  in 
the  District Electoral Division of Castleisland, to Uisce Éireann, in accordance with the 
terms of notice issued 9 March 2026 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government 
Act 2001 (as amended),  Section 211 and Section 211 (5) of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 (as amended) , and Article 206 of the Planning and 
Development Regulations 2001 (as amended). 
 
Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell welcomed this disposal and noted the importance of this 
building to the town of Castleisland. Cllr. O’ Connell asked if some of the proceeds can 
be used to renovate the building to attract more employment to the town.  
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly said the footfall of 80 people is the equivalent of small factory in 
Castleisland and asked if renovation works are undertaken that the entire building be 
fully wheelchair accessible.  
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae highlighted the importance of Irish Water having a regional 
office in the town.  
 
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue Director of Service advised that the Section 183 is to regularise 
the lease hold to Irish Water, however, he noted members comments. 
  
Conflict of Interest 
Cllr Fionnán Fitzgerald declared a conflict of interest for Item 5(e) and left the 
meeting.    
 
(e) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Jackie Healy- Rae and SECONDED by Cllr. Bobby O’ 
Connell it was agreed to approve the disposal of land measuring 0.11 hectares in Folio 
Ky6060F at Carrigcannon, Lyracrompane. Co. Kerry in the townland of Lyracrumpane 
in the District Electoral Division of Kilshenane to (Name withheld for data protection 
purposes. A paper copy of unedited Minutes available on request), in accordance with 
the terms of notice issued 02 March 2026 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, 
and Article 206 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001.   
 
 
Cllr. Fionnan Fitzgerlad returned to the meeting.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
8 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
(f) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Aoife Kennelly and SECONDED by Cllr. Michael 
Leane it was agreed to approve the disposal of land measuring 0.18 hectares in Folio 
Ky36872F at Rathscannell, Abbeydorney. Co. Kerry in the townland of Rathscannel in 
the District Electoral Division of Killahan (Name withheld for data protection purposes. 
A paper copy of unedited Minutes available on request), in accordance with the terms 
of notice issued on 02 March 2026 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government 
Act 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act, 2000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(g) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Liam Speedy Nolan and SECONDED by Cllr. Michael 
Leane it was agreed to approve the disposal of land measuring 0.12 hectares in Folio 
Ky76879F at Ballyegan, Lisselton. Co. Kerry in the townland of Ballyegan in the District 
Electoral Division of Ballyegan  to (Name withheld for data protection purposes. A 
paper copy of unedited Minutes available on request), in accordance with the terms of 
notice issued on 02 March 2026 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 and Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, and Article 206 of 
the Planning and Development Regulations 2001.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(h) On the PROPOSAL of Cathaoirleach Michael Foley and SECONDED by Cllr. 
Aoife Kennelly it was agreed to approve the disposal of land measuring 0.10 hectares 
in part of Folio Ky24058F and Ky24059F at 45 Ballygologue Park, Listowel. Co. Kerry 
in the townland of Listowel in the District Electoral Division of Listowel Urban to (Name 
withheld for data protection purposes. A paper copy of unedited Minutes available on 
request) in accordance with the terms of notice issued on 02 March 2026 pursuant to 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000, and Article 206 of the Planning and Development Regulations 
2001.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Aoife Kennelly and SECONDED by Cllr. Liam Speedy 
Nolan it was agreed to approve the disposal of land measuring 0.47 hectares in Folio 
Ky32535 at Gurteen, Listowel. Co. Kerry in the townland of Gortcurreen in the District 
Electoral Division of Listowel Rural to the late Patrick Stack, in accordance with the 
terms of notice issued on 02 March 2026 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, 
and Article 206 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(j) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Angie Baily and SECONDED by Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan 
it was agreed to approve the disposal of lands measuring 0.0063 hectares and 0.0002 
hectares in Folio 34051 and Folio 5711F at 40/41 Boherbee, Tralee. Co. Kerry in the 
townland of Tralee in the District Electoral Division of Tralee Urban to Stillwater 
Investment Limited, Coolowen, Blarney. Co. Cork, in accordance with the terms of 
notice issued on 02 March 2026 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 and Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, and Article 206 of 
the Planning and Development Regulations 2001. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23.03.2026.06 To consider and adopt the Annual Report on the operations of 
the Kerry Local Community Development Committee (LCDC) for the year 
ending 31 December 2025 
 

 
9 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill commended the work of IRD Duhallow, SKDP & NEWKD in 
relation to the distribution of LEADER funding in rural areas. 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly advised a deputation from the LCDC met with Mr Dara Calleary 
Minister for Social Protection Rural and Community Development and the Gaeltacht 
in Dingle where he undertook to review funding for rural communities.  
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan called for funding for infrastructure in Gaeltacht areas such as 
Dunquin.  
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly SECONDED by Cllr. Tommy Cahill, the 
Annual Report on the operations of Kerry’s Local Community Development Committee 
(LCDC) for the year ending 31 December 2025 was adopted. 
 
23.03.2026.07 Report of the Local Government Auditor.  
 
(a) To consider the Local Government Auditor’s Report on the Accounts of 
Kerry County Council for Year ended 31st December 2024. 
 
Ms. A. McAllen, Director of Finance, referred Elected Members to report dated 10 
March 2026 which had been circulated and set out the following  
 
1. Introduction 
1.1. Referred to a copy of the report of the Local Government Auditor on the 
Accounts of the Council for the year ended 31 December 2024, dated 10 
November 2025 (Schedule A) together with a copy of the certified Audit 
Opinion from the Annual Financial Statement (Schedule B).  
1.2. Section 118 (3) of the Local Government Act, 2001, sets out the primary 
duties of the Local Government Auditor as follows: 
In the course of the audit of accounts of the local authority or other bodies, the 
Local Government Auditor shall carry out such audit tests as he or she 
considers appropriate in order to be satisfied as to —  
 
(a) whether the Annual Financial Statement is prepared in accordance 
with section 107 or with the accounting requirements otherwise 
applicable to the body concerned,  
(b) whether the Annual Financial Statement presents fairly the financial 
position of the authority or other body and of its income and 
expenditure for the period in question, 
(c) whether the transaction of the audited body conform to the statutory 
or other authorisation which they purport to have been carried out. 
 
1.3. When the audit was completed, the Lead Auditor stated her opinion as 
indicated in the attached Audit Opinion. The Lead Auditor prepared a report, 
also, in accordance with Section 120 (1) (c) of the Local Government Act, 
2001 as now circulated to Members.  
 
2. Accounts 2024 – Overview  
 

 
10 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
2.1. The ongoing challenging global economic environment continued to impact the 
Councils finances over the course of 2024.  Development of targeted 
government supports, close budget monitoring and management throughout 
the year and increased revenue collections ensured that the Council finished 
2024 showing a modest positive outturn of €84,013. The final out-turn figures 
for the Income and Expenditure Account and the Balance Sheet, as per the 
confirmed audited Annual Financial Statement, are attached as Schedule C. 
The Annual Financial Statement for 2024 was presented to the Council and 
considered at the April 2025 Council meeting. 
2.2. The Council’s global total financial activity (aggregated Revenue and Capital 
Expenditure and Income) amounted to €655,655,055 for 2024. In addition, the 
Council managed an asset portfolio of €3.773bn. The Audit Report for 2024 
includes confirmation of the financial position of this Council as presented in 
AFS 2024 and notes the annual movements of the balance sheet including 
Fixed Assets, Long Term Debtors (mainly due to Capital Advance Leasing 
Facility) and increases in Net Current Assets. The Auditor notes the increased 
capital expenditure associated with the extensive capital program and notes a 
number of large-scale capital projects underway. The Auditor also notes the 
2024 Loans Payable position which reflects an interest only payment 
arrangement and the future funding requirement to repay the principal on these 
loans. Overall Loans Payable by the Council in 2024 showed a reduction 
reflecting ongoing active management of this area. Also included is an 
overview in relation to Procurement which highlights progress and ongoing 
initiatives in this area.  The report also confirms the increased collection rates 
on the major income streams of Commercial Rates, Housing Rents and Loans 
for 2024. 
2.3. The lead Auditor has completed the Statutory Audit of the Accounts of Kerry 
County Council for year-ended 31 December 2024 and issued her Audit 
Opinion and has stated that in her opinion “the Annual Financial Statement, 
which has been prepared in accordance with the Accounting Code of Practice 
and Accounting Regulations for Local Authorities, presents fairly the financial 
position of Kerry County Council at 31 December 2024 and its income and 
expenditure for the year then ended”.  
 
3. Conclusion  
 
3.1. Given the extent and complexity of the Council’s work programmes and the 
independent Audit Opinion as stated above, the Audit Report for 2024 is 
considered satisfactory. An integral part of Kerry County Council’s service 
delivery priorities is the continual improvement of processes, procedures and 
control measures to achieve greater efficiencies and improved performance 
outcomes across the Council’s services in accordance with our governance 
framework.  
3.2. The matters raised by the Auditor are as outlined in the report and relate to a 
range of areas including debt management, process and procedural 
enhancements, development contributions, transition to Uisce Éireann, capital 

 
11 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
account management and local authority companies. Recommendations have 
been reviewed and are being considered by this Council.  
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell and SECONDED by Cllr. Niall Kelleher 
it was agreed to note the report of the Local Government Auditor on the accounts of 
Kerry County Council for the financial year ended 31 December 2024 which was 
circulated. 
 
 
(b) To note the Report from the Audit Committee on the Statutory Audit Report 
for the year ending 31st December 2024. 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan requested details of all travel expenses be published in addition 
to Q2 and Q4 highlighted in the report. Mr. M. O’ Donoghue Director of Service 
advised that the Audit Report is a report which includes spot checks carried out as 
part of an audit, it is not a full review of travel expenses.   
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Niall Kelleher, SECONDED by Cllr. Angie Baily, it was 
agreed to note the report from the Audit Committee on the Statutory Audit Report for 
the year ending 31 December 2024. 
 
23.03.2026.08 Audit Committee- Kerry County Council 
 
(a) To consider the 2025 Annual Report of the Audit Committee of Kerry 
County Council.  
  
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Niall Kelleher, SECONDED by Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell, it 
was agreed to note the 2025 Annual Report of the Audit Committee of Kerry County 
Council which was circulated.  
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) To consider the approval of Kerry County Council's Audit Committee 
Charter.     
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Niall Kelleher, SECONDED by Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell, it 
was agreed to approve Kerry County Council's Audit Committee Charter.      
         
23.03.2026.09 To consider Report on the Operation of the Litter Pollution Acts 
1997-2009 in accordance with Section 10 of the Litter Pollution Act 1997. 
 
Cllr Robert Brosnan expressed concerns in relation to the low number of litter 
wardens in the county and requested the recruitment of additional wardens.  
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan, SECONDED by Cllr. Niall Kelleher, it 
was agreed to note the report on the Operation of the Litter Pollution Acts 1997-2009 
in accordance with Section 10 of the Litter Pollution Act 1997. 
 
23.03.2026.10 Draft Kerry County Council Beach (Amendments)Bye – Laws 
2026 
(a) Briefing on proposal to amend Kerry County Council Beach Bye-Laws 2022, in 
accordance with Part 19 of the Local Government Act 2001 and the Local Government 

 
12 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
Act 2001 (Bye-Laws) Regulations 2006, for the purposes of regulating and controlling 
the provision of sauna services and related commercial activities on specified beaches 
in County Kerry and providing for the imposition of fixed payments in accordance with 
Section 206 of the Local Government Act 2001. 
 
Mr. P. Neary Director of Service outlined the proposed amendments were considered 
at the Environment, Climate Change, Marine and Emergency Planning Strategic 
Policy Committee meeting. Submissions in relation to the draft amendments must be 
made by 5.00 p.m. on Tuesday 5th May 2026 and it is intended to bring the Chief 
Executives Report to the May Council meeting. 
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae welcomed the report and asked that the bye-laws be extended 
to non-blue flag beaches, piers and harbours to allow the provision of these facilities 
at further locations. 
 
The Director advised a broader set of byelaws will be drafted in relation to locations 
other than blue flag beaches. 
 
23.03.2026.11 To approve the change in representation of Social Inclusion 
Sectoral Representative on the Housing SPC Committee.  
 
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue Director of Service referred to the circulated report dated 13 
March 2026. Following the retirement of Ms. Catherine Lenihan from the Housing 
SPC, Ballyduff Family and Community Support Forum CLG have nominated Ms. Nora 
Lucid as Social Inclusion Representative on the Housing Strategic Policy Committee.  
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Marie Moloney and SECONDED by Cllr. Angie Baily it was 
agreed to approve the nomination of Ms. Nora Lucid Ballyduff Family and Community 
Support Forum CLG to the Housing SPC. 
 
 
23.03.2026.12 To dissolve a Committee under Section 51(3) of the Local 
Government Act 2001 that was established to assist and advise the Authority 
in respect of proposed Variation No. 2 (Killarney Municipal District 
Settlements’ Plan) of the Kerry County Development Plan 2022 -2028.  
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service advised that on completion of the process of making 
a variation of the Kerry County Development Plan it was agreed the relevant Section 
51 Committee would be dissolved by a resolution of the Elected Members. As 
Variation No. 2 was adopted on 19 January 2026, the committee can now be 
dissolved. 
 
Following a query from Cllr. Niall Kelleher, Mr. J. Nolan Director of Services advised 
that all documentation had been submitted as per the plan. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Niall Kelleher and SECONDED by Cllr Marie Moloney, it 
was agreed to dissolve the Committee established under Section 51(3) of the Local 
Government Act 2001 to assist and advise the Authority in respect of proposed 
Variation No. 2 (Killarney Municipal District Settlements’ Plan) of the Kerry County 
Development Plan 2022-2028. 
 

 
13 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
23.03.2026.13 Date for the Annual Meeting of Kerry County Council 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Marie Moloney, SECONDED by Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald, 
it was agreed that the Annual Meeting of Kerry County Council would be held on 
Monday, 22 June 2026 at 12.30 p.m. 
 
23.03.2026.14 Date for the Municipal District Annual Meetings 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Fionnan Fitzgerald, SECONDED by Cllr. Angie Baily, it 
was agreed that the Municipal District Annual Meetings would be held on Monday 22 
June 2026 as follows. 
 
 
 
Monday, 22 June 2026 
Tralee 
9.00 a.m.  
Listowel 
9.30 a.m. 
Killarney 
10.00 a.m. 
Castleisland-Corca Dhuibhne 
10.45 a.m. 
Kenmare 
11.15 a.m. 
 
23.03.2026.15 To Note report from SPC Chairs  
(a) Report from Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald, SPC Vice-Chair, on the meeting of the 
Culture, Heritage and Gaeltacht SPC held on 12 February 2026 was noted. 
 
(b) Report from Cllr. Tommy Cahill, SPC Chair, on the meeting of the Housing SPC 
held on 20 February 2026 was noted   
 
(c) Report from Cllr. Deirdre Ferris, SPC Vice - Chair of the Environment, Climate 
Change, Marine and Emergency Planning SPC meeting held on 05 March 2026 
was noted. 
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan asked for an update in relation to anonymous complaints 
received in the Enforcement Section. It had been agreed this would be discussed 
at the Planning SPC. 
 
The Executive agreed to revert to Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan on the matter.  
 
 
(d) Report from Cllr. Terry O’ Brien, SPC Cahir of the Economic Development, 
Enterprise, Tourism and Community SPC held on 05 March 2026 was noted. 
 
 
Cllr Jackie Healy-Rae welcomed the update in relation to the Ryder Cup and the 
progress of the sub-committee. He asked that the presentation to the SPC in relation 
to the Campervan Motorhome Policy Framework would also be presented to Full 
Council to include details of potential sites.  
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley noted the Ryder Cup formed part of the discussions 
with Tourism Ireland during the recent visit to the U.S.  
 
A discussion took place in relation to the importance of the Ryder Cup to Kerry and 
a request from members that the Council maximise the potential impact of the event 
on the County. Cllr. Kelleher & Cllr. Fitzgerald requested Kerry Tourism Industry 

 
14 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
Federation are invited to a Council meeting to present in relation to the work they 
are undertaking.  
 
Following a request from Cllr. Norma Moriarty, SPC Chair Cllr. Terry O’ Brien 
confirmed two public representatives will be nominated to sit on the sub-committee.  
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service confirmed discussions have taken place with KTIF 
and committed to revert with a presentation to Elected Members. 
 
23.03.2026.16 Summary of proceedings at the following events on behalf of the 
Kerry County Council delegates that attended in accordance with Section 142(5)(f) 
of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended: 
 
(a) Report on the Celtic Conferences on the theme ‘The Finance Act 2025’ held in 
The Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford, Co. Louth, from 16-18 January 2026 by Cllr. 
Michael Leane was noted. 
 
(b) Report on the Celtic Conferences on the theme ‘Misinformation Disinformation 
and Fake News’ held in O’Donovan’s Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork, from 6-8 February 
2026 by Cllr. Aoife Kennelly was noted.  
 
23.03.2026.17 Report on the operations and activities of the IRD Duhallow by 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald in accordance with Section 141 of the Local 
Government Act 2001. 
 
(a)Report on the operations and activities of the IRD Duhallow by Cllr. Fionnán 
Fitzgerald in accordance with Section 141 of the Local Government Act 2001 was 
noted. 
 
 
23.03.2026.18 To approve the opening of tenders  
(a) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr.  Paul Daly and SECONDED by Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan 
it was agreed to approve the opening of tender for Outdoor Exercise Area for 
Kerry County Council at Tralee Town Park (RFT 7547741), Closing Date: Friday 
13 March 2026. 
 
23.03.2026.19 Notice of Motion 
 
1.Transparency Measures in Property Purchase 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Angie Baily proposed 
That this Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, 
together with the Minister for Finance and the Minister for Justice, to introduce 
strengthened controls and transparency measures in the residential property purchase 
process, in order to protect first-time buyers and long-term residents in Ireland, and to 
ensure that housing supply primarily serves residents. I am asking that these 
measures include targeted and immediate restrictions on investors, large landlords, 
non-resident or non-domiciled purchasers which include a stamp duty of 10% on the 
purchase of all homes, and 12% on luxury homes as is common practice in many 
European countries 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 

 
15 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
 
Councillor Baily highlighted concerns in relation to the challenges being faced by first 
time buyers and long-term residents of the county in the current housing market. She 
highlighted the importance of housing not just as an asset but as the foundation of 
community, stability and dignity. She acknowledged the higher stamp duty for bulk 
purchases previously implemented by government but is calling for more to be done. 
 
Cllr. Paul Daly SECONDED this motion and said he would support an increase in the 
tax proposed.  
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae expressed concerns that such a proposal may impact on an 
Irish person living abroad who may want to buy a property and return home. He 
highlighted the only way out of the current challenges is to build more homes.   
 
2. Clarification on how Section 183s are Publicly Advertised 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Paul Daly proposed 
That this Council clarify how Section 183s are publicly advertised. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act (and associated statutory provisions) is the 
statutory process that governs how a Local Authority disposes of property it no longer 
requires for its statutory functions. The decision to dispose of land is a reserved 
function of Elected Members. 
 
Section 183 provides for prior notice of the proposed disposal to be sent to each of 
the members of the Local Authority. The disposal may then proceed unless the 
Authority resolves otherwise at the first meeting held after the expiration of the 10 days 
after the service of the notice. 
 
There is no requirement for public advertising of disposals. 
 
A lengthy discussion took place in relation to the Section 183 process and the 
legislative requirements. Cllr. Paul Daly called on the Council to erect a site notice or 
some other form of notification advising residents in the locality of the Section 183 
process underway.  
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald SECONDED this motion and said the responsibility rests with 
the elected members to advise their constituents of the disposal of land if they feel the 
disposal may impact on residents in the locality.   
 
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue confirmed there is no statutory process in place to deal with 
submissions if such a site notice were erected. Mr O’ Donoghue confirmed there is a 
statutory requirement to notify the Elected Members ten days before the public 
meeting and the Council endeavours to circulate the notice and documentation in 
advance of the 10 days. Mr O’ Donoghue noted a number of the Section 183 notices 
on today’s agenda are legacy issues that require titles to be rectified. These would 
have no bearing on the public and the erection of a site notice on such properties could 
be of concern to residents of these properties.  
 
3. Detailed Financial Report Regarding Greenways 

 
16 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae proposed 
That Kerry County Council provide a detailed report outlining the full costs 
associated with the development of Greenways in County Kerry, including: 
a) The total capital cost of all Greenways that have been completed and opened to 
date, with a breakdown per project. 
b) The current and projected costs of all Greenways under construction, including 
any revised or increased cost estimates since initial approval. 
c) The estimated projected costs of all Greenway projects that are planned or yet to 
commence, including design, land acquisition, construction, and associated  
infrastructure costs. 
d) A breakdown of the funding sources for each project, Transport Infrastructure 
Ireland (TII), Kerry County Council contributions, and any other funding streams. 
e) Clarification on any cost overruns, revised timelines, or additional financial 
commitments associated with these projects. 
 
The following reply issued:  
That Kerry County Council provide a detailed report to members outlining the full costs 
associated with the development of Greenways in County Kerry, including: 
a) The total capital cost of all Greenways that have been completed and opened 
to date, with a breakdown per project. 
Greenways Opened (Total Capital Cost) 
Total Cost   €18.85m   
 Tralee-Fenit Greenway €9.98m 
 Listowel to Limerick Border €8.87m 
 
b) The current and projected costs of all Greenways under construction, including 
any revised or increased cost estimates since initial approval. 
Greenways Under Construction (Current and Projected Costs): 
 South Kerry Greenway - Glenbeigh to Cahersiveen   
Projected Cost    €72m 
Spent to Date     €21.83m   
 
The route for this greenway contains many structures and requires significant platform 
reconstruction particularly between Mountain Stage and Kells. The topography over 
which the greenway is being built is very challenging to construct but will result in an 
exceptional greenway user experience. 
 
A Cost Benefit Analysis and an Economic Impact Assessment has been carried out 
on the scheme. This found that the South Kerry Greenway will attract between 232,000 
and 428,000 visitors annually with a spend of €20million to €38million creating 
between 296 jobs and 542 jobs. 
 
c) The estimated projected costs of all Greenway projects that are planned or yet 
to commence, including design, land acquisition, construction, and associated 
infrastructure costs. 
Estimated Costs for Planned Greenways 
 Tralee to Listowel Greenway   

 
17 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
The total length for this section is 28km. Scheme budgets will be finalised when 
planning and assessment of the final option is completed. 
 
d) A breakdown of the funding sources for each project, Transport Infrastructure 
Ireland (TII), Kerry County Council contributions, and any other funding 
streams. 
Greenways are fully funded by Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) since September 
2021. Prior to that they were funded by the Dept. of Transport and Kerry County 
Council. The funding for the above-mentioned projects has come from TII, Dept of 
Transport. 
 TII 
 
 
 
 
 
€35.2m 
 Department of Transport      
    
€5.2m 
 Kerry County Council  
             
€245,000 
There are amenity elements on greenways completed to date which have received 
other funding. Details of this additional funding are listed below: 
 A 2019 Town and Village Grant of €262,000 was allocated to Listowel to 
improve connectivity through the Town Park to link to the Greenway 
 A CLÁR grant for €220,000 for both North Kerry Greenways for facilities on the 
Greenways. 
 The new Toilet/Changing Area in Listowel has received €500,000 in ORIS 
funding. 
 The Quiet Road at Spa, Tralee has received €500,000 in ORIS funding. 
 
e) Clarification on any cost overruns, revised timelines, or additional financial 
commitments associated with these projects. 
Transport Infrastructure Ireland introduced a number of guidance documents in 
relation to Project, Cost, Environmental Management of Greenways since 2021. 
The Code of Best Practice for National and Regional Greenways was introduced in 
December 2021. 
 
These new documents combined with the Infrastructure Guidelines (formerly Public 
Spending Code) provide robust guidance on the planning and development of 
greenways utilising lessons learned from past projects and strengthening governance 
on infrastructural projects. 
 
The Project Governance on these projects and the associated approvals processes 
are being implemented in accordance with all the above requirements. 
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae welcomed the detailed response, and while acknowledging the 
benefits, highlighted the importance of ensuring it is delivered efficiently and within 
budget. He requested further information in relation to, how many landowners have 
been paid to date, how confident is the council that the cost will stop at €72M, further 
details in relation to the cost benefit analysis carried out and if the other greenways in 
Kerry have exceeded expectations.  
 

 
18 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill SECONDED this motion. He acknowledged the technical 
complexity of the project but noted the transformative impact of this project in creating 
a lifeline for South Kerry. The Greenway has the potential to attract jobs and will be an 
economic enabler. He acknowledged the significant investment and requested 
everything is done to pay the landowners out. 
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae also requested clarification in relation to the number of 
landowners paid and asked that every effort is made to ensure that the remaining 
landowners are paid in 2026 to encourage goodwill.  
 
The Chief Executive advised the South Kerry Greenway is an extremely complex 
engineering project. A further 5km section at Glenbeigh will open before Easter. 
Analysis carried out identifies the potential of the Greenway to attract between 296-
542 jobs to South Kerry, the economic impact of which will be realised over time. The 
Council will work with businesses and communities to optimise the benefits of the 
Greenway. The delivery of the project will require both direct labour and contractors. 
The CE confirmed the cost estimates are estimates and as the tender process 
develops these will become clearer. The CE expressed confidence in relation to the 
oversight and governance of the project. He confirmed that less than half of the 
landowners have been paid. 
 
4. Priority to First-Time Buyers in the sale of Vacant Homes 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Martin Grady proposed 
That Kerry County Council, following the recent assessment identifying 33 vacant 
housing units deemed “surplus to requirements” — comprising 1 in Tralee, 4 in the 
Castleisland–Dingle area, 4 in Killarney, 12 in Kenmare, and 12 in Listowel — and 
recognising that the disposal of such properties is a reserved function of the elected 
members, shall give priority to first-time buyers in the sale of these homes.  
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council Housing Department is currently progressing the documentation 
for the proposed sale of these properties under Section 183 of the Local Government 
Act 2001. 
 
Refurbishment of these units is deemed infeasible for a number of reasons including 
the following: 
• Significant refurbishment costs 
• Legal issues including boundary issues 
• Right of way and access to the property issues 
• Septic tank issues and location of same if present 
• No water connection 
• Properties in very rural locations with access issues 
 
Consequently, where these properties have no other use internally to Kerry County 
Council and are deemed “Surplus to Requirement”, it is proposed to sell these 
properties on the open market through the Section 183 process. The sale of 
properties/lands is a reserved function of the elected members. 
 
Cllr. Martin Grady noted prioritising first-time buyers in the disposal of vacant domestic 
properties will provide an opportunity for those currently priced out of the market. 

 
19 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
These properties may qualify for the Vacant Property grant, making them more 
affordable to purchase and restore. Cllr. Grady noted as this is a reserved function 
Councillors will have a direct role in ensuring these homes are used to best support 
local needs. 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty SECONDED the motion and advised there are a number of these 
properties in South Kerry. She raised concerns, putting the properties on the open 
market would price out first time buyers and said there needs to be a mechanism to 
address this. 
 
Ms. N O’ Sullivan Director of Service confirmed housing is liaising with the legal 
department in relation to the above. The legal department is considering including 
conditions in the sale, such as requiring that the property is the purchaser’s principal 
private residence. 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty said this does not go far enough and further restrictions must be 
in place. 
 
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue confirmed the Council will only sell housing stock if there is no 
other alternative. Many of these properties are single rural cottages with legacy issues 
regarding the sites. In many cases these properties cannot be re re-tenanted, and the 
property will possibly be disposed of to family as the only viable option. He confirmed 
that income from the sale of these properties is part of the Internal Capital receipts 
and will be utilised for social housing.  
 
5. Revise Laws Protecting Child Poverty and Homelessness 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Podge Foley proposed 
To ask Kerry County Council to write to the Department of Housing to revise laws to 
do more to protect children from poverty and homelessness immediately  
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Podge Foley noted that everything must be done to prevent children becoming 
homeless. 
  
Cllr. Angie Baily SECONDED the motion 
 
6. Solar Farms Update 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jimmy Moloney proposed 
How many solar farms have been granted planning permission in each Municipal 
District in last 5 years and what is Kerry County Council's strategy going forward on 
where these farms can be developed. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Four (4) solar farms have been granted permission for development within Kerry  
County Councils functional area in the last 5 year; all four developments are 
located within the Listowel Municipal District (MD). 
 
Kerry County Council policy in respect of the development of solar farms is set out 

 
20 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
in Chapter 12 of the Kerry County Development Plan 2022-2029, which set out our 
objectives in respect of all renewable energy developments including solar farms. 
These include: 
 
• KCDP 12-14 Maximise the development of all renewable energies at appropriate 
locations in a manner consistent with the proper planning and sustainable 
development of the County.  
• KCDP 12-15 Support and facilitate proposals for hybrid energy systems and/or 
co-location of renewable energy where applicable where such development has 
satisfactorily demonstrated that it will not have adverse impacts on the surrounding 
environment. 
• KCDP 12-16 Facilitate and promote sustainable alternative forms of renewable 
energy including hydro, bio, solar, geothermal and offshore wind energy.  
• KCDP 12-26 Facilitate USSPV, including USSPV electricity connections where it 
can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the planning authority that there will be 
no significant adverse impact on the built and natural environment, the visual 
character of the landscape, or on residential amenity.   
• KCDP 12-27 Prevent the loss of agriculturally productive land to Utility Scale 
Solar Photo-voltaic USSPV development 
• KCDP 12-28 Ensure that applications for Solar Farm developments should be 
accompanied by glint and glare assessments. 
 
It should also be noted that Volume 6 of the Kerry County Development Plan 2022-
2029 contains development standards relating to solar energy. The Council 
considers the following factors when assessing a planning application for a solar 
farm:   
 
• The reuse of previously developed land such as brownfield land, contaminated 
land or industrial land and non-productive agricultural land in preference to 
productive agricultural land. 
• The proximity of the PROPOSALto the electricity infrastructure such as 
substations and indicative proposals to connect to existing or proposed grid 
connections. 
• The potential impact on the ecological characteristics and features of the site and 
its sensitivity to the proposed changes arising from the construction, operation and 
decommissioning stages of a development. On a proposed site where a significant 
level of ecological impact is predicted an Ecological Management Plan may be 
used to mitigate against the predicted impact. 
• Possible significant effects and/or adverse effects on site integrity of Europeans 
which may require the submission of an AA Screening Report and/or a Natura 
Impact Statement. The potential to mitigate landscape and visual impacts through 
appropriate siting, design and screening with native hedges.   
• An appraisal of the existing roads infrastructure and the potential impact of the 
proposed development. 
 
Cllr. Jimmy Moloney welcomed the detailed response and highlighted the need for 
national guidelines. 
 
Cathaoirleach Cllr. Michael Foley SECONDED this motion. Cllr. Foley raised 
concerns in relation to the potential over saturation in one area. 

 
21 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service confirmed applications are dealt with under the 
REDZ 3 Directive within which everyone has a chance to appeal. The Commission 
is required to have regard to the County Development Plan in making decisions. 
 
 
7. Newsletters in Mobile Library 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Robert Brosnan proposed 
Go gcuirfeadh CCC nuachtlitreacha reatha PPN agus litríocht ábhartha eile ar fáil 
don tseirbhís Leabharlainne Soghluaiste ionas gur féidir le pobail thuaithe agus 
úsáideoirí leabharlainne páirt níos fearr a ghlacadh in imeachtaí agus sa corais 
Rialtas áitiúil. 
 
That Kerry County Council provide the Mobile Library service with current PPN 
newsletters and other relevant literature so that rural communities and library users 
can engage better with events and local Government systems. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Is féidir le Comhairle Contae Chiarraí nuachtlitreacha reatha PPN agus litríocht 
ábhartha a chur ar fáil tríd an seirbhís Leabharlainne Soghluaiste. Is féidir le 
Comhairle Contae Chiarraí nuachtlitreacha reatha PPN agus litríocht ábhartha a 
chur ar fáil tríd an seirbhís Leabharlainne Soghluaiste. 
 
Kerry County Council through the Mobile Library service can provide current PPN 
newsletters and other relevant literature to its users. 
 
Cllr. Paul Daly SECONDED this motion.  
 
8. Tidal Swimming Pool at Kenmare Pier 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Cahill proposed 
That Kerry County Council supports the development of a tidal swimming pool at 
Kenmare Pier and commits to progressing this project by commissioning a feasibility 
study to assess the potential for such a facility, including suitable design options, 
safety considerations, environmental impacts and potential funding streams. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council via the Community Section will contact the local group to 
consider the PROPOSALhaving regard to feasibility assessment that will include 
safety, issues and risks, environmental impacts and possible funding sources for a 
tidal pool at Kenmare. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill said such a development would diversify the tourism potential of 
Kenmare including wellness tourism and extend the tourist season. 
 
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly SECONDED this motion. 
 
9. Easing of Restrictions for Planning of One-off Rural Dwellings 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. John O’Donoghue proposed 
The Housing Minister has recently announced there will be an easing of planning 
restrictions on one off rural dwellings. This will be especially relevant in a rural county 

 
22 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
like Kerry. Will senior planners in local authorities like Kerry County Council have 
any input in deciding what the nature this easing of restrictions will be. If yes, what 
will Kerry County Council be looking to have included and what will they be seeking 
to have excluded.  
 
The following reply issued:  
Policies for one-off rural housing will be enacted through a new National Planning 
Statement (NPS).  The preparation of a NPS is a new statutory process introduced 
under the Planning and Development Act 2024 to replace previous ministerial 
guidelines and policy directives.  These statements are designed to ensure 
consistency across national, regional, and local planning tiers. The Minister for 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage is responsible for issuing the National 
Planning Statement. 
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue asked if there is opportunity for input from the Local 
Authority, that the Councillors would be consulted.  
 
Cllr Brendan Cronin SECONDED the motion.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill moved Notice of Motion no 20. 
 
20. Request to Further Liberalise One-Off Rural Housing Planning Rules 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Cahill proposed 
That Kerry County Council calls on the Government and the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage, James Browne, to liberalise the existing planning 
rules governing one-off rural housing, in order to make it easier for people with 
genuine local and family ties to rural areas to build homes on their own land." 
 
The following reply issued:  
Policies for one-off rural housing will be enacted through a new National Planning 
Statement (NPS). The preparation of a NPS is a new statutory process introduced 
under the Planning and Development Act 2024 to replace previous ministerial 
guidelines and policy directives. These statements are designed to ensure 
consistency across national, regional, and local planning tiers. The Minister for 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage is responsible for issuing the National 
Planning Statement. The Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage must 
conduct consultations before issuing an NPS. This will be reviewed once the Draft 
NPS is circulated. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill expressed concerns that if the policy remains unchanged it will 
wipe out rural Ireland. Many people want to return to rural Ireland and build a house 
and settle down but are prohibited by the current policy.  
 
Cllr. Michael Leane SECONDED the motion.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald supported the motion and moved Notice of Motion no 25.  
 
25. Issue New Planning Guidelines for Rural Areas 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald proposed 

 
23 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
That Kerry County Council ask James Browne TD, Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage of Ireland to issue the new planning guidelines for rural 
areas as quickly as possible. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald said the guidelines cannot come in quick enough. The 
current polices are restrictive, prohibit the building of homes and are preventing 
people from returning home.  
 
Cllr John O’ Donoghue said the new policy is especially relevant in Kerry and asked 
whether the planning department will have an input into the legislation.  
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin noted the Office of the Planning Regulator insisted that a 
paragraph be removed from the current County Development Plan in relation to sons 
and daughters of farmers building on their family land. He said this stipulation needs 
to be revisited, it will be a lifeline for Kerry. 
  
 
Cllr. Anne O Sullivan SECONDED the motion.  
 
Suspend Standing Orders 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae and SECONDED by Cllr. Fionnan 
Firtzgerald, it was agreed to suspend Standing orders as it was 1.30p.m. 
 
Cllr. Angie Baily took the chair in the absence of the Cathaoirleach Cllr.  
Michael Foley who left the meeting for a brief period. 
 
10. Development Proposals for Council Owned Coastal Heritage Assets and 
Maritime Structures 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Mikey Sheehy proposed 
That Kerry County Council provide an update on the current status of tourism 
development proposals relating to council-owned coastal heritage assets and 
maritime structures across County Kerry, including any feasibility studies, 
partnership arrangements, or funding applications being explored to support their 
development as visitor attractions. 
 
The following reply issued:  
There are a number of ongoing tourism development projects through Kerry in 
coastal regions.  With regard to development proposals for council owned coastal 
heritage assets and maritime structures, Fáilte Ireland has appointed a consultant to 
assess the feasibility for developing a visitor attraction on Little Samphire Island in 
Fenit, Tralee.  This includes an examination of access requirements, heritage 
considerations, environmental impacts, infrastructure needs, and potential tourism 
benefits. This report is currently being finalised by Fáilte Ireland. 
 
Cllr. Mikey Sheehy welcomed the update regarding Feint Island and acknowledged 
the level of investment in Fenit to date. He requested a timeline on the publication of 
the Fáilte Ireland report and queried the next steps in the process. Cllr. Sheehy also 

 
24 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
referred to the Blennerville Windmill and advised Mayor Cllr. Terry O’ Brien has 
requested that the facility be painted. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris SECONDED this motion and noted the importance of utilising the 
infrastructure we have. Cllr. Ferris also requested an update in relation to the area 
around the canal.  
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service confirmed the feasibility study is in draft and the 
Council has reverted to Failte Ireland with comments. The Director confirmed it is 
hoped to complete the works in Blennerville this year.  
 
The Cathaoirleach returned to the meeting and took the chair. 
 
11. Provisional License Anomaly 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Anne O’Sullivan proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Transport, Mr. Darragh O’Brien 
TD and the Minister of State for Road Safety, Mr. Sean Canney regarding the 
anomaly whereby provisional licence holders must be accompanied by a Full 
Licence holder when driving a car yet the same licence holder can legally drive 
agricultural machinery and pull trailers unaccompanied. 
 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan noted from the age of 16 an individual can drive a tractor 
unaccompanied on the public road. Cllr. O’ Sullivan called for improved regulation to 
be considered to include mandatory training and testing. 
 
Cllr. Angie Baily SECONDED this motion.  
 
Cllr Jackie Healy-Rae acknowledged the spirit of the motion but noted it is important 
any regulations would not further restrict young people, who play a vital part in the 
agricultural sector. 
 
13. Request for Kerry-Specific Homeless Services Policy 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Deirdre Ferris proposed 
That Kerry County Council produces a Homeless Services policy specifically for 
Kerry. 
 
The following reply issued:  
The Homeless Services were involved in the compiling of a Southwest Regional 
Homeless Action Plan for 2025-2030, alongside our collaborating partners within the 
Southwest Region and this Homeless Action Plan was adopted by Kerry County 
Council in May 2025. The Housing Department is currently developing, in 
conjunction with key stakeholders within the county and in consultation with the 
Housing SPC, a County Homeless Action Plan 2025-2030. This Plan, once drafted, 
will also be presented to Full Council for consideration and adoption. 
 
Cllr Deirdre Ferris called for the introduction of a specific homeless policy for Kerry.  

 
25 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
 
Cllr Robert Brosnan SECONDED this motion and said currently there is no 
homeless facility in West Kerry.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris moved Notice of Motion no 24 
 
24. Approve Local Authority Acquisitions 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Deirdre Ferris proposed 
That the Department of Housing approve local authority acquisitions of ex local 
authority properties for sale within their respective counties. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris noted this would be an appropriate method for the Council to assist 
people, particularly given the significant numbers on the housing list. 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty SECONDED this motion. 
 
12. Additional Concerns Regarding Liberalising Rural Planning 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Housing, James Browne, 
following his commentary on his intention to liberalise rural planning, to reiterate a 
number of key concerns: 
a) The overly expansive nature of rural areas under significant urban influence 
around a settlement. 
b) Planning consideration needs to be reinstated for landowners and not just 
farmers. 
c) The TII blanket ban on planning applications where there would be an 
intensification of entrance use or creation of entrances onto National Primary and 
Secondary roads. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Policies for one-off rural housing will be enacted through a new National Planning 
Statement (NPS). The preparation of a NPS is a new statutory process introduced 
under the Planning and Development Act 2024 to replace previous ministerial 
guidelines and policy directives. These statements are designed to ensure 
consistency across national, regional, and local planning tiers. The Minister for 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage is responsible for issuing the National 
Planning Statement. The Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage must 
conduct consultations before issuing an NPS. This will be reviewed once the Draft 
NPS is circulated. 
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae requested an amendment to the motion as follows  
 
That we the members write to the Minister for Housing, James Browne, following his 
commentary on his intention to liberalise rural planning, to reiterate a number of key 
concerns: 
a) The overly expansive nature of rural areas under significant urban influence 
around a settlement. 

 
26 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
b) Planning consideration needs to be reinstated for landowners and not just 
farmers. 
c) The TII blanket ban on planning applications where there would be an 
intensification of entrance use or creation of entrances onto National Primary and 
Secondary roads. 
 
Cllr. Healy Rae highlighted the lack of affordability and availability of housing and 
noted the new legislation needs to consider the previous policy which permitted sons 
and daughters of farmers to build on their own property.  
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald SECONDED this motion to include the amendment. 
 
14. Portion of Funds set aside for Gaeltacht areas 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald proposed 
That Kerry County Council ask Simon Harris TD, Minister for Finance and Jack 
Chambers TD, Minister for Public Expenditure, Infrastructure, Public Services, 
Reform and Digitalisation to make sure that a set portion of funds from Government 
Departments in charge of key infrastructure, like Housing, Roads, Water and 
Wastewater Treatment, is specifically set aside for Gaeltacht areas. The Local 
Authority would then be responsible for applying for and using these funds in places 
such as Corca Dhuibhne and Uíbh Ráthach in County Kerry. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald highlighted the need for specific ringfenced funding in every 
government department, for spending in Gaeltacht areas. The Department of Rural, 
Community Development and the Gaeltacht does not have adequate resources for 
Gaeltacht areas. 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty SECONDED this motion and highlighted the important work 
carried out by the task force in the Gaeltacht areas.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerlad asked that a letter would also issue to the Department of 
Rural, Community Development and the Gaeltacht advising them of the motion. 
 
15. Open Beds at Kenmare Community Nursing Unit 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Teddy O’Sullivan Casey proposed  
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Health to ask her to instruct the 
HSE to prioritise the immediate opening of the unoccupied beds at Kenmare 
Community Nursing Unit. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan noted 7 beds in Kenmare Community Nursing Unit are 
currently not in operation. There is a clear need in the local area for these beds to 
be in operation and the ongoing lack of available beds, places additional stress on 
individuals and their families. Cllr. O’ Sullivan is requesting the HSE prioritise the 
immediate recruitment of staff to allow these beds to open. 

 
27 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald SECONDED this motion. 
 
16. Delivery Schedule for Upcoming Roads Projects 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae proposed 
That Kerry County Council, following the allocation of over €33 million in National 
Roads funding to Kerry for 2026, set out a clear delivery schedule for all approved 
projects and confirm that tenders will be published without delay for all projects 
where funding has been allocated. Provide a timeline for the commencement and 
completion of each project to ensure that works are progressed in a timely and 
efficient manner. Ensure that all funding allocated is fully drawn down and expended 
within the required timeframe, so as to maximise delivery on the ground. 
 
The following reply issued:  
The works and procurement strategies associated with the projects, which have 
received funding, are being planned in accordance with the TII Project Management 
Guidelines. There will be updates and briefings throughout the year on project 
progress and every effort will be made to progress and deliver these projects 
efficiently using the funding allocated. The allocation under the TII grant heading 
Maintenance – Protection & Renewal (€1,175,825) is set out in the Schedule of 
Municipal District Works Plans for each Municipal District. In addition, projects 
currently at construction stage, progress at pace, including the N71 Kenmare to 
Bonane Phase 2 Pavement scheme (€2,500,000) and the completion of the N72 
Fossa Village RSIS scheme (€1,500,000). 
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae requested the Council provide a clear plan, including 
timelines to ensure funding allocated in 2026 is fully spent. Cllr. Healy-Rae believes 
this would support the case for increased allocations in 2027.  
 
The Chief Executive advised that all projects have project timelines and project 
programmes in place to ensure successful delivery. Further detail in relation to the 
programme can be provided through the SPC and Municipal Districts. 
 
17. Delivery of More Houses  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Podge Foley proposed 
To call on the Department of Housing to facilitate the building and delivery of more 
houses. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Podge Foley called on the Department of Housing to do everything possible to 
commence a building programme.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald SECONDED this motion.  
 
18. Locations of Proposed Bus Stops & Shelters 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Paul Daly proposed 
That Kerry County Council detail the locations of proposed bus stops and shelters 
across the county and give a timeline for their completion. 

 
28 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
 
The following reply issued:  
The National Transport Authority (NTA), in consultation with Local Link and Bus 
Éireann, has completed an audit of all officially registered primary bus stops in 
County Kerry. 
 
The audit identifies primary bus stop locations in 48 settlements across the county. 
These primary stops are centrally located within each settlement and include 
additional key destinations such as hospitals and third level institutions. The NTA 
selected these locations as those that best serve passengers and support efficient 
bus operations. 
 
The identified locations are:  
Abbeydorney, Annascaul, Ardfert, Baile an Fheirtéaraigh, Ballybunion, Ballyduff, 
Ballyheigue, Ballylongford, Barraduff, Beaufort (Bridge & Village), Blennerville, 
Brandon, Caherdaniel, Cahersiveen, Camp Junction, Castlecove, Castlegregory, 
Castleisland, Castlemaine, Causeway, Ceann Trá, Chapeltown, Currow, Daingean 
Uí Chúis, Duagh, Dún Chaoin, Farranfore, Kerry Airport, Fenit, Firies, Fossa, 
Glenbeigh, Inch, Kenmare, Kilgarvan, Killarney, Knightstown, Listowel, Lixnaw, 
Milltown, Moyvane, Portmagee, Rathmore, Sneem, Spa, Tarbert, Tralee and 
Waterville. 
 
Kerry County Council’s Capital Delivery Units are now progressing the upgrade of 
these bus stops to meet NTA standards and specifications. 
 
Under NTA guidelines, a bus stop qualifies for a shelter only if:  
• It is served by at least five bus services per weekday (across one or more routes), 
and 
• Suitable land is available for a shelter. 
 
Under the National Transport Authority (NTA) Bus Stop Enhancement Programme, 
Kerry County Council has carried out the following: 
 
Completed Works 
Kerry County Council has completed the following bus stop installations and 
upgrades: 
1. Rathmore (Eastbound) – New stop with shelter. 
2. Mission Road, Killarney – Larger urban bus stop installed with shelter. 
3. Fossa – Westbound stop with shelter and new eastbound stop. 
4. Rock Road, Killarney – Inbound stop upgraded; outbound stop constructed with 
shelter. 
 
Ballybunion Bus Stop – Section 38 in Q1 2026 
Design work for the Ballybunion Bus Stop is complete. Kerry County Council expects 
to initiate the Section 38 process at the end of Q1 2026, and complete construction 
before the 2026 summer season. 
 
Bus Stops Scheduled to Commence Construction – Q2 2026 
The following bus stops are programmed to begin construction in Q2 2026: 
5. Milltown–Killarney Road – eastbound and westbound stops. 

 
29 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
6. Beaufort Village – one stop. 
7. Chapeltown – one stop. 
 
Bus Stops at Design Stage (TII Approval Required) 
The following locations are at design stage and require approval from Transport 
Infrastructure Ireland (TII). These projects will include pedestrian crossings as part 
of the design and will proceed through the Section 38 statutory process following 
approval. Construction is targeted for Q3 2026: 
8. Lispole (N86) – eastbound & westbound 
9. Inch (R561) – eastbound & westbound 
10. Castlemaine (N70) – northbound & southbound 
11. Milltown (N70) – northbound & southbound 
12. Killorglin (N70) – eastbound & westbound 
13. Glenbeigh (N70) – eastbound & westbound 
14. Waterville – northbound & southbound 
15. Caherdaniel (N70, near National School) – northbound & southbound 
16. Sneem (Sportsfield Road) – one stop 
 
Bus Stops Progressing to Design Stage – Q2 2026 
The following bus stop locations are scheduled to enter design development in Q2 
2026: 
17. Kilgarvan – northbound & southbound 
18. Kenmare – one stop upgrade 
19. Baile an Fheirtéaraigh – eastbound & westbound 
20. Ceann Trá – eastbound & westbound 
21. Dún Chaoin – eastbound 
22. Camp Junction – eastbound & westbound 
23. Brandon – one stop 
24. Knightstown – one stop 
25. Portmagee – one stop 
26. Killorglin Square – Upgrade to accommodate additional bus capacity. 
 
Kerry County Council is preparing tender documentation to appoint a consultant in 
Q2 2026. The appointed consultant will progress a range of locations through 
preliminary design, statutory process, detailed design and contract documentation. 
Subject to funding it is proposed for construction commencement in Q4 2026. Given 
their location on National Roads, several sites will require ongoing TII input. 
 
Locations under consideration for this phase are: 
27. Blennerville 
28. Duagh 
29. Lixnaw 
30. Tarbert 
31. Tralee MTU North 
32. Tralee MTU South 
 
Kerry County Council is currently progressing inhouse design of the following 
locations, with the view of commencing construction in the latter half of 2026: 
33. Abbeydourney 
34. Ballyduff 

 
30 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
35. Ballyheigue 
36. Ballylongford 
37. Causeway 
38. Currow 
39. Firies 
40. Moyvane 
41. Spa 
 
Once construction on the above locations commences, Kerry County Council will 
advance additional bus stop locations. 
 
Pole & Signage Programme 
Kerry County Council, in conjunction with the NTA, has rolled out a pole and signage 
programme at 16 bus stop locations across the county. 
 
Cllr. Paul Daly queried why Curraheen was not on the list and also asked for 
clarification if the Spa on the list refers to Tralee or Killarney.  
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald A/ Director of Service undertook to revert to the councillor.  
 
19. Mandatory Requirement to Teach the National Anthem in Schools 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Robert Brosnan proposed 
Go rúnaíonn CCC scríobh chuig an Aire Oideachais, ag iarraidh ar an Roinn 
Oideachais scrúdú a dhéanamh ar an gceist maidir le ceanglas éigeantach a 
thabhairt isteach go múintear focail, brí agus léiriú cuí Amhrán na bhFiann do gach 
dalta bunscoile agus iar-bhunscoile mar chuid de churaclam na scoile. 
 
That Kerry County Council resolves to write to the Minister for Education, calling on 
the Department of Education to examine the introduction of a mandatory requirement 
that all primary and post primary school pupils are taught the words, meaning and 
appropriate performance of the National Anthem, Amhrán na bhFiann, as part of the 
school curriculum. 
 
Is ábhar é  seo atá le breithniú ag na Comhaltaí. 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan highlighted the importance of the national anthem, the pride 
and depth of culture that comes through in it. 
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald supported this motion and as a teacher said he would make 
every effort to teach Amhrán na bhFiann but questioned if the word “mandatory” 
should be included in the motion. Cllr. Fitzgerald noted circumstances where 
students would not be in a position to learn the words of the anthem.  
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan agreed to amend the wording of the motion  
 
That Kerry County Council resolves to write to the Minister for Education, calling on 
the Department of Education to examine the introduction of a requirement that all 

 
31 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
primary and post primary school pupils are taught the words, meaning and 
appropriate performance of the National Anthem, Amhrán na bhFiann, as part of the 
school curriculum. 
 
21. Seaweed Harvesting Policy 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. John O’Donoghue proposed 
Does Kerry County Council have a policy on commercial seaweed harvesting and 
do they have any role in the issuing of licenses for same. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council does not have a regulatory role regarding the harvesting of 
seaweed. The harvesting, disturbance or removal of seaweed requires either a 
Maritime Usage Licence (MUL) or Maritime Area Consent (MAC) which is issued by 
the Maritime Area Regulatory Authority (MARA). As an independent regulatory 
agency, MARA is tasked with implementing the Maritime Area Planning (MAP) Act 
2021, as amended. 
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue noted the response and asked what level of engagement does 
the Council have with Maritime Area Regulatory Authority?   
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill SECONDED this motion.  
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald A/Director of Service advised that the Council has engagement with 
the Maritime Area Regulatory Authority (MARA) and undertook to bring this motion to 
their attention.  
 
22. Action to Expedite Compliance with Derelict Notice 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Anne O’Sullivan proposed 
Regarding vacant and derelict sites/properties in probate, which have derelict site 
notice served and displayed, is Kerry County Council precluded from taking any action 
to expedite compliance with the derelict notice. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council is committed to safeguarding the amenity, environmental quality, 
and orderly development of the county through the consistent and robust exercise of 
its statutory powers and responsibilities. The Council places significant emphasis on 
addressing issues relating to derelict and neglected properties, recognising the 
adverse impacts such sites can have on communities, public safety, visual amenity, 
and sustainable development. Issues relating to property dereliction are addressed in 
accordance with the provisions of the Derelict Sites Act 1990. The provisions of the 
Act apply irrespective of ownership circumstances. Situations involving probate, estate 
administration, unresolved title matters, or other ownership processes do not suspend 
or mitigate the application of the Act where a site meets the statutory definition of 
dereliction.  
 
The Council continues to actively progress cases under the Act and to utilise the 
statutory mechanisms available to it in addressing dereliction. In 2024, a total of 39 
properties were formally entered onto the Derelict Sites Register. During 2025, a 
further 44 properties were added to the Register. In addition, there are currently 241 

 
32 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
properties with active case files under investigation, with engagement underway in 
respect of 106 of these cases. 
 
The derelict sites process is a multi-stage statutory procedure which includes the 
investigation and assessment of reported sites, engagement and correspondence with 
property owners or their representatives, and the progression of formal statutory 
actions where required under the Derelict Sites Act 1990. These actions may include 
the service of notices requiring works to be undertaken to prevent or remedy 
dereliction, the entry of properties onto the Derelict Sites Register, the application of 
the Derelict Sites Levy, and, where appropriate, the initiation of legal proceedings. 
 
The Council seeks to investigate all reports of derelict properties received and to 
engage proactively with property owners in order to facilitate the timely remediation of 
sites where dereliction has been identified. In addition to responding to complaints and 
reports from the public, the Council also undertakes proactive surveys of towns and 
villages throughout the county to identify properties that may meet the statutory 
definition of dereliction. 
  
Where a property is determined to be derelict, the Council will proceed as necessary 
in accordance with the provisions of the Act. While the Council prioritises engagement 
with property owners, estate representatives, and other relevant parties in order to 
facilitate voluntary remediation where possible, formal enforcement mechanisms may 
be pursued where properties remain in a derelict 
condition. 
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service confirmed a property going through probate does not 
impact on the Derelict Sites process.  
 
23.03.2026.20 Correspondence – Conferences and Seminars 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Niall Kelleher and SECONDED by Norma 
Moriarty it was agreed to get retrospective approval for the attendance of Cllr. 
Martin Grady on a visit to London for St. Patrick's Day, March 2026. 
 
(b) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Angie Baily and SECONDED by Cllr. Niall O’ 
Callaghan it was agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllr. Michael Foley, Cllr. 
Bobby O’ Connell, Cllr. Tommy Griffin, Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald, Cllr. Mikey 
Sheehy and Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan on the training - URBACT & EUI Information 
Session to be held in Dublin on Wednesday 25 March 2026. 
 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly and Cllr. Michael Leane was also granted approval however as 
the registration was closed, they were advised they would be added to a waiting 
list.  
 
(c) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald and SECONDED by 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley it was agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllr. Jackie 
Healy-Rae, Cllr. Tommy Cahill and Cllr. Jimmy Moloney to the AILG Training in 
partnership with the Northern Ireland Local Government Association (NILGA), titled 
“Ending Violence Against Women and Girls” to be held at The Slieve Russell 
Hotel, Cavan from Tuesday 24 and Wednesday 25 March 2026 

 
33 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
 
(d) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly and SECONDED by Cllr. Bobby O 
Connell to authorise the attendance of Cllr Tommy Griffin, Cllr. Charlie Farrelly, Cllr. 
Mikey Sheehy, Cllr Tommy Cahill, Cllr. Niall Kelleher, Cllr. Norma Moriarty, Cllr. 
Podge Foley, Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan and Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae to attend the IPI 
Annual Training Conference 2026 which will be held in the Radisson Blu, Athlone 
from 16 – 17 April 2026. 
 
(e) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly and SECONDED by Cllr. Breandán 
Fitzgerald it was agreed to get retrospective approval for the attendance of Cllr. 
Bobby O’ Connell, Cllr Martin Grady, Cathaoirleach Michael Foley and Cllr. Niall 
Kelleher to the Road Safety Conference held in Killarney on the 11 and 12 March 
2026. 
 
23.03.2026.21 Correspondence General 
 
Deputation with T.I.I. 
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue Director of Service referred to correspondence from T.I.I.  
 
T.I.I. have accepted a request for a meeting with Elected Members. It was agreed 
the following Elected Members would attend  
 
1. Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae 
2. Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald 
3. Cllr. Michael Foley (Cathaoirleach) 
4. Cllr. Norma Moriarty 
5. Cllr. Jimmy Moloney 
6. Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae 
7. Cllr. Tommy Cahill 
8. Cllr. Robert Brosnan 
9. Cllr. Niall Kelleher 
 
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue undertook to provide details on the number of tweets to Cllr. 
Robert Brosnan following his previous request on this matter.  
 
  
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were circulated: 
List of correspondence circulated at the March 2026 
Meeting of Kerry County Council   
  
Date 
From 
Description 
 1. 
13/02/2026 
Dept of 
Culture, 
Communication 
and Sport  
Response to a resolution by the Members to 
request that a review be conducted on the future of 
media reporting in Ireland. 
 
 2. 
13/02/2026 
National 
Broadband 
Ireland 
Response to a resolution by the Members re the 
roll out of National Broadband  

 
34 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
3. 
19/02/2026 
ComReg 
Response to a resolution by the Members re phone 
coverage in the county.  
4. 
19/02/2026 
Uisce Éireann 
Response to a resolution by the Members 
requesting a waiver for wastewater.
5. 
19/02/2026 
Uisce Éireann 
Response to a resolution by the Members in 
relation to upgrading schemes in Chorca Duibhne 
6. 
23/02/2026 
Min For Health 
Response to a resolution by the Members in 
relation to the provision of Dental Clinics.  
7. 
25/02/2026 
TII 
Response to a resolution by the Members in 
relation for a meeting with the TII to discuss 
Greenways, N86 and N70
8. 
26/02/2026 
Dept of 
Transport 
Response to a resolution by the Members in 
relation to a delay in Driving Test.
9. 
27/02/2026 
Min for 
Agriculture, 
Food & Marine
Response to a resolution by the Members in 
relation to the National Veterinary Prescription 
System. 
10. 
02/03/2026 
Dep of Housing 
LG & Heritage 
Response to a resolution by the Members in 
relation to review Sec 160 of Planning and Dev Act 
2000.
11. 
03/03/2026 
HSE 
Response to a resolution by the Members in 
relation to the provision of Dental Clinics.  
12. 
06/03/2026 
Min for 
Agriculture, 
Food & Marine
Response to a resolution by the Members to 
request Chairman of Bord Bia to set aside form his 
role.
13. 
09/03/2026 
TII 
Response to a request by Members to blanket Ban 
on planning on NSR and request to deputation. 
14. 
10/03/2026 
NTA 
Response to a resolution by the members in 
relation to connect bus time and flights times that 
service Kerry Airport. 
15. 
10/03/2026 
Minister of 
State for Health 
Mary Butler. 
Response to a resolution from the Members 
proposing that funding be made available for 
clinical treatment for people suffering with mental 
illness. 
16. 
12/03/2026 
Minister for 
Education  
Response to a resolution by the members in 
relation a course be designed for Primary & 
Secondary Education, educating pupils and 
students on the issue of 'Truth in media and social 
media'
17. 
13/03/2026 
Minister for 
Justice 
Response to a resolution by the members in 
relation to a request to review the Community 
Grant Aid Scheme.  
18. 
16/03/2026 
Minister for 
Education 
Response to a resolution by the members in 
relation to children’s use of internet enabled 
devices.
19. 
18/03/2026 
Minister for 
Housing, Local 
Government 
and Heritage
Response to a resolution by the members in 
relation to Short Term Letting Regulations.  

 
35 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
20. 
12/02/2026 
Galway County 
Council 
Galway County Council calling on Minister for 
Transport to re-evaluate the role of the RSA and to 
roll out the National Safety Camera Strategy. 
21. 
17/02/2026 
Wexford 
County council 
Wexford County Council calling on Government to 
task IPB Irish Public Bodies to provide insurance 
cover for commercial and residential properties 
that are unable to obtain insurance form 
commercial insurers. 
22. 
18/02/2026 
Westmeath 
County council 
Westmeath CC write to the Min for Housing to 
increase the threshold for social housing Provision 
and HAP.
23. 
04/03/2026 
Galway County 
Council 
Galway County Council call upon the Government 
to enact legislation to increase the provision of 
Irish-medium education. 
24. 
05/03/2026 
Sligo County 
Council 
 Sligo County Council calling on the Government to 
recognise the serious harm suffered by women and 
children in Mother and Baby Homes, County 
Homes and related institutions
25. 
05/03/2026 
Leitrim County 
Council 
Leitrim County Council calling on the Min For 
Justice to establish a national Grada Unit for 
human trafficking. 
26. 
05/03/2026 
Leitrim County 
Council 
Leitrim County Council calling on the Government 
to set up separate funding for Greenway 
maintenance. 
27. 
10/03/2026 
Clare County 
Council  
Resolution in relation to concerns expressed by the 
Elected Members of the financial pressure facing 
communities in particular for disabled people. 
28. 
12/03/2026 
Longford 
County council 
Resolution in relation to requesting emergency 
payment for people in receipt of disability 
allowance. 
 
 
23.03.2026.22 Minutes arising from the minutes as confirmed 
 
23.03.2026.23 Any Other Business 
 
Farewell Angela McAllen 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley congratulated Ms. Angela McAllen on her recent 
appointment as Divisional Manager in Cork County Council. He thanked her for 
keeping the county’s finances in a very healthy position and wished her well for the 
future.  
 
Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan expressed disappointment at Ms. McAllen’s departure but 
wished her well in her new position. 
 
Cllr. Martin Grady wished her well in her new position.  
 

 
36 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae said that despite her short time as Castleisland - Corca 
Duibhne MD Manager, he found her very hospitable and appreciated her expertise 
during the budget process. He wished her health and happiness for the future.  
 
Cllr. Niall Kelleher wished her well and commended her professionalism as Director 
of Finance. He said it is no wonder you are advancing to another role; Kerry’s loss 
is Cork’s gain.   
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald remarked that it is a fantastic opportunity for Angela. She is 
a very capable person and always helpful when trying to get thing things over the 
line. He wished her well in the future.  
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin wished to be associated with all the well wishes. He said he 
always found Angela very approachable and very practicable.  
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty said she was delighted for Angela on a personal level. As 
Director of Finance, she acknowledged how helpful she was, in particular her 
assistance with LEADER funding. She always approached matters with a sense of 
optimism and hope and was always aware of the groups that required support.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald said on behalf of the Corca Dhuibhne area, he said that 
Angela has been transformative for Dingle and complimented the work she 
undertook with Dingle’s sister city West Springfield, her attendance was so important 
and make the events possible.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill wished the outgoing Director well and thanked her for her help 
and assistance since joining Kerry County Council. He wished her well for the future.  
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan wished her well and acknowledged the pressurised position the 
Director of Finance holds. 
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan acknowledge her steady and effective hand during the budget 
process. She wished her continued success for the future.  
 
On behalf of the executive, The Chief Executive expressed his well wishes to the 
outgoing Director of Finance. He said that Angela has the public service running 
through her veins and DNA and it is well known how high Kerry County Councils 
finance department is regarded. He thanked her for her hard work as both Director 
of Finance and Municipal District Manager and had no doubt that their friendship 
would continue into the future.  
 
 Cllr. John O’ Donoghue wished to concur with the previous comments and wished 
her well in the future. He said that Angela has always been very helpful and always 
available at the end of the phone.  
 
Ms. Angela McAllen thanked everyone for the warm and kind words. She gave credit 
to the former Head of Finance Mr. John O’ Connor who minded the ship before her 
appointment. She also paid credit to the Finance staff. During her time as Director 
of Finance, she said that has been a number of economic cycles, such as the 
consolidation of the Town Council, Irish Water and Covid. She acknowledged the 

 
37 
March Ordinary Meeting – 23 March 2026 
support the Director of Finance has always received from the Elected Members and 
their approval during the budget process. She said the Local Authority is in a good 
position but not without the help and support of the Councillors.   
 
The meeting concluded at 2.31 p.m. 
 
Eileen O’ Donoghue 
 
_________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator 
Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
