May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
1 of 60 
 
 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect 
putting them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is 
available on request. 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ NA CRUINNITHE MHIOSIÚIL DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE 
CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN  
CHONTAE, TRÁ  LÍ, AR  AN  LUAN , 15 BEALTAINE, 2017 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL 
HELD IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE ON 
MONDAY, 15TH MAY 2017 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
R. Beasley 
M. Cahill 
P Connor-Scarteen         
B. Cronin 
J.J. Culloty 
P. Daly 
T. Ferris                             J. Finucane                       S. Fitzgerald  
      
J.F. Flynn 
N. Foley 
M. Gleeson  
        
D. Grady 
J. Healy-Rae 
M. Healy-Rae 
        
N. Kelleher 
M. Kennelly 
S. Locke 
 
         
J. Lucid 
D. McCarthy 
P. McCarthy  
         
T. McEllistrim 
J. Moloney 
N. Moriarty  
         
D. Nolan 
T. O’Brien 
B. O’Connell                      
M. O’Shea 
 L. Purtill 
D. Quigg 
 
        
J. Sheahan 
 G. Spring 
A. Thornton 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Ms. M. Murrell, Chief Executive    
  Mr. J. Kennelly, A/Director Water Services    
Ms. A. McAllen, Head of Finance 
  Mr. M. Scannell, A/Dir. Job Cr/Sust. ED          
Mr. M. O’Donoghue, A/Dir.H.&Corp.S.   Mr. C. O’Sullivan, Director of Operations        
Mr. L. Quinlan, Meetings Administrator Ms. J. McCarthy, SEO Tourism 
 
      
Ms. C. Farrell, SEO Housing 
  Mr. O. O’Shea, Press & Comm. Officer                
Mr. G. O’Brien, A/SEO Envir. Serv.         Ms. K. Kennelly, Arts Officer                         
Ms. B. Reidy, SSO Corporate Support   Ms. M. Galvin, CO Corporate Support            
Ms. J. O’Sullivan, CO Corp. Support         
 
 
The meeting commenced at 10.30am. 
 
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. M. O’Shea took the Chair. 
 
The Cathaoirleach referred members to Pages 29 – 31 of the Sunday Business 
Post which was circulated to all members where there is an article by Graham 
Clifford on Kerry: A Kingdom of Innovation.   
 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
2 of 60 
 
 
17.05.15.01 Cathaoirleach’s Report on the CPG Meeting held on the  
9th May 2017 
 
The Cathaoirleach read the following report into the record of the meeting: 
 
“Item 1 
 
Agenda for the May Council Meeting 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan gave a briefing on the Agenda for the May Council Meeting. 
 
The Cathaoirleach requested that (Name and address withheld for data protection 
purposes.  A paper copy of the minutes is available on request) would be allowed 
make a brief Presentation to the May meeting on her personal experience of the 
impact of Lymes Disease. 
 
The CPG agreed that this presentation would be made at the May meeting. 
 
Item 2  
Presentations to full Council 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan advised that the following requests were received to make 
Presentations to Council: 
 
1. 
Customer Services section of Iarnród Éireann who is undertaking a review 
of its customer service at all stations across the network.   
 
2. 
Union of Students in Ireland regarding publicly funded education.   
 
The CPG agreed to the Presentation by Iarnród Éireann but following discussion 
on the matter advised that this Presentation should be extended to include other 
significant issues which impact on the rail service for Kerry.   
 
The CPG agreed that the President of the Union of Students of Ireland would 
make a Presentation to a future Council meeting around the possible introduction 
of student loans. 
 
Item 3  
Update from the Chairs of SPCs 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher advised that the next meeting of the Quality of Life SPC would 
be held on the 10th May. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly stated a meeting of the Operations SPC was held on the 5th 
May and a detailed report will be circulated to members for the May Meeting. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley advised that a meeting of the Tourism, Culture, Arts & 
Recreation SPC was held on the 19th April and a detailed report will be circulated 
to members for the May Meeting. 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
3 of 60 
 
 
Item 4  
Review of requests for Civic Receptions 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan briefed the meeting on requests for Civic Receptions deferred 
from the April CPG meeting, requests received since then together with the 
requests received so far this year in accordance with the procedures set out in 
the adopted Protocol for Civic Honours Conferral. 
 
The CPG agreed the following: 
 
• Frau Liebherr and Kerry Mountain Rescue to be honoured at Civic 
Receptions to be hosted by full Council. 
 
• Dr. Crokes GAA Club to be honoured at a Civic Reception to be hosted by 
Killarney MD as previously agreed. 
 
• Panissiere – Listowel Town Twinning to be afforded a Civic Reception to 
be hosted by Listowel Municipal District. 
 
• Glenbeigh/Glencar GAA Team to be honoured at a Civic Reception to be 
hosted by South & West Kerry MD as previously agreed. 
 
• Basketballer Áine McKenna to be honoured at the County Annual Awards 
event. 
 
• Mezzo-Soprano Paula Murrihy and Boxer Patrick McCarthy to be 
honoured at the Tralee MD Annual Awards event. 
 
• St. Brendan’s College Football Team, St. Brendan’s College U15 Soccer 
Team and Spa GAA Dance Team to be honoured at the Killarney MD 
Annual Awards event. 
 
Item 5  
Any other business 
 
National Guidelines for Solar Farm Developments and Renewable Energy  
 
Members expressed much concern at the processing of applications for planning 
permission for solar farm development in the absence of proposed updated 
renewable energy national guidelines which the Department of Housing, 
Planning, Community and Local Government are currently preparing and asked 
that County Development Plan be reviewed in this respect. 
 
Both the Chief Executive and Mr. M. Scannell, A/Director of Services advised that 
the County Development Plan could not be reviewed until these proposed 
Guidelines are received.” 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
4 of 60 
 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly advised that he highlighted at CPG that energy demand is about 
to soar and the Renewable Energy Strategy for the county must be reviewed.  
Huge resources go into the processing of applications for both solar and wind 
farms and even though Kerry County Council refuses permission An Bord 
Pleanála subsequently grants it.  This is impacting not just on North Kerry but on 
the entire county.  In the County Development Plan there are areas in North 
Kerry ‘open to consideration’ yet there are no national guidelines in place for 
solar farm applications.  Cllr. Kennelly called for an immediate review of the Kerry  
Renewable Energy targets in the County Development Plan. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty agreed that the Renewable Energy Strategy in the County 
Development Plan should be reviewed immediately.  He also asked that the 
granting of permission for one off rural houses would be reviewed in light of a 
recent European Court ruling.  He then moved Notice of Motion No. 31. 
 
31. 
New Wind Farm Policy in the Kerry County Development Plan 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.J. Culloty PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council would commit to immediately commence developing 
the new Wind Farm Policy in the Kerry County Development Plan, once the 
Department publishes the new guidelines. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Wind Energy Development Guidelines 2006, issued by the Minister 
under Section 28, are, at present, subject to a review.  Following the 
publication of these revised guidelines by the Minister, it is intended to 
review Kerry County Councils Renewable Energy Strategy with a renewed 
analysis of the assimilative capacity of the landscape to absorb renewable 
energy infrastructure, with respect to noise, shadow flicker, separation 
distances and visual amenity. 
 
Cllr. Culloty stated Deputy Brassil recently spoke to the Minister who advised that 
it could be next September before the revised guidelines will issue.  He advised 
that Donegal County Council amended their Renewable Energy Strategy so that 
wind turbines cannot be constructed within 10 times their height of any dwelling.  
When Kerry County Council refused permission and the An Bord Pleanála 
Inspector agreed with the Council that decision was overturned by the Bórd.   
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher highlighted when the County Development Plan was being 
reviewed in 2014 members were informed that they could not review the 
Renewable Energy Strategy as new guidelines were imminent from the 
Department.  However Donegal County Council reviewed their RES and he 
believed Kerry County Council should do likewise.  Cllr. Kelleher SECONDED 
Cllr. Culloty’s motion. 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
5 of 60 
 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly PROPOSED that an emergency meeting would be requested 
with Minister Coveney immediately. 
 
Cllr. D. Nolan supported the views expressed by previous speakers in relation to 
the guidelines for the review of the Renewable Energy Strategy.  Éir recently 
contacted members to advise that it is intended to connect Clare with Kerry under 
the River Shannon and it is clear that Kerry is being targeted for the production of 
renewable energy.  It is time that Kerry set its own targets.  Cllr. Nolan added that 
the amenity value of North Kerry must be changed in the review of the 
Renewable Energy Strategy. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane asked why the cost of energy has not reduced for the customer 
with all the alternate sources of energy.  He asked that Minister Coveney would 
be requested to give a commitment as to when the new guidelines will be 
published.  Cllr. Finucane agreed with management that the new national 
guidelines must be published before the RES can be reviewed.  It could be 
argued that there is a requirement on the State to review tax incentives for wind 
turbines.   
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson highlighted if we continue to diminish the amenity value of the 
county we will suffer hugely in the long term and in time there will be efforts to 
undo the rampant desecration of the county.  60% of our economy depends on 
tourism and if the number of wind turbine developments continues to increase it 
will have an adverse impact on tourism.  If these developments were proposed 
for Dublin city they would not be permitted.  Cllr. Gleeson PROPOSED that all 
applications for wind farms would be deferred pending a review of the Renewable 
Energy Strategy.   
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED this proposal.  
 
Cllr. J. Moloney confirmed members were advised in 2014 they could not review 
the Renewable Energy Strategy until the new guidelines were published.  Wind 
turbines are now being developed in low lying areas and they are causing a lot of 
damage during construction and the residents do not want them.  In conclusion 
Cllr. Moloney supported Cllr. Gleeson’s proposal.  
 
The Cathaoirleach stated all members agree Kerry is a very scenic county that 
depends on tourism and it must be protected. 
 
Mr. M. Scannell accepted there has been undue delay in the publication of the 
new national guidelines and this has been a concern for both members and 
management.  Current legislation does not permit a planning authority to defer a 
planning application and there is a legal obligation on them to deal with 
applications as they are submitted.  An applicant or objector who is not satisfied 
with a planning authority’s decision can lodge an appeal with An Bord Pleanála 
who can overturn the decision of the planning authority.  If an application for 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
6 of 60 
 
 
planning is refused in accordance with the County Development Plan An Bord 
Pleanála may grant permission in the national interest.  In that context it is 
important that the Kerry County Development Plan has cognisance of national 
policy and guidelines and members should focus their efforts on influencing the 
guidelines.  Mr. Scannell advised members he has been assured that the 
guidelines are being finalised.  He will meet with Department officials in the 
coming weeks and he undertook to raise this issue with them.  He asked 
members to be patient and following the summer a mid term review of the County 
Development Plan will be undertaken and the review of the Renewable Energy 
Strategy can be included at that time. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty stated people who appealed to An Bord Pleanála did not find 
them helpful.  Their inspector upheld the decision of Kerry County Council yet the 
Bord over turned his/her recommendation and granted permission.  He asked if 
the people making these decisions have regard to the importance of the county 
for tourism.  Donegal County Council reviewed their RES and wind turbines must 
be located 10 times the height of the turbine from the nearest house.  In 2014 
members were informed the new guidelines were imminent yet they have not 
been issued by the Department.  That is not the fault of the members of Kerry 
County Council but it is to the cost of the county.  He had no issue with the 
location of wind turbines on the county bounds but there is an issue in other 
areas as they are 150m high.  The landscape is almost at saturation point and he 
believed when it is at capacity other options i.e. bio mass, tidal energy etc will be 
developed.  Cllr. Culloty called for an immediate review of the Kerry Renewable 
Energy Strategy.   
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly again stated energy demand is about to soar and he called for a 
meeting with the Minister in the next few weeks. 
 
The Cathaoirleach stated the Minister would be requested to meet with a 
deputation from Kerry County Council on this issue as soon as possible. 
 
Vote of Sympathy 
 
Cllr. D. Grady extended a vote of sympathy to the Mannix family on the tragic 
death of their daughter and sister Annette on the Killarney Bypass the previous 
week.   
 
Cllr. Gleeson supported this expression of sympathy and added that 20 years 
ago he proposed that there would be a left only turning at the Lewis Road 
junction.  He asked that this dangerous junction would be addressed 
immediately. 
 
 
 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
7 of 60 
 
 
17.05.15.02 Confirmation of Minutes 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Gleeson, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Finucane 
it was resolved that the minutes of the Special Meeting of Kerry County 
Council to consider the 2017 Service Delivery Plan for the Operations 
Department held on the 3rd April 2017 be confirmed. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. S. Fitzgerald 
it was resolved that the minutes of the April Ordinary Meeting of Kerry 
County Council held on 24th April 2017 be confirmed. 
 
17.05.15.03 Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
 
The Chief Executive read the following report into the record of the meeting: 
 
“Introduction 
 
Section 136(2) of the Local Government Act 2001, as inserted by Section 51 of 
the Local Government Reform Act 2014 places an obligation on the Chief 
Executive to prepare a report, to be known as the Management Report, in 
relation to the performance of his or her Executive Functions during the 
preceding calendar month, including implementation of policy or other matters 
required by the Council in the exercise of its Reserved Functions and the 
provision of services by the Council. 
 
As agreed by the Members, the report will be forwarded to you on a monthly 
basis along with the documentation for the ordinary monthly meetings. 
 
Members will also be aware that an update report is provided at each Municipal 
District Meeting on the work of the Directorates within Kerry County Council.  
These very detailed reports provide updates on the main activities per directorate 
at Municipal District level on such matters as the Housing Programme, the 
Roadworks Programme, Water and Wastewater projects, , Environmental 
Services etc. Please note in particular that the revised Municipal District Housing 
Report presented at the Municipal District Meetings includes updates across all 
social housing activity at municipal district level for the information of Municipal 
District members. As previously advised in order to avoid duplication of reporting, 
updates on these matters are not included in the Chief Executive's Report. 
 
The report has been prepared for the May 2017 Council Meeting. 
 
Finance Directorate 
 
As agreed with the Members, a Financial Report for Members will be provided on 
a quarterly basis in line with the Quarterly Reporting Process for Income and 
Expenditure already in place to the Department of Housing, Planning Community 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
8 of 60 
 
 
& Local Government. The Qtr 1 Financial report will be set out in the Chief 
Executive’s Report presented at the June Council Meeting. 
 
Infrastructure, Operations, Health & Safety Directorate 
 
Tralee Active Travel - Redevelopment of The Mall 
Works are on-going and on schedule. The Council has a full time Engineer on 
site liaising with local businesses. The Contractor has indicated that the works at 
the junction of Denny Street and the Mall, as well as the pavement overlay of 
Denny Street are expected to be completed this week, following which Denny 
Street will be opened to two way traffic. The Council is running an advertising 
campaign, in conjunction with local traders, identifying the availability of the 2,600 
car parking spaces in the town centre and assisting traders in the promotion of 
the town centre whilst works are on-going.             
  
Listowel By-Pass 
The EIA for the Listowel By-Pass was submitted to An Bord Pleanala last Friday. 
The CPO for the scheme will also be published this week in the local press and 
will then be submitted to the Board. Details of the scheme will be available in the 
Listowel Municipal District office and on our website. The Council will also be 
issuing a press release in the local media.  
  
CFRAM - Tralee Flood Risk Management Options   
The OPW, through their Consultants, JACOBS, has reassessed the flood 
maps/risk and options for Tralee (driven by the 2015/16 winter flooding event). 
The remodelling and remapping is now complete, which the Council has proofed 
to ensure the model accurately reflects the flooding witnessed in recent years. 
The re-assessment to identify potentially viable options to manage this revised 
flood risk has also been completed.  
 
The OPW held a public consultation day on the outcomes of this review, 
including revised flood maps and flood risk management options, last Thursday 
in the Brandon Hotel and invitations were issued to the members by the OPW.    
 
Economic & Community Development Directorate 
 
Kerry Local Enterprise Office  
Six projects were approved funding worth €70,000 at the April meeting of the 
evaluation committee. 
 
An extensive training programme is ongoing with courses underway in Start Your 
Own Business, a Business Growth Programme, a Food Academy Programme 
and Digital Marketing. Demand for mentoring and Trading Online Vouchers 
remains strong. 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
9 of 60 
 
 
The Kerry Business and Jobs expo took place on April 9th in Killarney with LEO 
staff manning the stand and engaging with the public and participating 
businesses.  
 
A new marketing export grant scheme was launched with €25,000 available to 
facilitate development of overseas markets. Eligible businesses can receive up to 
€2,500 towards trade show attendance and other marketing activities. 
 
Economic Development Unit (EDU) 
 
Dingle Creativity & Innovation Hub 
The Dingle Creativity and Innovation Hub was officially launched by the Minister 
for Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation Mary Mitchell O’Connor TD on Friday 28th 
April 2017.  It was attended by the Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council, 
elected representatives and council management.  The new facility provides 
state-of-the-art services for start-up companies to establish, expand and 
collaborate with other businesses. 
 
The Dingle Hub is a community enterprise initiative supported by a range of 
significant partners including Eir, Dingle Business Chamber, Údarás na 
Gaeltachta, Kerry County Council and Net Feasa. Focusing on three key areas - 
Music/Film-making, Animation and Internet of Things (IoT), the Hub will place a 
significant emphasis on creativity and the role it can play in supporting and 
developing businesses. 
 
Heritage Council 
The Economic Development Unit is currently working in partnership with the 
Planning Section KCC, IT Tralee and Tralee Chamber Alliance on a Heritage 
Council Pilot "Health Check" Study for Tralee Town Centre. This study has been 
underway since its launch and the first national workshop for the 9 participating 
Pilot Study Towns in September 2016. The collaborative work is designed to 
identify the strengths and weaknesses of town centres and to establish a starting 
point for the revitalisation of the town centres.   
The Economic Development Unit presented at the second Heritage Council 
workshop on the future revitalisation of Tralee Town Centre and the ongoing 
work of the Health Check partnership.  
 
Island of Geese 
The rejuvenation of Tralee Town Centre West and the former Denny bacon 
factory at the Island of Geese in Tralee has taken another step forward with the 
appointment of consultants to draw up a master-plan for the 2.3 acre site. 
 
Reddy Architecture + Urbanism have been tasked with identifying options for the 
strategic site which was gifted to the people of Tralee by Kerry Group in 2014. 
Reddy will be required to assess how best to utilise the site while incorporating a 
number of guiding principles including: 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
10 of 60 
 
 
• 
Stimulating economic growth and job creation in the town 
• 
Enhancement of the physical fabric of the area 
• 
Promoting the regeneration of Tralee Town Centre West 
• 
Ensuring the area is vibrant and socially inclusive 
• 
Retaining a minimum of 30% of the site for public realm/amenity space. 
 
Tourism 
 
Destination Kerry Promotion in Germany 
The German tourism market is extremely important to Kerry and is a growth area 
year on year.  Increased direct access into Kerry Airport from Frankfurt and Berlin 
is a welcome boost.  Kerry tourism caters well to the German tourist who have 
been identified by Failte Ireland and Tourism Ireland under the main target 
segments of the ’Culturally Curious’ and the ‘Great Escapers’.   To build on the 
current number of German visitors to the county, Destination Kerry Tourism 
Forum are organising a presence by the Kerry Tourism Trade at The Castle 
Festival in Frankfurt during the weekend of the 23rd to 26th June 2017.  The 
Mayor of Frankfurt has issued an invitation to our Cathaoirleach Cllr Michael 
O’Shea to join him to officially open the festival.  County Kerry will enjoy a 
prominent presence at the festival and every opportunity will be taken to promote 
and market the diverse range of natural attractions and activities on offer 
throughout our beautiful county. 
 
Mobile Observatory 
The Tourism Unit is developing a proposal for a high-tech Mobile Observatory as 
a shared resource for communities in the International Dark Sky Reserve in 
South-West Kerry. The Observatory will be able to operate in all weathers and 
during the day as well.  Input is being provided by a range of national and 
international agencies and institutions including the European Space Agency. It 
will be the only such facility in Europe and give the Kerry Dark Sky Reserve an 
advantage over competitor astrotourism destinations. The observatory is a key 
objective of both Kerry County Council’s new County Tourism Strategy, 2016-
2022 and Failte Ireland’s Skellig Coast Visitor Experience Development Plan. 
The next stage is the detailed design of the vehicle and preparation of a business 
plan and submission of the project for capital grant support. 
 
Bray Head Discovery Point 
Design work and environmental monitoring is continuing on the joint signature 
discovery point at Bray Head, Valentia Island.  It is planned to hold a public 
consultation in Valentia at the end of the month as part of Environment Impact 
Assessment process.  The Council expects to be in a position to lodge a planning 
application with An Bord Pleanala before the end of August. 
 
Community Department 
 
 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
11 of 60 
 
 
2017 Town and Village Renewal Scheme 
On the 25th of April, Kerry County Council announced a call for Expressions of 
Interest from towns and villages with populations of less than 10,000, who may 
have a suitable project for consideration under the 2017 Town and Village 
Renewal Scheme. 
 
The Town and Village Renewal Scheme is an initiative under the Government’s 
Action Plan for Rural Development, Realising our Rural Potential, and is part of 
national and local support measures to rejuvenate rural towns and villages 
throughout Ireland. 
 
All Expressions of Interest must be submitted by the 15th of May and will be 
assessed based on the priorities as contained in the Scheme Outline. A 
maximum of 15 proposals will be selected for development into detailed 
applications, which will be submitted to the Department of Arts, Heritage, 
Regional, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs for final approval on the 30th of June 2017. 
 
Project proposals must include activities that will have clear positive impacts on 
the town or village making them more attractive places in which to live and work, 
and to increase their tourism potential. Extra priority will be given to projects 
which can stimulate economic activity between a town/village and neighbouring 
townlands. 
 
CLAR 2017 
 
On the 5th of May, Kerry County Council submitted 20 applications under the 
2017 CLÁR Scheme to the Department of Arts, Heritage, Rural & Gaeltacht 
Affairs which were broken down as follows: 
Measure 1:  Support for Schools/Community safety measures - 9 applications 
Measure 2: Schools/Community Play Areas - 2 applications 
Measure 3: Targeted Community Infrastructure Needs - 9 applications 
 
The projects submitted build on the excellent results achieved under the 2016 
CLAR Programme and the positive response from both the schools and 
communities in relation to the funding. In the coming months, it is the intention of 
management in consultation with the Members to: 
• 
review the priority list and amend/expand as maybe necessary in line with 
this Programme and other funding Programmes such as the Rural 
Recreation Fund etc. 
• 
agree the process going forward to ensure all grant opportunities are 
maximised for schools and communities throughout Kerry. 
 
Planning and Sustainable Development  
 
Killarney National Park was awarded UNESCO Biosphere Reserve status in 
1982 due to the high ecological diversity, extensive habitats and range of wildlife 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
12 of 60 
 
 
found within the park. A periodic review is currently underway by UNESCO 
examining the functioning of the biosphere. Kerry County Council in conjunction 
with NPWS have appointed Mc Carthy, Kelvin and O'Sullivan consultants to co-
ordinate and formulate a submission to retain the current UNESCO Biosphere 
accreditation for Killarney National Park and the surrounding area. The retention 
of this accreditation involves no new designations and will not result in any 
additional constraints for land owners. The submission of this application to retain 
the Biosphere accreditation builds upon the existing network of reserved land in 
state ownership (The National Park), and the excellent agricultural practices 
already in existence by the farming community in the surrounding SAC'c and 
SPA's.  
 
There is potential for numerous opportunities through biosphere accreditation:  
• Biosphere branding available for tourism initiatives and local agricultural 
products.  
• Website and social media promoting the biosphere and associated groups 
and events. 
• Potential funding opportunities for stakeholders e.g. agri-environment 
schemes, EU Life projects. 
 
Water, Environment, Fire & Library Services Directorate 
 
Anti Dumping Initiative Funding 
 
Kerry County Council recently applied for funding under the National Anti 
Dumping Initiative and has secured the maximum available funding of €23, 000 
for a range of anti dumping initiatives to further assist in our fight against litter in 
Kerry.  This funding will assist with surveillance and monitoring of known 
dumping black spots as wells as assisting with clean ups and waste removal at 
these locations. 
 
Draft River Basin Management Plan for Ireland 2018 - 2021 
 
The Waters and Communities Office are hosting public meetings to discuss the 
natural waters of County Kerry over the coming weeks. The Community Water 
Officer for Kerry will present information and seeking feedback on the latest draft 
River Basin Management Plan for Ireland 2018 – 2021. There will be a 
discussion on local interests such as:  water quality, angling, heritage, 
biodiversity, amenity use or issues affecting your local waterways.  This is an 
opportunity to share your knowledge of your local waterways. 
 
Rural Development (LEADER) Programme:  Rural Environment Theme 
 
South Kerry Development Partnership (SKPD) and North East and West Kerry 
Development (NEWKD) will be present for the meetings within their area, to 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
13 of 60 
 
 
discuss the upcoming targeted call for Expressions of Interest in the Rural 
Environment theme and sub-themes. 
 
The times, dates and venues for the meetings are listed below.  Two meetings 
have already been held in Tralee (3rd May) and Killarney (11th May).  
 
Location 
Venue 
Date 
Time 
Caherciveen
Ring of Kerry Hotel 
Tuesday 30th May 
7.30 pm 
Killorglin 
Killorglin Library 
Thursday 1st June 7.30 pm 
Listowel 
Listowel Family Resource 
Centre 
Thursday 8th June
7.30 pm 
Kenmare 
Carnegie Arts Centre 
Tuesday 13th 
June 
7.30 pm 
Dingle 
Benners Hotel 
Thursday 15th 
June 
7.30 pm 
 
Housing Directorate 
There is a separate item on the Council agenda giving updates on various recent 
national housing initiatives & announcements.” 
 
Cllr. N. Foley welcomed the proposed Mobile Observatory which is a very 
innovative proposal.  There has been huge public engagement on the Island of 
Geese and she asked that the public would be updated as the project 
progresses.  The people of Tralee have bought into this project and it is important 
they are kept informed.  She welcomed the additional funding for anti littering 
measures and added that the level of illegal dumping is disheartening.  Cllr. Foley 
asked that additional covert cameras would be purchased with the additional 
funding as this is the only way to catch those responsible.  The public 
consultation on CFRAMS was held in Tralee the previous Thursday and there is 
a need to aggressively pursue funding for the county.  There must be a 
determined political campaign to get as high up the priority list as possible.   
 
Cllr. Foley welcomed progress on Tralee Active Travel, the redevelopment of the 
Mall and the awareness that there are 2,600 car parking spaces in the town.  She 
asked that appropriate signage would be erected to direct motorists to available 
parking.  Cllr. Foley further asked that priority would be given to advancing Pay 
by Text.  Denny Street will shortly open to two-way traffic and Cllr. Foley asked 
that this would be well publicised.  While works are ongoing in the Mall she asked 
that the area would be made aesthetically pleasing with flowers, art exhibitions, 
sculptor etc. 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy welcomed the additional funding to address illegal dumping and 
added that covert cameras are the most effective means of dealing with illegal 
dumping.  He recently spent 4 hours with the Litter Warden at Dromadda where a 
lot of refuse was dumped illegally and while the refuse was removed it was as 
bad as ever a few days later.   It is proposed to hold just one meeting in North 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
14 of 60 
 
 
Kerry to discuss the upcoming targeted call for Expressions of Interest in the 
Rural Environment theme and sub-themes and Cllr. McCarthy asked that a 
further meeting would be held in Castleisland.  The closing date for receipt of 
expressions of interest under the 2017 Town and Village Renewal Scheme is the 
15th May and he asked if all towns and villages were notified and could the 
deadline be extended by a week. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane welcomed the fact that work on the Tralee Active Travel project 
is on schedule and he congratulated all involved.  He referred to the Destination 
Kerry promotion in Germany and called on the Chief Executive to consider an 
exchange of staff working in tourism between Kerry and Berlin.   Cllr. Finucane 
asked that the plight of the undocumented Irish in the US would be a priority for 
the Council.  There appears to be a shortage of trades’ people especially in 
Dublin and he called on the Construction Industry Federation to make the 
application process easier for those who wish to return to Ireland from abroad.   
 
Cllr. P. Daly welcomed the recent meeting on the River Basin Management Plan 
and added that Mr. J. Breen and Ms. C. Fisher made very good submissions.  
Cllr. Daly called on the Water Services Department to raise the issue of the Big 
River with Irish Water with a view to having it addressed immediately.  He was 
aware it is intended to survey the river shortly but it is too late for that as the 
problem needs to be addressed immediately. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg stated at the recent meeting in Killorglin in relation to the 
UNESCO Biosphere Reserve he asked if this would impact on river walks, 
farms etc. and he was advised it would not.  He requested confirmation that 
this is correct as farmers are concerned it will impact on farming and 
fishing.  He welcomed the Town and Village Renewal Scheme and asked 
that Killorglin would get priority.  Cllr. Quigg asked if the funding available 
from the Fisheries Local Area Group Development 2016 – 2023 is being 
fully availed of and will any projects come to fruition as a result in the near 
future. 
 
Cllr. S. Fitzgerald welcomed the Dingle Creativity Hub and he thanked 
management for progressing this important project.  If it is a success it will have 
potential for other areas.   Cllr. Fitzgerald thanked officials for the support given 
to groups in submitting projects for Clár funding.   
 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill referred to CFRAMS and called for projects to protect family homes 
as there is no funding available for them at present.  He asked if the Council is 
assisting families interested in availing of funding under the relocation scheme as 
he was aware of one family that is interested in it.  Cllr. Cahill welcomed the 
Destination Kerry promotion in Germany as it is important for the tourism industry 
in the county.  He welcomed the additional funding to address illegal dumping 
and he moved Notice of Motion No. 1. 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
15 of 60 
 
 
1. 
Increased incidents of ‘illegal dumping’ 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Cahill PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council declare war as a matter of extreme urgency on the 
increased incidents of ‘illegal dumping’ that is now becoming a major problem 
throughout the County. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The 2016 Litter Pollution Report was considered by the Members at the 
April 2017 Council Meeting.  This report highlighted the many activities that 
the Council undertook in 2016 to prevent and control litter pollution and 
illegal dumping in the County.  The newly adopted Litter Management Plan 
2017 -2019 shows our continued commitment to dealing with these ongoing 
issues. 
 
During 2016, 676 cases of littering/illegal dumping were investigated.  This 
resulted in 71 on the spot fines being issued and 9 successful prosecutions 
in Court.  The biggest impediment to pursuing further convictions is the 
lack of available evidence to link the perpetrator to the offence as required 
by legislation.  2016 also saw a reduction in the amount of fly tipping 
collected.  Considerable resources were allocated to promotional events, 
environmental awareness initiatives, clean up campaigns and enforcement 
activities during 2016. 
 
While tackling littering/illegal dumping remains on ongoing challenge, good 
progress is being made.  The council will continue to work with all 
stakeholders, including community groups and tidy towns committees to 
address this issue. 
 
Kerry County Council recently applied for funding under the National Anti 
Dumping initiative and has secured the maximum available funding of EU 
23, 000 for a range of anti dumping initiatives to further assist in our fight 
against litter in Kerry. 
 
Cllr. Cahill stated it is evident over the past 12 months that there is an increase in 
illegal dumping all over the county.  This is unfair on Tidy Towns groups and 
volunteers and it must be tackled. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris congratulated all involved in meeting the targets in Tralee and she 
welcomed the emphasis on economic development in the county especially in 
relation to the Town and Village Renewal Scheme.  Public toilets and a coach car 
park are urgently needed in Ardfert and in 2016 there were 8,000 visitors to the 
Cathedral with just a few coaches.  She commended Mr. T. Hayes and the staff 
in the LEO for the unseen work they do with businesses.  A large amount of 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
16 of 60 
 
 
employment is generated as a result of the advice they give.  Cllr. Ferris 
welcomed the NEWKD programme on economic inequality.  Studies have shown 
that it is possible to deliver economic equality and she asked if Kerry County 
Council equality proofs plans and policies.  She asked that a member of staff 
would attend this programme to ensure that Kerry County Council is meeting its 
legal obligations in adopting plans etc. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae referred to the UNESCO Biosphere Reserve status for 
Killarney National Park and highlighted that the problem of overgrown 
rhododendron must be addressed.  He hoped additional restrictions would not be 
imposed on people living in the area or on landowners as a result of this 
designation.  It was said that Kerry County Council wanted the entire Caragh 
catchment included and he requested clarification on this.  There are already 
enough restrictions on landowners in this area and he highlighted that they must 
apply for permission to reseed a field due to restrictions to protect the pearl 
mussel.  Cllr. Healy-Rae asked when applicants for LEADER funding will be 
informed if they were successful or not and when will the second call be made for 
applications for funding.  It is 6 or 8 weeks since management increased the 
charges at Transfer Stations and he believed this is having a huge impact on 
illegal dumping.  He asked that a report would be presented to members at the 
June Meeting on the level of illegal dumping over the past 6 to 8 weeks in 
comparison with the same period last year together with a comparison between 
the number of transactions at Transfer Stations in this period also.  If the 
increased charges are resulting in an increase in illegal dumping it maybe better 
to revert to the old charges as the Council is responsible for the cost of removing 
refuse that is dumped illegally.   
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan highlighted that Clonkeen, Glenflesk and many other areas in his 
MD were adversely affected by flooding and he asked that Kerry County Council 
would assist these areas.  Tidy Towns groups do great work and he called for the 
use of CCTV cameras to address the problem of illegal dumping. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady welcomed the work carried out in 2016 in cleaning rivers but 
expressed disappointment that funding was not provided in 2017 to continue this 
work.  Further work needs to be urgently done near the Flesk Bridge.  Since pay 
by weight was introduced the amount of illegal dumping has increased and he 
called for the appointment of a Litter Warden for Killarney. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin stated there is great potential now that there is a direct air service 
to and from Germany.  Killarney always had great links with Germany with the 
Liebherr Factory that employs almost 1,000 people.  Both he and Cllr. Gleeson 
met a visiting group from Lieberhausen who informed them they celebrate an 
Irish day each year in their town and they would be interested in creating further 
links with Kerry and Ireland.  At the recent meeting in Killarney regarding the 
UNESCO Biosphere Reserve he asked if there would be an extension to the 
reserve or the buffer zone and if it would impact on farming, planning permission, 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
17 of 60 
 
 
percolation tests for planning applications or river maintenance.  He was advised 
there would be no changes to environmental requirements and he called on 
management to confirm this.   
 
The Chief Executive advised it is hoped that the Master Plan for the Island of 
Geese will be completed by the end of the year by which time the demolition of 
the Denny Factory will be completed.  There has been a lot of engagement on 
the Town and Village Renewal Scheme and she was satisfied with the high level 
of engagement with communities and it will not be necessary to extend the 
closing date.  However, if a community wants to make an expression of interest 
they should contact Niamh O’Sullivan.  There will be projects coming through 
FLAG.  She referred members to Page 5 of the Chief Executive’s Report where it 
states that Kerry County Council in conjunction with NPWS will have a 
submission formulated to retain the current UNESCO Biosphere accreditation for 
Killarney National Park and the surrounding area.  The retention of this 
accreditation involves no new designations and will not result in any additional 
constraints for land owners.  The Chief Executive confirmed that the Council 
does equality proof our main policies.  The LCDC will update members on the 
expected dates for the 2nd call for LEADER funding.  The additional funding 
received to deal with waste will be targeted at areas where specific issues have 
arisen.  There has been a high level of take up of the recycling bags at Transfer 
Stations and there was a €0.5m shortfall because of the market.  The Chief 
Executive undertook to establish if an additional meeting could be held in 
Castleisland.  In conclusion, she also undertook to consider Pay by Text. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin asked if there will be an extension of the UNESCO Biosphere 
Reserve as the maps circulated show a buffer zone. 
 
Mr. M. Scannell advised members there will be three areas in the Biosphere 
Reserve (1) Core which is the National Park, (2) Buffer zone and (3) Transition 
area.  The other biosphere area in Ireland is Bull Island and Dublin city is the 
Transition area and there are no restrictions in the Transition area.  The broader 
area will be educated on the Core area.  He also asked if there would be any 
restrictions in the Buffer zone and Transition area and he was informed there 
would not be any restrictions other than existing EU designations. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg asked if farmers could have this clarification in writing. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae stated the UNESCO site is the same as last time but are the 
Buffer and Transition areas the same as heretofore.     
 
Cllr. P. Daly asked that a letter would issue to Irish Water regarding the sewerage 
in the big river and he further asked that works would be completed to Shaws 
while work is ongoing at the Mall. 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
18 of 60 
 
 
Mr. M. Scannell advised under the old UNESCO Biosphere designation there 
was no buffer or transition area.  These are broader areas that include the Reeks 
and Caragh areas.  These areas are included solely for education purposes. 
 
The Chief Executive welcomed the opportunity to educate people in the broader 
area and added that this designation is very important for Kerry from a tourism 
point of view.  There will be no additional restrictions on land owners as a result 
of the designation.   
 
17.05.15.04 Housing Update 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue referred members to his report dated 11th May 2017 on this 
item which was circulated and he briefed them in detail on the report under the 
following headings: 
 
• Repair & Leasing Scheme – application forms available from 17th May, 
closing date 1st June. 
• Housing Capital Programme 
• Housing Support Grants 
• Housing Circular 17/2017 – Summary of Social Housing Assessment 2017  
• Easy to Read Guide to Filling in the Social Housing Support Application 
Form 
• Housing Circular 11/2017 – Mortgage to Rent Scheme for Borrowers of 
Commercial Private Lending Institutions 
• National Oversight and Audit Commission – A Review of the Management 
and Maintenance of Local Authority Housing 
• Housing VOIDS – Vacant Properties 
• Energy Retrofitting. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris asked what safeguards are built into the Repair & Leasing Scheme 
if a landowner needs to sell or move into a property himself.  She asked if Kerry 
County Council is approved for a maximum of 17 properties under this Scheme.  
There is a housing crisis in Kerry and it is not being adequately addressed.  In 
conclusion Cllr. Ferris asked if the Tenant Purchase Scheme is either being 
replaced or suspended. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady asked if funding from the Capital Account of the former Town 
Councils can be used for repairs etc.  He would welcome changes to the Tenant 
Purchase Scheme as the current Scheme is unfair. 
 
Cllr. S. Locke advised that the application form for the Tenant Purchase Scheme 
stipulates that the tenant must have paid water charges to qualify to purchase 
their house.  As water charges no longer apply he asked can this be excluded 
from the application form. 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
19 of 60 
 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue informed members that the lease arrangement is a formal 
contract and Kerry was sanctioned for an initial tranche of up to 15 units under 
the Repair & Leasing Scheme.  No update on the Tenant Purchase Scheme was 
received from the Department recently however the Government carried out an 
extensive review of it at which time Kerry County Council made a submission 
including the concerns expressed by members.  He anticipated an outcome from 
this review in due course.  Capital funding can only be used for the purpose 
sanctioned by the Department. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly welcomed the Repair and Leasing Scheme and asked if any 
applications were received to-date. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue stated no applications were received to-date as the 
application process only commences on Wednesday 17th May. 
 
Cllr. Kennelly asked if it was intended to house applicants in villages with a view 
to renewing them.  He added that repairs to older housing stock are taking 
months and he asked what the reason for the delay is. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney requested a report on the properties purchased by the Council in 
private estates etc. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue stated it is a stipulation in the Tenant Purchase Scheme that 
an applicant must have paid water charges but he undertook to seek clarification 
from the Department on it.  The release of information on properties purchased is 
under review nationally in the context of Data Protection.  The Data Protection 
Commissioner recently engaged with local authorities and this is one issue being 
addressed.  The aim of the Repair & Leasing Scheme is to make additional units 
available, to address dereliction and to renew towns and villages if suitable units 
are available.  There have been problems in North Kerry in getting builders to 
carry out works and concerns have been expressed regarding the capacity of the 
private market to deliver. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady requested an update on proposals submitted some time ago for 
turn key developments. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue advised that a number of projects are with the Department 
for final sanction while a number are in the planning process and his Department 
is engaging with developers on others. 
 
The Cathaoirleach highlighted that there is a serious housing crisis in Dingle and 
employers cannot get workers as they cannot source accommodation.  He asked 
if floating accommodation could be located at the Quay in Dingle. 
 
 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
20 of 60 
 
 
17.05.15.05 2016 Kerry County Council Annual Report 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan referred members to the 2016 Kerry County Council Annual 
Report and stated the Draft was considered at the April meeting and it was now 
before Council for formal adoption.   It is intended to formally launch the Report 
on the day of the June Council Meeting. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Gleeson it was 
unanimously agreed to adopt the 2016 Kerry County Council Annual Report in 
accordance with Section 221 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended by 
the Local Government Act 2014. 
 
17.05.15.06 Report on the Tourism, Arts, Culture and Recreation SPC 
 
It was agreed to note Cllr. R. Beasley’s written report on the meeting of the 
Tourism, Arts, Culture and Recreation SPC held on the 19th April 2017. 
 
17.05.15.07 Report on the Operations SPC 
 
It was agreed to note Cllr. M. Kennelly’s written report on the meeting of the 
Operations SPC held on the 5th May 2017. 
 
17.05.15.08 Approval for the opening of Tenders 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. P. McCarthy 
it was agreed to approve the opening of Tenders for Consultancy Services 
for the Construction of 7 No. Dwelling Houses and Associated Siteworks 
at Listowel – Closing date: Wednesday 17th May 2017 at 3pm. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. O’Shea, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Cahill it 
was agreed to approve the opening of Tenders for N70 Kilderry Bends 
Improvement Scheme – Archaeological Consultancy Services Contract 
Stage (i) – (iv) – Closing date: Friday 2nd June 2017 at 2pm. 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach thanked Mr. P. Curry and the staff of the NRDO for 
progressing Kilderry Bends Improvement Scheme and added that he 
hoped construction would commence later in 2017. 
 
17.05.15.09 Presentation on the impact of Lymes Disease by   
 
 
 
Ms. A.M. O’Connor 
 
Ms. Anne Marie O’Connor read the following statement into the record of the 
meeting. 
 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
21 of 60 
 
 
“Firstly I want to thank you for giving me the opportunity to be here today. I am 
here to offer my husbands struggle with Lymes disease and also to give you a 
perspective on behalf of other patients like my husband who are experiencing 
difficulties of the diagnosis and treatment of this horrible disease. 
 
Peter first got sick 6 years ago after getting a bite from a tick.  He had the classic 
bulls eye rash on his arm but 6 years ago my husband or I knew very little if 
anything about the disease which was about to change our lives.  2 weeks after 
getting bitten, Peter was rushed by ambulance to Kerry University Hospital with 
chest pain which we thought was a heart attack but after a weeks stay and 
having various tests including an angiogram, doctors could not find any thing 
wrong with him and he left the hospital undiagnosed with anything.  The following 
few months his health continued to steadily decline with a mixture of symptoms 
ranging from blurred vision, pins and needles in his arms and legs, body 
weakness and chronic fatigue, Countless trips to our GP and doctors still could 
not understand what was wrong.  At one point a doctor told him it must be 
depression and told him to go and seek counselling and prescribed anti-
depressants.  As the months progressed into years his health problems 
continued to get a lot worse which resulted in him having to give up work as he 
was in bed with chronic pain most of the days.  It was heart breaking to see a 
person of 51 who was so fit and healthy going through such terrible pain. I was at 
my wits end with worry and I didn’t know who to turn to for medical help.  I asked 
my GP to do a lymes test, in the hope that it might shed some light on things, 
which he did and it came back negative. So as I thought he doesn’t have lymes.  
We were referred to a neurologist in Kerry and she organised a muscle biopsy, 
which was negative.  The MRI was negative, and countless other unnecessary 
tests, all came back negative.  I mentioned lymes disease to her and she 
disagreed with me stating that it is more likely that my husband has Motor 
Neurons.  This was a misdiagnosis that totally shattered our world and we spent 
weeks fearful for his future until one day a friend of my husbands had been 
watching a documentary named ‘Living with Lymes’  and had suggested my 
husband watch it as he said, ‘watching the people on it with Lymes disease was 
like watching you Peter’. 
 
This was a programme that put a little light at the end of a tunnel for us as we 
could see from the programme that our Irish Testing System is not at all 
accurate.  So we sent his bloods to a German Lab for testing and low and behold 
they came back positive for Lymes disease and three co-infections.  But little did 
we know that that German positive test result was not recognised here in Ireland 
and no treatment would be offered on the basis of it. I showed this result to our 
GP and neurologist and requested that another Irish test be done.  But this time I 
asked for it to be sent to Portadown, and finally after 6 weeks it came back 
stating he was positive for Lymes. 
 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
22 of 60 
 
 
Now the big problem started to arise, how to get proper treatment here?  Two 
weeks of an antibiotic was all that was offered to him from our Irish Health 
System, two weeks would probably have been sufficient as treatment when he 
first got the tick bite and the bulls’ eye rash, but after 6 years of this deadly 
disease being in his system, two weeks is definitely not enough to cure you.  
Documentation is available which demonstrates that short courses of antibiotics 
fail to eradicate lymes and lots of people end up with long term problems as a 
result of this. 
 
We found a Lyme literate infectious disease doctor who was willing to treat my 
husband in Ireland with long term oral antibiotics. He is on this treatment since 
December 2016 but he is not tolerating this treatment.  We have been advised 
that long term IV treatment is what he requires to recover but we will not be 
offered this treatment here in Ireland so we are left with no other option but to go 
abroad for treatment to save his life.  I feel very angry about this, as an Irish 
citizen we should have this treatment available to us in Ireland and not have to 
travel for it.  In Ireland doctors are forced to treat patients with chronic Lymes for 
a restricted time only.  This is proved to be unsuccessful and patients continue to 
have symptoms. I don’t know what the future holds for my husband’s health and 
for many others like him but I hope the powers that be start to listen to us. 
 
Question I would like answers to; 
 
• I would ask why the proven most accurate test is not used as medical 
standard. Why use a test with a high false negative factor, when an 
alternative is available? 
 
• If you have symptoms of Lymes disease, Western Blot Testing should 
always be available as a second test, despite a negative result on the 
Elisa Test.  The common Elisa Test, which is the one you commonly get at 
the GPs office, misses 35 to 60% of proven Lymes disease, whereas the 
Western Blot finds about 60% of chronic infected patients.  Why are we 
not using Western Blot Tests? 
 
• We must acknowledge foreign tested and clinically diagnosed patients 
here in Ireland.  Patients should not be turned away for not having an Irish 
positive test result, what Irish patients have to endure here because they 
do not have an Irish positive result only a foreign one is to the point of 
scandalous. 
 
• The risk of contacting Lymes disease is rapidly growing and Kerry seems 
to be a high risk area. This risk is strongly correlated by the high number 
of deer in Kerry, a problem that has to be seriously addressed. 
 
• A lack of public awareness and awareness by our medical professionals 
means that patients are going undiagnosed and mis-diagnosed. This I 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
23 of 60 
 
 
should think demands an educational effort to make the public aware. 
Public signage on parks and wooded areas is a must.  We have a world 
class medical facility in Ireland and we should put it to use to research 
more accurate testing to put Ireland in the lead on this fast growing vector 
borne global epidemic. 
 
Finally I will close and thank you all for giving me the time to address these 
issues. I am not just doing this to help my husband but to help the many other 
Irish patients suffering from this deadly disease. Our government needs to make 
changes and the HSE need to listen.” 
 
All members thanked Ms. O’Connor for her excellent presentation and the insight 
into the lives of patients living with this disease and they wished her and her 
husband well for the future. 
 
The Cathaoirleach also welcomed Ms. O’Connor’s daughter and sister in-law to 
the meeting and added that her presentation was important to raise awareness 
among members of the impact of Lymes disease.  The Health Service must 
acknowledge and provide appropriate services for those suffering from this 
disease. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill stated in 2010 he met a lady in Beaufort whose husband was 
suffering from Lymes disease and he was aware of 3 other cases.  Families want 
to raise awareness of this disease among the general public.  He called on the 
Minister for Health to establish a dedicated Lyme disease treatment unit and he 
also called on the media to highlight the impact of this disease. 
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen stated he was aware that Lymes disease is very 
debilitating.  Many people walk in the National Park and other wooded areas and 
they need to be aware of the dangers of Lymes disease.  Deer carry the ticks and 
appropriate signage should be provided to warn the public.  It is unacceptable 
that patients must travel abroad for treatment and the Department of Health 
should provide appropriate treatment. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty highlighted that he moved a Notice of Motion at the March 
meeting calling on the NPWS to provide appropriate signage.  There are simple 
preventative steps that walkers can take to protect themselves and these include 
putting the legs of their pants inside their socks.  The number of deer must be 
controlled as they carry the tick that transmits Lymes disease.  The National Park 
is an important tourist attraction but this very serious issue must be highlighted. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane commented that it was amazing that the results of tests 
analysed in Europe are not recognised in Ireland.  Surely patients can be treated 
abroad through the Treatment Purchase Scheme.  The health system must 
respond positively to the need for suitable treatment for Lymes disease and the 
treatment is more effective if the illness is diagnosed early. 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
24 of 60 
 
 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin stated Ms. O’Connor outlined a catalogue of bad/wrong diagnosis 
and as a result a lot of time was lost in treating her husband.  A number of Kerry 
County Councillors are on the HSE Regional Health Forum and he advised that 
they would submit a Notice of Motion calling for a more accurate testing system 
to be put in place.  Kerry has a high incidence of Lyme disease as a large 
number of people walk the countryside and for this reason signage and 
information for the general public is critical. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher stated the documentary ‘Living with Lymes disease’ was 
frightening but it has done a service in highlighting the plight of patients living with 
the disease.  The dangers of Lymes disease should be highlighted to secondary 
school students. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson advised that to receive a misdiagnosis of Motor Neuron is 
dreadful.  It is vital that all doctors are educated so that they recognise the 
disease.  Lymes disease is not transmitted just by ticks but it can also be 
transmitted by some smaller creatures.  There is a recommended way to remove 
the tick and there is a need for an education campaign at medical, individual and 
pharmacy level to ensure the disease is recognised at an early stage.   
 
Cllr. D. Quigg concurred that awareness of Lymes disease should be part of the 
education process.  The HSE tend to be reactive rather than proactive.  He called 
for a reduction in the number of management layers in the HSE and that the 
resultant savings could be used to provide better services.  Cllr. Quigg also 
undertook to raise this issue at the Regional Health Forum. 
 
Cllr. S. Locke highlighted that a lot of people in Kerry take part in outdoor 
activities and they are unaware of the dangers of Lymes disease.  The diagnosis 
process is not acceptable and must be addressed.  Signage should be provided 
around the county on how to deal with the tick if a person is affected. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy welcomed the briefing on Lymes disease and asked that more 
signage would be provided around the county. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan stated he knew a person who was recently diagnosed with Lyme 
disease but the diagnosis took some time.  There is a need to upskill GPs and all 
medical staff so that they are familiar with Lymes disease. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly stated he knew a patient who had to go to Germany to get 
tested for Lymes disease.  Unfortunately the test used in Ireland is not accurate 
and there is an urgent need for a public awareness campaign and he called on 
the Department of Health to take immediate action on this. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty stated as the current test for Lymes disease is so inaccurate the 
HSE should not longer use it and they should use a more accurate one.  The 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
25 of 60 
 
 
NPWS and Kerry County Council should address the issue of appropriate 
signage.  The public should be educated on the dangers of Lymes disease and 
she called on Kerry County Council to utilise their website to promote public 
awareness. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady advised that he knew a person with Lymes disease who had to go 
to Germany for treatment.  He understood RTE will show the documentary ‘Living 
with Lymes disease’ shortly and this will help to raise awareness among the 
general public.  Public information notices should be displayed in all GP offices 
but that is not the case at present.   
 
Cllr. N. Foley stated there are two issues involved i.e. testing and awareness.  
The issue of signage was highlighted a few months ago and all public buildings 
including schools should have an information campaign.  It is imperative that the 
testing is accurate.  Cllr. Foley advised that Ms. O’Connor had done a great 
service by highlighting this issue. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae stated the lack of information by the HSE and the fact that 
patients must travel out of the country for treatment is unacceptable.   Kerry 
County Council should run an information campaign on Lymes disease. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton requested details of the service available in Germany for 
patients suffering with Lymes disease. 
 
Ms. O’Connor thanked members for their time and the opportunity to address 
them.  She hoped some progress would be made as a result of her presentation.  
Her husband attended Kerry University Hospital the previous week and was 
offered IV treatment but unfortunately following one treatment it was stopped as 
his positive test result came from outside the country.  At that time her husband 
had 4 positive test results but if the test is done in Cork it will be negative.  She 
asked that it would be sent to Portadown but this was refused. 
 
The Cathaoirelach then moved Notice of Motion No. 3. 
 
3. 
Call to alert people of the dangers of contracting Lyme Disease 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. O’Shea PROPOSED: 
To ask that Kerry County Council will write to the Parks and Wildlife Services, 
Coillte and the HSE to ask what are the State services doing to alert people of 
the dangers of contracting Lyme Disease, whilst partaking in recreational 
activities. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
26 of 60 
 
 
Cllr. O’Shea asked that a letter would issue to the HSE on this very serious issue 
and he assured Ms. O’Connor that the members of Kerry County Council on the 
Regional Health Forum will raise it at the Forum. 
 
The Cathaoirleach then left the meeting. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane took the Chair. 
 
17.05.15.10 Presentation by Mr. Philip King of Other Voices 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed Mr. Philip King of Other Voices to the meeting and 
invited him to make his presentation. 
 
Mr. P. King thanked members for the opportunity to address them.  He grew up in 
Cork city and in the late 50’s or early 60’s his father bought a radio and this was 
the first piece of technology that gave him contact with the outside world.  It had a 
remarkable influence on him.  It nourished him and gave him the impetus to set 
out on the journey he has been on for the past 40 years.  On the radio, he heard 
music from America while in the cinema he saw James Deane movies etc.  It was 
not long before he realised the way America colonised the rest of the world.  In 
1966, he came to West Kerry and fell in love with the place and he always 
wanted to come back.  Sean Ó Riada and Sean Ó Riordáin live on through their 
music and poetry.  22 years ago, he moved with his family to West Kerry and 
while so much has changed the tradition remains important to the people.   
 
Mr. King asked what assets Kerry has to differentiate us for the challenging road 
ahead.  He recently met Mr. Liam McGrath of DCU in a government department 
and he expressed concern that Ireland does not have the talent to meet future 
demands.  We must consider what can be done to produce the intellectual 
product.  Innovators have something in common with artists and we must be 
careful to naturally replenish that natural resource.  Mr. King highlighted that he 
views tradition as an accelerator.  The Creative Ireland project is very important 
and during the course of discussions the question was asked does Ireland have 
the necessary talent.  Of the 18-people working in digital design in Intercom just 
one is Irish.  The education system should be reviewed and the universities need 
creative energy on their campus.  In Kerry, we have the natural resource in the 
people and if that could be coupled with the education system and a good 
broadband service then it would be possible to work remotely.  Other Voices and 
Ireland’s Edge make Dingle audible and visible.  There is a need for strategic 
thinking and while tourism is important it is not the only employer in the county.  
There is a need for a balance so that the county can attract high level 
employment.  There are things in the offing in this county and if we have the 
sense these things can be realised.  We must recognise our talent and become a 
model that will be replicated all over the country.  Legislators must think 
strategically also.  In conclusion Mr. King thanked everyone for the support 
received for making ‘Other Voices’ which had 17.5m YouTube hits last year. 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
27 of 60 
 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach and members thanked Mr. King for his inspirational 
presentation.   
 
Cllr. P. Daly congratulated Mr. King on all he is doing to promote the county. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson stated it is important to be careful not to let our culture and 
traditions die.  One of the great weaknesses in this country is our inability to 
accept failure because its parallel is success.  He moved a notice of motion 
calling for the establishment of a committee comprising of industry and cultural 
representatives to identify the needs and riches of the county to ensure we have 
the talent in the county to make dreams a reality. 
 
Mr. King stated people come to West Kerry for a reason.  Hozier performed at 
Other Voices and he takes the story of this powerful inspirational place with him 
around the world.   
 
Cllr. N. Foley pointed out in Kerry we are naturally blessed to have such talent 
and art and it is vital to have the ability to acknowledge that and to harness it for 
more that is important.  Mr. King sees the possibilities where others see the 
impossibilities.  Sometimes we need an outsider to point out the potential and 
value around us.  The key is to reach for the shore of possibility and she hoped 
that would help us achieve greater things. 
 
Cllr. S. Fitzgerald confirmed that West Kerry has scenery, music and culture but 
industry has changed.  He remembers farmers ploughing with horses and turning 
hay with a pike but all these farming practices are changing and he asked if we 
are in danger of loosing this connection and tradition.  In conclusion Cllr. 
Fitzgerald asked where Mr. King sees Kerry in 50 years. 
 
In response Mr. King stated the fishing and agricultural industries are dissipating 
but citizens of a community carry on traditions.  Many children leave and never 
come back to their area.  However, if we are strategic we can invite those 
children back to work in a diverse situation.  Price Waterhouse Cooper has 
indicated in 20 years 80% of their work will be done by robots.  Technology is 
fundamentally changing the way we operate and if we do not embrace it, it will 
leave us behind.  Today young people speak of digital loneliness but if people 
continue to play music together and to talk this will become more important.  In 
Kerry, we have a resource that is remarkable and if we replenish it and marry it 
with technology it will last into the future.   
 
Suspension of Standing Orders 
 
The Cathaoirleach stated it was 1.30pm and it would be necessary to suspend 
Standing Orders. 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
28 of 60 
 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Foley, SECONDED by Cllr. S. Fitzgerald it was 
agreed to suspend Standing Orders to allow the meeting to continue. 
 
17.05.15.10 Presentation by Mr. Philip King of Other Voices (Cont’d) 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty highlighted that post Brexit and Trump we need deep and broad 
reflection.  Automation is an enormous problem and how to equip people to cope 
with it.  Education is very important together with the need to promote self 
esteem.  Our natural resources must be protected to ensure they continue into 
the future. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae stated he grew up in a pub in rural Ireland where he got to 
know everyone.  As a family, they were into music and culture.  People are not 
communicating with one another and they only use mobile phones.  Smaller rural 
communities are struggling to survive but there are many benefits to living in rural 
Kerry. 
 
The Chief Executive stated Mr. King’s vision for the county is fantastic and he 
has shown how we can deliver.  Kerry County Council supports Other Voices and 
Ireland’s Edge as it opens Dingle up to the outside world.  It is all about building 
the reputation of the county and she thanked Mr. King for his presentation and 
the work he is doing on behalf of the county. 
 
Mr. King highlighted that he recently read in a newspaper article and Ireland’s 
investment in the creative sector is 0.1% of GDP which is the lowest in Europe.  
This is not good strategic thinking and it is important to invest strategically in this 
resource.  However, he believes the State is now beginning to realise this.  Mr. 
King again emphasised the need to invest in people to deliver the intellectual 
product.  This exists in Kerry and if we develop the right relationships it will be 
fantastic for the county. 
 
The meeting adjourned for lunch at 1.40pm. 
 
The meeting resumed at 2.20pm. 
 
17.05.15.11 Notices of Motion 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane advised the meeting there were two emergency motions and he 
called on Cllr. Cronin to move the first one. 
 
Emergency Motion 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin moved the following Emergency Motion. 
 
 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
29 of 60 
 
 
Lewis Road Junction with Killarney Bye-Pass 
 
At the outset as Cathaoirleach of Killarney MD, Cllr. Cronin extended his 
sympathy to the Mannix family on the death of Annette last week.   
 
“Following another fatal accident on the Killarney Bye-Pass, adjacent to Lewis 
Road junction, which has plunged another family into tragic loss and grief and 
shocked the local community, I am again calling for immediate action to address 
this lethal section of the Killarney Bye-Pass from the TII Roads Safety Engineers 
and Senior Roads Engineers of Kerry County Council.  We in Killarney MD have 
for years repeatedly requested changes to this lay out and approaches to these 
junctions and nothing has happened.  We want an immediate meeting with TII 
and a commitment for safety improvement works.” 
 
Cllr. Cronin advised that all members for the Killarney MD have repeatedly 
highlighted the urgent need for safety measures at the Lewis Road junction and a 
number of accidents have taken place there.  However, no works were carried 
out.  Cllr. Cronin pleaded with the TII and management to facilitate his request for 
an immediate meeting with the TII Road Safety Office and senior Council 
officials.  He emphasised the importance of providing cycleways on all roads from 
a safety point of view.   
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher SECONDED the motion which has the unanimously support of 
all the members for the Killarney MD.  The following reply issued to Deputy 
Brendan Griffin from TII following a Parliamentary Question. 
 
“I refer to your recent parliamentary question to Mr. Shane Ross, T.D., Minister 
for Transport, Tourism & Sport, regarding the Lewis Road and Kilcummin Road 
junctions on the N22 Killarney Bypass.  The position in relation to your enquiry is 
as follows: 
 
Proposals in relation to improvement works on national roads are normally 
developed in the first instance by the relevant road authority, in this case Kerry 
County Council.  Any proposals submitted by the Council in relation to 
improvements at junctions on the N22 Killarney Bypass would be carefully 
examined and considered for funding by TII having regard, of course, to the level 
of funding available for national roads generally and the many competing 
demands for these resources”. 
 
Cllr. Kelleher stated there are accidents on an ongoing basis at this location and 
he called on the Director of Services for Operations to arrange to have a plan for 
this junction drawn up to address the issues highlighted by members. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady advised that he moved a Notice of Motion regarding this junction at 
a recent Killarney MD meeting and he asked if the letter issued to TII. 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
30 of 60 
 
 
Ms. A. McAllen, Manager for Killarney MD confirmed that a letter issued to TII 
requesting a meeting. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan informed members that a Garda investigation is ongoing and 
the outcome will be a matter for the Coroners Court.  The issues at the Lewis 
Road junction raised by members in the past were brought to the attention of TII.  
Following any accident, a review is undertaken with An Garda Siochana and TII. 
 
The Leas Cathaoirleach confirmed that a meeting would be sought with TII. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris then moved the following Emergency Motion. 
 
Recurring Grant Allocation Programme for Institutes of Technology 
 
“That this Council requests a meeting with the subgroup currently reviewing the 
recurrent grant allocation Programme for Institutes of Technology.  We call for 
funding to recognise basic function, area costs regardless of the number of 
students, particularly in more peripheral colleges”. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris advised there is agreement between all parties that a delegation 
from the Council would seek a meeting with the sub group and that the motion 
would be circulated to all local authorities. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED the motion. 
 
The Cathaoirleach stated Cllr. Thornton would move Notice of Motion No. 33. 
 
33. 
Support for Fáilte Ireland’s ‘Extend the season campaign’ 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Each Member of the Listowel Electoral Area 
PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister of State with responsibility for the 
Office of Public Works and the Minister for Arts, Heritage, Regional, Rural and 
Gaeltacht Affairs to support Fáilte Irelands ' Extend the season campaign' for 
North Kerry by extending the opening seasons for both Carraigafoyle Castle and 
Listowel Castle and giving much needed support to tourism in North Kerry and 
it's development of a viable local tourism economy. 
 
The following reply issued: 
With the development of the Wild Atlantic Way, visitor numbers, both 
domestic and international, at Carrigafoyle and Listowel Castle have 
increased significantly.  Both of these attractions form an important part of 
the tourism offering in North Kerry.  Both are included in the North Kerry 
Heritage Trails brochure and website, developed through the funding of 
North & East Kerry Development in 2013.  Carrigafoyle is a Discovery Point 
in a highly scenic area on the River Shannon and features in Failte Ireland 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
31 of 60 
 
 
promotional brochures for the Wild Atlantic Way.  However, Carrigafoyle 
does not offer a guided experience and its current season finishes at the 
end of September.  There is an opportunity, by extending the opening 
period to the shoulder season, to increase awareness of the heritage and 
cultural richness of the area which will over time, help to ensure increased 
visitor numbers and dwell time in the locality.  As well as the extension of 
the opening period, it must be stated also that the introduction of a guide at 
Carrigafoyle would also greatly enhance the visitor experience.   
 
Currently Listowel Castle’s opening season runs until the end of August.  
There is no doubt that September/October have in recent years, become an 
important time on the tourism calendar especially for the culturally curious 
traveller who likes to visit outside of peak season.  September also features 
Listowel Race Week – a seven day racing festival which attracts huge 
numbers to the town and surrounding areas from all over the country and 
overseas. It is an opportunity lost that Listowel Castle is not accessible at 
this time.   Due to its location, the Castle affords visitors the opportunity to 
explore the town, stay overnight and spend money in local businesses 
which will in time, lead to a growth in business start-ups and an increase in 
employment opportunities. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton highlighted that the tourism season has extended to September 
or October in particular with Race Week in September.  The extension of the 
season for Listowel and Carrigafoyle Castles is critical for tourism in North Kerry. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley SECONDED the motion and added that Listowel Castle closes at 
the end of August but Race Week is in September.  The extension of the season 
for Carrigafoyle Castle is important for Ballylongford. 
 
2. 
Repair of the road from Banshagh to St. James Church, Killorglin 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. Quigg PROPOSED: 
That this Council request that TII supply immediate funding to repair the sections 
of the main N70 road from Banshagh, Killorglin to St. James’ Church in Killorglin 
and also from Waterville Church to Waterville Village. These two sections of 
National roads are now the worst in the country. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has recently secured confirmation from the T.I.I. to 
prepare pavement design reports and drawings for the N70, from the 
recently completed Iveragh Road to the Laune Bridge, and on the N72 
towards Killarney. The Council is in discussions with the T.I.I. to 
incorporate a cycleway/ footway on the N72 as part of this project, and as 
previously requested by the members in the South & West MD.  
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
32 of 60 
 
 
The Council has also highlighted the need for pavement improvement 
works on the N70 from the Laune Bridge towards Bansagh. The T.I.I. have 
indicated that they will review our request in the context of available 
funding and this will raised again at our next meeting.   
 
Pavement improvement works to sections of the N70 at Tahilla, N70 north 
of Caherciveen, on the N72 at Kilbonane have commenced recently. A 
further request has been made to the T.I.I. for the section of the N70 from 
Waterville Church to Waterville.  The condition of this section of the N70 
will be brought to the attention of the T.I.I. again. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg highlighted he has raised this issue on a number of occasions in 
the past.  Members went on a deputation to TII but to little avail.  He believed 
roads, housing, health services etc. in Kerry are not being improved and this is 
not acceptable. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty SECONDED the motion and stated at least 5 or 6 locations could 
be added.  She called on TII to publish a works programme with a timeframe as 
these roads are impacting on the lives of the people of the areas. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill advised all members raised the problems with the road from 
Astellas to Killorglin town which is in a dreadful condition. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane stated the Minister for Transport would be invited to visit Kerry 
and to arrange for officials from TII to accompany him and to meet with 
councillors and officials. 
 
4. 
Japanese Knotweed 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Gleeson PROPOSED: 
That the Council would detail the degree of progress being made towards the 
identification of all the Japanese Knotweed sites in the County and of the 
proposed schedule of treatment towards elimination of the plant and that it would 
state how it proposes to interact with landowners into whose property this weed 
has spread. That the Council would also, in the overall context of Invasive 
Species, seek to determine from the NPWS the progress being made towards 
the elimination of the Rhododendron scourge within the beautiful Killarney 
National Park. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Council has been active in promoting public awareness to prevent the 
spread of Japanese Knotweed. We have also carried out a number of 
initiatives to prevent it’s spread, particularly on our own lands. These 
include:-   
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
33 of 60 
 
 
•  
Treatment of Japanese Knotweed on our national road network and   
large infestations on some of our non-national roads,  
•  
Working with local communities on pilot treatment projects,  
•  
Training staff and hedge cutting contractors on the identification of 
Japanese Knotweed  
•  
Surveying locations and erecting signage to prevent cutting and 
spread   
•  
Issuing information to over 5,000 landowners with the annual 
hedgecutting reminders, of the impact of the invasive species on 
homes and other structures, if not properly controlled.  
  
There have been numerous surveys carried out by volunteers, which has 
identified a very extensive spread of this invasive species throughout the 
county, primarily along rivers.  Given the extent of the species, it would be 
extremely challenging for the Council to eradicate it. However, our 
Biodiversity Officer, Ms. Cathy Fisher, and local Area Engineers provide 
advice to local communities and individuals on the treatment of Japanese 
Knotweed on private lands and we will continue to support these 
communities in addressing the spread of the species, as well as continuing 
treatment along our road network. 
 
This Council will write to the NPWS to seek an update on the issue of 
Rhododendron in Killarney National Park. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson highlighted that Japanese Knotweed is growing on the approach 
to Firies and Ballyfinnane Cross.  It is also growing in a raised flower bed in 
Killarney and he asked that it would be marked to prevent it from being cut.  Most 
Japanese Knotweed is transported by Council lorries at road works and it has 
spread onto private property.  Cllr. Gleeson called on management to consider 
running an information campaign for the public on Japanese Knotweed.   If this 
does not happen the cost of removing it will escalate hugely with time. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion and added a lot more needs to be done 
to eradicate Japanese Knotweed.  There needs to be ongoing interaction with the 
public also. 
 
Cllr. Gleeson then moved Notice of Motion No. 19. 
 
19. 
Macroom to Baile Bhúirne By-pass 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Gleeson PROPOSED: 
That this Council would provide an update to the Members on the progress being 
made by TII towards the development of the By Pass road from Macroom to 
Baile Bhúirne and also in the matter of the long awaited Adare By Pass. 
 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
34 of 60 
 
 
The following reply issued: 
The T.I.I. has advised of the progress on the above schemes as follows:-  
 
The Baile Bhuirne to Macroom Scheme is in the Capital Investment Plan 
and the delivery of the contract is being managed by Cork County Council, 
who are the administrative road authority. The lands for the scheme are 
currently being acquired. Advance Works Contracts are underway to carry 
out site clearance and to erect the scheme fencing. The availability of the 
necessary funding will determine when the Tender can be published for the 
Main Contract. 
 
The Adare Bypass is also included in the current Capital Investment Plan 
and the delivery of the contract is being managed by Limerick City and 
County Council, who are the administrative road authority. It is being 
developed as part of the N69 Foynes to Limerick scheme which is also part 
of the Capital Investment Plan. Environmental studies/ Investigative works 
are nearing completion on the ground. It is envisaged that the CPO/EIS 
documentation will be prepared by the end of 2017. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson highlighted that Kerry is dependant on the good will of Cork and 
Limerick to pursue the bypasses for Macroom and Adare.  The people of Kerry, 
tourists and business people have had to endure the torment of travelling these 
bad roads and he pleaded with the Chief Executive to pursue these issues with 
her colleagues in Cork and Limerick and with TII. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher SECONDED the motion and added these bypasses are 
extremely important for the county.  A significant number of Kerry people work in 
Cork and it is important that these projects are delivered. 
 
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. M. O’Shea returned to the meeting and took the Chair. 
 
5. 
Anomaly of places being used for post codes and addresses which 
are not appropriate 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council call upon the Department of Communications, Climate 
Action and Environment to rectify the anomaly of places being used for post 
codes and address which are not appropriate. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. P. Connor Scarteen advised that some postal addresses do not make any 
sense and are in fact misleading.  There are many examples of this in South 
Kerry including Castlecove which has a postal address of Killarney but it is over 
an hour from Killarney. People are proud of their parish and townland and they 
hoped their postal addressed would change to reflect their location more 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
35 of 60 
 
 
accurately with the introduction of Post Codes but that did not happen.  Tourists 
arrive in Killarney and believe they are at Lauragh as the postal address is 
Lauragh, Killarney when it should be Lauragh, Kenmare.    Cllr. Connor Scarteen 
requested that a letter would issue to the Minister for Communications calling on 
him to address this issue. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae highlighted that he raised this issue at MD level on two 
occasions.  It makes no sense that people living 60km away are associated with 
another town and it causes great confusion. 
 
6. 
Call to clear more sections of the Flesk River 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council and the TII to clear more sections of the Flesk River 
where bushes and mounds of silt are blocking the flow of the water. This work 
should be done now while the season is open for it, it is vital, as we may not be 
as lucky next Winter as we were in the previous Winter and the risk is still there 
that many homes will be flooded again. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The clearance of the River Flesk has been the subject of a number of 
motions moved at Council meetings and at the Killarney Municipal District 
Meetings, most recently at the February meeting in Killarney, and at which 
the following response was given:-  
 
“The responsibility for the maintenance of rivers which are not in the 
control of the OPW or Kerry County Council lies with the riparian 
landowners. The River Flesk is not under the control of the OPW or Kerry 
County Council. However, the Local Authority has responsibility to ensure 
bridge infrastructure is not damaged as a result of blockages on streams 
and rivers.  Considerable work has been carried out in the removal of 
material in the vicinity of bridges in the Glenflesk area, notably at Glenflesk 
Church, Annabeg Bridge, Garries Bridge and Gortacoosh Bridge, following 
consultation with the Fisheries and Wildlife Services, and these bridges will 
continue to be monitored for potential blockages.” 
 
The TII has no responsibility for the maintenance of rivers and their 
functions are clearly defined under the statutory provisions of the Roads 
Acts, 1993 – 2015, which are solely in relation to the national road network. 
As part of any significant national road improvement scheme, the TII 
require that an assessment of such works on the existing drainage network 
be carried out. It is on this basis that consultants have been retained to 
examine any potential impact of addressing the flooding of the N22 at 
Garries bridge, near Glenflesk. 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
36 of 60 
 
 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae confirmed that the clearing of bridges carried out over the past 
year made a big difference however it is important to be mindful that there were 
no big floods last winter or spring.  16 houses at Foiladuane are prone to flooding 
and there are 2 or 3 other areas where the river is blocked and she asked that 
they would be cleared.  Cllr. Healy-Rae asked when the consultants report would 
be published and she stated the level of the road cannot be raised. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion and stated Kerry County Council is 
responsible for roads and bridges.  While the work carried out over the past while 
is welcome residents are concerned if the level of the road is risen it will result in 
further flooding in the valley.  Cllr. Healy-Rae called on management to resolve 
this issue before the winter. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher supported the motion and asked that members would be 
provided with a copy of the consultant’s report when it is available.  Rock armour 
was put in place in a part of Foiladuane but more is needed.  There are several 
locations where the river is blocked and these need to be addressed as soon as 
possible. 
 
7. 
Dress Code for all Dáil and Council Members 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
That this Council calls for a dress code to be introduced for all Dáil and Council 
Members in order that they respect the office that they hold. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy advised that he submitted the motion following his observations 
of Dáil Debates.  TDs who do not dress appropriately are disrespectful both to 
the Dáil and the people they represent.  This is not a reflection of the majority of 
TDs and he was aware that the Dáil Ethics Committee is reviewing a number of 
issues including the dress code.  Cllr. McCarthy asked that Kerry County Council 
would consider a suitable dress code for Council Meetings.  If the motion is 
agreed he asked that it would be circulated to local authorities. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris stated it is not for the members of Kerry County Council to make a 
determination on what a Dáil Committee must do.  In relation to a dress code for 
the members of Kerry County Council she believed all members appreciate the 
honour it is to be elected and they respect their position on the Council.  With the 
abolition of Town Councils members divested themselves of a formal dress code.  
Cllr. Ferris opposed the motion. 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
37 of 60 
 
 
Cllr. D. Grady highlighted that some TDs are not dressed appropriately and he 
concurred with the motion.  The members of Killarney Town Council had a blazer 
and pants which was smart and he PROPOSED that a similar dress code would 
be adopted for Kerry County Council. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty also supported the motion. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley advised that members should be and are more than the sum of 
their apparel.  There has been a blurring of the lines and leisure wear is just that.  
She did not agree with the proposal to have a uniform. 
 
In response Cllr. P. McCarthy stated he did not advocate that Kerry County 
Council should dictate the Dáil Ethics Committee but rather he asked that the 
Council’s Ethics Committee would consider a dress code. 
 
A vote was taken on the motion which resulted as follows: 
 
For: 
Cllrs. Cahill, Connor-Scarteen, Cronin, Culloty, Fitzgerald, Grady, 
Kelleher, Kennelly, Lucid, D. McCarthy, P. McCarthy, McEllistrim, 
Moloney, Sheahan, O’Shea (15) 
 
Against: 
Cllrs. Beasley, Ferris, Foley, J. Healy-Rae, M. Healy-Rae, Moriarty, 
Quigg (7) 
 
Not Voting: None (0) 
 
The Cathaoirleach declared the motion CARRIED. 
 
8. 
Circle of North Kerry 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given, Cllr. R.  Beasley PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council in conjunction with the Wild Atlantic Way approve of a 
circle of North Kerry coming form Tarbert into Ballylongford, Astee, and 
Ballybunion on to Ballyduff, Causeway and Ballyheigue including Ardfert, Tralee 
and out by Listowel and have the route mapped out in brochures in conjunction 
with Failte Ireland. 
 
The following reply issued: 
This project would greatly help to promote North Kerry as a tourism 
destination showcasing the beautiful beaches, cliffs, walks, activities, 
heritage and cultural attractions and also its many welcoming towns, 
villages and communities.  A review of the Wild Atlantic Way programme is 
due to be carried out by Failte Ireland later this year and as part of the 
review, the development of loops off the Wild Atlantic Way will also be 
considered.  The Tourism Unit will be proposing this North Kerry project to 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
38 of 60 
 
 
Failte Ireland as an attractive addition and destination for inclusion in their 
extended Wild Atlantic Way Development Programme. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley welcomed the reply. 
 
Cllr. J. Lucid SECONDED the motion and highlighted that the Circle of North 
Kerry should be advertised as part of the Wild Atlantic Way. 
 
9. 
Call for the reinstatement of the telephone allowance 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Moriarty PROPOSED: 
That we write to the Minister for Communications, Denis Naughten requesting the 
reinstatement of the telephone allowance which was abolished by the last 
Government. This has had a detrimental effect on the numbers of elderly people 
taking up the panic button activated seniors alert system. They must have a 
landline in order to avail of this service fully. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Moriarty highlighted that the Telephone Allowance was discontinued a 
number of years ago and it is impacting adversely on people who want to avail of 
text alerts.  If they live in an area with poor mobile phone coverage they need a 
landline.  She called on the Minister for Communications to reintroduce this 
allowance. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea SECONDED the motion. 
 
10. 
Appreciation of the dedication and effort of the staff of Kerry County 
Museum 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. T. Ferris PROPOSED: 
That this Council appreciates and commends the dedication and effort of the staff 
of Kerry county museum involved in planning and producing family events 
throughout the year. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The sentiments expressed in this Notice of Motion which is a matter for 
resolution of the Members are welcomed. In 2012 Kerry County Museum 
reversed an overall downward trend in visitor figures by concentrating on 
growing our audience during the off-peak months. Since then, we have 
managed to retain and grow that audience by developing imaginative low 
cost programmes for schools and families. The Museum has also taken full 
opportunity of small grant funding from the Department of Arts, Heritage 
and the Gaeltacht, and from the Heritage Council. This has given the 
Museum  the capacity to devise and implement programmes on a scale that 
has sustained our visitor numbers. And it is sustainable growth because it 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
39 of 60 
 
 
taps into an audience that is right on our doorstep twelve months of the 
year. 
 
For the past five years the Museum has transformed the Medieval 
Experience at Easter, Halloween and Christmas into a magical, creative 
space for schools and all the family. Each holiday event attracts on average 
over 2,500 local families and schools. At the heart of our strategy is giving 
visitors to the Museum, both local and non-local, a sense of place. This 
involves recognising that our visitors are not passive, and that the Museum 
is a resource to be used by them to gain an understanding of the distinct 
culture and heritage of County Kerry. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris highlighted that the staff at the County Museum run many of these 
family events during their own time.  They create a magical experience for 
children and they must be commended for their efforts.  The County Museum 
should receive greater financial support to keep history alive. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED the motion. 
 
11. 
Calling on car rental companies to ensure all rental cars have a spare 
wheel 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
That we at Kerry County Council ask the relevant authorities that car rental 
companies ensure that all rental cars are equipped with a spare wheel. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy stated he recently encountered a tourist who sought his help as 
he had a puncture in his hired car.  As there was no spare tyre it took 4 hours to 
get someone to come and repair the puncture.  Cllr. McCarthy called on all car 
hire companies to include a spare wheel in hired cars. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED the motion. 
 
12. 
Call to repair and surface dress all roads leading to beaches 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. T. McEllistrim PROPOSED: 
To call on Kerry County Council to repair and surface dress all the roads leading 
to beaches in Kerry for the benefit of the locals and tourists. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The condition of the roads leading to our blue flag beaches and major 
beaches have been inspected and are all considered to be in good 
condition.  
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
40 of 60 
 
 
In developing the roads programme for 2017, and in particular the non-
national roads to be funded from the Restoration Improvement programme 
and the Restoration Maintenance programme, priority was given to 
identifying local strategic routes in need of upgrading, having regard to the 
economic and social development of the county, including access routes to 
our blue flag beaches as well as other major beaches and tourist 
attractions. This plan was adopted by Council in March.   
 
There is no specific funding available to surface roads, outside of the 
adopted Roads programme. However, if there are specific roads, identified 
by the members, these will be maintained and can be considered in the 
2018 programme. 
 
Cllr. T. McEllistrim welcomed the reply but highlighted that some roads lead to 
smaller beaches and he referred in particular to the road leading to 
Cappaghclough Beach at Camp which is in a poor condition.  As summer 
approaches Cllr. McEllistrim called on the Operations Department to inspect all 
roads leading to beaches and to carry out repairs if necessary. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea SECONDED the motion. 
 
13. 
Process in the allocation of houses 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B. Cronin PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council clearly outline each stage of the process involved in 
reaching a decision to allocate a house to a person who has applied to Kerry 
County Council for housing, how their personal information is dealt with and how 
a successful applicant is notified. 
 
The following reply issued: 
• 
When an application for social housing supports is received it is first 
checked to ensure that the household is eligible to apply for social 
housing supports. There are four eligibility criteria:- 
 
i. Household Income less than €30,000 - €36,000 depending on 
   household composition 
ii. Residency status 
iii. Alternative accommodation available 
iv. Rent arrears 
 
If the application fails to meet any of the above criteria then the 
application is closed and the applicant(s) advised accordingly. 
 
• 
Once the application has been entered on our records it is then 
assessed by the Housing Investigations Officer in order to qualify and 
categorise the household's housing need in accordance with our 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
41 of 60 
 
 
adopted Social Housing Allocation Scheme 2011. This scheme sets out 
the manner in which dwellings will be allocated and the order of 
priority that shall apply to same. 
 
• 
All qualified applicants are then placed on the appropriate housing 
waiting list as per their household need and areas of choice. 
 
• 
The applicant(s) are notified of the council's decision as to whether 
they are qualified for inclusion on the housing waiting lists. All 
information provided by the applicant(s) including application form etc. 
is placed in their housing file and stored in the housing office. 
 
• 
When a property becomes available for letting/re-letting in an area, the 
Housing investigations Officer will consider all qualified applicants, 
having regard to our Social Housing Allocation Scheme, in that area of 
choice. A recommendation based on the household with the most need 
for the property is then forwarded to Housing Management for 
consideration and decision. A request for a Garda check is 
simultaneously submitted for all adult members of that applicant 
household. 
 
• 
When the decision to allocate is approved by Management an offer 
letter is then issued, subject to the applicant household having a clear 
Garda Check, by registered post. 
 
• 
However, if any member of the household fails to pass the Garda check 
 then the offer is not issued and the application is placed on stand-by. 
 
• 
The applicant(s) are normally given five working days to respond. 
 
All personal information/ data supplied in support of the Housing 
application is processed in accordance with Data Protection legislation/ 
guidelines and legalisation generally and only processed for the purpose of 
which it was provided to the Council – in conjunction with the Housing 
application and related processes. These processes on occasion involve 
third parties (e.g. Garda checks, Approved Housing Bodies etc). Such 
personal data or information cannot be provided to third parties except in 
accordance with the law, authorised processes or where the applicant 
expressly provides consent to do so. 
 
Where representations are made by an elected Representative on behalf of 
a Housing applicant, in accordance with Data Protection Commissioner 
advice, the Council can assume consent i.e. the Council can assume the 
applicant has provided consent to the Council to deal with the 
representation made. 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
42 of 60 
 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin acknowledged the comprehensive reply and referred in particular 
to the last paragraph of the reply.  A constituent advised him recently that a TD 
got a house for him and this was confusing.  Cllr. Cronin asked what role has a 
TD in the decision making process.   
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue confirmed that the allocation of local authority housing is an 
executive function and a TD has no role in this process. 
 
Cllr. Cronin called on the media present to highlight that a TD has no input in the 
process for the allocation of local authority housing.   
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae asked if a TD has the same rights to make representations on 
behalf of constituents as councillors.   
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue confirmed that the members of Kerry County Council and 
TDs can make representations on behalf of housing applicants.  Data Protection 
is very complex and changes must be implemented as a result of EU legislation.  
At present the Data Protection Commissioner has advised that the Council can 
assume consent i.e. the Council can assume the applicant has provided consent 
to the Council to deal with the representation made.  However this may change 
under the new Data Protection Directive.  The Data Protection Commissioner 
made a presentation on this at the last AILG Conference. 
 
14. 
Use of water reeds for dealing with untreated sewage 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Sheahan PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council to consider the planting of water reeds in Kerry as 
they are acknowledged as an effective means of water filtration and a treatment 
plant for dealing with untreated sewage. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Wetland Vegetation and Reeds have been in use in the treatment of 
wastewater for quite a number of years and can be incorporated into a 
wastewater treatment process in numerous ways. 
 
Reed Beds are a structured arrangement of beds of stone, gravels and 
sand planted with reeds. Effluent is allowed to flow either vertically or 
horizontally over and through the gravel beds and bacteria that develop on 
the surfaces of the granular material and the roots and stems of the reeds 
break down and treat the effluent so that it can be safely discharged. A 
Reed Bed system is in operation in Farranfore WWTP 
 
Over the past decade Kerry County Council has also piloted small scale 
Integrated Constructed Wetlands at Rossbeigh and Cé Bhreannain. 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
43 of 60 
 
 
Integrated Constructed Wetlands use a series of shallow lagoons or ponds 
planted with wetland vegetation.  As the effluent passes through the series 
of shallow ponds, it is broken down and treated by the bacteria which 
develop on the stems of the wetland vegetation. Integrated Constructed 
Wetlands discharge little or no effluent in dry weather. For this reason they 
are ideally suited to situations where the availability of receiving waters is 
limited. Where generous suitable receiving waters are available, as is 
regularly the case, the justification for an Integrated Wetland is generally 
diminished. 
 
Irish Water is also considering developing Integrated Constructed 
Wetlands at other sites provided sufficient suitable lands can be acquired.  
 
Reed Beds and Integrated Constructed Wetlands have an important  place 
in the Treatment of Wastewater. However they are not the solution in every 
situation. Reed Beds are mostly considered suited to improving or 
polishing the effluent following a traditional wastewater treatment process. 
Integrated Constructed Wetlands (ICWs) are also suitable for polishing final 
effluent and in some circumstances can play a greater role in the treatment 
process.  ICWs require a large area of land, typically as much as one acre 
of wetland pond is required per 100 Population Equivalent (P.E.)  
 
Wetlands can be economical depending on circumstances such as the 
population to be served, site suitability, prevailing land prices, and the 
characteristics of the available receiving waters. It must also be borne in 
mind that the cost of developing a Reed Bed or an Integrated Constructed 
Wetland is only part of the cost associated with providing a complete 
sewerage scheme. The budget must also cover the construction of gravity 
sewers, pumping stations, buildings, outfall pipelines and other equipment.  
 
The use of Reed Beds or Integrated Constructed Wetlands is an option 
which can be considered where circumstances are appropriate. They can 
also have a considerable amenity value and can provide a suitable habitat 
for a wide range of wildlife. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan stated reed beds offer a real solution to untreated sewage that is 
flowing into rivers in this county.  He moved the motion to try to find a solution to 
this problem.  He believed Kerry County Council should liaise with the EPA to 
progress this initiative as it is a cost effective system and he is advised that it is 
effective.  In Northern Ireland they are using the Reed Bed system and for this 
reason he believed it should be considered in Kerry to ensure our rivers and 
lakes are clean and safe. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion and stated he moved a similar motion 
last July in respect of Scartaglin where raw sewerage is flowing into the river.  At 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
44 of 60 
 
 
that time Kerry County Council had a small pilot project and he asked if it was a 
success. 
 
15. 
Air B&B providers 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. S. Fitzgerald PROPOSED: 
Can Management clarify whether or not Air B&B providers have a competitive 
advantage over authorised accommodation providers. Do they need planning 
permission, are they complying with Health and Safety Regulations, are they 
paying water charges and are they liable for rates. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Under Article 10(4) of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 – 
2015, the use of not more than 4 bedrooms in a house, (where each is used 
for the accommodation of not more than 4 persons) as overnight guest 
accommodation is exempted development. Article 5, which defines a 
house, specifically excludes a building used as two or more residential 
units or an apartment from availing of this exemption.  
 
An Bord Pleanála have also issued a Section 5 declaration regarding the 
use of an entire residential apartment for short term holiday lettings. The 
Bord has ruled that such a use constitutes a change of use, is not 
exempted development and therefore, requires planning permission.  
 
In order to be liable for commercial rates; accommodation providers must 
be registered as a guesthouse or hotel with Failte Ireland. The current 
legislation does not legislate for the rating of Bed & Breakfast properties 
that are not registered. 
 
Cllr. S. Fitzgerald highlighted that he was contacted by a family who have 
provided accommodation for in excess of 40 years as they are concerned at the 
growth in the Air B&B business.  Those involved in Air B&B may or may not be 
paying rates, water charges etc and he asked if Air B&B providers are compliant 
in the way other providers of accommodation are.  Must they comply with fire 
safety regulations, pay water and waste water charges, insurance etc.  Cllr. 
Fitzgerald stated he was not opposed to Air B&B providers but they should be 
treated the same as other accommodation providers.   
 
Ms. McAllen advised that the legislation is clear in relation to rates as outlined in 
the reply.  Fáilte Ireland is reviewing Air B&Bs in relation to water charges etc.  
 
Cllr. Fitzgerald advised that B&Bs find it harder to fill rooms because of the 
number of Air B&Bs.  He asked that a letter would issue to the Minister for 
Housing, Planning, Community & Local Government and Irish Water asking them 
to review this matter urgently. 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
45 of 60 
 
 
16. 
Demountable Units 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.J. Culloty PROPOSED: 
To call on this Council to discontinue the practice of purchasing demountable 
units, and instead consider the option of using modular units, which would have 
better insulation and draught proofing, and would also have a longer life span. 
Also, to ask how many demountable units does this Council own? How many are 
in use? How many are no longer fit for purpose? How many have been 
purchased in the past 10 years? And currently, what is the cost of a standard two 
bed demountable unit. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has a number of demountable units in use in 
predominantly rural areas throughout the county. These have traditionally 
been used to meet a specific housing need in a particular area. They were 
generally used where no viable alternative housing option was available.  
 
The principle of Social Housing is to provide sustainable social housing, to 
a specific standard, to meet the need of all our housing applicants and we 
continue to seek alternative long term solutions in all cases for occupants 
of demountable units provided by the Council. Therefore, the provision of 
new demountable units, while they remain an option, is deemed 
appropriate only in very exceptional and limited cases.  
 
Kerry County Council has assessed the option of using modular units 
instead of demountables units. It was initially expected nationally they 
would provide a cheaper and quicker to construct than conventional 
housing units, The Dublin Councils commenced the program in 2016. The 
experience to date is that they are proving to be very similar in cost as 
conventional housing. It is also proving to take almost as long to deliver 
these units as conventional housing. 
 
There are currently 88 occupied units within the county-including official 
halting sites. 
 
There are also a number of vacant units through the county but these are 
largely derelict or demolished. None are considered viable for repair due to 
the costs involved in repairing and re-siteing costs. 
 
The cost to purchase, deliver, site and carry out ancillary site works to 
connect to the services will run to over €60,000 per unit. 
 
Kerry County Council has provided no new Demountable Units in the last 
two years. The Council has replaced 2 Demountable Units from existing 
stock in this period. 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
46 of 60 
 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty stated the insulation in demountable units is not effective and the 
floors tend to give way.  These should be replaced with steel framed units 
especially in halting sites as they will last longer.  Cllr. Culloty asked that modular 
units would be considered for use going forward especially for halting sites.   
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae opposed the motion as demountable units are a suitable 
housing option especially for single men in some cases and in emergency 
situations. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris supported the views expressed by Cllr. M. Healy-Rae.  It is clear 
that the motion is calling for an end to the use of demountable units and she has 
asked management to continue using them in certain cases.  She highlighted that 
no demountable unit has been approved in the last few years. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney SECONDED the motion. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue stated the use of demountable units would not be absolutely 
discontinued but they will only be considered in certain situations.  Alternative 
construction methods will be considered. 
 
Cllr. Culloty agreed to amend the first sentance of his motion to read as follows: 
 
“To call on this Council to consider discontinuing the practice of purchasing 
demountable units, and instead consider the option of using modular units, which 
would have better insulation and draught proofing, and would also have a longer 
life span.” 
 
The amended motion was agreed. 
 
17. 
Call for grant support for all septic tank owners who need to replace 
their septic tanks 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Lucid PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Communication, Climate 
Action and Environment to ask to have legislation amended to make grant 
support available to all septic tank owners who need to replace their septic tanks. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Lucid highlighted there is an anomaly with regard to grant assistance for 
the replacement / upgrade of septic tanks. 
 
The current situation is, if a septic tank is inspected by the Environment Section 
and they issue a decision that it must be replaced then the owner is entitled to a 
grant to replace it.  However if a property owner knows that his/her septic tanks 
should be replaced because it is not up to the required standard and if they want 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
47 of 60 
 
 
to take the initiative to replace it in the interest of the environment they are not 
entitled to any form of assistance.  This does not make sense and if we are 
serious about protecting the environment and wish to bring septic tank standards 
up to the required level then some consistent form of incentive must be put in 
place. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty SECONDED the motion. 
 
18. 
Call for funding to reconstruct part of the Laune Bridge 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. Quigg PROPOSED: 
That this Council calls on the TII to provide funding to reconstruct part of the 
Laune Bridge in Killorglin as the bow is now clearly visible at the town side of the 
bridge and people are very worried as to its condition. This bridge is on the main 
N70 route, Ring of Kerry, servicing not only Killorglin but most of South Kerry. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The TII have responsibility for the maintenance of bridges on the National 
road network. The Laune Bridge, in Killorglin, has been the subject of a 
number of surveys/ inspections since 2006 when settlement of piers on the 
town side of the bridge became pronounced. A Rehabilitation Contract, 
which included underpinning of three piers on the Killorglin side, repairs to 
scour protection at all the piers, reconstruction of the bull nosed cutwaters, 
masonry repairs, re-pointing throughout, replacement of road gullies, kerb 
re-alignment and footpath reinstatement was carried out in 2009/ 2010 and 
funded by the T.I.I. Since the works were completed, the surveys carried 
out to date have indicated that the settlement has been arrested and there 
is no evidence to support any concerns of the bridge collapsing. 
 
The bridge was most recently inspected in December 2016 by a Senior 
Bridge Consultant who is satisfied that there are no structural concerns 
with the bridge but some minor local defects, which do not pose a concern, 
were noted. These repairs will be carried out in the coming weeks.  
In conjunction with the TII, given the strategic importance of the river 
crossing, we have initiated a regular monitoring programme for this bridge. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg stated there is concern in Killorglin regarding the bow in the bridge 
which is clearly visible.  When the bridge was constructed in the 1800’s no one 
envisaged the size of trucks and tour buses that would use it.  There are 900 jobs 
in FEXCO and it is time Kerry County Council and TII gave serious consideration 
to the main access to South Kerry.  Cllr. Quigg called for the construction of a 
modern bridge over the River Laune and that the old bridge would be restricted 
for cars only once the new bridge is in place. 
 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
48 of 60 
 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae highlighted that Laune Bridge is of the upmost importance to 
the Iveragh Peninsula.  It is Kerry County Council’s responsibility to maintain and 
monitor bridges and he asked if Laune Bridge is capable of carrying current traffic 
volumes. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill stated he expressed concern regarding Laune Bridge last year.  
Following a TII inspection no problems were identified.  Cllr. Cahill stated he was 
opposed to banning any kind of traffic from using Laune Bridge. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea advised his father in law who lives in Killorglin has indicated that 
Laune Bridge has deteriorated.  The people of Killorglin and indeed South Kerry 
are very concerned and he expressed his amazement that TII believe this is not 
an issue. 
 
Cllr. Quigg pointed out he was not asking that heavy traffic would be prevented 
from using the bridge at present but when a new bridge is in place. 
 
In response Mr. C. O’Sullivan clarified that Laune Bridge is not an issue for buses 
etc. due to the span of the bridge.  A few years ago some scouring was 
undertaken and since then underpinning was carried out.  Since this work was 
done there is no evidence of subsidence.  This is the only crossing into Killorglin 
and during the peak tourism season there is traffic congestion.  This was raised 
with TII who indicated that funding for a new bridge was unlikely to be allocated.  
These projects take 10 to 15 years to plan and he undertook to prioritise this 
project with TII. 
 
20. 
Establishment of a dedicated Rural Development Unit 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council set up a dedicated Rural Development Unit. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry is predominantly a rural county, with only two towns with 
populations in excess of 10,000.  Rural Development is therefore an integral 
part of Kerry County Council’s remit and the new Directorate of Economic 
& Community Development, through its relevant business units Economic 
Development, Tourism, Community, Local Enterprise & Development 
Management is invested heavily in the economic, community and cultural 
advancement of rural areas within the county. There is a clear recognition 
that the economic growth in Kerry is dependent on a strong rural economy. 
Policies in relation to its advancement are contained in all the strategic 
plans prepared by or in association with the council, including; 
 
Kerry County Development Plan 2015-2021 
Local Economic & Community Plan 2016-2022 
County Kerry Tourism Strategy and Action Plan 2016-2022 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
49 of 60 
 
 
Kerry Local Development Strategy (LEADER Programme) 
 
The strategic involvement of Kerry County Council in the delivery of the 
LEADER programme, in developing the Local Development Strategy with 
key partners, its role as financial partner and through the Chief Officer in 
monitoring and implementing the local Economic and Community Plan has 
positioned the Council firmly within all aspects of rural development within 
the county. The appointment of the Broadband Officer has further 
strengthened this remit.    
 
Within these strategic plans there are a range of objectives and actions to 
develop the economy of rural towns and villages as well as the wider rural 
areas.  Included in these objectives are the areas of natural resources, 
marine, forestry, home working, the development of economic hubs in 
towns and villages, the improvement of infrastructure (including 
broadband), community tourism, events and festivals, adventure tourism, 
environmental, natural and cultural heritage tourism, aquaculture, social 
enterprise, renewable energies and a range of other economic drivers for 
rural areas. 
 
The Council has also successfully pursued all relevant grant funding for 
the advancement of rural areas, including REDZ, Town & Village Renewal, 
Rural Recreational Funding, Clar, and through the strategic use of the 
Councils own Community Support Fund significant investment has 
occurred across the county in recent years.  
 
As outlined above, rural development is core to the functions, operations 
and delivery of all sections of Kerry County Council. This continued focus 
on rural development throughout the organisation offers the best avenue 
for rural development within the county and this can be achieved through 
the existing structures. 
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen stated he recently attended an AILG Conference in 
Clare where he heard Clare County Council established a Rural Development 
Unit in October 2016.  He felt this would also be a good idea for Kerry and he 
called on management to liaise with Clare County Council at the initial stages.  
The work areas could include measures to halt rural decline.  The Unit in Clare 
stemmed from the Action Plan for Rural Ireland’   Throughout Europe more and 
more people are moving from rural to urban areas and in some cases this is a life 
style choice.  Thankfully there are extra resources being put into rural areas, yet 
some services are still being cut.  All members are doing what they can to 
maintain and enhance rural Ireland.  He called on the CPG to consider his motion 
and to revert to Council with a report within two months. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy SECONDED the motion. 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
50 of 60 
 
 
The Chief Executive highlighted that Kerry County Council has 4 Municipal 
District Officers and she was satisfied there is a good level of engagement with 
relevant organisations and local communities.  She believed there are adequate 
structures in place. 
 
21. 
Progress report on all Group Sewerage Schemes 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Cahill PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council give a detailed up to date progress report in respect of 
the various stages of where all Group Sewerage Schemes are at in the County 
and will the Council confirm what additional funding if any, has been provided to 
address these Schemes in view of the fact that there is in excess of a 50% failure 
rate of all septic tank inspections carried out to date, the fact that many of our 
villages have no Waste Water Treatment facilities which impacts on our 
waterways, rivers and streams. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Further to previous reply given to the South & West Municipal District 
meeting, The administration and development of the Group Sewerage (and 
Water) Scheme sector continues to be a function of the Local Authorities 
under the guidance and supervision of the Department of Housing, 
Planning Community and Local Government. 
The only Group Sewerage Schemes in Kerry are the Killeen Road, (a 7-
house scheme completed in 2015) in Tralee and the Dingle High Road (4 
houses), which is currently under way. Grant aid has also been made 
available for a proposed group sewerage scheme of circa 80 houses at 
Alderwood Road, Tralee.  
 
In the Government’s National Rural Water 2016-2018 Multi-Annual 
Programme, only 2 newly proposed Group Sewerage Schemes were 
allocated specific funding in the whole country, of which Alderwood Road 
is one.  
 
Since most septic tanks are attached to rural housing, the proposed 
development of group sewerage schemes to replace these appliances is 
neither practical nor economically feasible, mainly because of the low 
density / dispersed nature and remote location of rural settlement. The 
maximum grant allocation per household of €6,750 is generally not 
sufficient to meet the capital costs involved in constructing a sewer 
extension. 
 
In 2014, Kerry County Council made a submission to Irish Water for its 
Water Services Strategic Plan, to request the provision of sewerage 
infrastructure to all unsewered villages in the county.   
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
51 of 60 
 
 
However, Irish Water’s stated policy in their capital Investment Plan 2017-
2021 is to give priority to upgrading the existing sewerage schemes, in 
order to meet the requirements of the EPA Discharge Licenses and 
Certificates for these schemes, prior to considering investment in new 
schemes or in extensions to existing schemes. For the moment, they will 
only consider developer-led extensions to the public sewer network. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill pointed out that lower Cromane would be suitable for a group 
sewerage scheme.  In Caherdaniel raw sewerage is flowing into a stream and 
onto a Blue Flag Beach.  He expressed his disappointment there are only 2 
group sewerage schemes in Kerry and he called on the Minister to make 
additional funding available. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan SECONDED the motion. 
 
22. 
Minish Railway Crossing, Killarney 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council what progress has been made with Irish Rail to 
rectify Minish Railway Crossing, Killarney. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Following the moving of this motion at the December Council meeting, and 
previous motions by members of the Killarney MD, the Council made direct 
contact with senior management in Irish Rail, clearly expressing an 
urgency to have the poor riding quality at the Minish Railway Crossing 
addressed and highlighting their responsibility in this regard, under an 
agreement reached in 1996.  
 
The TII have agreed to fund any repairs to the road surface but the critical 
issue that has been identified is with the settlement of the railway tracks. 
Irish Rail sought surveys of the line which were subsequently forwarded to 
them.  
  
At a follow up meeting with Irish Rail on the 27th April, there was a 
consensus on the extent of the works required and Irish Rail has confirmed 
that they will carry out the necessary repair works to the rail line. Given the 
complexity of the works involved, which may require restrictions on rail 
services to Tralee, Farranfore and Killarney as well as a temporary traffic 
diversion, it is envisaged that the works will be scheduled for next 
September. Further updates in relation to these works will be advised to the 
MD members. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae welcomed the reply and added she has raised this issue 
consistently since she was co-opted to the Council.  She welcomed the fact that 
works would commence in September.   

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
52 of 60 
 
 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae supported the motion. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan advised he raised this issue on a number of occasions as it was 
a health and safety issue.  He asked that the traffic warning signs would be 
upgraded with this work. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan advised that this issue has been under review for the past 9 or 
10 years.  It was raised by Danny Healy-Rae and by all members for the Killarney 
MD.  It is Council policy to keep all members updated and when confirmation was 
received from Iarnród Éireann that they acknowledged the issue notification 
issued to all members at the same time.  Mr. O’Sullivan undertook to review 
signage at this location in conjunction with the works. 
 
23. 
Continuation of funding for counselling and psychology services 
through primary and secondary schools 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Moriarty PROPOSED: 
That we write to both Tusla and Minister Zappone to seek the continuation of 
funding for counselling and psychology services through our primary and 
secondary schools. Tusla's decision to cease all funding is tantamount to turning 
their backs on our young people and to do so when we are only beginning to 
realise the depth and breadth of mental health issues being experienced by our 
young beggars belief. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty advised that the grant received for counselling is of assistance to 
students on a family bereavement.  Councillors attend schools 1 or 2 days a 
week and students have access to this service.  The grant of €5,500 paid by the 
Department is heavily subsidised by the school by approx. €12,000 per annum.  
Following a review of the programme grants were discontinued and now there is 
no funding for counselling services.  There was good public consultation around 
suicide prevention and one of the questions asked was had the Government ring 
fenced funding for the recommendations arising from the public consultation.  
She did not believe the funding will be provided and she added that the 
Government is paying lip service to mental health.  Cllr. Moriarty asked that the 
resolution would be referred to the relevant Minister and authority calling for the 
restoration of funding for counselling services in schools. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris supported the motion and added there is a crisis in the mental 
health service and virtually all counselling services have been removed.  
Services for children are very poor and one parent had to take to the air waves to 
access suitable services for their child.  Not only has the mental health services 
budget been cut but there has not been any investment in preventative 
measures. 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
53 of 60 
 
 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae also supported the motion and added in school she has 
witnessed the consequences of the cuts of this nature.  Services are not in place 
for students under stress. 
 
24. 
Number of signed housing contracts that have commenced building 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. O’Shea PROPOSED: 
To ask the Director of Housing how many of the previously signed housing 
contracts have commenced building. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has signed 4 No. Housing contracts for construction 
projects in 2016/2017, all these projects have proceeded to construction 
stage – projects in Listowel, Lixnaw, Tralee and Killarney. 
 
In addition a further contract for the provision of 4 units in Tralee was 
signed on 4th May and will commence shortly. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea welcomed the reply. 
 
25. 
Proposals to resolve the difficulty in getting properties for HAP and 
Long Term Leases 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. T. Ferris PROPOSED: 
What steps do Kerry County Council propose to take to resolve the difficulty in 
seeking properties that meet the criteria for HAP and long term leases. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Housing Department is undertaking a review of the criteria used by 
Kerry County Council for Longterm Leases.  In relation to HAP, it is a 
National scheme and the criteria is set out nationally.  However, since 1st 
January 2017, Kerry County Council has signed up 119 HAP tenancies. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris pointed out that 119 HAP tenancies have commenced but in Tralee 
there are 2,000 housing applicants alone.  Since 1st January 146 new 
applications were received but just 119 HAP tenancies commenced.  Cllr. Ferris 
accepted that Kerry County Council is restricted by Government policy but she 
expressed her disappointment that individuals are buying up premises, 
converting them and letting them.  It is not good policy to depend on private 
landlords to provide social housing.  Cllr. Ferris called on the Council to be more 
imaginative in securing properties. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue clarified that the HAP Scheme is a new scheme that only 
went live in December 2016.  The number of tenancies is low but will increase 
and the Scheme is predicated on availability.  Kerry County Council is obliged to 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
54 of 60 
 
 
implement government policy.  The Repair and Leasing Scheme is aimed at 
property owners and the Council cannot buy and repair properties.  Any repairs 
are subject to Department ceilings together with the repairs that can be carried 
out. 
 
26. 
Review of time frame for full time residential care 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
That the HSE review it's time frame given to families where a member of the 
family is in need of full time residential care. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy highlighted a case where the patient is in full time care and it 
will be up to 12 months before the paper work is completed.  He called on the 
HSE to review this process and to ensure the necessary documentation is in 
place within 3 or 4 weeks. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty SECONDED the motion. 
 
27. 
Making of public toilets at High Street Carpark, Killarney accessible 
for people with disabilities 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B. Cronin PROPOSED: 
Following repeated requests which I have made at MD meetings, why have Kerry 
County Council made no effort to make the public toilets at High Street Carpark 
Killarney accessible for people with disabilities. 
 
The following reply issued: 
There are 4 public toilet facilities, provided by the Council in Killarney. The 
toilets at the Ha Ha (Kenmare Place), Knockreer, and New Street car park 
are fully accessible. The Public Toilet at New street car park was fully 
refurbished in 2015, at a cost of €30,000 which included works to fully 
facilitate disabled access. 
 
The public toilet at High street is not currently accessible. The layout and 
internal dimensions of this facility does not allow for easy adaptation for 
disabled access.  
An extension or full reconstruction would be required.  
 
Based on a preliminary estimate, having regard to similar works, the 
estimated cost of providing fully accessible facilities at this location would 
cost in the region of €50,000.  
 
Given the investment needs, priorities for other works in Killarney town 
identified with the member’s, demands for other public conveniences 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
55 of 60 
 
 
throughout the county and the provision of 3 other fully accessible 
facilities in the town, no funding provision has been made in the current 
adopted budget for these works. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin stated he has highlighted that the public toilets at the High Street 
Car Park are not disability friendly.  He asked that a new design would be drawn 
up to adapt the toilets.  There are disabled parking spaces next to the toilets but 
they cannot use them.  Ironically the Irish Wheelchair Association held their 
conference in Killarney the previous weekend and the theme of the conference 
was ‘Breaking Boundaries’.  It is difficult to get parking at Knockreer car park and 
all accessible toilets are on one side of town.  Cllr. Cronin called for a 
commitment that the Toilets at the High Street car park would be made 
accessible.   
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty also supported the motion. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan highlighted that the reply took into account that the toilets may 
have to be demolished.  However it maybe possible to refurbish them at a cost of 
€25,000 to €30,000. 
 
28. 
Call to install a pumping station at Mountain View Estate 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Sheahan PROPOSED: 
To ask Irish Water to install the Pumping Station for the Kilcummin Sewerage 
Scheme at Mountain View Estate, north of Kilcummin village as this would deal 
with the difficult situation which has been experienced at this Estate for many 
years. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Further to previous reply to the Killarney Municipal District meeting, it is 
intended to construct a waste water pumping station and rising main to 
connect this development to the proposed public sewerage scheme for 
Kilcummin. However, work will only commence on site at Mountain View 
when the current Planning process for Kilcummin Sewerage Scheme is 
complete and when the schedule for the construction of the proposed 
public scheme is confirmed.  Planning permission for the Kilcummin 
Sewerage scheme was granted by Kerry County Council recently and has 
been appealed to An Bord Pleanála. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan stated there is confusion as to where the pumping station will be 
located.  If it was located at Mountain View the Bond could be used to resolve 
outstanding issues.   
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
56 of 60 
 
 
Mr. J. Kennelly stated it is proposed to provide a pumping station at this estate 
and that the sewerage will be pumped to the new public sewer. 
 
29. 
Call to give Community Childcare Centre’s the option of being 
managed by the state 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. S. Fitzgerald PROPOSED: 
That we the Members of Kerry County Council seek support in getting the 
Government to give Community Childcare Centre's the option of being managed 
by the state. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. S. Fitzgerald stated that childcare facilities are under pressure and pay and 
conditions are not being adequately addressed. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. J. J. Culloty referred to his Notice of Motion No. 31 and advised that he 
wanted to delete the last 7 words from his motion.   
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue advised that the motion was dealt with earlier in the meeting 
and it cannot be amended at the meeting at which it was moved. 
 
The Chief Executive stated that an approach to this issue was agreed earlier in 
the meeting.  It is intended to review what developments have been constructed 
and those where permission has been granted but have not yet been developed. 
 
The Cathaoirleach advised members that a Planning Briefing for members would 
be held on Monday 29th May. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue stated members are referring to commencing a significant 
process while the Planning Department is in the process of preparing Municipal 
District Plans.  At the Briefing it is intended to update members on policies and 
any proposed changes.  It is intended to hold the Planning Briefing on the 29th 
May.   
 
Cllr. Culloty again highlighted that Donegal County Council amended their 
County Development Plan and it has made a huge difference.   
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher called on the executive to consider the Variation adopted in 
Donegal. 
 
 
 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
57 of 60 
 
 
32. 
Call to re-instate the Local Improvement Scheme 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Lucid PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council request that the Minister of Transport, Tourism and 
Sport re-instate the Local Improvement Scheme with immediate effect. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Similar motions have been made on this issue by Council and referred to 
the Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport. The scheme was suspended 
in 2012 and prior to this, the funding was ring fenced by the Department in 
the grant allocations to road authorities. Strong representations were made 
by this Council to the Minister on the suspension of the scheme and 
subsequently the scheme was restored in 2013. However the funding was 
not ring fenced and road authorities had discretion to allocate up to 7% of 
the Discretionary Grant to fund the repairs of private roads under an LIS 
scheme.  
 
The Council has made some provision in the adopted roads programme for 
limited funding towards this programme since 2013, but this only allows for 
approximately 5 to 6 private roads to be completed. This is due to the lack 
of adequate funding to repair public roads, with over 1500 km of local and 
regional roads, identified in surveys of the non-national road network, as 
being in a poor state of repair.  
 
The need for increased investment in the maintenance and upkeep of the 
road network has been highlighted in reports by the Department of 
Transport , Tourism and Sport to Government.   
 
The Programme for Partnership Government provides that “as the 
economy recovers the Government will promote increased funding for local 
improvement schemes on an annual basis”.  The Minister has previously 
indicated in response to Dáil questions that it is a major objective of the 
new Government to prioritise new investment in local and regional road 
maintenance and improvements and local improvement scheme funding 
will be promoted in that context. 
 
This is a matter for resolution by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Lucid welcomed the comprehensive reply and requested that a further 
letter would issue to the Minister for Transport. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty SECONDED the motion. 
 
 
 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
58 of 60 
 
 
17.05.15.12 Conferences and Seminars 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. McCarthy, SECONDED by Cllr. N. Kelleher 
it was agreed to approve the attendance of the Cathaoirleach, Cllr. M. 
O’Shea at the Annual Daniel O’Connell Commemoration held in Dublin on 
the 14th May 2017. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Kelleher, SECONDED by Cllr. D. McCarthy 
it was agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllrs. J. Healy-Rae, M. Healy-
Rae and T. Ferris at the Conference on the theme “Brexit, Regional 
Planning and EU Affairs to be held in Wicklow on the 26th May 2017. 
 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Lucid, SECONDED by Cllr. N. Kelleher it 
was agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllr. M. Kennelly, Chair of the 
Operations SPC at the RSA Annual Conference to be held in Dublin on 
the 1st June 2017. 
 
 
Cllr. Kennelly was nominated to report back to Council on this Conference. 
 
(d) 
No member expressed an interest in attending the Conference on the 
theme “The Local Authority Waters and Communities Office” to be held in 
Clonakilty from 16th to 18th June 2017. 
 
(e) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Lucid, SECONDED by Cllr. D. McCarthy it 
was agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllrs. Culloty and Kelleher at a 
twinning event in St. Avertin, France from 23rd to 25th June 2017. 
 
 
Cllr. Kelleher was nominated to report back to Council on this event. 
 
(f) 
No member expressed an interest in attending the Conference on the 
theme “What Does a Hard BREXIT mean for Ireland” to be held in 
Clonakilty from 23rd to 25th June 2017. 
 
17.05.15.13 Correspondence General 
 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were 
circulated. 
 
1.  
Letter dated 20th April 2017 from University Hospital Kerry in response to a 
resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to the provision of a Stroke Unit at 
UHK. 
 
2.  
Email dated 24th April 2017 from the Office of the Minister for Transport in response 
to a resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to the national bus strike. 
 
 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
59 of 60 
 
 
3.  
Email dated 24th April 2017 from the Office of the Minister for Transport in response 
to a resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to transport for children from 
towns to National Schools in rural areas. 
4.  
Letter dated 24th April 2017 from the Department of Arts, Heritage, Regional, Rural 
and Gaeltacht Affairs in response to a resolution from Kerry County Council in 
relation to the eradication of mink. 
 
5.  
Letter dated 25th April 2017 from the Department of Housing, Planning, Community 
and Local Government in response to a resolution from Kerry County Council in 
relation to the Mortgage to Rent Scheme. 
 
6.  
Email dated 28th April 2017 from the Office of the Minister for Housing, Planning, 
Community and Local Government in response to a resolution from Kerry County 
Council in relation to a call for a grant to install monitored intruder alarms for over 
66s living in rural areas. 
 
7.  
Email from Mr. John Halligan TD in response to a resolution from Kerry County 
Council in relation to the provision of transport for children from towns to rural 
primary schools. 
8.  
Letter dated 18th April 2017 from Tipperary County Council in relation to a resolution 
adopted by that authority calling on the Government to progress the Coroner’s Bill 
and that the Coroner’s Bill will provide for an automatic inquest into every maternal 
death. 
9.  
Letter dated 24th April 2017 from Tipperary County Council in relation to a resolution 
adopted by that authority calling on the Minister for Social Protection to allow those 
over 55 on Community Employment Schemes to continue to do so until they reach 
65. 
 
10.  
Letter dated 24th April 2017 from Waterford City & County Council in relation to a 
resolution adopted by that authority in support of the legalisation of the use of 
cannabis for medicinal purposes. 
 
11.  
Letter dated 24th April 2017 from Waterford City & County Council in relation to a 
resolution adopted by that authority calling for amendments to allow for medical 
certification for the 80% attendance requirement for members Annual Expense 
Allowance. 
 
 
17.05.15.15 Any other business 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris requested that the CPG would consider granting proxy voting to 
members on maternity leave to enable the parents of young children to vote on 
important issues.   
 
The Chief Executive advised that the Department would be consulted on this 
issue. 

May Ordinary Meeting 
15th May 2017  
60 of 60 
 
 
 
Cllr. Ferris asked if this was not possible that business would be conducted at a 
particular time to allow the councillor to be present for a limited time only. 
 
The meeting concluded at 4.30pm. 
 
 
 
Liam Quinlan                                       _________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator                     Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
 
 
 
 
 
