 
1 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
 
 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect putting 
them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is available on 
request. 
 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ AN CRUINNIÚ DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH 
I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRÁ LÍ, AGUS AR-LÍNE/FÍORÚIL 
AR AN LUAN, 18 BEALTAINE, 2026 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN THE 
COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE AND ONLINE ON MONDAY, 18 
May 2026 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
 
ABSENT/ AS LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
 
Mr. F. Reidy Chief Executive               
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue, Director of Corporate Services and People Development 
Ms. N. O’ Sullivan, Director of Housing            
Mr. P. Neary, Director of Community, Climate Action and Operational Services
Ms. K Moriarty, Acting Director of Finance 
Mr. J. Nolan, Director of Active Land Management & Economic Development
Ms. B. Fitzgerald Acting Director of Capital Delivery, Climate Resilience and Culture
Ms. E O’ Donoghue Meetings Administrator  
Mr. O’ Shea Press Officer 
Ms. C. Fitzgerald S.S.O. Corporate Services  
Ms. M Galvin C.O. Corporate Services 
 
The meeting commenced at 10.30a.m.   
 
Filming of May Council Meeting 
Angie Baily                           Tom Barry   
Robert Brosnan 
Tommy Cahill
Brendan Cronin
Paul Daly                        
Charlie Farrelly                     Deirdre Ferris 
Breandán Fitzgerald 
Fionnán Fitzgerald                Michael Foley (Cathaoirleach) Podge Foley 
Martin Grady 
Tommy Griffin                     Jackie Healy-Rae 
Johnny Healy-Rae                Maura Healy-Rae               Niall Kelleher                  
Aoife Kennelly   
Michael Leane 
Sam Locke    
Dan McCarthy 
Jimmy Moloney 
Marie Moloney 
Norma Moriarty 
Liam Speedy Nolan 
Terry O’Brien                  
Niall O’ Callaghan
Bobby O’Connell                 John O’Donoghue  
Anne O’ Sullivan                   Teddy O’Sullivan-Casey       Mikey Sheehy     

 
2 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley took the Chair and welcomed everyone. 
 
The Cathaoirleach advised members Mr. Jerry Kennelly of Local Story Films was present 
in the Chamber. Mr Kennelly was recording footage, without audio, for a documentary, as 
approved by the CPG. 
 
 
18.05.2026.01 
Protocols/Induction 
Ms. E O’ Donoghue, Meeting Administrator, referred Elected Members to the Protocols 
for Meetings of Kerry County Council and took a roll call.  
 
 
18.05.2026.02 
Cathaoirleach’s Report on CPG Meeting 
The Cathaoirleach’s report on the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 12 May 
2026, was noted by the Members. 
 
18.05.2026.03 
Confirmation of Minutes 
(a) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell and SECONDED by Cllr. Terry O’ 
Brien, it was resolved that the Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Kerry County 
Council held on 23 March 2026 be confirmed. 
 
18.05.2026.04 
Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
The Chief Executive’s Report, circulated in advance of the meeting was noted by 
Members.  
 
The Chief Executive advised Members the Council was notified of the decision of the 
International Blue Flag jury to award 16 Blue Flags to Kerry on Friday 15 May. The 
high standard of Kerry’s beaches and coastal amenities has been recognised with the 
awards, an increase of one on previous years and the highest number achieved 
nationally. 
 
Members welcomed the Blue Flag Awards and commended those involved in 
achieving the awards. 
 
Members welcomed the Vacant Properties Refurbishment Grant information sessions 
and requested additional sessions be organised in Kenmare and Dingle. All sessions 
should be widely promoted to ensure public awareness.  
 
Members requested the Council actively promote the public consultation process in 
relation to the proposed speed limit bye laws. 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly welcomed the funding for  
 Castleisland Castle  
 Castleisland playground 
 Asked that the Council consider extending the Estate Enhancement fund to 
estates that have been taken in charge by the Council. 
 

 
3 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald 
 Requested that the Elected Members would have an input into the Estate 
Enhancement Fund guidelines. 
 Welcomed funding for Castleisland Castle and the playground in Castleisland.   
 Welcomed the Councils visit to Coláiste Gleann Lí as part of the National Voter 
Registration Day and requested that further engagement be undertaken with 
schools and the Electoral Registers office. 
 Thanked the Arts Office for supporting the World Fiddle Day in Scartaglin and 
acknowledged all involved in the success of the Castleisland 800 Festival.  
 
Cllr. Tom Barry: 
 Welcomed the Estate Enhancement Fund. 
 Congratulated Ballylongford Playground Committee on the opening of their 
facility and noted that works are currently taking place in Listowel playground. 
 Welcomed funding under the Rural Regeneration Development Fund for the 
Neo-Data Site, Listowel.  
 Highlighted the importance of maintaining structures under the Community 
Monument Fund. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill: 
 As Chair of the Housing SPC acknowledged the work carried in relation to the 
disposal of dwellings under Section 183 process and highlighted the importance 
of prioritising first time buyers. 
 Highlighted the importance of the Estate Enhancement Fund and requested the 
Council ensure the application process is kept as simple as possible.  
 Requested the Council to expediate the proposed housing schemes for 
Farranfore, Waterville and Killarney.  
 
Cllr. Marie Moloney: 
 Asked if the Estate Enhancement fund could be extended to private estates.  
 Asked if the scheme in Ballydribeen is a Council built estate or AHB  
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty: 
 Welcomed the provision of housing for Spunkane, Waterville and requested a 
timeframe for full planning.  
 Highlighted the importance of the Council engaging with residents associations 
as part of the Estate Enhancement fund. 
 Commended the work done on the Section 183 disposal process and the 
prioritisation of first time buyers. 
 Asked that the Council ensures works are undertaken to improve access to 
beaches and coastal protection works.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald: 
 Requested further information regarding the potential implications the geo 
political situation could have on Kerry County Council. 
 Welcomed the Historic Structures funding 
 Congratulated everyone involved in the Short Film Programme- deascéal and 
welcomed the funding for Dingle Courthouse.  

 
4 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
 
Cllr. Sam Locke: 
 Welcomed the Estate Enhancement Fund and the positive impact it will add  to 
the efforts of Tidy Towns groups. 
 Asked that two to three EV charging points would be installed in each housing 
estate.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin: 
 Welcomed the Estate Enhancement Fund. 
 Requested an update in relation to the Dingle Phoenix project.  
 Welcomed the Section 183 process and asked if the Council will be reviewing 
other Council owned properties / building with a view to disposing them for 
housing.  
 Noted the impact the speed limit review will have on road users and highlighted 
the need for awareness in relation to the proposed changes. 
 
Cllr Deirdre Ferris: 
 Welcomed the provision of funding for playgrounds and thanked staff for 
ensuring that repairs are carried out promptly.  
 Highlighted an issue in certain locations where green areas for rewilding are 
now been used for littering. 
 Raised significant concerns in relation to the lack of charging infrastructure in 
estates due to the nature of the build. 
 Congratulated everyone involved in the retention of the Blue Flags but stressed 
that access to the beach is still an issue and referred in particular to Banna 
Beach where there is no safety rails provided and requested funding be 
provided to carry out these works.  
 Expressed frustration at a recent water pipe burst at Lisloose. Tralee. She 
called on the Council to demand a definitive timeline from Uisce Éireann on 
when the works will be undertaken.  
 
Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell  
 Welcomed the funding for the upgrade works to the playground in Castleisland 
and Brosna.   
 
Cllr. Angie Baily: 
 Asked for an update on the submissions received in relation to the Rahoonane 
Masterplan.  
 Acknowledged the importance of engaging with students to encourage pre-
registration to vote and requested that such engagement be extended to 
additional schools.  
 Welcomed the funding for playgrounds across the county.  
 Requested consideration be given to Irish classes for Councillors. 
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae: 
 Welcomed the progress on housing and highlighted the importance of 
engagement with Councillors as part of the process.  
 Requested an update on what landowners have been paid to date in regard to 
the South Kerry Greenway and how many will be paid by year end. 

 
5 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
 Welcomed the funding for the playground in Castleisland.  
 Highlighted the importance of public awareness regarding the proposed 
changes in the speed limit review. 
 Highlighted the reliance on low energy documentation from energy suppliers as 
proof of vacancy and asked if alternative documentation could be considered. 
 Asked if the Council is organising events to coincide with the EU Presidency.  
 
Cllr. Terry O’ Brien: 
 Welcomed the engagement with students of Colaiste Gleann Lí as part of 
National Voter Registration Day.  
 
Cllr. Niall Kelleher: 
 Welcomed the active engagement in relation to the Section 183 process. 
 Welcomed the introduction of the property marking machines through the Local 
Community Safety Partnership. 
 Asked for an update on the timeline for the proposed speed limit review. 
 Welcomed the update on lands at St. Finans and asked for confirmation as to 
who is the lead organisation.     
 
Cllr. Martin Grady: 
 Welcomed the application for funding for St Finans site.  
 
Cllr. Podge Foley: 
 Welcome the advancement of the public realm for Killorglin and Caherciveen.  
 
Cllr. Paul Daly: 
 Welcomed the funding for Castle Street, Tralee under the Historic Towns 
Initiative and asked if property owners had been engaged with.  
 Asked if EV Charging points are included in the masterplan for Rathoonane. 
 Welcomed the funding under the Estate Enhancement Fund. 
 Asked that clarification would be requested from Uisce Éireann in relation to 
the proposed pipe replacement works at Lisloose.   
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan: 
 Thanked the Council for assisting with the environmental issue at Bin Bán 
Beach.  
 Asked again that the payments process regarding Croí Conaither grants be 
examined.  
 Expressed concerns regarding parking in Dingle town during the summer 
months, noting that seven parking space have recently been lost. 
 Welcomed the proposed works to the playground in Lispole.  
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan: 
 Complimented staff in Oifig na Gaeilge for facilitating Irish Language Classes.  
 Complimented all involved in Cruinniú na nÓg due to take place on 06th June 
2026.  
 Welcomed the proposed disposal of properties under the Section 183 process. 
  
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae: 

 
6 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
 Welcomed the provision of housing in Waterville but expressed disappointment 
with the lack of social housing for Kenmare.  
 Called on Uisce Éireann to provide an update on the provision of additional 
water supply for Kenmare town. 
 Concurred with the comments expressed in regard to the Croí Conaithe 
Scheme and noted some applicants are wating months to be paid and asked 
that the process be reviewed.  
 
The Chief Executive advised Members: 
 The Council is continuously monitoring the geo political impact on the 
organisation and assessing any potential costs associated with same.  
 While the Council awaits the appeal the Council continues to plan for the 
Phoenix Cinema site.  
 Files have been reviewed and each landowner on the South Kerry Greenway 
has been written to. The Council has engaged with the IFA and held one on 
one engagements. The next section of the Greenway will open in June. 
 
Ms. N. O’ Sullivan Director of Service advised: 
 The Housing SPC led the process in regard to the development of the Estates 
Enhancement fund. The application process is straight forward and the funding 
will support improvements to communal areas, estate clean initiatives, the 
purchase of planting and the promotion of biodiversity and climate change 
activities. Engagement with resident’s association is currently underway.  
 The Housing SPC agreed the Section 183 disposal process. There is currently 
14 units with clear title that can be disposed of. The properties have been 
assessed by the housing technical team which has confirmed they cannot be 
brought back into use as part of social housing stock.  
 The Council will shortly commence an expression of interest to deliver housing 
turnkey housing in areas where there is a high demand.   
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald A/ Director of Service advised: 
 The Czech Ambassador to Ireland had visited Kerry County Council and further 
engagement with the Embassy will take place throughout the year.  
 A programme of events for the EU presidency is being examined. 
 The Public consultation in Killorglin has completed. 
 In Caherciveen works are progressing to the Carnegie building and a contactor 
is currently being appointed for the Broadwalk and Amenity area.  
 
Mr. P. Neary Director of Service advised: 
 In relation to the Speed Limit review, Council staff have engaged with the 
Elected Members in each MD and circulated maps identifying the proposed 
changes. All feedback from the Members is welcome in advance of going to 
public consultation. The Director acknowledged the concerns raised by 
members in relation to public awareness of the changes. The public 
consultation is on schedule to be advertised before the end June. Once the 
public consultation is complete a briefing will be arranged with Members.  
 Funding is available under the Outdoor Recreation Infrastructure Scheme to 
support access to beaches, and a review of the provision of handrails will be 
undertaken.  

 
7 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
 Discussions will be held with Uisce Éireann in regard to the pipe replacement 
works at Lisloose.   
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service advised: 
 An Irish Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant information session will be 
arranged.  
 Confirmed the payment of Croí Conaithe applications will be reviewed.  
 In regard to Castle Street, Tralee the Council has engaged and received 
submissions from businesses.  
 Acknowledged the concerns raised in relation to the EV charging points for 
Rathoonane and confirmed the installation of charging point will be reviewed 
in the context of future design in housing estates.  
 Kerry County Council is taking the lead in progressing the application for the 
St. Finans site with the support of the HSE and the Land Development Agency. 
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy Rae welcomed the enhanced engagement with landowners on the 
South Kerry Greenway and asked that agreements be finalised in 2026. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill asked for an update on dog litter signage along the South Kerry 
Greenway. He acknowledged the engagement with the landowners and asked that it 
be resolved as soon as possible.  
 
The Chief Executive advised that a programme of interpretation and signage is being 
developed for the Greenway, that the Council continues to engage with landowners, 
the hope and intention is to get agreement but noting this is a collaborative two-way 
process.  
 
18.05.2026.05 
To consider the disposal of the following: 
 
 
(a) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan- Casey and SECONDED by Cllr. 
Norma Moriarty it was agreed to approve the disposal by way of lease of property, 
18.45m2 of office accommodation located in the Kenmare Courthouse Building, 
The Square, Kenmare, Co. Kerry, situated in the townland of Kenmare, in 
the  District Electoral Division of Kenmare, to Teagasc, in accordance with the 
terms of notice issued 20 April 2026 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001 (as amended), Section 211 and Section 211 (5) of the 
Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) and Article 206 of the 
Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended). 
 
(b) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Norma Moriarty and SECONDED by Cllr. Tommy 
Cahill it was agreed to approve the disposal by way of lease of property, 23.8m2 
of office accommodation  in Folio No KY6809F  located in the Caherciveen 
Courthouse Building, Caherciveen, Co. Kerry, situated in the townland of 
Caherciveen, in the  District Electoral Division of Caher, to Teagasc, in 
accordance with the terms of notice issued 20 April 2026 pursuant to Section 183 
of the Local Government Act 2001 (as amended), Section 211 and Section 211 
(5) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) and Article 206 of 
the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended). 
 

 
8 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
(c) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Tommy Cahill and SECONDED by Cllr. Podge Foley 
it was agreed to approve the disposal by way of lease of property, 300 sq.m of 
existing building located in the former St. Clare’s Convent Building Kenmare. Co. 
Kerry, situated in the townland of Gortamullin, Kenmare in the  District Electoral 
Division of Kenmare  to Kenmare Family Resource Centre, in accordance with 
the terms of notice issued 05 May 2026 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local 
Government Act 2001 (as amended), Section 211 and Section 211 (5) of the 
Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) and Article 206 of the 
Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended). 
 
 
 
 
 
18.05.2026.06 To consider the approval of Kerry County Council’s Audit 
Committee Work Programme 2025.  
 
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue Director of Service referred Elected Members to the report 
circulated outlining the Audit Committee Work Programme for 2026. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney and SECONDED by Breandan 
Fitzgerald it was agreed to approve the Kerry County Council’s Audit Committee 
Work Programme 2026. 
 
18.05.2026.07  Kerry County Council Beach (Amendments) Bye-Laws 2026 
To adopt Kerry County Council Beach (Amendments) Bye-Laws 2026, 
following public consultation, in accordance with Part 19 of the Local 
Government Act 2001 and the Local Government Act 2001 (Bye-Laws) 
Regulations 2006, for the purposes of regulating and controlling the provision 
of sauna services and related commercial activities on specified beaches in 
County Kerry and providing for the imposition of fixed payments in 
accordance with Section 206 of the Local Government Act 2001. 
 
The Director of Service Mr. P. Neary presented the Director of Services report into the 
Draft Beach Amendment Bye-laws 2026 as circulated to Members in advance of the 
meeting. He outlined the process undertaken to get to this stage with the draft byelaws 
advertised for public consultation in line with the legislative requirements. Mr. Neary 
advised Members of the submissions received and the Executives response to the 
submissions. In consideration of all submissions 1 amendment was made to the draft 
bye-laws, to exclude Ballybunion North beach. Mr. Neary noted the proposed bye-
laws were discussed in full at the Environment, Climate Action, Marine & Emergency 
Planning SPC meeting on Thursday, 05th March 2026 and again on Wednesday 13th 
May 2026.  
 
Following consideration of the submissions the Director of Service was recommending 
the adoption of the Kerry County Council Beach (Amendments) Bye-Laws 2026 in 
accordance with Part 19 of the Local Government Act 2001 and the Local Government 
Act 2001 (Bye-Laws) Regulations 2006 for the purposes of regulating and controlling 
the provision of sauna services and related commercial activities on specified beaches 
in County Kerry and providing for the imposition of fixed payments in accordance with 
Section 206 of the Local Government Act 2001. 
 

 
9 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
Cllr. Sam Locke Chair of the Environment, Climate Action, Marine & Emergency 
Planning SPC acknowledged the significant work involved in developing the bye-
laws. 
 
Cllr. Jimmy Moloney welcomed the bye-laws.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin asked if the location at Inch be reviewed and if the Council can 
confirm if there is currently a lease for the car park.   
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty asked if there a long-term goal to introduce bye-laws to non 
blue flag beaches such as Bunbhalla Beach.  
    
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris concurred bye-laws must be extended to non-blue flag beaches 
and welcomed the regularisation of services in some areas. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill welcomed the byelaws and highlighted the importance of such 
facilities for mental health and well-being. He called on the Council to extend the 
bye-laws to non-blue flag beaches and support existing businesses where possible.   
 
Cllr. Podge Foley highlighted concerns regarding disability access Cromane. 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan welcomed the bye-laws and said this is a growing industry that 
will continue to expand. In relation to Inch beach the facility should be on the beach 
rather than in the car park and he requested clarity in relation to the lease of the car 
park. He stated that it is important that the Council ensures that all facilities and 
amenities are regulated.  
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service confirmed the Council is supportive of such facilities 
in the County Development Plan. There are a number of private operators on private 
land throughout the county and this is a planning matter.  
 
Mr. P. Neary confirmed that further bye-laws will be considered for non blue flag 
beaches and amenity areas to facilitate service provision. It is hoped to have a draft 
for members in late 2026. The Director confirmed the facility in Inch is situated on a 
hard standing area and not on sand as this would require further environmental 
impact assessment. In line with previous years the Council is currently finalising the 
lease for the car park at Inch..  
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin expressed concerns that the car park lease is not finalised and 
asked that the Council ensure it is agreed without delay.  
 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Sam Locke and SECONDED by Cllr Jimmy Moloney that this 
Council resolves to make the Kerry County Council Beach (Amendments) Bye Laws 2026 
pursuant to the recommendation in the Director of Services report for the purposes of 
regulating and controlling the provision of sauna services and related commercial activities on 
specified beaches in County Kerry and providing for the imposition of fixed payments in 
accordance with Part 19 of the Local Government Act 2001, Section 206 of the Local 
Government Act 2001 and the Local Government Act 2001 (Bye-Law) Regulations 2006. 
 

 
10 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
The result of the vote was as follows: 
 
For: Cllrs: Angie Baily, Tom Barry, Robert Brosnan, Tommy Cahill, Paul Daly,  
Charlie Farrelly, Deirdre Ferris, Breandán Fitzgerald, Fionnán Fitzgerald, Podge 
Foley, Tommy Griffin, Jackie Healy-Rae, Johnny Healy-Rae, Niall Kelleher, Aoife 
Kennelly, Michael Leane, Sam Locke, Jimmy Moloney, Marie Moloney, Norma 
Moriarty, Terry O’Brien, John O’ Donoghue, Teddy O’Sullivan-Casey, Michael Foley 
(Cathaoirleach) (24) 
  
Absent: Cllrs: Brendan Cronin, Martin Grady, Maura Healy-Rae, Dan McCarthy 
Liam Nolan, Niall O’ Callaghan, Bobby O’Connell, Anne O’ Sullivan, Mikey Sheehy 
(9) 
 
Against: Cllrs: (0) 
 
The Cathaoirleach declared the vote was carried. 
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley advised that he had to leave the meeting to attend 
another engagement.  
 
Leas- Cathaoirleach Cllr. Marie Moloney took the chair at 12.21p.m. 
 
18.05.2026.08 
To agree a date for the holding of a Special Meeting of the 
Full Council to consider the Chief Executives Report and Section 51 Report 
on submissions received in relation to the material alterations to Variation 
No.3. Castleisland-Corca Dhuibhne Municipal District Settlements’ Plan, 
Suggested Date: Monday 15 June 2026. 
 
On the PROPSAL of Cllr. Teddy O Sullivan and SECONDED by Cllr. Fionnan 
Fitzgerald it was agreed to hold a special meeting of the Full Council to consider the 
Chief Executives Report and Section 51 Report on submissions received in relation 
to the material alterations to Variation No.3. Castleisland-Corca Dhuibhne Municipal 
District Settlements’ Plan, on Monday 15 June 2026.  
 
To Note Report from SPC Chairs 
(a) Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey, SPC Chair on the meeting of the Culture, Heritage 
and Gaeltacht SPC held on 14 April 2026 was noted.  
 
(b) Cllr. Tommy Cahill, SPC Chair, on the meeting of the Housing SPC held on 30 
April 2026 was noted  
 
(c) Cllr. Terry O’ Brien, SPC Chair, on the meeting of the of the Economic 
Development, Enterprise, Tourism and Community SPC held on 07 May 2026 was 
noted. 
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae  
 Acknowledged the work of the Ryder Cup working group and requested a 
plan be put in place to ensure Kerry and Castleisland benefit from the event.  

 
11 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
 Acknowledged the work of the SPC in progressing campervan pilot sites for 
Summer 26, requested further details in relation to the operations and noted 
that campervan owners would not expect access to facilities to be provided 
free of charge. 
 
Mr. J. Nolan undertook to revert to Councillors with further details of the pilot and 
advised for charges to be implemented byelaws would have to be introduced.  
  
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald referred to the report of the Culture, Heritage & the Gaeltacht 
SPC and welcomed the provision of funding for events linked to the upcoming EU 
Presidency.  
 
 
18.05.2026.09  Report on the operations and activities of the Association of 
Irish Local Government (AILG) by Cllr. Tommy Cahill in accordance with 
Section 141 of the Local Government Act 2001. 
 
(a)The report on the operations and activities of the Association of Irish Local 
Government (AILG) by Cllr. Tommy Cahill in accordance with Section 141 of the 
Local Government Act 2001 was noted.  
 
Cllr Tommy Cahill provided an overview of the activities of AILG. One of the most 
important developments during the year was AILG’s leading role in the establishment 
of the Local Democracy Taskforce. This is a major national initiative examining the 
structure, powers and supports available to Councillors. He also noted the AILG’s 
influence in strengthening the Councillor’s Security Allowance allocation. 
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae welcomed the work of the Taskforce and said it is progressing 
at a good pace but that the implementation plan needs to be published.  
 
18.05.2026.10 To note the opening of tenders 
  
(a) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald and SECONDED by Cllr. Anne 
O’ Sullivan it was agreed to approve the opening of tender for the N86 Tralee to Camp 
Pavement Repair Phase 1, N86 Defect Repairs and N70 Gleensk Defect Repair.  
Closing Date:  Friday 22 May 2026. 
 
(b)On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae and SECONDED by Cllr. Norma 
Moriarty it was agreed to approve the opening of tender for N70 Sneem to Blackwater 
Bridge (Tahilla to Doon) Roadworks Construction Contract. Closing Date: Tuesday 26 
May 2026. 
 
(c) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Norma Moriarty and SECONDED by Cllr. Johnny 
Healy-Rae it was agreed to approve the opening of tender for the Establishment of a 
Multi-party Framework Agreement for Masterplanning and Urban Design Services in 
Kerry for the period 2026-2030, Closing Date: Wednesday 27 May 2026. 
 
(d) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald and SECONDED by Cllr. Norma 
Moriarty it was agreed to approve the opening of tender for Design, deploy, 

 
12 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
commission and maintain a Dark Sky Quality Measurement and Data Visualisation 
Dashboard for County Kerry. (7969070) Closing Date: Thursday 28 May 2026. 
 
(e) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald and SECONDED by Cllr. Jackie 
Healy-Rae it was agreed to approve the opening of tender for the N86 Ballynasare 
Lower to Ballinclare & Doonore North to Ballygarret Roadworks Construction Contract. 
Closing Date: Friday 29 May 2026. 
 
(f) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald and SECONDED by Cllr. Anne 
O’ Sullivan it was agreed to approve the opening of tender for Procurement of 
Architect-Led Integrated Design Team Services for the regeneration and 
redevelopment of The Phoenix, Dingle, Co. Kerry from stage 2c (RFT 8079041) – 
Closing Date: Tuesday 09 June 2026. 
 
(g) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly and SECONDED by Cllr. Tom Barry it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tender for Single Operation Framework 
Agreement for a Staff Application. Closing Date: Monday 08 June 2026. 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae noted the importance of the tenders approved and asked that 
members be provided with an update on progress of the tenders through the Chief 
Executives Report.  
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae requested further information in relation to the tender for the 
Dark Sky Reserve dashboard. Cllr. Norma Moriarty highlighted the positives of the 
Dark Sky reserve to South Kerry. Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service undertook to bring 
a report to the Municipal District.  
 
18.05.2026.11 Notice of Motion 
 
1. Provide Information on Plant Hire, Haulage Contractors, Transport Providers 
from 2025 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Brendan Cronin proposed 
To request that the elected members of this Council be provided with the full list of all 
plant hire, haulage contractors and transport providers employed by Kerry County 
Council from January 1st , 2025, to December 31st  2025 and the full amounts paid to 
each provider. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The following schedule provides details of the total payments made to Contractors in 
respect of the hire of plant/equipment and haulage services in the financial year 2025.  
 
In 2025, the hire of plant and machinery for Kerry County Council was procured 
through the Dynamic Purchasing System for Local Authorities (the “DPS”). The DPS 
is an ‘open market’ procurement mechanism that remains open to new or previously 
unsuccessful applicants. This makes the DPS an effective compliant arrangement for 
supporting micro, small and medium-sized enterprises. This was developed by the 
Local Government Operational Procurement Centre, based in Killarney and managed 
by Kerry County Council.  
 

 
13 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
The overall effectiveness of our works programme and the achievement of best return 
on the sizeable level of expenditure incurred, require that we carefully assess the plant 
hire on an ongoing basis, having regard to the use of the current central purchasing 
mechanism of the Dynamic Purchasing System and the effective use of the Financial 
Management System.  Ongoing achievement of cost effectiveness/value for money 
and focus on achieving efficiencies in this expenditure area, as in all other activities 
remains, critically important to the Council.  78% of the total payments made in 2025 
relate to Kerry Contractors. 
 
Plant Hire, Haulage and Transport Providers Supplier 
Name & Address 
                              Total 
paid 
                                    2025 
 
Acc Services & Loo Hire Ltd, Mungret, Co. Limerick 
8,733 
AOK Plant Ltd, Melbourne, Racecourse Road, Tralee, Co. Kerry 
9,695 
Ballyhaunis Plant Hire Ltd, Ballyhaunis, Co. Mayo 
26,999 
Brendan McGillycuddy, Garahadoo, Killorglin, Co. Kerry 
14,865 
C Wharton Tool Hire Ltd, Lissataggle, Gortatlea, Tralee, Co. Kerry 
322,276 
Calnan Containers Ire Ltd, Brooklodge, Glanmire, Co. Kerry 
66,746 
Clancy Plant Hire Ltd, Knockanure, Moyvane, Co. Kerry 
450,507 
Crean & McHugh t/a CMP, North Esk Business Park, Glanmire, Co. Cork 
180,125 
Curreal Limited, Cahersiveen, Co.Kerry 
16,616 
D and  L Tool Hire, Clash Industrial Estate, Tralee, Co. Kerry 
31,399 
Dillons Waste Disposal, The Kerries, Tralee, Co. Kerry 
166,865 
Eamonn & Seamus Hobbins Ltd, Coolroe, Killorglin, Co. Kerry 
552,203 
Farran Plant Hire Ltd, Farran, Castleisland, Co. Kerry 
136,603 
GPT Plant & Tool Hire Commercial Estate(Galway), GBT Industrial 
Estate, Tuam Road, Co. Galway 
86,371 
Griffin & Sons Agricultural Contracting Ltd, Cools, Emlaghmore, Co. 
Kerry 
6,120 
Healy-Rae Plant Hire Ltd, Main Street, Kilgarvan, Co. Kerry 
210,399 
Height For Hire Ltd, Ashbourne Business Centre, Ballybin Road, 
Ashbourne, Co. Meath 
8,493 
Higgins Waste & Recycling Services Ltd, The Kerries, Tralee, Co. Kerry 
50,050 
Hireservices (I) Limited, T A Hireservices, Plovervale, Castlebar, Co. 
Mayo 
126,091 
John F Doherty, Knockanes, Headford, Killarney, Co. Kerry 
19,631 
John Kerins & Sons Ltd, Curragraigue, Blennerville, Co. Kerry 
100,349 
John M Hartnett, Clieveragh, Listowel, Co. Kerry 
6,880 
JOHN MC GILLYCUDDY, Ardnaknockeen, Killorglin, Co. Kerry 
9,059 
John Paul Breen, Shanacloon, Beaufort, Co. Kerry 
60,734 
KDM Hire (Ireland) Ltd, Grouga Lane, Balbriggan, Co. Dublin 
19,400 
Kelliher Crane & Hoist Ltd, Clashatlea, Ballymacelligott, Tralee, Co. Kerry
23,040 
Leanes Tool Hire, Woodlands Industrial Estate, Killarney, Co. Kerry 
11,001 
Michael O Connor Hedgecutting, Ardtully, Kilgarvan, Co. Kerry 
30,718 
Michael, Timothy & Patrick O'Sullivan, Kilquane, Headford, Killarney, 
Co. Kerry 
5,780 
 

 
14 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
Mike Cronin & Sons Ltd, Coolnageragh, Currow, Co. Kerry 
785,921 
ML Lynch Civil Engineering Ltd, Brewsterfield, Headford, Killarney, Co. 
Kerry 
9,700 
Nenagh Plant Hire (Hardware) Ltd, Ormond Street, Nenagh, 
Co.Tipperary 
153,727 
Newbridge Car & Van Rental Ltd T/A Go Rentals, T/A Rentals, Newhall, 
Naas, Co. Kildare 
447,138 
Nicholas Browne & Son Ltd, Clahananoe, Balinskelligs, Co. Kerry 
582,953 
Norspace Ltd., Cookstown Industrial Estate, Tallaght, Co. Dublin 
38,012 
O Connors Hardware & Farm Supplies Ltd, Duagh, Listowel, Co. Kerry 
90,272 
P. McNamara Contracting Ltd, Tullahinell, Ballylongford, Co. Kerry 
15,134 
Paddy Ryan & Sons Plant Hire Ltd, Currabaha, Templederry, Nenagh, Co. 
Tipperary 
44,906 
Padraig Campion, Brackluin, Annascaul, Co. Kerry 
82,210 
Pat Ashe & Sons Ltd, Ballinagrown, Inch, Annascaul, Co. Kerry 
5,640 
Pat O'Driscoll Plant Hire Ltd, Woodview, Castlefreke, Clonakilty, Co. 
Cork 
107,673 
Paul Fitzgerald Building Supplies Ltd, Unit 6 Coolcaslagh Industrial Park, 
Killarney, Co. Kerry 
127,276 
RT Hedge & Tree Cutting Ltd, Cordal, Castleisland, Co. Kerry 
159,127 
Sandmore Ltd, Camp Cross, Tralee, Co. Kerry 
500,431 
Sean O Shea, High Road, Ventry, Co. Kerry 
73,121 
Sunville Construction Ltd, Main Street, Kilgarvan, Co. Kerry 
35,626 
Tim Keanneally Auto Elec Repairs Ltd, Main Street, Carrigtwohill, Co. 
Cork 
110,342 
Ward Waste Products Ltd, Knocknadiha, Tournafulla, Co. Limerick 
17,706 
Miscellaneous payments under €5,000 (17 suppliers) 
31,000 
The Collector General - Reverse Charge  VAT____________________ 
511,819 
                                                                                                                                       6,687,483 
                                                                                                                                                          
    
 
Cllr. Breandan Cronin thanked the Finance Department for the detailed response and 
emphasised the importance of ensuring these figures are in the public domain. He 
asked for further information in relation to the amount paid to Newbridge Car & Van 
Rental Ltd. 
 
Ms. K. Moriarty A/Director of Finance confirmed the cost relates to the hiring of 
vehicles for the delivery or the Councils works programmes.  
 
Mr. P. Neary confirmed the vehicles are used across all service areas. 
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin asked that a breakdown on the cost of the fleet would be 
provided.   
 
Cllr. Marie Moloney SECONDED this motion.  
 
2. Road Signage and Junction Overgrowth 

 
15 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Robert Brosnan proposed 
"Déanann Comhairle Contae Chiarraí suirbhé ar na comharthaí bóthair agus na 
hacomhail uile atá ann cheana féin ar an mbóthar mórthaibhseach lena chinntiú nach 
bhfuil siad clúdaithe le fásra agus déanann siad na hoibreacha riachtanacha ionas go 
nglanfar iad agus go bhfanfaidh siad glan, chun línte radhairc shábháilte a chinntiú 
d'úsáideoirí bóithre i rith shéasúr an tsamhraidh.  
 
That Kerry County Council surveys all existing road signage and junctions to ensure 
that they are not covered in overgrowth and carries out the necessary works so that 
they are cleared and they remain clear, to ensure safe sightlines for road users for the 
summer season. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Déanann an Chomhairle monatóireacht agus cothabháil ar chomharthaíocht bóthair 
agus ar acomhail tosaíochta feadh an líonra bóithre poiblí. Aithníonn gach Ceantar 
Bardasach acomhail ríthábhachtacha le cur san áireamh sna cláir ghinearálta 
cothabhála bóithre, agus áirítear gearradh fálta mar ghné de sin chun radhairc soiléire 
a choiméad. Tá an obair seo mar chuid de Sceideal Phlean Oibreacha an Cheantair 
Bardasach. Is féidir aon iarratas sonrach a chur ar aghaidh chuig an Oifig Cheantair 
nó Cheantair Bardasach ábhartha. 
 
The Council monitors and maintains road signage and priority junctions along the 
public road network.   Each Municipal District identifies critical junctions for inclusion 
in the general road maintenance programmes, an element of which comprises hedge 
cutting to maintain sightlines. This work forms a part of the Schedule of Municipal 
District Works Plan.  Any specific request can be relayed to the relevant Area or 
Municipal District Office.  
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan welcomed the response and asked if the Council consider a more 
planned approach and noted the importance of ensuring overgrowth and hedging 
covering junctions and road signage is cut back this time of year.   
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae SECONDED this motion and said it is very important that road 
signage is visible especially for visitors. 
  
3. Social Housing Retrofit and Solar Panels 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Paul Daly proposed 
Go gcuirfidh an Chomhairle seo painéil ghréine ar gach tithíocht shóisialta amach 
anseo agus go gcuireann sé plean i bhfeidhm chun a stoc tithíochta reatha a 
athchóiriú.  
 
That Kerry County Council install solar panels on all future social housing builds and 
puts in place a plan to retrofit its current stock. 
 
The following reply issued: 
All new social housing stock meets the requirements of Part L of the Building 
Regulations regarding energy efficiency with a minimum BER rating of A2. The heat 
pump systems used meet all of the space heating and water heating requirements for 
the new build homes.  
 

 
16 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
The Employer Requirements for Detail Design of Quality Housing must be used in the 
design of new build homes. These Requirements specify that where appropriate, an 
efficient district heating system is the preferred option for space heating for new build 
homes. This is followed by a heat pump, either individual or group systems for multi-
unit developments. The provision of a boiler or photovoltaics in addition to a heat pump 
is not supported by the Department. 
 
Tenants can apply directly to SEAI for funding to install solar panel on their council 
house subject to approval from Housing section regarding suitability of the roof 
structure and prevention of leaks following the installation of the panels. 
 
The Energy Efficiency RetroFit Programme EERP does not cover the cost associated 
with the installation solar panel on current council houses. This programme does cover 
new efficient heating systems, insulation, new windows, and external doors which with 
bring the BER rating of the house up to a B2 standard. The council will deliver energy 
upgrade works to 100 housing units under this programme in 2026. 
 
The Director of Housing noted an amendment to the response. She advised the SEAI 
has clarified that it is only Kerry County Council that can apply for grants for their 
houses and not the tenant. 
 
Cllr. Paul Daly noted the significant increase in electricity in the past four years and 
the challenge for the public and particularly vulnerable members of society. Ireland 
has some of the highest energy costs and remains behind in the development of 
renewable energy. He emphasised both Local Government and state should be 
leading the way in advancing renewable energy.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris SECONDED the motion. 
 
7. Highlight that Rural Ireland is Vital to Rialtas na hÉireann 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald proposed 
That Kerry County Council writes to Rialtas na hÉireann highlighting that rural Ireland 
is a strong and vital contributor to the State's economic and social fabric. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald noted it is disappointing when a debate arises in the media 
creating a “them and us”. He expressed disappointment with the commentary and said 
it is not helpful when comments are made that urban Ireland is leading the way.  
 
Cllr. Deridre Ferris noted the terminology used was disappointing and emphasised  
Kerry a thriving tourist destination contributes significantly to the whole country. 
 
The Notice of Motion was unanimously supported by all Elected Members. 
 
8. Additional Funding for LIS 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald proposed 

 
17 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
That Kerry County Council ask the Minister for Transport, Darragh O'Brien T.D. and 
the Minister for Rural and Community Development and the Gaeltacht, Dara Calleary 
T.D. for additional funding for the Local Improvement Scheme in Kerry. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
Members. 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald highlighted the need for increased funding for Local 
Improvement Schemes.  
 
Cllr. Niall Kelleher SECONDED this motion.   
 
9. Insurance Conflicts with Community Support Fund and Community 
Enhancement Programme 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Marie Moloney proposed 
Each year a number of organisations do not take up the funding under the 
Community Support Fund and Community Enhancement Programme due to the fact 
that they must have insurance which is higher than the grant allocated. Can 
members be advised: (a) Over the past three years, how many organisations did not 
take up the funding under these schemes (b) How much money did this equate to, 
and (c) Was this funding reallocated and, if not, on what was the funding spent. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Over the past three years, Kerry County Council has not received any notification from 
community groups or organisations to return, or not drawdown funds granted due to 
insurance issues. Occasionally where issues may arise in relation to the conditions 
relating to the grant of funding, the Council works closely with these groups to 
overcome the issues, and ensure the funding is spent for the benefit of the community 
in question. Consequently, there has been no requirement to repurpose funding on 
this basis.  
 
Groups with queries in relation to insurance are advised to contact their local Municipal 
District Officer in the first instance. 
 
Cllr. Marie Moloney expressed surprise at the response and advised she had 
previously allocated Councillors Allocation to a resident’s association, as they were 
unable to access grant funding due to insurances. 
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald SECONED this motion and acknowledged the work of 
resident’s associations. 
 
Mr. P. Neary Director of Service advised this issue is being looked at nationally, 
particularly in relation to groups such as residentsassociations.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald moved Notice of Motion no 11 on behalf of Cllr. Mikey 
Sheehy. This was SECONDED by Cllr. Norma Moriarty.  
 
11. Request for Presentation from DCEE and MSP Advisory Group 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Mikey Sheehy proposed 

 
18 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
That Kerry County Council invites representatives from the Department of Climate, 
Energy and the Environment (DCEE) and the Marine Spatial Planning (MSP) 
Advisory Group, including the coordinators of the Regional Stakeholder Participation 
Programme, to present directly to the Council—either at a full council meeting or at 
a dedicated briefing session—on the development of the National Designated 
Maritime Area Plan (DMAP) for Offshore Renewable Energy. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
12. Greater Flexibility in Enrollment Age Range under ECCE 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Norma Moriarty proposed 
That Kerry County Council calls on the Department of Children, Disability and Equality 
in respect of the Early Childhood Care and Education Program (ECCE) to allow for 
greater flexibility in respect of the ages that the two years of care can be availed of. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty commended the scheme but advised greater flexibility would 
allow for more families to avail of the programme.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald SECONDED this motion.   
 
13. Requesting Further Response from Minister of Health Re: Free Bowel 
Screening For Over 70’s 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. John O’ Donoghue proposed 
In light of the response to my previous notice calling for free bowel screening to be 
extended to those over the age of 70, that we would write to the Minister requesting 
the rationale behind the decision not to automatically include them. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue expressed disappointment with the response received to his 
previous motion from the Department of Health, which called for the extension of free 
bowel screening to those over 70. He called on the HSE to provide clarification as to 
why bowel screening will not be extended to this age group.  
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly SECONDED this motion.  
 
Cllr. Deridre Ferris noted early intervention will be more cost effective for the H.S.E. 
 
15. Report on Applications for Costal Protection and Flood Defence Measures 
from OPW 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Griffin proposed 
Can Kerry County Council provide an up-to-date report on the applications for 
Rossbeigh and Cromane to be submitted to the OPW for coastal protection and flood 
defence measures. 
 

 
19 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
The following reply issued: 
Applications to the OPW for coastal protection and flood defence measures for 
Cromane and Rossbeigh are currently being developed and will be submitted to the 
OPW before the end of Q2 2026. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill noted the current situation is very serious for both Rossbeigh and 
Cromane and expressed disappointment with the lack of progress. The erosion has 
increased significantly and there is a view locally that the current has changed due to 
the erosion. Cllr. Cahill requested clarification on the specific schemes the Council 
intends to apply for funding under and sought an update and clear timelines be 
provided to members.  
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae SECONDED this motion and said given the significant erosion 
at both locations an application for funding must be submitted.  
 
The Chief Executive advised that an application will be submitted in June and the 
Council is hopeful the turnaround time will be short, while noting it is outside the 
Councils control. If approved a detailed design for the works can be developed and 
the Council will engage with the local community.  
 
Cllr. Podge Foley requested an update regarding an application for €5,000 for a project 
in Rossbeigh. Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service undertook to revert to Cllr. Foley.  
  
16. Introduction of PIN/Card to Link Medical Records and History 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Podge Foley proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Department of Health requesting they consider 
the introduction of a personal identification number / card for individuals which could 
be linked to all medical records and medical history held by doctors and hospitals in 
relation to an individual. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Deridre Ferris SECONDED the motion. Cllr Ferris advised a Health Identifier app 
is currently being piloted in Wexford similar to what Cllr. Foley has proposed.  
 
17. Safety Works on Piers and Slipways 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Robert Brosnan proposed 
Go ndéanfadh CCC na hoibreacha sábháilteachta riachtanacha go léir agus go 
ndéanfadh sé níochán cumhachta ar na Céanna agus na Sleamhnáin atá faoina 
chúram, chun a chinntiú go bhfuil na bonneagair seo sábháilte do na daoine iomadúla 
a úsáideann iad i rith shéasúr an tsamhraidh.  
 
That Kerry County Council carry out all necessary safety works and power washing to 
the piers and slipways under its charge, to ensure that these infrastructures are safe 
for the many people who use them during the summer season.  
 
The following reply issued: 

 
20 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
Tá Comhairle Contae Chiarraí freagrach as cothabháil breis is 50 cé/sliop ar fud an 
chontae. Leag an Sceideal de Phleananna Oibreacha Ceantair Bhardasacha 2026, a 
glacadh le déanaí, an sprioc seo a leanas do na Ceantair Bhardasacha ábhartha: 
• Daingneáin agus feistis le cothabháil 
• Cigireachtaí uair sa bhliain 
• Glanadh algaí ar shleamhnáin dhá bhabhta sa bhliain nó de réir mar is gá 
Is féidir aon iarratas sonrach a chur ar aghaidh chuig an Oifig Ceantair nó Ceantair 
Bardasach ábhartha. 
 
Kerry County Council is responsible for the maintenance of in excess of 50 piers/slips 
throughout the county. The recently adopted Schedule of Municipal District Works 
Plans 2026 set the following target for the relevant Municipal Districts: 
• 
Fixtures and fittings to be maintained 
• 
Inspections once a year 
• 
Algae cleaned on slips twice yearly or as required 
Any specific request can be relayed to the relevant Area or Municipal District Office. 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan noted the importance of maintaining slipways from a health and 
safety perspective and called on the Council to clean Minard, Ventry and strengthen 
the slipway in Annascaul which is currently blocked with rock armour.   
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris SECONDED this motion and acknowledged the maintenance work 
to Fenit Pier. 
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley returned to the meeting and took the Chair.  
 
18. Vacant and Derelict Properties Owners to be Notified of Grants Available 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Teddy O’Sullivan Casey proposed 
Can Kerry County Council identify and contact all registered owners of derelict and 
unoccupied properties in our towns and villages and provide them with the details of 
all the various grants that are available to bring these properties back into use. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Vacant Homes Office and Derelict Sites Office of Kerry County Council, undertake 
a structured and focused programme of work involving the proactive identification and 
assessment of vacant and derelict buildings, together with the investigation of reports 
and complaints relating to dereliction and vacancy received from members of the 
public, elected representatives and other stakeholders. 
 
Once a property has been identified as vacant and/or potentially derelict, the Council 
works to establish ownership details and engage directly with the relevant property 
owners in order to encourage and support the bringing of such properties back into 
active use. 
 
As part of this engagement process, property owners are informed of the range of 
financial supports and assistance schemes currently available under the national 
Vacant Homes Initiative and related programmes. These include, but are not limited 
to, the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant, the Above the Shop Living 
Accommodation Grant Scheme, the Repair and Lease Scheme, and other relevant 

 
21 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
supports designed to facilitate the refurbishment, remediation and sustainable re-use 
of vacant properties. 
 
In addition to this direct engagement approach, Kerry County Council is currently 
undertaking a programme of public information and awareness initiatives aimed at 
further promoting the available schemes and supports. In this regard, a series of 
workshops and information sessions are being organised and will be held in the 
coming weeks across each Municipal District: 
 
The information sessions will take place on the following dates and times: 
 
Date 
Time 
Location 
Municipal 
District 
Area 
Venue 
Wed 20th 
May  
3pm 
to 
7pm 
Tralee 
Tralee 
Tralee Bay Wetlands 
Mon 25th 
May 
3pm 
to 
7pm 
Killarney 
Killarney  
ANAM Arts & Cultural Centre 
Tues 26th
May 
3pm 
to 
7pm 
Castleisland
Castleisland-Corca 
Dhuibhne  
Castleisland Community Museum, 
42 Main Street 
Tues 
9th 
June 
3pm 
to 
7pm 
Listowel 
Listowel 
The Listowel Arms Hotel 
Wed 10th 
June 
3pm 
to 
7pm 
Cahersiveen
Kenmare 
Cahersiveen Marina and ACARD 
Offices 
 
These sessions are intended to provide property owners, community groups, 
stakeholders and members of the public with practical information and guidance 
regarding the various schemes available and the processes involved in accessing 
such supports. Informational leaflets will also be provided to support these sessions. 
 
Furthermore, following the delivery of these workshops and information sessions, the 
Council is also in the process of developing an online webinar resource, the purpose 
of which is to provide an accessible and informative platform to further communicate 
and explain the range of schemes, supports and initiatives available to property 
owners seeking to remediate and reactivate vacant and derelict properties. 
 
Through these coordinated measures, Kerry County Council remains committed to 
supporting the regeneration of towns and villages, addressing vacancy and dereliction, 
and encouraging the sustainable re-use of existing building stock for the benefit of 
local communities and the wider county. 
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey welcomed the expansion of the Vacant Property Grant 
which will allow for the conversion of over the shop units into residential units and in 
particular the Expert Advice Grant. He called on the Council to identify all owners of 
vacant units and advise them of the grants and supports available. He welcomed the 
information sessions and requested the Council undertake a publicity campaign to 
advertise the events.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill SECONDED this motion.  
 
5. CAP Budget Remain Unaffected when Framing 2028/2034 EU Budget 

 
22 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Teddy O’Sullivan Casey proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Office of An Taoiseach asking that it uses its 
upcoming Presidency of the EU Council to ensure that the CAP Budget is not reduced 
in the current negotiations around the framing of the EU budget for 2028/2034. 
Specifically, it is crucial that funding for LEADER is ringfenced with the requirement 
that Member States reserve at least 2.5% of the value of their CAP allocation for 
LEADER. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey confirmed at a meeting with the Minister today, Minister 
Heydon gave a commitment that he will do everything possible to ensure that the CAP 
funding will be maintained.  
Cllr Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey said the Agri-Food sector in Ireland is hugely important 
to the survival of rural Ireland. He said that Ireland has one of the highest proportions 
of small family farms in the EU which is hugely dependent on CAP supports. He 
highlighted concerns that the CAP budget maybe reduced by 20% and the 
prioritisation of Defence spending over Agriculture. The period of the Irish Presidency 
will be crucial in progressing the negotiations for the next CAP budget.  
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly SECONDED this motion. 
 
6. Request Urgent Delivery of Student Accommodations 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Angie Baily proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Higher Education and the Minister 
for Housing, Local Government and Heritage requesting the urgent delivery and 
expansion of purpose-built student accommodation through increased state funding, 
planning measures, and support for higher education institutions, in order to address 
the high cost and limited availability of accommodation, which is impacting access to 
education and placing significant financial pressure on students and their families. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Angie Baily noted the significant challenges facing families and young people  
accessing and paying for student accommodation. Right now in Ireland, access to 
third-level education is increasingly determined not by intelligence, ambition, or hard 
work but by whether a family can afford somewhere for their child to sleep. This crisis 
is hitting our children the hardest, without the option of reliable transport options, they 
have no option but to leave home and move to cities already consumed by a housing 
crisis.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris SECONDED this motion and said that investment funds should 
have no involvement in student accommodation and state-run student accommodation 
is required.  
 
Suspend Standing Orders 
On the PROPSAL of Cllr. Marie Moloney and SECONDED by Cllr. Deirdre Ferris it 
was agreed to suspend standing Orders as it was 1.30p.m. 

 
23 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
 
19. Amendments to the Criminal Justice Act 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Angie Baily proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to Mr. Jim Callaghan, Minister for Justice, requesting 
the introduction of legislation to amend the Criminal Justice Act so as to: (a) provide 
that Victim Impact Statements are heard as the final evidence prior to the delivery of 
sentence, unless the court, in the interests of justice, directs otherwise; and (b) 
regulate the making of any final remarks by an offender following a conviction, 
including the presentation of character references, by empowering the court to limit, 
disregard or prohibit any content that is abusive, intimidating, or likely to cause further 
harm or distress to the victim. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Angie Baily noted based on recent data from Women’s Aid, more than one in 
three women in Ireland have experienced psychological, physical and or sexual abuse 
from a partner. In 2024, An Garda Siochana responded to an average of 1250 
incidents every week. This motion does not seek to remove fair procedures. It does 
not seek to silence lawful mitigation. What it seeks is balance, dignity, and recognition. 
It asks that Irish law acknowledge the vulnerability of victims and ensure that the final 
human impact heard before sentence is imposed is the impact of the crime itself. 
Because after all they have endured, they should not lose the final word in their own 
story. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris SECONDED this motion  
 
20. Widen Criteria for Entry to Fuel Allowance Scheme 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald proposed 
That Kerry County Council writes to the Department of An Taoiseach and the 
Department of Finance to examine the current fuel allowance scheme with a view to 
widening the criteria for entry and reducing the cost of home heating oil in the coming 
months. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald said the eligibility criteria for the fuel allowance must be 
widened to better support ordinary people struggling with the rising cost of fuel.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald SECONDED this motion. 
   
21. MD Funding for the Development of Cost Rental Housing Schemes 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald proposed 
That Kerry County Council seek Government funding for the development of Cost 
Rental Housing Schemes in each of its Municipal Districts – Castleisland/Chorca 
Dhuibhne, Kenmare, Listowel, Tralee and Killarney. 
 
The following reply issued: 

 
24 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
Kerry County Council will shortly be preparing a Housing Delivery Action Plan under 
the government’s Delivering Homes Building Communities Housing Action Plan 2025-
2030. The Council will consider all forms of housing delivery across all settlements in 
the county to deliver on the ambitious targets set, and this may include Cost Rental 
schemes, where considered viable. 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald welcomed the response and called on the Council to set 
targets for Cost Rental homes. He is of the view affordable housing and Cost Rental 
homes should be available across all Municipals Districts.  
 
Cllr. Marie Moloney SECONDED this motion and noted there are a significant cohort 
of individuals who do not qualify for social housing and are paying excessively high 
rents and she supported the call for the introduction of Cost Rental homes.  
 
22. Detailed Update to Bus Route 515 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Marie Moloney proposed 
That Kerry County Council calls on the National Transport Authority (NTA) to provide 
a detailed update regarding the proposed new Route 515 bus service connecting 
Killarney - Kilcummin - Gneeveguilla - Rathmore to Mallow. This update should 
include: (a) Confirmation of the current status of the roll out of the service (b) 
Anticipated commencement date for the service (c) A proposed timetable and service 
frequency The correspondence to the NTA should include that the Council recognises 
the importance of enhanced public transport connectivity between Killarney, 
Kilcummin - Gneeveguilla - Rathmore and Mallow, particularly in supporting regional 
economic development, tourism, and providing sustainable travel options for 
residents, students, and workers. Accordingly, the Council requests that the NTA 
prioritise the delivery of this service and provide clarity on its progression. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Marie Moloney advised the contract for the bus service has been signed and 
stated the delay appears relate to funding. She requested a letter also issue to the 
Minister with responsibility for the NTA and noted the proposed route will be of 
significant benefit to local people and tourists.  
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley SECONDED this motion.  
  
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald moved Notice of Motion no 24 on behalf of Cllr. Mikey 
Sheey.   
 
24. Capacity and Potential of Kerry’s Ports and Coastal Infrastructure 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Mikey Sheehy proposed 
That Kerry County Council engages with relevant state agencies to assess the 
capacity and potential of Kerry’s ports and coastal infrastructure, including Fenit 
Harbour, to support Offshore Renewable Energy development. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council is actively engaging with multiple state agencies and the CCMA 
in respect of the development of the Designated Maritime Area Plans (DMAP) for 

 
25 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
offshore renewable energy to ensure Kerry County Council and our coastal 
infrastructure are appropriate reflected in the future development of offshore 
renewable energy projects.  
 
In conjunction with liaising with state agencies, Kerry County Council is also liaising 
with the regional local authorities to ensure appropriate investment in on shore 
infrastructure, including ports and harbours to facilitate the growth in our blue and 
green economies while facilitating the delivery of the renewable energy strategy.  
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley SECONDED this motion. 
 
25. Plan for Ryder Cup 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. John O’Donoghue proposed 
Has Kerry County Council a plan in place to capitalise on the upcoming Ryder Cup in 
Adare Manor next year. If not, that they would begin to work with the various Tourism 
and Golfing bodies to attract as many visitors to Kerry as possible. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Economic Development, Enterprise, Tourism & Community SPC has established 
a working group to coordinate and progress actions that maximise the economic, 
tourism and enterprise benefits for County Kerry arising from the Ryder Cup 2027 at 
Adare Manor, the groups strategic objectives include: 
 
• 
Maximising the county wide economic benefit from tourism, including golf and 
non-golf venues, 
• 
Diversify the visitor experience beyond golf to include families, culture and 
communities 
• 
Ensure Kerry projects a coherent, high quality visual identity 
• 
Deliver a lasting legacy through repeat visitation, reputation and business 
connections  
• 
Leverage international exposure to support Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) 
On the 24th of September last year, to coincide with the 2025 Ryder Cup, a video was 
released (Coming to Ireland for the Ryder Cup 2027, Discover The Magic of County 
Kerry) to promote Kerry as a premier destination for visitors attending the 2027 Ryder 
Cup. It highlights the county’s golfing and wider tourism offering and positions Kerry 
as a key destination for golf enthusiasts travelling to Ireland during the Ryder Cup 
period. This has been supported by the launch of the Discover Kerry Golf microsite, 
which acts as a central hub for golf-related content, itineraries, accommodation 
options, and visitor information. Kerry was also represented at the PGA Show from 
20th–23rd January 2026 while a sponsorship agreement with the Irish Golf Tour 
Operators Association (IGTOA) has been finalised to further enhance Kerry’s profile 
within the international golf trade and support sustained promotional activity during 
their conference in Tralee in October 2026. 
 
The high-level marketing roadmap covering the period leading up to, during and 
following the event is continuing to be developed and refined in conjunction with the 
industry and working group.  The roadmap will ensure a strong and lasting legacy for 
the county.  In addition, the LEO are working with the regional LEOs to ensure that 
Kerry supplier have an opportunity to become contractors and sub-contractors for the 
Ryder Cup event, the industry is developing a training and communication campaign 

 
26 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
to ensure that the visitor experience, accommodation and welcome will ensure a long-
lasting legacy for the sector. 
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue expressed his thanks for the reply. He noted the importance 
of maximising the opportunity presented by the event and the potential television 
exposure for the County.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill SECONDED this motion.  
 
26. Establishment of a Government Department Agency in South Kerry 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Cahill proposed 
That Kerry County Council writes to the Minister for Public Expenditure, Infrastructure, 
Public Service Reform and Digitalisation calling on him to relocate/decentralise or 
establish a Government Department agency or significant public service function in 
the South Kerry region. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill highlighted the success of the Legal Aid Board in Caherciveen as 
an example of how decentralisation can work and support balanced regional 
development. It supports employment, allows people to live and work locally, and 
encourages those who have emigrated to return home. Cllr. Cahill suggested sectors 
such as the processing of the SEAI grant scheme could potentially be located in South 
Kerry. 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald SECONDED this motion. 
 
27. Number of IPAS Centres 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Podge Foley proposed 
Can the Government clarify the number of IPAS centres going out for tender when we 
have a homeless epidemic here in Ireland. Any proposed IPAS centres should not be 
built instead we need to focus on housing our own homeless first. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
This Motion was not seconded by the Elected Members. 
 
4. Establish a Driving Test Centre in Listowel 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Aoife Kennelly proposed 
That Kerry County Council calls on the Road Safety Authority and the Minister for 
Transport to examine the establishment of a driving test centre in Listowel to serve 
North Kerry residents, due to long travel distances to existing centres in Tralee and 
Killarney and increasing demand for driving tests in rural communities. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 

 
27 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly called for equality of access to driving test centres for the people 
of North Kerry. For anyone living in Listowel or the surrounding areas the closest 
driving test centre is Tralee, which is over a 40-minute drive. It requires individuals 
to take time off work to travel to Tralee and not everyone has access to a vehicle to 
travel this distance. Cllr. Kennelly noted Listowel is well positioned to accommodate 
a driving text centre. 
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley SECONDED this motion.  
  
14. Additional Resources Provided to Home Help 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Griffin proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Health Jennifer Carroll MacNeill 
T.D., and the HSE requesting additional resources to provide 'Home Help' in the 
county. 
 
Ms. E. O’Donoghue stated that this is a matter for consideration by the 
members. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin noted the provision of home help service is a significant concern 
across the County and there doesn’t seem to be adequate resources. He said the 
situation is very stressful for carers and called on the HSE to provide additional 
resources to assist carers, the current hours allocated aren’t sufficient.  
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley SECONDED the motion and advised that he raised 
this matter when he was on the Southern Regional Health Forum and said the 
problem appears to be related to the private contractors who employ the carers, 
who don’t provide them with enough hours. 
 
18.05.2026.12 
Correspondence – Conferences and Seminars 
(a) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly and SECONDED by Cllr. Deirdre 
Ferris retrospective approval was agreed for Cllr. Angie Baily, Cllr. Deirdre Ferris, Cllr. 
Maura Healy-Rae, Cllr. Aoife Kennelly, Cllr. Marie Moloney, Cllr. Norma Moriarty, Cllr. 
Anne O’Sullivan to attend the Women’s Regional Caucus Network Meeting held in 
Tipperary County Council on Wednesday 29 April 2026. 
 
 
(b) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald and SECONDED by Cllr. 
Michael Leane retrospective approval was agreed for Cllr. Niall O’Callaghan at 
the “Drogheda Civic Trust Summer School’ held in Drogheda from Friday 08 
May to Sunday 10 May 2026. 
 
(c) No member requested authorisation to attend the International Centre for Local 
and Regional Development Conference event (ICLRD) on the theme: ‘Planning the 
Future: People, Place, Process, Possibilities - the next 20 years’ to be held in Dundalk 
on Thursday 21 May 2026. 
 
(d) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly and SECONDED by Cllr. Jackie Healy-
Rae it was agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllr. Bobby. O’Connell to attend (as 
member of the Culture, Heritage and the Gaeltacht SPC) the Festival Makers 
Conference 2026 to be held in Sligo from 21 – 23 May 2026. 
 

 
28 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
(e) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Tom Barry and SECONDED by Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae 
it was agreed to authorise the attendance of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly as Chair of the Kerry 
LAG and Cllr. Norma Moriarty if Cllr. Farrelly cannot attend the Cap Network Ireland 
Leader Meeting in Tullamore, Co. Offaly on Thursday 21 May 2026. 
 
(f) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Michael Leane and SECONDED by Cllr. Fionnán 
Fitzgerald it was agreed to authorise Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Michael Foley to attend the 
Scott Medal Award Ceremony in Dublin on Friday 22 May 2026. 
 
(g) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Tommy Cahill and SECONDED by Cllr. Paul Daly 
it was agreed to authorise Block Approval for Elected Members to attend AILG Module 
3 2026 titled: ‘Supporting Councillors: Responding to Mental Health, Suicide, and 
Addiction Issues’ to be held (Southern Region) – Wexford on Saturday 23 May and in 
Cavan on Thursday 21 May 2026.  
 
(h) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald and SECONDED by Cllr. Michael 
Leane it was agreed to authorise the approval of Cllr. Niall Kelleher, LCSP 
Chairperson, to attend the National Office for Community Safety Engagement Meeting 
to be held in Westmeath on Wednesday 27 May 2026. 
 
(i) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly and SECONDED by Cllr. Jackie 
Healy-Rae it was agreed to authorise Block Approval for Elected Members to attend 
AILG Module 4 2026 titled: ‘OPR-AILG Councillor Planning Training’ to be held 
(Southern Region) – Waterford on Thursday 18 June and (Out of Region) in 
Westmeath on Saturday 20 June 2026. 
 
 
18.05.2026.13 Correspondence General 
 
 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were circulated: 
List of correspondence circulated at the May 2026 
Meeting of Kerry County Council 
  
Date 
From 
Description 
 1. 
15/04/2026 
Department of 
Health   
Response to a resolution by the Members to 
provide an update on the CAMHS report. 
 
2. 
20/04/2026 
Dept of 
Culture, 
Communication 
and Sport  
Response to a resolution by the Members 
regarding the delivery of High-Speed Broadband 
infrastructure to North Kerry. 
3. 
22/04/2026 
Minister for 
Rural and 
Community 
Development 
and the 
Gaeltacht. 
Response to a resolution by the Members 
regarding a request to set aside a portion of funds 
from Government Departments in charge of key 
infrastructure for Gaeltacht areas. 

 
29 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
4. 
23/04/2026 
Minister for 
Housing  
Response to a resolution by the Members 
regarding 
The 
Second-Hand 
Acquisitions 
programme. 
5. 
24/04/2026 
Department of 
Transport 
Response to a resolution by the Members 
regarding provisional licence holders driving 
agricultural 
machinery 
and 
pull 
trailers 
unaccompanied.
6. 
29/04/2026 
Minister for 
Housing  
Response to a resolution by the Members 
requesting the delivery of additional houses.  
7. 
24/04/2025 
South Dublin 
CC 
Motion passed by the Members requesting the 
Minister to investigate Bessborough mother and 
baby home.  
8. 
05/05/2026 
Roscommon 
County Council
Motion asking Min for Housing and LG to establish 
a commission for the validation of Planning 
objections.
9. 
12/05/2026 
Clare County 
Council 
Resolution adopted calling on the Government to 
bring forward cost of living package.  
 
 
18.05.2026.14 Minutes arising from the minutes as confirmed 
 
18.05.2026.15 Any Other Business 
 
Recording of Council Meeting  
Cllr Jackie Healy-Rae acknowledged that monthly Council meetings are live 
streamed however, following the introduction of a new camera system, he requested 
that the meetings also be recorded, noting that this would enhance transparency and 
openness within the Council Chambers.  
 
The Chief Executive undertook to review the matter in line with Standing Orders and 
revert to Cllr. Healy-Rae.  
 
Tim Severin 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald noted Clare County Council have recently honoured 
explorer Mr. Tim Severin to mark the 50th anniversary of “Brendan Voyage” and 
requested that this Council could reach out to Clare County Council to join in on 
commemorating the event.  
 
Castleisland Chorca Duibhne MD Manager. 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald welcomed M. Kathleen Moriarty as the new Castleisland 
Corca Dhuibhne MD Manager.  
 
Community Investment fund 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald welcomed the announcement of the Community Centre 
Investment Fund by Minister Dara Calleary. He said the scheme will close on 13 July 
2026 and encouraged community groups to apply for the funding.    
 
Civic Reception  
Mr. Martin O’ Donoghue Director of Service advised that a Civic Reception will be 
held at the June Full Council to honour Aoibheann Daly on winning Stripe Young 

 
30 
May Ordinary Meeting – 18 May 2026 
Scientist of Year 2026. Mr O Donoghue advised the Council is awaiting proposed 
dates from the All-Ireland Club champions regarding Civic receptions. 
 
The meeting concluded at 2.04 p.m. 
 
Eileen O’ Donoghue     
_________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator 
Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
