November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
1 of 58 
 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect 
putting them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is 
available on request. 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ NA CRUINNITHE MHIOSIÚIL DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE 
CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, 
TRÁ LÍ, AR AN LUAN 20 SAMHAIN 2017 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN 
THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE ON MONDAY 20TH 
NOVEMBER 2017 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
T. Barry 
R. Beasley 
M. Cahill 
 
                
P Connor-Scarteen          B. Cronin 
J.J. Culloty  
 
    
P. Daly 
T. Ferris                             J. Finucane                            
S. Fitzgerald 
J.F. Flynn 
N. Foley 
 
             
M. Gleeson 
D. Grady 
J. Healy-Rae 
             
M. Healy-Rae 
M. Kennelly 
S. Locke 
 
              
J. Lucid 
D. McCarthy 
P. McCarthy  
               
T. McEllistrim 
J. Moloney 
N. Moriarty  
               
T. O’Brien 
B. O’Connell                      M. O’Shea   
               
L. Purtill 
D. Quigg 
J. Sheahan   
 
    
G. Spring 
A. Thornton 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Ms. M. Murrell, Chief Executive    
  Mr. J. Breen, Director Water Services                   
Ms. A. McAllen, Head of Finance 
  Mr. M. Scannell, Dir. Job Cr/Sust. ED                    
Mr. M. O’Donoghue, Dir.Hsg.&Corp.S.   Mr. C. O’Sullivan, Director of Operations              
Mr. L. Quinlan, Meetings Administrator Mr. J. Kennelly, SE Water Services 
                           
Mr. D. Ginty, A/SE Planning 
  Ms. J. McCarthy, SEO Tourism 
Mr. J. Griffin, Tourism Officer 
  Ms. K. Moriarty, AO Human Resources                
Mr. G. O’Brien, A/SEO Environ. Serv.    Mr. O. O’Shea, Press & Comm. Officer  
             
Ms. B. Reidy, SSO Corporate Support   Ms. O. O’Shea, CO Corporate Support  
Ms. J. O’Sullivan, CO Corp. Support  
 
The meeting commenced at 10.40am. 
 
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Sheahan took the Chair. 
 
The Cathaoirleach congratulated Tralee on winning the Regional Category for 
Munster in the Bank of Ireland National Enterprising Town Competition. 
 
As Mayor of Tralee, Cllr. N. Foley welcomed this recognition for Tralee and she 
acknowledged the tremendous work that went into it by Kerry County Council staff 
and the Chamber Alliance.  This is a huge boost for the town and there was a 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
2 of 58 
 
phenomenal response from the town for this competition.  Cllr. Foley also 
acknowledged Listowel who were runners up in their category. 
 
The Chief Executive acknowledged this accolade that was bestowed on Tralee and 
to come first from over 70 entries was a tremendous achievement.  She also 
congratulated Listowel on being the regional runner up in their category. 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy also highlighted that Tralee was awarded a Purple Flag recently. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea congratulated Vodafone, College Street, Killarney on being awarded 
Electronic & Tech Store of the Year at the Retail Excellence Annual Awards recently. 
Cllr. A. Thornton congratulated Tralee and Listowel on their success in the National 
Enterprising Town Competition. 
17.11.20.01 Cathaoirleach’s Report on the CPG Meetings held on the 10th 
October and 14th November 2017 
 
10th October 2017 
 
“Meeting Update on Trip / Promotion  
 
Mr J Griffin briefed the group on the details of the upcoming trip / promotion to Berlin 
from 2nd – 5th November 2017. Mr Griffin stated that the announcement by Ryanair of 
a new direct service between Berlin and Kerry, starting at the end of October, is a 
major boost for the county and is warmly welcomed.   
 
Germany is Ireland’s major Continental market and Kerry is their preferred regional 
destination.  The potential for growth of German business to Kerry, both tourism and 
general, on the back of the new air service is considerable.  As the Irish county most 
dependent on tourism, it is important that this opportunity is maximised.   
 
Kerry County Council, in conjunction with Destination Kerry Tourism Forum, Kerry 
Airport, local tourism trade, Fáilte Ireland, Tourism Ireland and the Irish Embassy in 
Berlin, is planning a major promotion in Berlin from November 2nd to 5th.  The 
delegation will be led by Minister Brendan Griffin and the Cathaoirleach and will 
include tourism trade representatives from every region of the county.  The schedule 
includes trade and consumer promotions in the Irish Embassy and the Europa Centre 
and an engagement in Berlin City Hall.   
 
A considerable amount of advance work is being done reaching out to Berlin schools, 
sports and social clubs and business groups. The aim is to attract new business into 
Kerry especially over the winter months. 
 
It was agreed that a review of the trip would be undertaken with a view to establishing 
longer term benefits for Kerry that this new route can potentially bring. 
 
Cllr Kelleher commended all involved in ensuring a very successful TBEX event, 
recently held in Killarney, which was supported by the other CPG Members. 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
3 of 58 
 
Agenda for the October Council  
Mr. L. Quinlan briefed the meeting on the Agenda for the October Council Meeting. 
 
In relation to the proposed National Planning Framework Item, Cllr. Finucane expressed 
serious concerns with regard to the urban/rural divide that the Plan would generate and 
the substantial implications for Kerry. 
 
Mr. O’Sullivan stated that the concerns of the members had highlighted in our 
submission to the draft Plan. It will be critically important that the Council engage 
actively with the Southern Regional Assembly on the development of the Regional 
Spatial and Economic Strategy, which will influence development and capital 
investment in the county. 
 
SPC update 
It was noted that (name withheld for data protection purposes. A paper copy of the 
unedited minutes is available on request) has replaced (name withheld for data 
protection purposes. A paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request) on 
the Economic Development and Enterprise SPC. 
 
It was noted that the Tourism, Culture, Arts & Recreation SPC and the Quality of Life 
SPC will have a report for next CPG meeting. 
 
It was noted that the next Operations SPC meeting will include funding programme 
priorities. Mr O’Sullivan updated the members on the Speed Limit Review. It is proposed 
to give briefings to the members at Municipal District level by the end of the year in 
advance of the public consultation phase. However, it will be early in the New Year 
before the proposed Bye-Laws are drafted in a format to go on public consultation.  
 
Review of request for presentations to Council 
It was recommended that a presentation by the Union of Students of Ireland and a 
presentation by the Central Statistics Office be made to the Economic Development 
and Enterprise SPC. 
 
Annual Awards / Civic Honours Conferral 
 
In respect of the following outstanding requests, the following was agreed: 
 
Annual Award at County Level: Kerry Minor team on winning the All Ireland minor 
championship. 
Annual Award at Tralee Municipal District: (name withheld for data protection 
purposes. A paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request). 
Annual Award at Killarney Municipal District: Killarney Ladies senior golf team and 
Ladies Crew of the Workmen rowing Club, Killarney. 
Annual Award at Listowel Municipal District:Ballybunion Golf Club, (names withheld 
for data protection purposes. A paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on 
request) 
Annual Award at South &West Municipal District: (name withheld for data protection 
purposes. A paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request) 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
4 of 58 
 
It was also agreed that the Marian Players, Rathmore will be afforded a Killarney 
Municipal District Civic Reception.  
 
The Municipal District Meetings Administrator will be in contact with the respective 
Cathaoirligh / Mayor to make arrangements for the hosting of these Annual Award 
events and Civic Receptions as per the adopted Civic Conferral Protocol. 
 
Any other business 
 
Mr. Liam Quinlan advised, that, under existing policy in relation to the flying of the 
National Flag, we observe the Guidelines of the Department of An Taoiseach.  Also, 
the only other occasions that flags are flown outside County Buildings is when 
visiting Dignitaries are afforded Civic Welcomes. Following a discussion, CPG 
recommends the European Union, National and County flags are flown at all times.  
CPG recommends that, in the event of a visiting Dignitary from a foreign country, 
that the European Union Flag be replaced by the flag of that country. 
 
14th November 2017 
 
Agenda for the November Council Meeting 
Mr. L. Quinlan briefed the meeting on the Agenda for the November Council Meeting 
and he advised that as agreed at the Special Meeting held on 23rd October only 1 
speaker per motion would be permitted due to the large number of motions to be 
considered given the motions carried forward from the October cancelled meeting. 
 
In relation to the Corporate Plan  Mr. M. O’Donoghue advised the meeting that following 
the Local Elections in 2014 an interim Corporate Plan was adopted and a commitment 
was given to revisit it following the establishment of the LCDC and the adoption of the 
LECP. The new Plan will be in place until the next Local Elections. 
 
Update from the Chairs of SPCs 
Cllr. S. Locke advised that a meeting of the Tourism, Culture, Arts & Recreation SPC 
was held on the 4th October and he outlined the items considered at that meeting.  
His report will be circulated and considered at the November Meeting. 
 
The remaining Chairs indicated that a meeting of their SPC would be held in the 
coming few weeks. 
 
Review of requests for Municipal District Awards 
The CPG agreed that Paula Murrihy would be honoured at the Annual Awards Event 
for full Council. 
 
Civic Welcome – West Springfield 
The CPG agreed that the West Springfield delegation would be afforded a Civic 
Welcome at the December Council Meeting in accordance with the adopted Protocol 
for Civic Honours Conferral.”  
 
 
 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
5 of 58 
 
17.11.20.02 Confirmation of Minutes 
 
(a)  
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Gleeson, SECONDED by Cllr. P. Connor-
Scarteen it was resolved that the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Kerry 
County Council held on the 25th July, 2017 be confirmed. 
 
(b)     On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Grady, SECONDED by Cllr. S. Locke it was 
resolved that the Minutes of the September Ordinary Meeting of Kerry County 
Council held on the 11th September, 2017 be confirmed. 
 
(c)     On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Moriarty, SECONDED by Cllr. B. O’Connell it 
was resolved that the Minutes of the Special Meeting of Kerry County Council 
held on the 23rd October, 2017 be confirmed. 
 
17.11.20.03 Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
 
The Chief Executive read the following report into the record of the meeting: 
 
“The report below has been prepared for the November 2017 Council Meeting. 
 
Finance Directorate 
 
As agreed with the Members, a Financial Report for Members will be provided on a 
quarterly basis in line with the Quarterly Reporting Process for Income and 
Expenditure already in place to the Department of Housing, Planning Community & 
Local Government. The Qtr 3 Financial report will be included in the December 2017   
report. 
 
Infrastructure, Operations, Health & Safety Directorate 
 
Ex- Hurricane Ophelia and Storm Brian 
 
As previously advised to the Members, Kerry County Council implemented its 
Severe Weather Response Plan on the 13th October 2017, following notification 
from Met Eireann and the National Directorate for Fire and Emergency Management 
of the Red Weather Alert predicted for Monday 16th October associated with Ex- 
Hurricane Ophelia.   
 
The co-ordinated response resulted in a positive outcome in terms of public safety, 
with no reported serious injuries and I would like to take this opportunity to thank the 
public for heeding the advice given. I would also like to take this  opportunity to thank 
our own staff,  Garda Siochana and  Chief Superintendent Tom Maher, the Chief 
Fire Officer and the principal response agencies for dealing with the events.  In 
particular, I would like to thank the Civil Defence and their volunteers for their 
excellent work throughout this major weather event.  
 
The full extent of any damage caused is currently being assessed and we are 
seeking to recover the exceptional costs incurred from the Department. 
   

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
6 of 58 
 
The Severe Weather Response Plan was also implemented on Friday 20th October, 
following the issuing of an Orange Weather Alert from Met Eireann for strong winds 
on the Friday night and Saturday morning. 
 
 
 
CPO Scheme Burial Ground Killarney 
The CPO for the acquisition of lands for a new burial facility in Killarney was 
approved by An Bord Pleanála on the 1st November. The Council is now issuing the 
relevant notices to give effect to this decision and intend to commence works on site 
before the end of the year.  
 
CPO & EIS Listowel ByPass  
The CPO and EIS for the Listowel By-Pass were approved by An Bord Pleanála on 
the 9th November. The Council will be liaising with TII to secure the relevant funding 
to allow the scheme to progress through detailed design, tender and construction.   
 
LIS Scheme 
The Department of Rural and Community Development have allocated €727,000 in 
funding under the LIS scheme. The Council currently has 120 applications on hand 
for funding under the scheme. 30 applicants have confirmed acceptance of the offer 
and works are now progressing on these roads.   
 
Additional T.I.I. Funding 
Transport Infrastructure Ireland has allocated a further €306,520 to Kerry County 
Council for pavement repairs and safety improvement works, including €80,000 for 
safety works at the N86 Ballymullen junction; €35,000 for safety works at KiIltallagh 
National School; €50,000 towards the cost of the repairs on the N22 at Minish 
Railway crossing and the balance for repairs on the N21, N70 and N72. Full details 
of the works will be given to members at the relevant MD meetings.  
 
N70 Kilderry Bends 
Kerry Council has issued tenders for the construction of 3.5 km improvement works 
on the N70 Kilderry Bends between Castlemaine and Killorglin. It is expected to have 
contractors appointed for the €10 million scheme by the end of the year, with all pre-
contract works, including archaeological testing and fencing now substantially 
complete.   
 
Funding for Drainage Works 
The OPW has approved funding of €148,370 towards flood relief works in 
Clieveragh, Listowel . This funding will allow the Council to proceed with the 
procurement of Consultants to complete the detailed design of the Scheme, to 
progress the scheme through the planning process, and subject to securing planning 
consent, acquire the lands necessary for the scheme. The estimated cost of these 
elements of the project is €164,855 and the grant allocation will cover 90% of the 
costs.  
 
Economic & Community Development Directorate 
 
Economic Development Unit 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
7 of 58 
 
 
Kerry Prosper Series 
The Kerry Prosper Series inaugural event was held in the Guinness Enterprise 
Centre in Dublin on the 9th November.  The mission for these events is to support 
counties’ business diaspora to enhance the prosperity in a county through co-
operation, knowledge sharing, creativity, inspiration and an entrepreneurial 
ecosystem. This business linking event was developed by Kerry County Council in 
partnership with the IT Tralee, Enterprise Ireland, along with the Kerry working group 
based in Dublin.   
 
Kerry Local Enterprise Office  
The core training programmes are now nearing completion. “Start Your Own 
Business Programmes” have now been completed in Killorglin and Listowel.   A 
series of online marketing programmes incorporating Facebook and Twitter are 
scheduled over the next month. Other funded programmes are reaching conclusion. 
These include the Local Enterprise Innovation and Investment Fund and Kerry’s Best 
Young Entrepreneur. There has been strong interest in both programmes. The KCC 
LEO has supported local food events including Blás na hEireann and Listowel Food 
Fair. The office is also sponsoring a number of Craft producers to attend the Craft 
Showcase event in the RDS in January 2018. The office has commenced it’s 2017 
Employment survey to determine employment in grant assisted businesses.  
 
Tourism Department 
 
Kerry Tourism Promotion in Berlin 
A three-day Kerry tourism promotion was held in Berlin on the first weekend of 
November.   A group of 35 participants, led by Minister Brendan Griffin T.D. and 
Mayor of Kerry, Cllr. John Sheahan, held a series of engagements with tourism 
trade, media and consumer groups.  A high level political meeting with State 
President Mr. Ralf Wieland in the Berlin Parliament was arranged, to promote closer 
economic ties between Kerry, Berlin and the State of Brandenburg.  The visit was in 
support of the new direct Ryanair flight from Berlin to Kerry and was organised by 
Kerry County Council, Destination Kerry and Kerry Airport and supported by Tourism 
Ireland, Fáilte Ireland and the Irish Embassy.  Trade representatives from all over 
Kerry formed part of the delegation with the main events being hosted by the Irish 
Ambassador, Mr. Michael Collins, at the Irish Embassy.  Over 70 Berlin trade and 
media attended the Kerry Tourism Showcase event at the Embassy and a consumer 
promotion was also held at Ring Shopping Centre in Berlin.  The promotion received 
extremely positive feedback and was deemed a very successful initiative. 
 
Community Department 
 
RAPID  - (Revitalising Areas by Planning, Investment and Development) 
On the 2nd of November 2017, Minister Michael Ring TD and Minister Pascal 
Donohue TD launched the revamped RAPID Programme.  The Local Community 
Development Committees will be responsible for targeting and allocating funding in 
line with the County’s Local Economic and Community Plan (LECP). The 
Programme will fund projects that address disadvantage and seek to enhance 
communities in Urban Areas. Details of the scheme will be available in the coming 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
8 of 58 
 
week on Kerry County Council’s website and a  total of €64,500 has been allocated 
to Kerry County Council under this Programme. 
 
LEADER Programme 
A meeting of the Kerry LCDC led Local Action Group (LAG) was held on Thursday, 
26th October, 2017. 12 Enterprise Development Projects, supported by North East 
West Kerry Development Company, were presented for approval at the meeting.  
Following a detailed consideration of each of the projects, 11 no. projects were 
approved for funding with a cumulative value of €134,898.   
 
SICAP 2018 – 2022 
The Social Inclusion and Community Activation Programme 2018 – 2022 (SICAP) 
has taken into account feedback from a national consultation process which took 
place in the first half of 2017.  One tender was received for each of the 3 Lots within 
Co. Kerry following the Request for Tenders.  The Evaluation Team met to evaluate 
the tenders on 9th October, 2017.  Following the evaluation process  the  
recommendations made to the LCDC in respect of the appointment  of the preferred 
tenderer per Lot  were approved at its meeting held on 9th November, 2017 
 
Comhairle AGM 
Over 100 young people from 25 secondary school in Kerry attended Kerry Comhairle 
na nÓg's AGM on Friday the 13th of October in the Rose Hotel, Tralee at which 
facilitated workshops took place where those present identified and discussed issues 
of importance to them. A number of recommendations were made and voted upon 
and new topics and actions were agreed. Also, an election process took place 
electing young people to the Kerry Comhairle na nÓg for the next two year term.  
Those elected are afforded opportunities to attend national events and to represent 
young people on a number of policy making bodies both at county level and 
nationally. Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council Cllr. John Sheahan presented 
certificates to members. 
 
Housing & Corporate Directorate  
There is a separate report on Housing Delivery Activity included on the Council 
Agenda.” 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton asked that local communities would be encouraged to get involved 
in biodiversity.  Kerry LCDC is one of the front running Committees in drawing down 
funding and she called on the all local groups to consider the funding that is 
available. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg stated while he welcomed the €727,000 for LIS there was a reduction 
in LEADER funding and he called for the reinstatement of this funding to previous 
levels.  It is very difficult for smaller groups to apply for LEADER funding as the 
application process is very detailed and they would need an administrative person to 
complete the application for them.  He suggested that one collective application 
could be made for 5 or 6 groups in an area.  In conclusion Cllr. Quigg welcomed the 
funding for Kilderry Bends.  
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen welcomed the funding for the LIS and he asked when new 
applications will be invited.  Kerry County Council is leading the way in tourism 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
9 of 58 
 
promotion and he paid tribute to all involved.  Cllr. Connor-Scarteen also welcomed 
LEADER funding but he agreed that the application process is very onerous.  In 
conclusion Cllr. Connor-Scarteen complimented the LCDC on their work. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley also asked when new applications for LIS would be accepted and she 
asked how many roads remain on the current list.  She welcomed the additional 
funding received for safety works on the N86 and she asked when the works would 
be completed.  Cllr. Foley referred to RAPID funding and asked if there is a limit to 
the number of projects that can avail of this funding.  In conclusion Cllr. Foley 
acknowledged the work of Comhairle na nÓg and the input of Mr. A. Smith.    
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea welcomed the €10m allocated for Kilderry Bends.  He expressed 
concern at the poor condition of the road from Milltown to Killorglin and he asked that 
it would be better maintained.  There are serious concerns at the condition of the 
Laune Bridge and if it had to be closed it would have serious consequences for traffic 
going to and from South Kerry.  He asked that consideration would be given to 
identifying an alternative route to South Kerry. 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy requested that the list of projects approved for LEADER funding 
would be circulated to members.  Community groups can apply for funding from the 
Community Support Fund and from LEADER.  However, they will not be considered 
for funding from the Community Support Fund yet LEADER funding is allocated later 
in the year. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill also welcomed the funding for Kilderry Bends and the flights to and 
from Berlin.  There are hundreds of private roads in the county that need LIS funding 
and residents on these roads are paying motor tax and LPT yet the potholes are not 
filled on their roads.  It is unacceptable that LIS funding cannot be used to fill 
potholes on these roads and he called on the Department to amend the terms of the 
Scheme to allow for this. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson welcomed the confirmation of the CPO for Killarney burial ground 
and added that this site will cater for the needs of Killarney for years and there will be 
onsite parking.  He called on everyone to work in harmony to achieve this objective. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty highlighted there have been significant changes in LEADER funding 
since the first round.  Expressions of interest are being sought at present and the 
changes have been outlined.  She complimented all involved in the LCDC as Kerry is 
to the fore in the roll out of LEADER funding in the country.  Cllr. Moriarty 
emphasised the need for an increase in LEADER funding.  Development Officers are 
exceptionally good at working with groups to assist them in applying for LEADER 
funding.  Cllr. Moriarty then moved Notice of Motion No. 23 on the October list. 
 
23. 
Call to reopen the Local Improvement Scheme 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N Moriarty PROPOSED: 
That in light of the announcement of funding for the LIS Scheme, that we now 
reopen the Scheme in order that additional roads in need of repair can be added. 
 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
10 of 58 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council welcomes the recent announcement by the Department 
of Rural and Community Development of €727,000 towards LIS scheme, which 
will allow for approximately 27 schemes to be constructed.  
 
However, there are currently 120 applications, assessed and approved under 
the Department’s guidelines, on the Council’s scheme. Unfortunately, the 
Council had to close the scheme for new applications in 2010, initially due to the 
discontinuation of the scheme and also taking in to consideration the low level 
of funding available when some discretion was allowed to use part of the grant 
funding for public roads.  
 
One of the criteria in prioritizing applications for funding is based on the length 
of time since an application was approved for funding. On this basis it is unlikely 
that any new application could realistically expect to be approved for 
construction within the next 3 to 4 years, which is conditional on a similar level 
of funding being provided in the coming years.  
 
Consideration could be given to re-opening the scheme in 2018, if a similar level 
of grant aid is made available next year. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae advised that in 2016 he requested that a survey of the Laune Bridge 
would be carried out.  He welcomed the funding for Kilderry Bends and Mountain 
Stage.  Cllr. Healy-Rae asked that funding would be sought for Phase 2 of the 
Kenmare By-Pass as the town badly needs it.  Applicants for LEADER funding are 
waiting a long time for a decision on their application but he hoped this will improve in 
subsequent rounds. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady welcomed the allocation of €306,520 for pavement repairs and safety 
improvement works but he expressed his disappointment that there has not been 
progress on the Lewis Road Junction. 
 
Cllr. S. Locke welcomed the restoration of funding under the RAPID Programme and 
he called on management to advertise this Programme in the local papers. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson then moved Notice of Motion No. 36. 
 
36.  
Request for a delegation to meet with the TII 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given the Members of Killarney Municipal District 
PROPOSED: 
 
In reference to correspondence dated 20th September, 2017 received from the TII 
regarding meeting arrangements, we the Members of Killarney Municipal District 
request Kerry County Council to organise a delegation from the Elected 
Representatives of the Council and the TII as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
11 of 58 
 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson advised that the primary reason for moving this motion was concern 
regarding the Lewis Road Junction with the By-Pass.  Over 20 years ago he 
proposed that traffic would be permitted to turn left only at this Junction.  Cllr. 
Gleeson accepted that officials are aware of how dangerous this junction is but 
nothing is being done to address it.  The fact that there has been a number of 
accidents at this Junction suggests there is a problem with it.  If the TII, who are well 
aware of the problems with this Junction, fail to meet with the Cathaoirleach of Kerry 
County Council and the Killarney MD they will be culpable. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion. 
 
The Chief Executive assured members that management are taking this issue 
seriously and are trying to agree a solution with TII.  A Feasibility Study has been 
submitted and approval was granted to proceed to design and planning.   
 
Cllr. Gleeson asked that the members for the Killarney MD would be invited to attend 
a meeting with officials from the TII. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty highlighted if the 60km sign was moved to the other side of this 
Junction it would help.   
 
Cllr. T. Ferris then moved Notice of Motion No. 6 on the November list. 
 
6.  
Reduce delays in accessing LEADER funding for community groups 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. T Ferris PROPOSED: 
That this Council calls on the Minister for Rural and Community Development to take 
immediate action to reduce the delays in accessing LEADER funding for community 
groups; to make a commitment that no LEADER programme funding will be diverted 
to other projects and to make a commitment that the funding for LEADER will be 
restored as soon as possible. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Department of Rural and Community Development hosted a forum with 
representatives from all Local Action Groups (LAG’s) and their Implementing 
Partners on the 17th of May 2017 to explore issues of concern and to identify 
potential solutions aimed at streamlining the current administration and 
application procedures under the current LEADER Programme. On the basis of 
the feedback at the Forum, a total of 31 Action points were drawn up to improve 
procedures for LAG’s and project promoters. Most of these actions have already 
been delivered, with the remaining actions in train. In Kerry a total of 102 
applications have been approved funding by the Kerry LAG to the value of 
€1,672,303. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris stated in light of the article in the Irish Examiner the previous week and 
the fear that Irish Water will transfer from Kerry County Council the suggested 
reduction of 25% in the number of staff is a cause for concern and she did not believe 
this reduction could be achieved through retirements only.  She called on the Chief 
Executive to give reassurances in this regard. 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
12 of 58 
 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney highlighted that member’s concerns regarding Irish Water could be 
discussed when Item 11 was being considered. 
 
The Chief Executive assured members that quarterly inspections are carried out on 
Laune Bridge and there has been no change in recent times.  She agreed that the 
Killarney By-Pass is vital given the volume of traffic it takes.  The Chief Executive 
confirmed that Kerry County Council has a Service Level Agreement with Irish Water 
until 2025 and she understood Mr. Grant from IW had clarified his comments through 
correspondence with Unions who then wrote to their members.   
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan referred to comments on the LIS and he welcomed the funding 
received to-date.  This will allow 30 schemes to proceed and there are 85 applications 
on the list.  It will cost approx. €1.5m to clear the list and the level of funding for 2018 
must be assessed before new applications are invited. 
 
17.09.11.04 Disposal of Property 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Kennelly, SECONDED by Cllr. P. McCarthy it 
was agreed to dispose of a plot of ground consisting of approx. 0.021 
hectares in an unregistered folio at St. Anne's Road, Kilcoolaght in the DED of 
Killarney Urban to (name and address withheld for data protection purposes. 
A paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on request) in accordance 
with the terms of notice issued 29th September 2017 pursuant to Section 183 
of the Local Government Act 2001, Section 211 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 and Article 206 of the Planning and Development 
Regulations 2001. 
 
(b)  
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. B. O’Connell, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Kennelly it 
was agreed to lease a plot of ground consisting of House No. 59 at Doirín 
Álainn, Ballydribeen, Killarney for 6 years to Ballydribeen Residents 
Association, Killarney, Co. Kerry in accordance with the terms of the notice 
issued 2nd November 2017 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government 
Act 2001, Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 and Article 
206 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001. 
 
17.11.20.05 Date for December meeting 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Kennelly it was 
agreed that the December Ordinary Meeting would be held on Monday 11th 
December 2017 in Killarney House commencing at 11am. 
 
17.11.20.06 Approval of the incurring of overdraft accommodation 
 
Ms. A. McAllen referred members to her report dated 6th October 2017 on this item 
which was circulated and she briefed them on the report. 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
13 of 58 
 
On the PROPOSAL OF Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. T. O’Brien it was 
agreed to approve the incurring of overdraft accommodation not exceeding €10m for 
the 12 months ending 31st December 2018. 
 
17.11.20.07 Raising of a loan for the provision and development of Burial 
Grounds 
 
Ms. A. McAllen referred members to her report dated 6th October 2017 on this item 
which was circulated and she briefed them on the report. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. B. O’Connell, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Lucid it was agreed 
to approve the raising of a loan of €1m for the provision and development of Burial 
Grounds. 
 
17.11.20.08 Presentation on proposed Kerry Brand 
 
Mr. M. Scannell welcomed Mr. Martin Gaffney and Mr. Rocky Grennel of Design 
Works who would make a presentation to members on the proposed Kerry Brand.  
Management and members were always aware of the need to professionally market 
Kerry from a tourism point of view.  The Kerry Brand will be extremely important to 
showcase Kerry positively and the Brand is multi-facetted and can be used for a 
number of purposes. 
 
Suspension of Standing Orders 
 
The Cathaoirleach indicated that it was 1.30pm and it would be necessary to 
suspend Standing Orders. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Foley, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Finucane it was agreed 
to suspend Standing Orders to allow the meeting to continue. 
 
17.11.20.08 Presentation on proposed Kerry Brand (Cont.d) 
 
Mr. M. Gaffney then addressed the meeting. 
 
Mr. Gaffney highlighted that both he and his colleague Mr. Grennel were delighted to 
work with the Tourism Office to come up with a tourism Brand for the county.  He 
commended the Tourism Office for their excellent input and added that following the 
establishment of the Destination Kerry Tourism Forum and the setting up of a 
dedicated Tourism Unit in Kerry County Council, it was deemed in order to create a 
new Destination Brand which will serve to promote Kerry on a national and 
international level, across the full media platform.  Mr. Gaffney briefed the meeting 
on the Project Process/Stages. 
 
Mr. R. Grennel then briefed the meeting on the creation of the Kerry Tourism Brand 
under the following headings: 
 
• Introduction 
• The Log 
• Logo Variations 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
14 of 58 
 
• Sample Advertising 
• Sample Collateral 
• Sample Collateral – Irish Language 
• Digital Applications 
• Sample Displays 
• Overview 
• Tourism Brand Architecture. 
 
In conclusion Mr. Grennel advised that it is intended to prepare Guidelines to ensure 
consistency when the Brand is rolled out. 
 
All members welcomed the Kerry Brand and complimented Mr. Scannell, Mr. 
Gaffney and Mr. Grennel on a professional product.   
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty welcomed the beautiful collage of images presented and she 
suggested that any project that receives grant aid should be required to use this 
logo.  She looked forward to a more cohesive marketing of the county going forward. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane stated on first viewing the Brand is very vibrant and he believed it 
would be an important tool going forward.  The fragmentation that exists needs to be 
brought together under this logo.   
 
Cllr. S. Fitzgerald concurred with the views expressed by previous speakers.  
However from a West Kerry perspective agriculture is very important and he asked 
that some images of sheep would be incorporated into the logo.   
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy agreed with the sentiments expressed by Cllr. Fitzgerald in relation 
to the importance of agriculture to the county and that it should be reflected in the 
Kerry Brand.   
 
Cllr. A. Thornton stated the Brand beautifully encapsulates what Kerry is about.  She 
suggested that community groups should be consulted on how they can feed into the 
County Brand. 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy confirmed that the Brand says all that needs to be said about Kerry 
and the experience a tourist can expect.  
 
Cllr. T. Ferris highlighted that the choice of font makes the Brand stand out and while 
the Brand captures the beauty of the county it does not reflect the medieval features 
which should also be marketed. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan stated tourism is the life blood of the county and it is vital that it is 
professionally promoted.  He commended the Chief Executive and staff for 
commissioning the new Brand and the way the Skelligs, the MacGillycuddy Reeks 
and Beaches are incorporated in it.  He suggested that Scotch sheep should be 
included in the logo as low land sheep were only introduced to Ireland a few decades 
ago.   
 
Cllr. N. Foley welcomed the new Brand which suggests a natural environment which 
should be the tourists’ automatic choice of destination.  The green and gold are nice 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
15 of 58 
 
but she asked that the gold would be manipulated as it is hard to see at a distance.  
Cllr. Foley acknowledged the work of Ms. J. McCarthy and Mr. J. Griffin on the Brand 
and she asked that the logo would be used as extensively as possible.   
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty welcomed this positive development for tourism in the county and he 
added that the Killarney Lakes, Muckross House and the red deer are a huge selling 
point. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill stated the new Brand is very impressive and he commended all 
involved in developing it. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg concurred with the views expressed by Cllr. Thornton and asked what 
guidance will issue for the use of the Brand and Logo. 
 
Ms. J. McCarthy thanked members for their compliments and advised that an action 
in the Tourism Strategy was to create a Brand for the county.  Tourism partners were 
consulted and it will be up to them to take it on board and to use it when promoting 
the county both nationally and internationally.  A roadshow will be organised to 
advise how the brand can best be utilised.  It will be launched in Killarney on the 8th 
December by Minister Griffin and following this contact will be made with the tourism 
sector to advise them how it can be used.  Community groups will also be included 
as it is important that the Brand and Logo are used as presented. 
 
17.11.20.09 Update on the Draft National Planning Framework 
 
Mr. M. Scannell informed the meeting that the Draft National Planning Framework 
“Ireland 2040 – Our Plan” sets a sustainable long term strategic planning and 
development context for Ireland and its regions from now until 2040.  The Plan will 
have legislative backing and it will be underpinned by a new 10-Year National 
Investment Plan.  The NPF objectives and spatial outcomes will be fully supported 
by the Government and its implementation will be overseen by the Office of the 
Planning Regulator.   
 
Mr. Scannell briefed members on this item under the following headings: 
 
• Regional Implementation 
• Regional Growth 
• Growth Projections 2040 ESRI 
• Urban Population Growth Targets 
• Large Regional Towns 
• Strengthening Urban Fabric 
• Rural Development 
• Kerry in a Regional Context 
• Investment in Infrastructure – Alignment with 10 Year Capital Investment Plan 
 
All members complimented Mr. Scannell on his detailed presentation and Kerry 
County Council’s submission on the NPF. 
 
Cllr. B. O’Connell highlighted that the emphasis in the NPF is on the development of 
the Tralee/Killarney Hub and towns with a population in excess of 10,000 but he was 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
16 of 58 
 
concerned that this policy would not serve smaller towns.  The NPF should 
encourage regeneration and allow smaller towns to develop.  Cllr. O’Connell added 
that the NPF would not support the countryside. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane stated that in reality Kerry is dependent on the spin off from growth 
in Cork, Limerick and Galway.  There is no reference to rural decline and population 
diversity in the Plan.  The Shannon Landbank is owned by Shannon Properties while 
road access to the county is controlled by two other local authorities.  It is vital that 
an IDA officer would be based in Tralee and he asked what incentives do the IDA 
offer to bring investment from Cork to Kerry.  The Plan does not address how 
employers can be encouraged to locate outside of the East coast.  There should be 
an emphasis on bringing communities together with a view to getting emigrants to 
return home.   In conclusion Cllr. Finucane stated the NPF is not business driven and 
we need guarantees that our region will be allowed to develop. 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy highlighted that this is a Draft Plan and the growth in the East will 
be massive in comparison to growth in the West. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea concurred with the views expressed by Cllr. Finucane and 
emphasised the importance of access from Kerry to the Atlantic route.  If this does 
not happen development will not materialise.  Cllr. O’Shea called on all TDs and 
Senators to lobby at a national level to ensure that Kerry has access to the Atlantic 
Corridor. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson advised under the NSS the Killarney/Tralee Hub was intended to 
inspire growth but this did not happen.  If that happens again there will be dissolution 
on the entire western half of the country.  While the Plan is aspirational the policies 
must be more specific.  Unless communities are planned, even in Dublin, with proper 
linkages further social problems will be created.   
 
Cllr. D. Quigg pointed out that the IDA do not have a plan for development in Kerry 
and we are raising children for export.  Kerry must lobby to be included in the Atlantic 
Corridor but it should automatically be included.  Kerry County Council must lead the 
way and pursue investors for the county otherwise we are going nowhere. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae expressed his disappointment in the Plan as Kerry is dependent 
on access from other counties.  In the past he called on the Council or the IDA to 
purchase the Ceann Mara site in Kenmare which is on the market at a very 
reasonable cost.  Cllr. Healy-Rae called for the provision of a footpath from Killorglin 
to the Liebig site to facilitate workers.  Housing is a major issue and he asked would 
land be dezoned in the Municipal District Plans and what is the current status of the 
MD Plans.   
 
The Chief Executive advised that the National Planning Framework is a high level 
strategy for the country.  It is vital that Kerry County Council makes a strong 
submission to ensure the county is strategically connected with both Limerick and 
Cork.  It was not intended that the Killarney/Tralee/Killorglin area is the only area that 
will grow but from research there is evidence that there is enough vibrancy in these 
areas to justify the inclusion of Kerry in the Atlantic Corridor.  The Chief Executive 
stressed that investment will be based on the Plan.  The Killarney/Mallow and 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
17 of 58 
 
Mitchelstown roads are very important for Kerry as is the Foynes road.  Expertise will 
be engaged to assist in putting the best case possible forward for Kerry.  In Budget 
2018 the members of Kerry County Council provided €600,000 for economic 
development in the county and this is a very strong statement from the Council.  The 
IDA are trying to secure a client for the advance unit in Tralee and she supported 
members calls to have an IDA officer based in the county.   
 
Mr. M. Scannell thanked members for their contributions and he stated the National 
Spatial Strategy was not a success as it was not supported by policies.  Specific 
policies must be in place before growth will happen.  Mr. Scannell again stressed the 
importance of having adequate infrastructural linkage and in Kerry we maintain that 
the capacity of Tralee, Killarney and Killorglin is a sufficient economic base to 
contribute to the economic development of the region. 
 
17.11.20.10 Update on Wind Energy Policy 
 
Mr. D. Ginty made a presentation to members on recent developments on Wind 
Energy Policy.  The Wind Energy Development Guidelines 2006 are being reviewed 
by the Department.  The Guidelines are subject to a Strategic Environmental 
Assessment and the Department aim to complete the SEA and finalise the 
Guidelines in early 2018.  The proposed set back is 4 times the turbine height with a 
mandatory minimum distance of 500m.  The maximum noise limit permitted will be 
43dB(A).  Interim Guidelines for Planning Authorities on Statutory Plans, Renewable 
Energy and Climate Change issued by the Minister in July 2017 pursuant to Section 
28 and planning authorities must have regard to Section 28 Guidelines. 
 
Mr. Ginty briefed the meeting in detail on the various Plans, Strategies and Policies 
that must be taken into account by planning authorities.   A development plan, local 
area plan or variation must indicate how the plan/variation will contribute to realising 
overall national targets on renewable energy and climate change mitigation and in 
particular wind energy production (in megawatts).  Any proposal to introduce a 
mandatory setback distance for wind turbines into development plans must 
demonstrate compliance with national policy seeking to realise overall national 
targets. 
 
Circular letter PL5/2017 which issued on 3rd August 2017 stated that local authorities 
should defer amending their existing Development Plan policies in relation to wind 
energy and renewable energy generally as part of either the normal cyclical six-
yearly review or plan variation processes and should instead operate their existing 
development plan policies and objectives until the completion of a focused review of 
the Wind Energy Development Guidelines 2006.  However, Mr. Ginty confirmed that 
a review of the Landscape Character Assessment has begun and he outlined the 
process involved. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson asked if the new Wind Energy Guidelines are being prepared 
without reference to solar energy. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney expressed his frustration that the new Wind Energy Guidelines have 
not yet issued.  When the current County Development Plan was being adopted in 
2014 members were informed they could not review the Renewable Energy Strategy 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
18 of 58 
 
until the new Guidelines issued.  He expressed concern at the current Landscape 
Character Assessment and its reference to North Kerry and he highlighted that the 
landscape has changed due to the level of development of wind farms.  Cllr. 
Moloney also highlighted that the LCA has been referenced in decisions issued by 
An Bord Pleanála.  In Ballyhorgan permission was granted for 158m high turbines 
and permission was refused in Ballylongford due to the proliferation of turbines in the 
area.  15% of wind turbines in the country are located in Kerry.  Cllr. Moloney asked 
when will the draft Landscape Character Assessment be presented to members. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton welcomed the review of the Landscape Character Assessment.  
The last LCA stated that Ballybunion was not a scenic area and this must be 
amended in the new LCA.  An Bord Pleanála have referenced the LCA in their 
decisions therefore it is important to get it right.  Cllr. Thornton also asked when the 
draft LCA would be presented to members.  The difficulty is that the infrastructure in 
North Kerry has been damaged hugely as a result of the development of wind farms.   
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty moved Notice of Motion No. 28 from October. 
 
28. Minimum set back distance of wind turbines from dwelling houses 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.J. Culloty PROPOSED: 
That this Council insert into the County Development Plan, a minimum set back 
distance of ten times the blade tip height of wind turbines from any dwelling house. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Interim Guidelines for Planning Authorities on Statutory Plans, Renewable 
Energy and Climate Change issued to Local Authorities by the Minister in July 
2017 pursuant to Section 28 of the Planning and Development Acts 2000 - 2017. 
Planning Authorities must have regard to guidelines issued by the Minister in 
exercising functions under the Planning Code.  
 
These guidelines state that: 
Planning authorities shall, in particular, have regard to (the following) national 
plans, policies and strategies when making, reviewing, varying or amending 
development plan or local area plan policies or objectives that relate to 
renewable energy, and in particular, wind energy developments.  
 
These Ministerial guidelines state that any development plan, local area plan or 
variation to these policy documents must indicate how the proposed plan / 
variation will contribute to realising overall national targets on renewable energy 
and climate change mitigation, and in particular wind energy production and the 
potential wind energy resource (in megawatts).  
 
The guidelines state that any proposal to introduce or vary a mandatory setback 
distance for wind turbines from specified land uses or classes of land use into 
a development plan or local area plans must demonstrate compliance with 
national policy seeking to realise overall national targets on renewable energy 
and climate change mitigation.  
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
19 of 58 
 
Any mandatory setback distance will also be a consideration in SEA, when 
taking into account likely significant effects on climatic factors, in addition to 
other factors such as landscape and air, if such a mandatory setback would 
create a significant limitation or constraint on renewable energy projects, 
including wind turbines.  
 
Circular Letter PL5/2017 was issued to Local Authorities on the 3rd of August 
2017 and advised that:  
local authorities should defer amending their existing Development Plan 
policies in relation to wind energy and renewable energy generally as part of 
either the normal cyclical six-yearly review or plan variation processes and 
should instead operate their existing development plan policies and objectives 
until the completion of a focused review of the Wind Energy Development 
Guidelines 2006. The content of Circular letter PL 20-13 continues to be the 
advice of the Department.  
 
The Department has advised that the revised Guidelines will be available in the 
first Quarter of 2018.  
 
In that context in anticipation of the finalised Guidelines a review has 
commenced of the Landscape Character Assessment. The work being 
undertaken includes a significant quantum of background research, analysis, 
field and preparatory work. This analysis and revised landscape character 
assessment will best position the Council to consider a planning policy review 
once the 2006 Ministerial guidelines with respect to Wind Energy Development 
are finalised. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty stated unfortunately we are reactive rather than proactive.  Rural 
areas have been commercialised where wind farms have been or are about to be 
developed without regard for health issues or the value of homes.  There should be a 
minimum set back distance of 10 times the height of the turbine from homes as 
people’s homes and health should be protected.  Some of the existing wind turbines 
are relatively small but when they reapply for permission it is likely they will seek an 
increase in the height of the blades. The Renewable Energy Strategy cannot be 
reviewed until the new guidelines issue yet turbines are still being erected.  In 
conclusion Cllr. Culloty highlighted that roads and bridges have been damaged during 
wind farm developments but there is no funding to repair them. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin SECONDED the motion and added that Kerry County Council adopted 
the RES and identified suitable locations for wind energy development and 
subsequently permission was granted for wind farm developments.  However as a 
result of some developments communities have been devastated.  He asked if the 
new Guidelines will restrict local authorities as they have no concept of the reality for 
communities where these developments take place.  In conclusion Cllr. Cronin pointed 
out there are no guidelines in place to regulate solar energy developments. 
 
Cllr. J. Lucid highlighted that one of the main concerns about wind farm developments 
is that they operate for just 30% of the time and they need thermal stations to support 
them.   
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
20 of 58 
 
Cllr. Thornton then moved Notice of Motion Nos. 20 and 35 from October. 
 
20. Review of renewable energy in Kerry. 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. A Thornton PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council conduct a review of renewable energy in Co. Kerry 
including a review of the Landscape Character Assessment and the Renewable 
Energy Strategy. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Circular Letter PL5/2017 was issued to Local Authorities on the 3rd of August 
2017 and advised that:  
local authorities should defer amending their existing Development Plan 
policies in relation to wind energy and renewable energy generally as part of 
either the normal cyclical six-yearly review or plan variation processes and 
should instead operate their existing development plan policies and objectives 
until the completion of a focused review of the Wind Energy Development 
Guidelines 2006. The content of Circular letter PL 20-13 continues to be the 
advice of the Department.  
 
The Department has advised that the revised Guidelines will be available in the 
first Quarter of 2018.  
 
In that context in anticipation of the finalised Guidelines a review has 
commenced of the Landscape Character Assessment. The work being 
undertaken includes a significant quantum of background research, analysis, 
field and preparatory work. This analysis and revised landscape character 
assessment will best position the Council to consider a planning policy review 
once the 2006 Ministerial guidelines with respect to Wind Energy Development 
are finalised. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly SECONDED the motion. 
 
35. Terms of a licence on renewal for wind turbines 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. A Thornton PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council confirm whether it is possible to change the terms of a 
licence on its renewal in the case of wind turbines. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Section 42 of the Planning and Development Acts 2000 – 2017 allows the 
Planning Authority to extend the duration of a planning permission for a period 
not exceeding 5 years provided the application is made before the permission 
expires and subject to the following conditions: (a) Where no works have been 
carried out.  
 
The planning authorities are satisfied that:  
 
I. There were considerations of a commercial, economic or technical nature 
that mitigated against the commencement of the development.  

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
21 of 58 
 
 
II. There have been no significant changes in the Development Plan since 
the date of the permission.  
 
III. The development will remain consistent with any Ministerial guidelines 
issued pursuant to Section 48.  
 
IV. An EIA and / or an AA was carried out on the development if required.  
 
V. The application is made before the expiration of the permission.  
 
(b) Where substantial works have been carried out.  
 
The planning authorities are satisfied that:  
 
I. 
The development commenced before the expiration of the permission, 
 
II. 
Substantial works were carried out and  
 
III. The development will be completed within a reasonable time.  
 
Where the duration of permission is restricted by a planning condition, a new 
grant of permission is required in order to allow the development to be in 
place beyond the specified period. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton stated the reason she put down the motion was that in her opinion 
the roads in North Kerry are in an appalling condition following the development of 
new wind farms and funding is not available to restore them to the condition they were 
in prior to the development.  She suggested that a condition should be imposed on 
permissions that a financial contribution would be required to repair the local 
infrastructure.  She asked if that is the position at present. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson SECONDED this motion and added that he has never known anything 
about which attitudes have changed so much over the past 20 years.  Councillors 
pleaded to have their areas zoned for wind farm development but now there is a 
universal outcry against this type of development.  This is because companies moved 
into areas with disregard for communities.  If we continue to allow hillsides to be 
desecrated our tourism industry will suffer.  The vast majority of wind farms are not 
locally owned and they invested in prime locations with little or no respect for 
communities but the interest of communities should be our primary concern.   
 
Cllr. R. Beasley highlighted that when you drive from Foynes to North Kerry there is a 
saturation of wind turbines in Clare as well as in the Tarbert/Asdee area. Wind farms 
were permitted in prominent areas in North Kerry and they impact on the Wild Atlantic 
Way.  Cllr. Beasley asked when the new Guidelines would issue.  The disruption and 
damage caused to the road network where wind farm developments have taken place 
is dreadful and he called on the Council to ensure these roads are repaired.  He asked 
what rates are payable on wind turbines and he highlighted that wind farm 
developments have not benefitted the consumer where they are located. 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
22 of 58 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris advised that members were aggrieved at the reference to North Kerry in 
the Landscape Character Assessment and stated that the value of the landscape in 
all parts of the county should be recognised.  She thanked management for being 
proactive and reviewing the LCA and asked that the new LCA would clearly recognise 
the scenic value of the entire county.  
 
Cllr. D. Grady stated he was opposed to wind farm developments as they have 
desecrated East and North Kerry.  He acknowledged that in many instances Kerry 
County Council refused permission but An Bord Pleanála granted it on appeal.  
However, these developments are having a negative impact on our tourism industry. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea highlighted that wind turbines have increased in size and it is difficult 
to understand why the new national Guidelines have not issued long ago. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly welcomed the review of the Landscape Character Assessment as it 
was an insult to Ballybunion to state in the last LCA that it had no scenic value.  North 
Kerry has enough wind turbines and no further developments should be permitted.  
The vast majority of rates paid for wind turbines come from developments in North 
Kerry. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly stated that the local authority should consider developing wind farms with 
local communities on a smaller scale. 
 
The Chief Executive stressed that local authorities are precluded from reviewing their 
Renewable Energy Strategy until the new Guidelines issue.  However it is logical that 
the LCA would be reviewed as this will take a few months to complete.  There are no 
national guidelines on solar energy and she would not rule out developing a local 
policy when an indication is received from the Department whether they plan to issue 
guidelines or not.  When the new Guidelines issue it will be necessary to vary the 
County Development Plan to incorporate the new RES. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty stated he understood the RES was reviewed in other counties and 
those he represents want the policy reviewed.  Wind farm development companies 
are still being granted permission and it is unfair that local authorities are not permitted 
to amend the County Development Plan.  Cllr. J.J. Culloty stated the new Guidelines 
must issue in the first quarter of 2018.   
 
The Chief Executive pointed out that there was ministerial intervention in some 
counties.  Any change to policy must be in accordance with the new Guidelines as it 
would not stand up to scrutiny otherwise. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane requested that a letter would issue to the Minister asking him to 
indicate the date on which the Guidelines would be published. 
 
The meeting adjourned for lunch at 1.55pm. 
 
The meeting resumed at 2.30pm. 
 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
23 of 58 
 
17.11.20.11 Presentation on Draft River Basin Management Plans -    
Feedback from public consultation and prioritisation of Water 
Bodies 
 
Mr. J. Breen briefed the meeting on this item under the following headings: 
 
• New approach to management of our Rivers, Lakes and Coastal waters 
• EU Water Framework Directive 2000 
• The draft River Basin Management Plan 
• Why prioritise “areas for action”? 
• Vulnerable Waterbodies (Surface Waters) 
• How were areas prioritised? 
• How were priority “areas for action” selected? 
• What does the prioritisation mean for people living within these areas? 
• What happens next? 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane stated that a lot of scientific data was compiled for the Plan and he 
suggested that a dedicated unit should be established to take responsibility for water 
course. 
 
Cllr. S. Fitzgerald highlighted that he lives in one of the pressure zones and in his 
opinion the closing date for the spreading of slurry is causing problems.  Farmers 
should be allowed to spread it when the land is suitable.  A lot of the farmers in his 
area are suckler farmers and there should be a 100% grant to upgrade storage 
facilities. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney called on Mr. Grant of Irish Water to withdraw his recent comments 
as he is blaming staff for water outages.  This is very unfair and staff did an excellent 
job recently when the water supply was interrupted in Listowel.   
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty highlighted there are two areas of particular concern in South Kerry 
and they are the Inny River and Lough Currane.  Work has been undertaken by the 
Waterville Trust as they value the importance of angling for the area.  She agreed 
with Cllr. Fitzgerald that 100% grant aid should be available to farmers to upgrade 
storage facilities as water courses must be protected. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley agreed that the quality of our water courses is hugely important.  She 
asked if the 12 key areas identified are sufficient.  She supported the request by Cllr. 
Moloney calling on Mr. Grant to withdraw his comments and she asked that he would 
do so in public.  Workers believe that his comments reflect badly on them and this is 
unfair.   
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson welcomed the inclusion of the Flesk River of which the Finow is a 
tributary.   He had witnessed the degeneration of the Flesk and he remembers the 
freshwater pearl in that river years ago but it is no longer there.  He welcomed the 
prioritisation of certain areas and he asked if adequate staff are available to 
supervise and implement policies.  He commended home owners who empty their 
septic tanks regularly and he asked if it is possible to ensure that the material 
removed is treated properly.  In conclusion he asked if material removed from septic 
tanks is brought to the Killarney Treatment Plant for treatment. 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
24 of 58 
 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae acknowledged that a River Basin Management Plan must be in 
place but he highlighted that the pearl mussel has a strong presence in the rivers in 
his area.  The Area Engineer was arranging to have shores cleaned but this work 
was stopped but an active drain cleaning programme should be put in place.  While 
he welcomed the Plan it is vital that farmers and others are not hampered in carrying 
out their work.  In 2017 it rained for 22 days after the slurry spreading season 
opened.  Farmers should have the discretion to decide when is the most suitable 
time to spread slurry.  There was a recent break in the water pipe network at 
Farranfore and it was repaired within 7 hours.  Mr. Grant’s comments were unfair on 
staff who are very professional and diligent. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin expressed disappointment that the River Maine or the River 
Gweesten are not included in the priority areas and he requested that they be 
included as part of the river catchment analysis.  He concurred with the views 
expressed by previous speakers in relation to the spreading of slurry and he added 
that it should be spread when the weather is suitable.  Recent reports indicated that 
50% of septic tanks inspected failed the test and this has a bearing on water quality.  
He highlighted that grants should be available to all those who want to replace or 
upgrade their septic tank.  Cllr. Cronin advised that Mr. Grant’s recent comments 
were an insult to staff.  He lives in a problematic area and staff work day and night to 
restore the water supply to customers.  The repair crews are experts at their job and 
he rejected the recent comments by Mr. Grant.  There is an urgent need for 
investment in the pipe network which is in a very poor condition in some areas. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill agreed that grants should be available to all to upgrade their septic 
tanks.  He condemned Mr. Grant’s comments which were unfair on staff.  The Mid 
Kerry Regional Water Supply Scheme is problematic and adequate funding should 
be allocated to replace the remaining pipe network. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty concurred with the views expressed by previous speakers in relation 
to Mr. Grant’s comments and the spreading of slurry.  In France they have smaller 
sites but they are very strict on desludging. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea asked if funding is available to clean waterways.  He concurred with 
the views expressed by Cllr. Moloney in relation to Mr. Grant’s comments.  Water 
Services staff are excellent and they are out in all types of weather fixing breaks.  He 
understood that repairs to water schemes going forward will be advertised and he 
asked if Kerry County Council can tender for this work.  While the Service Level 
Agreement is up to 2025 staff need assurances. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley also objected to Mr. Grant’s comments regarding staff.  The recent 
break in the water supply in Listowel was fixed in a short time by staff.  In conclusion 
Cllr. Beasley agreed that farmers should be permitted to spread slurry when the 
weather is suitable and not by the calendar as is the case at present.  
Mr. J. Breen acknowledged the compliments by members for the water services staff 
and he advised that the spreading of slurry is being considered at a national level.  
He highlighted that septic tanks should be emptied annually and checks are carried 
out to ensure they are emptied by those who are licensed.  At present grants are 
only available to those whose septic tanks have been inspected and require upgrade 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
25 of 58 
 
or replacement.  Members comments in relation to the various rivers will be referred 
to the relevant body. 
 
The Chief Executive again highlighted that she clarified her position in relation to the 
recent article by Irish Water and she understood Mr. Grant provided clarification to 
the Unions who will notify their members. 
 
17.11.20.12 Housing Delivery Activity Report 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue referred members to his report on this item which was circulated 
and he briefed the meeting in details on it under the following headings: 
 
• Housing Construction 
• Housing Maintenance 
• Planned Maintenance Programme 
• Voids 
• Replacement Demountable Programme 
• Acquisitions 
• Buy & Renew 
• Turnkeys 
• Housing Assessment, Allocation & Transfer 
• Housing Assistance Payment  
• Private Rented Inspection 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris requested for the following meeting that a report would be presented to 
members on the findings of the inspections carried out and on the Council’s housing 
maintenance programme.  Local authorities are tasked with inspecting private rented 
houses yet there is inadequate funding to maintain the Council’s housing stock.  Cllr. 
Ferris welcomed the funding for demountable units but added that progress is very 
slow on the Improvement Works in Lieu Programme.  She asked that priority would 
be given to applicants for this scheme as it means they will not have to be rehoused.  
Kerry County Council received offers from up to 20 developers in response to 
requests for Turnkey developments.  However, in Kerry only 10% upfront is offered 
to the developer while Cork County Council offer 30%.  She asked why that cannot 
be the case in Kerry. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady expressed his disappointment that there is not enough staff to repair 
Council houses and he asked that additional staff would be taken on for this 
purpose.  He welcomed the 40 properties purchased in 2017 and he requested an 
update on proposals received for turnkey developments.  
 
Cllr. J. Finucane acknowledged that progress is being made in relation to housing 
and he welcomed the 360 new tenancies.  One of the issues with turnkey 
developments is that developers find it hard to get builders.  Cllr. Finucane asked 
that an advertising campaign would be undertaken over Christmas encouraging our 
emigrants to return home permanently in 2018 as there are job opportunities in Kerry 
and Dairymaster had such a campaign at Kerry Airport. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty then moved Notice of Motion No. 13 on the October list. 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
26 of 58 
 
 
13.  
Single rural dwellings which remain vacant for more than 12 months 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. JJ Culloty PROPOSED: 
To ask this Council to provide details of all single rural dwellings which remain 
vacant for more than 12 months and why they remain vacant. Also, to provide all 
information regarding actions taken to overcome any difficulties related to these 
dwellings. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council has an extensive programme of work in Housing to 
provide for persons qualified on our Housing waiting list. In the first 2 years of 
the 2015 to 2017 programme 791 units across all the various Social Housing 
delivery schemes available were delivered. It is intended that by the end of 2017 
a further 686 units will be delivered bringing a projected delivery of 1477 units 
under the 3year programme (which can be broken down as follows: 290 new 
units either constructed or purchased, 326 refurbished voids, 912 socially 
leased or HAP units and 47 units delivered by the voluntary housing sector). 
This represents a 40% increase over our original allocation of 1058 units.  
 
It is anticipated that our 2018 programme will deliver an additional 1122 units 
under and the various delivery schemes, therefore the combined total from 
2015-2018 is expected to be 2599 units in total. DHPCLG approval will be 
required for the various proposals. We are continuing to press ahead with all 
programmes and develop them further into 2018.  
 
There are currently 22 vacant Single Rural Cottages across the County. Works 
are ongoing on 10 of these properties.  
 
For the remaining 12 a range of issues exists affecting the ability of the Council 
return these to productive use - e.g. poor condition of some which would 
warrant demolition rather than refurbishment, legal issues with regard to Rights 
of Way and ownership of sites. These issues are currently being worked through 
to attempt to secure resolution of the cases.  
 
We have made progress in relation to resolving a number of other cases in 
recent times. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty highlighted that there is a vacant dwelling in his area for a number of 
years.  This house is 15 minutes from Killarney and a decision should be taken on 
what will be done with it.  If there are legal or right of way issues with it then it should 
be resolved. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady SECONDED the motion and he confirmed that he also enquired about 
the house referred to by Cllr. Culloty when he was informed it would be put up for sale. 
 
Cllr. T. Barry asked how many vacant Council houses are in the Listowel area and he 
asked when will they be allocated. 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
27 of 58 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly asked if there is a shortage of staff in North Kerry as it is taking a long 
time to turn around voids.  He acknowledged that there is a skilled labour shortage in 
North Kerry and one house in particular will be vacant for 12 months before it is 
allocated. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae welcomed the Replacement Demountable Programme and he 
added the most that would be required in a year is 2.  The tendering process for the 
repair of voids is too complicated and as a result builders are not bothering with this 
work.  He asked how this can be addressed and will the Council approach builders 
who have done this work in the past. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly highlighted that some applicants are sleeping on couches with families 
and friends.  There is an urgent need for accommodation for single applicants and the 
Council should have an extensive building programme. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley advised that there is a severe shortage of accommodation for single 
people.  She acknowledged that the staff in the Housing Department are excellent and 
they deliver a first class service.  The Investigating Officers cover very large areas and 
this makes it very difficult for them to do their job. 
 
In response Mr. M. O’Donoghue referred to member’s comments on turnkey 
developments and assured them that his Department is doing what is allowed by 
procurement and Departmental guidelines.  It was confirmed at a meeting that the 
model operated by Kerry County Council is the only model available.  Mr. O’Donoghue 
asked members to discuss individual cases directly with him as he could not discuss 
them in a public forum.  If repairs to a vacant house are estimated to cost in excess of 
€30,000 Department funding is required.  An application for funding for a number of 
these was made to the Department and funding was allocated.  Mr. O’Donoghue 
advised that detailed housing reports are provided at MD meetings.  The problem with 
the repair of houses is not necessarily a direct labour issue but rather the capacity of 
the private market.  On occasion where sanction is received to proceed it can be 
difficult to get someone to carry out the work.  Mr. O’Donoghue undertook to discuss 
this issue with the CIF representative at the next SPC meeting. 
 
17.11.20.13 Kerry County Council Corporate Plan 2015 – 2019 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue referred members to his report dated 14th November 2017 on 
this item which was circulated and he briefed them on the report. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. S. Fitzgerald, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Kennelly it was 
agreed to adopt  the Kerry County Council Corporate Plan 2015 – 2019 in 
accordance with Section 134 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended by the 
Local Government Reform Act 2014. 
 
17.11.20.14 Nominee to the JPC 
 
Cllr. N. Foley PROPOSED that Cllr. J. Finucane be nominated to the JPC following 
the resignation of Cllr. Spring. 
 
Cllr. S. Fitzgerald SECONDED this proposal and it was unanimously agreed. 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
28 of 58 
 
 
17.11.20.15 Duine a ainmniú ar Thascfórsa Ghaeltacht Uíbh Ráthaigh 
To agree a nominee to the Task Force of the Uibhrathach 
Gaeltacht 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane PROPOSED that Cllr. N. Moriarty be nominated to the Task Force 
of the Uibhrathach Gaeltacht. 
 
Cllr. S. Fitzgerald SECONDED this proposal and it was unanimously agreed. 
 
17.11.20.16 Report by Cllr. S. Locke on the meeting of the Tourism, Culture, 
Arts and Recreation SPC held on the 4th October 2017 
 
It was agreed to note Cllr. Locke’s report on the meeting of the Tourism, Culture, 
Arts and Recreation SPC held on the 4th October 2017. 
 
17.11.20.17 Summary of proceedings at events 
 
It was agreed to note reports on the following events on behalf of the Kerry County 
Council delegates that attended in accordance with Section 142(5)(f) of the Local 
Government Act 2001 as amended. 
 
(a)  
AILG Training on "The National Planning Framework 2040" held in Waterford 
on the 11th February 2017 by Cllr. D. Quigg 
 
(b)  
Conference on the theme "The Fair Deal Scheme" held in Carlingford, Co. 
Louth from the 10th to 12th March 2017 by Cllr. J.J. Culloty. 
 
(c)  
AILG Annual Training Conference 2017 held in Ennis, Co. Clare on the 6th 
and 7th April 2017 by Cllr. N. Moriarty. 
 
(d)  
AILG Training Event on the theme "Urban and Rural Development" held in 
Ballina/Killaloe, Co. Tipperary on the 18th May 2017 by Cllr. P. Connor-
Scarteen. 
 
(e)  
Irish Planning Institute Autumn Planning Conference held in Dublin on the 6th 
October 2017 by Cllr. J. Lucid. 
 
17.11.20.18 Approval for the opening of Tenders 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. J.J. Culloty  it was 
agreed to approve the opening of the following tenders: 
 
(a) 
Construction of a Single Rural Dwelling and associated site works at 
Cahernaboshina, Ventry - Closing date: Friday 15th September 2017 at 3pm. 
 
(b) 
N22 Coolgarriv HD28 Resurfacing Scheme - Closing date: Wednesday 25th 
October 2017 at 4pm. 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
29 of 58 
 
(c) 
Engineering Consultancy Services for Phase 6 (Construction and 
Implementation) and Phase 7 (Handover, Review, 7 Closeout) of N70 Kilderry 
Bends Improvement Scheme - Closing date: Friday 27th October 2017 at 
2pm. 
 
(d) 
2017 HD28 Pavement Resurfacing / Retexturing Works - Closing date: 
Wednesday 1st November 2017 at 4pm. 
 
(e) 
N21 Pavement Defect Repair Works - Closing date: Thursday 2nd November 
2017 at 3pm. 
 
(f) 
Lough Leane Amenity Trail - Supply and Installation of Deer Fencing at 
Lismongane, Fossa, Killarney - Closing date: Wednesday 8th November 2017 
at 4pm. 
 
(g)      Construction of one housing unit and associated site works at Pinewood, 
Killarney - Closing date: Tuesday 14th November 2017 at 3pm. 
 
(h)      RFID Self Service System for Kerry County Council Library Service - Closing 
date: Friday 17th November 2017 at 3pm. 
 
(i) 
Provision of training and consultancy services for Accessible Tourism - 
Closing date Friday 17th November 2017 at 3pm. 
 
(j) 
Kerry County Council 2017 Public Lighting N22 Killarney By-Pass LED 
Upgrade - Closing date: Wednesday 22nd November 2017 at 12pm. 
 
(k)       Consultancy Services for the construction of 20 Housing Units at Marconi, 
Ballybunion - Closing date: Wednesday 22nd November 2017 at 3pm. 
 
(l)      Conversion of Kerry County Council's existing library stock from barcode 
enabled to RFID enabled - Closing date: Friday 24th November 2017 at 3pm. 
 
(m)      N71 Port Road Improvement Scheme - Closing date: Tuesday 28th 
November 2017 at 4pm. 
 
(n) 
Electrical Upgrade Works, North Kerry Landfill, Muingnaminnane, Kielduff, 
Tralee - Closing date: Thursday 30th November 2017 at 4pm. 
 
(o)      Consultancy services for the construction of Community Facility - Boxing Club 
and Youth Project, Deans Lane, Tralee - Closing date: Friday 1st December 
2017 at 12pm. 
 
(p)      Consultancy services for the construction of 28 Housing Units at Balloonagh, 
Tralee - Closing date: Friday 1st December 2017 at 3pm. 
 
 
 
 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
30 of 58 
 
17.11.20.19 Notices of Motion deferred from October  
 
1. Lack of broadband connectivity 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M Gleeson PROPOSED: 
In view of the social, economic and educational deprivation being inflicted on many 
in our County because of lack of broadband connectivity or because of the wholly 
inadequate level of the broadband service, that Kerry County Council in cooperation 
with other similarly afflicted counties would initiate a major campaign towards 
achieving equality of treatment for all citizens of the state. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The availability of High speed broadband in all parts of Kerry will be key 
infrastructural element to the continued economic and social development of 
the County. The National Broadband Plan (NBP) is a Government policy 
initiative which aims to deliver high-speed broadband to every household and 
business in Ireland within 3-5 years of commencement of the large scale rollout. 
The Department of Communication, Climate Action and the Environment is 
responsible for procuring a contractor to deliver the NBP. Current indications 
are that the contract will be awarded in 2018. Kerry County Council have 
appointed a broadband officer as recommended in the recent ‘Report of the 
Mobile Phone and Broadband Task Force’. The Broadband officer will act as a 
single point of contact for engagement with operators within the local authority 
and will assist with accelerated rollout of the National Broadband Plan when the 
contractor is in place. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson read the following statement into the record of the meeting. 
 
“In 1967 the then Minister for Education Donagh O Malley gave equality of 
opportunity to all young student when he introduced free 2nd level education.  It was 
seen as levelling the playing field or the classroom.  It ensured that many thousands 
received a quality education that prepared them for life and enriched its quality. 
Strange then, indeed almost perverse that the arrival of Broadband technology has 
re-introduced inequality of educational opportunity. 
 
Much modern education is done on line and that is wonderful for those with access 
to quality broadband.  But it isolates and discriminates against the person who has 
limited or no access. In instance, Hibernia teacher training through which many 
young men and women qualify for their chosen profession but sadly there are some 
who are denied because of inequality of opportunity to access Broadband. 
 
Decent and reliable Broadband would transform this country especially rural and so 
called isolated areas.  But the promise of 2012 to provide high class Broadband to all 
has been totally reneged upon.  A recent report found that our Broadband speeds 
are very poor – 36th in Europe. 
 
The present situation is a failure that guarantees failure for individuals and 
communities.  I call on all counties deprived in this regard to unite and demand 
equality.” 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
31 of 58 
 
2. Social houses to be provided in 2017/2018 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. R Beasley PROPOSED: 
How many social houses can we expect to see commencing in Kerry in 2017/2018? 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has a strong housing construction and acquisition 
programme in place with 99 units intended to be commenced or purchased by 
the end of 2017. A further 197 units are planned to be commenced or purchased 
in 2018 subject to DHPCLG approval and compliance with Planning 
requirements. In addition, the Council is currently reviewing our Housing lands 
with a view to finalising future plans and proposals for the next phase of the 
Housing Programme. This work is expected to be completed in coming weeks 
and will be brought to Council before year end. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley welcomed the 20 houses to be constructed in Ballybunion.  He 
expressed concern at the Government’s plan for housing which seems to be an 
acceptance of homelessness.  There were negative comments in the media the 
previous week regarding volunteers who help the homeless but his only concern is the 
lack of co-ordination between all the groups involved.   
 
3. Retained Fire Service. 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J Healy Rae PROPOSED: 
How come Kerry County Council stop Firemen being Firemen when they get a full 
time job in the Council. How are private companies and businesses expected to 
leave employees answer a fire call when the Council won’t. 
 
The following reply issued: 
There is no absolute requirement that an employee cannot hold another 
employment with the Council as well as that of Retained Firefighter. Indeed 
Kerry County Council continues to employ a number of persons who hold 
positions both as members of the Retained Fire Service and in other separate 
employments within other Council. In these cases Council management has 
determined that their release to attend to Fire Service duties would not 
potentially create an unacceptable level of risk in terms of their duties and 
responsibilities in these other positions while absent on their fire service duties, 
that their absence would not negatively impact on the delivery of Council 
services, and that they remain eligible for continued membership of the Fire 
Service( e.g. availability to respond at all times, proximity to their respective Fire 
Station, etc. ). Where an existing member of the Retained Fire Service, who 
applied for and following competition was offered a position with Kerry County 
Council and any of the foregoing criteria cannot be guaranteed in respect of the 
dual roles, then he or she would be required by council management to choose 
whether to accept the position offered and resign from the Retained Fire Service 
or decline the position and remain in the Retained Fire Service. This requirement 
would be absolute in such circumstances given the emergency/ critical nature 
of the fire service and to avoid any potential conflict into the future between both 
roles. 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
32 of 58 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae highlighted that this issue has been ongoing for some time.  If a part 
time fireman gets a full time job they must decide between that or being part time in 
the Fire Service.  They have been trained at a cost to the local authority and when an 
opportunity arises to get a full time job on the roads etc. they cannot stay in the Fire 
Service.  It is unfair of the Council to expect private businesses to allow staff to respond 
to a fire call when they do not allow it.  The absence of staff on fire calls also impacts 
on the delivery of services by the private sector.  Cllr. Healy-Rae PROPOSED that 
staff who have been fully trained would not be forced to leave the Fire Service when 
they get full time work with the Council. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion and this proposal. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue advised that this proposal could not be accepted as staffing is an 
executive function.  There is no absolute embargo on full time staff remaining in the 
Fire Service and where appropriate it is allowed.  However, when staff work in remote 
areas it would not work.  Kerry County Council has employees working in other areas 
who are members of the Fire Service where it is compatible and he pointed out that 
the response time is critical for this service. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae stated he was referring to staff who remained in their area and they 
have been told they cannot continue in the Fire Service.   
 
4. National Pension Fund  
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J Finucane PROPOSED: 
That this Council calls on the Government to establish as a matter of urgency a 
National Pension Fund for state employees and Local Authority workers, the present 
situation where pensions are paid out of income is not sustainable into the future. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane pointed out that €7.9m is provided in the Council’s Revenue Budget 
for pensions.  In the US and the UK Police Departments have their own pension 
funds and they go to the market every 3 years.  The State has made no provision for 
funding pensions and he requested that a letter would issue to the Minister for 
Finance asking as the economy improves that such a fund could be utilised to fund 
infrastructure projects.  The fund could be managed by the National Treasury 
Management Agency. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty SECONDED the motion. 
 
5. Draw on the artistic/creative talents of people throughout the County 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N Foley PROPOSED: 
Drawing on the artistic/creative talents of people throughout the County, that Kerry 
County Council seek to co-ordinate volunteers who will donate their talents to 
improve/enhance areas in our towns and villages that are currently in 
decline/disrepair. The enhancements of such areas will do much to improve the 
visual aspect of our towns/villages. 
 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
33 of 58 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Arts Office will look at how this proposal can be advanced and will carry 
out preliminary enquiries as to the availability of such volunteers with 
appropriate skills and of suitable projects to work on. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley highlighted that there are incredibly talented people in the county and 
they could enhance some areas.  She welcomed the involvement of the Arts Office 
to co-ordinate this project and suggested that a small allocation could be made from 
the Community Support Fund for one or two projects. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris SECONDED the motion. 
 
6. Behy Bridge on the Ring of Kerry  
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M Cahill PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council/Transport Infrastructure Ireland give a detailed progress 
report in regards to the dangerous S-Shaped Behy Bridge on the Ring of Kerry in the 
vicinity of Glenbeigh N.S. where numerous accidents have occurred and where lives 
have been lost. When will work commence on the construction of a new bridge, how 
long will this work take and what is the estimated cost. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The proposals for the N70 Glanbehy Bridge Road Project, involves the 
construction of a new bridge and comprises a combination of both off-line/on-
line realignments. The options appraised vary between 900m and 1850m in 
length and overall costs range from c. €3m to €4.5m. A Draft Route Selection 
Report has been prepared and submitted to Transport Infrastructure Ireland 
(T.I.I.) for consideration.  
 
Subject to any comments from the T.I.I., the Council is proposes to commence 
in a public consultation process in November 2017 before finalising the Route 
Selection Report. It is our intention to have the final Route Selection Report 
complete and submitted to T.I.I. in December 2017.  
 
Approval from T.I.I. will then be sought to proceed with the Part 8 Planning 
Process and subject to planning consent, funding will be requested to 
progress the scheme in 2018. Updates on the progress of the scheme will be 
given to members at the South & West MD meetings. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill welcomed the reply and added that this is a very important project for 
Mid Kerry and the Ring of Kerry.  He complimented the Road Design Office on the 
preparation of the design which will be submitted next month.   
 
Cllr. D. Quigg SECONDED the motion. 
 
7. Proposed skate park for Tralee 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. T Ferris  PROPOSED: 
What progress has been made on the proposed Skate Park for Tralee since April 
last. 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
34 of 58 
 
 
The following reply issued: 
All initial consultations have been complete and a preliminary design has been 
completed.  
 
Discussions are at advanced stage in respect of lease / licence for the 
proposed site. It is intended to proceed to Planning Stage thereafter.  
 
As with all such projects the progression of same will be dependent on 
identifying a source of funding in respect of same. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris advised that an application for grant aid must be submitted by February 
and she did not want to see a third generation of skaters have to articulate what 
facilities they want.  She called on the Chief Executive to ensure planning is in place 
so this project will be shovel ready by February in time to apply for a Sports Capital 
Grant. 
 
Mr. M. Scannell replied that the planning application is ready to be lodged but the 
agreement of the landowner is needed. 
 
9. Survival of the Valentia Island Ferry 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N Moriarty PROPOSED: 
That we arrange for a delegation to meet with all relevant Ministers in relation to 
ensuring the survival of the Valentia Island Ferry. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty advised that the Valentia Island Group sent a number of letters 
requesting grant aid but unfortunately the response was not great.  They need to 
secure the funding now as it takes a year to build the ferry.  They sought Fáilte 
Ireland Capital funding but they were refused.  She asked that a delegation would be 
arranged with the relevant Minister with a view to identifying funding steams for the 
new ferry. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea SECONDED the motion. 
 
10. Lyme Disease 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J Sheahan PROPOSED: 
To write to the Minister for Health, Mr. Simon Harris, that he would acknowledge the 
people who suffer from Lymes Disease before it becomes an epidemic. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan stated there is a serious issue with the number of people infected 
with Lyme Disease in Kerry.  The Minister for Health must acknowledge how serious 
this is and he called on the Minister to fund their treatment abroad. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin SECONDED the motion. 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
35 of 58 
 
 
11. Lyme Disease 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D Quigg PROPOSED: 
That this Council write to the Minister for Health, Mr. Simon Harris calling on the 
need for the standardisation of testing across the EU in relation to Lymes Disease. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg moved his motion and added that Ireland must comply with EU 
regulations which is the norm but not in this situation.  He asked how there can be a 
positive result from a test conducted in Germany while that is not the case with the 
test carried out in Ireland.  If tests were standardised people would be diagnosed 
faster and get the appropriate treatment. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane SECONDED the motion. 
 
12. Industry for Kerry 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M O’Shea PROPOSED: 
To ask the CE what is the up to date position with the IDA's interest and intentions to 
date of directing any form of industry to Kerry. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council has established a County Working Group focused on 
Economic Development. The Partners include, The IDA Regional Manager, The 
Enterprise Ireland Regional Manager, The Institute of Technology, President & 
Vice President and The Chief Executive & The Director of Economic 
Development in Kerry County Council.  
 
The Group is established with a specific focus of co-ordinating and having 
updates from all Partners on activities within the County.  
 
During 2017, the co-ordinated approach has delivered the following:-  
• IDA & Kerry County Council “Invest in Kerry” promotion which forms part of 
the international selling for Kerry.  
 
• Kerry County Council has worked closely with the IDA to identify investment 
ready sites across the County. This has involved a high level, research & 
analysis by Kerry County Council.  
 
• Kerry County Council, Enterprise Ireland and the IDA, as part of its 
commitment to the South West Regional Action Plan for Jobs, prioritised the 
establishment of two pilot Enterprise Hubs within the County, to promote rural 
employment. The Sneem Digital Hub and Skills Audit and the Dingle E-Hub – 
both funded under the Kerry County Council Town & Village Renewal 
Programme – will also have significant support from the IDA & Enterprise 
Ireland, which is critical to their future success.  
 
The IDA Ireland has reported the following activity levels within the County:-  

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
36 of 58 
 
• 13 IDA Client Companies in Kerry employing 2,083;  
• This represents an increase of 586 over 5 years;  
• Borg Warner €10m investment in capital equipment/€1.5m facility renovation 
in Tralee;  
• The establishment of Starwood Hotels and Resorts Hub in Kenmare; • 
Expansion of JRI America in Tralee;  
• VT iDirect announced 30 new jobs in Killarney;  
• Provision of Advanced Technology Building in Tralee;  
 
IDA Ireland has also advised that they are engaged in a strong marketing 
campaign in relation to the advanced Technology Building in Tralee.  
 
As Chief Executive, it is very important that Kerry County Council works closely 
with the IDA and also that the investment needs of the County are put forward 
to the IDA on an on-going basis, as part of this engagement. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea expressed his disappointment in the IDA and added that but for 
indigenous companied who have trebled their work force there would be very little 
employment in the county.  600 jobs were announced last week by the IDA but none 
of these were in Kerry.  In April the new Advance Unit was opened but no tenant has 
been secured for it to-date.  Cllr. O’Shea called on the IDA to appoint a permanent 
officer in Kerry.  Members supported economic development in the Budget by 
providing €600,000 but the IDA have not delivered for the county.   
 
Cllr. J. Finucane SECONDED the motion. 
 
14. Inspection of bridges for the build-up of debris 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D McCarthy PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council to inspect all bridges for the build-up of debris. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Council is currently carrying out a visual inspection of approximately 250 
bridges on National, Regional and local roads in advance of the winter season, 
to ensure that there are no blockages or immediately potential blockage to the 
opes. These are prioritized having regard to the scale of the bridge, traffic 
volumes on the routes, areas where there has been a history of flooding to 
properties in the past and cognizant of the need to maintain access to critical 
infrastructure. Any debris identified, which could restrict river flows, will be 
removed. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy welcomed the reply. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson SECONDED the motion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
37 of 58 
 
15. Programme for footpaths 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B Cronin PROPOSED: 
To request that this Council compile a defined programme for footpath construction 
similar to our Roads Programme as new footpaths are required in our towns and 
villages when in many cases the surfaces are very poor and uneven with water 
ponding in wet weather. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Council is currently developing a 3 year programme of prioritized footpath 
repairs in each Municipal District, which will also identify critical locations 
where new footpaths may be required, and which will be brought to the members 
for approval.  
 
The Council recognizes that there is a need for a footpath improvement 
programme, and the funding of this programme will be a matter for the members, 
through the road grant allocations, our own resources and the General 
Municipal Allocation. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin pointed out that many footpaths are cracked and are unsuitable for 
people with mobility or disability issues.  Members are advised that the only way 
footpaths can be improved is if they allocate €2,000 or €3,000 to improve a section 
each year.  He welcomed the 3-year programme and added that footpaths in Killarney 
town need improvement. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris moved Notice of Motion No. 16 in Cllr. Daly’s absence. 
 
16. Support for a Referendum to keep water provision in public 
ownership 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P Daly PROPOSED: 
That this Council supports a Referendum to keep water provision in public 
ownership. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
17. Introduction of a composting service 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M Healy Rae PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council to consider introducing a composting service to 
address the problem people in estates are facing with nowhere to dispose of their 
grass and foliage. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Green waste is accepted from domestic customers at the Dingle Civic Amenity 
Centre which is a purpose built facility. The Councils other Waste Facilities do 
not have a composting facility available. The proposal as outlined would have 
significant cost and licensing implications and for these reasons the council 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
38 of 58 
 
will not be in a position to introduce such service. There are many options 
available to dispose of green waste through composting, and mulching etc. In 
fact grass clippings left on a lawn can add back up to 25 % of the nutrients that 
growth removes from soil. These clippings also encourage beneficial micro-
organisms and earthworms that digest this grass and maintain healthy soil. 
The Council is also encouraging community groups such as Tidy Towns to 
switch to mulching of the grass which does not then require off-site disposal 
and we have assisted some groups in acquiring the necessary attachments for 
their grass cutting equipment. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae stated the reply does not address the difficulties people who live 
in estates have.  People should be encouraged to maintain their homes and if the 
facility is available in Dingle it should be rolled out to the rest of the county. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty then moved Notice of Motion No. 12 for November. 
 
12. Green waste permits 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. JJ Culloty PROPOSED: 
As the regulations currently in place to secure a green waste permit are not 
reasonable for a sparsely populated County, I ask this Council to discuss options 
which would help make it feasible to set up such a necessary facility. 
 
The same reply issued for this motion as for no. 17 above. 
  
Cllr. J.J. Culloty highlighted that these facilities are very expensive to set up and he 
asked if a system could be provided to accept small amounts of waste.  In many 
instances people who cut trees cannot mulch them. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion. 
 
18. New levy on tyres 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. F Flynn PROPOSED: 
The new tyre levy introduced from the 1st October, has both the retailer and the 
public confused in relation to the allocation of the levy and how Repak ELT is going 
to enforce the new system. Are the public once again expected to foot the bill of €14 
approx. per full change of tyres. 
 
The following reply issued: 
This notice of motion refers to the new National Waste Tyre Regulations which 
were recently signed into effect by the Minister, thereby replacing the previous 
regulations in this area. As per the regulations, a new visible environmental 
management cost (vEMC) will apply from the 1st October to certain types of 
tyres at the point of sale : €2.80 per car tyre and €1.50 per motorbike tyre, both 
ex-VAT (it is intended that the charging regime will be expanded to include other 
types of tyres in the future). The charge will be used to offset the costs of 
managing waste tyres into the future and the Producer Responsibility Initiative 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
39 of 58 
 
model is similar to those already in place for other products including batteries, 
electrical equipment etc. A new national compliance scheme is also now in 
place, operated by REPAK ELT, and it will their role to manage the collection 
and disposal of waste tyres into the future on behalf of the industry. All 
producers, suppliers and retailers are required to sign-up to this compliance 
scheme. Information on the new system is currently being disseminated to the 
industry and consumers via a number of outlets and agencies. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn highlighted that the new levy is approx. €2.80 per tyre plus VAT.  There 
is now a tracker on every tyre and they must be collected by Repac.  If a tyre is bought 
online Repack cannot collect it so it will be dumped.  It is expensive enough to run a 
car without having to pay an additional €14 on top of the cost of a new set of tyres.  
Cllr. Flynn asked that a letter would issue to the Minister calling on him not to impose 
this tax. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill SECONDED the motion. 
 
21. Requirements for appointment of nurses and doctors from other 
countries 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M Gleeson PROPOSED: 
As large numbers of our eminently qualified young doctors and nurses leave Ireland 
for more attractive positions abroad, that the Department of Health, the Medical 
Council and An Bord Altranais would ensure that (a) those doctors and nurses who 
come to work in Ireland from other countries have adequate fluency to communicate 
with patients (b) that only those with the required qualification would be appointed as 
Consultants. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson clarified that he was not specifically referring to Kerry or Munster.  
He then read the following statement into the record of the meeting. 
“The first part of my Motion deals with a lady who suffers from arthritis.  When she 
developed a severe pain the locum in the GP practice advised her to visit the local 
University Hospital.  
 
The Doctor who examined her in the hospital could not communicate with her nor 
she with him.  So a third party had to be brought along to try and interpret.  The 
diagnosis was wholly incorrect and a few days later following a visit to her own GP 
the lady was admitted to a major Dublin Hospital for a heart procedure. 
 
It is wrong that a person with inadequate language skills would be in such a position 
just as it would be wrong for such a person to be in a classroom position.  I am 
asking that as well as Medical knowledge being a pre-requisite for a HSE 
appointment so too should language skills.  The sick and concerned deserve no 
less.” 
 
Cllr. Gleeson added that there cannot be another country in the world that has higher 
entry requirements for young people to get into Medical School than applied in 
Ireland.  There are so many richly talented young Doctors that training sufficient as 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
40 of 58 
 
Consultants should be relatively straightforward.  His motion was submitted quite 
some time before the recent Annual Conference of the Irish Hospital Consultants 
Association but the points made there reinforce the concerns expressed in the 
Motion.  He quoted the following excerpts from that conference:- 
 
“1. 
Public patients are being treated by 81 doctors working as consultants who do 
not have full specialist training. 
 
2. 
The President of the IHCA warned that critically ill patients are dying because 
they are forced to stay in A&E when they should be in Intensive Care. 
 
3. 
Patients with commonplace medical and surgical problems are waiting years 
to see a Consultant. 
 
4. 
In 2016 we performed about half the number of hip replacements and much 
less than half of the knee replacements.” 
 
Cllr. Gleeson added that it is quite incredible in a country that trains so many 
superbly qualified people that our system is so repulsive to them that they choose to 
emigrate and leave their parents, families and friends to the mercy of a system that 
for far, far too long has failed dismally to relieve the normal pains, aches and 
disabilities of life’s journey. 
 
Cllr. Gleeson stated we should be ashamed of our ongoing failures particularly in 
light of the enormous money allocated annually to Health.  He highlighted these two 
situations in the hope that someone will Shout Stop to the ongoing malaise that 
condemns and ignores. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan SECONDED the motion. 
 
22. The Old Pier at Blennerville 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J Finucane PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council begin a process to bring the Old Pier at Blennerville into 
public ownership given its Tourism potential for the County. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The development of the Old Pier at Blennerville has not been identified in the 
Kerry Tourism Strategy 2016 – 2020 and the Kerry County Council LECP. 
Consideration was given by the former Tralee Town Council to compulsorily 
acquire the site over 20 years ago, but there were significant legal constraints.  
 
The Council also has responsibility for the operation of 59 piers and slipways 
located around the County. Kerry County Council cover the cost associated 
with all these piers including maintenance, the provision of tourist moorings, 
aids to navigation and pontoon maintenance within limited resources.  
 
Therefore, the Council could only give consideration to this proposal, if there 
was a specific tourism potential and the reasonable prospect of a funding 
stream. 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
41 of 58 
 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane advised that Tralee Town Council had commenced the process of 
taking the Pier at Blennerville into public ownership as the bulk of all emigrants that 
left the county left from Blennerville.  It was planned to develop an emigrant’s 
walkway and he asked that this would be considered.   
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy SECONDED the motion. 
 
24. Footpath at Ard Bhearna, Kenmare 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J Healy Rae PROPOSED: 
Why hasn't a footpath been included in the tender for 20 houses in Ard Bhearna, 
Kenmare to join up with the town and to ask that funding be sought from the 
Department of Housing and the TII for this purpose as a matter of urgency. 
 
The following reply issued: 
A submission was made to the Department of Housing Planning and Local 
Government for the funding of the footpath, as part of the tender for the 20 
houses in the Ard Bhearna scheme, but was not approved as part of the cost of 
the scheme. The Council has made a further request to the Department, to 
reconsider the decision and requesting a contribution towards the cost of the 
works.  
 
Separately, the Council has engaged further with Transport Infrastructure 
Ireland on the feasibility of providing the footpath, particularly as the N71 Molls 
Gap / Killarney Road, Kenmare has been identified for pavement improvement 
works.  
 
The section of the route from Ard Bhearna Estate towards the town centre has 
also been identified by Transport Infrastructure Ireland (T.I.I) for further 
examination under T.I.I.’s Network Safety Ranking process, and the Council has 
been requested to submit a Feasibility Report, which we expect to have 
completed and submitted by the end of the year.  
 
The case will be made in the Feasibility Report that there is a need for a full 
traffic calming scheme which would include the provision of footpath linkage to 
Ard Bhearna estate. The current cost estimate to provide 440m of footpath is 
€206,000, including for public lighting and a pedestrian crossing.  
 
There are economic benefits in having all of the works identified to be 
constructed under both schemes completed under a single contract and we are 
hopeful of favourable consideration from the T.I.I. to this proposal. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae welcomed the reply and stated there are in excess of 80 children in 
this estate.  He asked that priority would continue to be given to the provision of this 
footpath. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy SECONDED the motion. 
 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
42 of 58 
 
25. Location of ESB poles 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J Sheahan PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council to write to the ESB and ask them if a risk assessment 
has been done to the location of their poles which may be in dangerous locations and 
which may cause Health and Safety issues. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan stated in his electoral area at Leam, Gneeveguilla a new ESB pole 
was erected and in his opinion it is in a dangerous location.  It is located on a hill and 
where traffic veers right and in his option there is a real risk that vehicles could crash 
into it.  He hoped the ESB would recognise this danger and remove the pole. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion.   
 
26. Post Office management at Lauragh 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D Quigg PROPOSED: 
That this Council write to An Post asking for an extension to the timeframe that they 
have issued to the people of Lauragh to put new Post Office Management in place. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg highlighted that this Post Office has now closed which is very 
disappointing.  Communities like this need help if they are to survive and it was 
suggested that a co-op would be set up but guidelines are needed. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn SECONDED the motion. 
 
27. Update on Tenant Purchase Scheme 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M O’Shea PROPOSED: 
To ask the Housing Director what is the up to date position with the success of the 
Tenant Purchase Scheme regarding purchases and refusals. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The following describes the progress to date on the tenant Purchase scheme 
in Kerry County Council. 
 
289 Applications received  
136 Eligible at the income stage  
116 Not eligible  
37 had further Information requested  
 
79 have reached the Valuation stage  
57 have had Letters of Offer issued  
31 have accepted the Offer and are securing finance  
5 have begun the legal process to complete the purchase. 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
43 of 58 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea advised that the criteria for the Tenant Purchase Scheme is very 
frustrating.  Cllr. O’Shea requested that a letter would issue to the Department calling 
for the Scheme to be amended to allow more tenants to purchase their houses. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson SECONDED the motion. 
 
29. Education of young people on the use of defibrillators 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D McCarthy PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council request the HSE to put a programme together on 
educating young people on how to use defibrillators through schools. 
 
Mr. L Quinlan said this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy highlighted that all towns and villages have defibrillators and he 
called on the HSE to fund the training of young people to use them. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion. 
 
30. Housing estates waiting to be taken in charge 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B Cronin PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council clarify how many housing estates are waiting to be taken 
in charge in each Municipal District. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council currently has 48 Taking in Charge applications on hand. 
The breakdown per Municipal District is as follows:  
 
Municipal District No. of Estates  
Killarney 12  
Listowel 12  
South & West Kerry 15  
Tralee 9  
 
Kerry County Council has made substantial progress over the past number of 
years in addressing issues identified in unfinished housing estates across the 
County. Works have been completed in many of the more problematic estates 
which has greatly improved the quality of life for the residents living in these 
estates. Since 2009, 127 housing estates have been taken in charge across the 
County. 15 estates have been taken in charge to date in 2017 and the statutory 
process to take a further 5 in charge will commence shortly. We are also working 
closely and pursuing outstanding bond sums with the various financial 
institutions. Good progress is also being made in this regard.  
 
Many of the remaining estates to be taken in charge are historic estates where 
there is no bond in place. We also require formal approval from Irish Water 
before proceeding to commence the TIC process in accordance with our 
Memorandum of Understanding and in many cases, site resolution plans are 
required to be prepared. 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
44 of 58 
 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin complimented the Taking in Charge unit on how helpful they are to 
residents who want to apply to have their estate taken in charge.  He expressed 
concern that the approval of Irish Water must be received and this is slowing down 
the process where minor work must be undertaken.  One estate in Killarney applied 
to be taken in charge in 2013 and it has still not been finalised.  Cllr. Cronin asked 
that the procedures would be streamlined where only minor works are required. 
 
31. Fencing at Fenit Island 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. T Ferris PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County would remove the illegal fencing at Fenit Island as a matter of 
urgency as permitted under Legislation in light of An Bord Pleanála decision. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has already commenced enforcement action in respect of 
this matter and is currently actively engaged to ensure adherence with the An 
Bord Pleanála decision regarding this fencing. Kerry County Council are very 
mindful of advancing this case as quickly as possible. The Council is satisfied 
that the process being followed is the appropriate course of action. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris highlighted that the public are frustrated at the lack of progress in the 
enforcement of the Order.  On the 28th May 2015 An Bord Pleanála ruled that the 
fences were unlawfully erected and Kerry County Council has the legislative power to 
remove them.  She PROPOSED that specific queries would be forwarded for reply in 
the next 2 weeks.  Cllr. Ferris asked that the Council would act as they are entitled to 
and to enforce the decision of An Bord Pleanála. 
 
Cllr. T. O’Brien SECONDED the motion.   
 
32. Update on Single Rural Dwellings 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M Healy Rae PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council the following in relation to rural cottages - how many 
applicants are there currently in Kerry; how many are currently being built; when will 
they be completed and how many are in the ownership of Kerry County Council that 
are vacant. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has an extensive programme of work in Housing to 
provide for persons qualified on our Housing waiting list. In the first 2 years of 
the 2015-2017 programme 791 units across all the various Social Housing 
delivery schemes available were delivered. It is intended that by the end of 2017, 
a further 686 units will be delivered bringing a projected delivery of 1477 units 
under the 3 year programme (which can be broken down as follows: 290 new 
units either constructed or purchased, 326 refurbished voids, 912 socially 
leased or HAP units and 47 units delivered by the voluntary housing sector). 
This represents a 40% increase over our original allocation of 1058 units.  
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
45 of 58 
 
It is anticipated that our 2018 programme will deliver an additional 1122 units 
under the various delivery schemes, therefore, the combined total from 2015-
2018 is expected to be 2599 units in total. DHPCLG approval will be required for 
the various proposals. We are continuing to press ahead with all programmes 
and develop them further into 2018.  
 
There are currently 28 applications for single rural dwellings on the Kerry 
County Council housing waiting list.  
 
Kerry County Council's Capital Construction Programme to 2019 has a target to 
build twelve single rural dwellings.  
 
There are no single rural dwellings currently under construction but Kerry 
County Council intends to commence construction of two dwellings in Nov/Dec 
2017 and these should be completed by mid 2018.  
 
There are five SRD applications which are in the approval process and subject 
to completion of the legal transfer of the land, Departmental approval etc., Kerry 
County Council expects that it will be in a position to commence building on 
these five sites in the 1st quarter 2018.  
 
There are a further five SRD applications identified on which site suitability 
assessments will have to be completed and subject to these being deemed 
suitable then the Part 8 planning process etc. will commence. The Council 
anticipates that it will have contractors on site in late 2018 subject to site 
transfer etc. being completed. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae asked if funding is in place to build 28 single rural dwellings.  She 
added that her query regarding the number of vacant single rural dwellings was not 
addressed in the reply and she asked if funding is in place to repair them. 
 
In response Mr. M. O’Donoghue advised that there are 12 single rural dwellings 
included in the current construction programme.  A number of single rural dwellings 
are vacant as there are particular problems with them including legal issues.  Any 
house that costs in excess of €30,000 to repair requires Departmental approval.  Mr. 
O’Donoghue undertook to revert to members with details of vacant single rural 
dwellings at the next meeting. 
 
34. Cost of all feasibility studies/consultant reports 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M Cahill PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council give a detailed breakdown on the cost of all feasibility 
studies/consultant reports carried out during the past 3 years. How much is being 
spent on feasibility studies/consultant reports to date this year and what will be the 
final cost of on-going feasibility studies/consultant reports that have not yet been 
finalised. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The attached schedule gives the details of the sums paid to Consultants 
engaged by Kerry County Council on County Council projects and the jobs 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
46 of 58 
 
between 2014 and 2016. The information for 2017 can be made available to 
Council early in 2018.  
  
The majority of the funding for consultants on roads schemes (approx. 95%) 
relates to the construction of major capital projects, funded entirely by T.I.I. 
and managed by a dedicated Road Design Office in Castleisland. The Council 
also has an extensive housing capital programme, managed by a dedicated 
design team. It is necessary to retain specialist consultants to ensure the 
delivery of these projects. The Capital Infrastructure Unit also manages major 
projects such as our greenways, the redevelopment of the Mall and the Denny 
site.  
  
The total cost of consultancy services for 2014 to 2016 is set out in the 
following table:  
 
2014
2015 
2016
Totals 
Consultancy    
€
2,086,965    
€                  
1,678,091    
€                  
1,951,564   
Recoupable
€                 
1,854,360    
 €                  
1,419,040    
€                  
1,511,788   
 
 
 Across the three-year period approx. 84% of the total payments to consultants 
was recoupable. Appendix One details this expenditure by division. 
 
APPENDIX ONE  
  
Revenue & Capital Expenditure     Consultants Expenditure   
Consultants Recoupable 
2016:  
A: Housing                                   
46,617                                
44,649  
B: Roads                              
        1,262,861                                    1,194,006                               
D: Development Mgmt.                          214,437                                         36,113   
                  
E: Environment                                        38,834                                     
  -  
 
                  
F: Recreation & Amenity                        189,933                                        187,190  
                  
G: Agri, Educ, Health & Welfare             195,559                                         49,831  
                  
H: Misc. Services                                        1,046                                          -  
                                
J: Central Management Charges                2,277                                          -  
 
2016 Total                              
          1,951,564                                   1,511,788  
 
Revenue & Capital Expenditure  
2015:    
A: Housing                                               13,388                                           6,487  
B: Roads                              
        1,219,145                                    1,201,862  
C: Water                                                     8,733                                           8,733  
D: Development Mgmt.                             93,456                                          1,600  
E: Environment                                         51,277                                          1,845  
F: Recreation & Amenity                         180,265                                      175,893  
G: Agri, Educ, Health & Welfare               93,984                                        20,357  
H: Misc. Services                                        5,830                                          2,263 
J: Central Management Charges              12,013                                                - 
 
2015 Total                              
         1,678,091                                   1,419,040  
 
Revenue & Capital Expenditure  

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
47 of 58 
 
2014:    
A: Housing                                               112,065                                        21,372  
B: Roads                                               1,680,161                                   1,668,544  
D: Development Mgmt.                              31,569                                        19,126  
E: Environment                                          11,094                                          3,075  
F: Recreation & Amenity                          131,894                                      128,480  
G: Agri, Educ, Health & Welfare                83,609                                          6,974  
H: Misc. Services                                         6,790                                          6,790  
J: Central Management Charges               29,784                                                -  
 
2014 Total                              
           2,086,965                                  1,854,360  
 
Cllr. M. Cahill welcomed the reply and noted that €5.7m has been spent on 
consulting services since 2014.  He also noted that a substantial portion of this was 
recoupable.  While he did not have an issue with any of the companies involved it 
would be preferable if there was an in-house consultancy unit.  He believed that 
savings could be achieved and he asked if the Council can select the consultants or 
does the Department select them. 
 
The Chief Executive advised that much of the expenditure is in the Capital Roads 
Programme that is driven by the NRDO which is an agent of TII.  Much of the work 
for housing is done in-house but with a substantial Housing Programme some of the 
design work must be done by consultants.   
 
17.11.20.20 Notices of Motion 1 – 18 
 
1. South Kerry Greenway 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M Cahill PROPOSED: 
I propose that all the Members of Kerry County Council fully support and endorse the 
South Kerry Greenway from Glenbeigh to Caherciveen which has the potential to be 
one of Ireland's biggest and best Tourism Projects and will play a massive 
contribution to the local economy here in Kerry and job creation in the South West, 
an area that has been ravaged by emigration and is subject to continuous population 
decline. It is imperative that this project is supported and progressed by all to fruition 
and that the Greenway receives the political leadership it deserves from within the 
County. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill highlighted that the South Kerry Greenway is the next major tourism 
project for the county and it is imperative that it is constructed as soon as possible.  
This will transform South Kerry and in particular the Caherciveen area needs this 
stimulus.  The onus is on all politicians to support this project. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson then moved Notice of Motion No. 8.  
 
 
 
 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
48 of 58 
 
8. Update on the progress in the development of the South Kerry 
Greenway 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M Gleeson PROPOSED: 
That the Council would give an update on the progress made thus far in the 
development of the former railway line from Glenbeigh to Reenard as a Walkway 
cum Cycleway and would further give a hoped for completion date for the overall 
project. This scheme has the potential to transform the economy of the Iveragh 
Peninsula and give vibrancy to communities that have endured much from 
unemployment and depopulation. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The final public consultation on the South Kerry greenway was held in the Ring 
of Kerry hotel on 30th and 31st August. The route which went on public 
consultation is available to view on the Council's website under the Project and 
Schemes section of Latest News.  
 
The preferred route selection process has now been completed and this route 
is being subjected to an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). Any 
recommendations arising from the EIA process will be incorporated into the 
final design.  
 
The EIA is a very complex and exacting assessment process, particularly given 
the scale of the project, and which ultimately will have to be considered by An 
Bord Pleanála, as well as the application for the Compulsory Purchase Order for 
the lands required to construct the scheme. At this stage it is envisaged that the 
EIA will take approximately 4 months for substantial completion. Following this 
process, the Council may engage in pre-planning consultation with the Board. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson stated he recently met a lady from Waterford who informed him that 
the development of the Greenway in Waterford has transformed the area.  If the South 
Kerry Greenway was developed it would be the greatest tourism attraction in Northern 
Europe.  Cllr. Gleeson called on all involved to put aside their previous entrenched 
positions and to work to get this project over the line.  
 
2. Request meeting with Minister Shane Ross regarding the Dale road 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. A Thornton PROPOSED: 
As the Rathscannell/Abbeydorney Road (also called the Dale Road) has been 
confirmed as the priority road in North Kerry, I am asking for the members support in 
requesting an expedited meeting with Minister Shane Ross to highlight the danger 
this road poses in our county to residents, commuters, businesses and tourists. We 
cannot tolerate this road trundling around in a system and being left in such a grave 
state for so many years. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton highlighted that a delegation from the Dale Road was received at a 
Listowel MD meeting and while deputations are not received at full Council she 
believed there are issues of such priority that they should be permitted to come 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
49 of 58 
 
before full Council.  Priority should be given to the Dale Road as it is the top priority 
for North Kerry.  Cllr. Thornton suggested that there should be four priority roads, 
one from each MD and these should be discussed with the Minister.  
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly SECONDED the motion. 
 
The Chief Executive confirmed that she and the Director of Operations met with 
Department officials to discuss the Dale Road in the past 12 months and the Minister 
can be requested to meet with a deputation from Kerry County Council to discuss it 
further. 
 
Cllr. Thornton stated that the members for the Listowel MD had requested a meeting 
with the Minister previously.  This is the most dangerous road in North Kerry and she 
asked why it has not been prioritised.  Funding has not been secured to-date and 
she again requested that four priority roads, one per MD, would be identified with a 
view to applying for funding for them. 
 
The Chief Executive informed members that both she and the Director of Operations 
met with Department officials on two priorities over the past 12 months.  The first 
was in relation to the Fenit road and €400,000 was allocated for this road.  The 
second was in relation to the Dale Road and she understood from the Department 
that roads of economic benefit are receiving priority.   
 
3. Set up a Rural Affairs Strategic Policy Committee 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. T McEllistrim PROPOSED: 
To call on Kerry County Council to set up a Rural Affairs Strategic Policy Committee 
for the enhancement of Agriculture and Rural Villages and Parishes throughout 
County Kerry. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The statutory basis for Strategic Policy Committees (SPCs) is set out in 
Section 48 of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended by Section 41 of the 
Local Government Reform Act 2014. The primary role of the Strategic Policy 
Committees is to assist Kerry County Council in the formulation, development 
and review of policy.  The experience and expertise of relevant external Bodies 
on our 4 existing SPCs help enhance the overall role of Councillors by 
providing a platform for an input into policy formulation at an early stage. As 
you are aware the existing Kerry County Council Strategic Policy Committee 
Scheme was adopted in July 2014 following the election of the existing 
Council and will be reviewed again following the 2019 local elections. Rural 
development is core to the functions, operations and delivery of all sections of 
Kerry County Council as outlined in a recent reply to a Notice of Motion. The 
existing sectorial representatives on the various SPCs bring the knowledge 
and expertise of people working with social, economic, cultural and 
environmental bodies throughout the county into the operation and strategy of 
Kerry County Council and transcend many aspects of rural affairs in the 
county. Therefore, it is considered that the existing SPC structure which was 
developed in accordance with this adopted scheme already facilitates a strong 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
50 of 58 
 
focus on the development of policy and assessing its impact on rural affairs in 
the county. 
 
Cllr. T. McEllistrim stated that a Rural Affairs SPC would promote and facilitate long 
term economic and social progress across rural Kerry.  A Rural Affairs SPC could 
co-ordinate an action plan for rural development and Jobs. 
 
A Rural Affair SPC could co-ordinate an Action Plan for Rural Development and 
Jobs.  A Rural Affairs SPC could aid the delivery of the Rural Regeneration Scheme, 
the Town and Village Enhancement Scheme, the Clár programme, the development 
of the Post Office Network, and the speed up and roll out of Broadband which are 
key priorities in Kerry.  Agricultural issues could also be brought forward in a Rural 
Affairs SPC including farmers concerns and BREXIT. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy SECONDED the motion. 
 
4. Total expenditure for the 2016 Count A Fresh/Re Count in Listowel 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M Kennelly PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council confirm what the total expenditure/cost and breakdown to 
the tax payer was as a result of the 2016 Count A Fresh/Re Count which took place 
in the Listowel Municipal Area. 
 
The following reply issued: 
While a significant portion of the costs related to this matter have been 
submitted and dealt with, there remains a number of outstanding costs claims 
which have not been submitted to date.  
 
When the matter has been finalised we will come back to the Council with a 
final position. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly stated it is 2 years since the Judgement on the Listowel Local 
Election Count and he wanted a breakdown of the costs involved in the County 
Afresh and what is the liability to Kerry County Council. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue advised that the Court Order was clear in that certain costs were 
payable by Kerry County Council.  An insurance policy was in place but some costs 
have not yet been submitted and he undertook to revert to Council when the matter 
is closed. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris moved Notice of Motion No. 5 in the absence of Cllr. Daly. 
 
5. Solution to sewage at The Big River 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P Daly PROPOSED: 
That this Council, in light of the recent announcement from Irish Water that the 
dumping of raw sewage into waterways will not be eliminated until 2020, will take 
steps to find an alternative solution to the sewage issue at The Big River. 
 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
51 of 58 
 
The following reply issued: 
Irish Water has made €500,000 available for the investigation of the Tralee 
Sewerage Scheme, including the Oakpark road sewer, having regard to its 
condition and capacity to deal with existing and future loading. Irish Water has 
recently tendered for this work and it is anticipated that consultants will 
commence work in early 2018. 
 
7. Call to address the unfairness in selling off our energy from the grid 
outside this country 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D Quigg PROPOSED: 
That this Council write to the Minister for Communications, Climate Action and 
Environment, Mr. Denis Naughten, asking him to address the unfairness in selling off 
our energy from the grid outside this country while electricity bills in Ireland are the 
second highest in the EU. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg advised that wind turbines are a blight on the landscape and to make 
matters worse the cost of energy has not reduced for the consumer.  Energy costs in 
Ireland are the second highest in Europe and he asked that a meeting would be 
sought with Minister Naughten to discuss this issue. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill SECONDED the motion. 
 
9. Lyme Disease 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J Sheahan PROPOSED: 
To ask the Irish Blood Transfusion Service are they testing donated blood for Lyme’s 
disease. Are they asking their clients if they are affected by the Lyme’s disease virus. 
A Campaign must be organised for T.V. to make people aware and what to do to 
keep the tick / unique flea at bay. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan stated he has been reliably informed that if someone infected with 
Lyme Disease donates blood then the recipient becomes infected.  The Blood 
Transfusion Service should be aware of this problem.   
 
Cllr. D. Quigg SECONDED the motion and added that this issue was raised at a 
recent HSE Regional Forum Meeting and a presentation will be made by a doctor on 
it at the next meeting. 
 
10. Implement a new system for the upcoming Local Electoral Area 
Boundary review 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B Cronin PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council call on Minister Eoghan Murphy to implement a new 
system for the upcoming Local Electoral Area Boundary review whereby the 
Boundary Review Committee show their proposed changes on a draft map which is 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
52 of 58 
 
then put out for public consultation for a six week period inviting the public and 
affected communities for their views, observations and submissions in advance of 
any final decision. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin highlighted that he had first-hand experience of how an independent 
boundary review changed DEDs from Killarney to Killorglin without consultation with 
those affected.  Some DEDs were in an electoral area that they had no connection 
with and they felt disenfranchised.  The general public should be given the 
opportunity to comment on the draft proposals.  Cllr. Cronin asked that the motion 
would be referred to all local authorities for their support. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg SECONDED the motion. 
 
11. Full banking licences for Post Office and suitable Credit Unions 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J Finucane PROPOSED: 
To ask the Minister for Finance to instruct the Central Bank to give full banking 
licences to the Post Office and it’s networks and also suitable Credit Unions. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane highlighted that there is no valid alternative to the banks and he 
suggested that either new banks from outside the country would be introduced or 
that licences would be granted to Credit Unions and Post Offices.  The level of 
suffering caused to people who have lost their homes is unacceptable and people 
have lost confidence in the banks.   
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson SECONDED the motion. 
 
14. The lining programme on national routes in the County 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M O’Shea PROPOSED: 
To ask the Director of Operations to make immediate contact with the TII to 
readdress the current lining programme that is currently taking place on the national 
routes in the County of Kerry as this is causing mass confusion for all road users and 
will result in fatal accidents in the County of Kerry. 
 
The following reply issued: 
This issue was raised with Transport Infrastructure Ireland recently and they 
have advised as follows:- 
 
Transport Infrastructure Ireland commissioned surveys and designs for the 
lining of all National Routes in the Country. These have been rolled out since 
2010 with works being implemented on the ground since 2011. The 
outstanding routes are now being finalised this year which include the N69, 
N70 and N72.  
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
53 of 58 
 
All delineation markings are designed in accordance with the Department of 
Transports Traffic Signs Manual 2010, which are the current design standards. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea highlighted that in Tinnahalla prior to 2010 there were 7 accidents 
but from 2010 to 2014 there were 4 accidents.  TII had no information on these but 
he contacted the local Garda who confirmed these stats.  Cllr. O’Shea asked that TII 
would be requested to replace the broken line with a continuous white line at (a) 
Kennedy’s Cross and (b) the Golf Course entrance junction. 
 
15. Overhanging trees on roads 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D McCarthy PROPOSED: 
In light of Storm Ophelia, Kerry County Council should insist that all trees 
overhanging onto roads, should be cut back. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Following the recent storms, the Council advised all landowners, on local radio 
and other media platforms, of their obligation to inspect any roadside trees on 
their lands and to take reasonable steps to ensure that they are not a hazard to 
road users. The Council also wrote to Coillte, NPWS and known owners of other 
large land holdings with extensive sections of roadside trees, in relation to this 
matter. 
  
The Council are also carrying out a preliminary visual inspection of the national 
routes and regional routes where there are extensive sections of roadside trees 
and will take any necessary measures as prescribed under current legislation.  
 
The Council also inspects specific roadside locations, where it has received 
complaints or concerns from elected members or the general public. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy called on management to ensure that overhanging trees are cut back 
in the interest of public safety. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson SECONDED the motion. 
 
16. Call to connect College Road, Tullig, the Black Road and the Brosna 
Road to the public sewer in Castleisland 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M Healy Rae PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council and Irish Water to connect residents from College 
Road, Tullig and the Brosna Road to the public sewer. Many people are suffering as 
a result of this. 
 
The following reply issued: 
This matter has been referred to the Irish Water for a response. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae highlighted that this issue has been ongoing for in excess of 40 
years.  Residents were promised they would be connected to the public sewer but it 
has not happened and they must empty their septic tanks a number times a year.  

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
54 of 58 
 
There is a shortage of 4 and 5B houses in Castleisland and unless the land can be 
connected to the sewer further development cannot take place. 
 
Mr. J. Breen undertook to pursue this matter with Irish Water. 
 
17. "Pay Per View" exemptions to nursing homes, day care centres and 
hospitals 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
To ask the Minister for Communications and the GAA to direct SKY to grant "Pay Per 
View" exemptions to nursing homes, day care centres and hospitals, as people who 
have watched GAA matches all their lives, cannot watch some of them now. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae advised he was contacted by a number of people in a nursing 
home and in a hospital who expressed their disappointment at the Pay per View.  
With Pay per View the elderly miss one or two of the televised matches but if they 
were at home they could pay to view them.  Cllr. Healy-Rae called for an exemption 
from this charge for nursing homes and hospitals as it is exorbitant.  This would be a 
very minor thing to do to respect the elderly who supported the GAA all their lives. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson SECONDED the motion and read the following statement into the 
record of the meeting. 
 
“Tradition is its foundation, continuity its essence and community its ongoing 
objective. The Gaelic Athletic Association, since it foundation in Hayes Hotel, Thurles 
in 1884 has to a very considerable extent formed and defined Ireland and in a 
special way rural Ireland.  The GAA has its roots deeply set in every parish in the 
country and is the ongoing epi-centre of social and sporting interaction. 
 
Each time that I visit Dublin, most recently 3 weeks ago, I make a fraternal visit to 
Fingal Cemetery.  When my private visit and clean-up is concluded I always call to 
the grave of Míchael O’Hehir and his wife Molly. 
 
Through the medium of the then very scarce radio his voice brought the story of 
distant games into young lives.  He inspired thousands to see vision and to dream 
dreams.  He was to many of us an idol and inspiration.  I’m proud to have known 
him, I am glad that I was in Croke Park on the day that the GAA saluted the great 
man in his wheelchair.  A cruel Stroke stopped him one short of broadcasting his 
100th All Ireland Final.  Míchael O’Hehir, through radio and latterly through television 
was for 40 years (1938-1985) or more the inspirational voice of the GAA for people 
at home and abroad. 
 
If radios were scarce then, SKY Sport is now not to be found in every home.  Maybe 
not in up to 40% of homes – for many and varied reasons.  But calling into a home 
down the road is not as much an option now as it once was. 
 
As a result, some people are un-willingly forced to go the Pub, where children are 
not always welcome, not should they be. 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
55 of 58 
 
The truth is that many people are deprived of the opportunity to see their favourite 
county and for children, of their chance to watch their local heroes on the Big Day. 
 
Local clubs and indeed counties need to maximise the glamour of their local Star 
players if the next generation is to be inspired. 
 
Many who are now aged, infirm and unable to travel to games have given many 
years of loyal and devoted service to the GAA games and cultural pursuits.  It seems 
very harsh to deprive them of the joy of seeing their county teams on the big day. 
 
I ask that the GAA would re-examine this entire matter and in consultation with the 
Clubs seek to maximise the viewing potential of the games free of charge.  
Guaranteeing the future right to see the inter-county games and taking cognisance of 
the social needs of community are deserving of priority over the generation of 
immediate profit. 
 
For 132 years the people of Ireland and the GAA have been almost synonymous.  It 
would indeed be sad if the generation of finance is to alienate and deprive people 
who have served and those who will or may serve in the years ahead” 
 
In conclusion Cllr. Gleeson highlighted that he was calling for an end to the Pay per 
View for GAA matches. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae asked that a letter would issue to Uachtarán CLG and that the 
resolution would be circulated to all local authorities. 
 
17.11.20.21 Correspondence – Conferences and Seminars 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.F. Flynn, SECONDED by Cllr. J.J. Culloty it was 
agreed to approve the attendance of Cllrs. B. O’Connell and N. Kelleher at the 
Conference on the theme “What does a Hard BREXIT mean for Ireland” held 
in Clonakilty, Co. Cork from 20th to 22nd October 2017. 
 
 
Cllr. Kelleher was nominated to report back to Council on this event. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Quigg, SECONDED by Cllr. D. McCarthy it was 
agreed to approve the attendance of Cllrs. Beasley, Lucid and Moloney at the 
Conference on the theme “Housing in Crisis – Defining the Role of the 
Councillor” held in Wexford from 10th to 12th November 2017. 
 
 
 
Cllr. Beasley was nominated to report back to Council on this event. 
 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.F. Flynn, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Moloney it was 
agreed to approve the attendance of Cllrs. Foley and Lucid at the Bank of 
Ireland National Enterprising Town Awards Dinner held in Tullamore, Co. 
Offaly on the 15th November 2017. 
 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
56 of 58 
 
(d) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. McCarthy, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Moloney it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. P. McCarthy at the Purple Flag 
Awards Ceremony held in Norwich, England on the 16th November 2017. 
 
(e) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. McCarthy, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Moloney it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. Connor-Scarteen at the 
Housing Conference 2017 to be held in Dublin on the 22nd November 2017. 
 
 
Cllr. Connor-Scarteen was nominated to report back to Council on this event. 
 
(f) 
This event is the same as (e) above. 
 
(g) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Gleeson, SECONDED by Cllr. J.F. Flynn it was 
agreed to authorize the attendance of Cllr. J. Healy-Rae at the Conference on 
the theme “Invasive Exotic Species of Wildlife in Irish Rivers, Canals and 
Lakes” to be held in Clonakilty from the 24th to 26th November 2017. 
 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae was nominated to report back to Council on this event. 
 
(h)  
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Moriarty, SECONDED by Cllr. D. McCarthy it 
was agreed to authorize the attendance of Cllrs. O’Connell, Kelleher and 
O’Shea at the Conference on the theme “Audit Committees in the Irish LG 
System” to be held in Carlingford, Co. Louth from 1st to 3rd December 2017. 
 
 
Cllr. O’Connell was nominated to report back to Council on this event. 
 
(i)  
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Moloney, SECONDED by Cllr. J.J. Culloty it 
was agreed to authorize the attendance of Cllrs. Kennelly, J. Healy-Rae, M. 
Healy-Rae and Moriarty at the Conference on the theme “A Practical Guide to 
Budget 2018” to be held in Clonakilty, Co. Cork from 8th to 10th December 
2017. 
 
(j) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Healy-Rae, SECONDED by Cllr. J.J. Culloty it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. O’Connell at the Conference on 
the theme “A Practical Guide to Budget 2018” held in Carlingford, Co. Louth 
from 13th to 15th October 2017. 
 
(k)  
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.F. Flynn, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Healy-Rae it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of the Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Sheahan 
at the Kerry London Association Annual Dinner held on Friday 20th October 
2017. 
 
(l) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. McCarthy, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Gleeson it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllrs. Sheahan, Finucane, Kennelly, 
Kelleher and Moriarty on a delegation to Berlin from 2nd to 5th November 2017. 
 
(m)  
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.J. Culloty, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Healy-Rae it 
was agreed to authorise the attendance of the Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Sheahan 
at the Excellence in Local Government Awards 2017 to be held in Dublin on 
the 23rd November 2017. 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
57 of 58 
 
 
17.11.20.21 Correspondence General 
 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were circulated. 
 
1.  
Letter dated 6th September 2017 from the RSA in response to a resolution from Kerry 
County Council in relation to the process for renewing driving licenses. 
2.  
Letter dated 11th September 2017 from the Car Rental Council of Ireland in response 
to a resolution from Kerry County Council that all rented cars would have a spare 
wheel. 
3.  
Email dated 11th September 2017 from Irish Water in response to a resolution from 
Kerry County Council in relation to the taking over of group water supply schemes. 
4.  
Letter dated 12th September 2017 from Irish Rail in response to a resolution from 
Kerry County Council calling for a pedestrian bridge linking the bus and train stations 
in Killarney. 
5.  
Letter dated 13th September 2017 from the Department of Housing, Planning and 
Local Government in response to a resolution from Kerry County Council calling for 
an increase in the income threshold for social housing. 
6.  
Email dated 13th September 2017 from the Department of Housing, Planning and 
Local Government in response to a resolution from Kerry County Council calling for 
the enacting of legislation to abolish water charges. 
7.  
Letter dated 19th September 2017 from the Department for the Economy, Northern 
Ireland in response to a resolution from Kerry County Council calling for a reduction 
in the commission charged by Booking.com. 
8.  
Letter dated 19th September 2017 from the Fáilte Ireland in response to a resolution 
from Kerry County Council calling for a reduction in the commission charged by 
Booking.com. 
9.  
Letter dated 19th September 2017 from the Department of Rural and Community 
Development in response to a resolution from Kerry County Council regarding the use 
of the Pobal Deprivation Index for the next iteration of SICAP. 
10.  
Letter dated 19th Septembers 2017 from the Department of Health in response to a 
resolution from Kerry County Council regarding the trafficking of human organs. 
11.  
Letter dated 21st September 2017 from Irish Water in response to a resolution from 
Kerry County Council calling for the opening of an office by Irish Water in Kerry. 
12.  
E-mail dated 22nd September 2017 from the Department of Education in response to 
a resolution from Kerry County Council regarding training for the Hospitality sector. 
13.  
Email dated 4th October 2017 from Irish Water in response to a resolution from Kerry 
County Council calling on them to discontinue their policy of billing farmers for non-
domestic water that has not been utilised. 
14.  
Letter dated 20th October 2017 from the Minister of State for Tourism and Sport in 
response to a resolution from Kerry County Council regarding Booking.com 
commission charges. 
15.  
Letter dated 20th October 2017 from Coillte in response to a resolution from Kerry 
County Council regarding information for the public on Lyme Disease. 
16.  
Letter dated 20th October 2017 from Tourism Northern Ireland in response to a 
resolution from Kerry County Council regarding the Booking.com commission charge.
17.  
Letter dated 23rd October 2017 from the Secretary to the Firearms Consultative Panel 
in response to resolutions from Kerry County Council regarding a proposed ban on 
night time shooting. 

November Ordinary Meeting 
 
20th November 2017 
58 of 58 
 
18.  
Letter dated 27th October 2017 from KETB in response to a resolution from Kerry 
County Council regarding Culinary/ Hospitality/Tourism Programme and Training in 
County Kerry. 
19.  
Email from Deputy Danny Healy-Rae in response to a resolution from Kerry County 
Council asking Oireachtas members not to support the proposed Fixed Penalty Drink 
Driving Bill 2017. 
20.  
Email from Senator Ned O’Sullivan in response to a resolution from Kerry County 
Council asking Oireachtas members not to support the proposed Fixed Penalty Drink 
Driving Bill 2017. 
21.  
Letter dated 15th September 2017 from Monaghan County Council in relation to a 
resolution adopted by that authority calling for a review of legislation regarding school 
transport. 
22.  
Letter dated 19th September 2017 from Offaly County Council in relation to a 
resolution adopted by that authority calling for an overhaul of how the Social Housing 
Programme is administered by the Department. 
23.  
Email dated 4th October 2017 from Ballina MD regarding a resolution adopted by that 
authority calling on the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine to address the 
problem of ragworth. 
24.  
Letter dated 18th October 2017 from Monaghan County Council regarding a resolution 
adopted by that authority supporting the SIPTU Big Start/Early Years Campaign 
objectives. 
25.  
Email dated 10th November 2017 from Kilkenny County Council regarding a resolution 
adopted by that authority calling for the introduction of a compulsory training program 
of occupational first aid training for all teachers and SNAs. 
 
 
17.11.20.23 Any Other Business 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn PROPOSED that Kerry County Council would take a table at the 
Kerry London Association Annual Dinner in future. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan advised that this proposal would be referred to the CPG for 
consideration. 
 
The meeting concluded at 4.55pm. 
 
 
Liam Quinlan                                       _________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator                      Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
