 
1 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
 
 
 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect putting 
them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is available on 
request. 
 
 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ AN CRUINNIÚ DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH 
I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRÁ LÍ, AGUS AR-LÍNE/FÍORÚIL 
AR AN LUAN, 17 SAMHAIN, 2025 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN THE 
COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE AND ONLINE ON MONDAY, 17 
November 2025 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
Angie Baily                            Tom Barry  
Robert Brosnan 
      
Tommy Cahill                        Brendan Cronin 
Paul Daly                            
Charlie Farrelly                      Deirdre Ferris 
Breandán Fitzgerald  
Fionnán Fitzgerald                 Michael Foley (Cathaoirleach) Podge Foley       
       Martin Grady 
       
   Tommy Griffin                     Jackie Healy-Rae  
      Johnny Healy-Rae                  Maura Healy-Rae               Niall Kelleher                                          
Aoife Kennelly                       Michael Leane                     Sam Locke 
Dan McCarthy                       Jimmy Moloney 
 
     Marie Moloney                      
Norma Moriarty                     Liam Speedy Nolan               Terry O’Brien                       
Niall O’Callaghan                  Bobby O’Connell                   John O’Donoghue                
Anne O’ Sullivan                   Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey       Mikey Sheehy 
 
ABSENT/ AS LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Mr.  F. Reidy Chief Executive              Mr. M. O’ Donoghue, Dir H.R. & Corporate Affairs                  
Ms. N. O’ Sullivan Dir Housing            Mr. P. Neary Dir Com, Climate Act& Oper Serv     
Ms. A. McAllen Dir Finance                 Mr. F. Hartnett Dir. Cap Deliver, Climate Resil & Culture        
Ms. S. Scally Meetings Admin             Mr. J. Nolan Dir Act Land Mgt & Econ Dev                              
Mr. B. Looney Head of Dig, Smart Prog & BB   Ms. C. Fitzgerald S.S.O. Corporate    
Ms. O. O’Shea, C.O Corporate           Ms. N. Curran S.O. Corporate                                  
 
 
 
The meeting commenced at 13.00 p.m.   
 
Cllr. Michael Foley took the Chair and welcomed everyone.  
 
Cllr. Michael Foley welcomed Mr. P. Neary and Mr. O. O’Shea back to Kerry County 
Council. 
 
Vote of Sympathy 

 
2 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
Cathaoirleach expressed a vote of sympathy on the passing of a friend and colleague, 
Jim Finucane.  Cllr. Foley described Mr. Finucane as a gentleman, who transcended 
all parties, a man who was thought highly of inside and outside the County, a man who 
will always be remembered for his work in local politics. 
Cllr. Foley extended his sympathies to his wife Sheila, son James, daughters Jill and 
Orla, sister Caroline and brother Danny. 
Cllr. M. Foley finished with a quote from Mr. Finucane which summed him up as a 
great friend who will be missed. 
“Politics is a personal journey, you either believe in something or you don’t. 
You’re in a party but you make certain personal decisions.  If I lost that approach 
I would leave politics without hesitation.” 
 
All Elected Members wished to be associated with this vote of sympathy.  He was 
described as a man who was passionate about Kerry, a man with a huge capacity to 
bring people together and a fantastic ambassador for Kerry in his term as mayor.  He 
was a man who was always looking to the horizon to see where the communities could 
be best served.  He always had Kerry at heart, cared for his community and left a 
proud legacy. 
 
Cllr. M. Sheehy thanked the Councillors for all their sentiments.  Cllr. Sheehy described 
Mr. Finucane as an incredible public representative, and it didn’t matter what one’s 
background was.  He acknowledged his number one passion was education and was 
on the ETB board for many years.  He will be remembered for his work with Tralee 
Boxing Club and recently being named the Honorary Consul of Ukraine for the South-
West of Ireland. 
Cllr. Sheehy finished with a quote from Mr. Finucane, “Be yourself, show resolve, 
there are people who depend on you”. 
 
Mr. F. Reidy, Chief Executive expressed his sympathies to the family of Mr. J. 
Finucane.  He expressed the sorrow felt in Kerry County Council on Jim’s passing.  
The Chief Executive said he met Jim in his first week in Kerry County Council when 
the Sports Complex roof collapsed in, and he was in constant contact with him and the 
Executive from thereon.  The Chief Executive described Mr. Finucane as a gentleman 
 
Cllr. R. Brosnan asked that his last motion be suspended – “That Kerry County 
Council Commission and erect a statue of Sr. Stanislaus Kennedy in Lios Póil 
village”.  
Cllr. R. Brosnan expressed a vote of sympathy on the passing of Sr. Stanislaus 
Kennedy, founder of the homelessness charity Focus Ireland, who dedicated her life 
to helping the poor and downtrodden.   She will be remembered not only in Lispole but 
in Dublin as a person who saved lives. 
 
Cllr. B. Fitzgerald stated Sr. Stan gave assistance to people less well off.  She had a 
huge impact on people’s lives, a shining example of what we can do to help people. 
 
All Elected Members wished to be associated with the sympathies expressed. 
 
17.11.2025.01 
Protocols/Induction 
Mr. S. Scally, Meeting Administrator, referred Elected Members to the Protocols for 
Meetings of Kerry County Council and took a roll call.  

 
3 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
 
17.11.2025.02 
Cathaoirleach’s Report on CPG Meeting 
The Cathaoirleach’s report on the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 11 
November 2025, was noted by the Members. 
 
17.11.2025.03 
Confirmation of Minutes 
(a)  Minutes of the Special Meeting of Kerry County Council for the Presidential 
Election Nomination held on 8th September 2025. 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. A. Baily, SECONDED by Cllr. C. Farrelly, it was resolved 
that the minutes of the Special Meeting of Kerry County Council for the Presidential 
Election Nomination held on 8 September 2025 be confirmed. 
 
(b)  Minutes of Special Planning Meeting of Kerry County Council held on 15th 
September 2025. 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. S. Locke, SECONDED by Cllr. A. Baily it was resolved that 
the minutes of the Special Planning Meeting of Kerry County Council held on 15th 
September be confirmed. 
 
(c) Minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Kerry County Council held on 20th 
October 2025. 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. C. Farrelly, SECONDED by Cllr. F. Fitzgerald, it was 
resolved that the minutes of the Ordinary Meeting of Kerry County Council held on 20th 
October be confirmed. 
 
17.11.2025.04 
Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
The Chief Executive’s Report to Council for the month of November 2025 which had 
been circulated was noted by the Members.  
 
All members congratulated the Tidy Towns on their recent awards and recognised the 
contribution of the work done by volunteers in the various Tidy Towns groups 
throughout the county. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin welcomed the Affordable Housing Scheme.  He expressed the 
need for the scheme to be extended to smaller towns and villages.  He asked to clarify 
how many units would be built for both towns? 
Cllr. Griffin asked if the Christmas tree disposal will be available this year? 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald echoed the sentiments of Cllr. Griffin regarding Affordable 
Housing Scheme, saying it is very welcome in Tralee and Killarney but needs to be 
rolled out to the rest of the county.   
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald welcomed the Fisheries Local Area Group Briefings 
scheduled for 27th November. Cllr. Fitzgerald welcomed the announcement of the 
Historic Structures Fund (HSF)and asked Kerry County Council to promote the 
scheme.  Under the scheme, eligible projects can receive between €50,000 to 
€200,000. 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly encouraged everyone to attend the workshops regarding the 
variation to the County Development Plan. 

 
4 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
Cllr. Farrelly expressed his hope that Councillors have an input regarding the speed 
limit review. 
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae welcomed the movement on Affordable Housing in Tralee and 
Killarney.  Cllr. Healy-Rae questioned why it was Tralee and Killarney, and asked if 
other towns do not meet the requirements?  He noted that Castleisand Corca 
Dhuibhne have suitable land available for Affordable Housing and asked why this land 
doesn’t meet the requirements?  He asked is it the Local Authority who makes the 
decision or is there a reason the land doesn’t qualify for Affordable Housing? 
Cllr. Healy-Rae questioned if a speed limit review will be carried out by Kerry County 
Council, saying there hasn’t been a review done since 2018 and the zones need to be 
recommended. 
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald called on Kerry County Council to initiate a social media 
campaign to highlight safety around fires and the danger of chimney fires, coming into 
the winter months. 
 
Cllr. Angie Baily wished to applaud everyone involved on grants getting into the 
county. 
Cllr. Angie Baily called on Kerry County Council to introduce free parking again this 
year in Tralee for Christmas, and to promote shopping local. 
 
Cllr. Mikey Sheehy welcomed the construction work beginning on Tralee Boxing Club 
and the funding received for the Ballyseedy Amenity Walk.   
Cllr. Mikey Sheehy also welcomed the Affordable Housing Scheme and the 
Government’s renewed focus on housing, but stated there is still a cohort of people 
left behind who can’t get on the housing ladder.  Cllr. Sheehy said that Local 
Authorities need to be given the means and flexibility to deliver houses. 
Cllr. Mikey Sheehy stated he is not averse to penalty charges being imposed on Local 
Authorities if not meeting targets and he queried how many units will 20million Euros 
give around the county? 
 
Cllr. Terry O’Brien welcomed the Affordable Housing Scheme, saying some people 
are just below the required threshold.   
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan stated that an increase in the threshold for Affordable Housing 
should be asked for those who can’t get on the property ladder. 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan welcomed the construction works commencing on the Boxing 
Club and welcomed the newly formed West Kerry Boxing Club. 
He stated that more engagement is needed with BIM to get more grants for fisheries.   
Cllr. Robert Brosnan asked that Kerry County Council lobby for a direct flight from 
Farranfore to Belfast as it would be a huge opportunity for the county. 
 
Cllr. Anne O’Sullivan stated that the Affordable Housing Scheme is important to deliver 
to the part of the population who are out of the market. 
Cllr. Anne O’Sullivan welcomed the Community building in Castleisland as a focal hub 
for the community. She also welcomed the arts grants saying the arts is important to 
everyone. 
Cllr. Anne O’Sullivan welcomed the recent ORIS announcement saying that anything 
that enhances the outdoors should be welcomed. 

 
5 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
Cllr. Anne O’Sullivan congratulated the Tralee Town Park and Wetlands on their 
achievement of the Green Flag awards. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris echoed the request for the speed limit change.  The change has 
caused difficulties in some areas in Ardfert. 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris stated that adults with disabilities find it difficult to find recreational 
activities to engage with in the county, she asked that Kerry County Council examine 
the possibility of setting up a perpetual sporting centre in the county. 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris stated that huge work is being done by the local authority and the 
Tralee Boxing Club who have created an inclusive organisation. 
 
Cllr. Sam Locke stated the executive report contained a lot of positives. 
Cllr. Sam Locke argued that there should be a fixed fee for objections and suggested 
a fee of €1,000.   
Cllr. Sam Locke suggested the Income threshold be increased to €5,000 as some 
people will never make the list as they are just above the threshold and are on the list 
nearly 15 years.  People are paying rent of €1,500 monthly so can’t save and won’t 
get a mortgage, adding that these people need to be supported. 
 
Cllr. Podge Foley stated the Fire Brigade in Killorglin needs an upgrade as no upgrade 
done since the eighties. 
 
Cllr. Michael Foley welcomed the ORIS funding, in particular the funding for the 
Shannon Way, phase 2, which will be a huge amenity when complete, and a huge 
asset to the area. 
 
The Chief Executive stated that housing will be the absolute priority for Kerry County 
Council. He stated Kerry County Council is well ahead on the variations. 
This reflects our mission to acquire land, and Kerry County Council are actively 
working on all the sites.  He said it takes times to acquire land and also need to look 
at the submissions.   
Mr. Fearghal Reidy stated that the new Housing Plan is very ambitious and proposed 
to meet with the members to discuss it.  He added that he is proposing a considerable 
increase in housing in the budget for 2026. 
 
Ms. Niamh O’Sullivan stated there have been a number of engagements of the roll out 
of Affordable Housing.  She stated there have been a lot of background consultations 
which are very positive. 
Ms. O’Sullivan stated that it is hard to say at this stage how many units as it will be 
subject to funding.  It is hoped to get out to the public in March 2026, there is very 
good engagement with the Department. 
 
Mr. Paul Neary replied to questions raised: 
 Christmas trees will be accepted by the Council in January 
 Fire safety message will be put out on social media warning people of fire 
hazards. 
 Phase 2 of the Speed limit will look at built up areas and urban areas and see 
how they compare. Members will be advised when the guidelines are received. 
 

 
6 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
Mr. James Nolan reported that with regard to public engagement and consultation on 
Variation 3 of the County Development Plan, the Council is and will be very proactive 
in promoting the consultation events via print and social media.  He added that the 
Council is promoting ‘shop local’ via our Discover Kerry platform, and there is a 
dedicated section which highlights the opportunities to purchase locally produced gifts 
and crafts. 
 
A discussion took place on the Speed limit review.  Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae noted that 
the last speed limit adopted by this Council was 2018.  Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae stated 
that during a normal review, zones would be looked at, but this was not examined at 
national level.  Mr. Paul Neary replied that the built-up areas and urban areas would 
be looked at and compared. 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan asked if the SPC could write to the relevant authority regarding 
the speed limits at upper and lower Camp. 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly stated that 200 signatories were received regarding the speed 
limit in Cordal, but it was never examined by Kerry County Council. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin asked if it could be clarified if there are restrictions on providing 
Affordable Housing outside Tralee and Killarney. 
 
Ms. Niamh O’Sullivan replied that the initial phase for Affordable Housing is Tralee 
and Killarney, but that it is hoped to roll it out and Kerry County Council are in 
discussions with the Department. 
She added that the number of units can vary on the developer and the scale of the 
development. 
 
17.11.2025.05 
To consider the disposal of the following: 
 
(a) On the proposal of Cllr. Norma Moriarty and seconded by Cllr. Dan McCarthy it 
was agreed to approve the disposal of land measuring 0.096 Acres (0.039 Hectares) 
in is part of Folio KY2978F, at Inchinaleega West, Sneem situated in the townland of 
Inchinaleega West, District Electoral Division of Sneem to Uisce Éireann, Colvill 
House, 24-26 Talbot Street, Dublin 1 in accordance with the term of the notice issued 
on  06 November 2025, pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 
and Section 211 of the Planning and Development Act 2000, and Article 206 of the 
Planning and Development Regulations 2001. 
 
(b) On the proposal of Cllr. Norma Moriarty and seconded by Cllr. Dan McCarthy to 
consider the disposal of land measuring 0.656 acres (0.267 hectares) and is part of 
Folio KY35447 , at Ballinskelligs,situated in the townland of Ballinskelligs, District 
Electoral Division of Ballinskelligs, to Uisce Éireann, Colvill House, 24-26 Talbot 
Street, Dublin 1 in accordance with the term of the notice issued on 06 November 
2025, pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 and Section 211 of 
the Planning and Development Act 2000, and Article 206 of the Planning and 
Development Regulations 2001. 
 
 

 
7 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
17.11.2025.06 To establish a Committee under Section 51(1)(a) of the Local 
Government Act 2001 to assist and advise the Authority in respect of proposed 
Variation No. 3 (Castleisland - Corca Dhuibhne Municipal District Settlements’ 
Plan) of the Kerry County Development Plan 2022-2028.    
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service referred to the report recently circulated to the 
Members. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly and Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald that it hereby 
resolved in accordance with Section 51a of the Local Government Act 2001 and 
standing orders Q62-68 to appoint a special committee for the following special 
purpose: To consider matters connected with Variation No. 3 of the Kerry County 
Development Plan 2022 – 2028 and to assist and advise the Authority on this matter. 
The members of the special Committee shall be all the elected members of the 
Castleisland - Corca Dhuibhne Municipal District MunicipalDistrict and the 
Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council as an official member (as per standing 
orders).  
The result of the vote was as follows: 
For: Cllrs: Angie Baily, Tom Barry, Robert Brosnan, Tommy Cahill, Brendan Cronin, 
Paul Daly, Charlie Farrelly, Deirdre Ferris, Michael Foley, Podge Foley, Martin Grady, 
Tommy Griffin ,Jackie Healy-Rae, Johnny Healy-Rae, Maura Healy-Rae, Niall 
Kelleher, Aoife Kennelly, Michael Leane, Dan McCarthy, Jimmy Moloney, Marie 
Moloney, Norma Moriarty, Liam Nolan, Terry O’Brien, Bobby O’Connell ,John 
O’Donoghue, Anne O’ Sullivan, Teddy O’Sullivan-Casey, Mikey Sheehy, Breandán 
Fitzgerald (Cathaoirleach) (30) 
  
Absent: Cllrs: Fionnán Fitzgerald, Sam Locke, Niall O’ Callaghan. (3) 
 
Against: Cllrs: (0) 
 
The vote was carried. 
 
17.11.2025.07 To dissolve a Committee under Section 51(3) of the Local 
Government Act 2001 that was established to assist and advise the Authority in 
respect of proposed Variation No. 1 (Tralee Municipal District Settlements’ Plan) of 
the Kerry County Development Plan 2022-2028. 
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Services referred to documentation circulated to the Elected 
Members. He stated as was advised when the Section 51 Committee for Variation 
No. 1 was established, it was envisaged that on completion of the process of making 
the variation the committee would be dissolved by a further resolution of the elected 
members. Variation No. 1 was adopted on July 21st, 2025, the committee can 
therefore now be dissolved. 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Bobby O Connell  and seconded by Cllr Jimmy Moloney.  it 
was agreed to dissolve a Committee under Section 51(3) of the Local Government 
Act 2001 that was established to assist and advise the Authority in respect of 

 
8 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
proposed Variation No. 1 (Tralee Municipal District Settlements’ Plan) of the Kerry 
County Development Plan 2022-2028. 
 
 
17.11.2025.08 To approve the change in representation of the Business/ 
Commercial Sectoral Representative on the Environment, Climate Action, 
Marine and Emergency Planning Strategic Policy Committee.  
 
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue Director of Service referred to the report circulated. He advised 
that a vacancy has arisen on the Environment, Climate Action and Emergency 
Planning SPC. Chambers Ireland have agreed that Ms. Colette O’ Connor will replace 
Ms. Stacey McSwiney on the Business / Commercial Sectoral.  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney and seconded by Cllr.  Mikey Sheehy   it was 
agreed to approve the appointment of Ms. Colette O’ Connor Tralee Chamber Alliance 
to the Environment, Climate Action, Marine and Emergency Planning Strategic Policy 
Committee.  
 
17.11.2025.09 To note the date and venue of the December Ordinary Council 
Meeting Date: Friday, 12 December 2025 @ 11.00a.m. in the Parish Hall, 
Ballylongford.  
 
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue stated as previously agreed, the December Council meeting 
will be held on Friday 12th December in the Parish Hall, Ballylongford to coincide with 
the tradition of holding the December meeting in the Cathaoirleach’s venue of 
choice.  
 
17.11.2025.10 To note the opening of tenders for: 
 
(a) On the proposal of Cllr Norma Moriarty and seconded by   Cllr. Dan McCarthy it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tender for Cahersiveen Playground, Co. 
Kerry – Swings (CFT 6883205) – closing date Wednesday 19 November 2025. 
 
(b) On the proposal of Cllr Dan McCarthy and seconded by Cllr. Charlie Farrelly it was 
agreed to approve the opening of tender CFT 7005661 Design, Supply and install 
of 2 No. Lightweight Prefabricated Units for purchase including all ancillary works 
to Kerry Fire Services Department. - Closing date:  Wednesday 03 December 
2025. 
 
17.11.2025.11  Notices of Motion 
 
Emergency Notice of Motion  
Cllr. Liam Speedy Nolan submitted the following Emergency Notice of Motion. 
 
That this Council address the urgent issue of sourcing funding required for Foildarrig 
Bridge, Duagh. I understand that there is a monitoring process currently taking place 
in relation to Foildarrig Bridge. However, given the concern that the bridge may not re-
open in December 2025, can this Council write to the Minister of Transport and to all 

 
9 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
relevant government bodies as a matter of urgency for future funding to secure the 
project.  
 
Cllr. Liam Nolan said that a monitoring process was due to take place but has been 
delayed following adverse weather. Currently the bridge is closed affecting 
businesses and children travelling to school. 
 
Cllr. Jimmy Moloney seconded this motion.  
 
Cathaoirleach Cllr. Michael Foley said the problem at the bridge has previously been 
outlined and said he can’t understand why it hasn’t been rectified.  
 
Cllr. P. Neary Director of Service said the bridge has been closed on the advice of 
construction engineers. Once the water levels drop in the coming days the bridge 
will be further examined.  
 
 
1. Extend the timeframe for the spreading of Slurry  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Sam Locke proposed. 
That this Council write to the Minister for Agriculture with a view to extend the 
timeframe for our farmers to enable them to spread slurry into the month of October, 
weather permitting. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
 
Cllr. Sam Locke said that given the inclement weather in August and September, 
farmers were prohibited from spreading slurry causing problems. If the timeframe was 
extended to October, it would a significant help to them. 
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae seconded this motion.    
 
2. Number of applicants received Vacant Property Grant Scheme 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae proposed.  
Since the opening of the Vacant Property Grant, how many applications have been 
received, approved, rejected, the number of grants issued on completion of works and 
the total value of grants issued since the grant scheme opened. Can a brief summary 
be given regarding reasons for refusal. 
 
The following reply issued:  
As at 04/11/2025 108 Grants have been paid with a Value of €5,862,250. Since the 
opening of the Vacant Property Grant scheme, 726 Vacant Property Refurbishment 
Grant Applications have been received in Kerry County Council as at 04/11/2025. 
• 58% of applications received, 423 applications, have been approved. 
• 7% of applications received, 54 applications, were refused on the basis that the 
application did not meet the requirements of the grant. 
• 18% of applications received, 134 applications, have been closed where the 
applicant(s) did not submit further information required. 
• 9% of applications received, 64 applications, were withdrawn by the applicant(s). 
• 7% of applications received, 51 applications, are currently being processed and are 
at validation stage, awaiting further information or pending inspection. 

 
10 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
 
Applicants who have been approved for the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant 
have 13 months to complete the works to the property and submit vouched 
expenditure and all required documentation for grant drawdown. Extensions may be 
granted on a case by case basis where issues arise on site. Applications that do not 
meet the requirements of the grant are refused. The requirements are as follows – 
 
• For a property to qualify for the grant it must have been vacant for two or more years 
prior to the application being made and have been built up to and including the year 
2007. 
• The grant is available to individuals or households for which the property will be their 
principal private residence or who will make the property available to rent on the private 
market. It is not available to registered companies, developers, undertakings etc. 
• Applications can only be made by named individuals who own the property for which 
the grant is being applied for or are actively engaged 
in purchasing the property. 
• Applicants may only apply for a maximum of two grants under this scheme - where 
one is in respect of a property that will become their principal private residence and 
one additional grant in respect of a property made available for rent. Only one grant 
will be payable in respect of a property for rent. 
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae said the success of the scheme is evident from the response 
but stressed that people must abide to the terms and conditions. As a result of the 
scheme there are a number of properties back in use. He said he tabled this motion 
to encourage people to apply. He thanked the staff in the Vacant Home’s unit for their 
help and assistance.   
 
Cathaoirleach Cllr. Michael Foley seconded this motion.  
 
3.Survey on the wastewater network 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Martin Grady Proposed. 
That Kerry County Council write to Uisce Éireann requesting that a full survey would 
be carried out on the wastewater network across the county, as there is evidence that 
sections of the existing system is deteriorating and wastewater is seeping into the 
ground. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr Martin Grady said wastewater pipework is a growing concern in the County, with 
clear evidence that parts of the network are aging and breaking down.  He said that 
combined sewer and stormwater contain large amounts of older concrete and culvert 
infrastructure. Concrete pipes from the 1950s–1980s are particularly vulnerable to 
sulphuric acid damage, corrosion, cracking, and joint failure.  He said our wastewater 
infrastructure is vital for public health, environmental protection, and sustainable 
development. Evidence of deterioration and leakage highlights an urgent need for a 
full assessment. It is essential that Uisce Éireann is requested to undertake a complete 
survey of the wastewater network and to carry out all necessary upgrade works as a 
priority. 
  
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald seconded this motion.  

 
11 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
 
4. Assaults on Front-line workers 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Podge Foley Proposed. 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Justice to introduce mandatory 
sentences for assaults on front line workers i.e. nurses, doctors, fire brigade, civil 
defence and An Garda Síochana. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Podge Foley said it is important that we protect front line workers who do a 
fantastic job to help the public.  
 
Cllr. Angie Baily seconded this motion. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris said that while she accepted the sentiments of the motion, she 
voiced concerns in regard to the wording stating that some of the public that are 
presented to front line workers can be very vulnerable and mayn’t be accountable for 
their actions.  She proposed that the wording would be amended to remove the word 
mandatory.  
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty said that if such an incident ended up in the courts, mitigation will 
be considered.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris proposed that the Notice of Motion would be amended as follows. 
Cllr. Paul Daly seconded this proposal.   
 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Justice to introduce sentences for 
assaults on front line workers i.e. nurses, doctors, fire brigade, civil defence and An 
Garda Síochana. 
 
A vote was taken as follows  
For: Cllrs: Robert Brosnan, Paul Daly, Deirdre Ferris, Fionnán Fitzgerald (4) 
  
Against: Cllrs, Angie Baily, Brendan Cronin, Charlie Farrelly, Breandán Fitzgerald, 
Podge Foley, Tommy Griffin, Jackie Healy-Rae, Maura Healy-Rae, Michael Leane, 
Dan McCarthy, Jimmy Moloney, Norma Moriarty, Mikey Sheehy, Michael Foley 
(Cathaoirleach) (14) 
 
Absent: Cllrs: Tom Barry, Tommy Cahill, Martin Grady, Johnny Healy-Rae, Niall 
Kelleher, Aoife Kennelly, Sam Locke, Marie Moloney, Liam Speedy Nolan, Terry 
O’Brien, Niall O’ Callaghan, Bobby O’Connell, John O’Donoghue, Anne O’ Sullivan, 
Teddy O’Sullivan-Casey. (15) 
 
The vote wasn’t carried. 
 
7.Request Roads SPC to examine the provision of an annual allocation 
towards LIS 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald proposed  
That this Council writes to the Government calling on it to run a campaign showing 
how the IPAS system works in Ireland. 

 
12 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald said there appears to be some confusion and anger amongst 
the public in regard to accommodation for refugees and Asylum seekers and asked 
that the Government would outline to the public how the system works. The country is 
in the midst of a housing crisis and there is a lot of concerns expressed through social 
media.  
 
Cllr. Angie Baily seconded this motion.  
 
9.Provide Emergency accommodation in each Municipal District.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Paul Daly proposed 
That Kerry County Council provide emergency accommodation in each Municipal 
District. 
 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council provides emergency homeless accommodation in 7 facilities 
across the county as follows: 
- Tralee (5) 
- Killarney (1) 
- Listowel (1) 
This is currently sufficient to meet any homeless situation that may arise but is kept 
under review. 
 
Cllr Paul Daly noted the response and said the homeless accommodation available is 
currently not sufficient. There are two Local Electoral Areas that have no emergency 
homeless accommodation and for people who find themselves homeless and want to 
remain living in these areas, they can’t do so. Some people must leave their supports 
and their jobs and children may have to move schools. He asked that this matter is 
addressed urgently.  
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan seconded this motion.  
 
Ms. N. O’ Sullivan Director of Service said the provision of homeless accommodation 
is a problem for local authorities. The situation has become complex, and the support 
services can be in the main towns and acknowledged there is a strong homeless 
service in Tralee town. Following a query from Cllr. Paul Daly on what are the options 
where no support services are available, Ms. N. O’ Sullivan Director of Service 
acknowledged that this a concern and can be particularly challenging. The council 
does provide additional supports in other towns.   
 
8.Pre - Planning consultation timelines 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae proposed 
That Kerry County Council would review the system for Pre-Planning Meetings and to 
introduce a set realistic timeline for applicants and their agents as the variance in this 
is huge. 
 
The following reply issued: 

 
13 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
Kerry County Council is currently reviewing the process/system for dealing with pre-
planning consultations and will implement a four-week turnaround in terms of giving 
feedback to applicants on pre-planning submissions received. 
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae welcomed the response and said a planning application can 
cost between €5,000-€9,000 and yet can be refused. There is a high percentage which 
can be done at pre planning stage and it is only fair that people are afforded the 
opportunity of pre planning consultation within a reasonable timeframe.  
 
Cllr. Michael Leane seconded this motion.  
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae said she has previously raised this matter and hoped that the 
turnaround time does improve. 
 
10.Pre - Planning consultation timelines 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan proposed 
That Kerry County Council request the Minister of Justice, Home Affairs and Migration, 
Mr. Jim O'Callaghan T.D., to review the terms and conditions of Free Legal Aid to 
ensure a fair and equal system for all. 
 
Mr. S. Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan said access to free legal aid should be reviewed in light of 
repeated applications and that consideration should be given to restrict the number of 
applications granted in a certain period of time.   
 
Cllr. Michael Leane seconded this motion.  
 
11.Introduction of physical traffic calming measures  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Griffin proposed 
That Kerry County Council will roll out the use of physical traffic calming measures 
such as raised platforms and speed ramps for traffic calming measures in all our small 
villages and towns given their proven effectiveness in slowing traffic in some of our 
larger towns. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council is supportive of measures that improve road safety and promote 
safer travel for all road users in our towns and villages. Over the past 5 years, Kerry 
County Council has invested more than €3 million in delivering over 50 safety schemes 
across the county through the Safety Improvement Schemes on Regional and Local 
Roads Programme, funded by the Department of Transport.  
 
Physical traffic calming measures such as raised platforms have proven effective in 
reducing vehicle speeds and enhancing pedestrian safety, particularly in areas with 
high levels of footfall. The installation of such measures must be also be considered 
having regard to factors such as road classification, traffic volumes, proximity to 
junctions and driveways, drainage considerations, emergency service access, and 
compliance with the Design Manual for Urban Roads and Streets (DMURS), Traffic 
Management Guidelines and TII Guidelines. 
 

 
14 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
Kerry County Council is currently reviewing Traffic Calming Measures for Regional 
and Local Roads, and this will be considered further at the November meeting of the 
Transport Strategic Policy Committee (SPC). 
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin said Denny Street in Tralee is an example where this has been 
effective. He said there are high volumes of traffic in smaller towns where the traffic 
needs to slow down. He said if ramps are installed there is no need to review signage.  
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley seconded this motion and said there is only one way to 
slow down traffic and that is the provision of ramps.  
 
 
12. Feasibility of allocating a dedicated budget to each Municipal District  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Mikey Sheehy proposed 
That Kerry County Council would investigate the feasibility of allocating a dedicated 
budget on a Municipal District basis for the purpose of marketing and promoting each 
MD’s unique tourism offerings and attractions. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council, through the Economic Development and Tourism Unit, 
continues to actively support the marketing and promotion of the county’s tourism 
offering through the DiscoverKerry.com platform. This platform plays a central role in 
promoting Kerry as a destination to visit, live, and work, and features dedicated landing 
pages highlighting key towns, regions, and attractions across each Municipal District. 
 
Ongoing collaboration with local stakeholders – including Chambers of Commerce, 
Tourism Forums, Festival Committees, and Community Development Associations – 
ensures that local tourism priorities and initiatives are well represented and effectively 
promoted. 
 
The Discover Kerry platform has continued to grow and perform strongly since its 
launch. The “What’s On” event guide, along with pages featuring festivals and things 
to do, remain among the most visited sections. In October 2025, the site recorded 
33,536 visits, compared to 19,484 visits for the same month in 2024, representing a 
significant increase in engagement. 
 
In 2025, several new digital marketing campaigns have been implemented.  
 
The Council will continue to review and enhance its promotional efforts 
with continued collaborative across the MD’s and local stakeholder 
groups. 
 
Cllr. Mikey Sheehy noted the response and that each Municipal District should have 
their own discretionary funding to promote and market each Municipal District.   
 
Cllr. Jimmy Moloney seconded this motion and said that the Listowel Greenway is 
awaiting three years for interpretation signage. It is this type of works that the Council 
could undertake if there had their own funding.   
 

 
15 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
13. KCC to support the Irish Fishing Industry and their demands for an Eight-
Point Emergency Action Plan 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald proposed  
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister of State for Fisheries and the Marine, 
Timmy Dooley TD to support the Irish Fishing Industry and their demands for an Eight-
Point Emergency Action Plan to prevent the collapse of the Irish Fishing sector. 
 
Mr. S.  Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Norma Moriarty.  
 
14. Request Min for Housing to abolish blanket ban policy for planning on 
national roadways.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Taoiseach, the Minister for Transport and the 
Minister for Housing to abolish the blanket ban policy whereby any planning 
application which accesses onto national roadways is objected to by the TII and 
therefore refused. The previous Government and former Taoiseach, Leo Varadkar 
committed to addressing this issue and specified that this specific legislation was 
never intended to be a blanket ban. This legislation is preventing people from fair 
consideration in planning applications and is in part contributing to the ongoing 
housing crisis. 
 
The following reply issued: 
This is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Note - Official policy for development at or near national roads is set out in in the 
DECLG Spatial Planning and National Roads Guidelines for Planning Authorities 
(2012). The aim of this policy is assist TII to deliver and maintain a modern, efficient 
and safe networks of national roads. 
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae stated that there is already an existing access route and 
refusing such planning application is only exacerbating the housing crisis.  The policy 
is nonsensical.  
 
Cllr Martin Grady seconded this motion.  
 
15.Request Dept of Housing to provide additional funding for the upgrade of 
older housing stock.   
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Deirdre Ferris proposed 
That this Council resolves to write to the Department of Housing seeking additional 
funding for upgrades to our older housing stock that are in a terrible state and not 
suitable for the Energy Retrofit Programme (ERP). 
 
Mr. S.  Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris said this matter has previously been discussed at length. Many 
older local authority properties are unsuitable for the retro- fit programme as there are 
in a very poor condition and have no alternative funding resources.  
 

 
16 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
Cllr. Paul. Daly seconded this motion.   
 
16.Operation of shower facilities on beaches all year round   
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Michael Leane proposed 
I would like Kerry County Council to consider that all showers in beaches in Kerry be 
left on all year round to facilitate our daily swimmers. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Where feasible and where there is no risk from storm or freezing damage, Kerry 
County Council will maintain the operational status of these facilities on a year-round 
basis. 
 
Cllr. Michael Leane acknowledged the response and said in Ballyheigue, the showers 
have not been operational for the last fortnight.  
 
Cllr. Paul Daly seconded this motion and said the benefits to sea swimming all year 
round is becoming more evident for mental health and it is important that such facilities 
are operational.  
 
17.Provision of funding for clinical treatment for mental health and addition 
services.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Robert Brosnan proposed  
Go scríobhfaidh CCC chuig an aire sláinte ag iarraidh go dtabharfaí tuilleadh 
maoinithe agus infheistíochta i gcóireáil chliniciúil do sheirbhísí sláinte meabhrach 
agus andùile don chontae. 
 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Health and the HSE requesting 
that further funding and investment in clinical treatment for mental health services 
and addiction services be given to the County. 
 
Mr. S.  Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan said that Ireland has the lowest rates of psychiatric beds in 
Europe.  As a result, there are 100’s of people suffering in the county as they are not 
getting the supports they need. The families and friends of these people who are 
suffering feel powerless.  He called on the Government to put the supports in place.  
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Podge Foley.  
 
18.Call on the Government to build residential centres for people suffering 
with mental health illness.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Podge Foley proposed  
That Kerry County Council write to the Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage to consider building residential centres for people suffering with mental 
illness. The aim being to have one centre in every county nationwide. 
 
Mr. S.  Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 

 
17 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
Cllr. Podge Foley said that mental illness is a significant problem in this country. He 
called on the Government to provide residential centres to help and support these 
people. 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan seconded this motion.  
 
19. Update on review for the provision of School Wardens.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae proposed  
Upon the appointment of the Road Safety Officer, a review of School Wardens, their 
location and potential new locations was promised. What is the status of this review 
and its findings. 
 
The following reply issued: 
A comprehensive review of the School Warden Crossings across the county is 
currently underway and nearing completion. 
 
The review covers a range of key criteria, including: 
• Crossing types and locations 
• Existing crossing conditions 
• Potential upgrades and improvements 
• Number and frequency of students using each crossing 
• Requests for new school crossings 
• Considerations for relocation of existing crossings 
 
In parallel with the review, several school crossings have already been upgraded and 
improved. These independent works have included new road markings, refreshed 
lineage, and improved road surfacing — all of which will complement the outcomes of 
the ongoing review. 
 
Initial findings indicate that the majority of current school crossings are expected to 
remain in place. Meanwhile, new requests for additional school warden crossings 
continue to be assessed as part of the overall process. 
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae acknowledged the response and said if there is a requirement 
for additional school wardens will there be a capacity to put the measures in place.  
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly seconded the motion and said the review can’t come quick 
enough. He too questioned if additional funding will be allocated if required.  
 
The Chief Executive replied that following the outcome of the review, the council does 
have a funding stream to implement if necessary.  
 
21. Update on safety Junction at N22.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae proposed  
That Kerry County Council would give an update on safety improvement works at 
junctions on the N22. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The performance of junctions on the National Network are continually monitored by 
the TII Safety Section and intervention locations are identified and forwarded to Kerry 

 
18 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
County Council. The N22 junction at Poulgorm Bridge has had a number of safety 
improvement works carried out in recent years and further safety improvements are 
planned aimed at improving junction definition and reducing speed. These measures 
are being identified in consultation with the TII Safety Section and An Garda Síochána 
as well as through local consultations. New VAS signs installed earlier this year are 
recoding speed on the approach to the junction and this information will inform the 
next interventions. Once developed further these will be outlined to the elected 
members in the coming months. 
 
Meanwhile the lining at all junctions on the N22 has been repainted in 2025 and hedge 
cutting and visibility splay clearance works will be carried out shortly to improve 
junction definition on the N22. 
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae welcomed the works to the junction at Poulgorm Bridge and 
said it is a very busy junction serving two peninsulas.  There has been a number of 
incidents here and it is important that the hedges are cut back if nothing else. He called 
on several additional measures to be introduced such the introduction of lighting, the 
reduction of the  speed limit and an extension of the slow lane. 
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Niall Kelleher.    
 
22.Request Government Minister for additional funding for tree trimming  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Paul Daly proposed  
That Kerry County Council urgently request extra funds from Local Government 
Minister, James Browne, for tree trimming across the country. 
 
Mr. S.  Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Paul Daly said there are many trees across the county far too big in size and need 
to be cut back and trimmed for health and safety. 
 
Cllr. Dan McCarthy seconded this motion.  
 
23.Request Government to provide compensation to farmers following TB 
tests.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan proposed  
That Kerry County Council request the Minister for Agriculture, Mr. Martin Heydon 
T.D., review the compensation paid to farmers who are subject to de-stocking as a 
result of positive TB tests. 
 
Mr. S.  Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan said the financial loss for famers can be in the thousands and 
the current compensation cost doesn’t factor in a fraction of the cost to replace the 
livestock. 
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae seconded the motion.  
 
24. KCC to support the provision of a site and activity Centre for Kerry Scouts 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Griffin proposed  

 
19 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
That Kerry County Council will support Kerry Scouts to identify and develop a camp 
site & activity centre in the County for their growing membership. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council actively engages with community groups, volunteers, social 
groups and sports clubs wishing to develop new recreation amenities. This includes 
promoting awareness of project development stages such as feasibility assessment 
and identifying potential funding streams such as LEADER, CLÁR, ORIS etc. Kerry 
County Council’s Community section and sports partnership liaise with these groups 
including, if requested, Kerry Scouts to develop such facilities. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin welcomed the response and said there are a number of sites that 
have been identified.  
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae seconded this motion. 
 
25. Update on the disposal of council-owned land across the county 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Mikey Sheehy proposed  
Will Kerry County Council outline how many Expressions of Interest processes for the 
disposal of Council-owned lands are currently active across the county and provide an 
update on their respective stages of progress. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council are preparing an expression of interest (EOI) for the sites at Fels 
Point, which will be published in February 2026. The EOI reflects the development 
framework for the site as set out in Tralee MD settlement plan, which was adopted by 
the elected member under variation No. 1 of the County Development Plan. 
 
Cllr Mikey Sheehy welcomed the response and said there is a very focal site and 
here is a huge appetite for the community to see the site developed.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald seconded this motion.  
 
26.Support small to medium size businesses sending good to the USA 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Breandan Fitzgerald proposed  
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister of Enterprise, Trade and Employment 
Peter Burke TD to support small to medium size business sending goods and 
packages to the USA due to the introduction of tariffs and the end of ‘de minimis’ 
shipping to the USA. 
 
Mr. S.  Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald said that many of Kerry businesses selling products like 
clothing, arts & crafts, jewellery, pottery or specialty foods will see their margins 
squeezed as customers hesitate to pay extra duties. Kerry SMEs that rely on online 
sales to US customers are disproportionately affected.  
The removal of de minimis threatens all Kerry SMEs’ access to the US market. There 
is a need for combined Government approach of grant assistance and advisory 
support and also the need continued Irish EU-level advocacy for small SME’s. Without 

 
20 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
this Kerry SMEs risk losing competitiveness and market share and this could seriously 
impact these businesses and their viability. 
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin seconded this motion.  
 
28. Amend County Development Plan  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae proposed  
To amend the County Development Plan in respect of KCDP 5-14 
(D) and KCDP 5-15 (E) and to include the following: 
To allow for consideration of persons who have spent a substantial period of their lives 
(i.e. over seven years), living in the local rural area in which they propose to build a 
first home for their permanent occupation near a family member living with a lifelong 
or life limiting condition and can clearly demonstrate that the need to live adjacent to 
their immediate family is both necessary and beneficial in their endeavors to live a full 
and confident life whilst managing such a condition and can further demonstrate that 
the requirement to live in such a location will facilitate a necessary process of 
advanced care planning by the applicant. 
 
The following reply issued: 
This motion seeks to amend the existing objective, which allows a person who has 
spent a substantial period of their lives (i.e. over seven years), living in the local rural 
area in which they propose to build a first home for their permanent occupation, who 
currently lives with a lifelong or life limiting condition to be favourably considered for 
housing in a rural area, to be altered to now allow a family member of a person with 
a lifelong or life limiting condition to be favourably considered for housing in a rural 
area. 
 
The original objective is intended to support and facilitate a person with a lifelong or 
life limiting condition to move home and live adjacent to immediate family, which is 
both necessary and beneficial in their endeavours to live a full and confident life whilst 
managing such a condition. The policy does not allow for family members, who are 
seeking to becomes carers to be considered for housing within the rural area, unless 
they meet a different criterion within the rural settlement policy. 
 
This would be a material change to the rural housing policy, and it is more appropriate 
that this proposal is considered further as part of the upcoming rural housing policy 
workshops. The two remaining workshops on rural housing policy are taking place for 
in November and December, and the above matter will form part of the workshop 
discussions. Once these workshops have taken place with all MD’s, a report on the 
outcome of these workshops will be prepared and circulated, for consideration by the 
Strategic Policy Committee. It is anticipated that the report will be presented in 
January. This report will outline the findings from each workshop and will also outline 
a series of recommendations, which can inform the next steps in considering the Rural 
Housing Policy. 
 
Cllr Maura Healy-Rae noted the response and said the motion is to retain the 
existing criteria but to allow a very close family member such as a son or daughter to 
be considered so they can live adjacent to their immediate family as their carer.  
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae seconded this motion.  

 
21 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Services said that motion can be considered as part of 
upcoming MD workshops.  
 
29.Redesign Plan for Ardfert Village 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Deirdre Ferris proposed  
That this Council will commit to a complete redesign plan of the current layout of the 
village centre Junction in Ardfert. 
 
The following reply issued: 
To move this forward, the Tralee Municipal District is engaging with a local community 
group to develop a Village Centre Plan for Ardfert. This plan will assess accessibility 
and connectivity across the village and will provide an evidence-based approach to 
future public realm and infrastructure improvements.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris welcomed the positive response and said that a health check was 
carried out in the village in 2012 which highlighted a number of issues. She undertook 
to work with the executive to source a funding stream.  
 
Cllr. Paul Daly seconded this motion.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill moved Notice of Motion No 5 and No 27 
 
5. Request SPC to allocate funding towards hardship and emergency Local 
Improvement Schemes (LIS) 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Cahill proposed  
That Kerry County Council request the Roads and Transportation Strategic Policy 
Committee (SPC) to examine the possibility of allocating, with the agreement of all 
Councillors, a sum of between €3,000-€5,000 per annum from their councillors 
allocations towards hardship and emergency Local Improvement Schemes (LIS), in 
order to provide limited but essential support for cases where residents experience 
particular hardship or urgent access issues that cannot otherwise be addressed under 
the existing LIS programme. 
 
The following reply issued: 
There is currently no provision within the Local Improvement Scheme (LIS) allocations 
to provide funding for hardship or emergency cases. In accordance with the LIS 
Scheme Outline, a local authority cannot make a financial contribution to the cost of 
projects unless the road also serves local authority property. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill said these are very difficult situations where critically ill people are 
living in areas with very poor access due to the condition of the road.  
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae.  
 
A very detailed discussion was held in regard to the Notice of Motion where the 
Members acknowledge the validity of the request but noted that these are private 
roads and that the scheme must be amended nationally to fund emergency or hardship 
cases. 
 

 
22 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
Mr. P. Neary Director of Service said there is no priority scheme in place for emergency 
and hardship cases. There is an item on the LIS Scheme which will before the next 
Roads and Transport SPC meeting.  
 
It was agreed that a letter would issue to the Minister for Social Protection and Rural 
and Community Development and Minister for Transport requesting that the Local 
Improvement Scheme be reviewed to allow for Emergency and Hardship cases.  
 
27. Introduce a pilot Night-Time Market Scheme  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Cahill proposed  
That Kerry County Council engage and collaborate with town teams, community 
councils, chambers of commerce, and tidy towns groups across the county to develop 
and pilot a Night-Time Market Scheme in our towns. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council is committed to the implementation of the Town Centre First 
Policy, which places our towns and villages at the heart of local decision-making and 
aims to revitalise them as attractive, liveable and economically resilient places. The 
development and piloting of a Night-Time Market Scheme would complement this 
national policy by supporting local enterprise, enhancing the evening economy, and 
encouraging greater community activity within town centres. 
 
Meaningful and effective engagement with local stakeholders including businesses, 
residents, and community groups is essential to the success of these objectives and 
to achieving vibrant, inclusive and economically active settlements where people can 
live, visit and work. 
 
In this context, Kerry County Council would welcome continued collaboration with town 
teams, community groups, chambers of commerce, and Tidy Towns groups to explore, 
develop, and pilot a Night-Time Market Scheme that reflects local needs and 
opportunities, strengthens the night-time economy and contributes to the overall 
vitality of towns across the county. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill said that Christmas Markets can attract a huge number of visitors 
to towns every year. The night-time market scheme can also provide a safer town 
environment.  
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley seconded this motion.  
 
Cllr John O’ Donoghue moved Notices of Motion no 20 and 6 
  
20.Borrow Box for Toys in Libraires  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. John O’ Donoghue proposed  
Our libraries currently have a fantastic Toy and Sensory Resource Collection. I am 
requesting that a system be put in place where other toys can be borrowed by any 
child. This collection would be entirely separate to the above mentioned facility and 
during the current cost of living crisis might provide comfort for parents of small 
children who are struggling financially, particularly in the lead up to Christmas. 
 
The following reply issued: 

 
23 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
Kerry Library will review this request in line with the current Library Development Plan 
and develop various service strands including those for children with complex and 
neurodiversity needs, the housebound, teenagers and young adults, the aged and 
health & wellbeing services. 
 
 
Cllr John O’ Donoghue said the currently scheme is a fantastic success and suggested 
that a similar facility would be introduced to allow all toys to be included. 
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Jimmy Moloney. 
 
6.Letter to ESB re survey power lines.   
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. John O’ Donoghue proposed  
That Kerry County Council would ask the ESB to survey their power lines and cut down 
tree branches that are likely to damage the lines during stormy weather. 
 
Mr. S.  Scally stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue said overhanging branches is a significant issue especially 
during storm season. It can lead to a disruption in the power lines.  
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin seconded this motion.  
 
17.11.2025.12 Correspondence – Conference and Seminars 
(a) On the proposal of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney and seconded by Jackie Healy-Rae it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of the Cathaoirleach Cllr. Michael Foley to the 
Cork and Kerry Food Festival at Cork City Hall on Saturday 01 November 2025. 
 
(b) On the proposal of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney and seconded by Jackie Healy-Rae, it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of the Cathaoirleach Cllr. Michael Foley to the 
Inaugural Address of Professor Dermot Nestor President of Mary Immaculate College 
on Monday, 10 November 2025. 
 
(c) On the proposal of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney and seconded by Jackie Healy-Rae, it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Michael Foley to a 
reception in honour of the President of Ireland in the State Apartments, Dublin Castle 
on Tuesday, 11 November 2025. 
 
(d) On the proposal of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney and seconded by Jackie Healy-Rae, it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly and Cllr. Tommy Griffin 
at the LCDC meeting held at the Landmark Hotel, Carrick-on-Shannon on Wednesday 
15 October 2025. 
 
(e) On the proposal of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney and seconded by Jackie Healy-Rae, it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. Martin Grady to the Tidy Towns Awards 
in Dublin on Friday 24 October 2025. 
 
(f) On the proposal of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney and seconded by Jackie Healy-Rae, it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. Tommy Griffin at the Inaugural Local 

 
24 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
Development Conference in Ballina, Co. Mayo from the Thursday 30 – Friday 31 
October 2025. 
 
(g) On the proposal of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney and seconded by Jackie Healy-Rae, it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald and Cllr. Bobby 
O’Connell, to attend the Daniel O’Connell Study Day, hosted by the Irish Georgian 
Society and Dublin City Council, held in the City Assembly House, South William 
Street, Dublin, Wednesday, 12 November. 
 
(h) On the proposal of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney and seconded by Jackie Healy-Rae, it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of the Deputy Mayor of Tralee, Cllr. Angie Baily 
to attend the 2025 Green Flag for Parks Award Event held in Maynooth on Wednesday 
12 November. 
 
(i) On the proposal of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney and seconded by Jackie Healy-Rae, it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. Martin Grady at the National LTACC 
Conference in Dublin on Thursday 13 November 2025.in the Ashling Hotel, Dublin. 
 
(j) On the proposal of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney and seconded by Jackie Healy-Rae, it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cllr. Tommy Griffin at the National and Local 
LCDC Communications Campaign development training at the Tullamore Court Hotel, 
Tullamore, Co Offaly on Wednesday 19 November 2025. 
 
(k) On the proposal of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney and seconded by Jackie Healy-Rae, it 
was agreed to approval the attendance of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly at the National and 
Local LCDC Communications Campaign development training at the Great National 
Hotel, Ballina, Co Mayo on Monday 01 December 2025. 
 
(l) On the proposal of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney and seconded by Jackie Healy-Rae, it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Elected Members to the Celtic Conference 
Event “Irish Health Services Entitlements” in Co. Louth from Friday 05 December to 
Sunday 07 December 2025. 
 
17.11.2025.13 Correspondence General 
 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were circulated: 
 
List of correspondence circulated at the November 2025 
Meeting of Kerry County Council 
  
Date 
From 
Description 
1. 
23/10/2025 
Min for Health 
Response to a request from the Members in relation 
to an update to previous correspondence on Bowel 
Screening 
2. 
24/10/2025 
Min for Health 
Response to a request from the Members to review 
the Breast Check age from 40 years. 

 
25 
Nov Ordinary Meeting – 17 November 25 
3. 
  
ESB Networks 
Letter from ESB Networks in relation to the Role of 
ESB Networks in regard to Public Lighting. 
4. 
30/10/2025 
Dept of 
Agriculture 
Response to a request from the Members requesting 
funding would be provided for the collection of deer. 
5. 
3/11/2025 
Min for 
Transport 
Response to a request from the Members re: 
retirement age for Bus Drivers. 
6. 
4/11/2025 
Donegal Co. 
Co. 
Request from the Elected Members of Donegal Co. 
Council to seek funding from the Department to 
purchase equipment for 'Emergency Household 
Response Package'. 
 
 
17.11.2025.14 Minutes arising from the minutes as confirmed 
 
17.11.2025.15 Any Other Business 
 
Access to Killarney Library 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae stated that there appears to be an issue with the wheelchair 
ramp entering Killarney Library and asked that it would be addressed. 
 
Mr. F. Hartnett Director of Service undertook to review the matter and revert to Cllr. 
Maura Healy-Rae.  
 
Birch Hill Estate 
Cllr Brendan Cronin requested that an update would be provided from Uisce Éireann 
on the proposed works at Birch Hill Estate.  
 
Mr. P. Neary Director of Service undertook to review the matter with UE and revert to 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin.  
  
The meeting concluded at 4.13 p.m. 
 
Sean Scally 
 
_________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator 
Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
