 
1 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect putting 
them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is available on 
request. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ AN CRUINNIÚ DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH 
I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRÁ LÍ, AGUS AR-LÍNE/FÍORÚIL 
AR AN LUAN, 20 DEIREADH FÓMHAIR, 2025 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN THE 
COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE AND ONLINE ON MONDAY, 20 
October 2025 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
Angie Baily                            Tom Barry  
Robert Brosnan 
      
Tommy Cahill                        Brendan Cronin 
Paul Daly                            
Charlie Farrelly                      Deirdre Ferris 
Breandán Fitzgerald  
Fionnán Fitzgerald                 Michael Foley (Cathaoirleach) Podge Foley       
Martin Grady  
       
   Tommy Griffin                     Jackie Healy-Rae  
Johnny Healy-Rae                 Maura Healy-Rae               Niall Kelleher                     
Aoife Kennelly  
 
    Michael Leane                   Dan McCarthy                        
Jimmy Moloney 
 
    Marie Moloney                      Norma Moriarty                     
Liam Speedy Nolan               Terry O’Brien                       Niall O’Callaghan                  
Bobby O’Connell                   John O’Donoghue                Anne O’ Sullivan                   
Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey       Mikey Sheehy 
 
ABSENT/ AS LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
Sam Locke 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Mr.  F. Reidy Chief Executive              Mr. M. O’ Donoghue, Dir H.R. & Corporate Affairs                 
Ms. N. O’ Sullivan Dir Housing            Mr. J. Kennelly, A/ Dir Com, Climate Act& Oper Serv    
Ms. Ms. A. McAllen Dir Finance          Mr. F. Hartnett Dir. Cap Deliver, Climate Resil & Culture       
Ms. B. Fitzgerald, Meetings Admin     Mr. J. Nolan Dir Act Land Mgt & Econ Dev                             
Mr. B. Looney Head of Dig, Smart Prog & BB   Ms. C. Fitzgerald S.S.O. Corporate    
Ms. O. O’Shea, C.O Corporate                                     
 
 
 
The meeting commenced at 12.30 p.m.   
 
Cllr. Michael Foley took the Chair and welcomed everyone.  
 
Vote of Sympathy 
Cathaoirleach expressed a vote of sympathy to Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan on the passing 
of his brother Paudie O’ Callaghan who recently passed away. 

 
2 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
 
All Elected Members wished to be associated with the sympathies expressed. 
Cathaoirleach expressed a vote of sympathy to Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald on the passing 
of his father Robert (Bob) Fitzgerald who recently passed away. 
 
All Elected Members wished to be associated with the sympathies expressed. 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty expressed a vote of sympathy to the family of Mr. Bill Morrell who 
recently passed away. 
 
All Elected Members wished to be associated with the sympathies expressed. 
 
Cllr. Terry O’ Brien expressed a vote of sympathy to the family of Mr. Dick Henggeler 
(Rose Hotel) who recently passed away. 
 
All Elected Members wished to be associated with the sympathies expressed. 
 
20.10.2025.01 
Protocols/Induction 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald, Meeting Administrator, referred Elected Members to the Protocols 
for Meetings of Kerry County Council and took a roll call.  
 
20.10.2025.02 Cathaoirleach’s Report on CPG Meeting 
The Cathaoirleach’s report on the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 14 October 
2025, was noted by the Members. 
 
20.10.2025.03 Confirmation of Minutes 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly, SECONDED by Cllr. Tom Barry, it 
was resolved that the minutes of the meeting of Kerry County Council held on 15 
September 2025 be confirmed. 
 
20.10.2025.04 
Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
The Chief Executive’s Report to Council for the month of October 2025 which had 
been circulated was noted by the Members.  
 
A number of Elected Members referred to the Winter Maintenance Programme for 
2025/26 and asked if additional machinery and snow ploughs have been sourced to 
ensure that roads will remain open in the event of adverse weather in the upcoming 
winter months. They also made reference to tree cutting and to ensure that the 
branches are cut at the top. They asked if consideration will be given to source local 
contractors if necessary. The members asked that salt would be readily available for 
all roads. In conclusion they thanked Mr. Frank Hartnett and the roads staff for the 
tremendous work they have done in the past.   
 
Many Elected Members welcomed the provision of housing units in the county but 
expressed concerns that all avenues should be exhausted to provide affordable 
housing in the county. They stated that Kerry County Council needs to be proactive 
rather that reactive.  

 
3 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
  
In relation to the Household Waste Survey campaign Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald said that 
many properties have no offer of a bin collection from a private operator.  
 
Cllr. Martin Grady welcomed the provision of housing units under the Housing report 
and noted that there is currently housing land for sale in Killarney.  He thanked the 
staff involved in organising the Culture night which was a huge success in Killarney.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris welcomed the provision of the Boxing Club in Tralee and in addition 
the breast-feeding initiative, it is very important that provisions are put in place to allow 
Kerry to be a breast-feeding friendly county. She asked that consideration would be 
given to circulate a text alert to all Elected Members when been notified by different 
events such as the “Electrical Recycling Drop Off Day”. She asked that an update 
would be provided on the purchase of land in Tralee for affordable housing.   
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae welcomed the date for the Castleisland/Corca Dhuibhne 
Variation Plan.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill welcomed the provision of housing in Killorglin. He asked for 
clarification on the funding for the Samhain Festival as funding for the festival appears 
to have reduced in Killorglin.  
 
Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan asked the executive what plans Kerry County Council have to 
mark the Ryder Cup 2027 which will be held in Adare, Co. Limerick and promote Kerry 
as a tourist destination. He said that the event will be held only an hour away and Kerry 
must take every opportunity to promote Kerry by showcasing several events and 
festivals across the county. He suggested that a delegate be sent to the Orlando Golf 
Show to highlight Kerry as a tourist destination. 
 
All Elected Members wished to support the comments raised by Cllr. Niall O’ 
Callaghan. 
 
Cllr. Niall Kelleher expressed concerns regarding the ash dieback disease which is 
spreading amongst Ash tress in both the county and country. He said that all 
landowners have responsibility to maintain all trees and hedging.   
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan commended Oifig na Gaeilge on the provision of Irish classes 
to the Elected Members. 
 
Cllr. Tom Barry welcomed the events undertaken during Road Safety Week and said 
it is important that all road users in particular cyclists and electric scooters are taken 
into consideration.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald thanked Kerry County Council for the support during the 
recent Dingle Food Festival.   
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan asked that an update could be provided for the Housing schemes 
in Dingle and the provision of a relief road between Ard na Greine and Goat Street. 
He also asked if there was any further information on his previous Notice of Motion to 
provide an access road in University Hospital Kerry.  

 
4 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin concurred with comments expressed by Cllr. Niall Kelleher 
regarding the ashe dieback disease and said he believed that it is a lot worse than 
what is outlined.  
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan stated that a number of projects were submitted for Kenmare 
under the RRDF and asked if feedback form the Department had been provided. 
 
In response to queries raised Mr. John Kennelly A/Director of Service advised that 
nine snow ploughs had been secured along with additional drivers. The snow ploughs 
will be assigned to national routes and the main artery roads.  
 
The Chief Executive advised that the council is very committed to the delivery of 
affordable housing in the county. Currently the council is in consultation regarding 
three sites for affordable housing in the county and will provide an update at MD Level.  
 
In relation to the Áras Padraig, he advised that a different proposal would have to be 
drawn up for the URDF application which will include a new cost analysis.   
 
Mr. G. O’ Brien SEO Housing provided details of housing delivery dates over the next 
12-month period. He advised that all future updates will be provided at MD level.  
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service advised that land has been acquired in Oakpark, 
Tralee for Housing and a masterplan for the development will be brought to the Tralee 
members at MD level. 
  
He acknowledged the Member’s comments regarding the Ryder Cup and said that the 
council is very determined to maximise its potential.  
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service referred to the query raised by Cllr. Tommy Cahill in 
relation to the funding allocated for Samhain events and said that the allocation for 
Killorglin was the same as 2024 and there has been no reduction.  
 
Mr. F. Harnett Director of Service said that the road at the Gaelcholáiste link road for 
ambulances to the hospital was not intended for traffic.  
 
Following a query from Cllr. Jackie Healy Rae to confirm how much funding was 
allocated for the N22 in 2025, Mr. F. Harnett confirmed the allocation is €3M.  
 
Cllr Deirdre Ferris proposed that a letter of support issue to Wexford County Council 
regarding the correspondence received in relation ash dieback diseases.  
 
This was seconded by Cathaoirleach Michael Foley.   
 
Cllr. Robert Brosana agreed to contact Mr. F. Harnett after the meeting to discuss the 
link road project in Dingle.  
 
Following a query from Cllr. Podge Foley on the Killorglin to Anglot scheme, Mr. F. 
Hartnett Director of Service advised that the application will be submitted to An Bord 
Pleanála in 2026. 

 
5 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
 
20.10.2025.05 To approve the incurring of overdraft accommodation not 
exceeding €24m for the 12 months ending 31st December 2026. 
 
The report from Ms. A. McAllen, Director of Finance, dated 09 October 2025, which 
had been circulated was noted. 
  
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Terry O’ Brien, SECONDED by Niall Kelleher, it was 
agreed to approve the incurring of overdraft accommodation not exceeding €24m for 
the 12 months ending 31 December 2026. 
  
20.10.2025.06 Report on Southern Regional Drug and Alcohol Task force  
It was agreed to note report from Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan - Casey on the operations 
and activities of the Report on Southern Regional Drug and Alcohol Task force  
 in accordance with Section 141 of the Local Government Act 2001. 
 
 
20.10.2025.07 Note reports from SPC Chairs: 
 
(a) Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey, on the meeting of Culture, Heritage & the Gaeltacht 
SPC Strategic Policy Committee held on 02 October 2025 was noted. 
. 
(b) Cllr. Tommy Cahill, SPC Chair, on the meeting of the Housing SPC held on 06 
October 2025 was noted. 
 
20.10.2025.08 To note the opening of tenders for: 
 
(a) On the proposal of Cllr Maura Healy-Rae and Seconded by Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae 
it was agreed to get retrospective approval for opening of tender, for the HD28 N22 
Killarney bypass pavement works. Closing Date:  Thursday 28 August 2025 
 
(b) On the proposal of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and seconded by Cllr. Terry O’ Brien it was 
agreed to get retrospective approval for the opening of tender for Tralee Bay 
Wetlands Solar PV Installation RFT 6551142 - Closing Date: Wednesday 01 
October 2025. 
 
(c) On the proposal of Cllr. Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald and seconded by Cllr. Charlie 
Farrelly it was agreed to get retrospective approve the opening of tender for supply 
and Installation of Standby Generator and Automatic Changeover Panel at 
Castleisland Area Services Centre (RFT 6613491) Closing Date: Wednesday 15 
October 2025. 
 
(d) On the proposal of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and seconded by Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan it 
was agreed to approve the opening of Tender for Supply of temporary jackleg 
building to Kerry Fire Service (RFT 6677415) Closing Date: Wednesday 22 October 
2025.  
 
(e) On the proposal of Cathaoirleach Michael Foley and seconded by Cllr. Liam 
Speedy Nolan it was agreed to approve the opening of tender for Tralee to Listowel 

 
6 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
Greenway project – Topographical Survey Services: Closing Date Wednesday 12 
November 2025. 
 
(f) On the proposal of Cllr. Brendan Cronin and seconded by Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan 
it was agreed to approve the opening of Tender for Collection of Scrap Metal from 
KCC Civic Amenity Sites, Closing Date: Friday 14 November 2025.  
 
(g) On the proposal of Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey and seconded by Fionnán 
Fitzgerald it was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for Technical 
Consultancy Services (Kenmare relief Road Phase 2). Closing Date:  Friday 14th 
November 2025. 
 
 
20.10.2025.09  Notices of Motion 
 
Emergency Notice of Motion  
Cllr Maura Healy-Rae submitted the following Emergency Notice of Motion. 
 
To ask Kerry County Council to intervene, by way of the tenant in situ scheme or an 
approved housing body arrangement, in the crisis facing the residents of Loreto 
Convent Estate, Muckross who have all received a notice of eviction from their 
homes due to a decision by an investment fund to sell the properties. If these 
evictions proceed it will have a devastating and detrimental effect on the families, 
their children’s stability and education and on Loreto National School which would 
see the loss of fourteen pupils. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council is aware of the issues surrounding the Loreto Chapel Estate 
in Killarney. This is a private development and the company managing the 
properties for the owners have also advised the council of the current position. 
Kerry County Council’s Housing Social Support Team are available to engage with 
the effected individuals and will provide advice, support and assistance in relation 
to the supports available. The team will arrange a clinic with the effected individuals 
if required.  
The Council is exploring both the Tenant in Situ Scheme and the Cost Rental Tenant 
in Situ Scheme. The terms of the ‘Tenant in Situ’ Scheme states that all other 
housing solutions must be exhausted before a Tenant in Situ acquisition can be 
considered and is also dependent on the landlord being willing to sell to Kerry 
County Council. Tenants also must be in receipt of social housing supports to qualify 
for the Tenant in Situ Scheme. Contact will also be made with AHB’s to explore 
options.  
Kerry County Council have been in contact with the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage on the matter also. 
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae said for these residents there is no alternative for housing in 
the Killarney area due to the lack of affordable housing. The impact will have a 
detrimental effect on the children and Loreta National School as 14 of the pupils are 
residents of Loreto Convent Estate, Muckross. Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae asked that 
the tenant in situ scheme would be considered for these residents.   
 

 
7 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded this motion and asked that every avenue is exhausted 
for the residents.  
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue said he has met with residents who aren’t council tenants. 
They have been outlining their concerns, and they have been given a commitment 
that the council will do everything it can. He condemned the purchase of these 
properties by vulture funds and said it is wrong.  
 
Ms. N. O’ Sullivan Director of Service said the council is very aware of the situation 
and confirmed that it is a private development. The council is currently engaging 
with the management company and the residents. If the residents wish, the council 
can arrange a clinic to advise them of the supports available.  She advised that the 
Tenant in Situ scheme can only be considered if the tenants are in receipt of housing 
support which they are not.  
 
Cllr. Niall Kelleher asked if the Cost Rental in Situ scheme will be considered and 
will the Management company be willing to work with Kerry County Council. 
 
Ms. Niamh O’ Sullivan Director of Service confirmed that the Management company 
is willing to work with Kerry County Council.   
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae asked that Kerry County Council keep the Elected Members 
updated.  
 
1. Amendment of standing orders  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae proposed. 
That this Council amend its Standing Orders to provide that, in future Presidential 
Elections, any prospective candidate seeking a nomination from this Council must first 
secure the sponsorship of at least one elected member of the Council in order to be 
permitted to make a presentation to the full Council 
 
The following reply issued:  
Corporate Services will convene the expanded CPG to review this and bring forward 
a proposed addendum to Standing Orders covering the procedural approach to 
Presidential Election nominations. 
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae said the number of candidates to be received went from 10 up 
to 20 candidates in the space of a number of days in advance of the special meeting.  
The protocol introduced was that all presentations had to be forwarded in advance to 
the Elected Members. He recalled at one stage during the meeting there was no clarity 
on whether a potential candidate was going to arrive. He stressed that he didn’t want 
to disbar anyone but said the whole process must be reviewed with a view that 
candidates should secure sponsorship of at least one Elected Member. He said he 
was satisfied that the matter will be reviewed by the extended CPG.  
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly seconded this motion and moved the Notice of Motion no 4. 
4.Amendment of standing orders  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Charlie Farrelly proposed.  
To ask Kerry County Council to change our Standing Orders, so that prospective 
candidates who have ambitions to run in future Presidential Elections, must be 

 
8 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
proposed and seconded by 2 sitting Kerry County Councillors, before they are allowed 
to make a presentation to this Council 
 
The following reply issued:  
Corporate Services will convene the expanded CPG to review this and bring forward 
a proposed addendum to Standing Orders covering the procedural approach to 
Presidential Election nominations. 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly concurred with the comments expressed by Cllr. Jackie Healy-
Rae and said that no Elected Members should have to endure that process again.  
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley seconded this motion. The comments were echoed by 
several Elected Members.  
 
2. Planning Policy regarding Graffiti  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Griffin Proposed. 
That Kerry County Council will develop a planning policy restricting the painting of 
graffiti / offensive wording with the intent to intimidate on both public and private 
property. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Painting of graffiti without permission is illegal and considered a form of criminal 
damage or vandalism, governed by legislation Litter Pollution Acts and Criminal 
Damage Act 1991. Kerry County Council takes appropriate action in respect of graffiti 
under the provision of the aforementioned Acts. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin said he tabled this motion following the recent display of religious 
material painted on a building in private property to intimidate a family.  Following 
investigation, he said he noted that there was no planning policy to address this 
situation. 
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Brendan Cronin.  
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Services said he would review the matter and revert to Cllr. 
Tommy Griffin.  
 
Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald moved Notice of Motion no 3 on behalf of Cllr. Johnny Healy-
Rae.  
3.Irish water capacity for housing  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae proposed  
That Kerry County Council would write to Irish Water requesting an update on what 
towns and villages they have capacity in both water and sewerage to allow housing to 
be built. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
5. Delays in housing transfers  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Angie Baily proposed  
That this Council acknowledges the serious delays and inefficiencies currently 
experienced by council tenants looking for housing transfers, particularly in cases of 

 
9 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
downsizing, medical and physical needs, or where the current home no longer suits 
the occupant’s condition 
 
The following reply issued:  
The process for dealing with Housing Transfer Applications is set out in Kerry County 
Council’s Social Housing Allocation Scheme, adopted in November 2021 summarised 
as follows: Tenants of the Council, including tenants of dwellings provided under the 
Social Housing Leasing Initiative, RAS, HAP Transfers, or by Approved Housing 
Bodies will not normally be considered for transfer except under certain 
circumstances: -  
(a) Overcrowding  
(b) Downsizing 
 (c) Exceptional Medical and compassionate reasons. 
 
Tenants seeking a transfer must fulfil the following requirements to the satisfaction of 
the Council:  
(a) Clear rent account for at least 6 months (Service and any other charges paid)  
(b) Have kept their dwelling in a satisfactory condition, subject to inspection, and have 
complied with all conditions of their Tenancy Agreement  
(e) Satisfactory pass the required Garda Clearance check  
(f) Have been tenants of the present dwelling for at least two years. 
 
Priority may be given to a household in receipt of social housing support in a property 
that is not owned by the Council and the house is no longer available to them through 
no fault/act of their own, i.e., rental accommodation availability arrangements, 
availability agreements, long term leasing initiatives etc. All efforts are made to 
expedite transfer requests as efficiently as possible in the context of suitable available 
stock and competing demands from applicants. The Housing SPC will be looking at 
the development of a downsizing policy for local authority properties as part of its work 
programme. 
 
Cllr. Angie Baily said that she was raising the issue of Housing for older people who 
are looking to move into a smaller property or move to a ground floor property.  While 
she acknowledged the detailed response, she said it is not getting to the root of the 
problem, we need to move beyond looking at transfer lists.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded this motion.  
 
6. Letter to Min for Transport, NTA and Bus Éireann re MTU students 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tom Barry Proposed  
That Kerry County Council will contact the Minister for Transport, the National 
Transport Authority, and Bus Éireann to request that they work together to resolve the 
ongoing issue of students being left behind at the MTU Campus in Tralee in the 
evenings due to a lack of capacity on the bus serving the 272 Bus Route 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members 
 
Cllr. Tom Barry said there is a situation where students in north Kerry are being left 
behind due to lack of capacity. He called on the council to write to the relevant bodies 
requesting extra buses are provided to address this situation.  

 
10 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Paul Daly. 
 
7. Implementation of Age friendly parking  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Cahill Proposed 
That Kerry County Council, in recognition of the importance of supporting older people 
in our communities, expand the implementation of the Age Friendly Parking initiative 
to all towns and larger villages across the county. 
 
The following reply issued:  
At present, there are 14 Age Friendly Parking spaces available across County Kerry, 
located as follows: 
• Listowel: 3 spaces 
• Tralee: 5 spaces  
• Killarney: 5 spaces  
 
The Kerry Age Friendly Office is currently developing a new Age Friendly Strategy for 
Kerry 2025-2030. As part of the strategy’s development, Kerry County Council will 
examine expansion of Age Friendly parking spaces to additional towns and villages in 
Kerry, which will be reviewed in conjunction with the Operational Services Team. The 
strategy will be brought to the Strategic Policy Committee for review. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill said that older people are a vital part of our towns, villages, and 
parishes. The council has a duty to ensure that the infrastructure reflects their values, 
respect, inclusion, and dignity. Every older person in Kerry should benefit from this 
initiative. He proposed that the council works with the older community in these towns 
and villages to identify the most suitable locations for them.  
 
The motion was seconded by Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald  
 
8. Planning Queries procedure.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Michael Leane Proposed  
What procedures have Kerry County Council's Planning Department in place to ensure 
that queries from the public are dealt with in a timely manner.  
(a) What is the Council's target response time to a query.  
(b) What checks and balances are in place to reassure the public that responses to 
enquiries are in line with the Council's policy. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Queries to the Planning Department by email, by phone or in person are dealt with on 
a daily basis.  
a) In most cases a response is provided immediately but where a response cannot be 
provided straight away the query is referred to the relevant person/department for a 
response. Depending on the complexity of the issue it may take time to provide a 
response.  
b) In all instances every effort is made to ensure that a response is provided at the 
earliest opportunity. 
 

 
11 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
Cllr. Michael Leane said that many of his constituents have contacted him to express 
dissatisfaction to the time delay to planning queries. He asked that the council 
redeploy staff to the Planning Department to address the backlog.  
 
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly seconded this motion and said that some people have advised 
that they are waiting 13 weeks for a pre-planning meeting.  
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service said that a four-week response is desirable, and the 
council is currently reviewing the process to meet this timeframe.  
 
9. Quantity of pre planning meetings for Short Term letting  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. John O’Donoghue proposed  
To ask Kerry County Council, since January 1st 2024:  
(a) how many pre-planning meetings have been sought with Kerry County Council 
regarding planning permission for short term letting  
(b) how many applications they have received for full permission to short term let, and 
how many have been granted/refused." 
 
The following reply issued:  
(a) Kerry County Council has facilitated 629 pre-planning meetings since the 01st of 
January 2024, the specific nature of the meetings is not readily available within our 
system. 
 (b) 8 applications were received for short term lets from 01/01/2024 to 30/09/2025 
3 no. were granted  
2 no. were invalidated 
3 no. are pending a decision 
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue said his views on Short Term Letting are  well known at this 
stage and feel that it is far too heavy handed to be treating all areas in an MD the 
same, Also, notwithstanding the housing crisis, and the shortage of long term lets in 
the county, he said he believed that a balance should be struck given that this county 
is very reliant on tourism, and many of the properties affected by the new legislation 
are small units in back yards of peoples own primary residences and these will never 
appear for long term let. This type of cottage industry short-term letting has sustained 
generations of families within our county in very rural areas, and they now face being 
wiped out and any hope they had of their children remaining in their local area has 
disappeared. Rural depopulation is a colossal problem within our county, and it is a 
problem which is exasperated by our National Planning guidelines which seem to be 
very heavily biased towards forcing everybody to live in urban centres.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin seconded this motion.  
 
Cllr. Michael Leane moved Notice of Motion No. 27  
27. Pre-Planning meeting Wait times  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Michael Leane proposed    
What is the average waiting time for a pre-planning meeting for an agent or member 
of the public from Kerry County Council's Planning Department. Can Kerry County 
Council provide the annual number of pre-planning meetings for the past 4 years and 
for each year the number of responses that gave a positive response.  
 

 
12 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
The following reply issued:  
Average waiting time for a pre-planning meeting for an agent or member of the public 
is six to eight weeks. The number of pre-planning meetings held from 2022 to 
September 2025 are:-  
• 2022: 402  
• 2023: 368  
• 2024: 388  
• Jan to Sept 2025: 241  
It is not possible to bring a breakdown of the outcome of pre-planning discussions 
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan seconded this motion.  
 
Following a suggestion from Cllr. Michael Leane that site visits should be carried out. 
Mr. James Nolan Director of Service said that site visits would take a considerable 
amount time to carry out.   
 
Cllr. Michael Leane noted the remark and said suggested that site visits would be 
considered for commercial developments.  
 
10. Update on feasibility study for sports centre in north Kerry  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Aoife Kennelly proposed  
That Kerry County Council provide an update on the feasibility assessment currently 
being undertaken to identify potential sites, funding streams, and delivery models for 
the development of a multisport facility to serve all of North Kerry 
 
The following reply issued:  
The Council understands that Listowel Rugby Football Club is exploring the feasibility 
of developing lands which they own for a multi purpose sports facility at Tanavalla 
Listowel, in collaboration with Lios Tuathail AC and Listowel MD will support both 
groups in developing this facility.  
Kerry County Council actively engages with sporting clubs and community groups 
wishing to develop new recreation amenities. Kerry County Council’s Community 
section, local Municipal District team and Sports Partnership will continue to liaise with 
these and other clubs wishing to develop such facilities. 
 
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly said from Listowel to Ballyduff, from Ballybunion to Tarbert clubs 
are bursting at the seams. Many have 20 or 30 teams all trying to train and play on a 
single football pitch. That is simply not sustainable. The volunteers and coaches are 
doing incredible work, but they can only do so much without the proper infrastructure.  
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Tommy Cahill.  
 
Mr. J. Kennelly A/Director of Service said that the more clubs that provide a collective 
application will improve the chances to receive funding. He advised that the council 
will review any potential lands in north Kerry. 
 
11. Letter to Min for Agriculture and Aquaculture appeals board re Deenish 
Island  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Robert Brosnan Proposed 

 
13 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
Go scríobhfadh CCC chuig an Aire Talmhaíochta, Bia agus Mara reatha, agus chuig 
an Roinn agus chuig an mBord Achomhairc dobharshaothrú, ag leagan amach a imní 
maidir leis an gcinneadh le déanaí cinneadh roimhe seo a rinne an Roinn agus an 
tAire ag an am in 2019 a aisghairm chun ceadúnas feirme éisc a chúlghairm ag Oileán 
Duínis, rud a raibh tionchar tromchúiseach agus díobhálach aige ar an timpeallacht 
áitiúil agus ar an ngeilleagar áitiúil timpeall an Coireann. 
 
That Kerry County Council write to the current Minister for Agriculture, Food and the 
Marine, and the Aquaculture Appeals Board, outlining its concerns regarding the 
recent decision to rescind a previous decision made in 2019 by the Department and 
Minister at the time to revoke a fish farm licence at Deenish Island, which has had a 
severe and detrimental impact on the local environment and the local economy around 
Waterville. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members 
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan said there are concerns in the area, the farm is in breach of its 
licence. There are concerns regarding the amount of effluent that is been realised from 
the farm and the effect it will have on the area. This is an ecology disaster and called 
on the Government to review the matter urgently.  
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty seconded this motion and said the actions of this company are 
detrimental to the environment and local economy.  
 
12. Funding for N69 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr Liam Speedy Nolan Proposed  
Is there any progress on getting funding for the N69 Listowel to Tralee Road 
 
The following reply issued:  
A request for funding has been made to the TII for funding to carry out pavement 
improvements in 2026 on the N69 between the Tim Kennelly Roundabout and Boltons 
Cross. We will continue to raise the condition of this location at meetings with the TII. 
 
Cllr. Liam Nolan welcomed the update and asked that the pressure is kept on 
especially for road to Cahirdown.  
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley seconded this motion. 
 
Cllr. Liam Nolan moved Notice of Motion no 31 
 
31. Walk in Medical Centre Listowel 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr Liam Nolan Proposed  
That we write to the Minister for Health requesting a walk in private Medical Centre in 
Listowel like they have at Manor West Medical Centre in Tralee 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members 
 
Cllr. Liam Nolan said it can be very costly and inconvenient for people in Listowel to 
travel to Tralee and asked for the support of his fellow councillors on this request.  
 

 
14 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley seconded this motion.  
 
13. Letter to Min for agriculture re Rhododendron  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr Teddy O’Sullivan Casey proposed  
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Agriculture to urgently develop a 
plan of action to deal with the increasing spread of the invasive Rhododendron. It is 
spreading in many areas of our county at an alarming rate and is creating huge 
concern amongst the farming community and environmentalists. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members 
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey said that many parts of the county is infested with 
Rhododendron and spreading at an alarming rate. Many famers have without success 
tried to treat/eradicate the plant.  He called on the relevant ministers to urgently 
develop a plan to deal with this national issue. 
  
Cllr. Dan McCarthy seconded this motion and said that roads are overgrown with this 
species, if we don’t address the problem we will have no land left. 
 
14. Letter to the Minister of Health Re wages of Creche employees 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr Podge Foley proposed  
That Kerry County Council write to the Department of Health to increase the wages of 
Creche employees to €15 per an hour. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members 
 
Cllr. Podge Foley said that staff are overworked and their value is understated.  He 
said if there are not sufficiently paid, they will have no option but to go on strike.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin seconded this motion and said that Creche employees should be 
brought under the remit of the Department of Education.  
 
 
15. Rural Housing 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Brendan Cronin proposed  
Following Taoiseach Micheal Martin's statement in September that he is looking to 
facilitate people building homes on their own land, I propose that this council re-insert 
the following paragraph to the Rural Housing section of the of county development 
plan, "landowners including their sons and daughters who wish to build a first home 
for their permanent occupation on the landholding associated with their principal 
residence for a minimum of seven years prior to the date of the planning application.  
 
The following reply issued:  
The Taoiseachs’ statement in September related to guidelines/policy which is being 
developed by the Department of Housing Local Government and Heritage. To date 
the revised guidelines/policy has not issued to the Planning Authority. Until such time 
as revised or new guidelines and/or policies are issued, it would be premature to 
amend the Rural Housing Section of the County Development Plan. 
 

 
15 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
Cllr Brendan Cronin said this paragraph was in the previous County Development Plan 
and worked very well, it allowed families who weren’t descendants of farmers to 
progress and build a property on a site. He said it is the sensible thing to do and there 
is no risk. He said since 2022 a number of applicants have come to him stating that 
they have no hope of been granted planning.   
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae seconded this motion and cited that the word “landowner” is 
significant and has cause untold difficulties. People have been advised that there are 
wasting their time submitting a planning application resulting in no information been 
collected.   
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service advised that the word” landowner” was removed 
following a legal case. He referred to the upcoming planning MD workshops and said 
that the matter can be discussed in more detail.  
 
16. Safety of Poulgorm Junction on the N22 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae proposed 
To ask Kerry County Council and the TII to examine the safety of Poulgorm Junction 
on the N22 and to explore the implementation of further safety measures. 
Notwithstanding previous measures that have taken place, accidents and collisions 
continue to occur at this location on a regular basis 
 
The following reply issued:  
The performance of this junction continues to be examined in consultation with the TII 
Safety Section. Further intervention measures to improve safety at this location are 
being planned to provide improved junction definition and to promote speed reductions 
on the N22. 
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae said the safety at the junction is paramount and  a petition has 
been signed by the residents. She said unfortunately the works that have taken place 
haven’t eliminated the danger and said that more action is needed. She said that 
speed and the lack of lighting is an issue.  
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue seconded this motion and said that Poulgorm Bridge is raised 
at almost every Killarney MD Meeting. He wished to concur with the comments 
expressed by Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae and said the presence of lighting on the new 
Macroom By-Pass is testament to the advantage of lighting an area.  
  
17. Social Media campaign re damage dogs cause sheep  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr Fionnan Fitzgerald proposed  
That Kerry County Council runs a campaign on social media calling on owners of dogs 
to make sure they are accounted for at all times and highlighting the damage 
uncontrolled dogs can do to sheep. 
 
The following reply issued:  
A guide to responsible dog ownership in Ireland has been compiled by the DAFM, the 
Department of Rural and Community Development (DRCD) and Local Authorities and 
is available on the Kerry County Council website. This guide will also be promoted on 
various media platforms. 
 

 
16 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
Cllr Fionnán Fitzgerald said as the winter months approach it is important that dog 
owners are aware of the dangers, roaming dogs can cause to livestock.  He asked 
that this is highlighted through a public campaign, it is better to be proactive rather 
reactive.  
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan seconded this motion.  
 
18. Development of old Dingle Hospital 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr Brendan Fitzgerald proposed  
That Kerry County Council continue to work with Údarás na Gaeltachta and all other 
State Agencies and Departments in order to progress the plans and development of 
the Old Dingle Hospital. 
 
The following reply issued:  
A positive meeting recently took place between all parties to progress, plan and 
develop the Old Dingle Hospital. It is anticipated that more concrete development, 
funding and delivery timeframe will be forthcoming from Údarás na Gaeltachta in Q4 
2025. 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald said that this is such an important site for Dingle and 
welcomed the update.  
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Tommy Griffin.  
 
19. LIS Assessment 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Norma Moriarty proposed 
To ask Kerry County Council for an update on the deliberation of the relevant SPC on 
my previous motion to bring LIS roads accessing community amenities to be taken in 
charge by Kerry County Council when they are at standard necessary. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Section 81(5) of the Local Government Act 2001, stipulates that upon completion of a 
Local Improvement Scheme (LIS), the local authority bears no further responsibility or 
liability for the maintenance of the road carried out under the scheme. Therefore, LIS 
roads cannot be taken in charge by the local authority. The detail of this can be 
reviewed at the Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty expressed disappointment that the matter had not yet been 
referred to the relevant SPC.  
 
Mr. J. Kennelly A/Director of Service gave a commitment that the matter will be 
included on the November SPC agenda.  
 
20. Road Safety in Schools  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Paul Daly proposed  
That Kerry County Council's Road Safety Officer engage with primary and secondary 
schools to highlight road safety as we head into winter. 
 
The following reply issued:  

 
17 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
Between now and the end of 2025, the Council’s Road Safety Officer is scheduled to 
deliver road safety education sessions at: 
• 18 Primary Schools  
• 12 Post Primary Schools  
 
Projected Student Reach:  
• Primary Schools: Approximately 3,000 students 
• Post Primary Schools: Approximately 1,500 students 
 
Cllr. Paul Daly noted the response and requested that zoom meetings would be 
considered to reach out to a greater number of schools and students. He said he has 
witnessed bike and E Scooter users who don’t wear hi vis vests.  
 
Cllr Tommy Cahill seconded this motion and concurred with the comments expressed 
by Cllr. Paul Daly.  
 
Mr. J. Kennelly A/Director of Service said that Cllr. Daly’s comments will be taken on 
board; it will be considered if there is a need to review the circulation of hi vis vests.   
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty moved Notice of Motion no 21 on behalf of Cllr. Jimmy Moloney 
21. Letter to Min for Health and HSE lookback CAHMS 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jimmy Moloney proposed  
That Kerry County Council once again call on the HSE and the Minister for Health to 
immediately publish the Lookback Review into North Kerry CAMHS, to undertake a 
broader lookback review to include all files ever opened to the service, and to broaden 
the existing State redress scheme to encompass North Kerry CAMHS cases where 
an apology has been issued by the HSE. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members 
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae moved Notice of Motion no 22 on behalf of Cllr. Johnny Healy-
Rae 
22. Estate takeover applications  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae proposed  
That Kerry County Council outline how many estates have applied for takeover and 
with how long. Please give a timeline as to when these will be complete. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council currently has 71 live applications for estates to be taken in 
charge.  The list below sets out the numbers and associated dates when the 
applications were received.   
 
Year 
Received 
No. 
of 
Application 
Outstanding
2012
1
2014
2
2015
4
2016
2
2017
4

 
18 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
2018
5
2019
7
2020
9
2021
6
2022
4
2023
7
2024
16
2025
4
Total
71
 
The Council continues to work through this programme and deal with new applications 
as they arise. Following on from previous queries from Members we are currently 
preparing a report on this programme with the full details and status of these 
applications. This report will also include an action plan and associated programme to 
address all individual requests for Taking in Charge.  The action plan and programme 
once finalised will be presented to each Municipal District and a progress report will 
form part of the Directorate report at each future MD Meeting.  
 
23. Coroners overspend  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Charlie Farrelly proposed  
To call on Kerry County Council to explain why there appears to be a massive 
overspending in the region of some €750,000 for our Coronary Service, between 2020 
and 2024 between what was budgeted for in our Annual Budget, and what was actually 
spent in this period 
 
The following reply issued: 
Total expenditure on Coroner Fees and Expenses from the period 2020 to 2024 was 
€2,321,788, the Adopted Budget was €1,683,234 for this 5-year period, the out-turn 
reflects an average annual increase over budget of over 7%. This includes the salaries 
of Coroners covering this county and the fees and expenses incurred resulting from 
the holding of postmortems and inquests. The amount provided for in the budget is an 
estimate for the year ahead based on potential activity levels. The final outturn for the 
year is dependent on actual activity levels and incurred expenditure as certified by the 
coroner. All unexpected deaths are reported to the Coroner and it is a matter for the 
Coroner to determine whether a Postmortem, Inquest and associated services are 
required on a case by case basis. 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farelly said that Kerry County Council has no remit or isn’t a service 
provider in regard to the coroners but is somehow responsible for paying Coroner’s 
fees. This matter has been previously raised, and it appears that the council has no 
voice in the matter.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill seconded this motion and said that he has raised this matter with 
Mr. Jim O’ Callaghan Minister for Justice and Home Affairs.   
 
24. Letter to Min for Equality, Public Expenditure, and Finance  Re End 
Discrimination of Inheritance (EDIT)  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Angie Baily proposed  

 
19 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
That Kerry County Council endorses the End Discrimination of Inheritance (EDIT) 
campaign and calls on Ministers for Equality, Norma Foley, Public Expenditure, Jack 
Chambers and Finance Paschal Donoghue to commit to harmonising the inheritance 
laws and bands so that people with no direct descendants are treated the same as 
those with children under inheritance law and succession planning. Furthermore, I 
request that upon adoption, this motion is circulated to all Local Authorities. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members 
 
Cllr. Angie Baily said that not everybody has a direct descendant, and inheritance 
shouldn’t be treated differently. The legislation should be amended to determine what 
the meaning of family means in this situation.  
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Martin Grady.  
 
25. CCTV update 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tom Barry Proposed  
Can Kerry County Council arrange a meeting between An Gardai Sìochana and the 
Kerry County Council Data Protection Officer with a view to carrying out a data 
protection impact statement as part of the proposed roll out of a CCTV system in the 
county. 
 
The following reply issued: 
There has been considerable engagement between all stakeholders in relation to 
CCTV and in particular the preparation of a Data Protection Impact Assessment 
(DPIA) for the Killarney Town Centre CCTV scheme. 
The final approval to that DPIA is awaited and Kerry County Council will continue to 
work with partners to reiterate the importance of this. 
 
Cllr. Tom Barry acknowledged the reply but stated that in Listowel there is no CCTV 
system in place. He noted that the work is in progress by the council and An Gardai 
Siochana but urged that the matter remains on the agenda. He urged that the 
proposed meeting between the Data Protection officer and Garda would progress. He 
said the allocation of Gardai in Listowel town is understaffed and called on the Council 
to write to the Mr. Jim O’ Callaghan Minister for Justice and the new Garda 
Commissioner. 
  
26. Life Buoys allocation 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Cahill Proposed  
That Kerry County Council ensure an adequate number of life buoys are provided and 
maintained at all beaches, rivers, lakes, and water-based recreational areas 
throughout the county. Furthermore, that the Council offer life buoys free of charge to 
landowners whose properties are adjacent to waterways which are regularly accessed 
or used by the public, in the interest of public safety and drowning prevention. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council provide and maintain approximately 414 lifebuoys throughout 
the county which are typically located at public amenities including our Blue Flag 
beaches, Designated Bathing Areas, Local Authority managed piers and harbours and 
urban amenities located along watercourses e.g. Tralee Bay Amenity Walkway. These 

 
20 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
devices are the subject of scheduled inspection and repair, and Kerry County Council 
assigns significant resources in this regard annually in the interest of water safety.  
 
Kerry County Council does not have responsibility for the provision of life buoys at 
privately owned or privately accessed water courses or water bodies, as there is a 
significant resource required for their ongoing inspection and maintenance 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill said as councillors, our first responsibility is public safety. This 
motion is about taking a proactive approach to a very real danger. The provision and 
maintenance of life buoys at all beaches, rivers, lakes, and water-based recreational 
areas, is of the utmost importance. Furthermore, he called on this Council to take an 
additional step, to offer life buoys free of charge to landowners whose properties 
border waterways frequently accessed by the public. These landowners often find 
themselves in a grey area of responsibility. He said if this motion helps save even one 
life, then it will have been worth it.  
 
Mr. J. Kennelly A/Director of Service stated that the issue with the life buoys is that 
they must be monitored and inspected. The council may not have the resources to 
undertake these works on private property.  
 
Following comments from Cllr. Tommy Cahill that the landowner will assist, Mr. J 
Kennelly A/ Director of Service stated that he will review the matter.  
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan. 
 
28. Tralee Economic Corridor  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. John O’Donoghue proposed   
To request an update on the plans for the N22 Cork - Tralee Economic Corridor which 
will provide a bypass for Killarney Town. Is it likely that we will see work commence in 
2026. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Phase 3 design and environmental evaluations work are underway and will 
progress throughout 2025-2026 ahead of the statutory application to An Coimisiún 
Pleanála in 2027.  
 
Topographical surveying is underway and a ground investigation contract is about to 
be awarded with fieldwork to commence in the coming weeks and will continue through 
Q1/Q2 2026.  
 
Engagement with landowners in relation to the fieldwork is underway. Meanwhile the 
preliminary design for the project is being prepared and will be further informed by 
both the topographical and ground investigation contracts. 
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue stated that this issue appears on the agenda at nearly every 
Council meeting. The traffic congestion in Killarney is an almost year long issue now 
and needs to be addressed urgently. The proposed economic corridor which will 
provide a bypass for the town of Killarney, is not a silver bullet which will solve all our 
traffic woes as given the nature of the town, it will always be in demand as a desirable 
location for people to live in, work in and holiday in. He said he hopes that in time 

 
21 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
public transport will improve to the extent that many people will feel comfortable 
leaving their cars at home and travelling on public transport.  
 
This motion was seconded by Cathaoirleach Cllr. Michael Foley. 
 
29.Parking Bylaws for overnight campervans 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Aoife Kennelly proposed  
That Kerry County Council review the existing bye-laws relating to the overnight 
parking of camper vans and motorhomes throughout the county, as the illegal parking 
in public spaces is creating issues due to the lack of appropriate facilities. Furthermore, 
that Kerry County Council examine the feasibility of installing paid, serviced facilities 
to better manage demand and support responsible tourism 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has commenced the process of developing a strategy to guide 
the development of well-planned, sustainable campervan facilities near towns, 
villages, and other centres that have the necessary infrastructure and services to 
support them. The strategy will be completed and published in advance of the tourism 
season 2026.  
 
Following the adoption of the policy, Kerry County Council will undertake a review of 
the car park bye-laws to ensure that the byelaws reflect the tourism strategy and 
associated policies in respect of camper vans and motor homes. 
 
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly stated that every summer, we see how popular Kerry has become 
with camper van tourists and they are very welcome. But the reality is that illegal 
overnight parking in public spaces is now a growing problem. It’s creating issues for 
local residents, for businesses, and for the environment particularly in our coastal and 
scenic areas. She said the current byelaws are not clear enough. Gardaí and Council 
staff need stronger, unambiguous rules so that enforcement can actually happen when 
illegal parking occurs. The enforcement alone isn’t enough and said that the councils 
needs to provide suitable, serviced locations with waste disposal, water, and electricity 
so that visitors have a proper alternative. Paid facilities like this have worked extremely 
well in other counties and across Europe.  
 
The motion was seconded by Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and called on the council to liaise 
with Motor Homes Ireland.  
 
 
30.Information re tenders to local suppliers  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr.Robert Brosonan proposed  
Go ndéanfaidh CCC feachtas faisnéise agus cur chuige áitiúil spriocdhírithe, ag 
tabhairt cuireadh do sholáthraithe, seirbhísí agus ceardaithe ó laistigh den Chontae, 
ionas go gcuirfear níos mó soláthraithe, seirbhísí agus ceardaithe áitiúla ionchasacha 
ar an eolas faoi chonarthaí amach anseo trí chóras soláthair CCC agus go dtabharfar 
rochtain dóibh tairiscintí a dhéanamh i leith conarthaí amach anseo.  
 
That Kerry County Council undertakes an information campaign and targeted localised 
approach, inviting suppliers, services, and tradespeople from within the County, so 
that more prospective local suppliers, services, and tradespeople are made aware of, 

 
22 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
and given access to tender for future contracts through the Kerry County Council's 
procurement system. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Tá Comhairle Chiarraí tiomanta do thacaíocht a thabhairt do fhiontair áitiúla agus a 
chinntiú go gcuirtear soláthraithe i gCiarraí ar an eolas faoi dheiseanna tairisceana 
agus go bhfuil siad in ann páirt a ghlacadh iontu.” Cé go gcaithfidh soláthar cloí le 
rialacháin náisiúnta agus rialacháin an AE chun cothroime, trédhearcacht agus luach 
ar airgead a chinntiú, aithníonn an Chomhairle an tábhacht a bhaineann le 
rannpháirtíocht áitiúil a spreagadh agus leanfaidh sí de thionscnaimh a iniúchadh a 
chuireann feasacht agus acmhainn chun cinn i measc soláthraithe, seirbhísí agus 
ceardaithe áitiúla. Is minic a bhíonn baisceanna réigiúnacha (regional lots) i socruithe 
soláthair lárnacha na hOifige um Sholáthar Rialtais (OGP) agus SupplyGov a ligeann 
do sholáthraithe áitiúla dul san iomaíocht ar chonarthaí laistigh dá gceantar féin, rud 
a laghdaíonn an iarracht riaracháin agus a mhéadaíonn infheictheacht na hoibre 
áitiúla. Cinntíonn an cur chuige trédhearcach, láraithe seo go bhfuil soláthraithe áitiúla 
ar an eolas faoi dheiseanna atá le teacht agus gur féidir leo páirt a ghlacadh ar 
chomhchéim le hiomaitheoirí. Feidhmíonn “Ionad Soláthair Oibríochta Rialtais Áitiúil” 
an LGOPC, faoi choimirce Chomhairle Contae Chiarraí, mar chomhlacht ceannaigh 
lárnach agus is Seirbhís Chomhroinnte Náisiúnta í atá freagrach as socruithe soláthair 
lárnacha a chur i bhfeidhm, a bhainistiú agus a fhorbairt faoi na catagóirí atá faoi stiúir 
earnáil an Rialtais Áitiúil maidir le fruiliú gléasra, oibreacha beaga tógála agus 
sibhialta. Tá iarracht d’aon ghnó agus chomhbheartaithe déanta ag an LGOPC chun 
deiseanna a leathnú, i gcomhar leis an Oifig Fiontair Áitiúil, don earnáil 
FBManna/MicreaFBManna chun páirt a ghlacadh sa phróiseas soláthair phoiblí. 
Leanfaidh Comhairle Contae Chiarraí de bheith ag athbhreithniú roghanna chun 
cumarsáid le soláthraithe a fheabhsú, lena n-áirítear treoir maidir le clárú agus 
rannpháirtíocht sna hardáin soláthair náisiúnta eTenders, Supplygov agus Oifig an 
tSoláthair Rialtais (OGP), trína bhfógraítear gach tairiscint phoiblí. 
 
Kerry Council is committed to supporting local enterprise and ensuring that suppliers 
within Kerry are made aware of and have access to tender opportunities. While 
procurement must comply with national and EU regulations to ensure fairness, 
transparency, and value for money, the Council recognises the importance of 
encouraging local participation and will continue to explore initiatives that promote 
awareness and capacity among local suppliers, services, and tradespeople. The 
Office of Government Procurement (OGP) and SupplyGov central procurement 
arrangements often include regional lots that allow local suppliers to compete for 
contracts within their own area, reducing administrative effort and increasing visibility 
of local work. This transparent, centralised approach ensures that local suppliers are 
aware of upcoming opportunities and can participate on an equal footing with 
competitors. The LGOPC “Local Government Operational Procurement Centre” under 
the auspices of Kerry County Council, acts as a central purchasing body and is a 
National Shared Service with responsibility for implementing, managing and 
developing central procurement arrangements under the Local Government sector led 
categories of plant hire, minor building works and civils. A deliberate and concerted 
effort has been made by the LGOPC to expand opportunities in conjunction with the 
Local Enterprise Office, for the SME/Micro-SME sector to participate in the public 
procurement process. Kerry County Council will continue to review options to enhance 
communication to suppliers, including guidance on registration and participation in the 

 
23 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
national eTenders, Supplygov and Office of Government Procurement (OGP) 
procurement platforms, through which all public tenders are advertised 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded this motion.  
 
32. Cluster Housing policies  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Griffin proposed  
That Kerry County Council develop a specific planning policy and guidelines for cluster 
housing and serviced sites in our small rural villages to support and revitalise them. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The County Development Plan includes a specific objective in respect of cluster 
housing and serviced sites. The objective of this plan is to permit clusters of housing 
served by individual wastewater treatment systems in the small villages and small 
village settlements listed in Table 5.1 where there are no wastewater infrastructure or 
no plans for such infrastructure. The strategy for these clusters within these 
settlements is to facilitate a small number of additional dwellings and/or small 
enterprises to consolidate the existing pattern of development around these focal 
points and utilise existing services in the area 
 
 
 
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin said there is some great examples around the country which has 
been successfully developed, but the difficulty is getting rural planning. This could be 
an opportunity to develop the small villages. It would revitalise these villages, the local 
schools and communities would all benefit. He said the council needs to encourage 
this type of development and remove barriers of rural settlement policy. 
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey seconded this motion.  
 
33. LIS update  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Teddy O’Sullivan Casey  
Can Elected Members receive an updated list of all Local Improvement Scheme 
applications in Kerry, bearing in mind the necessary GDPR rules 
 

 
24 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
The following reply issued: 
An updated LIS list was issued to Elected Members on October 7th, 2025. 
 
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey welcomed the response. It is important that this council 
keeps pressure on the Department to increase this allocation.   
 
Cathaoirleach Michael Foley seconded this motion.  
 
34. Municipal District Funding  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Podge Foley proposed  
Can Kerry County Council provide a detailed account of funding going into each 
Municipal District in Kerry the last 5 years 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Council has commenced the process in collating the financial information 
requested on programmes where the specific information on municipal districts is 
available and will revert in due course. 
 
Cllr. Podge Foley questioned where the funding is been spent and said that he has 
previously called on the council to purchase a building for the Arts Centre in Killorglin. 
 
The motion was seconded by Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald.   
 
35. Letter to HSE RE Killarney Nursing Home 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Brendan Cronin proposed  
To call on the HSE to publicly clarify the unacceptable situation where families with 
elderly relatives requiring long term nursing home care are being offered beds in 
homes outside Kerry while a newly built 130 bed facility in Killarney remains unopened 
and gathering dust. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members 
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin said the scenario is completely unacceptable, people are being 
offered beds outside of the county. The situation is very frustrating for the 
administration staff in the HSE and very upsetting for families and the patients.  
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue seconded this motion and said unfortunately this situation may 
remain stagnant as the H.S.E. tend not to move patients in the winter months.  
 
36. Amendments to County Development plan  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae proposed  
To ask Kerry County Council for a detailed update, following my previous motion and 
subsequent vote of this council to amend the county development plan regarding the 
extensive nature of areas under significant urban influence in Killarney Municipal 
District, and to outline the next step in the process 
 
The following reply issued: 
Following the passing of the motion, requesting Kerry County Council to complete a 
report to amend the County Development Plan, to reduce the footprint of the areas 
associated with the policy objective of Areas Under Significant Urban Pressure.  

 
25 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
 
The appropriate Report was prepared by the executive and presented to the elected 
members in November 2024. Following the consideration of the report it was agreed 
that the Planning Department would carry out a series of workshops with the Municipal 
Districts (MD’s) to consider the Rural Housing Policy and its’ application within the MD. 
Workshops have been completed with 3 of the 5 MD’s. The two remaining MD 
workshops will be completed in November. Once these workshops have taken place 
with all MD’s, a report on the outcome of these workshops will be prepared and 
circulated, for consideration by the Strategic Policy Committee.  
 
It is anticipated that the report will be presented to the full council meeting in January. 
This report will outline the findings from each workshop and will also outline a series 
of recommendations, which will inform the next steps in the process. 
 
Cllr Maura Healy-Rae expressed dissatisfaction with the delay in the process and said 
the workshops have been the idea of the executive and said it has delayed the whole 
process. She respectfully asked that the request in the motion is adhered to.  
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue seconded this motion.  
 
37.Letters to Ministers for Finance and Culture Re Extend income for Arts 
scheme  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Brendan Fitzgerald proposed  
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister for Finance and the Minister for Culture, 
Communications and Sport to retain, extend and expand the Basic Income for the Arts 
Scheme 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald welcomed the announcement that the scheme will be 
maintained and hopefully it will be expanded. He asked that the Government would 
consider expanding the scheme to all artists. 
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue seconded this motion.  
  
38.Letter to minister re Skellig Michael  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Norma Moriarty proposed  
That Kerry County Council call on Minister Moran to ensure that an earlier opening to 
the Skellig Michael Landings can be achieved for 2026 and into the future. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members 
 
Cllr Norma Moriarty stated that Skellig Michael is a very important amenity to the whole 
county. There was only 61 landing days in 2025 and asked that the facility would be 
opened earlier in the year given that the weather trends show better weather now 
earlier in the year.   
 
Cllr Dan McCarthy seconded this motion.  
 
20.10.2025.10 Correspondence – Conference and Seminars 

 
26 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
(a) On the proposal of Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan and seconded by Cllr. Charlie Farrelly 
it was agreed to grant approval to the Cathaoirleach to attend the Pride of Place 
Awards 2025 at the Limerick Strand Hotel, Ennis Road, Limerick on Friday 7 
November 2025 
 
(b) On the proposal of Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald and seconded by Cllr. Charlie Farrelly 
it was agreed for the Cathaoirleach Cllr. Michael Foley to attend a national 
presentation of Long Service Awards to members of the Fire Service and Emergency 
Control Operations Personnel to be held in Trim Co Meath on Thursday 13 November 
2025. 
 
(c) On the proposal of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly and seconded by Cllr. Michael Leane it 
was agreed for the Cathaoirleach to the Kerry London Association Annual Dinner 
Dance that will be held in Wembley, London on Friday 14 November 2025. 
 
(d) On the proposal of Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan and seconded by Cllr. Deirdre Ferris it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of Cathaoirleach Michael Foley at the Tech 
Industry Alliance Leaders Awards in Cork on Friday 28 November 2025. 
 
(e) On the proposal of Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald and seconded by Cllr. Deirdre Ferris 
it was agreed to approve the attendance of Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Michael Foley and 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan at the Chamber Ireland Excellence in Local Government Awards 
2025 to be in Dublin on Thursday 27 November 2025. 
 
(f) On the proposal of Cllr. Aoife Kennelly and seconded by Cllr. Michael Leane it 
was agreed to get retrospective approval for Cllr. Tommy Griffin to attend the Irish 
Planning Institute 50th Anniversary Autumn Planning Conference in Dublin on 
Thursday 02 October 2025. 
 
(g) On the proposal of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly and seconded by Cllr. Aoife Kennelly it 
was agreed to approve the attendance of all members to the October - Module 5 2025 
– ‘Local Authority Finance & Budget’ on Saturday 11th October 2025 & (Southern - 
Region – Horse & Jockey Hotel, Tipperary) on Thursday, 9 October 2025 (Arklow Bay 
Hotel, Wicklow for Northern and Midlands - Region). 
 
(h) On the proposal of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and seconded by Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan it 
was agreed to get retrospective approval for the attendance of all members to the RIAI 
Conference (RIAI Conference 2025 - Cities, Towns and Neighbourhoods) which was 
held in the at RDS Dublin. On Wednesday 08 and Thursday 09 October 2025  
 
(i) On the proposal of Cllr. Aoife Kennelly and seconded by Cllr. Charlie Farrelly it was 
agreed to approve the attendance of Elected Members at the ICSH – Irish Council for 
Social Housing Conference will take place in Co. Cavan on Wednesday 15 and 
Thursday 16 October 2025.  
 
(j) On the proposal of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and seconded by Cathaoirleach Michael 
Foley it was agreed to approve the attendance of Elected Members to The ETC 
Network Event – EU Funding in Action at the Southern Regional Assembly, Assembly 
House, Waterford City on Tuesday 04 November 2025. 

 
27 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
 
(k) On the proposal of Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae and seconded by Cllr. Charlie Farrelly 
it was agreed to approve the attendance of Elected Members to attend the Celtic 
conference “The Evolving Role of AI in Public Relations” in Clonakilty, Co. Cork from 
Friday 07 – Sunday 09 November 2025. 
 
 
20.10.2025.11 Correspondence General 
 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were circulated: 
List of correspondence circulated at the October 2025 
Meeting of Kerry County Council 
  
Date 
From 
Description 
1. 
09/09/2025 
Minister for 
Housing & LG 
Response from Minister for Envir in relation to a 
request to remove the requirement of a minimum 
of 25 houses for Group Water Schemes
2. 
12/09/2025 
Minister for 
Housing, LG & 
Heritage  
Response from Minister for in relation to a request 
to reintroduce a development contribution waiver 
scheme. 
 
3 
22/09/2025 
Dept of 
Education  
Response to a resolution in relation to a request 
from the Members in relation to funding for 
Schools.  
4 
22/09/2025 
Dept of Climate 
Energy & 
Environment  
Response to a resolution in relation to the fee 
imposed by Energy Providers when taking out 
contracts. 
5 
24/09/2025 
Dept of Social 
Protection  
Response from Dept of SP re eligibility of CE 
Scheme. 
6 
24/09/2025 
Min for 
Education 
Response from Dept of Education re in relation to 
a request from EM to review payments for 
Secretaries and Caretakers. 
7 
23/09/2025 
Min for Health 
Response from Dept of Health re in relation to a 
request to prohibit vaping in workplaces.  
8 
23/09/2025 
Min for 
Education  
Response from Dept of Education re Return to 
School dates 

 
28 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
9 
30/09/2025 
Min for 
Housing  
Response from Dept of Housing asking that the  
delivery of affordable and cost-rental housing in 
Kerry is an emergency priority, 
10 
01/10/2025 
Min for 
Education 
Response to a resolution requesting that the pupil 
ratio in primary schools be reduced. 
11 
02/10/2025 
HSE 
Response to a resolution requesting that the age 
of Breast Screening be extended to the age of 40 
12 
8/10/2025 
Dept of 
Communication 
Response to a resolution on the provision of 
Eircode to all farmyards 
13 
10/10/2025 
Dept of 
Housing  
Response to a resolution requesting that the 
threshold for social Housing be reviewed. 
14 
10/10/2025 
Dept of 
Housing  
Response to a resolution requesting the Minister to 
urgently address the housing crisis in County Kerry 
by 
expediting 
the 
provision of 
wastewater 
treatment infrastructure in towns and villages 
across the county. 
15 
12/09/2025 
Carlow County 
Council  
Resolution calling on the Minister for further 
Education 
and 
Taoiseach 
expressing 
their 
opposition to any increase in College Fees. 
16 
18/09/2025 
Sligo County 
Council 
Resolution calling on the Min for Trade, Enterprise 
and Employment and Min for Rural affairs to 
support Town and City Gift Card.  
17 
25/09/2025 
Roscommon 
County Council 
Resolution asking that development fees be 
waived 
for 
all 
applicants 
who 
served 
a 
commencement notice before the deadline in 
2024.
18 
26/09/2025 
Limerick City & 
County council 
Resolution calling on the Taoiseach and Min for 
Mental Health re removal of VAT on Counselling 
services and psychotherapy and extension of tax 
relief on Counselling services and psychotherapy.
19 
30/09/2025 
Limerick City & 
Limerick 
County 
Resolution calling on the Min for Agriculture & 
Forestry to provide compensation for the loss of 
livelihoods caused by Ash Dieback disease.  
20 
03/10/2025 
Wexford 
County Council Review of Ash dieback situation on public roads.  

 
29 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
21 
09/10/2025 
Monaghan 
County Council
Resolution from EM asking Government to act 
immediately to ensure the Health and social Care 
Sector in Ireland is cleansed following reports in 
Care facilities for the elderly.  
22 
16/10/2025 
Galway City 
Council  
Resolution asking that Extension of free fares to 
under 9’s to commercial bus operators.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris expressed disappointment with the reply received from the HSE in 
regard to the Breast Screening Health check for women over 40 years. She said she 
is aware of young women in the 25 /30 age bracket who have been diagnosed with 
breast cancer, it is an ever-growing problem.  The response doesn’t show respect for 
the women of this country. She proposed that a reply issue to the HSE outlining the 
Elected Members disappointment to the response.  
 
Cllr. Angie Baily seconded this proposal.  
 
All Elected Members wished to be associated with the comments expressed by Cllr. 
Deirdre Ferris.  
 
20.10.2025.12 Minutes arising from the minutes as confirmed 
 
20.10.2025.13 Any Other Business 
 
Opening Hours Banna Beach Facilities 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris expressed disappointment that the public toilets in Banna beach 
currently remain closed from Monday – Friday. She stated that this blue flag beach 
has huge visitors all year round and the town of Tralee is heavily dependent on the 
amenity. She asked that the council exercise common sense.  
 
Mr. J. Kennelly A/Director of Service said the council will review the opening times in 
accordance with the MD works plan.  
 
Civic Reception for Kevin Cronin 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue proposed that a civic reception would be held for Mr. Kevin 
Cronin who was recently crowned Irish Light Heavyweight champion.  
 
The executive undertook to forward the Civic Honours Protocol form to Cllr. John O 
‘Donoghue so that an official request can be submitted. 
 
Congratulations 
Cllr Brendán Fitzgerald congratulated Austin Stacks Football team and Dingle Football 
Team who reached the Senior County Championship final.  
 
He congratulated the Clounmacon Senior Ladies Team on winning the Kerry 
Intermediate Championship and Southern Gaels Ladies Senior team on winning the 
County championship. 
 
The meeting concluded at 4.17 p.m. 

 
30 
Oct Ordinary Meeting – 20 October 25 
 
Bridget Fitzgerald 
 
_________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator 
Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
