September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
1 of 56 
 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect 
putting them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is 
available on request. 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ NA CRUINNITHE MHIOSIÚIL DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE 
CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN  
CHONTAE, TRÁ  LÍ, AR  AN  LUAN , 11 MEÁN FÓMHAIR, 2017 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL 
HELD IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE ON 
MONDAY, 11TH SEPTEMBER, 2017 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
R. Beasley 
M. Cahill 
P Connor-Scarteen         
B. Cronin 
J.J. Culloty 
P. Daly 
 
         
T. Ferris                             J. Finucane                       J.F. Flynn 
 
        
N. Foley 
M. Gleeson 
D. Grady 
 
        
J. Healy-Rae 
N. Kelleher 
M. Kennelly  
        
S. Locke 
J. Lucid 
D. McCarthy  
         
P. McCarthy 
T. McEllistrim 
J. Moloney  
        
N. Moriarty 
T. O’Brien 
B. O’Connell                      
M. O’Shea 
 L. Purtill 
D. Quigg 
 
        
J. Sheahan 
 G. Spring 
A. Thornton 
 
APOLOGY/LEATH SCÉAL 
D. Nolan 
S. Fitzgerald 
 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Ms. M. Murrell, Chief Executive    
  Mr. J. Breen, Director Water Services             
Ms. A. McAllen, Head of Finance 
  Mr. M. Scannell, A/Dir. Job Cr/Sust. ED          
Mr. M. O’Donoghue, A/Dir.H.&Corp.S.   Mr. C. O’Sullivan, Director of Operations          
Mr. L. Quinlan, Meetings Administrator Ms. K. Lynch, SEO Finance 
                        
Mr. D. Ginty, A/SE Planning 
  Ms. B. Conway, AO Corporate Support           
Mr. G. O’Brien, A/SEO Envir. Serv.         Mr. O. O’Shea, Press & Comm. Officer   
      
Ms. T. Browne, AO Revenue 
  Ms. B. Reidy, SSO Corporate Support            
Mr. P. O’Connor, SSO Finance 
  Mr. R. Tangney, SO Finance 
Mr. J.J. Canty, A.S.O. Finance 
  Ms. G. Cotter, CO Finance 
 
Ms. K. Kennelly-O’Driscoll, Arts Off.   Ms. O. O’Shea, CO Corporate Support  
Mr. S. Hussey, Corp. Support 
  Ms. A. Hogan, IT   
 
 
The meeting commenced at 12.50pm. 
 
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Sheahan took the Chair. 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
2 of 56 
 
17.09.11.01 Cathaoirleach’s Report on the CPG Meeting held on the 5th 
September 2017 
 
The Cathaoirleach read the following report into the record of the meeting: 
 
“Agenda for the September Council Meeting 
Mr. L. Quinlan briefed the meeting on the Agenda for the September Council 
Meeting. 
 
The Chief Executive highlighted that it is intended that a draft Report on the 
National Planning Framework will be presented to Cabinet in a few weeks and this 
will be followed by a public consultation process.  She said that linking Kerry to the 
proposed Western Corridor is of critical strategic importance for the county and 
she reminded members of Kerry County Council’s submission on the National 
Planning Framework which was circulated earlier in the year which highlighted 
this.  It is critical that Kerry is linked to the Western Corridor to ensure that funding 
can be secured for infrastructure into the future. 
 
The CPG agreed that a meeting should be arranged with Minister of State 
Brendan Griffin T.D. to brief him on this matter. 
 
Ireland Regional Enterprise Fund 
The Chief Executive briefed the meeting on the Ireland Regional Enterprise 
Fund. 
 
Springfield MOU 
Mr. J. Griffin, Tourism Officer advised that Kerry County Council has been 
approached by the City of West Springfield, MA for a Sister City relationship with 
Dingle.  A delegation, led by Mayor Reichelt, met with Mayor Michael O’Shea in 
Boston in March and there have been two follow-up Skype calls with the Chief 
Executive and Mayor John Sheahan.  A delegation from West Springfield is 
planning a visit in October and to attend the Council meeting. 
 
This Sister City relationship provides a great opportunity for the Council to raise 
the profile of County Kerry in Boston and Massachusetts, promote closer 
economic, cultural and educational ties.  The current President of the University 
of Massachusetts is former Congressman Marty Meehan, who has strong West 
Kerry connections.  Similarly Congressman Richard Neal is a former Mayor of 
Springfield.  This Sister City Twinning is recommended by the executive. 
 
The Chief Executive advised that she strongly supported such an initiative and 
highlighted the significant opportunity that entering into this relationship would 
bring to the region. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue highlighted that Twinning is a reserved function and a draft 
Twinning Policy will be formulated and presented to members at the October 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
3 of 56 
 
meeting.  Council can agree in principle to enter into a Memorandum of 
Understanding with Springfield at the September meeting. 
 
The CPG endorsed the Springfield MOU initiative. 
 
Meeting with Norwegian Airlines 
Cllr. J. Finucane requested that a meeting would be arranged with Norwegian 
Airlines as they now provide flights from Shannon, Cork and Dublin and they 
have the potential to be a major carrier going forward. 
 
The Chief Executive agreed that it would be advantageous to arrange such a 
meeting through Kerry County Council and Kerry Airport given the importance of 
this new carrier to the county. 
 
Update from the Chairs of SPCs 
Each of the Chairs of the SPCs indicated that a meeting of their SPC would be 
held in the coming few weeks. 
 
Request for Presentation to Council 
The CPG agreed that a presentation by Early Years Educators in the County 
would be made to the Quality of Life SPC. 
 
Request for a Civic Reception 
The CPG agreed that Fr. Patrick Ahern, founder of Siamsa Tire, would be 
honoured at a Civic Reception by full Council for his outstanding contribution to the 
artistic, cultural and literary tradition of our county. 
 
All outstanding requests for Civic Honours will be considered by CPG in October in 
accordance with the adopted Protocol for Civic Honours Conferral. 
Any other business 
 
Update on Mechanical Problems at Scartleigh Pumphouse, Listowel 
The Chief Executive advised members that on Saturday evening last (2 
September), severe mechanical problems were experienced at the Scartleigh 
Pumphouse near Listowel. Two pumps, which supply raw water to the Listowel 
Regional Water Treatment Plant, failed. As a result, the treatment plant was 
unable to supply water to areas including Listowel, Moyvane, Knockanure, 
Lisselton, Finuge, Lixnaw and surrounding areas. By early on Sunday morning, 
supplies were critically low. 
 
Senior personnel from Irish Water and Kerry County Council met in Listowel at 
9:00am on Sunday to assess the situation and the decision was taken to activate 
the Drinking Water Incident Response Plan and to begin preparations for a Red 
(High Severity) incident.  A decision was taken to restrict supplies so as to 
maintain supply to vulnerable facilities such as Listowel Community Hospital and 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
4 of 56 
 
local nursing homes. It was agreed that Irish Water would put in place a 
communications plan for customers and, in conjunction with Kerry County 
Council, our members and Oireachtas members were briefed throughout the day. 
 
Water tankers and water stations were put in place at six locations including 
Listowel, Knockanure, Moyvane, Lixnaw, Lisselton and Finuge which were 
manned by Kerry County Council area staff. These were in place at all locations 
by 2.30pm and their locations were advertised. An information leaflet drop in 
Listowel town was coordinated by the Kerry Civil Defence as was the distribution 
of bottled water to vulnerable facilities and individuals. 
 
The two pumps had been removed from Scartleigh on Saturday evening and 
taken to EPS Group in Mallow for repair throughout Sunday. Temporary repairs 
to one of the pumps were completed on Sunday night and it was made 
operational by Water Services Staff shortly after midnight. Substantive repairs 
are required to the second pump and are ongoing. 
 
The restoration of the supply throughout the network was ongoing until late 
Monday (4September).  Irish Water has been advised of the Listowel Races 
Festival beginning on next weekend and the urgency of having contingency plans 
in place to ensure continuity of supply.  Such plans are currently in train and Irish 
Water will be updating us on the matter on a daily basis. It is intended that two 
submersible pumps will be in place by the weekend and a back up pump will be 
in place next week.  Council staff are also working with Irish Water to develop a 
permanent solution for ScartleighPumphouse. 
 
Update on LIS 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan informed members that the Department of Rural and 
Community Development has notified local authorities of its intention to 
implement an LIS in 2017 subject to: 
• The level of demand 
• The level of resources available, and  
• The capacity of the Local Authorities to complete the scheme by the end 
of 2017. 
 
Submissions must be made by the 14th September and it is intended to submit all 
120 applications remaining on the list. 
 
Update on the Oral Hearing for the Listowel By-Pass 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan highlighted that the Oral Hearing for the Listowel By-Pass 
commenced that morning in Listowel and it will take 3 days to complete.   
 
Outdoor Recreational Infrastructure Scheme 2017 Measures 1 and 3 
Ms. J. McCarthy briefed the meeting on the funding allocated for 13 Kerry 
projects under the Outdoor Recreational Infrastructure Scheme 2017. 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
5 of 56 
 
Works at Minish Railway Crossing 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan advised that works would commence on Minish Railway 
Crossing on the 9th October and the road will be closed for the duration of the 
work which is 3 days. 
 
Housing allocations and homelessness 
A discussion took place on housing allocations and the increase in the number of 
homeless people/families in the county.  It was agreed that the Housing SPC 
would carry out a fundamental review of data protection issues around the 
notification of members of housing allocations and formulate a policy with regard 
to same. “ 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney referred to the interruption to the water supply in Listowel the 
previous weekend and commended all involved who worked late into Saturday 
night and early Sunday morning to resolve the problems.  Members were kept up 
to-date and leaflet drops were arranged to update residents and businesses.  
Cllr. Moloney then moved Notice of Motion No. 5. 
 
5. 
Notification of members when the purchase of new housing is 
complete 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Moloney PROPOSED: 
That the elected members of Kerry County Council be informed when any 
purchase of new housing is complete. Currently, members only become aware 
where the Council has purchased when the allocation is made.  
 
The following reply issued: 
Following a recent Notice of Motion at Full Council, the approach to data 
protection in respect of housing applicant information and related 
information is currently under review. This includes not only personal 
applicant data but information and data which would indicate a person’s 
personal circumstances (specific addresses of Council owned units 
indicates that future occupiers are of a specific class or social/economic 
background).  
 
Management will be bringing a proposed policy and procedure to the next 
Housing/ Quality of Life SPC. 
 
This will come back to Full Council in due course. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney highlighted it can be a year after the Council buys a house before 
members become aware of it and he PROPOSED when the purchase of a house 
is complete that members would be informed. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris SECONDED this proposal. 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
6 of 56 
 
Cllr. N. Foley welcomed the Springfield MOU and added that there is potential for 
other towns and villages to enter into twinning agreements.  She asked that 
members would be provided with a list of towns and villages in the county that 
are twinned and that future twinning plans would be outlined also.  In conclusion 
she acknowledged the agreement of the CPG to the hosting of a Civic Reception 
for Fr. Patrick Ahern. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly highlighted that it was an unfortunate set of events that led to 
the water outage in Listowel on the 2nd and 3rd September as the two pumps 
failed.  He commended Council staff on their tireless work over the weekend to 
restore the water supply.  Cllr. Kennelly advised that meetings were held recently 
with Irish Water with a view to getting the water main replaced in the Moyvane 
area as the road is opened by Gas Networks Ireland to bring natural gas to 
Listowel.  He called on Irish Water to ensure they engage when major projects 
are being undertaken in future.  Cllr. Kennelly highlighted a specific housing 
allocation where he made representations on behalf of the applicant and how a 
certain Deputy had got her contact details. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson welcomed the proposed works on Minish Railway Crossing 
which will commence on the 9th October and he stated he wanted to place on 
record his gratitude to his colleagues and the executive for pursuing this matter.  
He also welcomed the return of funding for LIS. 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton thanked the Council for their speedy response to the water 
outage in Listowel.  At a recent Council meeting it was agreed that data 
protection issues in relation to housing would be reviewed by the Quality of Life 
SPC and she asked that this would happen as soon as possible. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady objected to the suggestion that the Minister plans to send the 
homeless from Dublin to rural areas to be housed by local authorities.  Every 
local authority has a homeless problem to deal with as it is. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea commended the Council on hosting an excellent conference on 
the Wild Atlantic Way in Listowel recently.  The inclusion of Kerry in the proposed 
Western Corridor is critical for the future of the county.  Cllr. O’Shea suggested 
that a meeting should be arranged with Minister of State Brendan Griffin and the 
Taoiseach if necessary to ensure Kerry is included.  In conclusion Cllr. O’Shea 
asked that housing allocations would be notified via email to members going 
forward. 
 
The Chief Executive thanked the staff in the Water Services Department under 
John Kennelly, John McEniry and Freddie Bartlett for their work in Listowel to 
restore the water supply.  She also acknowledged the involvement of Irish Water 
at that time.  She advised members that no information has been received on the 
proposal to relocate homeless persons from Dublin to rural areas.  In her report 
to council she outlined progress to-date on housing.   

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
7 of 56 
 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue highlighted that the allocation of housing is an executive 
function and a commitment was given to revert to CPG with proposals regarding 
the notification of councillors of housing allocations.  At present all councillors are 
notified of housing allocations.  Mr. O’Donoghue advised if a member of the 
public has concerns they can contact the Information Commissioner on it. 
 
The Chief Executive assured members that the data held by Kerry County 
Council is private to that individual and private information is not given out to 
anyone.  If an individual feels there has been a breach they are entitled to contact 
the Information Commissioner. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris stated she believed if there is a breach of data protection the 
person may not want to make a complaint and she highlighted one such case.  
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue clarified that he invited Cllr. Ferris to submit the relevant 
information to him but she did not do so and therefore the case could not be 
investigated. 
 
Cllr. Ferris advised she asked the applicant for their permission to pass on their 
information but they refused. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly asked if there is a breach in the system that it would be 
identified.  If a Deputy does not make representations they should not be notified 
of allocations as it undermines the work of councillors.   
 
The Chief Executive advised members if anyone has concerns they should 
submit them in writing to the Director of Housing.  The staff in the Housing 
Department should be appreciated for their hard work and she assured members 
that good governance procedures are in place. 
 
It was unanimously agreed to host a Civic Reception for Fr. Patrick Ahern. 
 
Resignation of Cllr. D. Nolan 
 
Cllr. P. Daly advised that Dianne Nolan has resigned from Kerry County Council 
and he paid tribute to her work both as a member of Listowel MD and full 
Council.  She always advocated that the Council should have its own housing 
stock and she will be missed.   
 
On behalf of the Fine Gael Party Cllr. J. Finucane stated Dianne was very 
constructive and he wished her well for the future. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady wished Ms. Nolan well for the future and added that she was a 
very dedicated councillor and she will be missed. 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
8 of 56 
 
On behalf of the Fianna Fáil members Cllr. N. Foley wished Ms. Nolan well for 
the future and added that she was an excellent, pro-active councillor.  She 
acknowledged her work as a member of Kerry County Council. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris stated she wanted to be associated with the tributes to Dianne 
Nolan who has been an active member of Sinn Féin for many years. 
 
17.09.11.02 Confirmation of Minutes 
 
(a)  
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Kennelly 
it was resolved that the Minutes of the Annual Meeting held on the 30th 
June 2017 be confirmed. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. J.J. Culloty it 
was resolved that the Minutes of the July Ordinary Meeting held on the 
17th July 2017 be confirmed. 
 
17.09.11.03 Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
 
The Chief Executive read the following report into the record of the meeting: 
 
“The report below has been prepared for the September 2017 Council Meeting. 
 
Finance Directorate 
As agreed with the Members, a Financial Report for Members will be provided on 
a quarterly basis in line with the Quarterly Reporting Process for Income and 
Expenditure already in place to the Department of Housing, Planning Community 
& Local Government. The Qtr 2 Financial report is included in this report. 
 
Infrastructure, Operations, Health & Safety Directorate 
 
N69 Listowel By Pass  
The oral hearing on Kerry County Council’s application for approval of the EIS 
and CPO for the Listowel By-Pass commenced on 5th September in Listowel. A 
decision on the applications is expected in early November.    
 
Economic & Community Development Directorate 
 
Kerry Local Enterprise Office  
The Local Enterprise Office continues with core programmes and the full set of 
17 training programmes has been scheduled for the Autumn throughout the 
county.   
 
The promotion of Ireland’s Best Young Entrepreneur has continued with 11 
applications submitted to date. The closing date is September 29th, 2017.  

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
9 of 56 
 
The office has also promoted the LEO Investor Programme with an investment of 
€25,000 available to successful businesses. A further 11 applications have been 
received. Regional short listing is to proceed. 
 
Mentoring activity has been very busy over the summer period with 81 
assignments approved in the year to date. There has been ongoing engagement 
with clients throughout the county in relation to core financial incentives including 
feasibility, priming and business expansion grants. 
 
Ireland Regional Enterprise Fund 
 
A copy of my report circulated to CPG in relation to projects developed in this 
county under the Ireland Regional Enterprise Fund is attached.  
 
Tourism Department 
 
The Ring of North Kerry Cycle: 
The Tourism Unit in co-operation with the Operations Unit, recently installed 
cycle gradient signage on Kerry Head with the aim of promoting cycling in the 
area (this is a medium term action, No. 2.5.2 in the Tourism Strategy and Action 
Plan 2016- 2022).   The signage was in place in time for the very successful 
‘Ring of North Kerry Cycle’, organised by Finuge Freewheelers Cycling Club, 
which was held over the August weekend in Ballyheigue and which saw in 
excess of 500 cyclists registering for the event. 
2017 Outdoor Recreation Infrastructure Scheme: 
The Outdoor Recreation Infrastructure Scheme is part of the Government’s 
Action Plan for Rural Development and provides funding for the development of 
new infrastructure or maintenance, enhancement or promotion of existing 
outdoor recreational infrastructure.  Below is a breakdown of monies allocated to 
each application: 
 
Kerry Activity Brochure (Tourism Unit) 
€10,000.00 
Tralee Municipal District
North Kerry Way,  Tralee to Kerry Head 
€  4,880.00 
Killeen Woods Nature Walk, Tralee 
€  8,000.00 
Killarney Municipal District
Castleisland River Walk, Castleisland 
€  8,000.00 
Old Road Walk, Derrynafinnia 
€  9,280.00 
Old Road Walk, Rathmore 
€  9,280.00 
Listowel Municipal District

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
10 of 56 
 
Listowel Town Park, Listowel 
€10,000.00 
Kerry Head Walking Trail, 
Ballyheigue/Kerry Head 
€  8,172.00 
Beach Wheelchairs, Ballyheigue 
€  8,695.00 
South & West Municipal District
Kerry Dark Sky Reserve Solar Trail, 
Caherdaniel 
€  9,319.00 
Daniel O’Connell Heritage Trail, 
Caherciveen 
€10,000.00 
Doorus Nature Trail, Lauragh 
€  8,651.00 
 
Community Department  
 
LEADER 
Meetings of the LAG were held in July, August and early September for the 
purposes of considering LEADER applications.  Specifically, the LAG met on two 
occasions in July (i.e. on the 5th & 27th July), on one occasion in August, (i.e. 8th 
August), and on one occasion to date in September (4th September) for the 
purpose of considering LEADER applications received under the Rural Tourism;  
Enterprise Development and Basic Services Targeted at Hard to Reach 
Communities sub-themes. In total, 74 no projects with a monetary total value of 
€1,19m approx were approved by the LAG at these meetings. 
 
Age Friendly Initiatives – Call for proposals under the Community Facilities 
Capital Grant Scheme 
A total of €64,500 was made available under this fund to support local age 
friendly initiatives and projects in Kerry. The Kerry Local Community 
Development Committee (LCDC) recommended approval of funding for age 
friendly initiatives for each of the 4 municipal districts at its meeting of 5th July 
2017. 
Projects recommended by the LCDC were presented to the elected members at 
MD level for final decision at MD meetings convened during July/August 2017 
and the successful applicants have been notified accordingly. 
 
SICAP 2018 - 2022 
The Social Inclusion and Community Activation Programme 2018 – 2022 
(SICAP) is based on the previous SICAP 2015 – 2017 Programme.  The new 
programme design has taken into account feedback from a national consultation 
process which took place in the first half of 2017. 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
11 of 56 
 
The indicative budget for Kerry for 2018 (made up of 3 individual Lots) is €1.63 
million.  The Request for Tenders was published on 31st July, 2017 with a 
closing date of 29th September 2017. 
 
Kerry Public Participation Network: 
 
To encourage community participation, the PPN Secretariat have designed a 
user friendly brochure which will be available to all in the first week in September. 
The brochure is proposed to be launched at the Access for All - Disability 
Awareness workshop to be held in Killarney on Tuesday 5th September. 
 
Water, Environment, Fire & Library Services Directorate 
 
Water Services 
There are a number of Water Mains Replacement jobs which will be carried out 
by Contract in Kerry in the coming months.  
These include works of value €700,000 due to be commenced in September at 
Brewery Road, Lower Oakpark Road, Cloondara and Lisbeg in Tralee. Further 
pipe replacement works of total value €850,000 will be done, also by Contract, in 
the coming months at Ballykissane Killorglin (1.1 Km), Shannera(1.55 Km) and 
Cappagh North (1.75 Km) Kilgobnet, Droum Glenbeigh (0.75 Km) and Sneem 
South (0.7 Km).  
Meanwhile, Council crews currently work on the further replacement of 
watermains at Baile An Fheirtéaraigh, Valentia, Cahersiveen and Glancuttaun 
Killorglin. 
 
This is in addition to the 18.5 Km of pipelines (estimated cost €2.2M)  replaced 
to-date in 2017 by the Council’s own direct labour crews in Tarbert, Ballyheigue, 
Causeway, An Daingean, Baile An Fheirtéaraigh, Dún Chaoin, Valentia, 
Cahersiveen,  Killorglin, Milltown, Mangerton, and Lauragh, and a further 0.75Km 
replaced by Contract at Glenderry Ballyheigue. 
 
Housing Directorate  
 
Housing Construction and Acquisition Programme 
Kerry County Council has an extensive programme of work in Housing to provide 
for persons qualified on our Housing waiting list. In the first 2 years of the 2015 to 
2017 programme 791 units across all the various Social Housing delivery 
schemes available were delivered. It is intended that by the end of 2017 a further 
686 units will be delivered bringing a projected delivery of 1477 units under the 3 
year programme (which can be broken down as follows :- 290 new units either 
constructed or purchased, 326 refurbished voids, 912 socially leased or HAP 
units and 47  units delivered by the voluntary housing sector).  This represents a 
40 % increase over our original allocation of 1058 units. 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
12 of 56 
 
It is anticipated that our 2018 programme will deliver an additional 1122 units 
under and the various delivery schemes, therefore the combined total from 2015-
2018 is expected to be 2599 units in total. DHPCLG approval will be required for 
the various proposals. We are continuing to press ahead with all programmes 
and develop them further into 2018. I intend to give quarterly updates to Council 
in the Chief Executive’s Report in respect of the implementation of this 
programme.  
 
Members may be aware that the Rebuilding Ireland Programme is currently 
under review by the Minister and it is expected that an update and a Strategy on 
Vacant Properties will be published during September. Following this 
Management will come back to Council with an update on the various 
programmes currently in place.  
 
Tenant Purchase Scheme Progress Update 
The Housing Department has received a total of 279 applications to date under 
the Tenant Purchase Scheme. At this stage 74 of these have reached the 
valuation stage of which 47 have now been issued with a Letter of Offer and 21 
applicants have confirmed their offer of acceptance and have been advised to 
engage the services of a Solicitor once they have secured Finance to purchase 
the property. 
 
Rent Supplement transfer to HAP process 
The Housing Assistance Payment (HAP) scheme has been in operation in Kerry 
since December 1st 2016 and is operated by Kerry County Council in close co-
ordination with the Department of Social Protection (DSP). Phase One has 
concentrated on giving HAP to new applicants in need of social housing support. 
At the moment there are over 260 active HAP tenancies in Kerry. 
 
Phase 2 of the HAP scheme involves the migration of existing rent supplement 
recipients to HAP and it has been agreed with the Department of Social 
Protection that this will commence on the 11th September 2017 on a phased 
basis.  
 
Capital Assistance Scheme – Call for proposals 
As in previous years, Kerry County Council will issue a call in September 2017 
for applications for capital funding for the delivery, through either construction or 
acquisition, of housing accommodation, to cater for the priority groups under the 
Capital Assistance Scheme (CAS) including:  
 
1. 
elderly;  
2. 
homeless persons (including “care leavers” exiting State care on reaching 
the age of 18);  
3. 
people with a disability, with a particular emphasis on moving people with 
disability from a congregated settings into community based living.” 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
13 of 56 
 
The Chief Executive drew members attention to the item in her report on the 
Ireland Regional Enterprise Fund and briefed them as follows on the projects 
submitted under Stream 1. 
 
 
1. 
Agri-Tech-Centre of Excellence 
 
The proposal promotes the development of a Global Centre of Excellence in Agri-
Tech with the objective of positioning Ireland at the fore-front of the international 
Agri-Tech Industry. 
 
The project is collaboration between the ITT and the leading Agri-Tech 
Companies in the Country – including Dairymaster. 
 
The intention is to locate the Centre of Excellence within County Kerry – the 
potential for economic benefit accruing to the County from such a development is 
very significant, as it would place the County as the national location for Agri-
Tech Training, Research and Development.  The potential for the 3rd Level 
College in the County, as a Centre of Excellence in the area of Agri-Tech will 
have a significant knock-on-effect and positive reputational impact for the County. 
 
2.  
RDI HUB 
 
Killorglin Centre of Excellence for Applied Research, Co-Working and Co-
Learning – nurturing the high-growth and entrepreneurial segments of all the 
Regions’ Industries. 
 
The i-Hub application has the potential to develop the research capacity in the 
Region, accelerate knowledge transfer and the placement of researchers in 
industry. 
 
The Hub will provide innovative and industry-Tech Education and Training 
opportunities – linking the Higher Education Authorities in the Region. 
The ITT and FEXCO have lodged the application and Kerry County Council 
would propose to strongly support the project application. 
The potential to bring increased employment to the County is a critical element of 
this application. 
 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
14 of 56 
 
Financial Report 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Kerry County Council 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
1 
Major Expenditure & Income by Division with 2017 Adopted 
Budget 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Date as at end of Quarter 2 (June 2017) in accordance with EU / IMF return on expenditure and Income made to DOHP&LG on 24th 
August 2017 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
EXPENDITURE 
  
INCOME 
  
Service
Total Exp. 
To date 
Budget 
Budget 
Remaining 
% 
Budget 
Spent 
to 
date 
  
Total Inc. 
to date 
Budget  
Not Rec'd 
% 
Rec'd 
  
Division Description 
2017 
2017 
2017 
2017 
  
2017 
2017 
2017 
2017 
  
A 
Housing and Building 
12,544,623 
24,160,868 
11,616,245 
52% 
  
11,623,130 
23,525,846 11,902,716 
49%   
B
Road Transport & Safety 
13,872,501 
31,144,636 
17,272,135 
45% 
  
8,003,185 
19,090,066 11,086,881 
42%   
C 
Water Services 
6,505,109 
14,466,687 
7,961,578 
45% 
  
6,035,710 
13,690,847 
7,655,137 
44%   
D 
Development Management 
5,571,427 
10,896,467 
5,325,040 
51% 
  
2,000,420 
2,697,912 
697,492 
74%   
E 
Environmental Services 
8,562,897 
17,566,586 
9,003,689 
49% 
  
1,427,716 
3,915,986 
2,488,270 
36%   
F
Recreation and Amenity 
3,871,187 
8,042,487 
4,171,300 
48% 
  
401,994 
507,971 
105,977 
79%   
G 
Agriculture, Education, Health & Welfare 
1,110,952 
2,633,042 
1,522,090 
42% 
  
759,177 
1,993,332 
1,234,155 
38%   
H
Miscellaneous Services 
8,643,724 
17,819,233 
9,175,509 
49% 
  
2,906,534 
6,375,070 
3,468,536 
46%   
  
Local Government Fund/General Purpose Grant 
  
  
  
  
6,888,380 
13,776,761 
6,888,381 
50%   
Rates 
  
  
  
  
  
20,566,991 
41,156,215 20,589,224 
50%   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Grand Total 
60,682,420 
126,730,006 
66,047,586 
48% 
  
60,613,237 
126,730,006 66,116,769 
48%   
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
2 
Performance of Local Authority Revenue Collection 
Levels 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Major sources of Revenue Income - Collection levels as at 31st 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
15 of 56 
 
July 2017 
  
Total for 
Collection 
Collected 
% 
collected 
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
Commercial Rates 
 € 
49,569,311  
 €    
22,010,935  
44% 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Total for Collection - Full year rate 
demand plus arrears 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Rates demands were issued on 2nd March 2017 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Housing Rent & Loans: 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Rents 
 €   
8,016,985  
 €      
6,868,090  
86% 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Loans 
 €      
873,992  
 €         
566,140  
65% 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Rent and loans: Total for Collection - 
Year to date billed plus arrears 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
3
Recourse to Overdraft Facility 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
None 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
4
Emergency Capital works not provided for in the 
Budget 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
None 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
16 of 56 
 
All members welcomed the two projects outlined by the Chief Executive. 
Cllr. J. Finucane highlighted that it is regrettable that a tenant has not been 
identified for the new Advance Unit in the Kerry Technology Park in Tralee.   
Cllr. M. O’Shea stated that FEXCO and Dairymaster are major international 
companies and he commended all involved with these two projects. 
Cllr. D. Grady referred to the Tenant Purchase Scheme and stressed that 80% of 
tenants are not eligible to apply for the Scheme even though family members are 
in a position to buy the house for them.  The number of successful applications is 
too low and the Scheme should be reviewed.  Cllr. Grady pointed out that 
members are not notified of allocations under the RAS Scheme yet the applicants 
are removed from the housing list.   
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae highlighted that valuations for the Tenant Purchase Scheme 
are taking a long time and he asked that all applicants would be notified of a 
decision on their application prior to Christmas.  The Scheme is very strict and 
families are willing to contribute to the purchase of a house but that is not 
acceptable.  He asked that if possible the Scheme would be amended.  Cllr. 
Healy-Rae referred to households where the couple separate and they have 
children.  In many instances the man moves out of the family home and for years 
his name remains on the deeds of the family home while he maybe living in 
dilapidated accommodation.  While he is a qualified housing applicant he will not 
be allocated a house while his name is on the deeds of another property and if 
there is a mortgage on the property his name will not be taken off the deeds.  The 
Department has indicated that an applicant can be allocated a house in 
exceptional circumstances and Cllr. Healy-Rae asked that the circumstances of 
these housing applicants would be taken into consideration. 
Cllr. T. Ferris asked if the executive can adopt a position that applicants under 
the Tenant Purchase Scheme will not be precluded because of non payment of 
water charges.  She asked how many people are on HAP, how many properties 
have been inspected and how many passed inspection. 
Cllr. S. Locke pointed out that a Notice of Motion was moved at a recent Council 
meeting calling on the Department, in light of recent developments on water 
charges, to allow applications under the Tenant Purchase Scheme to be 
considered where water charges were not paid.  He understood the legislation 
must be amended to cater for this and he asked that a letter would issue to the 
Department calling on them to enact the relevant legislation as soon as possible. 
Cllr. M. Cahill welcomed the two proposed Centres of Excellence and he asked 
that a letter would issue to Enterprise Ireland endorsing both applications and 
asking that funding would be allocated to both projects.  Cllr. Cahill expressed 
disappointment at the Repair to Lease Scheme and he called on the Department 
to utilise both the Town Renewal Scheme and Tax Incentives in an effort to 
tackle the housing crisis.  In conclusion Cllr. Cahill requested a breakdown of the 
791 housing units provided by house size. 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
17 of 56 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley expressed concern at the small number of applications that have 
gone to the valuation stage under the Tenant Purchase Scheme.  While many 
tenants are on social welfare their families are willing to help them purchase their 
house.  This option should be considered and if they fail to meet repayments they 
should be allowed to revert to renting.  Some people on the housing list did not 
reply to correspondence that issued to them earlier in the year and he could 
understand why as they are on the housing list for years and this was more 
bureaucracy but they still need to be housed. 
Cllr. P. Daly welcomed the focus on the housing construction programme by the 
Government but this Government made private landlords rich through their 
housing policies.  He did not agree with the wholesale selling off of social houses 
as he had witnessed houses that were purchased being let soon after and there 
is no Garda vetting when private houses are let.  He was in favour of the Tenant 
Purchase Scheme in certain cases.  Cllr. Daly asked that the requirement to have 
paid water charges as part of the Tenant Purchase Scheme would be waived. 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen then moved Notice of Motion No. 28. 
28.  
Housing Crisis 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen PROPOSED:         
The housing crisis is becoming more and more serious in Kerry- what plans have 
Kerry County Council in place to assist people in dire need of housing. 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has an extensive programme of work in Housing to 
provide for persons qualified on our Housing waiting list. In the first 2 years 
of the 2015 to 2017 programme, 791 units across all the various Social 
Housing delivery schemes available were delivered. It is intended that by 
the end of 2017 a further 686 units will be delivered bringing a projected 
delivery of 1477 units under the 3 year programme which can be broken 
down as follows:-  
290 new units either constructed or purchased, 326 refurbished voids, 912 
socially leased or HAP units and 47 units delivered by the voluntary 
housing sector. 
This represents a 40% increase in units which will be delivered over the 3 
year programme compared to Kerry County Council’s original allocation of 
1058 units. It is anticipated that our 2018 programme will deliver an 
additional 1122 units under the various delivery schemes, therefore the 
combined total from 2015-2018 is expected to be 2599 units in total. 
DHPCLG approval will be required for the various proposals. We are 
continuing to press ahead with all programmes and develop them further 
into 2018. 
Members may be aware that the Rebuilding Ireland Programme is currently 
under review by the Minister and it is expected that an update and a 
Strategy on Vacant Properties will be published during September. 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
18 of 56 
 
Following this, Management will come back to Council with an update on 
the various programmes currently in place. 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen highlighted that letting agents have indicated that there 
are very few properties available to rent as Airbnb is more profitable for landlords.  
He welcomed the 40% increase in the number of units delivered over a 3 year 
period in comparison to our original allocation of 1058 units.   
Mr. M. O’Donoghue advised members that a review of the Tenant Purchase 
Scheme was undertaken by the Department but no changes were made to the 
Scheme.  The processing of applications is ongoing and a number of applicants 
will require Council loans.  Mr. O’Donoghue undertook to provide members with a 
breakdown of the number of units by bedroom size.  Kerry County Council only 
took over HAP in late 2016.  It has been agreed with the Department of Social 
Protection that Phase 2 of the HAP scheme would commence that month.  It is 
proposed to increase resources to enable more inspections to take place.   
17.09.11.04 Disposal of Property 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Gleeson 
it was agreed to dispose of a plot of land comprising 0.764 Ha. (1.888 St. 
Ac.) in area situated in the townland of Lissyviggeen/Clash in the DED of 
Killarney Rural and County of Kerry to St. Brendan’s Trust, Bishop’s 
House, Killarney, Co. Kerry in accordance with the terms of notice issued 
26th July 2017 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, 
Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 and Article 206 of 
the Planning & Development Regulations 2001. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Healy-Rae, SECONDED by Cllr. M. 
Kennelly it was agreed to grant a lease/licence agreement for 25 years to 
Valentia Island Development Company for the building and lands known 
as Cromwell Fort Lighthouse at Fort Point, Glanleam, Valentia Island in 
accordance with the terms of notice issued 3rd August 2017 pursuant to 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001. 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Kennelly, SECONDED by Cllr. A. Thornton 
it was agreed to grant a 99 year lease to Listowel Community Centre 
Limited in respect of a plot of land measuring approximately in total 0.3298 
hectares situated at Listowel Town Park, Bridge Road, Listowel in the 
DED of Listowel in accordance with the terms of notice issued 23rd August 
2017 pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001, Section 
211 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 and Article 2016 of the 
Planning and Development Regulations 2001. 
 
 
 
 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
19 of 56 
 
17.09.11.05 Update on the National Planning Framework 
 
The Chief Executive highlighted that at the March Meeting members were briefed 
on Kerry County Council’s submission on the National Planning Framework.  This 
submission focussed on the knowledge triangle between Tralee/Killarney and 
Killorglin where there is a very strong economic cluster.  It is intended that a draft 
Report on the National Planning Framework will be presented to Cabinet in the 
coming weeks.  The linking of Kerry to the proposed Western Corridor is of 
critical strategic importance for the county and Kerry can add significantly to the 
Western Corridor as a link with both Limerick and Cork.  It is reasonable to 
assume once a county forms part of a strategic corridor that strategic investment 
will follow.  It is vital that submissions are made in support of the inclusion of 
Kerry during the public consultation.  The Chief Executive advised members she 
would discuss this matter both with Departmental officials and Minister of State 
Brendan Griffin. 
 
Mr. M. Scannell in his presentation displayed a map on the concept of Atlantic 
corridor cities.  In both submissions Kerry was excluded.  The Southern Regional 
Assembly carried out a survey of travel destinations showing where people travel 
into cities for work which demonstrated in Kerry that the development of a 
corridor without connecting Kerry would not be to the economic benefit of the 
county.  The Council’s submission introduced the concept of a knowledge 
triangle as previously outlined.  Fenit is also very important for the economy of 
the county.  Connectivity within the region through air, port and road access is 
also vital and Kerry would support the motorway link from Limerick to Cork with a 
connection to Kerry.  Mr. Scannell highlighted that Kerry has a lot to offer to the 
Southern Region.  He then outlined the objectives of the submission from Kerry 
County Council as follows: 
 
• Target the inter-regional international access disparities for both 
passengers and freight through significant policy change and 
investment in both regional ports and airports. 
• Develop the strategic links between the major cities and towns in the 
Southern Region to allow it to function as a cohesive economic region. 
• Clearly target the growth of sectors that are currently performing well in 
the regions (Tourism, Fin-tech & Smart Agri in the South West region), 
leveraging on the exemplary tourism product & existing global leaders in 
these areas. 
• Establish (around these sectors) centres of excellence of a national and 
international scale that will lead to increased economic activity within the 
regions and enhance Ireland’s national reputation as a global leader in 
research and development. 
• Support population targets with appropriate capital investment decisions 
from relevant state agencies including the IDA, TII and Irish Water. 
 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
20 of 56 
 
• Seek to strengthen large rural towns like the Kerry hub and knowledge 
tri-angle outside the orbit of major cities to counterbalance 
overdevelopment and sprawl.  This will require the setting of real and 
achievable population targets for these settlements. 
• Realise significant benefits through investment in servicing 
comparatively more modest priced land offerings to achieve scalable 
commercial and residential developments. 
• Support the potential of brownfield sites in major urban areas in order to 
assist Local Authorities in site assembly and to achieve sustainable 
development.   
• Build on the extensive investments already made in the Kerry Hub towns 
with respect to road infrastructure, water and waste water. 
• Build on the success of the Kerry Technology Park and similar sites 
through interagency support in acquiring additional lands adjoining the 
Technology Park. 
• Achieve long term Regional & National Energy security through the 
implementation of the Shannon LNG project particularly in the regard to 
the uncertainty in energy supply resulting from BREXIT. 
 
Mr. Scannell emphasised that the Council’s submission is very important as it 
puts Kerry at the centre of the region and in an international context and any 
support the members can give to the submission would be greatly appreciated. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane stated the proposal to exclude Kerry from the Western Corridor 
epitomises central Government’s approach to the decline of rural Ireland.  He 
could not understand how the Atlantic Corridor would start in Waterford which is 
located in the South East of the country.  While a Minister for Rural Affairs was 
appointed Government policy does not support rural Ireland and he PROPOSED 
that a meeting would be sought with Minister Ring on this critical issue.  Cllr. 
Finucane welcomed the inclusion of Shannon LNG in the Council’s submission.  
Members must insist that Kerry is included in the Western Corridor. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea advised that the Kerry members on the Southern Regional 
Assembly tried to have Kerry included as part of the Western Corridor but they 
were not successful.  It is vital that Kerry is linked to the Western Corridor and all 
contacts should be utilised to achieve this. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill SECONDED Cllr. Finucane’s proposal that a meeting would be 
sought with Minister Ring. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson agreed that it is vital that Kerry is included in the Western 
Corridor if it is to grow and we must lobby to the highest level to ensure it is 
included.   
 
 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
21 of 56 
 
17.09.11.06 Date for the Budget Meeting 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. B. O’Connell, it was 
agreed that the Budget Meeting would be held on Monday 13th November 2017 
at 10.30am. 
 
17.09.11.07 Nominee to the Board of KETB 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan referred members to his report dated 5th September 2017 on this 
item which was circulated. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. T. Ferris, SECONDED by Cllr. R. Beasley it was 
agreed to nominate Cllr. P. Daly to the Board of KETB. 
 
17.09.11.08 Ionadaí a chur fé bhráid an Aire Stáit le ceapadh ar Bhord 
Údarás na Gaeltachta 
 
Aontaíodh ainmniú an Clr. S. Mac Gearailt do Bhord Údarás na Gaeltachta a 
chur fé bhráid an Aire Stáit, ar mholadh an Clr. B. Ó Conaill, cuidithe ag an gClr. 
L. Púirséal. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. B. O’Connell, SECONDED by Cllr. L. Purtill it was 
agreed to nominate Cllr. S. Fitzgerald for appointment by the Minister of State to 
the board of Údarás na Gaeltachta. 
 
17.09.11.09 Summary of proceedings at events 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J. Finucane, SECONDED by Cllr. J.J. Culloty it was 
agreed to note reports on the following events on behalf of the Kerry County 
Council delegates that attended in accordance with Section 142(5)(f) of the Local 
Government Act 2001 as amended. 
 
(a) 
LAMA Spring Training Seminar held on the 28th and 29th April 2017 in 
Gormanstown by Cllr. J. Lucid. 
 
(b) 
Conference on the theme “Brexit, Regional Planning and EU Affairs” held 
on the 26th May 2017 in Newtownmountkennedy by Cllr. T. Ferris. 
 
(c) 
Visit to Frankfurt from 23rd to 26th June 2017 by former Cathaoirleach Cllr. 
M. O’Shea. 
 
(d) 
iRoute Integrated Rural Urban Transport Evolution Conference held on the 
27th and 28th June 2017 by Cllr. S. Fitzgerald. 
 
(e) 
Visit to Rhode Island, USA from 6th to 8th July 2017 by the Cathaoirleach, 
Cllr. J. Sheahan. 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
22 of 56 
 
17.09.11.10 Tenders opened since the July Council Meeting 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Moriarty, SECONDED by Cllr. S. Locke it was 
agreed to note the opening of the following tenders since the July meeting. 
 
(a) 
Fenit Dolphin and Viaduct Junction Repairs – Closing date: Friday 4th 
August 2017 at 4pm. 
 
(b) 
Construction of Single Storey Rural Dwelling House and Associated 
Siteworks at Callinafercey, Milltown, Co. Kerry – Closing date: Tuesday 8th 
August, 2017 at 3pm. 
 
(c) 
Bituminous Surfacing works on Regional and Local Roads in the South 
and West Kerry MD – Closing Date: Friday 18th August, 2017 at 4pm. 
 
(d) 
Ballinskelligs Pier Phase 2 Works – Closing Date: Thursday 24th August 
2017 at 4pm. 
 
(e) 
Engineering Consultancy Services Dredging Permit – Fenit Harbour – 
Closing Date: Friday 25th August 2017 at 4pm. 
 
(f) 
Architect Led Design Team Consultancy Services for the construction of 5 
housing units and associated site works at Pinewood Estate, Killarney – 
Closing Date: Wednesday 30th August 2017 at 3pm. 
 
(g) 
Refurbishment & Extension of No. 3 & 4 O’Connor Tce., Tralee, Co. Kerry 
– Closing Date: Thursday 31st August 2017 at 12pm. 
 
(h) 
Architect Led Design Team Consultancy Services for the construction of 8 
housing units and associated site works at Bridewell, Milltown, Co. Kerry – 
Closing Date: Friday 1st September 2017 at 3pm. 
 
(i) 
Construction of 22 Housing Units and associated site works at 
Ardbhearna, Gortamullin, Kenmare, Co. Kerry – Closing Date: Tuesday 5th 
September 2017 at 3pm. 
 
17.09.11.11 Approval for the opening of Tenders 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Quigg, SECONDED by Cllr. R. Beasley it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for the Supply, installation 
and commissioning of four new water booster stations on the 
Dawros/Bonane WSS for Bonane WSS, Kenmare, Co. Kerry – Closing 
Date: Friday 8th September 2017 at 3pm. 
 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
23 of 56 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. O’Shea, SECONDED by Cllr. D. Quigg it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for the N70 Kilderry Bends 
Improvement Scheme Construction Contract – Closing Date: Monday 25th 
September 2017 at 4pm. 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Grady, SECONDED by Cllr. J.J. Culloty it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for the Provision of 
Services in relation to the Social Inclusion and Community Activation 
Programme 2018 – 2022 – Closing Date: Friday 29th September 2017 at 
3pm. 
 
(d) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. R. Beasley, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Kennelly, 
it was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for the N71 Five Mile 
Bridge Pavement Scheme – Closing Date: Friday 6th October 2017 at 
4pm. 
 
(e) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. B. Cronin, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Gleeson it 
was agreed to approve the opening of tenders for KCC – CCTV and 
Condition Surveys of Storm and Foul Sewer Networks and Water Audits of 
Watermains Networks in 17 housing estates in County Kerry – Closing 
Date: Friday 22nd September 2017 at 3pm. 
 
17.11.09.12 Notices of Motion 
 
1. 
Water harvesting in all schools 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Gleeson PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council calls on Government to promote by means of grant 
aid the development of Water Harvesting in all schools. Such a programme 
would benefit the environment, reduce demand on public supply and serve as an 
inspiration to the young. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson read the following statement into the record of the meeting: 
 
“Water has been much in the news in recent weeks and that is good because we 
saw both its destructive power and its indispensable importance. 
For many thousands of years humankind had a deep affinity with water and an 
almost spiritual understanding of its role and importance. 
During the 20th century that closeness and affection all changed, changed to 
such an extent that it has been wisely and sadly said that the principal legacy of 
that century has been the pollution of every stream, river, lake, sea and ocean. 
In the 1950’s the French dumped their Nuclear waste encased in concrete deep 
into the Atlantic Ocean. The Americans nuclear tested on fragile atolls in the 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
24 of 56 
 
Pacific. For our part we erected our sheep dipping tanks beside rivers and 
streams, the handier to get rid of the toxic dip. We piped our sewage into our 
pristine lakes and magnificent seas. 
I was born and reared beside the River Flesk and knew it when it was pristine 
pure when the Caddis fly existed in great numbers and trout and salmon swam 
freely in great numbers. I returned to live in Kerry in 1974 and my once lovely 
river was a mass of impenetrable weed thanks to eutrophication. Thankfully slow 
recovery is now taking place but it will be a slow process. 
If the human race is to survive it is imperative that pure clean water is always 
available in our taps and therefore in our rivers and lakes. 
For that to happen we must convince children of its importance and that it is their 
responsibility to save the worlds water resources. 
Installing water harvesting in schools will show them that water is a priceless 
resource that should and must be respected and cared for. It will teach them that 
we humans are responsible for how the world is managed. It will tell them that 
nature’s bounty is there to be respected and shared. 
The short term financial cost will be miniscule when compared to the long- term 
lesson that will be learned, a lesson that may well save them and their world from 
extinction. 
It will of course also save Governments and Local Authorities from having to 
needlessly treat water that is not fit for human consumption.” 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion. 
2. 
Calling on Irish Water to reinstate roads 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. A. Thornton PROPOSED:                     
That Kerry County Council ensure that Irish Water reinstate the roads after work 
on our local roads. 
The following reply issued:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
Irish Water provides for full road reinstatement in all of its mains 
replacement projects, including those delivered by both contractors and 
direct labour, in accordance with the “Guidelines for Managing Opening in 
Public Roads, 2017” (The Purple Book). In general, the road reinstatement 
on Irish Water capital works is completed to the satisfaction of the 
Operations, Health & Safety Directorate.  
Kerry County Council Water Services Staff monitor the quality of road 
reinstatement works carried out by contractors as part of Irish Water mains 
replacement projects. Where any deficiencies are identified in the quality of 
road reinstatement, these are highlighted by our staff to Irish Water, who in 
turn follow up directly with their contractor to undertake remedial works. 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
25 of 56 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton highlighted she was referring in particular to the road at 
Laccamore, Abbeydorney where Irish Water carried out repairs and left the road 
in a poor state for a long time.  Irish Water refused to restore it to an acceptable 
condition.  The Council Engineer had to go back to Irish Water on a number of 
occasions before it was sorted.  The roads in North Kerry are in a bad enough 
condition and a problem has also arisen in Moyvane recently where diversions 
will be in place for up to 3 months.   
Cllr. M. Kennelly SECONDED the motion. 
3. 
Progress on the County Kerry Marketing Brand 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Foley PROPOSED: 
What progress has been made regarding plans to introduce and promote an 
appropriate County Kerry Marketing Brand. 
The following reply issued: 
A company have been contracted to provide a tourism brand identity for 
the county. In the development of this brand, we have had discussions with 
many key stakeholders to help showcase County Kerry and set us apart 
from other brands/destinations. We are currently in consultation with a 
number of tourism industry representatives to progress this brand identity 
and design. The Tourism Unit is working to ensure that this brand strategy 
is designed to promote Kerry on a national and international level, across 
the full media platforms. It is intended that this new brand proposal will be 
presented to the Tourism SPC and the Destination Kerry Forum, before it 
will be formally launched later in the Autumn. 
Cllr. N. Foley stressed the importance of having a brand Kerry as it will bring an 
element of cohesion to the county.  The brand should be approved by the 
Tourism SPC and Destination Kerry before it is adopted.  When it is endorsed it 
should be used extensively on letterheads etc and other tourism operators should 
be invited to use it also.   
Cllr. Foley then moved Notice of Motion No. 23. 
23. 
Waiting list for access to the Child and Adolescent Mental Health 
Service 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Foley PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister for Health and the HSE to provide 
the resources necessary to immediately tackle the enormous and absolutely 
unacceptable waiting list for access to the Child and Adolescent Mental Health 
Service. As things stand the welfare of children and young adults dealing with 
mental health challenges is being put at considerable risk. 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
26 of 56 
 
Cllr. N. Foley stated it is reprehensible that in excess of 2,400 children are 
waiting to access this service and 225 of these are in County Kerry.  25% of them 
are waiting for more than a year and it is unacceptable that the service cannot 
cater for young people in difficulty.  At present over 80 posts in this service are 
vacant and at least 2,000 additional staff are required to ensure a properly 
functioning service.  This is wholly unacceptable and she called on the Minister 
for Health to make funding available to bring this service up to an acceptable 
standard. 
Cllr. N. Moriarty SECONDED the motion. 
4. 
Cutting of hedges at junctions 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Healy-Rae PROPOSED:                     
That Kerry County Council would urgently cut all dangerous hedge junctions and 
especially the lands they own themselves. 
The following reply issued: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
Each Municipal District has identified a significant number of junctions on 
the public road network which require the hedges to be cut back to ensure 
that sight distance lines are maintained.  The majority of these locations 
have been cut back with the remainder due to be completed over the next 
number of weeks. To date this year, municipal districts have cut over 
625km of hedges involving 300 junctions. This is based on a list of 
locations which were reviewed and updated in 2016, following requests 
from the members. 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae asked that the hedges at the remaining junctions would be cut.  
The overgrown hedges are the first thing tourists notice when they visit the 
county.  It is difficult to travel many roads in South Kerry because of overgrown 
hedges and some landowners are in nursing homes, abroad etc.  It costs approx. 
€1,400 to replace the wing mirror of a bus and while cars can travel these roads 
safely buses and lorries cannot.  Cllr. Healy-Rae asked that a solution to this 
problem would be identified. 
Cllr. B. Cronin moved Notice of Motion No. 21 as it relates to this issue. 
21. 
Overgrown hedges 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B. Cronin PROPOSED: 
 
        
As there is a very serious road safety problem in certain areas of the county with 
totally overgrown hedges on narrow dangerous roads, can each Municipal 
District Roads Engineering Office take responsibility to ensure that these areas 
are made safe and to deal with enforcement issues as the current policy of 
posting out letters is not working. 
The following reply issued: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
Over the past year the Council has issued 422 hedge cutting notices based 
on complaints / reports from Elected Members (25 number), members of 
the public and Municipal District staff. Following the issue of these notices 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
27 of 56 
 
and follow up inspections, 400 landowners have complied with the 
direction given. The Council had to cut the hedges at 17 of these locations 
as it was not possible to identify or contact the land owner. There are 
currently 5 more cases where investigations are on-going at the moment.  
In addition to the above, the Area Staff in the Municipal Districts have cut 
over 625km of hedges involving 300 junctions, in the past year, primarily on 
lands in our ownership. This is based on a list of locations which were 
reviewed and updated in 2016, following requests from the members.  
In accordance with the procedures put in place in 2015, Municipal Districts 
will continue to review critical locations in their areas, and follow up on 
these locations where works are required, having regard to the policy 
approved by Council. 
Cllr. B. Cronin complimented landowners who cut their hedges each year.  He 
received a hedge cutting notice and his hedges are now cut.  In certain parts of 
rural Kerry hedges are out of control and are a danger to pedestrians and 
cyclists.  Some rural roads in the Killarney MD are practically closed in with 
overgrown hedges.  The campaign to given 1.5m to cyclists is commendable but 
it is not possible to abide by that on many rural roads because of overgrown 
hedges.  Members highlight this issue every year and it is time it was seriously 
addressed.  Public money was used to remove bends but hedges and growth at 
these locations are completely overgrown.  There is in excess of 1.1m acres in 
the county with 552,000 acres of forestry and woodland and the remainder is 
cultivated.  Both elected members and the general public are tired and frustrated 
at the present situation.   
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motions and agreed that the county is too large 
for 1 Roads Enforcement Officer to manage.  
Cllr. M. Cahill stated that Clare County Council introduced a hedge cutting 
scheme and following a Notice of Motion he was advised that officials would get 
the details of it.  The present hedge cutting policy has failed miserably. 
Cllr. N. Kelleher highlighted that the work on pursuing the cutting of hedges is 
done in September and one Roads Enforcement Officer cannot cover the entire 
county. 
6. 
Call for An Post to collect outgoing mail from houses 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Kelleher PROPOSED:    
 
     
That we write to An Post and the relevant Minister to arrange to offer to collect 
outgoing mail from homes as well as delivering it. 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
Cllr. N. Kelleher advised that this is a practical proposal as the post man is calling 
to houses and he believed An Post should offer this service. 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
28 of 56 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae SECONDED the motion but highlighted that the crucial issue is 
the recent increase in the cost of a stamp.  As a result a lot of business is now 
transacted online. 
7. 
Initiatives to make setting up practices in rural areas more attractive 
for GPs 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
 
        
To ask Kerry County Council to write to the HSE and Minister for Health to put 
incentives in place to make setting up practices and working in rural areas more 
attractive for GP's such as in Sneem. 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
Cllr. D. McCarthy welcomed the appointment of a GP to Sneem and stated a 
similar issue will arise in other rural areas unless incentives are put in place to 
make it attractive for GPs to move to rural areas.   
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen SECONDED the motion and also welcomed the 
appointment of a GP to Sneem.  He thanked the local community who organised 
a petition to put pressure on the HSE to get a GP for Sneem.   
8. 
Leagan Gaeilge den ainm áite ar na comharthaí bóthair níos mó ná 
an leagan Béarla 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Daly PROPOSED:  
                  
Go ndéanfaidh an Comhairle seo, sa todhchaí, iarracht a dheimhniú go mbeadh 
an leagan Gaeilge den ainm áite ar na comharthaí bóthair níos mó ná an leagan 
Béarla, chun fíor bhrí na logainmneacha a thaispeáint. 
The following reply issued: 
 
 
 
 
 
         
D’eisigh an tAire treoir gur chóir comharthaí bóithre a sholáthar de réir 
Treoirleabhar na gComharthaí Tráchta. Tá saghas agus méid an téacs 
leagtha síos sa lámhleabhar. Bíonn Gaeilge agus Béarla ar na comharthaí 
bóithre seachas cinn sa Ghaeltacht a bhíonn i nGaeilge amháin. De réir an 
lamhleabhair, a thagann faoi threoir an Aire, ní mór don teacs Gaeilge a 
bheith i gcló iodálach agus ar an méid céanna leis an téacs Béarla. 
The Minister has issued a direction that road signs must be provided in 
accordance with the Traffic Sign Manual.  The type and size of text is set 
out in this manual. Irish and English text is provided on all road signs 
except in Gaeltacht areas where it is in Irish only. The guidelines issued 
under Ministerial Direction prescribe that Irish text must have the same text 
height as the English text but Irish text must be in italic. 
Cllr. Daly read a poem in the context of this motion into the record of the meeting. 
 
 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
29 of 56 
 
9. 
Wild Atlantic Way Interpretive Centre  
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Cahill PROPOSED:  
 
    
That Kerry County Council and Fáilte Ireland take into consideration the massive 
success of the Wild Atlantic Way which is a world class route and has 
significantly increased visitor numbers to County Kerry and has also developed 
into a famous international marketing brand by building a Wild Atlantic Way 
Interpretive Centre in Kerry, as a matter of extreme urgency, as this will be a 
major tourist attraction for our County. 
The following reply issued: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
The Wild Atlantic Way (WAW) is a 2500 km (1550 mile) touring route along 
the West Coast stretching from Donegal to West Cork.  County Kerry has 
the longest section (550km) which includes the North Kerry coastal drive, 
Slea Head Drive, Skellig Ring and large sections of the Ring of Kerry and 
Ring of Beara. It is a Fáilte Ireland initiative supported by local authorities 
and tourism trade.  Since its launch in 2014, the WAW is already proving to 
be an outstanding success in delivering increased visitor numbers to 
peripheral areas and in extending the tourism season year-on-year. 
A specific objective of the WAW is to get people into less trafficked areas 
to experience the wildness of the Atlantic coastal areas; encourage and 
facilitate them to engage in activity pursuits both land and sea, explore the 
natural and built heritage, the distinctive culture, food, crafts, traditions, 
meet and engage with local people rather than providing new visitor 
interpretive centres.   
While there are visitor attractions and interpretive centres along the route 
and a small number of new centres on specific themes may be added, the 
principal focus is on a series of 150 Discovery Points (25 in Kerry) and 
Signature Discovery Points (Blaskets and Skelligs Viewing Points in Kerry).  
The new Kerry County Tourism Strategy includes an action to provide for 
an increased number of such viewing points with interpretive panels along 
the Kerry coast, especially along the Kenmare Bay area, and a Signature 
Discovery Point in North Kerry.   
Fáilte Ireland, earlier this year, following extensive consultation with the 
local community, Kerry County Council and other state agencies, launched 
its new Skellig Coast Visitor Experience Development Plan which is seen 
as a national pilot project to be rolled out along the entire Wild Atlantic 
Way. This complies with the new Kerry County Tourism Strategy. 
Cllr. M. Cahill expressed his disappointment with the reply and stated the WAW 
is a huge success that is a world class brand which is growing.  An Interpretive 
Centre would be an important addition for Kerry and the Tourism Department 
should lead the way on it.  Cllr. Cahill asked that his request would be 
reconsidered so that Kerry is the first county to have such a Centre.  In 
conclusion Cllr. Cahill pointed out there is no viewing point in the Caherciveen 
area and he called on Fáilte Ireland to identify one in the area. 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
30 of 56 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg SECONDED the motion and added there would be no better way 
to market Kerry than through a WAW Interpretive Centre. 
10. 
Allocation of additional funding for local and regional roads to the 
Listowel MD 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Kennelly PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council will allocate any additional allocation of funding for 
local and regional roads in 2017 from the Department for roads in the Listowel 
Municipal District area in view of the deteriorating condition of the road network in 
North Kerry. 
The following reply issued: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Kerry County Council has not been advised of additional funding by the 
Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport for improvements to the non-
national road network which was allocated having regard to the priority list 
adopted by Council. Should the Council receive additional funding; the 
programme will be reviewed with the members. 
Cllr. M. Kennelly read the following statement into the record of the meeting: 
“Mayor/CE the condition on the majority of our roads in North Kerry are in a very 
poor condition.  As I have stated here in the Chambers before in North Kerry we 
have 900km of a road network. 
 
Last year, due to increased funding (flood related) 30km of roads in North Kerry 
were re-surfaced.  This means that it will take 30 years for the whole road 
network to be addressed. 
 
I, as a Public Representative for the North Kerry area find that the issues raised 
on sub standard roads in my area, the toughest I face as a councillor. 
 
Over the last 10 months alone, I have had 3 deputations to our Listowel 
Municipal District Meeting, for 3 different areas namely, the Killocrim Road, in 
Listowel, the Knockalougha Road Residents in Lyrecrompane and the Powell 
Road Residents in Moyvane, where these residents can no longer put up with 
these sub-standard roads.  It is just not acceptable, where people cannot walk, 
run, push a pram, wheelchair, and now because some stretches are so poor, 
they can’t drive their vehicles because it’s too dangerous and that is a reality.  
 
Everyday as a Councillor, I am approached by residents on different roads like 
the ones mentioned and the anguish these people face is sickening. One 
example, Dirha East in Listowel which is on the Works Programme for 2018, and 
one road that I tried to include on this years programme, has to be the worst road 
in Ireland.  This road connects the Listowel/Ballybunion Road to the 
Listowel/Ballylongford Road and is heavily travelled.  
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
31 of 56 
 
As a Councillor,  I am working hard with Kerry County Council Roads Engineers 
in the Listowel Muncipal District and I want to acknowledge the amount of work 
these staff do in giving these affected areas a proper road carriage, but in a lot of 
the roads mentioned my hands and Kerry County Council’s hands are tied. 
 
Pre-election 2016, certain elected deputies went around North Kerry and 
promised motorways everywhere and ultimately the local elected councillor was 
left dealing with the residents on these sub standard roads. 
 
This is a battle cry from me for the people of North Kerry where even over the 
last 12 months, where due to a lot of road closures, the roads used on these 
diversions are being destroyed, these roads are not fit for such heavy traffic. We 
have seen only last weekend in Moyvane where locals are furious with these 
diversions.  Yes G.N.I and EIR Grid will repair the road in which they work on but 
the roads used for diversions during these repair works, Kerry County Council 
are responsible for. 
 
I am pleading and urging Management that when additional funding for our road 
network in Kerry is allocated that this funding is allocated to North Kerry so that 
we can complete the false promises made to the people of North Kerry pre 2016 
General Election. 
 
I’m asking the CE to write to the Minister for Transport to call for the allocation of 
additional funding for North Kerry.”  
 
Cllr. R. Beasley SECONDED the motion. 
 
Cllr. J. Lucid pointed out that in the first 5 meetings he attended of Listowel MD 
there were 4 deputations in relation to roads and something must be done to 
improve the roads in North Kerry. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty highlighted that the roads in East Kerry are in a poor condition 
also and require additional funding. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady concurred with the views expressed by Cllr. Culloty. 
 
12. 
Measures to promote age friendly communities in Kerry 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen PROPOSED: 
What measures have Kerry County Council in place to promote age friendly 
communities throughout Kerry, especially in terms of community development, 
well being and public health for our older persons. 
 
 
 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
32 of 56 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Kerry Local Economic & Community Plan 2016 – 2022 (LECP) commits 
the Local Community Development Committee (LCDC) to the achievement 
of the following High Level Goal within the term of the Plan: 
 
“To promote Kerry as an age-friendly county and strengthen collaboration 
between statutory agencies and voluntary & community organisations to 
improve health, well-being, safety and participation of older people.”   
Certain actions are linked to this goal in the Plan. At the February, 2017 
meeting, the LCDC agreed to prioritise the Age Friendly Programme as one 
of the priority actions to be focused on in the 2017 LECP Implementation 
Plan. 
 
One of the key actions to be implemented is the development of an Age 
Friendly Strategy for the County in collaboration with all stakeholders.  
Work on the development of the Strategy is progressing and it is proposed 
to present the draft strategy to the Members in quarter 4 of this year.  
It is on the basis of the LCDC’s focus on the Age Friendly Programme in 
2017 that an application was submitted to the Department to approve the 
application of the €64,500 allocated under the 2017 Community Facilities 
Scheme to support age friendly initiatives. 
 
In total, 65 no. applications were approved under the Scheme to provide 
funding for new activities that support age friendly communities such as: 
 
• Improved access to public and community buildings 
• Creation of safe, comfortable places to meet 
• Intergenerational capital projects  
• Provision of recreation and healthy living facilities 
 
These projects are currently under implementation in local communities 
across the County. 
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen welcomed the reply and asked when the LCDC are 
compiling the Strategy that other options would be considered such as computer 
classes, calling on State agencies to make services more user friendly and the 
provision of community buses once a week. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly SECONDED the motion. 
 
13. 
Temporary funfairs 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Lucid PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council clarify what the position is with regards to planning 
requirements for temporary funfairs in this County? Do they require planning 
permission? If so what are the conditions set out under planning. What control 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
33 of 56 
 
has Kerry County Council to ensure best practice in relation to control of noise 
levels and other issues? 
 
The following reply issued: 
The use of land for a funfair, and the placing or maintenance of tents, vans 
or other temporary or movable structures or objects on the land in 
connection with such use does not require planning permission provided 
that: 
 
1. The land shall not be used for any such purposes either continuously for 
a period exceeding 15 days or occasionally for periods exceeding in 
aggregate 30 days in any year. 
 
2. On the discontinuance of such use the land shall be reinstated.  
There are a number of requirements in relation to notification, certificates 
of safety, and other details to be submitted to the local authority in respect 
of the operation of funfairs, which are set out in Section 239 of the Planning 
Development Act 2016. Under this legislation operators of a playground are 
required to provide valid safety certificates for their fairground equipment 
to the Council at least 2 weeks in advance of using the lands for this 
purpose.  
 
There is no specific legislation or guidelines currently in place in relation to 
noise from such activities.  Any such issues arising are generally dealt with 
on a case-by-case basis on receipt of complaints. 
 
Cllr. J. Lucid read the following statement into the record of the meeting. 
 
“If the funfair operates for a period of in excess of 15 days – what is the legal 
position, who is responsible - likewise if the funfair operates for a period of in 
excess of 30 days – what body is responsible to control this.  My point about 
noise refers to a situation where it is situated near houses – where people have 
young children that cannot sleep with noise and maybe loud music that continues 
until 11:00pm at night.  Can you clarify if the Council has any responsibility?” 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea SECONDED the motion and added that there was an issue in the 
Maharees.  Funfairs that create noise should have to apply for planning and they 
should not be permitted to disturb sand dunes. 
 
14. 
Call for works at the mouth of the Cashen 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. R. Beasley PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council use their influence with the OPW to have major works 
carried out at the mouth of the Cashen as the people are living in fear there. They 
have no insurance since the floods of 2014 and 2015. 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
34 of 56 
 
The following reply issued: 
At the recent visit by Minister Kevin Moran, Minister of State for the OPW, 
on the 27th July 2017, the OPW confirmed that Consultants for the Cashen 
Estuary Drainage Project have been appointed by the Office to bring a 
viable scheme forward through environmental assessment, detailed 
design, tender and construction, subject to available funding. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley expressed concern at the reference to ‘subject to available 
funding’ in the reply.  When the Minister visited the county he indicated that some 
work could be undertaken under the Minor Works Scheme and he asked if plans 
have been advanced for the Cashen with a view to applying for funding.  Cllr. 
Beasley asked that boulders would be placed on the wall for 100m at the extreme 
west of the Cashen to alleviate the fears of families in this area. 
Cllr. P. Daly SECONDED the motion. 
 
15. 
Inadequate mobile phone service 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. O’Shea PROPOSED: 
We the members of Kerry County Council call on the Minister for 
Communications, Climate Action and Environment, Mr. Denis Naughten, to 
urgently investigate the serious inadequate mobile phone services provided by 
network operators in the County of Kerry. 
 
The following reply issued: 
This is a matter for consideration by the members.  Following on from the 
recommendations set out in the ‘Report of the Mobile Phone and 
Broadband Taskforce’ published in December 2016, The Commission for 
Communications Regulation (ComReg) is currently working with the 
various operators to create a composite national coverage map and make 
this available on its web site, as at present there is no reliable independent 
map showing coverage which would highlight ‘Blackspots’. Separately we 
have been advised that the Department of Communications, Climate Action 
and the Environment is undertaking a review to address the issue of 
‘Blackspots’ to include recommendations on initiatives to address the 
issue, taking into account the various innovative options available. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea read the following statement into the record of the meeting: 
 
“To people living in disperse areas, their only defence is their mobile phones.  
This is an extract from Jeremy Godfrey, Chairman of Com Reg: 
 
Poor mobile phone coverage in rural areas of Ireland could soon be swept away 
by state-sanctioned moves to introduce signal-boosting services for homes. 
The technology could solve an issue that affects as many as 500,000 Irish Mobile 
users. The head of Ireland’s telecoms regulator confirmed that his watch dog is 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
35 of 56 
 
considering the move in the face of growing complaints from rural TD’s and 
householders over weak mobile phone coverage. 
 
There are places where people were able to use their phone in their homes five 
years ago and they can’t use them there now, said Jeremy Godfrey, Chairman of 
ComReg, at an Oireachtas committee hearing on communications. 
 
We acknowledge that individuals sometimes have a worse experience than they 
previously had.  Our evidence is that this is not due to any reduction in the signal 
strength being provided by operators.  But that doesn’t mean that there isn’t a 
problem. We are going to consider the licensing of amplifiers to enable 
individuals through their mobile operators to improve the coverage in their 
homes. 
 
Amplifiers, also called boosters or repeaters, involve placing an antenna on the 
roof of a house that captures any available mobile signal in the surrounding area 
and boosts it into a home or limited local area.  At present, such equipment is 
illegal to use in Ireland without a special licence.   
 
Mr. Godfrey said that 500,000 mobile phone users in Ireland were dissatisfied 
with their service.   
 
The ComReg Chief also said that the Regulator was likely to introduce a new 
mobile phone spectrum that would widen the reception of existing operators’ 
signals.  However, this process would not be introduced for at least 3 years, he 
said.  
 
Some rural TDs say that weak mobile phone coverage is a bigger issue among 
constituents than lack of broadband.  There is a real problem with coverage in 
large areas of the country, said Helen McEntee, a Fine Gael TD for Meath East.  
I can’t keep a call without it dropping on routes that I travel.  Under Irish 
Telecoms law, mobile operators are only required to cover between 70pc and 
80pc of the country’s population with no legal requirement to cover rural areas. 
 
This means that once Dublin, Cork, Limerick, Galway and Waterford are covered, 
the operators are only obliged to cover a handful of other large towns to meet 
their legal obligations.  Mobile operators say that they face planning objections 
from local authorities, despite the growing outcry over coverage black spots. 
 
One in three applications for masts and other mobile network infrastructure is 
rejected by rural councils and An Bord Pleanála.  ComReg’s Chairman rejected 
claims that mobile phone signals were worse today than they were five years 
ago.  We conduct tests four times a year, said Mr. Godfrey.  Coverage is over 
90pc of the population.  There’s no evidence that those signal strengths have 
gotten worse in recent years.  However, Mr. Godfrey admitted that ComReg’s 
testing procedure did not reach some rural areas.” 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
36 of 56 
 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty SECONDED the motion and highlighted that black spots are 
inhibiting development by sole traders.  Business customers receive a far better 
service than private individuals. 
 
16. 
Option to car parking charges by Credit/Debit Card 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. Grady PROPOSED: 
That the option to pay car parking charges by Credit/Debit Card would be 
considered for all public car parks in Kerry. 
 
The following reply issued: 
In response to a previous motion moved, the Council is undertaking a full 
review of payment options for parking throughout the County. This will 
include an assessment of payment options introduced in recent times by 
some other local authorities, including the option of cashless payment 
systems. This review will be completed by the end of the year and a report 
will be brought to Council on any capital investment that may be required 
to implement such a system. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady highlighted that this system is working in Dublin and motorists still 
have the option of paying at the parking meter. 
 
17. 
Provision of services to persons with disabilities 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. T. Ferris PROPOSED: 
That the CE will provide a report for the November Meeting outlining provisions 
that is currently being made to provide services to persons with disabilities and 
encourage their participation in decision making structures. The report should 
also include future plans and budget plans to implement same. 
 
The following reply issued: 
A report will be prepared for the November Council meeting as requested. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris stated as Ireland is due to implement the UN Convention on the 
rights of persons with Disabilities in the near future that this report would be 
presented as soon as possible.  The Council provides so many services that are 
accessed by a large number of disabled people and she wanted to establish how 
development can be incentivised to allow all people to live equally.  The issues 
that need to be considered include the provision of recreational facilities, the 
granting of licences and the development of social housing to ensure the needs 
of the 162 applicants in the county are met.   
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan SECONDED the motion. 
 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
37 of 56 
 
18. 
Flying of Flags Policy 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. Quigg PROPOSED: 
That this Council review or put in place a flying of Flags Policy. 
 
The following reply issued: 
This matter will be reviewed and brought to CPG for consideration prior to 
reverting to Full Council. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg asked if Kerry County Council has a policy on the flying of Flags.  
He PROPOSED that the Palestinian flag would be flown for one week in 
solidarity with the people of the region who have suffered atrocities until the new 
policy is brought to CPG.  Other local authorities have taken this initiative.  
 
Cllr. T. Ferris SECONDED the motion. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue confirmed there is a policy on the flying of flags and flags are 
flown on the occasion of a visiting dignitary to the county.  The CPG will review 
the existing policy which is in place since the early to mid 90s. 
 
Cllr. Quigg asked that his proposal would be implemented until the policy is 
considered by the CPG. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris supported this request. 
 
The Chief Executive recommended that members would await the review of the 
current policy by CPG before making a decision. 
 
A number of members highlighted that while they were not opposed to the motion 
they would have a preference to await the new policy before any decision is 
taken. 
 
Cllr. Ferris highlighted this was the only opportunity to do something in solidarity 
with the people of Palestine. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue confirmed that CPG would review the current policy on the 
flying of flags. 
 
The Cathaoirleach PROPOSED that members would await the outcome of the 
review of the policy by CPG. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson SECONDED this proposal and pointed out that the notice of 
motion was agreed. 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
38 of 56 
 
Cllr. Ferris highlighted that the motion called for a review of the policy but Cllr. 
Quigg proposed that the Palestinian flag would be flown now.  It was 
disrespectful to members that a vote was not taken on this proposal. 
 
Cllrs. Ferris and Quigg then left the meeting. 
 
19. 
Call for a ban on the advertising of alcohol products 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.J. Culloty PROPOSED: 
As excessive consumption of alcohol in this country contributes to unnecessary 
social, human and economic costs, I ask this Council to call on the Taoiseach, 
Leo Varadkar, to begin the process of banning the advertising of alcohol products 
in this country. 
 
The following reply issued: 
As requested when this motion was considered at the July Council Meeting 
a letter issued to the Southern Regional Drug and Alcohol Task Force 
requesting information on the impact of advertising on alcohol 
consumption.  A report was received from them and it is included in 
Correspondence General for this meeting.  
 
The Task Force strongly supported the motion. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty highlighted that very important studies have proven that there is 
a direct link between the advertising of alcohol and the impact on the drinking 
habits of young people.  While he was not against moderate drinking he did have 
an issue with the advertising of alcohol.  The report received from the Drug and 
Alcohol Task Force states: 
 
“From an alcohol marketing prospective, Irish 16-17 year olds are significant 
contributors to alcohol profits in Ireland spending an estimated €145m on alcohol 
each year.  Alcohol marketing increases the likelihood that children and young 
people will start drinking, and if already drinking, that they will drink more. 
 
Recent research has shown that children aged 10 – 15 years in the UK are more 
likely than adults to be exposed to alcohol advertising on television. 
People who begin drinking before the age of 15 are four times more likely to 
develop alcohol dependence than those who start at age 20 or older.  Those who 
drink heavily in their mid-teens are also more likely to experience alcohol-related 
harms as young adults.” 
 
From this it is apparent that the advertising of alcohol does have an adverse 
impact on young people and the statistics on public order drunkenness proves 
this.  Diageo sponsor a lot of events involving young people.   
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
39 of 56 
 
Cllr. P. Daly stated while he had no difficulty with a ban on advertising alcohol for 
the benefit of children he asked if this ban would also apply to small producers of 
craft beers.  If it will he could not support the motion but if it is limited to 
advertising at sporting events he would support it. 
 
A vote was taken on Cllr. Culloty’s motion which resulted as follows: 
 
For: 
Cllrs. Cahill, Culloty, Gleeson, Grady, Locke, Lucid, D. McCarthy, 
Moriarty, O’Shea Sheahan (10) 
 
Against: 
Cllrs. Daly, J. Healy-Rae (2) 
 
Not Voting: None (0) 
 
The Cathaoirleach declared the motion CARRIED. 
 
20. 
Tenders for RSA Roadworthiness/CVRT centres 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Moriarty PROPOSED: 
That we ascertain when the next round of contract tenders will be sought for RSA 
Roadworthiness/ CVRT centres and ask that those tendering should be able to 
tender per size of vehicle and not just on private or commercial registration. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The procurement of the contracts for the Roadworthiness / CVRT test 
centres is undertaken by the Road Safety Authority. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty highlighted if a business has an ordinary sized van and it is taxed 
commercial it must be taken to one of the bigger test centres.  If the Caherciveen 
NCT Centre was to tender for the testing of commercial vans it would require 
huge investment.  However if the tender was divided to allow Centres to tender 
for the testing of smaller commercial vehicles only it would be more reasonable. 
Cllr. D. McCarthy SECONDED the motion. 
22. 
Call to introduce a total ban on the use of non-recyclable plastic 
items 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Gleeson PROPOSED: 
 
        
As non-recyclable plastic items, large and small, seriously threaten our planet, 
air, land and water, that we call on our Government to give national and 
international example and leadership by introducing a total ban on the use of all 
such material in this country. 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
Cllr. M. Gleeson read the following statement into the record of the meeting. 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
40 of 56 
 
“Unless it has been burned every piece of plastic ever produced still exists either 
as single unit or in multiple pieces. It does so because it is non- biodegradable. 
Used and disposed of plastic is an ever- growing problem on land and in seas. It 
degrades the countryside. It strangles birds and small animals and probably 
worst of all it breaks down into microbeads in the oceans where it is consumed 
by fish and other forms of marine life who mistake it for food. These creatures 
may die a slow and painful death as a result. 
It is estimated that at least 8 million tonnes of plastic enter the world’s oceans 
every year.  
For too long humankind has seen the seas as acceptable dumping locations for 
all sorts of waste. This is a crime against humanity and against nature. 
There is in the Pacific Ocean an area larger than France of dumped plastic. That 
is desecration on a massive scale.  A 2016 United Nations report stated that 
humans eating plastic contaminated fish may be exposed to elevated levels of 
chemicals that could do considerable well- being damage.  Sea creature large 
and small, from whales to seabirds are being poisoned by micro plastic. 
We should be grateful that former Minister Noel Dempsey introduced a charge for 
the use of plastic bags. Our physical environment is very obviously the better of 
that decision.  But we need to do more; if we don’t our land and marine 
environments will continue to be degraded. 
It is especially important that the use of Micro Plastic is banned and we as a 
maritime country should be the world leader in this campaign. By so becoming 
we will be making a very clear statement that we really do care about the great 
wonder that is creation.” 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECODED the motion. 
24. 
Call to house the homeless within their Municipal District 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. P. Daly PROPOSED:   
 
     
That this Council will house persons who become homeless within their own 
Municipal District. 
The following reply issued: 
 
 
 
 
 
         
Housing services are provided on a County-wide basis with applicants 
entitled to indicate an area of choice across any location in the County. So 
allocations and tenancies are not limited or restricted by Municipal District 
due the applicant’s home address.  
In cases where people present requiring emergency accommodation, the 
primary consideration is securing emergency accommodation irrespective 
of locations. While ideally this accommodation would be in close proximity 
to their former residence this will unfortunately not be possible in many 
cases. Securing properties is proving challenging, especially in the key 
towns such as Tralee, Listowel, Killarney, Dingle, Caherciveen and 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
41 of 56 
 
Kenmare.  For that reason, people who present as requiring emergency 
accommodation, particularly families, will continue to be offered temporary 
short term-emergency accommodation wherever we have availability at that 
particular time. 
Cllr. P. Daly stated this problem has arisen since the abolition of the Town 
Councils.  In Tralee and Killarney provision is made for homeless persons but no 
such provision is made in other Municipal Districts.  It would be more effective if 
each MD had their own facilities for the homeless. 
Cllr. N. Kelleher supported the motion and added that it is exceptionally important 
that these services are provided in each MD. 
The Chief Executive confirmed that every effort is made to house people in their 
own area.  When funding for homeless services is drawn down it is on a 
countywide basis.  Transitional accommodation is now available to facilitate 
those who become homeless and consideration will be given to providing 
increased resources in this area. 
Cllr. D. Grady highlighted that Killarney needs a homeless facility and it is wrong 
to move families from their area as the children must also move schools. 
Cllr. Daly advised that people become homeless for a variety of reasons and they 
are moved to Tralee as it is said the services are in Tralee but that is not the 
case.   
Mr. M. O’Donoghue clarified that there is homeless accommodation in each of 
the MDs and the vast majority of cases are emergency cases and an emergency 
solution must then apply. 
25. 
Court Poor Box 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Kelleher PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council would write to the Court Service in Kerry regarding the 
allocation of the Poor box contributions made in Court in lieu of convictions and 
suggest that monies could be allocated to the Community Support Fund which 
allocates to community organisations right across the county of Kerry, also 
encouraging that the majority of monies be allocated to charities in Kerry. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher indicated his full support for the Court Poor Box whether it is 
distributed internationally or locally.  In 2016 395,000 was collected in Kerry 
which is a substantial amount.  Kerry County Council administers the Community 
Support Fund and a large number of organisations across the county benefit from 
it.  Cllr. Kelleher asked that a letter would issue to the Courts Service in Kerry 
outlining the benefits of the CSF and asking that some of the funds from the 
Court Poor Box would be allocated to it.  According to media reports 90% of the 
money from the Court Poor Box goes to third world charities.  While he was not 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
42 of 56 
 
opposed to these charities he would like to see local groups benefit.  A number of 
local groups are beneficiaries but the funding they receive is small. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill SECONDED the motion and suggested that the Cathaoirleach and 
a member of the Senior Management Team should arrange a meeting with 
Judge James O’Connor to discuss this matter with him prior to referring the 
resolution to the Courts Service. 
 
Cllr. Kelleher agreed that the Chief Executive and the Cathaoirleach should 
request a meeting with Judge O’Connor in the first instance to discuss this 
proposal with him. 
 
26. 
Breakdown for 2017 County Councillors Allocations 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Cahill PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council give a detailed breakdown for 2017 of County 
Councillors Allocation/Councillor Specific Municipal District Operations Fund 
(CSMDOF) estimates for each of the engineering areas in the county, with 
detailed costings of pipes, surface dressing, health & safety measures and labour 
costs etc. 
 
The following reply issued: 
To date, 158 projects have been agreed by the members for funding under 
Councillor's Allocations, for which estimates have been provided and the 
works approved at MD level, at a total cost of €661,504. Of these, 70 
projects have been approved where the cost of the works is in excess of 
€3,000, and where the total value of the works is €520,447. The following 
table gives a breakdown of the number of projects in each Municipal 
District and Engineering Area:-  
Municipal 
District 
Engineering 
Area 
Total No of 
Projects  
Total Cost of 
Projects 
Total No of 
Projects, 
where cost > 
€3,000 
Total Cost 
of Projects, 
where cost 
> €3,000 
Killarney 
Killarney  
17 
€59,850 
9 
€48,250 
Castleisland 
16 
€90,650 
5 
€75,650 
 
33 
€150,500 
14 
€123,900 
 
 
 
 
 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
43 of 56 
 
Listowel 
Listowel 
29 
€119,650 
17 
€98,050 
 
 
 
 
 
 
South & 
West 
Cahersiveen 
11 
€22,600 
3 
€59,850 
Dingle 
14 
€53,170 
8 
€59,850 
Kenmare 
4 
€8,000 
1 
€59,850 
Killorglin 
22 
€77,738 
9 
€59,850 
 
 
51 
€161,508 
21 
€117,851 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tralee 
Tralee 
45 
€229,846 
18 
€180,646 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total 
158 
€661,504 
70 
€520,447 
A detailed breakdown is provided by the relevant area engineer for works 
where the estimated cost is in excess of €3,000. These costs include for 
labour, plant and materials required to carry out the required works safely, 
as well as traffic management requirements. These cost estimate can vary 
significantly depending on the works required, depths of excavation and 
backfill, the location of the work, whether on busy roads or in urban 
centres which may involve additional traffic management arrangements, 
traffic and pedestrian volumes and other factors like ground conditions etc. 
Each item of works is costed individually based on the above factors.  
The Senior Engineer in Operations monitors expenditure under the 
scheme, and has reviewed a random sample of 14 projects this year and is 
satisfied that the cost estimates are consistent, allowing for the many 
variations in the nature of the works as outlined above.  
It is acknowledged that given the nature of projects funded under 
Councillor Allocations, better value for money could be achieved in each of 
the Municipal Districts, if a small number of larger scale locally strategic 
projects were funded from Councillors Allocations, which will need to be 
addressed in the context of the upcoming 2018 Budget.  
Cllr. M. Cahill highlighted that the reply did not address his motion.   

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
44 of 56 
 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan stated that procedures were put in place to give back up 
information to members in relation to works costing in excess of €3,000. 
 
Cllr. Cahill advised that he wanted to see the cost of one job across all the 
engineering areas as he has an issue with some of the costings. 
 
Mr. O’Sullivan advised that no two jobs are the same but he undertook to bring a 
random sample through the Operations SPC. 
 
The Chief Executive advised it would be reasonable if the member asked the 
Director to ensure value for money as no 2 jobs are the same. 
 
Mr. O’Sullivan highlighted that a lorry load of stone will be a different price 
depending on where it is being drawn from and to.  A lot of jobs are undertaken 
each year and procedures must be reviewed to ensure we get better value for 
money. 
 
The Chief Executive suggested that the Director will ensure that he is satisfied 
that any variances are reasonable. 
 
Cllr. Cahill asked that a rough idea of costs would be provided to him. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae pointed out if a councillor has an issue with an estimate they 
should discuss it with the relevant Area Engineer. 
 
Cllr. Cahill stated it is difficult to ask questions when he did not receive the 
answers he requested.  The cost of labour is being charged to these jobs even 
though staff are paid anyway. 
 
Mr. O’Sullivan highlighted that funding for Councillor’s Allocations is taken from 
Local Road Maintenance funding.  Labour must be charged where the staff 
deliver the projects. 
 
27. 
Repair and Lease Scheme 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. Kennelly PROPOSED: 
Can Kerry County Council confirm under the Repair and Lease Scheme which 
was introduced this year by Government what number of Applications were 
received and what is the successful amount of Applications. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Rebuilding Ireland Action Plan for Housing and Homelessness is the new 
Repair and Leasing Scheme, which targets the delivery of social housing 
and also ensures that existing housing stock is used to the maximum 
degree possible.  

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
45 of 56 
 
The basis of the scheme is that repair and improvement works to suitable 
vacant properties are funded to bring them up to the standard for rented 
accommodation and the cost of the works is then deducted from lease 
payments over an agreed lease term. 
 
If the property is located in an area of need and is suitable for social 
housing a property inspection will be carried out by Kerry County Council 
staff who will validate the works required to bring the dwelling to the 
required standard.  
 
Kerry County Council have been given a revised target for 2017 to deliver 
27 units under the scheme. Kerry County Council advertised the scheme 
during the week of the 15 May with an initial closing date of the 01 June 
2017. The Council received 84 applications. 20 applications have been 
prioritised as they are in areas of high demand and are now being assessed 
to determine if they meet the technical requirements of the scheme. A large 
number of other applications require further information to be submitted 
from the applicant primarily relating to the provision of a costed scope of 
works which is a requirement of the application process. This has now 
been requested from the applicants and once they have been received, they 
will be further assessed for inclusion in the scheme. 
 
There is no doubt that the scheme has the potential to identify and return 
vacant units to use as social housing units. However we are aware of 
concerns that the scheme may not be broad enough to maximise the 
potential benefits. The scheme is currently under consideration nationally 
and further refinement of the scheme may well take place. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly read the following statement into the record of the meeting: 
 
“In 2017 the Repair and Lease Scheme was introduced to bring vacant properties 
into social housing.  The owners would get an agreed lease payment from the 
Local Authority and the value or the repairs would be gradually off-set against the 
lease payment over a specified period to the value of up to €40,000. 
 
This Scheme is aimed at owners of such properties that could not afford such 
repairs to bring these properties up to standard for rental purposes. 
 
My motion today, needs to inform members if this initiative has been successful 
as this country has a huge housing shortage that is now affecting most large 
towns and villages in Kerry.  
 
Cllr. Kennelly asked if the Scheme would be opened up to new applications and 
will the revised target of 27 be achieved. 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
46 of 56 
 
In response Mr. M. O’Donoghue informed members that officials are processing 
the applications received and it is unlikely that we will reach our target by the end 
of the year.  It has been suggested that the Scheme maybe revised.  Landlords 
have expressed concern that there is no incentive for them if they must engage a 
consultant and apply for planning permission.  It is a rolling Scheme and the 
target of 27 was set by the Department.  Priority is being given to those likely to 
come to fruition the soonest.  Further calls for applications will be made in due 
course. 
 
Cllr. Kennelly asked if there was much take up of the Scheme in Listowel. 
 
Mr. O’Donoghue advised there was an even spread throughout the county.  The 
lowest uptake was in areas where there is the highest need for housing and the 
highest uptake was where there is little or no demand for housing.  He undertook 
to provide members with a list of the locations where applications were received. 
 
Cllr. Kennelly highlighted that Louth County Council undertook a pilot scheme 
where 35 houses were acquired through CPO over a 15 month period and a 
further 30 are being secured.  He asked that such a scheme would also be 
considered in Kerry. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue stated the Government has indicated that they will launch a 
Vacant Property Strategy and local authorities have been requested to prepare a 
report on vacant properties in the county.  At present there is no definite register 
of vacant properties and when the Vacant Property Strategy is launched greater 
detail will be available.  Mr. O’Donoghue added that he was aware that Louth 
County Council acquired houses in the larger towns through CPO and it has 
always been an option to acquire houses by CPO.  However there are risks 
involved and it must be possible to restore the property at a reasonable cost. 
 
29. 
Call on the Banks to ensure vacant houses in their possession are 
available for sale 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Lucid PROPOSED: 
To ask Kerry County Council to call on the Minister for Housing, Planning & Local 
Government, Mr. Eoghan Murphy to instruct the banks in state ownership to set 
up a working group to ensure vacant houses in their possession are made 
available for sale to private individuals or County Councils to assist in alleviating 
the present housing crisis. 
 
The following reply issued: 
While this is a matter for consideration by the Members, as stated in the 
reply to the previous Notice of Motion, the Rebuilding Ireland Programme is 
currently under review by the Minister and it is expected that an update and 
a Strategy on Vacant Properties will be published during September. 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
47 of 56 
 
Following this Management will come back to Council with an update on 
the various programmes currently in place. 
 
Cllr. J. Lucid read the following statement into the record of the meeting: 
 
“I am asking the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government, Eoghan 
Murphy to instruct Banks in state ownership such as AIB, BOI and PTSB to set 
up a working group to ensure that all vacant houses in their possession are made 
available for sale to private individuals and or County Councils to help alleviate 
the current housing crisis across the country.  
 
There are hundreds if not thousands of properties in bank ownership that are not 
available for sale. This is affecting market supply and we are all aware that the 
main problem with the market is a lack of supply for purchase or rent. We are too 
well aware also that prices for purchase or rent are rising continuously.  
 
I have a constituent who is aware of a property near his parent’s home that has 
been vacant for three years and is owned by one of the above mentioned Banks. 
He is interested in buying a house at present and is particularly interested in this 
house. He contacted his local bank branch; however nobody in the Tralee branch 
knows anything about the property and incredibly cannot find anyone in the 
banks head office that has information. I have contacted the Bank myself and a 
local T.D. contacted the bank but no information has come available.  
 
This is a completely unacceptable situation. We have thousands of people on 
housing waiting lists and there is a severe lack of properties available to rent. 
Rents are soaring out of control to a point where they are beyond people’s 
means and putting people in poverty. This particular situation is just one of the 
many reasons we have a housing crisis. Solving it will not solve the overall 
problem but solving this will help. The Minister must take immediate action to 
deal with this issue.” 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea SECONDED the motion. 
 
31. 
Call not to support the proposed Fixed Penalty Drink Driving Bill 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. M. O’Shea PROPOSED: 
We the members of Kerry County Council call on all our Oireachtas members in 
Kerry not to support the proposed Fixed Penalty Drink Driving Bill 2017 which will 
be put before both houses of Oireachtas in the Autumn as this will have 
devastating effects on rural Ireland. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
48 of 56 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea highlighted that he did not condone drink driving but people have 
no concept of rural living.  He then read the following statement into the record of 
the meeting: 
 
“I am an admirer of former Co. Corner – Terence Casey’s point of view on Rural 
Isolation. Changing social practices and increased isolation are causing more 
suicides among the older generation, a former Kerry coroner has said.  
 
People who experienced decreased social interaction are more susceptible to 
suicide in rural areas, where “the suicide rate has changed from the younger 
generation to the older generation,” according to Terence Casey, who retired as 
the corner for Kerry east and south.  
 
This comes after the release of new figures by mental health charity See 
Change, which show that 42pc of people in rural areas, would try to conceal a 
mental health difficulty, 4pc higher than the national average.  
 
Speaking to Independent.ie, Mr Casey said the older generation make “no 
attempt whatsoever to look for assistance” when experiencing mental health 
problems and attributes loneliness as the leading cause of the problem.  
 
Mr Casey said: “I’d say that trends in lifestyle have changed dramatically in the 
older generation living in isolated areas. They used to go to the creamery every 
morning and meet their friends and have a chat. The postman used to come to 
their door, now he only goes to the end of the laneway.  
 
“People used to go to the local pub, have a couple of Guinness and chat with 
their neighbour and go home. They can’t do that any longer because of the drink 
driving laws. So they’re now living in isolation and small problems which they 
dwell upon become great problem.”  
 
He continued: “If you look at some of the areas where you’ve had suicides in the 
older generation; their nearest neighbour might be a quarter of a mile away, 
whereas in the urban areas (Dublin) their nearest neighbour is next door. (Not 
talking about the one or two, I am saying thousands).  
 
In some cases that Mr Casey has seen, it had taken weeks to discover the 
deaths of people living in isolated locations.  
 
He said: “There was one man who died and only his dog kept him company. That 
gives you a broader idea of exactly how lonely people are. I mean not being 
missed for weeks and then to be found dead, decomposed.”   
 
Mr Casey said that while he has seen the suicide rate increase in the older 
demographic, the opposite was true of young people. He attributes this to the 
work of Donal Walsh, a teenager who was diagnosed with terminal cancer. He 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
49 of 56 
 
made national headlines in 2013 when he spoke out against suicide on The 
Saturday Night Show, hosted by Brendan O’ Connor.” 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn SECONDED the motion. 
 
34. 
Call for a dedicated ‘Story Room’ in each Library 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J.J. Culloty PROPOSED: 
To call on this Council to provide a dedicated "Story Room" in each of the 
Libraries throughout the County. These story rooms would be dedicated to 
presenting the definitive collection of the stories of their hinterland, to both locals 
and visitors. These stories would include local legend, nature, history folklore and 
present day. 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry Library is very active in collection of local studies material relating to 
the history of the County and holds an extensive collection of such material 
at the Local History & Archives Department, located at Library 
Headquarters in Tralee. This is available free of charge to members of the 
public from 10.00a.m. to 5.00p.m., Monday to Friday. In addition, each 
Branch Library holds a basic lending collection of published books relating 
to the history of the County. 
 
The library service already provides story telling sessions for children at all 
libraries on an ongoing basis. These are advertised locally as they occur 
and details are posted on the Library website www.kerrylibrary.ie and on 
the Library social media sites.  
 
In April of this year, as part of the national Right to Read Programme, Kerry 
Libraries participated in the Spring into Storytime initiative, whereby story 
telling sessions were held for children, using a combination of 
recommended resources and participant selections, followed by a 
drawing/colouring session and library induction tours. A similar 
programme, the Family Reading Initiative, is due to be rolled out to Kerry 
Libraries in November and December this year. These will be an annual 
initiative and Kerry County Council is open to promoting initiatives around 
story telling focusing on local legend, nature, history and folklore. 
However, any such initiative will require detailed plans and engagement 
and will need to be fully researched, analysed and assessed. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty stated the libraries provide a fantastic service but he would like 
to provide a service for adults where talks could be given on history, folklore etc.  
He asked that this would be considered for the two busiest libraries in the county.   
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan SECONDED the motion. 
 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
50 of 56 
 
35. 
Acquisition of land 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. J. Healy-Rae PROPOSED: 
How many different parcels of land is Kerry County Council hoping to buy in the 
County this year and how long have they been negotiating on these and where 
are they. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Members will be aware of the significant work programmes in delivering 
our social housing construction programme, road schemes, car parks, 
graveyards, greenways etc. These are identified in the 3 year Capital 
Programme adopted by Council, as part of the Annual Budget. To deliver 
on these projects, it is necessary for the Council to acquire suitable lands. 
The acquisition of lands, for the provision of this infrastructure, is an 
Executive Function. There is an obligation on the Council to ensure that 
any lands acquired represent the best value to the Council and members 
are regularly advised on progress in relation to the delivery of our Capital 
Programme. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae expressed his disappointment with the reply and 
acknowledged that the acquisition of land is an executive function.  He submitted 
the motion as he was not permitted a motion regarding the lands known as 
Peninsula lands in Kenmare.  Elected members are under pressure from the 
people they represent and it was unfair that management decided that he would 
first have to raise it at MD level before he would bring it to full Council.  He 
PROPOSED that this requirement would be changed to enable members to bring 
area specific issues directly to full Council.  In conclusion Cllr. Healy-Rae called 
on Kerry County Council to secure these lands for the people of Kenmare. 
 
In response the Chief Executive acknowledged that everyone is aware of the 
sensitivity around negotiations for land and every effort was made to brief 
members in so far as possible.   
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae again stated he should have been permitted to submit his 
motion on the Peninsula lands even though he was aware of the reply he would 
receive.  Members deserve more respect than this. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin supported the views expressed by Cllr. Healy-Rae. 
 
The Chief Executive assured members that no disrespect to members was 
intended.  In accordance with Standing Orders municipal specific motions must 
be raised at MD level in the first instance before they can be raised at full 
Council.  Notices of Motion for full Council should relate to the county in general. 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
51 of 56 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae PROPOSED that members would be permitted to bring a 
municipal specific motion to full Council provided it was not raised at MD level by 
another member. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin pointed that in the first instance members are elected to Kerry 
County Council and the Municipal Districts are sub committees of full Council.  
An issue can arise after an MD meeting and members should be entitled to raise 
it at full Council.  He called on CPG to review Standing Orders to ensure that 
members are permitted to submit at least one municipal specific motion to full 
Council. 
 
The Chief Executive indicated if members are in agreement that the CPG would 
review Standing Orders. 
 
36. 
Call for additional funding for playschools/preschools in rural areas 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. D. McCarthy PROPOSED: 
To write to the Minister for Education to provide more funding for 
playschools/pre-schools in rural areas. 
 
Mr. L. Quinlan stated this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy stated rural Ireland will suffer if we do not have the support of 
young people.  There will not be a shop or Post Office within 40 miles of Tuosist 
shortly.  There is a play school in Sneem with just 2 junior infants and he asked 
what parents will do if it closes.  They would have to take their children to 
Kenmare which would be very inconvenient.   
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty SECONDED the motion. 
 
37. 
Awareness and action campaign on the eradication of Japanese 
Knotweed 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. N. Moriarty PROPOSED: 
That Kerry County Council run an annual high profile awareness and action 
campaign around the eradication of Japanese Knotweed each Autumn that 
enlists local voluntary community groups and private landowners with a view to 
ensuring that we have some chance of combating in a meaningful way the 
spread of this invasive species. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Council is already actively involved in raising awareness around 
Japanese Knotweed and its management, particularly at this time of the 
year.  This includes working with several community groups, Tidy Towns 
Committees and private landowners.  The Council will shortly disseminate 
over 6,000 information leaflets on Japanese Knotweed to landowners. 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
52 of 56 
 
Municipal Districts have provided signs at locations along the public road 
network where Japanese Knotweed exists advising the public not to cut it.  
These locations will be treated with an appropriate herbicide over the next 
two months. 
 
TII are carrying out a similar programme to treat Japanese knotweed along 
National Roads. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty advised that she could see progress on the elimination of 
Japanese Knotweed on the N70 as this will be the 3rd year of spraying.  She 
asked that it would be carried out in a more co-coordinated way and that 
community groups would be contacted asking them to spray this weed at a 
certain time of the year and that they would be provided with masks and sprays.  
In this way greater areas will be treated and landowners could be encouraged to 
spray private land also. 
 
Cllr. J. J. Culloty SECONDED the motion and added that he noticed that a 
number of sites that were treated last year do not have signs displayed this year.  
If Japanese Knotweed is sprayed in October each year for three years it can be 
killed off.  Cllr. Culloty called on the Council to ensure notices are displayed on all 
sites where Japanese Knotweed is growing. 
 
Cllr. Cahill stated that the majority of people do not know what Japanese 
Knotweed looks like and when landowners cut hedges they inadvertently spread 
it.   
 
38. 
Lewis Road Junction 
 
Pursuant to notice duly given Cllr. B. Cronin PROPOSED: 
To request clarification on any progress regarding improvements to Lewis Road 
Junction with bypass and what is the update position regarding the request made 
by the Killarney Municipal District members to meet the TII regarding this lethal 
junction. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Chief Executive and Director of Operations met with Management from 
Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) in June 2017, at which the need to 
improve this junction was again highlighted. At this meeting, the TII 
requested that the Council prepare a Feasibility Report on the existing 
junctions, including their capacity, collision history and speed profiles. 
This report has now been submitted to the TII, which has identified that 
traffic volumes on the route is nearing capacity, which the Council 
considers justifies intervention.  
 
A further report on potential solutions to the current problems is being 
prepared and will issue to TII in late September / early October 2017. The 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
53 of 56 
 
report will examine potential solutions and identify a preferred solution, for 
which the Council will be seeking funding from the TII, to design and 
implement.  
 
The Killarney Municipal District Members will be consulted and kept 
appraised of progress in relation to this matter. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin welcomed the preparation of a report on potential solutions for this 
junction and added that it is long overdue.  Unfortunately there was a fatality at 
this junction earlier in the year and on foot of that he sought a meeting with TII.  
While the report states that the Killarney Municipal District Members will be 
consulted and kept appraised of progress in relation to this matter Cllr. Cronin 
highlighted that he sought a meeting with TII but apparently they do not want to 
meet the elected council.  There is genuine concern regarding this junction and 
he PROPOSED, on behalf of the members of the Killarney MD, that a request 
would issue to TII to meet with the members for the Killarney MD.  Cllr. Cronin 
asked that a copy of this request would be sent to Minister Griffin. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan SECONDED the motion and added that this is a most critical 
issue for the Killarney area.  There have been two fatalities and a number of 
serious accidents at this location.  A solution needs to be identified for this very 
busy junction. 
 
Mr. C. O’Sullivan advised members that the Chief Executive and he met with TII 
and highlighted the concerns of members and they are working on a solution.  TII 
carry out their own review and they had not identified that location as a cause for 
concern.  TII asked the Council to carry out a Feasibility Study and the accident 
statistics are on the RSA website.  It is a capacity issue and Council officials have 
also requested a review of the By-Pass.  Mr. O’Sullivan undertook to revert to TII 
on this issue. 
 
Cllr. J. Sheahan highlighted that many people are involved in accidents but they 
do not report them.  He emphasized the need to report all accidents to ensure 
they are recorded on the Pulse system. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin stated that he came across 3 and 4 car collisions at this location 
on numerous occasions.  He asked if TII officials every exited this junction and 
turned right onto the Cork road.  In conclusion Cllr. Cronin stated it is imperative 
that the members of the Killarney MD meet with TII on this matter. 
 
17.09.11.13 Correspondence – Conferences and Seminars 
 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.F. Flynn, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Cahill it 
was agreed to approve the following: 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
54 of 56 
 
 
i)   The attendance of former Cathaoirleach, Cllr. M. O’Shea at the event 
on the theme Creative Ireland County Plans 2017 held in Dublin on the 
25th May, 2017. 
 
 
ii)   The attendance of Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Sheahan at the 95th Annual 
Commemoration of President Arthur Griffith & General Michael Collins 
held in Dublin on the 20th August 2017. 
 
 
iii)   The attendance of Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Sheahan at the opening of 
Assembly House in Waterford on the 8th September 2017. 
 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.F. Flynn, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Cahill it 
was agreed to authorize the attendance of the Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. 
Sheahan at the UNESCO International Conference on Learning Cities to 
be held in Cork from 18th to 20th September 2017. 
 
(c) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. J.F. Flynn, SECONDED by Cllr. M. Cahill it 
was agreed to authorize the attendance of the Leas Cathaoirleach, Cllr. 
 
P. Connor-Scarteen at the Marking of the Centenary of Thomas Ashe in 
Dublin on Friday 22nd September 2017. 
 
(d) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. M. Cahill, SECONDED by Cllr. D. McCarthy it 
was agreed to authorize the attendance of Cllrs. Sheahan, Beasley, 
Connor-Scarteen, P. McCarthy, O’Connell, J. Healy-Rae, M. Healy-Rae 
and O’Shea at the Conference on the theme “Local Authority Budgets 
2018 to be held in Letterkenny, Co. Donegal from 13th to 15th October 
2017. 
 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy was nominated to report back to Council on this 
Conference. 
 
17.09.11.14 
Correspondence General 
 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were circulated. 
 
1.  
Letter dated 13th July 2017 from the Dáil Committee on Procedure in response to a 
resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to a dress code for members of the 
Dáil. 
 
2.  
Email dated 16th July 2017 from the NPWS in response to a resolution from Kerry 
County Council calling for the display of information on Lyme Disease. 
 
3.  
Letter dated 20th July 2017 from the Office of the Minister for Children and Youth 
Affairs in response to a resolution from Kerry County Council concerning the closure 
of the Tusla Counselling Grant. 
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
55 of 56 
 
4.  
Email dated 25th July 2017 from the Minister for Transport, Tourism and Sport in 
response to a resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to LIS. 
 
5.  
Email dated 26th July 2017 from the OPW in response to a request for a meeting 
with the Minister to discuss flooding issues. 
 
6.  
Letter dated 27th July 2017 from the Construction Industry Federation in response to 
a request from Kerry County Council in relation to policies to attract Irish people 
overseas to fill emerging shortages in construction trades. 
 
7.  
Letter dated 8th August 2017 from Tusla in response to a resolution from Kerry 
County Council in relation to the Tusla Counselling Support for Children. 
 
8.  
Letter dated 14th August 2017 from the Minister for Health in response to a 
resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to the Centre for narcolepsy in St. 
James’s Hospital. 
 
9.  
Letter dated 18th August, 2017 from the OPW in response to a resolution from Kerry 
County Council in relation to extending the opening seasons at Carrigafoyle and 
Listowel Castles. 
 
10.  
Report from the Southern Regional Drug and Alcohol Task Force in relation to the 
impact of advertising on alcohol consumption. 
 
11.  
Email dated 31st August 2017 from the Office of the Minister for Housing in response 
to a resolution from Kerry County Council in relation to Airb&b. 
 
12.  
Letter dated 4th August 2017 from Limerick City & County Council in relation to a 
resolution adopted by that authority calling on the GAA to halt the current practice of 
allowing SKY TV exclusive rights to screen particular Gaelic Games fixtures. 
 
 
17.09.11.16 Any other business 
 
Appointment of a caretaker to Aglish burial ground 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin asked if a new caretaker has been appointed to Aglish burial 
ground. 
 
Visit to Berlin 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill asked as flights are cheap that a delegation would travel to Berlin 
to meet with representatives of Berlin City Council and also tour operators.  
Councillors should also be approved to attend the Kerry London Association 
Annual Dinner to enable them to network with contacts over there.   
 

September Ordinary Meeting 
11th September 2017  
56 of 56 
 
The Chief Executive advised that the delegation to Berlin will include Minister 
Griffin, the Cathaoirleach, herself, tourism operators from the county and 
probably the Chair of Destination Kerry. 
 
Cllr. Cahill asked that councillors would be given the opportunity to go to Berlin 
also. 
 
The Chief Executive undertook to bring this request to the CPG for consideration. 
 
Tree Cutting 
 
Cllr. S. Locke requested, in light of the catastrophic weather events in the US 
which are likely to have an impact on Ireland that the tree cutting programme for 
October would be brought forward. 
 
The meeting concluded at 5pm. 
 
 
 
Liam Quinlan                                       _________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator                      Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
