 
1 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect putting 
them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is available on 
request. 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ AN CRUINNIÚ DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH 
I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRÁ LÍ, AGUS AR-LÍNE/FÍORÚIL 
AR AN LUAN, 15 MEÁN FÓMHAIR, 2025 
 
MINUTES OF THE ORDINARY MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL HELD IN THE 
COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE AND ONLINE ON MONDAY, 15 
SEPTEMBER 2025 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
Angie Baily                            Tom Barry  
Robert Brosnan 
      
Tommy Cahill                        Brendan Cronin 
Paul Daly                            
Charlie Farrelly                      Deirdre Ferris 
Breandán Fitzgerald  
Fionnán Fitzgerald                 Michael Foley 
 Podge Foley 
      
Martin Grady  
       
   Tommy Griffin                     Jackie Healy-Rae  
Johnny Healy-Rae                 Maura Healy-Rae               Niall Kelleher                     
Aoife Kennelly  
 
    Michael Leane                   Sam Locke                         
Dan McCarthy                        Marie Moloney (Leas-Cathaoirleach)                   
Norma Moriarty                     Liam Speedy Nolan               Terry O’Brien                       
Niall O’Callaghan                  Bobby O’Connell                   John O’Donoghue                
Anne O’ Sullivan                   Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey       Mikey Sheehy 
 
ABSENT/ AS LÁTHAIR 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
Jimmy Moloney 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Mr. M. O’ Donoghue, Dep Chief Executive                  Mr. Ger O’ Brien A/ Dir Housing                     
Mr. J. Kennelly, A/ Dir Com, Climate Act& Oper Serv Ms. K. Moriarty S.E.O. Finance                  
Ms. B. Fitzgerald, Meetings Administrator                     Mr. J. Nolan Dir Act Land Mgt & Econ Dev     
Mr. D. Doyle S.E. Cap Dev, Climate Resili & Cul        Mr. B. Looney Head Info Systems               
Ms. O. O’Shea, C.O Corporate                                    Ms. C. Fitzgerald S.S.O. Corporate                
Ms. M. O’ Connor A.O. Community 
 
          Mr. A. Grassick S.EO. Com, Clim Act& Oper 
Serv 
 
 
 
The meeting commenced at 10.30 a.m.   
 
Cllr. Marie Moloney Leas-Cathaoirleach took the Chair and welcomed everyone.  
 
Suspension of Standing Orders  

 
2 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
On the proposal of Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald and seconded by Cllr. Martin Grady it 
was agreed to suspend standing orders to allow RTÉ record the September Ordinary 
Meeting of Kerry County Council.  
 
Vote of Sympathy 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty expressed a vote of sympathy to the family of Fianna Fáil Cllr. 
Patrick Gerard Murphy who recently passed away. 
 
All Elected Members wished to be associated with the sympathies expressed. 
 
15.09.2025.01 
Protocols/Induction 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald, Meeting Administrator, referred Elected Members to the Protocols 
for Meetings of Kerry County Council and took a roll call.  
 
 
15.09.2025.02 Cathaoirleach’s Report on CPG Meeting 
(a) The Cathaoirleach’s report on the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 02 
September 2025, was noted by the Members. 
 
(b) The Cathaoirleach’s report on the Corporate Policy Group meeting held on 09 
September 2025, was noted by the Members. 
 
15.09.2025.03 
Confirmation of Minutes 
(a) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald, SECONDED by Cllr. Bobby O’ 
Connell, it was resolved that the minutes of the AGM of Kerry County Council held 
on 23 June 2025 be confirmed. 
(b) 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Brendan Cronin, SECONDED by Cllr. Tom Barry, it 
was resolved that the minutes of the Budget Meeting of Kerry County Council held 
on 21 July 2025 be confirmed. 
 
15.09.2025.04 
Chief Executive’s Report to Council 
The Chief Executive’s Report to Council for the month of September 2025 which had 
been circulated was noted by the Members.  
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae referred to the re-opening of the Community Involvement 
Scheme (CIS) and asked how many applications have been received to date. 
 
Cllr. Martin Grady welcomed the provision of housing but stated that there is a 
significant need for both affordable housing and adaptable housing for people with 
disabilities.  
 
Cllr. Tom Barry welcomed the success of the mattress amnesty and asked that 
additional days would be facilitated. 
 
Mr. J. Kennelly A/Director of Service undertook to revert to Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae with 
the number of CIS applications received.  
 

 
3 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris referred to the Quiet Road scheme at the Spa, Tralee and asked 
that there would be engagement between the Tralee MD Team and the Tidy Town 
groups before further works are undertaken.  
 
In response to a query from Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald requesting an update on 
Magherabeg, Mr. D. Doyle confirmed that the Council has provided further information 
to An Bord Pleanála and are awaiting a decision. 
 
15.09.2025.05 
Disposal of Property 
(a) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Tom Barry, SECONDED by Cllr. Deirdre Ferris, it 
was agreed to approve the disposal of land measuring 0.0158 Ha. at Cahirdown, 
Listowel. Co. Kerry, situated in the townland of Ballygologue, District Electoral 
Division of Ballygogolue, to (Name withheld for data protection purposes. A paper 
copy of unedited Minutes available on request) in accordance with the term of the 
notice issued on 14 August 2025, pursuant to Section 183 of the Local Government 
Act 2001, (as amended), Section 211 of the Planning & Development Act 2000 (as 
amended)  and Article 206 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as 
amended).  
 
(b) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly SECONDED by Cllr. Anne O’ 
Sullivan, it was agreed to approve the disposal of land measuring 0.40 Hectares. in 
folio KY 30181F, at Glenlarehan, Cordal, Castleisland Co. Kerry, situated in the 
townland of Glanlarehan, District Electoral Division of Kilmurry, to (Name withheld 
for data protection purposes. A paper copy of unedited Minutes available on request) 
in accordance with the term of the notice issued on 01 September 2025, pursuant to 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & 
Development Act 2000. 
 
(c) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae SECONDED by Cllr. Norma 
Moriarty , it was agreed to approve the disposal of land measuring 0.24 Hectares. in 
folio KY4893F, at Shronanhiree Beg, Gencar. Co. Kerry, situated in the townland of 
Shronahiree Beg, District Electoral Division of Cloon, to (Name withheld for data 
protection purposes. A paper copy of unedited Minutes available on request) to in 
accordance with the term of the notice issued on 01 September 2025, pursuant to 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & 
Development Act 2000. 
 
(d) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae SECONDED by Cllr. Johnny 
Healy-Rae, it was agreed to approve the disposal of land measuring 0.26 Hectares. 
in folio KY15827F, at Kilfadda Beg, Kilgarvan. Co. Kerry, situated in the townland of 
Kilfadda Beg , District Electoral Division of Glanlee, to (Name withheld for data 
protection purposes. A paper copy of unedited Minutes available on request) in 
accordance with the term of the notice issued on 01 September 2025, pursuant to 
Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001 and Section 211 of the Planning & 
Development Act 2000. 
 
15.09.2025.06 
Nomination of a Candidate for the Election for the Office of 
President of Ireland 
 

 
4 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell, SECONDED by Cllr. Norma Moriarty, it 
was resolved that Kerry County Council would not nominate a candidate for the 
election for the Office of President of Ireland pursuant to Article 12 of Bunreacht na 
nÉireann and Section 16 of the Presidential Act 1993. 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty said that while she was no way diminishing the people who came 
before the special Council Meeting last Monday, she said she felt that these people 
must prove themselves before they can put their name on a ballot paper. The past 
nine Presidents of this state have been very accomplished in several areas with some 
serving as senators and representing Ireland at European level. She questioned if a 
candidate has only been nominated for the sake of it.  
 
Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell proposed that Kerry County Council shouldn’t seek to nominate 
a candidate for election for the Office of President of Ireland.  
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy Rae said there are very few roles that the Elected Members can 
influence. If the people want to vote, this Council should put a candidate forward.  
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly supported the comments of Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae.  
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae said if the Elected Members are satisfied that a candidate has 
demonstrated a good work ethic then as a Councillor, we should give them the 
opportunity to be nominated into the wider public and put them before the people. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris said she listened very extensively to the presentations last week 
by the potential nominees and said to some extent she agrees with the comments 
expressed by Cllr. Norma Moriarty. However, she said she didn’t agree with decisions 
been dictated from outside the county and said that everyone has a right to their own 
individual decision. 
 
Cllr. Terry O’ Brien said the matter has been discussed at length and now as Elected 
Members a vote must be taken on the process.  He said he respects every person 
who gave a presentation, but the final decision should be with the people of Kerry.   
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin said he is very proud of the fact there are two processes involved 
and will support the process to nominate a candidate.  
 
Cllr. Sam Locke supported the comments of Cllr. Brendan Cronin and said that a 
candidate should be put forward to allow the people to vote.  
 
The Deputy Chief Executive clarified that the process has been followed, and the 
decision is now with the Elected Members to decide as follows. 
 
(a) Propose to Nominate a Candidate for the Election for the Office of President of 
Ireland 
 
(b) Propose not to Nominate a Candidate for the Election for the Office of President 
of Ireland 
 

 
5 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
If the Members decide to nominate a candidate, he confirmed that one candidate can 
be nominated. 
 
On the Proposal of Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell and Seconded by Cllr. Norma Moriarty it 
was hereby resolve not to nominate a candidate for the election for the Office of 
President of Ireland pursuant to Article 12 of Bunreacht na nÉireann and Section 16 
of the Presidential Act 1993. 
 
 The result of the vote was as follows: 
 
For: Cllrs: Angie Baily, Tommy Cahill, Breandán Fitzgerald, Fionnán Fitzgerald, 
Michael Foley, Tommy Griffin, Niall Kelleher, Aoife Kennelly, Michael Leane, Norma 
Moriarty, Bobby O’ Connell, Anne O’ Sullivan, Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey, Mikey Sheehy, 
(14)  
 
Against: Cllrs. Tom Barry, Robert Brosnan, Brendan Cronin, Paul Daly, Charlie 
Farrelly, Deirdre Ferris, Podge Foley, Martin Grady, Jackie Healy-Rae, Johnny Healy-
Rae, Maura Healy-Rae, Sam Locke, Dan McCarthy, Liam Nolan, Terry O’ Brien, Niall 
O’ Callaghan, John O’ Donoghue, Marie Moloney. (18) 
 
Absent: Cllr.  Jimmy Moloney. (1) 
 
The vote was not carried.  
 
Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan Proposed Gareth Sheridan for nomination as a candidate to 
contest the Presidential Election 2025. Cllr. O’ Callaghan said that Mr. Sheridan is a 
young enthusiastic candidate who is very experienced in both life and work.  
 
Cllr. Martin Grady Seconded the proposal. As an Independent Cllr. Martin Grady 
assured everyone in this chamber, he has met and listened to every candidate that 
canvassed him. He said that Mr. Sheridan made an effort prior to last Mondays pitch 
and travelled to Kerry to meet in person, he came across well, he said he believed 
Ireland will benefit from his American connections in terms of trade and tourism here 
in Kerry.  
He has a clear vision, encouraging innovation and progress. He acknowledged the 
number of young graduates leaving the country every year, he wants to give them a 
chance to return home, he’s willing to work with the Government, with a focus on 
domestic needs. 
He stated very clearly in this chamber last Monday he has “no ambition to be an 
antagonist to the Government but a protagonist for the people” 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan and SECONDED by Cllr. Martin Grady, 
we the members of Kerry County Council hereby resolve to nominate Mr. Gareth 
Sheridan as a candidate to contest the Presidential Election 2025. 
 
The Deputy Chief Executive confirmed Mr. Gareth Sheridan as Kerry County Council’s 
nomination as a candidate to contest the Presidential Election 2025. He stated that 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald Meetings Administrator will undertake the formalities for the 
nomination process.  
 

 
6 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. Brendan Cronin and SECONDED by Cllr. Johnny Healy 
Rae it was agreed that Ms. B. Fitzgerald Meetings Administrator will undertake the 
formalities for the nomination process.   
  
Cllr. Niall Kelleher said he wanted it noted that he didn’t support the nomination of Mr. 
Gareth Sheridan and asked that a vote to voice his objection would be carried out.  
 
The Deputy Chief Executive said as only one nomination is allowed, this is not an item 
for voting.  
 
The following Elected Members asked for it to be noted that they didn’t support the 
nomination of Mr. Gareth Sheridan:  
 
Cllrs. Tommy Cahill, Breandán Fitzgerald, Fionnán Fitzgerald, Niall Kelleher, Aoife 
Kennelly, Michael Leane, Norma Moriarty, Bobby O’ Connell, Anne O’ Sullivan, Teddy 
O’ Sullivan-Casey. 
 
 
15.09.2025.07 To note the appointment of Ethics Registrar for Kerry County 
Council. 
 
Report dated 11 September 2025 on this item, which had been circulated, was noted. 
 
 
15.09.2025.08 Local Community Safety Partnership  
Nomination of (7) Elected members to Local Community Safety Partnership. 
 
The Deputy Chief Executive noted the nomination of Elected Members to the Local 
Community Safety Partnership has previously been dealt under the CPG report. In 
addition, a report dated 15th September 2025 was circulated to the Elected 
Members.   
 
Members were advised that the grouping system applied, and 5 Members were 
required to make a group.  
 
Cllr Deirdre Ferris stated that a group had been formed, consisting of the 
following Members: Cllr. Robert Brosnan, Tom Barry, Paul Daly, Deirdre Ferris, Niall 
O’ Callaghan 
The Group nominated:  
Cllr. Tom Barry 
 
 
Cllr Terry O’ Brien stated that a group had been formed, consisting of the 
following Members: Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald, Michael Leane, Terry O’ Brien, Marie 
Moloney, Norma Moriarty,  
The Group nominated:  
Cllr. Marie Moloney 
 
Cllr Jackie Healy-Rae stated that a group had been formed, consisting of the 
following Members: Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae, Johnny Healy-Rae, Maura Healy-Rae, 
Sam Locke, Liam “Speedy” Nolan.  
The Group nominated:  
Cllr. Liam “Speedy” Nolan 

 
7 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
 
 
Cllr Bobby O’ Connell stated that a group had been formed, consisting of the 
following Members: Cllr. Michael Foley, Tommy Griffin, Aoife Kennelly, Bobby O’ 
Connell, Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey   
The Group nominated:  
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly 
 
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin stated that a group had been formed, consisting of the 
following Members: Cllr. Brendan Cronin, Charlie Farrelly, Podge Foley, Martin 
Grady, John O’Donoghue,  
 
The Group nominated: Cllr Charlie Farrelly 18 months 
     Cllr. John O’ Donoghue 18 months  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Tommy Cahill, seconded by Cllr. Mikey Sheehy, it was agreed 
and resolved that Cllr. Niall Kelleher and Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan would be nominated 
for the remaining  two positions. 
 
It was noted that the following has agreed as the members nominations to fill the 
vacancies: 
 
Cllr. Tom Barry, Cllr. Marie Moloney, Cllr. Liam “Speedy” Nolan, Cllr. Aoife Kennelly, 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly (18 months), Cllr. John O’Donoghue (18 months), Cllr. Niall 
Kelleher, Cllr. Anne O’Sullivan 
 
15.09.2025.09 To agree to reschedule dates  
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell and Seconded by Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald 
it was agreed to reschedule the date of the Castleisland Corca Dhuibhne MD 
meeting from Thursday 25 September to Friday 26 September at 10:00 am in 
Dingle. 
 
15.09.2025.10 To agree dates for the following meetings as follows: 
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Brendan Cronin and seconded by Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae it 
was agreed to approve the following dates as outlined 
 
a) CPG Meeting for consultation on Budget 2026 – Tuesday, 14 October 2025 at 
10.30 a.m. 
b) Workshop on the Council’s Budget 2026 – Monday, 20 October 2025 10.30 
a.m. – 12.30pm.  
c) Draft Budgetary Plan 2026 Meetings for the five Municipal Districts to be held 
in the Council Chamber, County Buildings, Tralee – Monday, 3 November 
2025. 
a. Tralee Municipal District at 9.00 a.m.  
b. Castleisland-Corca Dhuibhne Municipal District at 11:00 a.m.  

 
8 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
c. Killarney Municipal District at 1.00 p.m.  
d. Kenmare Municipal District at 2.30 p.m.  
e. Listowel Municipal District at 4.00 p.m. 
d)   November Ordinary Council Meeting – Monday, 17 November 2025 at 
10:30 a.m.  
 
e) Budget 2026 Meeting of Kerry County Council – Monday, 24 November 2025. 
f) December Ordinary Council Meeting – Friday, 12 December 2025. 
 
15.09.2025.11 To note reports from SPC Chairs: 
 
(a) Cllr. Tommy Cahill, SPC Chair, on the meeting of the Housing SPC held on 10 
July 2025. 
(b) Cllr. Terry O’ Brien, on the meeting of Economic Development, Enterprise, 
Tourism & Community Strategic Policy Committee held on 04 September 2025. 
 
15.09.2025.12 To note the opening of tenders since the July meeting:  
 
(a) On the proposal of Cllr. Podge Foley and seconded by Cllr. Marie Moloney it was 
agreed to retrospective approval for opening of tender, for the R878 Laharn 
Pavement Improvement Scheme - Closing Date: Monday 11 August 2025. 
 
(b) On the proposal of Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey and seconded by Cllr. Podge 
Foley it was agreed to retrospective approval for opening of tender for South Kerry 
Greenway - Cahersiveen Estuary Bridge and Gleenk Viaduct Consultancy 
Services (RFT 6180579) - Closing Date: Tuesday 04 September 2025. 
 
15.09.2025.13 To note the opening of tenders for: 
 
(a) On the proposal of Cllr. Podge Foley and seconded by Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald 
to approve the opening of tender for Provision of Occupational Therapy (OT) 
Services for Kerry County Council - Closing Date: Wednesday 01 October 2025. 
 
(b) On the proposal of Cllr. Tommy Cahill and seconded by Cllr. Marie Moloney it was 
agreed to approve the opening of tender for Technical Consultants to deliver a 
Feasibility Study on the Coast Guard Cottages, for Valentia Island, Co. Kerry (RFT 
6430608) - Closing Date: Friday 03 October 2025. 
 
 
15.09.2025.14  Notices of Motion 
 
1. Letter to Min for Education re lack of funding in Schools.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Sam Locke proposed. 
That this Council would write to the Minister for Education, Ms. Helen McEntee, T.D., 
to address the lack of funding to rural schools as this is becoming a burden on schools 
and parents.  

 
9 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris requested that the wording of the Notice of Motion would be 
amended from “rural” to “all” schools   
 
On the proposal of Cllr. Sam Locke and seconded by Cllr. Deirdre Ferris it was agreed 
to amend the Notice of Motion as follows 
 
That this Council would write to the Minister for Education, Ms. Helen McEntee, T.D., 
to address the lack of funding to all schools as this is becoming a burden on schools 
and parents.  
 
 
Cllr. Sam Locke said everyday expenses such as heating are becoming a burden for 
schools and asked that the Minister would consider additional funding as a matter of 
urgency.  
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded this motion.  
 
2. Halloween Safety Awareness Campaign  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr.  Tom Barry proposed. 
That Kerry County Council will again this year run a 'Safety Awareness Campaign' on 
the lead up to Halloween, to highlight the dangers associated from bonfires and 
fireworks. 
 
The following reply issued: 
As in previous years, Kerry Fire Service will again run a safety awareness campaign 
in the lead up to Halloween to advise the public on staying safe during the Halloween 
festivities and to advise on the dangers associated with bonfires and illegal fireworks. 
The awareness campaign will also include advice on the siting, construction and 
supervision of bonfires as well as the potential serious personnel injury that can be 
caused by the use of illegal fireworks/bangers. The public will be reminded that fire 
fighters and other Emergency Service personnel are there to ensure their safety 
and protect their property. The public will be asked to co-operate with instructions 
given by the emergency services; the Fire Service, Ambulance crews, An Garda 
Siochana and Council staff over the  Halloween period. 
 
This messaging will be communicated through the Council’s social media platforms, 
local radio Halloween safety ads and through Halloween safety awareness articles in 
local newspapers. 
 
Cllr. Tom Barry welcomed the response and asked that the message would be 
communicated to youth clubs and community centres. It is important that young 
children can enjoy festivities in a safe environment.  
 
The motion was seconded by Cllr. Martin Grady. 
 
 

 
10 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
3. Request to Min for Education and Min Public Expenditure re equity of pay 
for all school secretaries and caretakers. 
   Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr.  Norma Moriarty proposed. 
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister for Education, Ms. Helen McEntee, T.D., 
and Minister for Public Expenditure, Infrastructure, Public Service Reform and 
Digitalisation, Mr. Jack Chambers, T.D., to ensure parity and equity of pay for all school 
secretaries and caretakers. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
Cllr. Norma Moriarty welcomed that the strike action had ceased. She said that both 
caretakers and secretaries are a critical part of the school network, with young people 
entrusted in their care.  
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald seconded this motion.  
 
4. Letter to Min for State re further Investment in the Irish Post Office Network  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Angie Baily proposed. 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for State, Mr. Charlie McConalogue, 
T.D., calling on him to commit to further investment on an annual basis in the Irish Post 
Office Network. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
Cllr. Angie Baily said the survival of our post offices depends on a simple increase of 
funds from 10-15 million – a small amount to fight back against increasing isolation in 
rural communities. An Post offices have historically been places where trust, reliability, 
and familiarity thrive. She added that from October 2025 An Post will no longer accept 
Vodafone Bill payments.  
The motion was seconded by Cllr. Deirdre Ferris.  
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey moved notice of motion no 14 
14. Letter to Min for State re further Investment in the Irish Post Office Network  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr.  Teddy O’ Sullivan - Casey proposed. 
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister for State, Mr. Charlie McConologue, 
T.D., to commit to further investment on an annual basis to the Irish Post Office 
Network and to ensure vital services are retained in our rural communities. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
Cllr. Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey concurred with comments expressed by Cllr. Angie Baily 
and stated that unfortunately a number of rural Post Offices have closed over the 
years.  He said we can’t allow any further closures due to lack of support by the 
Government.  
Following a discussion the Members requested that the correspondence would include 
a request to the Minister to introduce all government services in the Post Office.  
This motion was seconded by. Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald.  
5. Letter to Min for Housing re grant aid for generator switch over switches  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Deirdre Ferris proposed. 

 
11 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
That Kerry County Council engage with the Minister for Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage, Mr. James Browne, T.D., with regard to seeking grant aid for elderly and 
vulnerable households, for the installation of generator switchover switches. This 
measure could be introduced alongside existing grants such as Housing Aid for the 
Elderly. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris stated as weather conditions continue to deteriorate in winter 
months, it is important that elderly and vulnerable people can access a power supply. 
The generator switchover switch is a safety mechanism to ensure that power is 
switched over safety to generators.   
 
Cllr. Paul Daly seconded this motion.  
 
6. Abolishment of VAT on weight loss drugs 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. John O’ Donoghue proposed. 
That Kerry County Council write to the Ministers for Health, Ms. Jennifer Carroll 
MacNeill and Minister for Finance, Mr. Paschal Donohoe, T.D.,and ask that the VAT 
be abolished on weight loss drugs due to their ability to combat such a wide variety of 
diseases. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue said as well as helping with weight loss, they have a huge 
number of additional benefits as they help alleviate and, in many cases, prevent, many 
of the secondary health issues associated with obesity. 
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and said if approved by health 
professionals it could be used for people with life threatening conditions. The drug would 
be very useful for people with underlying health conditions.  
 
7. Carry out feasibility study for provision of Tourist Cable Cars. 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Charlie Farrelly proposed. 
To call on Kerry County Council to carry out a feasibility study on the provision of a 
'Tourist Cable Car ' as a tourist attraction within County Kerry. 
 
The following reply issued:  
Kerry County Council acknowledges the potential value of innovative tourism 
infrastructure in enhancing the county’s appeal and supporting sustainable economic 
development. Product development is a key component of the five Tourism 
Destination Plans prepared by Fáilte Ireland in partnership with Kerry County Council. 
These plans set out the priority of projects each of which be brought forward for 
viability assessment. Kerry County Council will scope this proposition with Fáilte 
Ireland and revert to the Council via the Strategic Policy Committee. 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly welcomed the response and said following a recent trip to Dursey 
Island he noted that there were over 150 people waiting to use the facility. He 
understood that a previous proposal had been considered for the county but was met 
by local objection and was hopeful a project will advance in Kerry in the near future.   

 
12 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill said this was very good news and was very happy to second the 
motion. 
 
8. Development of Padel Courts in Kerry 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Cahill proposed. 
That Kerry County Council supports the development of padel courts across the 
county and seek relevant funding and liaise with stakeholders where appropriate, 
including Sport Ireland, Padel Ireland, Padel Fun Zone, local sports partnerships, and 
community groups, to identify suitable locations and ensure Kerry benefits from this 
growing recreational trend. Can Kerry County Council advise if they have already 
put plans in place to support organisations in developing padel courts in the county. 
 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council through the Kerry Recreation & Sports Partnership (KRSP) 
helps to deliver recreational sport at grassroots level through strategic planning, 
collaboration, and targeted programmes and supports sporting organisations with 
equipment, training & education via their grant schemes. Funding sources such as the 
Sports Capital Programme and the Large-scale Sports Infrastructure Programme may 
be suitable to develop Padel Courts into the future. It is anticipated that these 
Programmes will invite funding submissions for suitable projects in Q1 2026 and Q1 
2027 respectively. 
 
Kerry County Council will support groups who wish to develop padel courts where 
appropriate and is open to consider the development of padel courts on Council 
property where appropriate and in partnership with a local community group. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill welcomed the response and said that Padel has become a very 
popular sport, and this motion is to ensure that Kerry is not left behind and that 
communities can benefit from this exciting new opportunity.  
 
Cllr. Breandan Fitzgerald seconded this motion.  
 
9. Letter to Min of Further and Higher Education re SUSI Grant review 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae proposed. 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Further and Higher Education, Mr. 
James Lawless, T.D., calling for an urgent review of the SUSI Grant progression 
rules, to allow students to change their course of study once, without loss of grant 
eligibility, recognising that many school leavers may only discover their true career 
path after starting in higher education, and should not be financially penalised for 
changing direction. 
 
Mr. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members. 
 
Cllr Jackie Healy-Rae said that many leaving cert students are only 18 and 19 years 
when entering college and the idea that they know what they want to do for the rest 
of their lives at that age is crazy. As the SUSI Grant currently only provides grant 
funding to continuous progression it doesn’t allow students the opportunity to change 
course and asked that it would be reviewed. 

 
13 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae seconded this motion.    
 
10. 
Ask KCC to amend Planning Policy in rural housing    
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Aoife Kennelly proposed. 
That Kerry County Council amend planning policy to introduce flexibility in rural 
housing rules to allow homeowners to apply for planning permission to downsize, 
thereby opening up existing housing stock to meet family needs. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The planning policy in respect of rural housing is set out in Chapter 5 of Kerry County 
Development Plan which was adopted by the Elected Members on the 4th of July 2022 
following a statutory 2-year process involving extensive public consultation and 
engagement with the community, statutory stakeholders, Planning Regulator and the 
elected members. 
The planning policy allows for the development of self-contained extensions attached 
to existing dwellings to facilitate semi-independent accommodation for older persons 
and dependant relatives. 
 
Cllr. Aoife Kennelly said that downsizing would free up larger family homes for younger 
households, reduce under-occupancy, and better match housing stock to the changing 
needs of our communities. This measure would also help older residents remain in 
their own localities. She called on the Council to create a pathway for downsizing in 
rural Kerry — whether that’s through a targeted amendment to the Development Plan 
or by making formal representations to the Department of Housing for greater flexibility 
in the guidelines. 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald seconded this motion.  
 
 Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service said that representations will be made to the 
Department.  
 
11. 
Letter to Dept of Social Protection regarding a request to allow  
seasonal workers to apply for CE Scheme.    
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Robert Brosnan proposed. 
Go scríobhfaidh CCC chuig An Roinn Coimirce Sóisialaí ag iarraidh go bhforbrófar 
agus go gcuirfear scéim phíolótach i bhfeidhm i gCiarraí, ionas gur féidir le hoibrithe 
séasúracha nách bhfuil obair acu le linn an fhómhair, an gheimhridh agus an earraigh, 
cáiliú do Scéimeanna Fostaíochta Pobail. 
 
That Kerry County Council write to the Department of Social Protection requesting that 
a pilot scheme be developed and implemented in Kerry, so that seasonal workers who 
have no work during the off seasons can qualify for Community Employment 
Schemes. 
 
Mr. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan said that seasonal workers who are unemployed in the autumn / 
winter months can’t apply to a CE scheme as the criteria outlines that they must be 

 
14 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
unemployed for 12 months. A review of the scheme may allow seasonal works partake 
in a CE scheme and in addition help fill vacancies.  
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Marie Moloney 
 
12. 
Letter to Min for Education re reduction in pupil ratio 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Paul Daly proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Education, Ms. Helen McEntee, 
T.D., asking her to reduce the pupil teacher ratio in our primary schools by at least 2 
points. 
 
Mr. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
 
Cllr. Paul Daly said currently the class sizes in primary school are above the EU 
average. As a teacher he said he has had firsthand experience teaching a class of 38 
students. It is a disadvantage to all pupils in the class.  
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae seconded the motion  
  
Replace Cathaoirleach 
On the Proposal of Cllr Johnny Healy-Rae and Seconded by Cllr Breandán Fitzgerald, 
Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell took the Chair as the Leas Cathaoirleach had to leave the 
meeting for a short time.  
 
13. Letter to the Dept of Communication to request a review of media reporting  
 Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Podge Foley proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Department of Culture, Communications and  
Sport to request that a review be conducted on the future of media reporting in Ireland. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
Cllr. Podge Foley said there appears to be a significant amount of negative news 
reported on the radio. He said there needs to be more of a balanced approach with 
media reporting. He suggested that good news, upbeat pundits should be on the 
airwaves.  
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae seconded this motion.  
 
 
 
15. Update Tenants in Situ Scheme 
 Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae proposed 
To ask Kerry County Council to provide an update on the tenant in situ scheme over 
the last five years. How many people have applied and been approved and progressed 
in that time. 
 
The following reply issued: 
The Tenant in Situ Scheme was introduced in early 2023 as part of a suite of measures 
to combat the impact of the ending of the moratorium on evictions. Kerry County 
Council has acquired 23 properties to date under the scheme. Technical assessments 

 
15 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
have been carried on 73 properties, but many did not progress as they did not either 
meet the required standards, or the acquisition costs exceeded the departmental 
ceiling limits. The circular from the Department of the Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage on the Social Housing Second Hand Acquisitions Programme 2025, 
introduced updated eligibility criteria for Tenant in Situ acquisitions. 
Alternative housing solutions have been identified for many families and individuals 
who were faced with the threat of homelessness as required under the eligibility criteria 
for the scheme.  
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae noted the response and said this is a very important scheme.  
 
In relation to a number of queries raised by Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae, Mr. G. O’ Brien A/ 
Director of Service said that the acquired 23 properties are included in the 73 properties. 
He undertook to revert to Cllr Maura Healy-Rae with the ceiling limits.  He added technical 
assessments were undertaken but the properties didn’t meet the criteria under the Tenant 
in Situ Scheme.  
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae seconded this motion.  
 
Leas-Cathaoirleach Marie Moloney returned to the meeting and took the chair.  
 
  
16. County Wide review of Casual Trading Bye-laws 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Griffin proposed 
To ask Kerry County Council to commence a County wide review of Casual Trading 
Bye Laws. 
 
The following reply issued: 
In light of recent developments of new and emerging amenities across the county, 
Kerry County Council, through the Roads and Transportation Strategic Policy 
Committee (SPC) will develop an overarching policy on casual trading at county 
level. 
 
Following this, the making of Bye-laws, including the designation or amendment of 
casual trading areas, will revert to each Municipal District (MD) for consideration. 
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin said that a number of coffee and catering facilities are being 
hauled by planning in the absence of Planning policy. These such businesses 
should be trying to obtain a casual trading licence. He asked how long the review 
will take and will the enforcement on the businesses be suspended until the review 
is complete.    
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae voiced caution on revisiting casual trading bye-laws. He said 
the adoption of the Casual Trading bye-laws in Kenmare took years to finalise and 
said that sometimes it is wise to let well enough alone.   
 
Cllr. Podge Foley seconded the motion and said that currently in Library Square, 
Killorglin, a country market isn’t allowed.  
 

 
16 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
Mr. J. Kennelly A/Director of Service undertook to revert back to the Members with 
a time frame. He noted that the decision of adoption of Casual Trading bye-laws is 
a matter for each MD. He confirmed that no legal process can be suspended, the 
Council will have to engage in the whole process.  
 
17. KCC to carry out hedge cutting  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae proposed 
To call on Kerry County Council to cut the hedges and ensure that all roads are cut and 
kept passable for traffic 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council cuts approximately 177 kilometres of vegetation along National 
Roads and 304 kilometres along Non-National Roads each year, in addition to 
maintaining visibility at numerous junctions across the county. The maintenance of 
hedges on a public road is the responsibility of the landowner in accordance with Section 
70 of the Roads Act 1993, and the Council has an active policy for enforcing the 
provisions of the legislation. To support this work, Roads Enforcement Officer and the 
Municipal District Enforcement Officers manage a tree and hedgecutting database 
specific to their MD. They liaise directly with landowners to address vegetation issues, 
issuing notices where required. 
Each year, in early September, a general hedge cutting advisory notice is issued to the 
public. Kerry County Council remains committed to the ongoing implementation and 
enforcement of vegetation management to ensure safe and accessible roadways for all 
road users. 
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae questioned if hedge cutting has been carried out on the Ring of 
Kerry Road. The roads are passable in cars, however HGV’s and bus companies have 
expressed concerns that the overhanging branches are causing damage to their 
vehicles. The hedging and shrubs can be a significant cost to Kerry County Council 
following a clean-up operation after a storm if they are not cut. He noted that other Local 
Authorities such as Clare County Council have introduced hedge cutting grant 
schemes.  
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae seconded the motion. She said that hedge cutting is a very 
important service by Kerry County Council. 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty supported the Notice of Motion and said many tour buses are 
refusing to enter areas because of the overgrowth and said she believed that Fáilte 
Ireland have a role to play.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerlad moved Notice of Motion no. 18 on behalf of Cllr. Fionnán 
Fitzgerald. 
 
18. Feasibility of a phone App giving information and updates on activities.    
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr.  Fionnán Fitzgerald proposed 
That Kerry County Council would investigate the feasibility of a Phone App giving 
information and updates on it's activities. 
 
The following reply issued: 

 
17 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
The current Council strategy is to promote activities and services through the use of 
websites and a growing number of social media channels. These approaches are 
currently under review as part of the development of a new digital strategy. In 
addition, this review includes a review of external communication, the use of social 
media and our websites. The potential benefits of app based approaches will be 
considered as part of this project. 
   
19. Letter to Min for Health to ban vaping in Workplaces.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Mikey Sheehy proposed 
That Kerry County council write to the Minister for Health calling for the introduction of 
a ban on vaping in all workplaces, on the grounds of protecting public health and 
ensuring safe, aerosol-free working environments. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
 
20. Request number of Planning Enforcement Files resulting in Court 
Proceedings  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Brendan Cronin proposed 
To request specifically, since January 2024, how many planning enforcement files did 
Kerry County Council bring Court proceedings on. What were the planning 
enforcement issues of these cases and what was the courts final decision on each 
case brought by the Council 
 
The following reply issued: 
Since January 2024, 547 cases of alleged unauthorised development have been 
opened by the Planning Enforcement Section. Of the 547 cases, the Planning 
Enforcement section have referred 20 files to the legal department in Kerry County 
Council, with instruction to prepare legal proceedings under Section 160 of the Planning 
& Development Act 2000 (as amended).  
S160 proceedings have issued in 7 cases since January 2024, details of each outlined 
in the Table.  
S160 proceedings issued / served since January 2024 
  
Enforcement Issue 
Outcome 
1
The Construction of a large steel 
shed, which on inspection held 
construction materials & signage. 
Post the initiation of Court Proceedings, the 
developer 
to 
regularise 
the 
unauthorised 
development & the case was closed. 
2
The erection of unauthorised signage, 
which requires planning permission. 
Kerry County Council initiated Court proceedings 
& was subsequently granted reliefs by the Court. 
The unauthorised signage was removed & costs 
awarded to Kerry County Council. 

 
18 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
3
The unauthorised renovation of toilet 
facilities adjacent to Inch Strand and 
the construction of a caravan park 
and the construction of facilities for a 
Caravan Park. 
This case is ongoing - the Court adjourned the case 
in May 2025, to allow the developer to apply to An 
Coimisiún Pleanála for Substitute Consent to try 
and regularise the unauthorised development. 
4
Material Change of use of the site 
with the development of a restaurant 
and an art gallery.  
Post the initiation of Court Proceedings - the 
developer consented to undertake the orders of 
the Enforcement Notice & costs were agreed & 
awarded to Kerry County Council.  
5
Dwelling is being constructed without 
planning permission.  
This case was in Court in July 2025.  The Court 
refused the section 160 and granted the 
defendants their costs. 
6
The extension and construction of a 
shed to provide toilet facilities, the 
construction of 2 No. Sand arenas, the 
construction of a shed between the 
two sand arenas, the construction of 
a waste water treatment system, the 
erection of signage, the erection of 
fencing, 
the 
construction 
of 
a 
concrete manure storage unit, the 
erection of lighting poles, and the use 
of 
the 
land 
as 
a 
commercial 
equestrian centre  
This case is ongoing in the Courts. Case was 
adjourned earlier in the year, as a Retention 
planning application was submitted by the 
Developer to try and regularise the development - 
Further Information was requested by the 
Planning Authority & decision due on 21st 
September 2025. 
7
Construction 
works 
underway 
without Planning Permission - The 
renewal and enlarging of a vacant 
building. 
This case is ongoing - was listed for hearing in 
Court in July 2025, however an adjournment was 
sought by the Defendant to allow affidavits to be 
considered fully. 
 
 
 
 
Cllr Brendan Cronin said a number of these cases are ongoing for years with no 
definitive outcome.  
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty seconded this motion.  
 
Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service said once legal proceedings are issued, the 
Council is bound by the decision of the Court. He confirmed that the Planning 
Department will carry out all steps before implementing legal proceedings.  
 
21. Letter to Government re issue utility bills for who don’t have email access.   

 
19 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan proposed 
Householders who do not have an email account or access to same are subject to a 
fee of up to €300/year from energy providers when taking out a new contract as they 
cannot opt for paperless billing. That Kerry County Council raise this matter with the 
Minister for Climate, Energy and the Environment, Mr. Darragh O'Brien, T.D., and the 
Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Mr. James Browne, T.D. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
 
Cllr Anne O’ Sullivan said that an extra cost is added to householders who have no 
access to an email. This affects older people in particular and can be deemed as 
discriminatory. 
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty seconded this motion. 
 
22. 
Letter to Dept of Agriculture to support local deer management units 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Norma Moriarty proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister of Agriculture, Food and the Marine, Mr. 
Martin Heydon, asking him to support the co-operative efforts by the Irish Deer 
Management Strategy Group and the establishment of local deer management units to 
ensure success and good practices to allow for the collection of deer and provide the 
associated budgets. 
 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty said there is countywide support to cull the deer and adequate 
funding from the Department should be available for the collection of deer carcass as 
it causes a significant risk to road and public safety.   
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue supported the motion and said it has taken a long time to 
advance to this stage and called on the Department to provide the necessary supports.  
 
23. 
Letter to Min for Transport to increase bus drivers age from 70 to 79   
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Angie Baily proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Minister for Transport, Mr. Darragh O'Brien, 
T.D., and to Bus Éireann requesting that the retirement age for bus drivers be extended 
from 70 to 79, in order to allow older and retired drivers the option of continuing to work, 
thereby helping to address the chronic shortage of bus drivers, particularly for school 
transport and college link services. 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
 
 
Cllr. Angie Baily said that while the rule doesn’t apply to those driving private buses, it 
is a missed opportunity to alleviate the chronic shortage of bus drivers. This solution 
seeks not only to support school transport at local level but could also be expanded to 
supporting third level students from Kerry without accommodation (either through cost 
or lack of availability) to attend college in Limerick and Cork with a daily express service. 

 
20 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly moved similar Notice of Motion no. 26 
 
26. 
Letter to Min for Transport to review the Bus Driver age to over 70.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Charlie Farrelly proposed 
To call on Kerry County Council to write to the Minister for Transport, Mr. Darragh 
O'Brien urging him to exert pressure on Bus Éireann to change their age limit rule, 
which prohibits drivers 70 years or older from driving School buses .This outdated rule 
is currently putting massive pressure on transport providers who are restricted from 
employing perfectly healthy drivers to drive school buses. 
 
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrelly said the policy is age discriminating and the removal of the 
limitations would help to alleviate the pressure on Bus Éireann to source drivers.   
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae seconded this motion, which was supported by all elected 
members.  
 
24. Ask KCC to introduce mandatory trauma awareness and sensitivity training 
for Council staff and elected representatives 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Deirdre Ferris proposed 
That Kerry County Council introduce mandatory trauma awareness and sensitivity 
training for Council staff and elected representatives, with a particular focus on 
domestic, sexual, and gender-based violence (DSGBV). 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council has engaged with the Association of Irish Local Government 
(AILG) and they will include this request in the assessment of training programmes for 
2026. 
 
Kerry County Council’s Training Department arranges the necessary training for 
employees in these areas, as well any new requirements that may emerge, as required 
and depending on the needs of the work area. 
 
Front line staff who regularly collaborate directly with organisations and agencies such 
as Adapt, NOVAS, Tusla, TIRC, KASI etc will also advise of their specific training 
requirements which are arranged and facilitated by Kerry County Council. Training has 
been provided in areas of domestic violence, sexual violence, understanding trauma, 
trauma informed practice training, trauma in homelessness and 
addiction as well as many others. Employees in the HR section of Kerry County 
Council have also been trained in the area of domestic violence in line with the 
legislative amendments so that any staff can receive necessary supports and 
information as they need. 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris said she has worked and met with people who have been subjected 
to domestic violence and has no doubt that her fellow councillors have engaged in 
similar situations.  Following a recent meeting with ADAPT services, they highlighted 
that their biggest concern was a lack of accommodation and for many people they will 

 
21 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
not report domestic violence as there only option is to seek refuge in a homeless facility 
with their children. She said that when people approach councillors, they must be able 
to provide them with supports and assist people experiencing trauma. She noted that 
the ADAPT services have provided training and asked that a similar training be 
provided to Elected Members.  
  
Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell seconded this motion and said that LAMA has a training course 
in SITU and undertook to arrange to ask LAMA to circulate the details to all Elected 
Members.  
 
The Deputy Chief Executive said that council staff been provided with relevant training. 
The council will review the training provided by LAMA to ensure it is sufficient to the 
Member’s request and can arrange to provide alternative training if required.    
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris moved Notice of Motion no. 40 
 
40. Letter to the Dept of Health and HSE re expanding the Breast Check eligibility 
to the age to 40 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Each Female Member of Tralee Municipal District 
proposed  
In light of the rising incidence rates of breast cancer among women under 50yrs old, 
and the clear evidence that early detection leads to better outcomes, the Tralee 
Municipal District female members calls on the Department of Health and the HSE to 
expand Breast Check eligibility to begin at least from age 40. Furthermore, we urge 
that screening criteria be expanded to include risk factors such as dense breast tissue 
and hereditary risks including BRCA mutations, which affect men as well as women. 
 
A discussion took pace where it was agreed that the Notice of Motion would be 
proposed by all female Elected Members.  
 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members.  
 
A number of councillors including all female elected members spoke on the importance 
of this motion and on how reducing the Breast Check Age to at least 40 would 
determine a better outcome for many patients. Currently some women are not seen 
until they are 52 years.   
 
 
25.  Provide an update on settled KCC Claims 2023. 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. John O’ Donoghue proposed 
As the recent National Oversight and Audit Commission scrutiny report on Kerry 
County Council identified that we have the second highest personal liability claim 
payouts per capita among all Local Authorities in the country for the period of the report, 
to ask have Kerry County Council identified the reason for our payouts being so high. 
 
The Following reply issued: 
The performance indicator per capita total cost of settled claims for the Council for 2023 
was €28.40. The 2023 indicator in this area reflects the cost of a specific historic claim 
settled during the year. The 2024 Indicator outcome has reduced significantly to €10.75 
which is in line with average values for the sector. The Council monitors and 

 
22 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
investigates all claims closely in conjunction with our insurers Irish Public Bodies 
Insurance. In recent years the number of claims against the Council has been 
decreasing reflecting increased capital investment in public areas. 
 
 
Cllr. John O’ Donoghue said he was glad to see that the rate of payout for personal 
liability claims, although still extortionate, are back to a rate more in line with other 
Local Authorities and indeed compares favourably to most. There is an onus on this 
council to be prudent when it comes to the finances, as they are after all public monies.    
  
Cllr. Martin Grady seconded this motion.  
 
27. 
Request to develop KCC Campervan strategy  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr.  Jackie Healy-Rae proposed 
Given that Fáilte Ireland are not developing a national strategy regarding camper vans, 
will Kerry County Council finally press ahead with their own strategy to make Kerry a 
more welcoming place for camper van owners 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council is engaging with the County and City Management Association 
and Fáilte Ireland on a review of campervan policies. In parallel, a draft framework for 
campervans has been presented to the SPC. This includes a guide to planning 
requirements for campervan sites; a review of Council properties to assess their 
suitability; and supports for community groups to develop camper van sites as social 
enterprises. In addition, Kerry County Council is working with local community groups 
to assess and bring forward plans for camper van sites. 
 
These need to consider demand for campervan sites, along with displacement and 
competition for camper vans in areas across the County. This will inform a strategy, 
which will be completed and published in advance of the tourism season 2026. 
 
Cllr. Jackie Healy-Rae said that he has previously highlighted the lack of campervan 
facilities across the county and noted the matter has also been raised at Tralee MD 
Level. He asked that a copy of the framework would be circulated to all elected 
members.  
 
Cllr. Robert Brosnan seconded this motion and said he previously raised the matter 
and welcomed that there appears to be progress. He said there is a huge influx of 
campervans in the county, and the provision of proper facilities will eliminate illegal 
parking.  
 
These comments were supported by the Leas-Cathaoirleach Cllr. Marie Moloney.  
 
Mr J. Nolan Director of Service said the council is currently working with Fáilte Ireland 
on a draft plan and will go back to the SPC for review and then to the Full Council for 
approval.   
 
28.   Request LGMA to provide services on their website in Irish 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr.  Robert Brosnan proposed 

 
23 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
Go scríobhfeadh CCC chuig an Gníomhaireacht Bainistíochta Rialtais Áitiúil (LGMA) 
chun go mbeadh an seirbhís seo ar fáil as Gaelainn do phobal Chiarraí ar an suíomh 
idirlinn atá acu. 
 
That Kerry County Council write to the Local Government Management Agency 
(LGMA) to request that the services available on their website be made available also 
in the Irish language. 
. 
Ms. B. Fitzgerald stated that this is a matter for consideration by the members 
 
Cllr Robert Brosnan said he has been advised that it is not possible to make an 
application in Irish on this system. He said that according to what is in the LGMA’s 
language scheme, they are happy to provide these services, ''on request'' from Local 
Authorities. 
 
Cllr. Paul Daly seconded this motion.  
 
Suspend standing orders 
On the proposal of Cllr. Deirdre Ferris and seconded by Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae it was 
agreed to suspend standing orders aa it was 1.30p.m. 
 
29. Letter to UE requesting a commencement date for replacement of water pipes 
in Tralee Area.  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr.  Paul Daly proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to Uisce Éireann calling for a commencement date for 
the replacement of the water pipes that have burst twice this year in Shanakill in Tralee. 
 
The following Reply issued: 
We have been advised by Uisce Éireann that their target for this project is to 
commence construction in Q1 2026, and the design is currently progressing. 
 
Cllr. Paul Daly noted the response but cited that there was no confirmed time for the 
replacement works. Ther has been significant damage done and it is very disappointing 
the scheme has not progressed to date 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded this motion and said she submitted a similar notice of 
motion in July 2025. She said there is an ongoing level of fear amongst the residents 
that these pipes will burst again, and a more definitive timeline is required.  
  
30. Letter to Dept of Housing re vulture fund companies 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr.  Podge Foley proposed 
That Kerry County Council write to the Department of Housing, Local Government and 
 Heritage to request that vulture fund companies be prevented from purchasing 
 properties in the State and that repossession of family homes under vulture fund 
companies are stopped. 
 
Ms. B Fitzgerald said this is a matter for consideration by the Members.  
 

 
24 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
Cllr. Podge Foley said the repossession of a family home is very humiliating for the 
family. He said he was aware of properties that have been sold as much as 9 times by 
vulture funds. The ordinary working person who wants to purchase a property cannot 
compete with these companies.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded the motion. 
 
31. Letter to Minister for Housing to consider raising the income threshold for 
Social Housing  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr.  Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey proposed 
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage, Mr. James Browne, T.D., to urgently consider raising the income thresholds 
for applicants seeking Social Housing. 
 
Ms. B Fitzgerald said this is a matter for consideration by the Members.  
Cllr Teddy O’ Sullivan-Casey said that for many people they are slightly over the 
income threshold leading them to cut their working hours to qualify for social housing.  
Many of these people are providing valuable services in their jobs and it is a shame 
they have to go down this route.  
Cllr. Martin Grady seconded this motion.  
32. Letter to Minister for Housing to consider raising the income threshold for 
Social Housing  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae proposed 
To ask Kerry County Council what progress has been made with identifying lands for 
affordable housing development in the county. 
The following reply issued: 
Further to the Council’s Affordable Housing Submission to the Department in October 
2024, the Department indicated to the Council in December 2024 that it would consider 
proposals for Affordable Housing schemes in Tralee and Killarney. Since then the 
Council has acquired a strategic site in Tralee and it is anticipated that this will include 
provision for affordable housing and this will be considered as part of the overall 
masterplan for the site which is set to commence shortly. 
 
The Council is engaging with the market regarding possible developments in Killarney 
with the potential to include an affordable housing element. Once proposals are further 
developed, the members will be updated through the Housing SPC Reports and 
subsequently through the relevant MD Housing Directorate reports. 
 
Cllr. Maura Healy-Rae said this is very good news for Tralee and said she believed 
that the issue in Killarney is more significant due to planning restrictions. If the 
government want people to live in towns, they must make the land available.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill seconded the motion and said there are many people trying to get 
on the property ladder. A number of social houses are being built but more affordable 
homes must be provided.  
 

 
25 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
33. Letter to Minister for Education to standardise the return to school holidays 
to 01 September 25. 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Griffin proposed 
That Kerry County Council call on the Minister for Education, Ms. Helen McEntee T.D, 
to standardise the return to school after the summer holidays for all schools to 
September 1st to minimise its impact on the tourism industry and to bring it in line with 
other jurisdictions. 
 
Ms. B Fitzgerald said this is a matter for consideration by the Members.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Griffin said the decision to introduce a return to school date in August is 
having a significant impact on tourism and the economy. The return of date for some 
schools has been as early as 21 August 2025.  
 
Cllr. Norma Moriarty seconded the motion, and said the provision has shortened the 
summer season.  
 
34. Process the development of Piers and Piers. 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae proposed 
That Kerry County Council would start the process of a plan for future developments 
of piers in Kerry. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council will undertake a Marine Project to examine the current condition 
of piers throughout the county, in terms of their physical infrastructure and the needs 
of all current and future users. 
 
Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae made reference to a number of piers who he stated are in need 
of upgrading for the development of tourism and industry given the importance of them 
to the surrounding area. While he welcomed the works undertaken on the Peninsula 
Lands in Kenmare, he said Kenmare Pier is in need of upgrading and called on the 
council to determine what is feasible and what grants are available.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerlad seconded the motion and said that a portion of The Brexit 
Adjustment Reserve Fund (BAR) funding for Piers and harbours went unspent.  
 
The Deputy Chief Executive said it is not possible to carry out works to Piers in 
isolation, an examination of all Piers must be carried out across the county. 
 
 
 
Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan moved Notice of Motion no 35 on behalf of Fionnán Fitzgerald  
 
35. Update on development of policy for CCTV for illegal dumping. 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald proposed 
What is the update and status of the development of a policy document around the 
appropriate use of CCTV for the detection of illegal dumping by Kerry County Council. 
 
The following reply issued: 

 
26 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
In consideration of the Circular Economy and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 2022 and 
further guidance issued through CCMA Codes of Practice and WERLA (Waste 
Enforcement Regional Lead Authorities) Codes of Practice, the Council’s Environment 
Services section has developed a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for 
Assessment of Sites for Overt CCTV Installation for the specific purpose of managing 
waste offences. 
 
This SOP was presented to the Environment, Climate Action, Marine and Emergency 
Management SPC in March 2025 and is now operational. 
 
Cllr Breandán Fitzgerald seconded this motion.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald moved Notice of Motion no 36 on behalf of Fionnán Fitzgerald  
 
36. Letter to Min of Housing re Cost rental and affordable housing a priority in 
Kerry. 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Mikey Sheehy proposed 
That Kerry County Council calls on the Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage, Mr. James Browne, T.D., to declare the delivery of affordable and cost-rental 
housing in Kerry an emergency priority, and to set binding targets for the county so 
that young people and working families are no longer forced out of their own 
communities due to soaring housing costs. 
 
Ms. B Fitzgerald said this is a matter for consideration by the Members.  
 
Cllr Norma Moriarty seconded this motion.  
 
37. Timeframe for taking in charge of  roads . 
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Brendan Cronin proposed 
What is the expected time frame for residents of an estate who lodged a "taking in 
charge" application to Kerry County Council. How long will it take to process and 
bring before the Council and how many applications are awaiting processing at the 
moment. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Some of the steps in the Taking in Charge of estates have no statutory timeframes 
and are not directly under the control of Kerry County Council. The process requires, 
all taking in charge applications to be referred to Uisce Eireann (UE) per the 
Memorandum of Understanding agreed between UE and Kerry County Council 
(unless the developer can furnish a UE Cert of Conformance). 
 
When the estate is approved by UE, the estate will be included in the next batch for 
advertising for taking in charge (within c. 6 months). When the estate is advertised, 
the public have 6 weeks to make a submission / observation on same. 
 
After the 6 weeks, HEU prepare a Managers Report detailing any submissions / 
observations made. The estate is put forward to the next relevant MD Council meeting 
for resolution/decision by the elected members. 
 

 
27 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
Valid taking in charge applications for housing estates with UE Certs of Conformance 
/Completion usually proceed to be advertised within c. 6 months with the next batch 
of housing estates for taking in charge after the bond is released. 
 
There are currently 73 no. housing estates with validated taking in charge applications 
which have not been taken in charge for various reasons. 
 
• 42 of these have been referred to UE who have returned “Not accepted” decisions. 
These have not progressed to taking in charge for reasons including 
the following: 
 
 Site Resolution Plan required by UE 15 
 Developer Provided Infrastructure on site – Not accepted by UE - 10 
 Wayleaves – UE deem none or inadequate - 15 
 Unauthorised water connection - 1 
 Unfinished housing estate - 1 
 Schedule 1 & 2’s required 31 
• 31 of these applications are undergoing their initial site inspections. 
 
Cllr. Brendan Cronin said the response is concerning and asked how long it will take 
the 31 applications undergoing site inspection to progress.  
 
Mr. James Nolan Director of Services advised that 42 of the applications can’t 
progress until they are approved by Uisce Éireann, a number of estates have historical 
issues. Of the 31 applications undergoing initial inspection, he advised that a program 
of works has been identified. The council has appointed two additional staff members 
to clear the back log.  
  
The Leas-Cathaoirleach Marie Moloney seconded this motion.  
 
38. Review Beach Bye-Laws  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Anne O’ Sullivan proposed 
In reviewing Summer 2025 and planning for Summer 2026, can we review our each 
Bye Laws on our County’s Blue Flag beaches, in particular the stipulation that no 
dogs are allowed on the Blue Flag Beaches between June 1st and September 15th 
between the hours of 11am and 7pm. 
 
The following reply issued: 
Kerry County Council reviewed our Beach Bye-Laws in 2022 and as part of that 
process, a provision for limited dog-control measures on Blue Flag beaches was 
included. The Blue Flag Beach Programme is operated by An Taisce, who had raised 
dog-control on our Blue-Flag beaches as a significant issue at that time and 
specifically highlighted that Criterion 23 of the Blue-Flag conditions requires that dogs 
must be restricted within designated Blue-Flag areas. It is also generally 
accepted that restricting dogs and other animals from the vicinity of bathing areas is a 
positive measure for the protection of bathing water quality. 
 
In that context and given the risk posed to retaining Blue-Flag status, the decision was 
taken to review the Bye-laws at that time which included dog control measures. The 
review process included a comprehensive public consultation exercise. 

 
28 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
 
Cllr. Anne O Sullivan noted the response and asked what measures are undertaken 
to ensure that the Bye-Laws are adhered to.  
 
This motion was seconded by Cllr. Tommy Cahill and several other Councillors who 
acknowledged the excellent work of the lifeguards but noted it was not in their remit to 
enforce the beach Bye-Laws.  
 
The Deputy Chief Executive said it is not possible to patrol all beaches across the 
county and said there is a level of responsibility on dog owners to abide to the Bye-
Laws.  
 
39.  Letter to Min for Housing expand provision of wastewater infrastructure in 
towns and villages  
Pursuant to Notice duly given Cllr. Tommy Cahill proposed 
That Kerry County Council calls on Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage, Mr. James Browne, T.D., to urgently address the housing crisis in County 
Kerry by expediting the provision of wastewater treatment infrastructure in towns and 
villages across the county. 
 
Ms. B Fitzgerald said this is a matter for consideration by the Members.  
 
Cllr. Tommy Cahill said that due to the lack of wastewater infrastructure people who 
want to build a house in their own area are unable to do so. It is a major burden and 
referred in particular to Beaufort village where the wastewater infrastructure will take 
another seven years to complete.  
 
Cllr. Deirdre Ferris seconded this motion and stated that Feint is experiencing the same 
issues. 
 
15.09.2025.15 Correspondence – Conference and Seminars 
 
(a) On the proposal of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly and seconded by Cllr. Martin Grady it was 
agreed to grant approval for the attendance of Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Michael Foley and 
Cllr. Angie Baily to a reception celebrating the National Day of the People's Republic 
of China and the Victory in the World Anti-Fascist War that will take place in Dublin 
on Monday 22 September 2025. 
 
(b) On the proposal of Cllr. Breandan Fitzgerald and seconded by Cllr. Michael Leane 
it was agreed to grant approval for the attendance of Cathaoirleach Michael Foley to 
the Age Friendly Ireland Shared Service Awards ceremony in Galway on Thursday 
23 October 2025. 
 
(c) On the proposal of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly and seconded by Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald 
it was agreed to get retrospective approval for SPC Chairs to attend one day 
specialised workshop in Kilkenny on Wednesday 03 September 2025. 
 
(d) On the proposal of Cllr. Tommy Cahill and seconded by Cllr. Michael Leane to 
approve the attendance of Elected Members to attend the AILG’s Annual Autumn 

 
29 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
Training event to be held in Westport, Co. Mayo on Wednesday 17 and Thursday 18 
September 2025. 
 
(e) On the proposal of Cllr. Bobby O’ Connell and seconded by Cllr. Niall O’ 
Callaghan it was agreed to approve the attendance of Elected Members to attend the 
Irish Planning Institute 50th Anniversary Autumn Planning training, on Thursday 02 
October 2025 in Dublin.  
 
(f) On the proposal of Cllr. Charlie Farrelly and seconded by Cllr. Martin Grady it was 
agreed to approve the attendance of all members to the October - Module 5 2025 – 
‘OPR Elected Member Planning Training’ on Saturday 11th October 2025 & (Southern 
- Region – Horse & Jockey Hotel, Tipperary) on Thursday, 9th October 2025 (Arklow 
Bay Hotel, Wicklow for Northern and Midlands - Region). 
 
(g) On the proposal of Cllr. Tommy Cahill and seconded by Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald 
it was agreed to approve the attendance of Elected Members to attend the Celtic 
conference “A Practical Guide to Budget 2026” in Carlingford, Co. Louth.  between 
Friday 10 October – Sunday 12 October 2025. 
 
(h) On the proposal of Cllr. Marie Moloney and seconded by Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan 
it was agreed to approve the attendance of all Elected Members to the Smart Town 
and Village training event 2025 in Co. Leitrim on Monday 13 October 2025. 
 
(i) On the proposal of Cllr. Brendan Cronin and seconded by Cllr. Fionnán Fitzgerald 
To approve the attendance of all Elected Members to the LAMA Autumn Seminar in 
Co Wexford on Thursday 16 and Friday 17 October 2025. 
 
(j) On the proposal of Cllr. Paul Daly and seconded by Cllr. Niall O’ Callaghan to 
approve the attendance of all Elected Members to the November - Module 6 2025 – 
‘Supporting Councillors: Responding to Mental Health, Suicide, and Addiction Issues’ 
on Thursday 13 November 2025 (Southern Region – Ravenport Resort - Waterford) 
& Saturday 15 November 2025 (Out of Region for SR – Radisson Blu Hotel - Athlone). 
 
 
15.09.2025.16 Correspondence General 
It was agreed to note the following items of correspondence which were circulated: 
 
List of correspondence circulated at the September 2025 
Meeting of Kerry County Council 
  
Date 
From 
Description 
1. 
29/06/2025 
Minister for 
Transport  
Response to a request from the Members to ask the 
Minister to visit Kerry to review works required on 
roads and other projects under his remit.
2. 
21/07/2025 
Minister for 
Justice  
Response from Minister for Justice in relation to a 
request to introduce greater deterrents be put in 
place to protect the elderly from crime. 
 

 
30 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
3. 
22/07/2025 
Minister for 
Housing  
Response from Minister for Housing in relation to a 
request for a return in funding for the Tenant in situ 
Scheme 
4. 
28/07/2025 
Minister for 
Housing  
Response from Minister for Housing re Short-Term 
Letting Scheme. 
5. 
29/07/2025 
Minister for 
Health  
Response from Minster for Health re introduction of 
a national policy mandating cardiac screening for all 
young athletes engaged in organised sport
6. 
31/07/2025 
TII  
Response from TII regarding a request to carry out 
works on the N86.  
7. 
29/07/2025 
Min for Rural 
and 
Community 
Development 
and Gaeltacht
Response to a request for additional funding for LIS 
Scheme.  
8. 
05/08/2025 
Dept of 
Transport 
Response to a request from the Members that 
paper schedules would be provided at TFI and Bus 
Éireann bus stops.
9. 
07/08/2025 
Min for 
Finance  
Response to a request from the Members to 
introduce a more favourable tax rate for landlords 
who return their houses to rent long term.
10. 
08/08/2025 
Tánaiste 
Response to a request from the Members in relation 
to a new funding model for Foras na Gaeilge. 
11. 
20/08/2025 
GAA 
Response to a request from the Members re the 
GAA broadcast Media rights.  
12. 
27/08/2025 
Min for Justice Response to a request form the Members re 
Coroners’ payments.  
13. 
02/09/2025 
Uisce Éireann 
Response from UE re replacement of pipes at Killen 
Road, Tralee. 
14. 
09/09/2025 
HSE 
Response to a request from the Members in 
regards a request to carry out a Needs Analysis 
Ambulance Service  
15. 11/09/2025 
Minister for 
Finance  
Response to a request from the Members to ensure 
that regulations are amended to provide private 
renters with good rental records. 
16. 15/07/20285
Waterford City 
and County 
Council 
Resolution to Min for Social Protection re a request 
to abolish means testing for Carers allowance in 
Budget 2026.
17..
22/07/2025
Galway Co Co
Resolution to Min for Health re the downgrading of 
Portiuncula Hospital  
18. 
22/07/2025
Galway Co Co
Resolution to HSE re the downgrading of 
Portiuncula Hospital  
19. 
24/07/2025
Limerick City 
& County 
Council 
Resolution by the Members to Min for Higher 
Education condemning any future attempt by 

 
31 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
government to reinstate the €3,000 college 
contribution fee.  
20. 
08/08/2025
Galway 
County council 
Resolution calling to safeguard the triple Lock 
component of Irish neutrality.  
21. 
08/08/2025
Limerick City 
& CC  
Resolution calling on the Min of Housing to relax the 
current ribbon development rules. 
22. 
08/08/2025
Limerick City 
& CC 
That Limerick County Council provides a liaison / 
link to community welfare where support is 
necessary to enable newly allocated tenants move 
in speedily.
23. 
12/08/2025
Tipperary 
County 
Council 
Write to the Min for Housing LG re the urgent 
publication of regulations for renewable energy 
before any further grants are facilitated. 
24. 
14/08/2025
Donegal 
County 
Council 
Write to the Min for Housing & LG re the ineligibility 
of County Donegal from Key national affordable 
housing schemes.
25. 
14/08/2025
Donegal 
County 
Council
Call on the Government in Baile Átha Cliath to 
legislate for Socio Economic Status and Equality 
Legislation.
26. 
14/08/2025
Offaly County 
Council 
Council asks Min for Housing & LG to include Part 
5 houses in Tenant Purchase Scheme. 
 
 
15.09.2025.17 Minutes arising from the minutes as confirmed 
 
15.09.2025.18 Any Other Business 
 
Cllr. Charlie Farrrelly congratulated Mr. David Walsh a native of Cordal who was 
named the Kerry Person of the Year 2025 by the Kerry Association in Dublin.  
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald congratulated Dr. Crokes GAA Club on winning the 2025 
Senior Club Championship. 
 
Cllr. Breandán Fitzgerald congratulated An Gaeltacht Senior Football Team on 
winning the Intermediate Club Championship. 
 
All Members wished to be associated with the comments.  
 
Cllr. Breandan Fitzgerald congratulated Dingle Peninsula on being crowned the overall 
winner of Ireland’s Greenest Places 2025. 
 
All Members wished to be associated with the comments. 
 
Minister Kevin Boxer Moran  
Cllr Tommy Cahill welcomed the funding announced by Mr. Kevin “Boxer” Moran 
Minister for the OPW for Listowel and Ardfert following his recent visit to Kerry.   
 

 
32 
Sept Ordinary Meeting – 15 Sept 25 
Following on from this matter a discussion took place where Cllr. Johnny Healy-Rae 
expressed concerns regarding the timeline to the Kenmare Sewerage Scheme.   
 
Timeline to Variation plan for Castleisland Corca Dhuibhne MD 
Follow a request for confirmation on the timeline for the Variation plan for Castleisland 
Corca Dhuibhne MD, Mr. J. Nolan Director of Service said that the process as 
previously outlined will commence in October 2025. 
 
 
The meeting concluded at 2.25p.m 
 
 
Bridget Fitzgerald 
 
_________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator 
Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
