Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
1 of 26 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect 
putting them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is 
available on request. 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ NA CRUINNITHE SPEICIALTA DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE 
CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN  
CHONTAE, TRÁ  LÍ, AR  AN  MÁIRT, 25 IÚIL, 2017 
 
MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL HELD 
IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE ON TUESDAY, 
25TH JULY, 2017 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
R. Beasley 
M. Cahill 
P Connor-Scarteen         
B. Cronin 
J.J. Culloty 
P. Daly 
                    
T. Ferris                             J. Finucane                       S. Fitzgerald                  
J.F. Flynn 
N. Foley 
D. Grady 
 
        
J. Healy-Rae 
M. Healy-Rae 
N. Kelleher  
        
S. Locke 
D. McCarthy 
P. McCarthy                    
T. McEllistrim 
J. Moloney 
N. Moriarty  
        
D. Nolan 
T. O’Brien 
B. O’Connell                      
M. O’Shea 
D. Quigg 
J. Sheahan   
         
G. Spring 
A. Thornton 
 
APOLOGY/LEATH SCÉAL 
M. Gleeson 
J. Lucid 
M. Kennelly  
         
L. Purtill 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Ms. M. Murrell, Chief Executive    
  Mr. J. Breen, Director Water Services             
Ms. A. McAllen, Head of Finance 
  Mr. M. Scannell, A/Dir. Job Cr/Sust. ED 
    
Mr. M. O’Donoghue, A/Dir.H.&Corp.S.   Mr. C. O’Sullivan, Director of Operations          
Ms. B. Conway, A/Meetings Admin. 
  Ms. K. Lynch, SEO Finance 
                        
Mr. D. Ginty, A/SE Planning 
  Mr. D. O’Malley, SEP, Planning 
                 
Mr. G. O’Brien, A/SEO Envir. Serv.         Mr. L. Brosnan, AO Planning  
Mr. D. Burke, A.P. Planning 
  Mr. M. Brosnan, SO Revenue  
 
  
Ms. S. Sheridan, SSO Finance 
  Ms. B. Reidy, SSO Corporate Support            
Ms. O. O’Shea, CO Corporate Support   
 
 
The meeting commenced at 10.40am. 
 
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Sheahan took the Chair. 
 
 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
2 of 26 
Members Duties under Ethics Legislation 
Ms. B. Conway, A/Meetings Administrator stated she wanted to remind members 
of their duties under Part 15 (Ethics Framework) of the Local Government Act 
2001 and the Code of Conduct for councillors. She then read the following 
statement into the record of the meeting.  
 
“Councillors should be aware that the onus for complying with the requirement of 
the Act and the Code of Conduct lies with each individual councillors.  Under the 
beneficial interest provision and should that provision apply, a councillor must 
 
(1) Disclose the nature of his/her interest or the fact of a connected persons 
interest at the meeting and before discussion or consideration of the matter 
commences and 
 
(2) Withdraw from the meeting for so long as the matter is being discussed or 
considered, and accordingly, he/she shall take no part in the discussion or 
consideration of the matter and shall refrain from voting in relation to it.” 
 
17.07.25.01 Draft Development Contribution Scheme 
 
(a) 
Chief Executive’s Report on submissions received on the draft 
Development Contribution Scheme 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea referred to members’ duties under Ethics legislation and pointed 
out that some members are farmers and are also involved in business and he 
asked if they could remain in the Chamber while this item was being considered. 
 
In response Mr. M. O’Donoghue, A/Director of Housing and Corporate Services, 
pointed out that all members were given a copy of the booklet Code of Conduct 
for Councillors and the Meetings Administrator drew members’ attention to the 
need to comply with this legislation.  It is a matter for each member to make a 
personal decision based on the information available. 
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy declared that he owns a house and all 33 members could 
decide they maybe in breach of Ethics legislation and could leave the meeting. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin highlighted that members could use that argument to abdicate 
their responsibility to adopt a Development Contribution Scheme.  He declared 
that he is a dairy farmer and the only way members could be compromised is if 
they had a live planning application.   Cllr. Cronin confirmed that he did not have 
a planning application pending and in fact his last planning application was in 
2007.  While it is a grey area he did not believe members had a beneficial 
interest and they were entitled to take part in the discussion and decision on this 
item. 
 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
3 of 26 
Mr. O’Donoghue concurred with the views expressed by Cllr. Cronin and added 
that there is subtlety between generally and a beneficial interest in relation to a 
specific planning application.  The Oireachtas pass the Finance Act following the 
Budget each year. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae stated he is also a farmer and this is one of the reasons he 
was elected.  He declared that he has no current planning application and he 
believed members are entitled to remain in the Chamber to discuss and make a 
decision on the Draft Development Contribution Scheme.   
 
Cllr. N. Foley suggested that a short adjournment maybe helpful to allow 
members get advice from the Ethics Officer. 
 
Mr. O’Donoghue confirmed it is a matter for each member to decide if they have 
a beneficial interest or not.   
 
Members decided to proceed with the meeting. 
 
The Chief Executive referred members to her report dated 17th July 2017 on this 
item which was circulated.  She advised that the introduction of a Development 
Contribution Scheme by Kerry County Council in 2000 has over the past 16 years 
provided critical funding to facilitate the provision of essential physical and social 
infrastructure in the County.  However, previous Development Contribution 
Schemes operated in very different economic circumstances.  It is now essential 
to achieve the right balance between funding necessary infrastructure through 
planning gain and supporting/promoting economic activity and job creation by 
reducing costs to business and supporting the provision of both Social & Private 
Housing. 
 
Therefore, the proposed new Development Contribution Scheme seeks to 
promote sustainable development patterns, secure investment in capital 
infrastructure and encourage economic activity and the supply of housing. 
 
The Draft Development Contributions Scheme reflects the challenges facing the 
economy as reflected in the National Strategies:- 
 
Rebuilding Ireland – An Action plan for Housing and Homelessness 
• Providing significant reductions in contributions for standard housing 
throughout the county; 
 
National & Regional Action Plans for Jobs 
• Providing extensive reductions in contributions across retail, office and 
industrial uses; 
 
 
 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
4 of 26 
Action Plan for Rural Development 
• Providing substantial reductions for the redevelopment of Town and 
Villages, substantial credits for the reuse of existing buildings, scope for 
identifying areas for regeneration, redevelopment of Brown Field Sites, 
reductions in the Car Park requirements associated with changes of use. 
 
The Chief Executive emphasised while substantial reductions have been made 
some new charges are being introduced in the Scheme as a funding scheme for 
projects is required.  Some funding opportunities require a local contribution and 
the Fáilte Ireland grant requires co-funding of up to €1m.  Matching funding is 
also required for the Town and Village Renewal Scheme and the Minor Flood 
Mitigation Works & Coastal Protection Scheme.  Kerry County Council must be in 
a position to co-fund these projects.  Wonderful work has been achieved in 
Tralee town centre through the Smarter Travel initiative and greenways will also 
have to be co-funded.  The provision of additional car parking is a priority and 
Kerry does not just cater for a population of 147,000 but also for the many visitors 
to the county each year.  Additional land must be acquired and developed for car 
parking and that will be expensive and it is critical that a funding stream is 
available.  There is a need for ongoing investment in the public realm in our 
major towns also.   
 
The Scheme is also grounded on fairness and proportionality and extends the 
scope of Development Contributions across all areas of economic activity 
including agriculture.  The Scheme has been drafted on the principle that all 
sectors of the economy would make a contribution under the Scheme and this 
guiding principle has enabled reductions to be applied in both urban and rural 
areas. 
 
The Scheme aims to facilitate job creation through targeted support for specific 
development types.  The Contributions Scheme proposed reflects both the need 
to continue to provide a funding source as a contribution to critical infrastructure 
in Kerry, which facilitates both the economic and social development of the 
County, and which is pitched at a level that it does not constitute a disincentive to 
development.  The Scheme as developed also recognises the particular 
challenges facing the redevelopment of our Town and Village Centres, the re-use 
of existing vacant and derelict properties and provides some relief in respect of 
the existing charges as they relate to change of use applications and the 
associated requirements for additional parking spaces that may result. 
 
Currently, there are four Development Contribution Schemes in operation in the 
County, following amalgamation of the Local Authorities in 2014.  It is, therefore, 
necessary to adopt a single, revised Scheme, for the entire County. 
 
The existing Schemes that apply to both the former Tralee and Killarney Town 
Council Areas have significantly higher charges in recognition of the greater 
infrastructural demands in these area, particularly associated with the provision 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
5 of 26 
of roads and amenity infrastructure, the standards required of improved public 
realm for Towns of this size and their significance for both the social and 
economic development of the County.  It is proposed to continue to levy an 
additional ring-fenced Development Contribution in these areas for the 
improvement of the public realm and associated higher order amenity projects 
within the two towns.  This levy will apply to both residential and commercial 
applications.  A charge at a lower rate is included in the Draft Scheme for 
Listowel to provide a ring-fenced fund for the implementation of the Listowel 
Heritage Plan.  In this case, the charge is confined to commercial applications.   
 
The new Scheme reduces Development Contributions for a majority of 
development types irrespective of their location within the County. 
 
The Chief Executive pointed out that this is a progressive Development 
Contribution Scheme and she believed it is balanced and while the impact on 
some sectors has been reduced contributions are sought across all sectors which 
is reasonable.   
 
Mr. M. Scannell advised that the Scheme is progressive and pro development 
and it was difficult to replace 4 Schemes that had different charges and ways of 
attaching levies.  The major change relates to the charge for a standard house 
which is a significant reduction on the previous Scheme and he outlined the 
previous charges and reductions under the new Scheme for Kerry County 
Council together with previous charges for the county and the three Town 
Councils. Mr. Scannell outlined the savings in the Scheme for retail development 
and an application for change of use that would require 6 additional car parking 
spaces will be exempt resulting in a saving of €13,000.  The Scheme aims to 
encourage property owners to redevelop their property and through the MD 
Development Plan process areas in need of regeneration will be identified for 
further assistance through an emerging Rates Grant Scheme.  It is important that 
employment generating businesses are supported.  The agricultural development 
levy of €4.10 is very reasonable.  Significant development has already taken 
place and it is anticipated this will generate €800,000 over the lifetime of the 
Scheme.  Development levies associated with wind farm developments have 
increase 10 fold to €10,000 per MW.  Quarries have had a significant impact on 
rural roads where they are located and a levy of €0.29 per m³ is proposed.  The 
new Scheme harmonises development levies across the county.   
 
Mr. Scannell referred members to Page 3 of the Chief Executive’s Report on 
Submissions received where details of the process for the preparation of the 
Draft Development Contributions Scheme are set out.  He advised members if 
the Scheme is not adopted the current Schemes will remain in place.  10 
submissions were received during the consultation period of the scheme 
including a submission from the Minister for Housing, Planning, Community and 
Local Government.   
 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
6 of 26 
The report on submissions received is in accordance with Section 48(6)(b) of the 
Planning & Development Act 2000 which requires the Chief Executive to: 
 
i. List the persons or bodies who made submission or observations, 
ii. Summarise the issues raised by the persons or bodies in the submissions or 
observations, 
iii. Give the response of the Chief Executive to the issues raised, taking 
account of the proper planning and sustainable development of the area. 
 
There were 10 (no.) submissions received and Mr. Scannell briefed the meeting 
on the submissions as follows. 
 
Written Submission No. 1: 
Minister for Housing, Planning, 
Community and Local Government 
Submission: 
The submission states that the draft scheme appears broadly in compliance with 
the provisions of the Act, the Guidelines and the relevant Circulars. 
 
The submission notes that the scheme refers to utility infrastructure as being per 
building or per hectare whichever is greatest. In the interests of supporting the 
development of necessary infrastructure, particularly water and drainage, The 
Minister recommends that consideration could be given to restricting the 
applicable contribution to the buildings only. 
 
Response: 
The Minister has made a recommendation on the draft scheme pursuant to 
Section 48(5)(b) and the Council is obliged under Section 48(7) to have regard to 
the Ministers submission.   
 
Recommendation: 
It is recommended that the following text in italics and strikethrough under the 
Utilities section on page 13 be deleted and the table on pages 9 & 10 be 
amended accordingly:  
 
Development of utilities shall be subject to a development contribution. They 
are to be charged at a rate of €1,000 per structure or €5,000 per hectare,  
whichever is the greatest. 
 
Written Submission No. 2:             
Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII) 
Submission: 
TII has no comment to make on the proposed Draft Development Contribution 
Scheme. 
 
Response: 
Submission noted. 
 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
7 of 26 
Recommendation: 
No modification to the Draft Development Contributions Scheme. 
 
 
Written Submission No. 3:               
 
 
Ardfert Quarry 
Submission: 
The submission states that Ardfert Quarry understands the need for such 
contributions, but expresses concern at the extent of the proposed increase.  
 
The submission states that the proposed scheme will result in an additional 
payment of circa €20,000 per annum in development contributions based on 
current tonnages. 
 
The submission also states that a community & amenity levy cannot be justified 
and that quarries do not require these community & amenity developments to 
carry out their business.  
 
The submission agrees in principle with the payment of development 
contributions, however in its view development contribution schemes have led to 
significant levels of inequality in the market place. The submission states that it is 
imperative that any scheme is properly enforced, otherwise disparity will continue 
and a possible increase in the black market supply of aggregate may result. 
 
Response: 
The operations of the extractive industry results in significant heavy vehicular 
movements on the roads of the county. The Draft Development Contributions 
Scheme will support the provision of infrastructure in areas that these industries 
are located. 
 
The proposed scheme levies quarries that produce in excess of 10,000 tonnes 
per annum and calculates development levies in m3 as opposed to per tonne. A 
survey of the quarry can be under taken to ascertain the volume of material 
extracted, therefore the rate per m3 is considered a fairer and more equitable 
means of calculating development levies without the reliance on weighbridge 
returns. It also enables all quarries producing in excess of 10,000 tonnes per 
annum irrespective of whether a weighbridge is present to be subject to 
development levies.   
 
Recommendation: 
No modification to the Draft Development Contributions Scheme. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
8 of 26 
Written Submission No. 4:    
Name withheld for data protection 
purposes. A paper copy of the 
unedited minutes is available on 
request. 
Submission: 
The submission states that the proposed development charge of €4.10 on farm 
buildings should not be pursued. The submission asserts that farm buildings add 
very little additional traffic to the county's roads compared to the other 
development categories in the scheme and that farm buildings do not contribute 
any extra farm output or income and are constructed to comply with 
environmental legislation.  
 
The submission also states that proportionally the proposed agricultural charge 
would be a more significant percentage of the cost of a farm building than levies 
proposed on other development categories. 
 
Response: 
The Draft Development Contributions Scheme took into consideration all 
developments where public infrastructure is utilised. Agricultural developments 
have the benefit of rural roads and infrastructure in the same manner as rural 
housing and other rural commercial developments. A charge for agricultural 
developments similar to rural housing and rural commercial developments is 
therefore, considered reasonable.  
 
In addition the scheme also sought to reduce levies across all sectors in the 
interests of job creation and economic development. The development levy 
proposed in relation to agricultural developments enables reductions to be 
applied elsewhere in the scheme.  
 
A similar levy exists for agricultural developments in other counties 
 
Recommendation: 
No modification to the Draft Development Contributions Scheme. 
 
Written Submission No. 5: 
 
 
 
 
Kerry ICMSA 
Submission: 
This submission states that Agricultural Developments should remain exempt 
from development contributions.  The submission highlights that a policy of 
exempting Agricultural Development farm development contributions offers an 
incentive to promote ongoing agricultural development in rural areas which 
ultimately benefits the economic and social wellbeing of the local area. 
 
Response: 
See response to Submission No. 4. 
 
 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
9 of 26 
Recommendation: 
See recommendation to Submission No. 4. 
 
 
Written Submission No. 6: 
 
 
 
 
Kerry IFA 
Submission: 
This submission states that the IFA is opposed to any introduction of 
Development Contributions in relation to agricultural development as it will affect 
the development of the agriculture and food industry in Co. Kerry and jeopardise 
existing jobs in the sector.  
The submission also states that buildings for the pig and poultry sectors should 
also be exempt from Development Charges. 
 
The submission acknowledges that residential development contributions may be 
appropriate for large scale developments where the cost can be added on to the 
sale price of the property, however single residential developments should be 
exempt from Development Contributions.  
 
Response: 
Regarding agricultural development, see response to Submission No. 4. 
 
Regarding intensive agriculture, this type of industry results in significant 
vehicular movements, and is considered industrial with regard to their scale and 
operation. The industrial levy in relation to intensive agricultural development is 
therefore, considered reasonable. 
 
Regarding residential development in rural areas, the Development Contributions 
Guidelines issued by the Minister specifically state that all residential 
developments irrespective of location benefit from improvements to infrastructure 
and therefore should be levied.  
 
Recommendation: 
See recommendation to Submission No. 4. 
 
Written Submission No. 7: 
 
Irish Concrete Federation (ICF) 
Submission: 
The submission outlines that the proposed contributions are a multiple of those 
imposed by other local authorities and are a substantial increase over the 
existing scheme. 
 
The submission states that the ICF is greatly concerned that the proposed 
increase in the contribution level for extractive industries /operations would have 
a damaging impact on the future of quarrying activities in the county with a 
resulting impact on jobs and investment. The submission also states that there is 
a relative shortage of good quality rock quarries to service future demand in the 
county and if the proposed development levies are implemented the demand for 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
10 of 26 
quarry materials will be served from adjacent counties with no subsequent benefit 
for the county. 
 
The submission also proposes that all contributions from quarries should be 
based on special contributions pursuant to Section 48(2)(c) of the Planning Act.  
 
Response: 
See response to Submission No. 3. 
 
Regarding reference to a special contribution pursuant to Section 48(2)(c) of the 
Act, this provision provides for the payment of a special contribution in respect of 
a particular development where specific exceptional costs not covered by the 
scheme are incurred by the Local Authority in respect of public infrastructure and 
facilities. It would therefore not be appropriate to apply a special contribution 
pursuant to Section 48(2)(c) to the extractive industry. 
 
Recommendation: 
No modification to the Draft Development Contributions Scheme. 
 
Written Submission No. 8: 
 
 
 
 
Eirgrid 
Submission: 
The submission states that EirGrid provides a direct benefit to surrounding 
communities when it builds new transmission infrastructure. The submission 
states that where new infrastructure is built Eirgrid sets up a community fund and 
makes proximity payments to individual homes based on their location in relation 
to the infrastructure. The submission states that it would appear unreasonable to 
duplicate the payment of contributions, which arise as a result of EirGrid’s 
compliance with the Government’s policy statement on the strategic importance 
of transmission infrastructure, and payments required in accordance with Section 
48 of the Planning & Development Acts 2000-2015. 
 
The submission states that a large proportion of works to transmission lines 
relate to routine maintenance and refurbishment work including tower painting, 
replacement of old/damaged apparatus and replacement of wooden pole sets.  
Whilst these works are generally exempt exempted development, their proximity 
to protected sites may render them subject to a planning application.  
 
The submission therefore requests an amendment to the proposed text (on page 
13) in the Draft Contribution Scheme to ensure that maintenance, refurbishment, 
and upgrading works remain exempt from development levies.  
 
Response: 
Eirgrids Community Fund involves payments directly to property owners and 
does not equate to a Development Contribution Scheme funding key community 
and infrastructure projects. Section 34 of the Planning and Development Act 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
11 of 26 
2000-2015 does not allow a Local Authority to apply conditions relating to 
community gain.  
 
The Draft Development Contributions Scheme prepared under Section 48 of the 
Planning and Development Act 2000-2015 facilitates the Local Authority in the 
provision of key community and infrastructure projects for community benefit. 
 
Kerry County Council recognises that EirGrid operates a reliable, economic and 
efficient transmission system. In order to do this maintenance, refurbishment, and 
upgrading works are necessary. It is therefore considered appropriate that a 
development contribution should not apply to such works. 
 
Recommendation: 
It is recommended that the following additional text (in italics) be included in the 
Energy Infrastructure section on page 13: 
 
Planning applications for transmission lines (overhead & underground) other than 
applications for maintenance, refurbishment, and upgrading works shall be 
subject to a Community & Amenity contribution of €1,000 per kilometre. 
 
Written Submission No. 9: 
 
 
 
 
Terra Solar 
Submission: 
 
This submission states that the development contribution for solar photovoltaic 
(PV) renewable energy should be less than that of other renewable energy such 
as wind energy as  
(a) Solar PV development has substantially less impact on roads, transport 
infrastructure, community and  
(b) Solar PV development generates less electricity per megawatt (MW) than 
other renewable energy sources such as wind energy.  
 
The submission proposes a reduced contribution in the range of €3,000 to €5,000 
per MW. 
  
Response: 
Development Contributions are not calculated based on the financial return of a 
development; they are based on the provision of infrastructure benefitting 
development in the area. 
The proposed rate for renewable energy is calculated on a per MW basis, 
therefore the total charge for a proposed development will be reflective of the 
scale of the development. 
 
Recommendation: 
No modification to the Draft Development Contributions Scheme. 
 
 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
12 of 26 
Written Submission No. 10: 
 
 
 
 
 
SSE 
Submission: 
This submission relates to both renewable and non-renewable energy 
development. The submission: 
• Is opposed to the proposed increase in development levies for renewable 
energy developments. 
• Expresses concern that the proposed scheme will negatively affect 
investors’ willingness to invest in wind projects  
• Argues that Draft DCS does not give appropriate recognition to the 
substantial contribution the wind energy sector makes to the local and 
national economy through local direct investment, job creation, local 
authority rates, and increased demand for local services. 
• States that there is a lack of justification for the €20,000 per MW charge 
for non-renewable energy. 
 
Response: 
A commercial wind farm given its size and scale is considered an industrial scale 
enterprise. The proposed levy is therefore, considered reasonable. 
 
There is justification for a higher charge for non-renewable energy development. 
Government Policy favours renewable energy in order to ensure the compliance 
with the EU Renewables Directive (2009/28/EC) and in its Energy White Paper 
which targets increased electricity consumption from renewable sources.  
 
Recommendation: 
No modification to the Draft Development Contributions Scheme. 
 
In conclusion Mr. Scannell stated it is recommended that the proposed Draft 
Development Contributions Scheme be modified as follows: 
 
Additions to the text are in italics. Omissions to the text are in strikethrough. 
 
Revision 1: 
It is recommended that the following text in italics and strikethrough under the 
Utilities section on pages 13 be deleted and the table on page 9 & 10 be 
amended accordingly:  
 
Development of utilities shall be subject to a development contribution. 
They are to be charged at a rate of €1,000 per structure or €5,000 per  
Hectare, whichever is the greatest. 
 
Revision 2: 
It is recommended that the following additional text be included in the Energy 
Infrastructure section on Page 13: 
 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
13 of 26 
Planning applications for transmission lines (overhead & underground) 
other than applications for maintenance, refurbishment, and upgrading 
works shall be subject to a Community & Amenity contribution of €1,000 
per kilometre. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane acknowledged that the Draft Scheme takes full cognisance of 
the decline in development both in urban and rural settings which has resulted in 
the closure of shops, schools etc.  He welcomed the Scheme and added that the 
Council must take ownership of some of the issues including the provision of 
housing in rural area. This Scheme will contribute to a resolution of some of 
these issues and if funding is not available they cannot be addressed.  Many 
small to medium businesses are under pressure and in decline and it is vital that 
there is equity in the Scheme.  Farming is like any small enterprise and he 
PROPOSED that any development up to 250m would be exempt.  It is member’s 
duty to be part of a process to redevelop rural Ireland and this Scheme is a 
catalyst for that.  In conclusion Cllr. Finucane highlighted that the benefits of this 
Scheme will have a knock on effect and will contribute in no small way to the 
economic recovery of the county. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy declared that he is a farmer and the Manager of the Mart in 
Kenmare.  All members have witnessed the decline of rural Ireland and in 
Kenmare tourists caravans are parked at the side of road where there is no 
charge.  He welcomed the flat rate applicable to houses up to 125m².  Farming 
has been through 5 or 6 turbulent years and the average age at a mart is 60 
years while agricultural schools are full of young people who want to go into 
farming.  He asked if the exemption for farm buildings would remain for the 
lifetime of the Scheme.  If a levy is put on quarries, supermarkets etc. they can 
pass it on to the customer but farmers are dependant on the market and they do 
not have a weekly wage.  Farming is being devastated by forestry and there is no 
levy on it when it is being felled.  He PROPOSED that the Scheme be rejected. 
 
Cllr. M. O’Shea stated while he welcomed parts of the Scheme he disagreed with 
some proposed levies.  Members constantly express concern for businesses in 
small towns and the Scheme aims to entice businesses back into these town 
centres.  Cllr. O’Shea expressed concern at the exemption for houses as he 
believed the house size being exempted is too small.  He PROPOSED that the 
flat rate would be increased to 180m² which equates to the average house.  This 
would result in a saving of up to €1,100.  He expressed concern that if levies are 
imposed on quarries they will pass it on to their customers and that is why he 
made his proposal in relation to levies on houses.  A major issue for members is 
the proposed levy on agricultural developments but the proposed size shed to be 
exempt equates to a double 3 bay shed which accounts for 90% of farm buildings 
in the county.   
 
 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
14 of 26 
Cllr. N. Kelleher highlighted that car parking levies have been an impediment to 
the development of commercial units.  He welcomed the proposed changes as 
new industry must be encouraged to set up in Kerry.  Cllr. Kelleher further 
welcomed the exemption for masts etc. which form part of the National 
Broadband Scheme and the levies on wind farm developments.  Members were 
not provided with a copy of the submissions but he trusted they were accurately 
reflected in the report circulated.  Cllr. Kelleher suggested that funds raised under 
the Scheme in a Municipal District should be ring fenced for that Municipal 
District and that car parking levies generated would only be spent in the relevant 
town.  The average house in Ireland in 2008 per the CSO is 180m² and he 
PROPOSED that houses up to 180m² should be limited to the flat rate. 
   
Cllr. B. Cronin highlighted that he supported the last Development Contribution 
Scheme as agricultural developments were exempt.  However funding is required 
for projects in the county.  A major issue for members is the proposed levy on 
agricultural development and he PROPOSED that such developments would 
continue to be exempt.  The agri sector is the only sector that continues to pay 
water charges and the LIS is no longer available for those living on private roads.  
Farmers are self employed and if they get sick they are not entitled to social 
welfare benefits.  Cllr. Cronin welcomed the reductions in levies in the Scheme 
and clarified that the levies in place in Killarney were put in place by Killarney 
Town Council and not Kerry County Council.  An industrial development of 
1,000m² will be liable for levies of €55,000 which is substantial.  He welcomed 
the exemption for broadband masts in the Scheme and the levy proposed for 
wind farm developments.  Funding is required to support employment 
opportunities and additional parking is urgently needed in Killarney.  Cllr. Cronin 
PROPOSED that a sum of €250,000 be ring fenced for LIS going forward as it is 
important to support rural communities. 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill agreed that houses up to 180m² should be limited to the flat rate.  
The proposed levy of €4.10 for agricultural buildings will have serious 
consequences and for this reason he had proposed that any development up to 
250m² be exempt.  An application for a development that is 300m² will only be 
liable for levies for the 50m² over the 250m².  It is not proposed to charge a levy 
on silo yards, pits etc. and this is welcome. Cllr. Cahill advised that his proposal 
to exempt 250m² for agricultural developments acknowledges the special 
circumstances of farmers.  It is also important to remember that businesses are 
already paying rates, water/wastewater charges and the Scheme must be fair to 
all. 
 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn welcomed the Draft Scheme and highlighted that he moved a 
Notice of Motion a few months ago in relation to the levies on new houses which 
are substantial.  He welcomed the reduction in the levies but expressed concern 
that the house size to be exempt is too small.  He supported the proposal that the 
flat rate would apply to houses up to 180m².  Coastal protection is an ongoing 
problem in Kerry and members had to approve matching funding of €550,000 for 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
15 of 26 
works at Rossbeigh which put a substantial financial burden on the Council.  Cllr. 
Flynn welcomed the reductions in the Scheme for the change of use of buildings 
as hopefully this would encourage the use of existing buildings.  He supported 
the proposal to exempt farm developments up to 250m² which should facilitate 
the majority of farmers.  Members recently visited the new FEXCO building 
where it is hoped to provide 400 to 500 jobs.  Many of these will be sons and 
daughters of farmers who want to build on the family farm.  Cllr. Flynn 
SECONDED Cllr. Cronin’s proposal that a sum of €250,000 would be ring fenced 
for LIS.  In conclusion Cllr. Flynn highlighted the need to pursue forestry 
companies who are causing a lot of damage to roads when large lorries are used 
to transport timber from the forestry.   
 
Cllr. N. Foley acknowledged the huge amount of work that went into compiling 
the Development Contribution Scheme.  She welcomed many of the proposals in 
the Scheme including the proposed levy on wind farm developments, the 
reductions for change of use and the exemption for masts for the provision of 
broadband.   Cllr. Foley referred to the proposed flat rate for houses up to 125m² 
and highlighted that the average house according to the CSO is 180m² and 
members want this reflected in the Scheme.  The agricultural sector is hugely 
important to the economy of the county and caution must be exercised in the 
introduction of a levy on agricultural buildings and she was speaking personally 
on this issue.  It is vital to provide a stimulus to the agricultural sector and she 
had reservations about the proposed levy.   
 
Cllr. P. Connor-Scarteen thanked Mr. Scannell and his team for the work that 
went into preparing the Scheme.  Overall the Scheme will be beneficial to the 
county in the context of the Town and Village Renewal Scheme, reductions for 
the redevelopment of vacant buildings etc.  It is accepted that funding is required 
to improve roads, footpaths etc.  Cllr. Connor-Scarteen highlighted that car 
parking is a major issue in Kenmare and Dingle and additional parking is 
required.  There is a co-funding requirement for amenity areas, parks, coastal 
protection works and greenways and funding must be identified for these works.  
It is not proposed to impose a levy on silo yards etc but only on roofed buildings.  
He welcomed the proposal to exempt buildings up to 250m² and he was 
confident that 95% of farms in South and East Kerry will be exempt from this 
levy.  In conclusion Cllr. Connor-Scarteen stated the Scheme is reasonable, fair 
and balanced. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney acknowledged the work that went into compiling one 
Development Contribution Scheme for the county where previously there were 
four Schemes.  At every meeting members are calling for funding for projects and 
hopefully this Scheme will provide that funding.  He supported the proposal to 
increase the flat rate to houses up to 180m² as this will result in a saving of 
€1,100.  Levies for industrial development should not be increased and he 
welcomed the proposed levy for wind farm developments as wind farms do not 
benefit the local community.  Cllr. Moloney also welcomed the proposed 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
16 of 26 
reduction in car parking levies and he asked that the new Municipal District 
Development Plans would be finalised as soon as possible.  In conclusion he 
asked if an applicant applies for retention will they be liable for the new levies.   
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae highlighted that members must represent the people who 
elected them and in his opinion certain aspects of the Scheme are unfair.  He 
asked if the utilities levy will apply to Irish Water and the laying of new water 
pipes.  Additional car parking is needed in Dingle and he suggested that a 2 hour 
parking limit would apply to on street parking.  He asked that the Area Engineer 
in Dingle would be asked to compile a report on parking in Dingle as many 
visitors find it difficult to get parking.  Mobile phone masts are not exempted 
development under the Scheme yet mobile phone coverage is bad in many parts 
of the county.  The flat rate for a house up to 125m² is too small and water and 
sewerage connections must also be paid.  If an applicant gets permission for a 
180m² dwelling and if they are lucky enough to be in a position to connect to 
public water and sewer it will cost them between €12,000 and €15,000 or 
alternatively they must sink a well and provide a septic tank.  Cork and Limerick 
do not charge levies on agricultural buildings and Clare allows an exemption on 
developments up to 800m².  Cllr. Healy-Rae emphasised that he was not in 
favour of being the first local authority to impose a levy on agricultural buildings.  
He then referred to the proposed levy on quarries and pointed out that Kerry 
County Council is buying stone in from Cork and Limerick.  Any levy on quarries 
will result in an increase in prices. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley welcomed the exemption for masts for broadband and the 
proposed levy for wind farm developments.  Listowel MD is saturated with wind 
turbines and he suggested that revenue collected in an MD should be ring fenced 
for that MD.  Cllr. Beasley agreed with the proposal that the flat rate for houses 
should be increased from 125m² to 180m².  There was no mention of car parking 
in Ballybunion and he asked that it would be included.   In the Listowel MD there 
has been a charge on agricultural buildings exceeding 600m² since 2011 and he 
asked if there was any scope to increase the exempted area. 
 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty acknowledged that the Executive have a difficulty raising funding 
but this is a national issue.  There was a 56% reduction in funding for roads 
during the recession and this funding has not been restored.  The decline in rural 
Ireland can be attributed to the lack of funding by the government.  Many 
windfarm developments have already been completed therefore it is unlikely 
there will be much income from the new wind farm development levy.  If levies 
are imposed on quarries it will result in an increase in cost for the person building 
a house, farming etc.  Farmers already pay LPT, water charges and for the 
collection of silage wrap among other charges.  The existing levy of €1,100 for a 
house is substantial but the biggest impediment for those wanting to build a 
home is the difficulty in securing permission and this must be addressed.  Cllr. 
Culloty supported the proposal to increase the house size from 125m² to 180m² 
and he asked that the current exemption for agricultural buildings would continue. 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
17 of 26 
 
Cllr. A. Thornton welcomed the exemption from the parking levy and she added 
that this was an impediment to the provision of additional accommodation in 
Listowel.  She moved a Notice of Motion in relation to damage to infrastructure 
during wind farm developments and she was advised there is no development 
levy funding available to repair local infrastructure.   Many wind farm 
developments have already taken place in North Kerry and the levies on this type 
of development should have been introduced prior to this development taking 
place.   Cllr. Thornton welcomed the proposal to exempt houses up to 180m² and 
she believed farm buildings should be exempt.  She declared that she is married 
to a farmer and she did not believe she had a conflict of interest as her aim was 
to revitalise rural areas.  It is reasonable to state that the people who kept towns 
and villages going during the recession were the farmers as they shop locally.   
Many young people have gone to agricultural college and with the abolition of 
quotas they must increase their farm size.  The proposed Scheme will be in place 
for 6 years and with farmers facing the uncertainty of BREXIT it is the wrong time 
to impose this levy on them.  In conclusion Cllr. Thornton commended the 
forward thinking new Scheme and added that she believed it can be balanced 
without imposing a levy on agricultural units. 
 
Cllr. N. Moriarty acknowledged the work that went into drafting the Scheme and 
also those who made submissions.  She believed the intention was to be fair and 
while she had no issue with levying charges on agricultural buildings she wanted 
to ensure that rural communities, towns and villages are more viable.  She did 
not believe an exemption would be critical for farmers but the key for farmers is 
increased prices for their produce. The criteria for grants are extraordinarily 
difficult to meet but Kerry County Council cannot change that.  Small businesses 
do not have access to grants.  Cllr. Moriarty called for a reduction in the cost of 
car parking and she did not agree that funding should be spent where it is raised 
but rather investment must take place where it is needed.  While she 
acknowledged that Killarney is the tourism capital of the county it is important that 
other areas are well maintained also.  It would be preferable to see an increase in 
the size of houses to be exempt from levies as it would be a stimulus to 
development.  According to the Coillte website they had earnings of €98.6m last 
year and it they are responsible for damage to local roads they should pay for 
repairs to them.  Irish Water reinstates roads following repairs to the water supply 
network but that is not practical with Coillte as the harvesting of forestry is 
ongoing.  In light of this she suggested that an annual contribution would be more 
appropriate and this funding should be spent on repairing roads over which the 
timber is being transported.  She called on Management to liaise with other local 
authorities on this issue. 
 
Cllr. M. Healy-Rae acknowledged the work of the Planning Department in 
compiling the Scheme which replaces 4 Schemes.  She asked what is the 
projected income from the new Scheme and will it be an increase on the previous 
Scheme.  Water and sewerage charges were set by the Council with justification 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
18 of 26 
for improvements to the infrastructure yet ⅓ of Castleisland is not sewered and 
there is no sewerage scheme in Scartaglin.  Cllr. Healy-Rae referred to the 
proposed levy on agricultural sheds and highlighted that many are on local roads 
and there is little or no funding for these roads.  She expressed concern that 
mobile phone masts are not exempt as coverage is poor around the county and 
needs to be improved.  In the village of Firies and Barraduff there is no mobile 
phone coverage.  In accordance with EU legislation pig farmers must increase 
the space per pig and now the Council is proposing to levy agricultural buildings.  
She PROPOSED that farm buildings up to 500m² would be exempt.  In 
conclusion Cllr. Healy-Rae outlined she was opposed to the levy for advertising 
signage as any business should be allowed to advertise. 
 
Cllr. P. Daly acknowledged there are some positive measures in the Scheme.  
He referred to car parking and highlighted that approx. half of the car park at 
Lewis Road is given over to bus companies.  He agreed that farmers should have 
to pay some charges but they are after a few very difficult years.  Cllr. Daly stated 
the exemption of 250m² is too low and he agreed if a mobile phone company 
wants to erect a mast they should have to pay a levy.  In conclusion he stated if 
provision is made for an exemption for houses it should only be for first time 
buyers. 
 
Cllr. S. Fitzgerald welcomed the report and added it will benefit rural Kerry.  He 
welcomed the proposed reductions and agreed with the exemption for houses up 
to 1800 sq ft.  It is only fair that all businesses would contribute as they all need 
and appreciate car parks when they are provided.  He thanked Management for 
sourcing land in Dingle for a car park.  Most grant schemes now require matching 
funding therefore it is important to be in a position to provide this funding.  Cllr. 
Fitzgerald declared that he is a farmer and while he would like to see the 
exemption for agricultural buildings increased from 250m² he must be 
responsible and for this reason he agreed with the proposal to exempt buildings 
up to 250m².  If a farmer submits a further application it will not be amalgamated 
with any previous application.   
 
Cllr. P. McCarthy complimented the Chief Executive, Mr. Scannell and Mr. Ginty 
for the time and effort that went into compiling the Scheme which is very positive.  
The proposed exemption for farm buildings up to 250m² is reasonable and should 
include in excess of 90% of buildings.  It would be very welcome if some of the 
income from the Scheme could be allocated for LIS and he did not agree that 
funding should be ring fenced for the area where it is raised.  Cllr. McCarthy 
asked if the flat rate for a house is increased from 125m² to 180m² what will the 
impact be on projected income. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady highlighted it is a reserved function to adopt a Development 
Contribution Scheme which will have a positive effect on young people building 
houses.  The present levies to connect to water and sewer are exorbitant.  Cllr. 
Grady asked that at lease half of the money collected in Killarney would be ring 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
19 of 26 
fenced for the town.  He pointed out that buses are a very important part of the 
tourism industry in Killarney and they must be facilitated.  He added that Clare 
County Council charges €15 per bus for parking.  Cllr. Grady stated the proposed 
levy on farm buildings is not fair to farmers and he called on the Executive to 
review this levy. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris highlighted this is one of the few powers left to local authorities 
where they can influence revenue.  She SECONDED Cllr. Cronin’s proposal that 
income from levies on houses would be ring fenced for the road infrastructure.  
Cllr. Ferris agreed with Cllr. Moriarty’s suggestion that management would 
collaborate with other local authorities in an effort to recover some of the cost of 
repairs to roads damaged by Coillte.  While the Council does not create 
employment it can introduce policies to encourage and facilitate the creation of 
employment.  She welcomed the provisions in the Scheme for car parking but 
expressed concern at the exemption provided for IDA supported companies as 
they are in receipt of other benefits also.  She asked why these companies 
should be exempted.  Cllr. Ferris referred to the proposed levy on wind farm 
developments and asked if provision is made for a community fund and that a 
percentage of energy would be gifted to the local community.  She PROPOSED 
that an annual contribution of between €5,000 and €10,000 would be gifted by 
wind farm companies to local communities. 
 
Cllr. R. Beasley SECONDED this proposal. 
 
Cllr. Ferris highlighted that a number of wind farms have already been developed 
but they may submit proposals for additional wind turbines and even though the 
original development pre-dates the proposed Scheme she PROPOSED such 
applications would be subject to this additional levy to ensure the local 
community benefits.  Cllr. Ferris added that the proposed levy for the retention of 
shop fronts appears to be excessive and she asked what is the justification for it.  
She referred to Page 13 of the Report and the section on Energy Infrastructure 
where it states the €10,000 per MW contribution will be split 30/70 between 
Roads & Transportation and Community & Amenity and she asked how it will be 
decided how the income from these levies will be spent.  Cllr. Ferris highlighted 
there appears to be a perception that agricultural buildings were exempt 
heretofore but a levy applied in Listowel with an exemption up to 600m².  She 
objected to a blanket exemption for any sector however, she believed food 
production is one of the driving forces in the county and she did not want to 
compromise that.  She would support the introduction of the levy provided small 
farmers are protected.  It costs between €216,000 and €288,000 to build the 
average house and an exemption from the levy of €1,100 could be the difference 
between being able to afford a kitchen or not.  In conclusion Cllr. Ferris stated 
she fully supported the proposal to have the flat charge applied to the average 
house size. 
 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
20 of 26 
Cllr. S. Locke welcomed the proposed changes in relation to levies on retail 
developments.  He supported Cllr. Cronin’s proposal that levies would not be 
applied to agricultural buildings for 2 years.  While the economy has improved in 
Dublin last Christmas he helped six families put food on their table and they were 
all farming families.  In his opinion the proposed levy on agricultural buildings 
cannot be justified.  He suggested that farm buildings would be exempted for 2 
years until a new Council is elected. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg agreed that the size of houses to which the flat rate applied should 
be increased to 180m².  He was not in favour of the proposed levy on agricultural 
buildings as farmers are already under enough pressure financially and he 
believed the exemption for farm buildings in the current Scheme should continue.  
75% to 80% of his constituents are farmers and the proposed levy could be the 
difference between selling off cattle if they cannot afford to house them.  He 
suggested that farming should be subsidised in the winter.  In 2014 the Sinn Féin 
Party outlined proposals to raise revenue but they were dismissed at that time.  
In conclusion Cllr. Quigg confirmed he could not support the Scheme as 
presented. 
 
Cllr. G. Spring welcomed the Draft Development Contribution Scheme which is 
encouraging.  Matching funding is required for many grant schemes and this 
Scheme will provide that matching funding.  He welcomed the exemption for 
masts used to provide broadband and added that working from home is on the 
increase.  He welcomed the proposed flat rate for houses and asked if it was 
increased to 180m² what impact it would have on income.  He welcomed the 
exemption for voluntary housing also.  Farming culture must be given credence 
and it is a very volatile industry.  He agreed that there should be no levy on the 
average agricultural development.   
 
The Chief Executive informed members that the Draft Scheme aims to send out a 
strong message that the county is pro development, open for business and aims 
to rejuvenate towns and villages.  It is not possible to omit some provisions of the 
Scheme as it has been prepared with a view to ensuring a certain income.  
Income will be reduced by each proposal made by members and if there is a 
substantial loss she would have to rebalance the levies.  Members must remain 
true to the integrity of the Scheme.  The aim of the Scheme is set out in the 
report which she outlined earlier in the meeting. It was important to eliminate 
charges for broadband infrastructure.  It is not possible to impose a levy on 
forestry and while Section 48 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 allows 
for the ring fencing of funding it must be for public infrastructure.  If matching 
funding is required for coastal erosion works it cannot be charged to one 
Municipal District and the same applies to greenways which will not benefit one 
MD only.  The proposed levy on quarries is reasonable and fair.  The proposed 
flat rate for houses up to 125m² reflects a substantial reduction especially for 
urban areas which are the target areas.  The aim is to stimulate the development 
of town houses rather than large houses and the proposed exemption is 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
21 of 26 
specifically targeted at that sector.  The proposal to increase this exemption to 
185m² would cost €2m over the lifetime of the Scheme and if that proposal is 
adopted there will be no Scheme.  Alternatively the Scheme will have to be 
rebalanced.  The proposal to increase the exemption for agricultural buildings to 
250m² will result in a loss of income of €75,000 per annum.   
 
Cllr. A. Thornton highlighted while the Scheme is very positive there are 
significant changes in some areas and she asked that members proposal in 
relation to farm buildings be permitted. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane acknowledged that some members have concerns regarding the 
proposed levies on agricultural buildings but the proposal to increase the 
exempted buildings size to 250m² will facilitate 90 to 95% of farmers.  He 
believed members would adopt the Scheme with this amendment if a 
commitment is given that the Council will focus on improving rural roads. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin expressed surprise that funding cannot be ring fenced for LIS as 
members set aside funding for the Community Support Fund which is of huge 
benefit.  He requested clarification between the Community Support Fund and his 
proposal in relation to the LIS. 
 
In response the Chief Executive stated Section 48 refers to public infrastructure 
only.  The Development Levy Scheme has been audited on a number of 
occasions and while some local authorities ran into difficult Kerry did not because 
the income was spent on public infrastructure. 
 
Mr. M. Scannell noted that any third party could challenge a decision or condition 
imposed by the planning authority.  Any contribution to LIS from the Development 
Levy Scheme would put the decision of the local authority and the application of 
the Scheme into question. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin highlighted that he proposed that the agricultural sector would be 
exempt from levies and this proposal was seconded.  He called for a vote to be 
taken on his proposal. 
 
Mr. M. Scannell highlighted that a proposal was made that any agricultural 
building up to 250m² would be exempt and if an application is submitted for a 
building that is 300m² then only 50m² will be subject to the levy. 
 
Cllr. D. Quigg referred to the clarification in relation to funding for LIS and pointed 
out that the way round this is to take some of the roads into public ownership. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy asked how many farm buildings were built in the past 3 years.  
If agricultural buildings will not be exempt under the Scheme he would stand by 
his proposal that the Scheme be rejected. 
 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
22 of 26 
Cllr. J.J. Culloty PROPOSED that the levy on wind turbines would be increased 
from €10,000 to €20,000 per MW.   
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae advised that it was stated a 250m² agricultural building is a 6 
bay shed but that is not correct.  In accordance with new EU legislation the 
amount of space now required for a sow must be increased and piggeries are 
owned mostly by co-operatives who employ people.  If the application is subject 
to a levy it will be very expensive. 
 
Suspension of Standing Orders 
The Cathaoirleach indicated it was 1.30pm and it would be necessary to suspend 
Standing Orders. 
 
On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. P. McCarthy, SECONDED by Cllr. J. Finucane it was 
agreed to suspend Standing Orders to allow the meeting to continue. 
 
(a) 
Chief Executive’s Report on submissions received on the draft 
Development Contribution Scheme (Cont’d) 
 
Cllr. T. McEllistrim stated he was opposed to the proposed levy on agricultural 
buildings. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley requested clarification on the proposed levy for a house and asked 
if the cost for a house under 150m² is at a reduced rate. 
 
The Chief Executive clarified that the breakeven point is at 150m² and any house 
smaller than this will be liable for reduced levies. 
 
Mr. M. Scannell referred to Cllr. Culloty’s proposal and clarified that the proposed 
increase in the charge for wind turbines is 10 fold and anything beyond that 
would be deemed to be unreasonable. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris referred to existing permissions for renewable energy development 
and asked if an application for additional turbines is submitted will that application 
be subject to the new Scheme. 
 
Mr. Scannell confirmed that any such application would be subject to the levies in 
the new Scheme. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris asked if it is legally permissible that any applications for renewals of 
wind farm developments would incur additional charges. 
 
Mr. Scannell clarified it would not stand up to legal challenge. 
 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
23 of 26 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn stated if the proposal to increase the exempted house size to 
185m² was not permitted he could not support the Scheme as the Council should 
be encouraging people to build houses. 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae asked if the proposed levy of €1,000 per km will apply to water 
pipes. 
 
Mr. Scannell clarified that levy would not apply to water pipes.  He briefed the 
meeting on existing development levies for houses in place by a number of local 
authorities all of which are more expensive than Kerry.  The proposal in the 
Scheme that a house up to 125m² would be exempt is a strong development 
proposal.  The amendment proposed would have a significant impact on the 
income from the Scheme and would undermine both the Scheme and Kerry 
County Council’s capability to deliver projects.  The aim of the Scheme is to 
realise an income of €11m and any proposal to reduce that by €2m would 
seriously undermine our ability to deliver projects.  Mr. Scannell again highlighted 
that he believed the Scheme is reasonable in terms of residential development. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin asked if some leeway could be given for first time builders. 
 
Mr. Scannell advised that legally it would not be acceptable to categorise people. 
 
The Chief Executive highlighted that the proposal to have a flat rate for houses 
up to 125m² is a significant proposal. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue pointed out that a number of proposals were made but the 
two substantive proposals were from Cllr. Finucane that agricultural 
developments up to 250m² be exempt and the second was from Cllr. Cronin that 
the current exemption for agricultural development would continue. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy stated he proposed if agricultural buildings are not exempt he 
could not support the Scheme. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady asked what impact Cllr. Finucane’s proposal would have on 
income from development levies. 
 
The Chief Executive clarified that it would cost €75,000 per annum or €450,000 
over the lifetime of the Scheme.   Any further reductions would have a serious 
impact on the Council’s ability to deliver projects. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris asked how much development levies are outstanding over the past 
5 years. 
 
The Chief Executive advised members that €1.8m was collected in development 
levies in 2016. 
 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
24 of 26 
Ms. B. Conway, A/Meetings Administrator informed members that a vote would 
first be taken on Cllr. J. Finucane’s proposal that agricultural buildings up to 
250m² be exempt from development levies. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley asked if a vote would be taken on both amendments. 
 
Mr. O’Donoghue clarified that this depends on the outcome of the vote on Cllr. 
Finucane’s proposal.  If that proposal is defeated there would be a vote on Cllr. 
Cronin’s proposal. 
 
Cllr. N. Kelleher asked if Cllr. Finucane’s proposal is adopted is the Scheme then 
adopted. 
 
Mr. O’Donoghue highlighted that firstly a vote would be taken to modify the 
Scheme and a separate vote would be taken to adopt the Scheme. 
 
The vote on Cllr. Finucane’s proposal that any agricultural development up to 
250m would be exempt from development levies resulted as follows: 
 
For: 
Cllrs. Beasley, Cahill, Connor-Scarteen, Finucane, Fitzgerald, 
Grady, P. McCarthy, Moloney, Moriarty, Nolan, O’Brien, O’Connell, 
O’Shea, Spring, Sheahan (15) 
 
Against: 
Cllrs. Cronin, Culloty, Daly, Ferris, Flynn, Foley, J. Healy-Rae, M. 
Healy-Rae, Kelleher, Locke, D. McCarthy, McEllistrim, Quigg, 
Thornton (14) 
 
Not Voting: None (0) 
 
Absent: 
Cllrs. Gleeson, Kennelly, Lucid, Purtill (4) 
 
The Cathaoirleach declared the proposal CARRIED. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue clarified that a vote would then be taken on the adoption of 
the Scheme subject to the modification just adopted. 
 
The Chief Executive again highlighted that to increase the size of house to be 
exempt from development levies from 125m² to 185m² would cost €2m and if this 
proposal was adopted there would not be a Scheme. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris stated as one of the councillors in favour of this proposal given the 
stark reality of what the Chief Executive outlined members would do a greater 
service to adopt the Scheme to ensure matching funding for coastal protection 
works etc. is available. 
 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
25 of 26 
Cllr. J.F. Flynn asked if the house size to be exempted could be increased from 
125m² to 185m² in rural areas only. 
 
Cllr. Kelleher asked if the proposal was reduced to 1750 ft² how much would it 
cost. 
 
The Chief Executive advised it would cost €270,000 and a further €450,000 has 
already been taken from proposed income from the Scheme.  This would be 
unrealistic and the proposed Scheme is very fair. 
 
17.07.25.01(b) 
Making of the Development Contribution Scheme 
 
On the basis that there is a reduction in the levies for a house up to 150m² in the 
new Scheme Cllr. Finucane PROPOSED that the Development Contribution 
Scheme as amended be adopted in accordance with Section 48 of the Planning 
and Development Acts 2000 – 2016. 
 
Cllr. T. O’Brien SECONDED this proposal. 
 
A vote was taken on this proposal which resulted as follows: 
 
For: 
Cllrs. Beasley, Connor-Scarteen, Culloty, Daly, Ferris, Finucane, 
Fitzgerald, Foley, Grady, P. McCarthy, Moloney, Nolan, O’Brien, 
O’Connell, O’Shea, Spring, Thornton, Sheahan (18) 
 
Against: 
Cllrs. Cahill, Cronin, Flynn, J. Healy-Rae, M. Healy-Rae, Kelleher, 
Locke, D. McCarthy, McEllistrim, Moriarty, Quigg (11) 
 
Not Voting: None (0) 
 
Absent: 
Cllrs. Gleeson, Kennelly, Lucid, Purtill (4) 
 
The Cathaoirleach declared the proposal CARRIED. 
 
Mr. M. O’Donoghue advised members that the reference in the Scheme to Roads 
and Infrastructure should read Roads and Transport.  The reference to 
cemeteries was to be included in Community and Amenity Infrastructure Projects. 
 
Meeting with Minister Kevin Boxer Moran 
 
The Cathaoirleach informed members that the Minister of State at the 
Department of Public Expenditure and Reform with special responsibility for the 
Office of Public Works and Flood Relief, Kevin Boxer Moran TD will be in Kerry 
on Thursday 27th July and he has agreed to a brief meeting with representatives 
of Kerry County Council from 11am to 11.30am.  The meeting will be attended by 
himself and the extended CPG along with the Chief Executive and officials. 

Special Meeting re Development Contribution Scheme 
25th July 2017  
26 of 26 
 
Cllr. M. Cahill expressed his disappointment that he would not be permitted to 
attend the meeting with Minister Moran despite the fact that he is a member for 
28 years and Rossbeigh has been prone to flooding.  He wrote to the Minister 
inviting him to the county and all members should be entitled to meet him.  He 
asked that the Minister would be requested to meet with all members. 
 
The Chief Executive undertook to contact the Minister’s Office.  She pointed out 
that the Minister’s visit to Kerry is as a result of an invitation from Deputy Healy-
Rae. 
 
The meeting concluded at 2.15pm. 
 
 
Liam Quinlan                                       _________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator                      Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
