Special Meeting 23rd October 2017 
 
1 
 
These Minutes are edited for Data Protection purposes because in effect 
putting them on the Internet is publishing them.  An unedited paper copy is 
available on request. 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ NA CRUINNITHE SPEICIALTA DE COMHAIRLE CONTAE 
CHIARRAÍ A THIONÓLADH I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, ÁRAS AN  
CHONTAE, TRÁ  LÍ, AR  AN  LUAN , 23 DEIREADH FÓMHAIR, 2017 
 
MINUTES OF THE SPECIAL MEETING OF KERRY COUNTY COUNCIL HELD 
IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, TRALEE ON MONDAY, 
23RD OCTOBER, 2017 
 
PRESENT/I LÁTHAIR 
 
Councillors/Comhairleoirí 
T. Barry 
M. Cahill 
P Connor-Scarteen         
B. Cronin 
J.J. Culloty 
P. Daly 
 
         
T. Ferris                             J. Finucane                       S. Fitzgerald  
       
J.F. Flynn 
N. Foley 
M. Gleeson  
         
D. Grady 
J. Healy-Rae 
N. Kelleher  
        
M. Kennelly 
S. Locke 
J. Lucid 
 
        
D. McCarthy 
P. McCarthy 
T. McEllistrim 
        
J. Moloney 
N. Moriarty 
T. O’Brien 
                   
B. O’Connell                      L. Purtill 
D. Quigg 
 
        
J. Sheahan 
G. Spring 
A. Thornton 
 
APOLOGY/LEATH SCÉAL 
R. Beasley 
 
 
IN ATTENDANCE/I LÁTHAIR 
Ms. M. Murrell, Chief Executive    
  Mr. J. Breen, Director Water Services             
Ms. A. McAllen, Head of Finance 
  Mr. M. Scannell, A/Dir. Job Cr/Sust. ED          
Mr. M. O’Donoghue, A/Dir.H.&Corp.S.   Mr. C. O’Sullivan, Director of Operations          
Mr. L. Quinlan, Meetings Administrator Ms. B. Conway, AO Corporate Support           
Mr. O. O’Shea, Press & Comm. Officer  Ms. B. Reidy, SSO Corporate Support             
Ms. O. O’Shea, CO Corporate Support  
 
 
The meeting commenced at 1.40pm. 
 
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. J. Sheahan took the Chair. 
 
17.10.23.01 Filling of Casual Vacancy following the resignation of Dianne 
Nolan 
 
Cllr. P. Daly PROPOSED that Mr. Tom Barry be co-opted to fill the casual 
vacancy following the resignation of Dianne Nolan.  He introduced Tom as a 

Special Meeting 23rd October 2017 
 
2 
 
former Mayor of Listowel and a strong union member and advised he will be a 
fine addition to Kerry County Council. 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris SECONDED this proposal and added that Mr. Barry will be an    
excellent public representative and he is always available to those in need. 
 
As there were no other nominations the Cathaoirleach declared Mr. Barry to be 
co-opted to Kerry County Council to replace Dianne Nolan. 
 
Cllr. Barry then took his seat. 
 
Cllr. T. Barry thanked his proposer and seconder for their kind words and added 
that he was looking forward to working with councillors, management and staff.  
He acknowledged the work of former councillor Dianne Nolan for the Sinn Féin 
party and the people of North Kerry and he added that she had been a 
tremendous help to him over the past few weeks.  He wished her well in her new 
role.  It was a proud day for his family and he thanked them for their support and 
he pledged to do them and the Sinn Féin party proud. 
 
On behalf of the Fianna Fáil party Cllr. N. Kelleher congratulated Cllr. Barry on 
his co-option and wished him well for the future.  He represented Listowel with 
great distinction in the past and he looked forward to working with him.  Cllr. 
Kelleher also acknowledged the excellent work of Dianne Nolan who was 
extremely diligent and he acknowledged her excellent contribution to her 
constituents and to Kerry County Council and he wished her well in her new 
career. 
 
Cllr. D. Grady acknowledged the work of Dianne Nolan who was very capable 
and he wished her well for the future.  He also welcomed Cllr. Barry to the 
Chamber and wished him well for the future. 
 
On behalf of the Fine Gael party Cllr. J. Finucane welcomed Cllr. Barry to the 
Chamber and added that members are aware of his contribution to Listowel 
Town Council and the people of Listowel.  He wished Dianne Nolan every 
success and added that she made a positive contribution both in the Council 
Chamber and at SPC meetings.     
 
On his own behalf and on behalf of Cllr. Spring, Cllr. T. O’Brien extended a warm 
welcome to Cllr. Barry and added that they looked forward to working with him.  
He also commended Dianne Nolan who was very well researched and did her 
best for her constituents. 
 
Cllr. D. McCarthy wished Dianne Nolan success in her new role in Kilkenny and 
he welcomed Cllr. Barry to Kerry County Council and wished him the best for the 
future. 
 

Special Meeting 23rd October 2017 
 
3 
 
Cllr. J. Healy-Rae advised he wished to be associated with the tributes to Dianne 
Nolan and referred to her intelligence.  He wished her well for the future.  He also 
wished Cllr. Barry well in his role. 
 
Cllr. B. Cronin congratulated Cllr. Barry on his co-option and welcomed him to 
Kerry County Council.  His experience on Listowel Town Council will be very 
beneficial to him.  Cllr. Cronin also wished Dianne Nolan, who was articulate and 
made contributions which mattered, every success for the future. 
 
Cllr. S. Locke stated he wanted to be associated with the tributes to Dianne 
Nolan who was very articulate and never confrontational yet she was able to get 
her point across distinctly.  Cllr. Locke wished Cllr. Barry the best for the future. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson welcomed Cllr. Barry to Kerry County Council and added that he 
was confident he would work with all members for the betterment of the county. 
 
Cllr. M. Kennelly welcomed Cllr. Barry to Kerry County Council and he wished 
him well for the future.  He also paid tribute to Dianne Nolan for her work on 
Kerry County Council on behalf of her constituents and he wished her well for the 
future. 
 
Cllr. J. Moloney welcomed Cllr. Barry to the Chamber and added they worked 
well together on Listowel Town Council in the past.  He had no doubt that they 
would continue to work together for the betterment of the people of North Kerry.  
He also paid tribute to Dianne Nolan for her work on Kerry County Council. 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed Cllr. Barry to the Chamber and wished him every 
success.  He also wished Dianne Nolan well for the future. 
 
On behalf of Management and staff the Chief Executive wished Cllr. Barry well 
and added that she looked forward to working with him.  She also wished Dianne 
Nolan well for the future. 
 
17.10.23.02 Filling of Casual Vacancies on Boards/Committees 
 
(a) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. N. Foley, SECONDED by Cllr. P. Daly it was 
agreed to nominate Cllr. N. Kelleher to Kerry Education and Training 
Board to replace Dianne Nolan. 
 
(b) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. P. Daly, SECONDED by Cllr. T. Ferris it was 
agreed to nominate Cllr. T. Barry to the JPC to replace Dianne Nolan. 
 
(c) On the PROPOSAL of Cllr. T. Ferris, SECONDED by Cllr. N. Foley it was 
agreed to nominate Cllr. T. Barry to the Economic Development and 
Enterprise SPC to replace Dianne Nolan. 
 

Special Meeting 23rd October 2017 
 
4 
 
Cllr. T. Ferris asked that Dianne Nolan would be invited to the December Council 
Meeting so that members could pay tribute to her.  She also asked that a 
minute’s silence would be observed in memory of the late (Name withheld for 
data protection purposes.  A paper copy of the unedited minutes is available on 
request) who was died on the street in Tralee the previous day.  Cllr. Ferris 
congratulated the Chief Executive and Director of Operations on their trojan work 
during the two storms over the past week. 
 
The Cathaoirleach commended all the services involved during storm Ophelia the 
previous Monday.  The previous weekend he attended the Kerry London 
Association Annual Dinner which was very successful.  While there he visited 
Danny Tim O’Sullivan in hospital, who is in good form and he hopes to be 
allowed home for Christmas.  The Cathaoirleach referred to the deferred October 
Council meeting which was scheduled to be held the day storm Ophelia hit 
Ireland and as a result it had to be postponed.  He asked members to agree a 
revised date for the October meeting. 
 
Cllr. M. Gleeson suggested that the October meeting should be combined with 
the November meeting. 
 
Cllr. J. Finucane highlighted that a number of meetings are scheduled to be held 
over the coming weeks including the Budget meeting and for this reason he 
PROPOSED that the October meeting would be held in conjunction with the 
November meeting. 
 
Cllr. N. Foley SECONDED this proposal and it was unanimously agreed. 
 
A discussion then took place on the number of Notices of Motions each member 
would be permitted for the November meeting having regard to the cancelled 
October Council meeting and the number of Notices of Motions outstanding.  On 
the PROPOSAL of Cllr. D. Quigg, SECONDED by Cllr. B. Cronin it was agreed 
that members would be permitted one additional motion only for the November 
meeting and it was further agreed that only the proposer of a motion would be 
permitted to speak. 
 
A minute’s silence was then observed in memory of the late Michael Rice. 
 
 
The meeting concluded at 2.05pm. 
 
 
 
Liam Quinlan                                       _________________________________ 
Meetings Administrator                      Cathaoirleach of Kerry County Council 
 
 

Special Meeting 23rd October 2017 
 
5 
 
 
