1 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ AR AN GCRUINNIÚ IOMLÁNACH DE CHUID 
CHOMHAIRLE CONTAE CHILL CHAINNIGH TIONÓLTA AR AN LUAN, 
15 NOLLAIG 2025 AG 3.00 I.N. I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, 
HALLA AN CHONTAE & VIA FOIRNE MS 
 
MINUTES OF PLENARY MEETING OF KILKENNY COUNTY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY, 15TH DECEMBER, 2025 AT 3.00 P.M. IN THE COUNCIL 
CHAMBER, COUNTY HALL & VIA MS TEAMS 
 
 
Chair:  
 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh. 
 
Elected Members: 
Council Chamber 
Cllrs. Tomás Breathnach, John Brennan, Jenny Catt Slattery, John Coonan, 
Fidelis Doherty, Maria Dollard, Patrick Dunphy, David Fitzgerald, Pat 
Fitzpatrick, Ger Frisby, Joe Malone, Michael McCarthy, Andrew McGuinness, 
Eugene McGuinness, Seán Ó hArgáin, Joe Sheridan and Michael Shortall. 
 
MS Teams 
Cllrs. Brian Cleere, Deirdre Cullen, Stephanie Doheny, Michael Doyle. 
 
Officials: 
 
Lar Power, Tim Butler, Martin Prendiville, Fiona Deegan, Ian Gardner, Seamus 
Kavanagh, Denis Malone, Margo Hayes & Brenda Kelly. 
 
Apologies: 
 
Michael Delaney. 
 
 
Fógraí - Announcements 
 
Cathaoirleach Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh congratulated Cllr. John Brennan on reaching the milestone 
birthday of 70 years old and on making a full recovery to good health. 
 
Cllr. David Fitzgerald also paid tribute to Cllr. John Brennan praising his wife Catherine for her quick 
action that helped save his life. He emphasised the importance of people acting immediately if they 
notice any changes in someone’s health or behaviour. 
 
Cllr. John Brennan thanked the Elected Members for their good wishes as this time last year he was 
fighting for his life and he is now back among friends doing what he loves. 
 
The Cathaoirleach also congratulated Muckalee Ladies Football who won their first ever All Ireland 
Junior Football for Kilkenny and advised that a Reception will be held in the New Year to celebrate 
their success. 
 
Cllrs. Pat Fitzpatrick, David Fitzgerald and Seán Ó hArgáin were also associated with congratulating 
the Ladies Gaelic Football in Kilkenny stating that it was a huge achievement and a proud day for a 
small Club in North Kilkenny  
 
Cllr. Joe Sheridan passed on congratulations to Danesfort Hurling Club on winning the Intermediate 
Leinster Final and the official opening of their Club House. 
 
 
Vótaí Comhbhrón - Votes of Sympathy 
 
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh extended vote of sympathy to the following: 
 
▪ 
Anne Moylan, mother of Patrick Moylan, Castlecomer Municipal District. 
▪ 
Padraig Cullen, brother of Stan Cullen, Senior Engineer, Kilkenny Municipal District. 
 
Cllrs. Andrew McGuinness, David Fitzgerald and Seán Ó hArgáin were associated with the 
sympathies in particular to Stan Cullen on the passing of his brother and to all families who have lost 
loved ones. 
 
 

2 
 
 
1. 
Dearbhú Miontuairiscí  -  Confirmation of Minutes 
 
(i) 
Miontuairiscí ar Chruinniú Plé ar an Samhain - Minutes of November Plenary Meeting 
Proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Fidelis Doherty and agreed: 
 
“That Minutes of Plenary Meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on Monday, 17th 
November, 2025 as circulated with the Agenda be and are hereby approved”. 
 
(ii) 
Miontuairiscí ar Chruinniú SPC 2 - Minutes of SPC 2 Meeting 
Proposed by Cllr. John Coonan seconded by Cllr. Maurice Shortall and agreed: 
 
“That Minutes of SPC 2: Transportation/Mobility Management and Infrastructure 
Meeting held on Friday, 5th September, 2025  as circulated with the Agenda be and are 
hereby approved”. 
 
2. 
(a) 
Tithíocht & Díuscairt Eile  -  Housing & Other Disposal 
 
(i) 
It was proposed by Cllr. John Brennan, seconded by Cllr. David Fitzgerald and 
agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, to dispose 
of its interest in a plot of ground at the rear of 10 Chatsworth, Clogh, Castlecomer, Co. 
Kilkenny measuring circa 430 sq m (as identified on map) to John and Mary Lawlor, 
10a Chatsworth, Clogh, Castlecomer, Co. Kilkenny for the nominal sum of ten euro 
(€10) with Mr. and Mrs. Lawlor responsible for all legal costs associated with the sale.  
The Consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not 
required.” 
 
(ii) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. John Coonan 
and agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, to dispose 
of its interest in a small plot of ground at Kilbride Glebe, Callan identified as Plan No 
10 on Folio KK36844F measuring circa 404 sq m (as identified on map) to Majella 
Doheny, Monamought, Callan, Co. Kilkenny (as the Legal Personal Representative of 
the late Patrick Delaney) for the nominal sum of ten euro (€10) with Majella Doheny 
responsible for all legal costs associated with the sale. The Consent of the Minister for 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not required.” 
 
(iii) 
It was proposed by Cllr. John Brennan, seconded by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness 
and agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, to dispose 
of its interest in a small portion of land at 30 Chatsworth, Clogh, Castlecomer, Co. 
Kilkenny measuring circa 410 sq m – as identified on map - to Damien O’Neill, 30 
Chatsworth, Clogh, Castlecomer, Co. Kilkenny for the nominal sum of ten euro (€10) 
with Mr. O’Neill responsible for all legal costs associated with the sale. The Consent of 
the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not required”. 
 
2. 
(b) 
Pleanail - Planning 
 
(i) 
Tuarascáil an Phríomhoifigigh Feidhmiúcháin ar Athrú Plean Fráma Bhealaigh 
Ferrybank Belview 6 
Chief Executive’s Report on Ferrybank Belview Framework Plan Variation 6 
 
Mr. Denis Malone provided an update and gave an overview on the following: 
 
▪ 
Formal stage of Public Consultation commenced with notices in July 2025. 
▪ 
Workshop held on 30th July at Abbey Community College with over 40 
attendees. 
▪ 
77 submissions received from statutory bodies, community groups, 
businesses, and residents. 
▪ 
Key themes: transport safety, zoning strategy, flood resilience, and 
community infrastructure. 

3 
 
 
▪ 
School safety concerns at St. Mary’s Boys National School - calls for set-
down areas and parking. 
▪ 
Traffic Management: speed limit reviews, junction redesigns, pedestrian 
safety. 
▪ 
Greenway Access: support for connectivity with concerns on anti-social 
behaviour. 
▪ 
Public Transport: bus layover facilities; freight corridor protection; HGV 
restrictions sought. 
▪ 
Requests for additional housing lands (Abbey Meadows, Christendom, Mount Sion). 
▪ 
Port and industry seek strategic landbanks for expansion and energy 
infrastructure. 
▪ 
Conflicting views on Amenity and Industrial Use e.g. Glasshouse Park. 
▪ 
Need for Flood Zone Overlays and Stage 3 Assessments. 
▪ 
Support for SuDS and nature-based drainage solutions. 
▪ 
Calls for stronger climate adaptation measures and Blue-Green 
Infrastructure. 
▪ 
Strong support for Community Hub in Ferrybank Shopping Centre. 
▪ 
Education: clarity sought on school co-location and SEN provision. 
▪ 
Heritage & Amenity: support for conservation; mixed views on park 
proposals. 
▪ 
Section 28 Guidelines require additional 23.6 ha for housing growth. 
 
Cllr. Pat Dunphy asked if it was possible to make changes to the Plan and if it 
would be going back out for public consultation as some residents may have 
missed the planning notices and might not have been aware of it.  He suggested 
that lands within the Golf Club would revert back to Strategic reserve zoning 
as per 2017 LAP as opposed to open space proposed by the draft Plan and there 
should be an opportunity for people to make submissions on it. 
 
Mr. Denis Malone advised that if Members were proposing that this section be 
left as strategic reserve that the Chief Executive’s Report should be adopted and 
the change published as a material alteration to include the change to Strategic 
Reserve.  If the matter goes back on public display, the only decision at the next 
stage will be whether the amendments remain or are removed.  
 
Cllr. Fidelis Doherty asked that a solution be sought for the car park. 
 
Mr. Tim Butler, Director of Services advised that a formal proposer and 
seconder would be required to make the amendment. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Dunphy, seconded by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach and 
agreed to amend resolution as follows: 
 
“We, the Members of Kilkenny County Council, having considered the proposal to make 
Variation 6 to the Kilkenny City & County Development Plan 2021 under Section 13 
of the Planning & Development Act 2000 as amended, and having considered the Chief 
Executive’s Report as circulated on the 9th December, prepared in accordance with 
Section 13 (4) of the above Acts, the recommendations as set out in the Chief Executive’s 
Report, and with our decision made at a meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on 
the 15th December, 2025, do hereby resolve to prepare material alterations as 
recommended in the Chief Executive’s Report with the addition of the following Lands 
at the Golf Club zoned strategic reserve in the 2017 LAP to revert back to strategic 
reserve as opposed to proposed open space zoning.  Material Alterations to Proposed 
Variation 6 should be published for 4 weeks for public consultation in accordance with 
Section 13(5) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 to proposed Variation No 6. 
Prior to that publication, determinations shall be made regarding requirements for 
either a strategic environmental assessment or appropriate assessment or both such 
assessments, as the case may be”. 
 

4 
 
 
(ii) 
Aip Bonneagar Straitéiseach chun Léasuithe Chalafort a Fhairsingiú 
Strategic Infrastructure Application to Extend Port Facilities 
 
Mr. Tim Butler, Director of Services advised that Mr. Denis Malone, Senior 
Planner would present and summarise the Strategic Infrastructure Application 
to extend Belview Port.  He advised that a decision has to be made by An 
Coimisiún Pleanála and any comments of Elected Members  will form part of 
the Chief Executive’s Report to be sent for consideration. 
 
Mr. Denis Malone provided an update and gave an overview on the following: 
 
▪ 
Application process and deadlines. 
▪ 
Extension of Port Facilities at Belview Port to support Offshore Renewable 
Energy 
▪ 
National Policy - supported by national marine planning hierarchy. 
▪ 
Development aligns with national, regional, and local policy. 
▪ 
Significant benefits outweigh impacts. 
▪ 
Construction of Environmental Management Plan would be important 
considering location.  
▪ 
Traffic Management Plan 
▪ 
Consultation with Area Engineer. 
▪ 
Safeguarding of protected structures. 
▪ 
An Coimisiún Pleanala should grant permission subject to mitigation 
measures in EIAR and NIS. 
▪ 
The Board may grant permission, even if materially contravening 
Development Plan, seek further information, or refuse permission. 
▪ 
Case to be decided by Decision expected by 23rd June, 2026. 
 
Contributions were received from Elected Members as follows: 
 
Cllr. David Fitzgerald 
 
Cllr. Fitzgerald commented that this is a hugely significant proposal and it is 
remarkable that Kilkenny has a Port.  Offshore wind energy doesn’t have the 
numerous challenges that we have encountered with onland wind energy and 
this represents a highly positive development for Kilkenny, the South East and 
the country as a whole. 
 
He queried whether this initiative puts Kilkenny in competition with Rosslare 
Port or if it forms part of a broader strategy to develop infrastructure that 
supports the nationwide rollout of renewable energy solutions. 
 
Cllr. Tomás Breathnach 
 
Cllr. Tomás Breathnach stated that he broadly supported the extension and 
asked about the level of public consultation that occurred previously and asked 
if further consultation would be emanating from An Coimisiún Pleanála. 
 
He questioned the heritage of the site, i.e. the Glass Houses and Gorteens Old 
Mill and asked that An Coimisiún Pleanála include a condition in relation to 
protected structures and how they will be maintained going forward. 
 
Cllr. Fidelis Doherty 
 
Cllr. Doherty highlighted the historic significance of the Port, noting that 
Kilkenny’s access to the sea originated from a tradition whereby every diocesan 
Bishop was required to have a route to the sea to enable them to depart from 
the area if necessary. 
 
 

5 
 
 
Cllr. Maria Dollard 
 
Cllr. Dollard noted the importance of the Report as it outlines a very important 
development for Kilkenny and how it has the potential to be a fantastic asset 
for Kilkenny and the South East region.  She asked that An Coimisiún Pleanála 
would clarify how they intend to ensure proper oversight so that all conditions 
set out in the Planning Application are fully adhered to as this would prevent 
many potential issues. 
 
She also mentioned the heritage aspect of the site and the suggestions for 
repurposing the Glass House and Gorteens Old Mill.  She said that it is vital 
that they are protected and not allowed to fall into further disrepair and asked 
for confirmation that this will be prioritised. 
 
Cllr. Ger Frisby 
 
Cllr. Frisby welcomed the project stating that it was a cleaner and more 
practical solution compared to onshore wind farms.  He emphasised the 
importance of adhering to all conditions during the construction phase and for 
effective oversight and enforcement to avoid past mistakes that left 
communities feeling disenfranchised. 
 
He highlighted current concerns related to the Environmental Impact Study 
where issues such as wells running dry have arisen.  He stressed the need to 
address these risks and ensure robust plans and procedures are implemented 
to prevent similar problems. 
 
He also raised the importance of traffic and road management during the 
construction phase, suggesting that upgrades to the road network may be 
necessary to mitigate impacts on local traffic and residents.  He reiterated his 
overall support for the development, noting the significant benefits it will bring 
to local businesses and hospitality provided that regulations are adhered to and 
that it is policed properly to prevent problems. 
 
Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin 
 
Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin raised the issue of railings on site noting that when CIE 
shut down its freight operations in the 1980/90’s it resulted in a loss of access 
for timber processing which led to a significant shift of timber freight from rail 
to road causing major environmental impacts both nationally and in Kilkenny.  
He asked what the current situation is regarding the rail connection for this 
development and if it has been addressed or impacted within the report. 
 
Cllr. Pat Dunphy 
 
Cllr. Dunphy broadly supported the project and sought an update on the 
progress of the infrastructure and how it would be delivered onsite.  He 
emphasised his preference for offshore infrastructure stating that it is more 
suitable than onshore alternatives. He also requested clarification on how the 
infrastructure will be integrated and whether it will have any impact on the 
existing Power Station. 
 
Cllr. Jenny Catt Slattery 
 
Cllr. Catt Slattery asked about the impact it will have on local residents in terms 
of roads and traffic given the challenges they have already experienced.  She 
asked for confirmation that proper measures will be put in place to address 
these concerns effectively. 
 
 

6 
 
 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh 
 
Cllr Mary Hilda Cavanagh Cathaoirleach asked about who would have 
oversight of it the process. 
 
Mr. Denis Malone responded to the queries raised by the Elected Members 
stating that the An Coimisiún Pleanála will assess the application and will be 
responsible for all decisions regarding environmental impact.  The enforcement 
of conditions will ultimately fall to the Council. Therefore, it is essential that 
any conditions set by the Board are reasonable, appropriate and clearly worded 
to ensure they can be implemented effectively and without delay. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr David Fitzgerald, seconded by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach: 
 
“that Kilkenny County Council support the Chief Executive’s Report and that the 
Elected Members request An Coimisiún Pleanála to support the development in its 
entirety as proposed.” 
 
Members all agreed.  There was no Member dissenting in relation to this 
resolution. 
 
(iii) 
Glacadh i gCúram/Taking in Charge: Estate (TIC 183) Hillview, Bennettsbridge 
It was proposed by Cllr. Deirdre Cullen, seconded by Cllr. Michael Doyle and 
agreed that: 
 
“That the County Council of the County of Kilkenny, in exercise of the powers conferred 
on them by Section 11 of the Roads Act,1993 and in compliance with Section 180 of the 
Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended by Section 59 of the Planning & 
Development Act 2010, hereby declares the road listed in the Public Notice and listed 
below, to be a Public Road.” 
 
ESTATE: 
TIC 183 
Hillview, Bennettsbridge, Co. Kilkenny 
 
 
(c) 
Airgeadas  - Finance 
 
(i) 
Ceadaíodh Ais Léasa - Approval of Leasing Facility 
 
Mr. Martin Prendiville advised the meeting that a leasing facility of €1m is 
being requested 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr .Eugene McGuinness 
and agreed that: 
 
“We, the Members of Kilkenny County Council do hereby approve the terms and 
conditions applicable to the leasing facility in the amount of  €1,000,000.00 (the 
“Facility”) made available by Allied Irish Banks, p.l.c. trading as AIB Finance & 
Leasing (the “Bank”) to the Council under the Offer Letter dated 5th September 2025.  
 
That each of Lar Power, being the Chief Executive of the Council and Martin 
Prendiville, being the Head of Finance of the Council, are hereby authorised to sign the 
Offer Letter jointly on behalf of the Council and such other authorities, documents and 
instructions that the Bank may require to be signed by the Council in connection with 
the Facility.”  
 
 
 
(d) 
Gnóthaí Corparáideacha – Corporate Affairs 
 
(i) 
Tuarascáil Mhíosúil an Phríomhfheidhmeannaigh 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Report 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh advised that the Chief Executive Report will be 
taken as read and this was agreed by all. 
 

7 
 
 
Cllr. Pat Dunphy commented on the number of serious accidents on the 
N24/N25 and asked for an update on the next phase. 
 
Mr. Seamus Kavanagh advised that both N24 and N25 are included in a review 
of the National Development Plan which is positive for Kilkenny and that the 
Council are awaiting on an allocation from TII for 2026 in relation to funding. 
 
Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin requested a quarterly report on Notices of Motion and 
this was agreed to. 
 
 
3. 
Comhfhreagras  -  Correspondence 
 
(i) 
Freagra ón Aire - Response from Minister [Notice of Motion 20-2025] 
 
Response from Minister in relation to safeguarding of the Post Office Network [Notice 
of Motion 20-2025] was noted and agreed by all. 
 
 
4. 
Gnó ar athló ó chruinniúroimhe seo  -  Business adjourned from a previous Meeting 
 
None. 
 
 
5. 
Dátaí agus Amanta do chruinnithe a shocrú - Fix Dates & Times of Meetings 
 
(i) 
Sceideal na gCruinnithe  - Schedule of Meetings 
 
This was noted and agreed by all. 
 
 
6. 
Plé ar Thuairiscí agus Moltaí ó Choistí an Comhairle 
  
Consideration of Reports & Recommendations of Committees of the Council 
 
(i) 
Tuairisc ar SPC 2 - Report of SPC 2 
Proposed by Cllr. John Coonan seconded by Cllr. Maurice Shortall and agreed: 
 
“That Minutes of SPC 2: Transportation/Mobility Management and Infrastructure 
Meeting held on Friday, 5th September, 2025  as circulated with the Agenda be and are 
hereby approved”. 
 
 
7. 
Gnó Eile romhainn i bhFógra reachtála an Chruinnithe 
  
Other Business set forth in the Notice convening the Meeting 
 
None. 
 
 
8. 
Oideachas agus Oiliúint  -  Education & Training 
 
(i) 
Schedule of Conferences  
 
Proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Fidelis Doherty and agreed by all. 
 
 
9. 
Gnótha ag éirí as Miontuairiscí  -  Matters Arising from Minutes 
 
None. 
 
 
10. 
Aon Ghnó Eile  -  Any Other Business 
 
Cllr. Eugene McGuinness raised concerns regarding St. Patrick’s on the Kells Road in relation 
to a lot of building on site and indications that the Red Cross may be involved and reports 
suggesting that Palestinian children may be arriving and he sought clarification on whether 
they will be accompanied by families or arriving alone. 
 

8 
 
 
He asked about the position regarding Section 5 and if the development complies with 
planning regulations.  He asked if there is a possibility that St. Patrick’s will be used to 
accommodate International Protection applicants and if so, what numbers are being 
considered, and if it aligns with proper planning requirements.  He advised that it is 
incumbent to ensure that accurate information is provided, as local residents are concerned 
that the Centre could house a large number of people without adequate infrastructure to 
support them. 
 
Ms. Fiona Deegan, A/Director of Services advised that she had followed up with the Irish Red 
Cross in relation to several queries received. 
 
She advised that the Irish Red Cross are associated with the Gaza Medevac Initiative where 
Palestinian children receive healthcare through HSE and the Red Cross provide 
accommodation.  Red Cross confirmed that they were planning to move 6 families into St. 
Patrick’s from 24th November.  This raised huge concerns and she advised that she raised this 
with the Department and have no clarity on whether Department will enter into a contract in 
relation to these properties.   
 
She advised that An Coimisiún Pleanála are due to make a decision on 28th January in relation 
to temporary use of 3 of the buildings on site to accommodate persons with protected status. 
Waiting on determination from An Coimisiún Pleanála as to whether internal works on 
building are exempt. 
 
She confirmed that the properties do not have a Fire Safety Certificate or Disability Access 
Certificate and that no commencement notice has been submitted to the Building Control 
Authority.  She advised that she has submitted a number of requests to the Department 
seeking confirmation on whether a contract has been agreed for this property and she is 
awaiting a response. 
 
The Council’s role is to ensure regulatory compliance and the Local Authority Integration 
Team will provide supports to those who may arrive. 
 
Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin noted that injured families from Palestine seeking to come to us for 
treatment is an indication of situation we are dealing with and if should be done properly in 
a compliant way.  He also noted that a recent national report highlighted the shortage of 
hydrotherapy facilities and the only such facility previously available in the County was at St. 
Patrick’s.  He asked that the issue be addressed in the future as families currently have to travel 
to Waterford and other areas to access these services. 
 
He extended condolences to the Jewish community worldwide, and particularly in Australia, 
following the tragic attacks at Bondi Beach over the weekend. 
 
Cllr. Fidelis Doherty informed everyone of the Winter Solstace and complimented Linguan 
Valley team. 
 
 
11. 
Fógraí Rúin - Notices of Motion 
 
None. 
 
 
12. 
Fógraí i dtaobh Rúin ó Údaráis Áitiúla eile ag lorg tacaíochta ó Chomhairle Chontae Chill 
Chainnigh - Notices of Motion from other local authorities seeking support of Kilkenny 
County Council 
 
None. 
 
 

9 
 
 
 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh thanked everyone for their attendance and thanked Marian 
Flannery and her team and the Night Time Economy team for the wonderful Yulefest Festival 
and encouraged everyone to visit St. Canice’s Cathedral to view the Festival of Light. 
 
She wished Margo Hayes, Meetings Administrator a very Happy Birthday. 
 
She wished the Members and Staff of the Council and their families and the people of Kilkenny 
City and County a very happy and peaceful Christmas and New Year. 
 
 
 
That concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
______________________________ 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
DATE 
 
 
