1 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ AR AN GCRUINNIÚ IOMLÁNACH DE CHUID 
CHOMHAIRLE CONTAE CHILL CHAINNIGH TIONÓLTA AR AN LUAN, 
21 IÚIL 2025 AG 3.00 I.N. I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, HALLA AN 
CHONTAE & VIA FOIRNE MS 
MINUTES OF PLENARY MEETING OF KILKENNY COUNTY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY, 21st JULY 2025 AT 3.00 P.M. IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, 
COUNTY HALL & VIA MS TEAMS 
 
 
Attendance 
Chair:  
 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh 
 
Elected Members: 
Council Chamber 
Cllrs. Tomás Breathnach, Michael McCarthy, Jenny Catt Slattery, John Coonan, 
Deirdre Cullen, Michael Doyle, Fidelis Doherty, Patrick Dunphy, David 
Fitzgerald, Pat Fitzpatrick, Joe Malone, Andrew McGuinness, Eugene 
McGuinness, Seán Ó hArgáin, Joe Sheridan & Maurice Shortall 
 
MS Teams  
Cllrs. John Brennan, Brian Cleere, Ger Frisby, Joe Lyons, Michael Delaney, 
Maria Dollard & Stephanie Doheny. 
 
Officials: 
Lar Power, Martin Prendiville, Mary Mulholland, Fiona Deegan, Tim Butler, 
Seamus Foley, Eimear Cody, Michael Leahy, Annemarie Shortall, Philippe 
Beubry, Caitriona O’Sullivan & Martina Walsh 
 
Apologies: 
Ian Gardner. 
 
Fógraí – Announcements 
▪ 
Cllr. John Coonan wished to acknowledge the tremendous achievement of Ms. Emily Moloney of 
Warrington Equestrian Centre for her success in bringing home two gold medals in the individual 
and team events from the European Showjumping Championships. A feat that has now been 
achieved in the past.  His sentiments were echoed by all the Councillors present. 
 
▪ 
Cllr. Deirdre Cullen extended her congratulations to the Bennettsbridge U16 Camogie girls on 
wining the Roinn A League Final. 
 
▪ 
Cllr. Michael McCarthy extended his congratulations to David Brennan, Freshford on securing a 
gold medal at the Worlds Police & Fire Games in Alabama. 
 
 
Vótaí Comhbhrón - Votes of Sympathy 
 
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh extended votes of sympathy to the following: 
 
▪ 
Michael Pyke, Retired Traveller Liaison Officer, on the passing of this wife Brigid.  
▪ 
Katherine Peacock, Community Section, on the death of her nephew Jack Ronayne. 
▪ 
Chloe Martin, Motor Taxation Section on the passing of her niece Summer Kilcare. 
▪ 
Family of Tom Dunne Cortnacuddy, Enniscorthy Co Wexford 
▪ 
Family of Ger Brennan, Kilmanaghan, Piltown, Co Kilkenny. 
▪ 
Family of Tommy Delahunty, Luffany, Mooncoin, Co Kilkenny 
▪ 
Family of Tom Hennebry, Ballybrazil, Mooncoin, Co Kilkenny 
▪ 
Family of David McGrath, Dournane, Mooncoin, Co Kilkenny. 
▪ 
Family of Joe O’Keeffe, 7 Polerone Green, Mooncoin, Co Kilkenny. 
 
2. 
Dearbhú Miontuairiscí  -  Confirmation of Minutes 
  
(i) 
Miontuairiscí ar Chruinniú Buiséid Reachtúil - Minutes of Plenary Meeting 
Proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness seconded by Cllr. Pat Dunphy and agreed: 
 
“That Minutes of Plenary Meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on Monday 16th June, 
2025, as circulated with the agenda be and are hereby approved”. 
 

2 
 
 
(ii) 
Miontuairiscí ar Chruinniú Bhliantúil - Minutes of Annual Meeting 
Proposed by Cllr Andrew McGuinness and seconded by Cllr Pat Dunphy and agreed 
  
“That Minutes of Annual  Meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on Monday, 27th June, 
2025, as circulated with the agenda be and are hereby approved”. 
 
Cllr Pat Dunphy requested that the representatives of Macra na Feirme attend the September 
Meeting. It was agreed to allow a short presentation to Members in advance of the Council 
Meeting between 2.15pm to 2.45pm. 
 
 
2. 
(a) 
Tithíocht & Díuscairt Eile  -  Housing & Other Disposal 
 
(i) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Dunphy seconded by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach and agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 
2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the disposal of its interest in land 
at Tower Road, Piltown, Co. Kilkenny (as identified on the attached map) to Shane and 
Selena Bourke, 1 Railway Close, Fiddown, Piltown, Co. Kilkenny for the sum of 
€185,000 (one hundred and eighty-five thousand euro) with each party being 
responsible for their own legal costs associated with the sale.  Site area measures 0.420 
ha.  The Consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not 
required” (Notice sent to Members on the 27th June, 2025)”. 
 
(ii) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach seconded by Cllr. Jenny Catt Slattery and 
agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, to dispose of 
its interest in two derelict properties being sold as one at Dunkitt, Kilmacow, Co. 
Kilkenny (as identified on the attached map) to John McNicholas & Joe Culleton, 
CULMC Construction, Bridgefield, Tramore, Co. Waterford for the sum of two 
hundred and thirty five thousand euro (€235,000) with each party responsible for their 
own legal costs associated with the sale.  The combined site area measures 1.01 acres 
(0.41 Ha).  The Consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
is not required”  (Notice sent to Members on the 10th July, 2025). 
 
(iii) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Deirdre Cullen seconded by Cllr. Michael Doyle and agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 
2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the disposal of its interest in plot(s) 
of land at Graiguenamanagh, Co. Kilkenny – as identified on the attached map - to 
Westcourt Healthcare Limited for €142,000 (One hundred and forty two thousand euro).  
Land area measures 2.30 acres (0.931 ha). The Consent of the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage is not required”  (Notice sent to members on the 10th July, 
2025). 
 
(iv) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh seconded by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness 
and agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 
2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the disposal of its interest in land 
at Longfordpass North, Twomileborris, Co. Tipperary Plots 217.Z1 and 217.Z2 – as 
identified on the attached map - to Bord na Mona, Main Street, Newbridge, Co. Kildare 
for a nominal sum of €10 (ten euro) and each party will be responsible for their own 
legal costs associated with the sale.  Area combined measures 0.209 Ha (0.5 acre).  The 
Consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not required.” 
(Notice sent to Members on the 10th July, 2025). 
 
 

3 
 
 
(v) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Deirdre Cullen seconded by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach and 
agreed:  
 
“That, in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 
2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the disposal of its interest in land 
at Coolmore, Knocktopher, Co. Kilkenny Plots 202Z.1 to 4 inclusive – as identified on 
the attached map - to Mary Naim, Ballyda, Kilmacow and Moshe Naim, Totam 23, 
Timrat, Israel.  The Consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage is not required. The land area measures 0.026 Ha/0.064 acre.” 
(Notice sent to Members on the 10th July, 2025). 
 
(vi) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Deirdre Cullen, seconded by Cllr. Michael Doyle and agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 
2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the disposal of its interest in land 
at Coolmore, Knocktopher, Co. Kilkenny Plots 206z.1 and 206z.3 – as identified on 
the attached map - to Thomas Coogan, Coolmore, Knocktopher, Co. Kilkenny.  The 
Consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not required.  
The land area measures 0.04 Ha/0.1 acre.”  (Notice sent to Members on the 10th July, 
2025). 
 
(vii) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Michael Doyle seconded by Cllr. Fidelis Doherty and agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 
2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the disposal of its interest in land 
at Coolmore, Knocktopher, Co. Kilkenny Plot 206z.2– as identified on the attached map 
- to William Coogan, Ballynooney, Mullinavat, Co. Kilkenny and Mairead Coogan, 
Cappagh House, Cappagh, Inistioge, Co. Kilkenny. The Consent of the Minister for 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not required.  The land area measures 
0.035 ha/0.086 acre.” (Notice sent to Members on the 10th July, 2025). 
 
 
 
(b) 
Pleanail - Planning 
 
(i) 
Part 8: Site Works at 18 Skeaugh, Callan, Co Kilkenny 
It was proposed by Cllr. Deirdre Cullen, seconded by Cllr. David Fitzgerald and 
agreed to proceed with the proposed development. 
 
“We the Members of Kilkenny County Council approve the Part 8 in accordance with Section 
179 of the Planning & Development Act 2000 as amended and Part VIII of the Planning & 
Development Regulations 2001, for the demolition of existing single storey side and rear 
extensions (approx. 18.5sqm), the demolition of a shed to the rear of the site (approx. 34sqm) 
and the construction of a new part 2 storey, part single storey extension (77sqm) to provide a 
4-bedroom house with an accessible ground floor bedroom, bathroom & living accommodation, 
a new Domestic waste water treatment system and percolation area with all associated site 
works at 18 Skeaugh, Callan, Co. Kilkenny, R95 A9X8.” 
 
(ii) 
Proposed Variation 5 to City & County Development Plan 2021 
Castlecomer Settlement Plan 
Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrik proposed an amendment/alteration to Variation 5 of the City & 
County Development Plan 2021 – Castlecomer Settlement Plan seconded by Cllr. Mary 
Hilda Cavanagh and agreed: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council rezone to residential the lands to the West of Oak Hill as sought 
by Submission references KK-C322-13 and KK-C322-15 to the Variation) which was 
previously zoned in the LAP 2018”. 
 
It was explained to the Members that the relevant environment and flood assessments 
would be undertaken, and a further public consultation would take place on the 
proposed amendment only before reverting to Council for consideration. 
 
 

4 
 
 
(iii) 
Taking in Charge: [TC 184] Cnoc Baun, Ballyfoyle Road, Kilkenny. 
Proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Eugene McGuinness and 
agreed: 
 
“That the County Council of the County of Kilkenny, in exercise of the powers conferred on 
them by Section 11 of the Roads Act,1993 and in compliance with Section 180 of the Planning 
& Development Act, 2000 as amended by Section 59 of the Planning & Development Act 2010, 
hereby declares the road listed in the Public Notice and listed below, to be a Public Road.” 
 
Estate: TIC184 Baun/Cnoc Baun, Ballyfoyle Road, Kilkenny 
 
 
(iv) 
Taking in Charge: [TC 181] Rathullord Phase 3, Kilkenny. 
Proposed by Cllr. Joe Malone seconded by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin and agreed. 
 
“That the County Council of the County of Kilkenny, in exercise of the powers conferred on 
them by Section 11 of the Roads Act,1993 and in compliance with Section 180 of the Planning 
& Development Act, 2000 as amended by Section 59 of the Planning & Development Act 2010, 
hereby declares the road listed in the Public Notice and listed below, to be a Public Road.” 
 
Estate: [TIC181] Rathullord (Phase 3), New Orchard, Bonnettsrath Road, Co Kilkenny 
 
 
 
(c) 
Boithre _ Roads 
 
(i) 
Update on Graignamanagh -Tinnahinch Flood Relief Scheme. 
Andrea Brogan of Ayesa provided an update on the Graignamanagh-Tinnahinch 
Flood Relief Scheme and outlined the Background to the Scheme.  The Programme 
Schedule which is currently at Stage II – Planning entailing; Stakeholder Consultation, 
Option Selection Process, Key Environmental Considerations, the Overall Scheme and 
Current Actions with a current overall estimated cost of €22m. 
 
Contributions were received from Cllr. Deirdre Cullen, Cllr. Brian Cleere, Cllr Michael 
Doyle, Cllr Pat Dunphy and Cllr. Tomas Breathnach. 
 
Issues raised: 
▪ 
In relation the Thomastown/Inistioge Schemes, removal of sand and silt from the 
river. 
▪ 
Timeframe for Part 10. 
 
It was confirmed that the role of Ayesa was specifically in relation to the 
Graiguenamanagh – Tinnahinch Flood Relief Scheme and that the other schemes were 
being worked through.  It was further confirmed that the project was 100% funded 
through the OPW and that it is now moving into the Part 10 Planning process. 
 
The Cathaoirleach thanked Ms. Brogan for her informative presentation. 
 
(ii) 
N25 Glenmore to Luffany Speed Limit Review 
Mr. Seamus Kavanagh, Senior Engineer provided an update on the N25 Glenmore to 
Liffany Speed Limit Review, stating that the proposed speed limit change was from 
100km/h reduced to 80km/h from Luffany roundabout to 500m north of Ballinclare 
Junction (L7522).  Mr. Kavanagh noted that the speed limit reduction would be 
managed through an amendment to the 2023 Special Speed Limit Bye-Laws, noting 
that the pre-draft consultation phase closed on the 8th July and the Amended Bye-Laws 
Public Consultation will open on 23rd July until 4pm on the 4th September.  The 
Proposals are to be sent to the Garda Commissioner for observations and consent will 
be requested from Transport Infrastructure Ireland which will be required prior to 
bringing Bye-Laws for consideration of the Members. 
 
 

5 
 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Fidelis Doherty seconded by Cllr. Ger Frisby and agreed: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council agrees to go out to public consultation with a proposal to 
reduce the speed limit from 100km to 80km on N25 Waterford to Glenmore road from to 
Luffany Roundabout to 500m north of Ballinclare Junction (L7522).” 
 
Cllr. Frisby noted that a very positive meeting had taken place with Minister Darragh 
O’Brien on 16th July on this matter and a large number had attended the public 
meeting. 
 
   
(d) 
 Timpeallacht- Environment  
 
Section 85 – Carlow/Kilkenny Dog Shelter at Paulstown, Co Kilkenny. 
It was proposed by Cllr. Eugene Mc Guinness, seconded by Cllr. Michael Doyle and 
agreed: 
 
”To extend the Section 85 Agreement currently in place with Carlow County Council for the 
Operation of the Carlow/Kilkenny Dog Shelter in Paulstown until 31st August 2026.” 
 
 
 
(e) 
Airgeadas - Finance 
 
Capital Programme 2025-2030 
Mr. Martin Prendiville provided an update on the Capital Programme 2025 – 2030 and 
outlined that members are required to adopt a 3-year rolling programme annually.  Mr. 
Prendiville presented a 6-year capital programme with a total estimated spend of 
€1.105 billion, with match funding required of €104.6m, with a current funding 
shortfall of €59.2m of which a signification of same will be funded from Development 
Contributions and opportunities for additional grant funding to be explored. 
 
Contributions were received from Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh, Cllr. Andrew 
McGuinness, Cllr. Michael Doyle, Cllr. David Fitzgerald and Cllr. Sean O’hÁrgáin.  
 
It was agreed to arrange a further workshop on the Development Contribution Scheme 
on Monday 28th July at 3.30pm. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness and seconded by Cllr. Michael 
McCarthy 
 
“That the Capital Programme for the 6 Year period 2025-2030 be adopted by the Members of 
Kilkenny County Council.” 
 
This is subject to funding and to be reviewed annually. 
 
  
(f) 
Pobal & Cultúr – Community & Culture 
 
 
A report on the CCFCS grant approvals was circulated to all members. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin, seconded by Cllr. Michael Mc Carthy and 
agreed: 
 
“That the allocation of funding totalling €250,000 to 12 projects as outlined in the report be 
approved.” 
 
  
(g) 
Gnóthaí Corparáideacha – Corporate Affairs 
 
(i) 
Chief  Executive Monthly Report.  - Noted as read. 
Cllr. Sean O’hÁrgáin raised the recent River Nore health concerns and it was explained 
that a press release had issued to all members in relation to ongoing river testing and 
that it is not safe to bathe until tests are clear.  Efforts to identify the source will continue 
and that Members would be kept updated on same. 
 

6 
 
 
(ii) 
Appointment of Member to Watergate Theatre Company. 
It was proposed by Cllr Andrew Mc Guinness, seconded by Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick and 
agreed: 
 
“That Cllr Joe Malone be appointed as a member to the Watergate Theatre Company. 
 
(iii) 
Appointment of Chairperson to SPC 1 
It was proposed by Cllr. Fidelis Doherty, seconded by Cllr Pat Dunphy and agreed: 
 
“That Cllr. Michael Doyle be appointed as Chairperson to SPC1”. 
 
 3. 
Comhfhreagras  – Correspdence 
 
Ms. Mary Mulholland outlined items of correspondence received since the last Council 
meeting which had been circulated to members in advance of the meeting as follows: 
 
(i) 
Acknowledgement from Mr. Simon Harris, Tánaiste and Minister for Foreign Affairs 
in relation to Notice of Motion 14-2025 regarding ongoing conflict in all areas 
experiencing war. 
 
(ii) 
Response from Mr. John Cummins, TD, Minister for State in relation to Notice of 
Motion 08-2025 regarding updating Planning Guidelines for Wind Turbine 
Development. 
 
(iii) 
Response from office of Minister for State for Sport & Postal Policy in relation to Notice 
of Motion 04-2025 regarding current transgender policy. 
 
 
4. 
Gnótha ag éirí as Miontuairiscí  -  Matters Arising from Minutes 
 
None. 
 
5. 
Dátaí agus Amanta do chruinnithe a shocrú - Fix Dates & Times of Meetings. 
 
(i) 
Schedule of Meetings. 
 
A Workshop on Development Contribution Scheme to be held on Monday 28th July at 
3.30 p.m.  
 
6. 
Plé ar Thuairiscí agus Moltaí ó Choistí an Comhairle - Consideration of Reports & 
Recommendations of Committees of the Council. 
 
None 
 
7. 
Gnó Eile romhainn i bhFógra reachtála an Chruinnithe - Other Business set forth in the Notice 
convening the Meeting 
 
None 
 
8. 
Oideachas agus Oiliúint - Education & Training 
 
None 
 
 
9. 
Gnótha ag éirí as Miontuairiscí - Matters Arising from Minutes 
 
None 
 
10. 
Aon Ghnó Eile - Any Other Business 
 
None 
 
 

7 
 
 
11. 
Fógraí Rúin - Notices of Motion 
 
15 (25) Cllrs. Pat Dunphy, David Fitzgerald, Mary Hilda Cavanagh, Joe Lyons, Michael 
Doyle, Fidelis Doherty and John Brennan 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Dunphy and seconded by Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh and agreed 
that the motion be submitted in the name of all Councillors. 
 
“To call on the Minister for Climate, Environment and Energy, Minister Darragh O'Brien to urgently 
consider the introduction of a grant scheme to support homeowners in testing their homes for Radon 
Gas and safeguarding against the impacts. Radon is a colourless, odourless radioactive gas and is 
recognised as the second leading cause of lung cancer after smoking.  Despite its dangers, its presence 
is entirely preventable through proper testing and mitigation. 
 
Given the serious public health risks associated with prolonged exposure, it is essential that the 
Department provides financial assistance to encourage widespread testing. We urge the Minister to 
respond positively and act swiftly in making such support available to homeowners.” 
 
16 (25) Cllr. John Coonan & Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin 
It was proposed by Cllr. John Coonan and seconded by Cllr. Sean O’ hArgáin and agreed that 
the Council seek a suitable location for a BMX and pump track in Kilkenny.   
 
“Kilkenny County Council recognises the excellent work being done to promote cycling as a leisure 
activity and as a means of travel for commuting and tourism purposes in our City and 
County.  Recognising the growing demand for cycling as a leisure activity, particularly off-road cycling, 
this Council commits to investigating the provision of and give positive consideration to a BMX and 
pump track at Kilkenny Countryside Park Dunmore or another suitable location, which would also 
incorporate a safe space for beginner cyclists.” 
 
17 (25)  Cllr. Maurice Shortall 
It was proposed by Cllr. Maurice Shortall, seconded by Cllr. Eugene Mc Guinness and agreed: 
 
“To write to the Minister of Housing, Local Government and Heritage, Mr. James Brown and Minister 
for Justice, Home Affairs and Migration, Jim O’ Callaghan to request the withdrawal of all planning 
exemptions for properties accommodating International Protection Applicants. This will ensure that all 
properties go through the normal planning process. Also to request that the Community Engagement 
Team communicate with communities prior to signing of contracts for International Protection 
accommodation which will allow for full community engagement.” 
 
12. 
Fógraí i dtaobh Rúin ó Údaráis Áitiúla eile ag lorg tacaíochta ó Chomhairle Chontae Chill 
Chainnigh - Notices of Motion from other local authorities seeking support of Kilkenny 
County Council.              
 
16 (25)  Waterford City & County Council 
It was proposed by Cllr Fidelis Doherty seconded by Cllr John Coonan and agreed that this 
motion be taken as read and noted. 
 
“Waterford City & County Council calls upon the Central Bank to take all possible steps to discontinue 
facilitating the sale of Israeli bonds” 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach expressed best wishes on behalf of the members to Cllr. Stephanie Doheny 
on her upcoming maternity leave and noted that her replacement would be co-opted after the 
adoption of the minutes at the next Council meeting. 
 
 
That concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
______________________________ 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
DATE 
