1 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ DEN CHRUINNIÚ PLÉNACH DE CHOMHAIRLE 
CHONTAE CHILL CHAINNIGH ARNA REÁLT AG LÚNASA, AN 18Ú 
BEALTAINE, 2026 AG 3.00 I.N. SA SEOMRA COMHAIRLE, HALLA AN 
CHONTAE & TRÍ MS TEAMS 
 
MINUTES OF PLENARY MEETING OF KILKENNY COUNTY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY, 18TH MAY, 2026 AT 3.00 P.M. IN THE COUNCIL 
CHAMBER, COUNTY HALL & VIA MS TEAMS 
 
 
Chair:  
 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh. 
 
Elected Members: 
Council Chamber 
Cllrs. Tomás Breathnach, Jenny Catt Slattery, John Coonan, Fidelis Doherty, 
Maria Dollard, Michael Doyle, Patrick Dunphy, David Fitzgerald, Pat 
Fitzpatrick, Ger Frisby, Joe Lyons, Joe Malone, Michael McCarthy, Andrew 
McGuinness, Eugene McGuinness, Seán Ó hArgáin, Joe Sheridan and Maurice 
Shortall.   
 
MS Teams 
Cllrs. Brian Cleere, Deirdre Cullen, Michael Delaney and Stephanie Doherty. 
 
Officials: 
 
Lar Power, Martin Prendiville, Tim Butler, Mary Mulholland, Fiona Deegan, 
Ian Gardner, Margo Hayes, Catherine Cooney, Anne Marie Shortall, Maria 
O’Shea, Janette Boran, Seamus Kavanagh, Michael Leahy & Brenda Kelly. 
 
Apologies: 
 
Cllr. John Brennan. 
 
 
Fógraí - Announcements 
 
Cathaoirleach Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh welcomed everyone and proposed that the meeting would 
finish at 5.00 p.m. to facilitate a Civic Reception for The Iverk Show and this was agreed by all. 
 
Cathaoirleach Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh extended congratulations to the following: 
 
▪ 
Community Department on event held in Rivercourt Hotel.  She complimented Cllr. Pat 
Fitzpatrick on his involvement in the arrangement of the very informative event. 
▪ 
Community Section on events held in Kilkenny Castle for Tidy Towns, Pride of Place and the Estates. 
▪ 
New President of Chamber of Commerce, Claire McInerney Browne on her election and wished 
her well over the next two years. 
▪ 
NBI for great event in Lisnafunchion. 
▪ 
Turkish Ambassador and suggested that new Cathaoirleach send invitation to visit Kilkenny. 
▪ 
Romanian Ambassador and Kilkenny being linked with Romania for EU Presidency. 
▪ 
Cllr. Maria Dollard on becoming a grandmother. 
 
 
Vótaí Comhbhrón - Votes of Sympathy 
 
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh together with the Elected Members extended votes of 
sympathy to the following: 
 
▪ 
Family of Martin O’Shea, former employee of Kilkenny County Council. 
▪ 
Family of Michael Hester, former Principal of Castlecomer Community School. 
▪ 
Family of Jack Ryan, Father-in-law of Fiona Deegan, A/Director of Services. 
▪ 
Family of James Falsey, Kilkenny City. 
▪ 
Family of John Kelly, Newpark, Kilkenny. 
▪ 
Family of Sheila Brennan, The Sycamores, Kilkenny. 
▪ 
Family of John Fleming, Paulstown 
 
 

2 
 
 
1. 
Dearbhú Miontuairiscí  -  Confirmation of Minutes 
 
(i) 
Miontuairiscí Cruinniú Plé Ar Aibreán - Minutes of April Plenary Meeting 
Proposed by Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick, seconded by Cllr. Michael McCarthy and agreed: 
 
“That Minutes of Plenary Meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on Monday, 20th April, 
2026 as circulated with the Agenda be and are hereby approved”. 
 
(ii) 
Miontuairiscí Cruinniú SPC 2 - Minutes of SPC 2 Meeting 
Proposed by Cllr. Deirdre Cullen, seconded by Cllr. Maurice Shortall and agreed: 
 
“That Minutes of SPC 2 Meeting Transportation Policy/Mobility Management & 
Infrastructure held on Friday, 5th December, 2026 as circulated with the Agenda be and are 
hereby approved”. 
 
2. 
(a) 
Tithíocht & Díuscairt Eile  -  Housing & Other Disposal 
 
(i) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Deirdre Cullen, seconded by Cllr. Michael Doyle and 
agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 
2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the disposal of its interest in 
property at Raheen, Rosbercon, Co. Kilkenny for the nominal sum of €10.00 (ten euro) 
together with payment of the Council’s legal fees. The Consent of the Minister for the 
Environment is not required.” 
 
(ii) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick, seconded by Cllr. Mary Hilda 
Cavanagh and agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, to dispose 
of its interest in land at Castlecomer Demesne, Castlecomer, Co. Kilkenny (as identified 
on the attached map outlined in red) to Castlecomer Demesne Company CLG, for the 
sum of €100 per annum (one hundred euro) with each party responsible for their own 
legal costs associated with the Lease.  The site area measures 129.94 acres (52.58 ha).  
The Consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not 
required.” 
 
2. 
(b) 
Pleanail - Planning 
 
(i) 
Athrú Togra 9 don Plean Forbartha Cathrach agus Chontae Chill Chainnigh 
Proposed Variation 9 to Kilkenny City & County Development Plan 
Mr. Tim Butler presented the Chief Executive’s Report on submissions to the 
Proposed Variation 9 to the City & County Development Plan 2021-2027.  He 
advised that this amendment seeks to allow private Wastewater Treatment 
Systems for certain non residential developments where public infrastructure 
is unavailable or lacks capacity.  The Chief Executive recommends not 
proceeding at this time based on submissions received from the OPR, Uisce 
Éireann and the EPA which highlight uncertainty in the national policy for 
developer led wastewater infrastructure.  Concerns relate to long term 
management, maintenance and possible decommissioning of private systems 
in the future.  
 
Contributions were received from Cllrs. Jenny Catt Slattery, Michael Doyle, 
Andrew McGuinness, Pat Dunphy and Mary Hilda Cavanagh as follows: 
 
▪ 
support the recommendation, however, it is important that all stakeholders 
work together to identify a solution within a short timeframe as cannot 
afford to delay progress for years. 
▪ 
welcome a clear commitment from the Executive to actively work on 
advancing this and delivering it within a reasonable timeframe. 
▪ 
aim to incorporate this into the next Development Plan within the next three 
years. 
▪ 
Small towns and villages cannot afford prolonged delays. 
▪ 
Unfair position for Elected Members. 
▪ 
Need to put pressure on Department. 

3 
 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach, seconded by Cllr. John Coonan and 
agreed that: 
 
In relation to Proposed Variation 9, the purpose of this Variation being: 
 
▪ 
to amend Section 10.1.7 of the CCDP to allow for private Wastewater Treatment 
Systems in designated settlements under limited circumstances where the Council 
is satisfied that: 
 
(a) the settlement is included in the Uisce Éireann Capital Investment 
Programme, 
(b) the proposed wastewater system will be compliant with relevant specified 
standards. 
 
We, the Members of Kilkenny County Council having considered the Chief Executive’s 
Report as circulated on the 12th May, 2026 under Section 13 of the Planning & 
Development Act 2000, as amended, and having considered the recommendation, 
hereby resolve not to vary the current Kilkenny City & County Development Plan in 
accordance with Proposed Variation 9.”  
 
(iii) 
Glacadh i gCúram/Taking in Charge: Berkeley Terrace, The Beeches, Ferrybank 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Dunphy, seconded by Cllr. Ger Frisby and agreed 
that: 
 
“That the County Council of the County of Kilkenny, in exercise of the powers conferred 
on them by Section 11 of the Roads Act, 1993 and in compliance with Section 180 of 
the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended by Section 59 of the Planning & 
Development Act 2010, hereby declares the road listed in the Public Notice and listed 
below, to be a Public Road.” 
 
Development:  [TC 194] Berkeley Terrace, The Beeches, Ferrybank, Kilkenny 
 
 
2. 
(c) 
Pobol – Community 
 
(i) 
Scéim Chistí Deontas do Fháiltíochtaí Pobal agus Cultúrtha (CCFCS) 
Community & Cultural Facilities Capital (CCFCS) Grant Scheme 
Mr. Tim Butler, Director of Services advised that there were a lot of applications and 
that the Community Team worked closely with communities to ensure that as many 
applicants as possible were facilitated.  He advised the Members that a budget of 
€250,000 was allocated for these grants.  26 applications were received seeking funding 
totalling €770,640.  Following assessment it is recommended to the Elected Members 
that the total budget of €250,000 be allocated to 10 applicants.  He also advised that the 
Community Team would continue to work with the other groups to ensure that they 
have success in years to come.  He also thanked Anne Marie Shortall and Community 
Section for all their work. 
 
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh thanked Tim Butler and the staff of the 
Community Section for their work in assessing and processing the applications.  This 
scheme helps a lot of communities across the County. 
 
Contributions were received from Cllrs. Fidelis Doherty, Jenny Catt Slattery, Seán Ó 
hArgáin, Tomás Breathnach and Pat Fitzpatrick in relation to the following: 
 
▪ 
Congratulated the successful applications and commiserated with groups that 
were not successful. 
▪ 
Commended all volunteers that work so hard in their communities. 
▪ 
Issues with lease needs to be looked at for the future and look at possibility of 
getting away from leases and look at the option of using licence. 
▪ 
Complimented Grant Booklet.  AILG Executive found it hugely valuable and it 
may be replicated in other County Councils. 
▪ 
Suggested having a Workshop as part of the Budget Process in September of after 
Christmas in preparation of the Capital Budget whichever is appropriate. 
▪ 
Ensure that signage is erected showing funding granted from the Council. 

4 
 
 
Mr. Tim Butler confirmed that both Licences and leases will work but it can be just as 
difficult to secure a licence.  He also agreed to holding a Workshop later in the year to 
look at supports provided to communities to date and examine the CCFCS scheme. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Fidelis Doherty, seconded by Cllr. Eugene McGuinness and 
agreed: 
 
“That the Community & Cultural Capital Facilities [CCCFS] Grant Scheme 2026 is hereby 
approved by the Members of Kilkenny County Council.” 
 
 
2. 
(b) 
 Bóithre - Roads 
 
(i) 
Alt 85: Tionscadal Maolú Droichead ag Droichead Ferrymountgarret 
Section 85:  Bridge Remediation Project at Ferrymountgarret Bridge   
 
Ms. Mary Mulholland gave a Presentation and advised that the Section 85 
Agreement is to facilitate the bridge remediation works that are required at 
Ferrymountgarrett Bridge.  The bridge crosses between Kilkenny and Wexford 
and as part of the bridge will be in the Wexford Administrative Area a Section 
85 Agreement is required to carry out works on their behalf and Wexford have 
agreed to this.  She advised that works are proposed to be carried out during 
June, July and August as this will have the longest daylight hours.   
 
Contributions received from Cllrs. Michael Doyle, Deirdre Cullen, Fidelis 
Doherty, Mary Hilda Cavanagh, Eugene McGuinness, Joe Malone, Seán Ó 
hArgáin, Joe Sheridan, David Fitzgerald, Ger Frisby and Tomás Breathnach in 
relation to the following: 
 
▪ 
Thanked Mary Mulholland for her presentation 
▪ 
Works are necessary due to the age of the bridge, however, there will be 
major inconvenience for daily travel. 
▪ 
Acknowledged frustration especially for people in The Rower 
▪ 
Closure will cause major disruption, longer journeys and added costs 
▪ 
Big impact on commuters, tourism, haulers and farmers 
▪ 
Requested pedestrian access be considered [morning/evening if possible] 
▪ 
Need clear signage on diversion routes 
▪ 
Safety concerns on narrow roads with increased traffic 
▪ 
Garda support may be required 
▪ 
Consider a Stop/Go System 
▪ 
Important to provide regular updates to public and Elected Members 
▪ 
Publish Presentation online 
▪ 
Asked for clarification on cost and lifespan of repairs 
▪ 
Provision for cyclists after works 
▪ 
Possibility of Contractors working in shifts for extended hours, given the 
significant inconvenience to the public. 
▪ 
Asked for Elected Members to be provided with clear timeframe and simple 
accurate information to help stop misinformation in the community. 
▪ 
Ensure Google and other mapping services are updated with any changes.  
▪ 
Carry out a full survey of all bridges in the County to assess their condition 
and identify where future capital works may be needed. 
▪ 
Will there be restrictions will be in place for different modes of transport 
after bridge repairs. 
 
Ms. Mary Mulholland replied to queries as follows: 
 
▪ 
Health & Safety is a priority and the Contractor has a major responsibility 
to carry out the work safely.  
▪ 
Notifications have been sent to Emergency Services.  
▪ 
All closures have been communicated to travel information providers 
including Google Maps and other mapping services.  

5 
 
▪ 
Providing weekly progress updates will be considered. 
 
▪ 
A full survey of County bridges has been completed with a dedicated Team 
assessing conditions and planning repairs and maintenance.  Works are 
prioritised based on bridge condition and usage levels and it was agreed to 
provide update on this. 
 
Cllr. Pat Dunphy asked for an update on bridge at Carrick-on-Suir. 
 
Mr. Seamus Kavanagh advised that a joint application may be submitted 
between Kilkenny and Tipperary and he will request an update from Project 
Team. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Deirdre Cullen, seconded by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach 
and agreed to: 
 
“We the Members of Kilkenny County Council approve the Section 85 in accordance 
with the Local Government Act 2001 and Section 14 of the Roads Act 1993 for the 
Ferrymountgarret Bridge Remediation Project, Kylemore, The Rower, County 
Kilkenny.” 
 
 
 
(c) 
Gnóthaí Corparáideacha – Corporate Affairs 
 
(i) 
Tuarascáil Mhíosúil an Phríomhfheidhmeannaigh 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Report 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh advised that the Chief Executive Report will be 
taken as read and this was agreed by all. 
 
 
3. 
Comhfhreagras  -  Correspondence 
 
None. 
 
 
4. 
Gnó ar athló ó chruinniúroimhe seo  -  Business adjourned from a previous Meeting 
 
None. 
 
 
5. 
Dátaí agus Amanta do chruinnithe a shocrú - Fix Dates & Times of Meetings 
 
(i) 
Sceideal na gCruinnithe  - Schedule of Meetings 
This was noted and agreed by all. 
 
(ii)  
Socraigh dáta don Chruinniú Bliantúil - Agree date for Annual Meeting 
It was proposed by Cllr. Joe Malone, seconded by Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick and agreed to 
hold the Annual Meeting on Friday, 26th Junes, 2026 at 3.00 p.m. 
 
(iii) 
Cuairte an Aire – Minister’s Visit 
Ms. Margo Hayes advised that Minister James Browne will be launching the following 
URDF Projects - St. Kieran's Street & Market Square Urban Enhancement Scheme, 
Watergate Urban Park Scheme and Greensbridge Boardwalk to Abbey Quarter at 10.30 
a.m. on Friday, 26th June, 2026 
 
 
6. 
Plé ar Thuairiscí agus Moltaí ó Choistí an Comhairle 
  
Consideration of Reports & Recommendations of Committees of the Council 
 
(i) 
Tuarascáil ar Chruinniú SPC 2 - Report of SPC 2 Meeting 
It was agreed by Cllr. Deirdre Cullen, seconded by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness and 
agreed that: 
 
“That Report of SPC 2 Meeting Transportation Policy/Mobility Management and 
Infrastructure held on Friday, 5th December, 2026 be and are hereby approved.” 
 
 

6 
 
 
 
7. 
Gnó Eile romhainn i bhFógra reachtála an Chruinnithe 
  
Other Business set forth in the Notice convening the Meeting 
 
None. 
 
8. 
Oideachas agus Oiliúint  -  Education & Training 
 
(i) 
Sceideal Comhdhálacha - Schedule of Conferences  
Schedule of Conferences was noted. 
 
 
9. 
Gnótha ag éirí as Miontuairiscí  -  Matters Arising from Minutes 
 
None. 
 
 
10. 
Aon Ghnó Eile  -  Any Other Business 
 
None. 
 
 
 
11. 
Fógraí Rúin - Notices of Motion 
 
12 (26) Cllr. Maria Dollard 
It was proposed by Cllr. Maria Dollard, seconded by Cllr. Joe Lyons and agreed that: 
 
"That Kilkenny County Council identifies a funding source for the appointment of a dedicated, full-
time and fully resourced Access and Inclusion Officer.  This motion formally supports the Irish 
Wheelchair Association's Access It's No Joke Campaign, which highlights the critical need for a 
dedicated professional in every Local Authority to improve disability access to public services and 
amenities in our communities.  This motion calls on Kilkenny County Council to prepare a report on 
additional measures it has taken to enact the provisions of the Disability Act 2005, in the last 5 years, 
and this report to be shared with Councillors and Disability Groups in the County.” 
 
Cllr. Maria Dollard spoke on the Motion which is supported by the Wheelchair Association 
and highlights the need to support all types of disabilities.  She proposed that the Council 
should appoint a full-time Access Officer to make sure people with disabilities can access 
services and take part in society.  She explained that appointing an Access Officer would 
provide a clear contact point and help fix issues quickly while also preventing future problems 
and extra costs.  Current access issues include poor footpaths, lack of accessible parking and 
lack of accessible documents. There are also concerns about access to facilities like the 
swimming pool for disabled athletes.  Appointing an Access Officer would show Kilkenny 
County Council’s commitment to equality and inclusion and help create a more accessible 
community for everyone. 
 
Cllrs. Joe Lyons, John Coonan and Joe Malone spoke in support of this Motion. 
 
Ms. Mary Mulhollnd clarified that the recruitment of staff is an Executive Function and that 
most rural Counties are not in a position to appoint a full-time Access Officer.  She confirmed 
that the Council do have a Disability Group that review all Service Areas and there is a point 
of contact in each area.  
 
Mr. Tim Butler confirmed that the Parking Bye-laws have a significant amount of accessible 
bays throughout the City and he agreed to follow up on introducing Sunflower Spaces to 
ensure they are put in place. 
 
 
 

7 
 
 
15 (26) Cllrs. Fidelis Doherty, Pat Dunphy, Jenny Catt Slattery, Ger Frisby & Tomas Breathnach 
It was proposed by Cllr. Fidelis Doherty, seconded by Cllr. Jenny Catt Slattery and agreed 
that: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council seek of the TII to carry out a review of the speed limit signage currently 
in place on the N25 Glenmore to Waterford Road in the townsland of Ballinamona, Glenmore, in 
particular to include a driver feedback sign in advance of the 80km zone with a view to giving motorists 
adequate notice of the reduced speed limit ahead.‘’ 
 
Cllr. Fidelis Doherty asked for permission to amend her Notice of Motion and this was agreed. 
Cllr. Doherty spoke on the Motion stating that the issue of signage needs to be addressed.   She 
suggested that large speed markings be painted directly on the road. 
 
Cllrs. Jenny Catt Slattery, Pat Dunphy, Tomás Breathnach and Ger Frisby spoke in support of 
the Motion. 
 
Ms. Mary Mulholland explained that the Council have engaged with TII in relation to 
reviewing signage and advise that she will update Members when she receives a response. 
 
 
16 (26) Cllrs. Seán Ó hArgáin & Pat Fitzpatrick  
It was proposed by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin, seconded by Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick and agreed that: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council review our existing policies and services (particularly including our 
Housing and Community Engagement Policies) to ensure that they provide the maximum protection 
and supports for women and their families in danger of or suffering from domestic violence.  That we 
ensure that our policies align with the National Domestic Sexual and Gender-Based violence (DSGBV) 
strategy and that we recognise that children are a victim of violence in their own right and undertake 
to treat and protect children accordingly.” 
 
Cllrs. Ó hArgáin and Fitzpatrick spoke in favour of this Motion stating: 
 
▪ 
Focus on what local authorities can do to reduce gender based and domestic violence 
against women and girls.  
▪ 
Statistics on violence against women were highlighted. 
▪ 
Importance of addressing key issues, reviewing policies and making public spaces safer.  
▪ 
Adopt a zero tolerance approach to sexist and misogynistic language.  
▪ 
Ensure both Elected Members and staff commit to upholding this standard. 
 
17 (26) Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin 
It was proposed by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin, seconded by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach and agreed 
that: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council develop a no wait initiative inviting local businesses to participate by 
allowing urgent toilet access to people who have no wait card.  ‘No Wait Cards’ are issued by 
organisations such as Crohn’s & Colitis Ireland and Spinal Injuries Ireland and aim to empower 
individuals to request access to toilet facilities when urgent. The card is a critical support for many 
people with medical conditions such as Inflammatory Bowel Disease, which affects at least 40,000 people 
in Ireland.” 
 
Cllrs. Ó hArgáin and Breathnach spoke in favour of this Motion stating: 
 
▪ 
No Time to Wait” supports people with hidden disabilities who may need urgent access 
to public toilets.  
▪ 
Suggested working with groups such as the Chamber of Commerce and other 
organisations.  
▪ 
Encourage businesses to recognise and accept the “No Time to Wait” card.  
 
 

8 
 
 
18 (26) Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh 
“That Kilkenny County Council would write to the County Board of the GAA requesting parking spaces 
for wheelchair users at Nowlan Park.” 
 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh withdrew her Motion stating that the Chairman of the County 
Board engaged with her on the issue and explained that wheelchair parking was not placed 
behind the new stand following consultation with the County Wheelchair Association.  The 
Association advised that parking at MacDonagh Junction is closer and more suitable than the 
proposed location.  It was noted that anyone experiencing difficulties is encouraged to contact 
the County Board who will assist in providing a pass.   Support was expressed for the work 
and efforts of the GAA. 
 
19 (26) Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh 
It was proposed by Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh, seconded by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin and agreed: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council would erect signs in all parks in Co. Kilkenny warning the public of 
the dangers of Lyme disease from tick bites.” 
 
Cllr. Cavanagh confirmed that she had received confirmation that warning notices about ticks 
are displayed across the County.  There was a request made to install similar signage in Castle 
Park and it was noted that Kilkenny Castle was lit in green to mark Lyme Disease Awareness 
Week helping to raise awareness.  Signs include information on the risks and what to do in 
case of a tick bite. It was noted that this motion had already been passed at Kilkenny Municipal 
District and action was taken as a result of this. 
 
20 (26) Cllr. Maurice Shortall 
It was proposed by Cllr. Maurice Shortall, seconded by Cllr. Maria Dollard and agreed that: 
 
“I hereby propose that Kilkenny County Council write to Minister for Enterprise, Tourism and 
Employment, Peter Burke TD, and Minister for Culture, Communications and Sport, Patrick 
O’Donovan TD, urging the Government and relevant State agencies, including Fáilte Ireland and Sport 
Ireland, to examine and actively pursue a bid to bring WrestleMania, one of the world’s largest live 
entertainment and sporting spectacles to Ireland.” 
 
(ii) 
Nuashonrú ó Chomhairle na nÓg  - Update from Comhairle na nÓg 
Comhairle na nÓg were then welcomed to the meeting and gave a Presentation outlining the 
following: 
 
▪ 
National forum for young people (ages 12–17) to have their voices heard 
▪ 
Managed by the Department of Children (DCEDIY) and covers 31 Local Authority areas 
across Ireland 
▪ 
Led locally by trained Youth Workers 
▪ 
Connects young people with the democratic process 
▪ 
Policies are fairer when young people are included 
▪ 
Young people are experts in their own experiences 
▪ 
Youth led campaign to reduce smoking and vaping and promotes smoke and vape free 
outdoor spaces for young people 
▪ 
Aims to normalise healthier environments 
▪ 
Supports Tobacco-Free Kilkenny & Carlow 
▪ 
Health Risks of Vaping 
▪ 
Campaign Goals is to protect young people from second-hand smoke/vape, reduce 
normalisation of vaping and smoking and raise awareness in communities and promote 
HSE quit support services. 
▪ 
Not Around Us Campaign was launched April 2025 by Minister Jennifer Murnane 
O’Connor and is expanding to schools and sports clubs in 2026 
▪ 
Proposal is to install smoke and vape free signage in Kilkenny Parks and Playgrounds and 
request the Council’s approval to support healthier public spaces. 
 
 

9 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach thanked the Comhairle na nÓg students for their presentation and 
asked the speakers to share their information with local media, newspapers, and radio 
stations as many young people may not aware of the dangers of vaping. 
 
Contributions were received from Cllrs. Andrew McGuinness, Pat Dunphy, Maria 
Dollard, Deirdre Cullen, Seán Ó hArgáin and Joe Malone as follows: 
 
▪ 
Commended the group on an excellent presentation and strong campaign.  
▪ 
Acknowledged that vaping is a major issue and expressed support for banning vapes.  
▪ 
Recognised the significant work put into gathering and presenting the facts.  
▪ 
Praised the involvement of students from across the County.  
▪ 
Highlighted the positive impact of “Not Around Us” campaign  
▪ 
Referred to the Public Health Single Use Vapes Bill which passed the Dáil but is 
currently delayed in the Seanad and requested that Elected Members write to 
Government parties to progress the Bill.  
▪ 
Acknowledged the ongoing work of the group and the importance of giving young 
people a voice.  
▪ 
Suggested using GAA match programmes, parish newsletters and local media to raise 
awareness. 
▪ 
Thanked staff for their contributions.  
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Pat Dunphy and agreed: 
 
“We the Members of Kilkenny County Council support the initiative of the Carlow and Kilkenny 
Not Around Us campaign, as presented at today’s meeting.  Kilkenny County Council formally 
adopts and supports the “Not Around Us” campaign and commits to the installation of clear and 
visible smoke-free and vape-free signage in all Council-owned playgrounds and parks across the 
County.  This measure seeks to safeguard the health and wellbeing of children and young people, 
reduce exposure to second-hand smoke and vapour and support the ongoing development of a 
Tobacco Free Kilkenny.” 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Deirdre Cullen, seconded by Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh and 
agreed: 
 
That Comhairle na nÓg be provided with two opportunities to present to the Elected Members 
during the term of the Council on issues affecting young people.  
 
12. 
Fógraí i dtaobh Rúin ó Údaráis Áitiúla eile ag lorg tacaíochta ó Chomhairle Chontae Chill 
Chainnigh - Notices of Motion from other local authorities seeking support of Kilkenny 
County Council 
 
It was agreed by all that the following Notices of Motion be taken as read and noted: 
 
10 (26) South Dublin County Council 
“That this Council request the Minister investigate the 900+ missing children and girls in 
Bessborough Mother & Baby Institution and request a hold off on any development of the site 
until an investigation is completed and we commit to write to the Minister for Children, 
Disability and Equality, An Taoiseach and all other Local Authorities.” 
 
11 (26) Carlow County Council 
“That we the Members of Carlow county Council request from the Department of Climate, 
energy and the Environment that annual local representative clinics and a local representative 
dedicated reporting service be provided from ESB Networks.  This would be a similar service 
provided to a local representatives by Uisce Éireann.” 
 
That concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
______________________________ 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
DATE 
