1 
 
MIONTUARASCÁIL AR CHRUINNIÚ PLÉNACH CHOMHAIRLE CHONTAE 
CHEILCHINNÍ A TÓGADH AR LÚNASA, 20 AIBREÁN, 2026 AR 3.00 I.N. SA 
SEOMRA COMHAIRLE, HALLA AN CHONTAE & TRÍ MS TEAMS 
 
MINUTES OF PLENARY MEETING OF KILKENNY COUNTY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY, 20th APRIL 2026 AT 3.00 P.M. IN THE COUNCIL 
CHAMBER, COUNTY HALL & VIA MS TEAMS 
 
 
Chair:  
 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh. 
 
Elected Members: 
Council Chamber 
Cllrs. Tomás Breathnach, John Brennan, Jenny Catt Slattery, John Coonan,  
Michael Delaney, Stephanie Doheny, Michael Doyle, Patrick Dunphy, David 
Fitzgerald, Pat Fitzpatrick, Ger Frisby, Joe Lyons, Michael McCarthy, Andrew 
McGuinness, Eugene McGuinness, Seán Ó hArgáin, Joe Sheridan, Maurice 
Shortall and Fidelis Doherty. 
 
MS Teams 
Cllrs. Brian Cleere, Maria Dollard and Deirdre Cullen 
 
Officials: 
 
Lar Power, Martin Prendiville, Tim Butler, Mary Mulholland, Fiona Deegan, 
Ian Gardner, Margo Hayes, Anne Marie Shorthall, Aisling Slattery, Eimear 
Cody, Jan McIntyre, Frank Stafford, Michael Leahy, Seamus Kavanagh and 
Michael Arthurs. 
 
Fógraí - Announcements 
 
Cathaoirleach Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh welcomed everyone. Cllr. Cavanagh 
congratulated Mr. Brian Hayes (Caretaker)  who has recently been appointed to lead 
the Disabled Persons Organisation Group under the Department of Children, Equality 
& Disability.    
 
1. 
Dearbhú Miontuairiscí  -  Confirmation of Minutes 
 
(i) 
Miontuairiscí ar Chruinniú Plé ar an Feabhra - Minutes of March Plenary Meeting 
Proposed by Cllr. Pat Dunphy, seconded by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness and agreed: 
 
“That Minutes of Plenary Meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on Monday, 20th March, 
2026 as circulated with the Agenda be and are hereby approved”. 
 
Vótaí Comhbhrón - Votes of Sympathy 
 
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh together with the Elected Members 
extended votes of sympathy to the following: 
 
▪ 
Howard Garvey on the passing of his father Johnny Garvey  
▪ 
Lar Power on the passing of his mother, Kate Power  
▪ 
Josephine Coyne, County Librarian con the passing of her Mother Teresa 
▪ 
Pat Crotty of Paris Texas on the passing of his Grandchild 
 
Cathaoirleach proposed a minutes of prayer and a five-minute adjournment to 
mark the passing of Kate Power. 
 
Cathaoirleach Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh thanked all the Members for their kind 
words and again extended her sincere sympathy to the family. 
 
Cathaoirleach asked to change Agenda to take Item 2. (b)  iii & iv first. 
 
 

2 
 
 
2. 
(b) 
Pleanail - Planning 
 
(iii) 
Cuid 8 - Part 8:  Construction of Age Friendly & Accessible Dwellings at 
Loughboy 
Ms. Eimear Cody (Senior Engineer) provided an overview of the scheme and 
consultation process. The proposed development will consist of the 
construction of five no. single storey friendly and accessible dwellings which 
will include 3 no. 2 bedroom age friendly bungalows and 2 no. 3 bedroom 
accessible bungalows, new access road and vehicular parking, a type 1 
pumping station and all associated site works.  Submissions were made by 24 
people.  Multiple submissions were received from several people. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Seán Ó 
hArgáin and agreed: 
 
“We the Members of Kilkenny County Council approve the proposed Part VIII in 
accordance with Section 179 of the Planning & Development Act 2000, as amended and 
Part VIII of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended for the 
proposed development of five single storey Age Friendly & Accessible Dwellings at 
Loughboy Park,  as circulated.” 
 
(iv) 
Cuid 8 - Part 8: Mixed Tenure Development at Kilcreene/Drakelands  
Ms. Eimear Cody outlines that the proposed construction is a mixed tenure 
development of 80 housing units with all associated site works, landscaping, 
roadways, footpaths and services at Kilcreene / Drakelands. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Seán Ó 
hArgáin and agreed: 
 
“We the Members of Kilkenny County Council approve the proposed Part VIII in 
accordance with Section 179 of the Planning & Development Act 2000, as amended and 
Part VIII of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended for the 
proposed construction of a mixed tenure development of 80 housing units at 
Kilcreene/Drakelands, Kilkenny City, as circulated.” 
 
 
2. 
(a) 
Tithíocht & Díuscairt Eile  -  Housing & Other Disposal 
 
(i) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Eugene McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Andrew 
McGuinness and agreed: 
 
“Notice is hereby given, that at a meeting of the Council to be held after the expiration 
of 10 days from the date of this notice, it is the intention of Kilkenny County Council, 
in accordance with Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, to dispose of its 
interest in a property at 26 Michael Street, Kilkenny (as identified on the attached map) 
to Thomas Murray for the nominal sum of €1 (one euro) with Kilkenny County Council 
responsible for the legal costs associated with the Transfer.  Site area measures 0.0067ha.  
The Consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not 
required.” 
 
(ii) 
It was proposed by Cllr. David Fitzgerald, seconded by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin 
and agreed: 
 
“Notice is hereby given, that at a meeting of the Council to be held after the expiration 
of 10 days from the date of this notice, it is the intention of Kilkenny County Council, 
in accordance with Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, to dispose of its 
interest in a property (back-garden) at 27 Michael Street, Kilkenny (as identified on the 
attached map) to  Concepta (Connie) Jordan for the nominal sum of €1 (one euro) with 
Kilkenny County Council responsible for the legal costs associated with the Transfer.  
Site area measures 0.0366ha.  The Consent of the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage is not required.” 
 

3 
 
 
(iii) It was proposed by Cllr. Michael Doyle, seconded by Cllr. Michael Delaney and 
agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 
2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the disposal of its interest in land 
at Highrath, Maddoxtown, Co. Kilkenny (as identified 1z on the attached map) to John 
Bryan, Maddoxtown, Dunbell, Co. Kilkenny for the nominal sum of €10 (ten euro) with 
the purchaser being responsible for their own legal costs and the legal costs of Kilkenny 
County Council associated with the sale.  Site area measures 0.14 ha. The Consent of 
the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not required.” 
(iv) It was proposed by Cllr. Michael McCarthy, seconded by Cllr. David Fitzgerald 
and agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, to dispose 
of its interest in a strip of ground at Barrowmount, Goresbridge, Co. Kilkenny 
measuring circa 0.032 ha (as identified on the attached map) to Conor Nolan, 
Knocklane, Barrowmount, Goresbridge, Co. Kilkenny for the nominal sum of ten euro 
(€10) with Mr Nolan responsible for all legal costs associated with the sale.  The Consent 
of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not required.” 
 
(v) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Deirdre 
Cullen and agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, to dispose 
of its interest in a derelict factory at The Ring, Bennettsbridge, Co. Kilkenny (as 
identified on the attached map) to Talbots Inch Limited, Unit 2 Bagenalstown Industrial 
Park, Royal Oak Road, Bagenalstown, Co. Carlow for the sum of thirty five thousand 
euro (€35,000) with each party responsible for their own legal costs associated with the 
sale.  The combined site area measures 0.09 acres/.04 Ha/435 sq yards.  The Consent of 
the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not required.” 
 
 
2. 
(b) 
Pleanail - Planning 
 
(i) 
Tuairisc an Phríomhfheidhmeannach ar Athrú Molta Uimh. 8A - Cur i 
bhFeidhm an NPF: Riachtanais Fáis Tithíochta 
Chief Executive’s Report on Proposed Variation No. 8A - NPF 
Implementation: Housing Growth Requirements  
Cllr Fitzgerald excused himself from the meeting due to a Conflict of Interest  
 
Mr. Tim Butler (DoS) provided an overview of the rationale behind the 
variation. There is a requirement for 1,460 homes, or  52ha of additional zoned 
to meet our housing targets by 2034. The Government has recommended 
headroom; therefore, we are proposing to zone 76.2 ha which 46% above the 
requirement for 2034. The proposed variation 8A will ensure that 76.2 ha of 
land will be zoned for residential development mostly concentrated within the 
two emerging neighbourhoods of Loughmacask and Breagagh Valley. These 
lands are serviced for immediate delivery with planning application either 
granted or advanced pre planning discussions held for more than 300 houses 
and retailing in the Breagagh Valley alone. 
 
The Council will take on the responsibility for the delivery of the major open 
space delivery within the Breagagh Valley to ensure that recreational facilities 
are delivered in a timely fashion for the emerging neighbourhood. Tim Butler 
acknowledged the work of the forward planning team on Variation 8A.  
 
28 submissions were received, the details of which are included in the report. 
 
 

4 
 
 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Deirdre 
Cullen and agreed: 
 
“We, the Members of Kilkenny County Council, having considered the proposal to make 
Variation 8A to the Kilkenny City & County Development Plan 2021 under Section 
58 of the Planning & Development Act 2024 (as amended), and having considered the 
Chief Executive’s Report as circulated on the 15th April 2026, prepared in accordance 
with Section 11 (a) of the above Acts, the recommendations as set out in the Chief 
Executive’s report, and with our decision made at a meeting of Kilkenny County 
Council held on the 20th  April  2026,  do hereby resolve to vary the Kilkenny City & 
County Development Plan in accordance with Proposed Variation 8A.” 
 
 
(ii) 
Athrú Molta 9 - Proposed Variation 9 
(Deferred to Council meeting, May 2026) 
 
 
(v)  
Cuid 8 - Part 8: Development of St. Mary’s Laneway & Outdoor Amenity 
Space Enhancement Scheme 
Tim Butler acknowledged the work of Frank Stafford and the team, he 
provided an overview of the scheme.  The proposed development on St. Mary’s 
Laneway provides for pavement renewal with natural stone, drainage 
improvements, boundary treatment, street furniture, landscaping, signage and 
enhanced public lighting that will incorporate feature lighting. Within St. 
Mary’s Church grounds works include a combination of soft and hard 
landscaping interventions to improve the outdoor amenity space. Ten 
submissions were received. Ten number submissions were received a lot of 
which referenced accessing the grounds and maintaining the leaving the main 
gate open.  The gate will remain opened.  
 
It was proposed by Cllr David Fitzgeralkd and seconded by Cllr. Andrew 
McGuinness, and agreed 
 
We the Members of Kilkenny County Council approve the proposed Part VIII in 
accordance with Section 179 of the Planning & Development Act 2000, as amended and 
Part VIII of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, as amended for the 
proposed of the development of St Mary’s Laneway and Outdoor Amenity Space 
Enhancement Scheme, as circulated.” 
 
 
(vi) 
Glacadh i gCúram /Taking in Charge [TC191] Nuncio Park, Kilkenny 
It was proposed by Cllr David Fitzgerald and seconded by Cllr. Andrew 
McGuinness, and agreed 
 
We, the members of Kilkenny County Council approve the initiation of proceedings for 
the taking in charge of the following development in accordance with Section 11 of the 
Roads Act, 1993 and in compliance with Section 180 of the Planning & Development 
Act, 2000 as amended by Section 59 of the Planning & Development Act 2010”. 
Development: [TC 191]  Nuncio Park,  Kilkenny 
 
(vii) Scéim Chontribhúid Forbartha - Development Contribution Scheme 
A background to the scheme was provided by Mr Tim Butler. There were 5 
submissions and the Chief Executive is recommending adoption. 
 
 

5 
 
 
It was proposed by Cllr Michael Doyle and seconded by Cllr. Andrew 
McGuinness, and agreed: 
 
“We, the members of Kilkenny County Council, having considered the Kilkenny 
County Council Development Contribution Scheme 2026-2030 as prepared in 
accordance with Section 48 of the Planning & Development Act 2000 as amended, and 
having considered the Chief Executive’s Report as circulated on the 14th April 2026, 
as prepared in accordance with Section 48 (6) of the above Act, the recommendations 
as set out in the Chief Executive’s report, and with our decision made at a meeting of 
Kilkenny County Council held on the 20th April 2026 hereby approve the Kilkenny 
County Council Development Contribution Scheme 2026-2030. 
 
A first-time buyer waiver scheme is being introduced in conjunction with the 
development contribution scheme to support those purchasing or building a 
fist time home  
 
It was proposed by Cllr Michael Doyle and seconded by Cllr. Andrew 
McGuinness, and agreed 
 
“We, the members of Kilkenny County Council, having considered the First Time Home 
Buyers Waiver Scheme applicable under the Kilkenny County Council Development 
Contribution Scheme 2026 -2030, as per the waiver scheme circulated on the 17th April 
2026, and with our decision made at a meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on the 
20th April 2026 approve the First Time Home Buyers Waiver Scheme. 
 
 
(c) 
Boithre  - Roads 
 
(i) 
Scéim Obair Bhóthair 2026 - Roadworks Scheme 2026 
Mr Seamus Kavanagh -Senior Engineer provided a comprehensive overview of 
the Roadworks Scheme 2026. The scheme which outlines a spend of €36 million 
covers over 140 Kilometres of Road, 8 bridge upgrades, 22 significant projects 
(over €20,000) and infrastructure related to the N24 and N25.  
 
It was proposed by Cllr Michael Delaney and seconded by Cllr. Deirdre Cullen, 
and agreed. 
 
“We the Members of Kilkenny County Council approve the Roadworks Scheme for 
2026, as circulated.” 
 
 
(d) 
Pobal- Community  
 
(i) 
Tuairisc Bhliantúil LCDC - LCDC Annual Report 
It was proposed by Cllr Tomás Breathnach seconded by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin, 
and agreed: 
 
“That the Annual Report 2025 of the Kilkenny Local Community Development 
Committee was adopted by Resolution.” 
 
(ii) 
Deontais Imeachtaí Pobail - Community Event Grants  
Anne Marie Shortall, Senior Executive Officer provided an update.  The scheme 
was widely advertised with a closing date of 13th March, 2026.  The total budget 
allocation was €30,000 with a €700 underspend from 2025.  A total of 93 
applications were received with a total of €75,280 requested.  A total of 85 were 
granted an allocation. The remaining 8 were ineligible or received funding 
through a different source. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr Joe Lyons and seconded by Cllr Andrew McGuinness, 
and agreed: 
 
“That the Community Event Grants 2026 are hereby approved by the Members of 
Kilkenny County Council, as per Report circulated.” 
 
 

6 
 
 
 
(e) 
Timpeallacht - Environment 
 
(i) 
Deontais Reilig - Graveyard Grants 
Fiona Deegan, Director of Services provided the overview outlining that there 
was a total of 53 applications received under the Graveyard Grants Scheme 
2026.  The total budget allocation for the Graveyard Grants for 2026 is €24,000. 
The total amount of grant assistance recommended was €24,000. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr Fidelis Doherty and seconded by Cllr Jenny Catt 
Slattery, and agreed: 
 
“That the Graveyard Grants 2026, as circulated to the Members, are hereby approved 
by the Members of Kilkenny County Council.” 
 
(ii) 
Plean Cur Chun Feidhme Gnímh Aimsire - Climate Action Implementation Plan 
Michael Arthurs, Senior Executive Officer presented on the Year 2 
Implementation Plan of the Climate Action Plan.  The Climate Action Plan was 
adopted in February 2024, and this is the second annual progress report on your 
plan. The report looks at progress on delivering climate action across five 
strategic commitments, i.e. leadership and governance, climate mitigation, 
climate adaptation, delivery across services and community activation and 
engagement.  The report provides performance statistics relating to 2025 which 
supplements performance statistics from 2024 that was provided in the Year 1 
Implementation Report.  The Plan contains 99 actions, comprising 13% 
adaptation actions, 34% mitigation actions, and 53% which are both adaptation 
and mitigation.  89% of actions have commenced since the Plan was adopted 
(compared to 82% of actions commenced in 2024). It was noted that Severe 
Weather team met 18 times last year as opposed to 6 times in 2024 
 
Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin, notes that €1.5 million was send by Kilkenny County 
Council last year from the carbon Fund. This was used to retrofit houses. he 
feels that there is a lack of understanding of this fund and it needs to 
highlighted where the fund is being spend. He will look for a full breakdown 
on this. 
 
Fiona Deegan (Director of Services) thanked Michael and Claire Prendergast 
we well as colleagues throughout the organisation for their commitment, 
noting that much had been achieved and there is still work to be progressed.  
 
It was proposed by Cllr Seán Ó hArgáin and seconded by Cllr Michael Doyle 
and agreed: 
 
“That the Year 2 Implementation Report on the Local Authority Climate Action Plan 
is hereby approved by the Members of Kilkenny County Council.” 
 
 
             (f)         Páirceanna - Parks  
 
(i) 
Deontais Áise - Amenity Grants 
Frank Stafford -Senior Engineer provided an overview of the grants including 
the Budget, evaluation process and the number of application recommended. 
Budget – The 2026 budget approved under the Amenity Grant Scheme is 
€140,000. The closing date for the submission of applications was the 27th 
March 2026. A total of 186 applications were received and evaluated.  Two 
applications were deemed ineligible as they did not meet with the objectives of 
the Amenity Grant Scheme. A total of 181 applications were recommended for 
funding approval. Two additional were mislaid and deemed eligible.   
 

7 
 
 
Cllr Pat Fitzpatrcik noted that this is one of the most valuable funding scheme. 
He thanked Frank and his team and recommended that the funding allocation 
for this scheme be increased. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr Pat Fitzgerald and seconded by Cllr Fidelis Doherty 
and agreed: 
 
“That the Amenity Grants 2026, as circulated to the Members, are hereby approved by 
the Members of Kilkenny County Council.” 
 
 
             (f)          Airgeadas- Finance 
 
(i) 
Dréacht Ráiteas Airgeadais Bliantúil 2025 - Draft Annual Financial Statement 
Mr. Martin Prenderville Director of Services provided an overview of the Draft 
Annual Financial Statement 2025 as circulated. Martin highlighted the key 
elements including the small surplus, the cash balance, mortgage loans 
repayable and capital expenditure. There were no new non mortgage loans 
drawn down in 2025. An update on the collection rates across the areas of rates, 
rents and loans was provided. A summary of accounts for the Associated 
Companies was also provided.  
 
Martin explained that these are unaudited and a final audited version will be 
presented to the Elected members later in the year.  
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin and seconded by Cllr Fidelis Doherty 
and agreed: 
 
“We, the Members of Kilkenny County Council, hereby adopt the Annual Financial 
Statement for year ending 31st December, 2025.” 
 
 
(ii) 
Ceadaíocht ar Chaitheamh Iomarcach - Approval of Excess Expenditure 
Mr. Martin Prenderville Director of Services highlighted the excess expenditure 
incurred in the various service areas shown below. This mostly relates to 
additional income received during the year that was not included in Adopted 
Budget. 
 
Housing & Building 
A01 
Maintenance & Improvement of LA Housing 
1,181,642 
A05 
Administration of the Homeless Service 
203,594 
A07 
RAS and Leasing Programme 
5,911,139 
A09 
Housing Grants 
236,831 
A11 
Agency & Recoupable Services 
26,024 
Subtotal 
7,559,230 
Road Transportation & Safety 
B02 
NS Road – Maintenance & Improvement  
98,668 
B04 
Local Road – Maintenance & Improvement 
4,241,537 
B05 
Public Lighting 
341,021 
B07 
Road Safety Engineering Improvement 
256,346 
B10 
Support to Roads Capital Programme  
29,680 
B11 
Agency & Recoupable Services 
1,197,173 
Subtotal 
6,164,425 
 
 

8 
 
 
Water Services 
C02 
Weaste Water Treatment 
243,039 
C04 
Public Conveniences 
28,891 
C06 
Support to Water Capital Programme 
334 
Subtotal 
272,264 
Development Management 
D01 
Forward Planning  
439,709 
D03 
 Enforcement  
97,424 
D05 
Tourism Development and Promotion 
537,445 
D07 
Unfinished Housing Estates 
1,661 
D09 
Economic Development and Promotion 
1,186,028 
D11 
Heritage and Conservation Services 
226,132 
Subtotal 
2,488,399 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Services 
 
E01 
Landfill Operation and Aftercare 
6,666 
E02 
Recovery & Recycling Facilities Operations 
91,301 
E06 
Street Cleaning 
616,876 
E09 
Maintenance of Burial Grounds 
174,000 
E10 
Safety of Structures and Places 
62,296 
E11 
Operation of Fire Service 
266,579 
E13 
Water Quality, Air and Noise Pollution 
348,498 
E15 
Climate Change & Flooding 
436,172 
 
Subtotal 
1,995,722 
 
 
 
 
Recreation and Amenity 
 
F01 
Leisure Facilities Operations 
526 
F03 
Outdoor Leisure Areas Operations 
589,633 
F05 
Operation of Arts Programme 
35,639 
F06 
Agency and Recoupable Services 
11,652 
 
Subtotal 
637,450 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture, Education, Health & Welfare  
 
G04 
Veterinary Service 
166,205 
 
Subtotal 
166,205 
 
 
 
 
Miscellaneous Services 
 
H02 
Profit & Loss Stores Account 
215,372 
H04 
Franchise Costs 
22,066 
H05 
Operation of Morgue and Coroner Expenses 
44,508 
H07 
Operation of Markets and Casual Trading 
1,353 
H08 
Malicious Damage 
1,375 
H11 
Agency & Recoupable Services 
267,149 
 
Subtotal 
551,823 
 
 
 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin and seconded by Cllr Fidelis Doherty 
and agreed: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of Excess Expenditure for year ending 
31st December, 2025 as follows in accordance with S104(2) Local Government Act 
2001: 
 
 
 

9 
 
 
 
(c) 
Gnóthaí Corparáideacha – Corporate Affairs 
 
(i) 
Tuarascáil Mhíosúil an Phríom-Fheidhmeannaigh 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Report 
Cllr Mary Hilda Cavanagh took the report as read and noted.  
 
 
(ii) 
Tuarascáil Bhliantúil 2025 - Annual Report 2025  
It was proposed by Cllr. Michael Doyle and seconded by Cllr Andrew 
McGuinness and agreed. 
 
“That the Draft Annual Report for 2025 is hereby approved by the Members of 
Kilkenny County Council.” 
 
 
(iii) 
Tuarascáil Bhliantúil Chomhairle Iniúchóireachta 2025 
Audit Committee Annual Report 2025  
Brigid Webster (Internal Auditor presented the report highlighting the key 
details as circulated.   Cllr Tomás Breathnach and Cllr Pat Fitzpatrick and the 
members representatives. Cllr. Tomás Breathnach noted forensic nature of the 
works and acknowledged the work of the committee. Cllr Fitzpatrick thanked 
the committee and acknowledged the work of chairperson Sean Brady and 
Martin Prenderville.  Brigid Webster was congratulated for her achievement as 
a member of the chartered institute of Internal Auditors.  
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness and seconded by Cllr. Tomás 
Breathnach and agreed: 
 
“That the Audit Committee Annual Report 2025 is hereby approved by the Members 
of Kilkenny County Council.” 
 
 
(iv) 
Charter Choiste Iniúchta & Clár Oibre 2026 
Audit Committee Charter & Work Programme 2026 
It was proposed by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach and seconded by Cllr Pat Dunphy 
and agreed. 
 
That the Audit Committee Charter is hereby approved by the Members of Kilkenny 
County Council.” 
 
 
(v) 
Athbhreithniú ar Éifeachtúlacht Choiste Iniúchta 
Review of Effectiveness of Kilkenny County Council’s Audit Committee  
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness and seconded by Cllr Michael 
Doyle and agreed: 
 
“That the Review of Effectiveness of Kilkenny County Council’s Audit Committee is 
hereby approved by the Members of Kilkenny County Council.” 
 
 
(vi) 
Ceapain Ionadaí go Coiste AILG - Appoint Nominee to AILG Committee 
Cllr Michael McCarthy is stepping down from the AILG and is nominating Ger 
Frisby to replace him.  
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh and seconded by Cllr Michael 
McCarthy and agreed: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council hereby appoints Cllr. Ger Frisby to the Association 
of Irish Local Government. 
 
 

10 
 
 
 
(vii) 
Ainmnigh Cathaoirleach don SPC 4 - Appoint Chairperson to SPC 4 
It was agreed that Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin would replace Cllr. Eugene 
McGuinness as Chairperson of SPC 4. The replacement will take place from 
July 1st 2026. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach and seconded by Cllr Eugene 
McGuinness and agreed: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council hereby appoints Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin as Chair 
designate to SPC 4: Climate Action, Energy & Environment Protection”. 
 
3. 
Comhfhreagras  -  Correspondence 
 
(i) 
There was no correspondence to note 
 
 
4. 
Gnó ar athló ó chruinniúroimhe seo  -  Business adjourned from a previous Meeting 
 
None. 
 
 
5. 
Dátaí agus Amanta do chruinnithe a shocrú - Fix Dates & Times of Meetings 
 
(i) 
Sceideal Cruinniú  - Schedule of Meetings 
This was noted and agreed by all. 
 
 
6. 
Plé ar Thuairiscí agus Moltaí ó Choistí an Comhairle 
  
Consideration of Reports & Recommendations of Committees of the Council 
 
None. 
 
 
7. 
Gnó Eile romhainn i bhFógra reachtála an Chruinnithe 
  
Other Business set forth in the Notice convening the Meeting 
 
None. 
 
 
8. 
Oideachas agus Oiliúint  -  Education & Training 
 
(i) 
Sceideal na gComhdhálacha  - Schedule of Conferences  
Schedule of Conferences was noted. 
 
 
9. 
Gnótha ag éirí as Miontuairiscí  -  Matters Arising from Minutes 
 
None. 
 
 
10. 
Aon Ghnó Eile  -  Any Other Business 
 
None. 
 
 
11. 
Fógraí Rúin - Notices of Motion 
 
10 (26) Cllr. Maurice Shortall 
It was proposed by Cllr. Maurice Shorthall, seconded by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness and 
agreed that: 
 
“From 2nd February, 2026 a new national licensing system for retailers selling tobacco products and 
nicotine inhaling products, including vapes, officially came into force across Ireland.  Under Public 
Health legislation, all retailers must now hold a licence issued by the HSE Environmental Health 
Service for each premises where vapes or tobacco are sold.  Retailers have been advised that compliance 
checks will take place in the coming months. These checks are expected to include underage test 
purchasing as part of enforcement activity, similar to existing tobacco control measures. 
 

11 
 
 
Kilkenny County Council calls on the Minister for Health, Jennifer Carroll MacNeill, to work in 
conjunction with the Health Service Executive (HSE) to carry out spot checks on vape shops across 
Ireland.  The purpose of these inspections would be to ensure that all vaping products being sold are 
legal, properly imported into the country, and fully compliant with Irish regulations and licensing laws.  
This is to ensure that legitimate traders who are trying to make a living are not undermined by 
businesses selling illegal or non-compliant products.” 
 
Cllr Andrew McGuioness spike in favour of the motion citing a shop where American candy 
can be bought in the same vape flavour and targeting children and youth. He notes that some 
of the products are more potent than the original drug. Cllr Seán Ó hArgáin agreed saying 
that in Australia a prescription is required for a vape. He noted that vapes are sold at the front 
of the shops whereas tobacco is secure part of the shop. He said that the withdrawal from 
vaping is often far worse than from cigarettes and referred to the vapes as ‘the revenge of the 
tobacco industry’. He said that all hedge shops were closed down virtually overnight with a 
health directorate and recommended similar action. Cllr Coonan also spoke in favour of the 
motion  
 
11 (26) Cllr. Tomás Breathnach 
It was proposed by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach, seconded by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin and agreed: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council writes to the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
to seek the recognition of the appropriateness of multi-annual funding for Community Monuments 
Fund projects and accordingly to implement a suitable scheme which accords with their time-frames to 
completion.” 
 
Cllr. Tomás Breathnach provided the rationale for the motion saying that projects can be part 
funded and therefore left unfinished. Therefore, multiple annual funding is required to see 
project completed successfully  
 
12 (26) Cllr. Maria Dollard 
It was proposed by Cllr Maria Dollard, seconded by Cllr. Eugene McGuiness and agreed that 
the motion 12 (26) would be deferred to the May 2026 Plenary meeting.  
 
13 (26) Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh 
It was proposed by Cllr Mary Hilda Cavanagh, seconded by Cllr.  Michael McCarthy and 
agreed that: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council would write to the Minister for Health and the HSE asking for 
clarification on the GP service for the people of Johnstown and Urlingford and all patients in that area 
who use this service.” 
 
14 (26) Cllr. Pat Dunphy 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Dunphy, seconded by Cllr.  Jenny Catt Slattery and agreed that: 
 
“To ask the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to bring in measures to assist low 
paid people who do not get on the Housing List as they are over the threshold financially and now have 
to rent privately if they can get a house. Some people have to fork out €1,600 to €1,800 per month on 
rent. People cannot afford this amount of rent on low incomes (€35,000 to €50,000) These people were 
paying less than €1,000 per month for rent but received a Notice to Quit recently and have to move out. 
The cost of rent, The threshold financially and HAP should all be considered for improvements to make 
the rent more affordable if a  person doesn’t make it onto the housing list. The HAP should be given to 
those on low incomes as mentioned previously who do not make the housing list. What they have to pay 
in rent now is not manageable without support. If they don’t get support what will they do to meet the 
very high rent.” 
 
 Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin spoke in favour of the motion saying that we have a ‘locked out generation’. 
he said that the behaviour of investment and pension funds have locked people out of home 
ownership. Cllr. Tomás Breathnach, noted that he had brought a similar motion previously. 
He recommended that the word ‘adequate’ and ‘substantial increase’ be added to the motion. 
Cllr Dunphy noted that he had no issue with those amendments.  

12 
 
 
12. 
Fógraí i dtaobh Rúin ó Údaráis Áitiúla eile ag lorg tacaíochta ó Chomhairle Chontae Chill 
Chainnigh - Notices of Motion from other local authorities seeking support of Kilkenny 
County Council 
 
It was proposed by Cllr Mary Hilda Cavanagh, seconded by Cllr Michael McCarthy and 
agreed that the following Notices of Motion from other local authorities were taken as ready 
noted. 
 
02 (26) Sligo County Council 
“That this Council calls on the Government to: 
(a) 
Recognise the serious harm suffered by women and children in Mother and Baby 
Homes, County Homes and related institutions  
(b) 
Notes that over 1,090 babies and children died at Sean Ross Abbey, and that many 
burial locations remain unknown  
(c) 
Notes that this issue is also relevant locally, including Sligo County Home / St. John’s 
Hospital and boarded-out child records  
(d) 
Expresses concern at the continued sealing of State records relating to Mother and Baby 
Homes and the Ryan Report, denying survivors and families access to the truth  
(e) 
Investigate and excavate burial sites where children are believed to be buried  
(f) 
Unseal institutional records and provide survivors and families access to their own 
information  
(g) 
Extend redress to all survivors, without exclusion.  
 
and agrees to write to the Minister for Children, Disability and Equality and An Taoiseach and 
forward this motion to all TDs and Senators and other Councils”. 
 
 
03 (26) Wexford County Council 
That this Council calls on the Government to task Irish Public Bodies [IPB] with the provision 
of insurance cover for residential and commercial properties that are unable to obtain 
insurance from commercial insurers due to previous flooding events or because they are 
located within designated flood risk zones. 
 
This Council acknowledges that the risk profile of such properties makes it uneconomic for 
the private insurance market to provide cover on a commercial basis.  In that context, the 
Council further calls on the Minister for ~Finance to introduce a modest, ring-fenced insurance 
levy to establish and support a national flood insurance claims fund, which would underpin 
the provision of such cover and ensure long term sustainability.  This Council believes that 
access to insurance is essential for the protection of homeowners, businesses, community 
viability and local economic resilience and that a state supported mechanism is required to 
address this market failure.” 
 
04 (26) Leitrim County Council 
“That Leitrim County Council calls on the TII to set up a separate funding stream to support 
County Councils to carry out maintenance and repairs on greenways, separate from the Roads 
funding allocated to each County council.  The issue of maintenance on greenways is an issue 
all over the country as greenway demonstration stretches are developed and brought into 
use.” 
 
05 (26) Leitrim County Council 
“That Leitrim County Council calls on the Minister for Justice, Jim O’Callaghan TD, to fully 
implement the revised EU Anti-Trafficking Directive and to establish a special National Garda 
Unit to deal with human trafficking that would collaborate with labour inspectors who operate 
under Workplace Relations [WRC] and other agencies.  Such action would deal with human 
Trafficking for sexual exploitation and labour trafficking for the hospitality, construction and 
agricultural industries in Ireland.” 
 
 

13 
 
 
06 (26) Wexford County Council 
“That this Council calls on the Government to fast-track and publish the legislation outlawing 
the use of anonymous social media accounts, profiles and user/chat groups on all social 
medial platforms.” 
 
07 (26) Galway County Council 
“That this Council call upon Government to enact legislation to systematically, sustainably 
and steadily increase the provision of Irish-medium education so that future generations of 
Irish children will have the opportunity to be educated through their national language, if they 
so desire.” 
 
08 (26) Clare County Council 
"As Elected Members of this Council, we are deeply conscious of the financial pressure facing 
many people in our communities. For disabled people, that pressure is significantly greater. 
Disabled people incur additional and unavoidable costs every single day. These include 
higher heating and electricity usage, transport costs, the running of essential equipment, 
personal assistance, and the practical realities of living in environments that are not fully 
accessible. These costs rise further during winter months.  These are not discretionary 
expenses. They are structural costs linked directly to impairment and to systemic barriers. 
Across our County, disabled people are making impossible choices: between heating and 
participation, between mobility and food, between independence and debt. This is not 
acceptable in a society that claims to value equality and inclusion.  While local authorities do 
not determine national social protection policy, we are the closest tier of government to our 
communities. We see the impact of poverty in housing applications, in requests for supports, 
and in the growing strain on families. 
 
We are therefore calling on this Council to formally request that Government introduce an 
immediate emergency cost of disability payment. This payment should recognise the 
additional costs borne by disabled people and be delivered in a way that does not exclude 
those who are in employment.  Disabled people should not be penalised for working. Nor 
should they be pushed into poverty because of unavoidable additional costs. 
 
A national gathering is planned for 1.00 p.m. on 28 February at the Garden of Remembrance 
to highlight this issue. Many would prefer not to have to gather in protest, but to see leadership 
and action instead.  As Councillors, we have a responsibility to stand with our constituents 
and to send a clear message to Government that this matter requires urgent attention.  We 
respectfully ask our fellow elected members to support this call.” 
 
09 (26) Longford County Council 
“I call upon Longford County Council to write to the Minister for Children, Disability & 
Equality, Norma Foley TD and Minister of State Emer Higgins TD to strongly advocate for an 
emergency payment to be made to disabled people to alleviate the shortfall from cuts to 
disability funding in Budget 2026, as a mechanism to bridge the gap until an annual Cost of 
Disability payment (which the government has committed to implement) in 2027 is put in place to 
address the extra expenses faced by disabled people.” 
 
 
 
That concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
______________________________ 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
DATE 
