1 
 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ AR CHRUINNIÚ IOMLÁNACH DE CHOMHAIRLE 
CONTAE CHILL CHAINNIGH TIONÓLTA DÉ LUAIN, 19 EANÁIR 2026 AG 
3.00 I.N. I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, HALLA AN CHONTAE AGUS TRÍ 
MS TEAMS 
 
MINUTES OF PLENARY MEETING OF KILKENNY COUNTY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY, 19TH JANUARY, 2026 AT 3.00 P.M. IN THE COUNCIL 
CHAMBER, COUNTY HALL & VIA MS TEAMS 
 
 
Chair:  
 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh. 
 
Elected Members: 
Council Chamber 
Cllrs. Tomás Breathnach, John Brennan, John Coonan, Fidelis Doherty, Maria 
Dollard, Michael Doyle, Patrick Dunphy, David Fitzgerald, Pat Fitzpatrick, Ger 
Frisby, Joe Lyons, Joe Malone, Michael McCarthy, Eugene McGuinness, Seán Ó 
hArgáin, Joe Sheridan and Michael Shortall. 
 
MS Teams 
Cllrs. Brian Cleere, Deirdre Cullen, Jenny Catt Slattery, Michael Delaney, 
Stephanie Doheny & Andrew McGuinness. 
 
Officials: 
 
Lar Power, Tim Butler, Martin Prendiville, Fiona Deegan, Ian Gardner, Mary 
Mulholland, Margo Hayes, Jan McIntyre, Richard Vaughan, Catherine Cooney 
& Brenda Kelly. 
 
 
Fógraí - Announcements 
 
Cathaoirleach Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh welcomed everyone and extended good wishes and good 
health to all for the New Year. 
 
She congratulated all who were shortlisted for LAMA Awards to be held in February and to Kilkenny 
County Council for being shortlisted for Local Authority of the year. 
 
 
Vótaí Comhbhrón - Votes of Sympathy 
 
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh extended vote of sympathy to the following: 
 
▪ 
Jimmy Wall, Former General Services Supervisor, Callan Municipal District. 
▪ 
Kathleen Hyland, Mother of Alan Hyland, Area Engineer, Kilkenny Municipal District. 
▪ 
Carole O’Connor, Mother of Arlene O’Connor, Planning Department. 
▪ 
Clem Whyte, Brother and Brother-in-law of Helen Walton, Finance Department 
▪ 
Una Doheny, Mother of Helen Doheny, Planning Department. 
▪ 
Jack Magner, Former Finance Officer. 
▪ 
Kyle Comerford, son of Paul Comerford, Thomastown Municipal District & Fire Service. 
▪ 
John Hennessy, Father-in-law of Margo Hayes, Corporate Services. 
▪ 
Breda Walsh, Mother-in-law of Martina Walsh, Corporate Services. 
▪ 
Sean O’Brien, Goresbridge Retired General Operative. 
▪ 
Deirdre McArdle Clinton, Mother of Michelle McQuaid. 
 
 
1. 
Dearbhú Miontuairiscí  -  Confirmation of Minutes 
 
(i) 
Miontuairiscí ar Chruinniú Plé ar an Nollaig - Minutes of December Plenary Meeting 
Proposed by Cllr. Ger Frisby, seconded by Cllr. Seán Ó’hArgáin and agreed: 
 
“That Minutes of Plenary Meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on Monday, 15th 
December, 2025 as circulated with the Agenda be and are hereby approved”. 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
2. 
(a) 
Tithíocht & Díuscairt Eile  -  Housing & Other Disposal 
 
(i) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Michael McCarthy, seconded by Cllr. Michael Delaney 
and agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 
2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the disposal of its interest in 
Property at Ballykeeffe Quarry (Amphitheatre), Ballykeeffe, Kilmanagh, Co. Kilkenny 
– which measures approx. 1.3339 ha and as outlined on the attached map - to 
Kilmanagh Ballycallan Killaloe Community Enterprise Group Ltd, The Old School 
House, Kilmanagh, Co. Kilkenny by way of long term lease for a period of 15 years and 
at an annual rent of €52.  Both parties will be responsible for their own legal costs 
associated with the lease.  The Consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage is not required.” 
 
(ii) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach, seconded by Cllr. Pat Dunphy and 
agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, to dispose 
of its interest in a plot of ground at Ballygriffin, Carrigeen, Co. Kilkenny. (as identified 
on the attached map) to Colin Wemyss, Executor and son of the late Elizabeth Reddy, 
Ballygriffin, Carrigeen, Co. Kilkenny for the nominal sum of ten euro (€10) with Mr 
Wemyss responsible for all legal costs associated with the sale.  The site area measures 
800m².  The Consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is 
not required.” 
 
2. 
(b) 
Pleanail - Planning 
 
(i) 
Cuid 8: Forbairt Tithíochta/Part 8:  Housing Development, Ashgrove, Slieverue 
Mr. Richard Vaughan provided an update and gave a Presentation on the 
following: 
 
▪ 
Housing Demand in Slieverue and Ferrybank. 
▪ 
Units to be allocated via Choice Based Letting. 
▪ 
Open to all on Housing List to apply. 
▪ 
Proposal for 13 dwellings 
o 8 apartments consisting of four 1 bedroom and four 2 bedroom with 
own door access and ground floor apartments designed as Age 
Friendly. 
o 5 houses – four 2 bedroom and one three bedroom. 
▪ 
Submissions Received 
▪ 
Public Open Space and Parking [19 car spaces and 6 bicycle spaces] 
 
The support of the Elected Members was sought to proceed with the 
development. 
 
Contributions were received from Cllrs. Ger Frisby, Jenny Catt Slattery and 
Mary Hilda Cavanagh as follows: 
 
▪ 
expressed support for the proposed development and thanked Richard 
Vaughan and the team for the diligence shown throughout the process 
particularly during the Public Consultation. 
▪ 
Noted that concerns regarding the front wall, the rear boundary wall and 
the apartment elevation facing the road have been addressed. 
▪ 
Welcomed that some of the units will be allocated as affordable housing. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Ger Frisby, seconded by Cllr. Jenny Catt Slattery and 
agreed that: 
 
“We the Members of Kilkenny County Council approve the Part 8 in accordance with 
Section 179 of the Planning & Development Act 2000 as amended and Part VIII of the 
Planning & Development Regulations 2001 for the proposed development of 13 
residential units consisting of 4 no. 2-bedroom houses and 1 no. 3-bedroom house and 
a two-storey apartment block of 4 no. 2-bedroom apartments and 4no. 1-bedroom 
apartments all with own-door access at Ashgrove, Slieverue, Co. Kilkenny. 

3 
 
 
(ii) 
Tuarascáil an Phríomh-Fheidhmeannaigh ar Thairiscintí don Athrú Molta 7 
Chief Executive’s Report on Submissions to Proposed Variation 7 
Mr. Tim Butler presented the Chief Executive’s Report on the Proposed 
Variation 7 to the City & County Development Plan 2021-2027.  He advised that 
the proposed Variation is intended to change the zoning of three parcels of land 
in Kilkenny as follows: 
 
▪ 
Site 1 – Upper Patrick Street/ Jacob Street to Existing Residential. 
 
▪ 
Site 2 – Leggettsrath West - Proposal to change the zoning of this site from 
‘Existing Residential’ to ‘Agricultural’ as part of the implementation of the 
Residential Zoned Land Tax. 
 
▪ 
Site 3 – Kilcreene - Proposal to change the zoning of this site from ‘New 
Residential’ to ‘Open Space’ as part of the implementation of the Residential 
Zoned Land Tax. 
 
The proposed variation was published for a 4 week period.  Seven submissions 
were received and considered.  Details are included in the Report.  Appropriate 
Assessment Screening Report and Strategic Environment Assessment 
Screening Report were prepared and published. 
 
The Chief Executive recommends to the Council that the Variation to the City 
& County Development Plan 2021-2027 be adopted by the Members. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Maria Dollard, seconded by Cllr. John Coonan and 
agreed to: 
 
Make Variation No. 7 to the Kilkenny City and County Development Plan 2021, which is: 
 
To change the zoning of 3 parcels of land in Kilkenny City as follows: 
 
Site 1 – Upper Patrick Street/ Jacob Street in Kilkenny City – to Existing Residential. 
 
Site 2 – Leggettsrath West in Kilkenny City 
Proposal to change the zoning of this site from ‘Existing Residential’ to ‘Agricultural’, 
as part of the implementation of the Residential Zoned Land Tax. 
 
Site 3 – Kilcreene in Kilkenny City 
Proposal to change the zoning of this site from ‘New Residential’ to ‘Open Space’ as 
part of the implementation of the Residential Zoned Land Tax. 
 
“We, the members of Kilkenny County Council, having considered the proposal to make 
Variation 7 to the Kilkenny City & County Development Plan 2021 - 2027 under 
Section 13 of the Planning & Development Act 2000, as amended, and having 
considered the Chief Executive’s Report as circulated on the 13th January 2026, 
prepared in accordance with Section 13 (4) of the above Act, outlining all submissions 
received on this proposal, the recommendations as set out in the Chief Executive’s 
Report, and with our decision made at a meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on 
the 19th January 2026,  do hereby resolve to vary the current Kilkenny City & County 
Development Plan in accordance with Proposed Variation 7.”  
 
(iii) 
Glacadh i gCúram/Taking in Charge: Estate (TIC 164) Westcourt Demense 
It was proposed by Cllr. Joe Lyons, seconded by Cllr. Pat Dunphy and agreed 
that: 
 
“That the County Council of the County of Kilkenny, in exercise of the powers conferred 
on them by Section 11 of the Roads Act, 1993 and in compliance with Section 180 of 
the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended by Section 59 of the Planning & 
Development Act 2010, hereby declares the road listed in the Public Notice and listed 
below, to be a Public Road.” 
 
Development: [TC164]  Westcourt, Callan, Co. Kilkenny 
 
 

4 
 
 
(iv) 
Glacadh i gCúram/Taking in Charge: Estate (TIC 200) Crokers Hill, Kennyswell 
It was proposed by Cllr. Eugene McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Joe Malone 
and agreed that: 
 
“That the County Council of the County of Kilkenny, in exercise of the powers conferred 
on them by Section 11 of the Roads Act, 1993 and in compliance with Section 180 of 
the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended by Section 59 of the Planning & 
Development Act 2010, hereby declares the road listed in the Public Notice and listed 
below, to be a Public Road.” 
 
Development: [TC200]  Croker’s Hill, Kennyswell Road, Kilkenny 
 
 
 
(c) 
Gnóthaí Corparáideacha – Corporate Affairs 
 
(i) 
Tuarascáil Mhíosúil an Phríomhfheidhmeannaigh 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Report 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh advised that the Chief Executive Report will be 
taken as read and this was agreed by all. 
 
(ii) 
Taisteal Lá Fhéile Pádraig Thar Lear- St. Patrick’s Day Travel Abroad 
It was proposed by Cllr. Michael McCarthy, seconded by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin 
and agreed that the Cathaoirleach and Leas Cathaoirleach travel as part of a 
delegation to New York for St. Patrick’s Day. 
 
 
3. 
Comhfhreagras  -  Correspondence 
 
(i) 
Coibhneas ón Aire Correspondence from Minister [Notice of Motion 20-2025] 
Response from Minister regarding the Basic Income for Arts Pilot Research Scheme 
[Notice of Motion 20-2025] was noted and agreed by all. 
 
 
 
(ii) 
Coibhneas ón Aire Correspondence from Minister [Notice of Motion 24-2025] 
Response from Minister regarding review and reform of Ireland’s laws [Notice of 
Motion 24-2025] was noted and agreed by all. 
 
 
4. 
Gnó ar athló ó chruinniúroimhe seo  -  Business adjourned from a previous Meeting 
 
None. 
 
 
5. 
Dátaí agus Amanta do chruinnithe a shocrú - Fix Dates & Times of Meetings 
 
(i) 
Sceideal na gCruinnithe  - Schedule of Meetings 
This was noted and agreed by all. 
 
(ii) 
Aontú ar dháta don Chruinniú maidir le Fuinneamh Gaoithe SID Ballyfasy  
Agree date for Meeting in relation to SID Ballyfasy Wind Farm 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Dunphy, seconded by Cllr. Fidelis Doherty and agreed to 
hold Special Meeting in relation to SID Ballyfasy Wind Farm on Thursday, 19th 
February, 2026 at 4.00 p.m. 
 
(ii) 
Aontú ar dhátú do Chruinniú Plé Bealtaine - Agree date for March Plenary Meeting 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick, seconded by Cllr. Michael McCarthy and 
agreed to hold March Plenary Meeting on Monday, 23rd March, 2026 at 3.00 p.m. 
 
 
6. 
Plé ar Thuairiscí agus Moltaí ó Choistí an Comhairle 
  
Consideration of Reports & Recommendations of Committees of the Council 
 
None. 
 
 

5 
 
 
7. 
Gnó Eile romhainn i bhFógra reachtála an Chruinnithe 
  
Other Business set forth in the Notice convening the Meeting 
 
None. 
 
 
8. 
Oideachas agus Oiliúint  -  Education & Training 
 
(i) 
Schedule of Conferences  
This was noted and agreed by all. 
 
 
9. 
Gnótha ag éirí as Miontuairiscí  -  Matters Arising from Minutes 
 
None. 
 
 
10. 
Aon Ghnó Eile  -  Any Other Business 
 
Ms. Margo Hayes reminded Elected Members of their obligations to complete and return their 
Donation Statements by end of January and Annual Declarations by the end of February. 
 
 
11. 
Fógraí Rúin - Notices of Motion 
 
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh reminded Members that the proposer of a Notice 
of Motion is allotted three minutes to speak and the Member seconding the motion may speak 
for no longer than two minutes. 
 
01 (26) Cllr. Tomás Breathnach 
It was proposed by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach, seconded by Cllr. Maurice Shortall and agreed: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council writes to the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
to seek the publication of a new set of draft Wind Energy Guidelines and pending their adoption 
following a public consultation process, a moratorium be placed on all applications for Wind Energy 
Farms.” 
 
Cllr. Breathnach spoke on the motion noting that the existing Guidelines are more than 20 
years old and therefore require a comprehensive review including a full public consultation 
process. He further stated that it would be appropriate to pause new planning applications in 
the interim to ensure that communities are given the opportunity to have their say in relation 
to updated Guidelines. 
 
02 (26) Cllrs. Seán Ó hArgáin & Tomás Breathnach 
It was proposed by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin, seconded by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach and agreed 
that: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council supports the demands for an early morning train service on the Dublin 
to Waterford line, which would enable commuters to reach Waterford City in time for the beginning of 
the work and college days.  Kilkenny County Council will write to Transport for Ireland, Iarnród 
Éireann and the Minister for Transport, Darragh O’Brien to demand this service be put in place as soon 
as possible.” 
 
Cllrs. Ó hArgáin and Breathnach spoke in support of the motion noting that the current train 
schedule creates a significant barrier for commuters travelling to Waterford for work or study. 
Reference was made to an online campaign that has been running for several months and it 
was suggested that the Council show its support through communication with Iarnród 
Éireann and Transport for Ireland. They stressed that a sensible and practical approach is 
required and that as a Council we should promote every opportunity to increase the 
availability of public transport and to support measures to reduce carbon emissions. 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
03 (26) Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin & Cllr. Maria Dollard 
It was proposed by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin, seconded by Cllr. Maria Dollard and agreed that: 
 
“Kilkenny County Council calls on the Irish Government and the houses of the Oireachtas to 
immediately pass the General Scheme of the Israeli Settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory 
(Prohibition of Importation of Goods) Bill 2025, better known as the Occupied Territories Bill.  That 
our Council will urgently write to Taoiseach, Micheál Martin TD, Tánaiste, Simon Harris TD and 
Minster for Foreign Affairs, Helen McEntee TD seeking this outcome, as promised in the Programme 
for Government 2025.” 
 
Cllrs. Ó hArgáin and Dollard spoke in support of this motion. 
 
04 (26) Cllr. Maria Dollard 
It was proposed by Cllr. Maria Dollard, seconded by Cllr. Pat Dunphy and agreed that: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council calls on the Minister for Justice to urgently engage with and hold the 
social media platform X to account for the creation, generation, and distribution of photographic and 
photorealistic images of people and particularly vulnerable people produced by its artificial intelligence 
software, Grok, where such images may be harmful, exploitative, misleading, or in breach of Irish law. 
 
This Council further requests that the Minister for Justice: 
 
(i) 
Investigate whether the operation and outputs of Grok comply with existing Irish and EU 
legislation, including but not limited to child protection laws, harassment and abuse legislation, 
data protection law, and the EU Digital Services Act. 
 
(ii) 
Ensure that robust safeguards, transparency measures, and effective oversight mechanisms are 
in place to prevent the misuse of AI-generated imagery, particularly where women and children 
are concerned. 
 
(iii) 
Take decisive action, including enforcement measures where necessary, to protect the public 
from the harms associated with non-consensual, sexualised, or otherwise damaging AI-
generated images. 
 
Cllr. Dollard raised concerns regarding whether current legislation is sufficient to prevent the 
creation of non-consensual images of people.  There remains uncertainty as to whether the 
creation of these images is a criminal offence and that women and men must stand together 
in addressing it.  Cllr. Dollard stated that this should serve as a final wake-up call for political 
action to prevent further degradation of our online space.  She asked that Members reflect on 
their own use of the platform X and to consider transferring to alternative platforms.  
 
Ms. Mary Mulholland, Director of Services clarified that the Council does not post social media 
notifications on X. 
 
05 (26) Cllrs. John Brennan & Mary Hilda Cavanagh 
It was proposed by Cllr. John Brennan, seconded by Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh and agreed 
that: 
 
“To request that Kilkenny County Council would run a campaign on local media and print media 
calling on people to notify the Local Authority where household members or loved ones still get a polling 
card even though they have passed away.  Kilkenny County Council can use this information to update 
the Register of Electors.” 
 
Cllr. Brennan spoke in support of the Motion noting that considerable work is required to 
bring the Register up to date and called on the Council to appoint a dedicated staff member to 
work on it. 
 
Ms. Mary Mulholland, Director of Services clarified that work has been ongoing for the past 
two years and additional staff have been recruited to support the process.  She advised that 
the Council is progressing well and will transition to the national online system in August 
2026. 
 

7 
 
 
Ms. Mulholland emphasised that assistance from members of the public and Elected Members 
is essential to ensure the Register is accurate.  There is an obligation on electors to notify the 
Council when they change address or when a family member has passed away.  She 
encouraged the public to examine the Register and to contact the Franchise Department at 
franchise@kilkennycoco.ie or via the dedicated telephone number to inform them of any 
changes. 
 
She noted that the Council now has access to the National Register of Deaths which will 
support this work and acknowledged the significant progress made over the last 24 months 
under the leadership of Catherine Cooney and the Franchise Team. 
 
Cllrs. Seán Ó hArgáin, John Coonan, Mary Hilda Cavanagh, Tomás Breathnach, Joe Malone 
and Jenny Catt Slattery also spoke in support of the motion. 
 
 
12. 
Fógraí i dtaobh Rúin ó Údaráis Áitiúla eile ag lorg tacaíochta ó Chomhairle Chontae Chill 
Chainnigh - Notices of Motion from other local authorities seeking support of Kilkenny 
County Council 
 
None. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
That concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
______________________________ 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
DATE 
 
 
