1 
 
 
MIONTUARASCÁIL AR CHRUINNIÚ PLÉNACH CHOMHAIRLE CHONTAE 
CHEILCHINNÍ A TÓGADH AR LÚNASA, 16 FEABRAÍ, 2026 AR 3.00 I.N. SA 
SEOMRA COMHAIRLE, HALLA AN CHONTAE & TRÍ MS TEAMS 
 
MINUTES OF PLENARY MEETING OF KILKENNY COUNTY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY, 16TH FEBRUARY, 2026 AT 3.00 P.M. IN THE COUNCIL 
CHAMBER, COUNTY HALL & VIA MS TEAMS 
 
 
Chair:  
 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh. 
 
Elected Members: 
Council Chamber 
Cllrs. Tomás Breathnach, John Brennan, Jenny Catt Slattery, John Coonan, 
Deirdre Cullen, Michael Delaney Stephanie Doheny, Fidelis Doherty, Maria 
Dollard, Michael Doyle, Patrick Dunphy, David Fitzgerald, Pat Fitzpatrick, Joe 
Lyons, Joe Malone, Andrew McGuinness, Eugene McGuinness, Seán Ó 
hArgáin, Joe Sheridan and Michael Shortall.   
 
MS Teams 
Cllrs. Brian Cleere,  Ger Frisby and Michael McCarthy. 
 
Officials: 
 
Lar Power, Tim Butler, Martin Prendiville, Fiona Deegan, Ian Gardner, Mary 
Mulholland, Margo Hayes, Colm O’Murchu, Jan McIntyre, Aileen McGrath, 
Martina Comerford, Mary Cashin, Catherine Cooney & Brenda Kelly. 
 
 
Fógraí - Announcements 
 
Cathaoirleach Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh welcomed everyone and proposed that the meeting would 
finish at 5.30 p.m. to facilitate a Civic Reception for Katie Bergin.  This was proposed by Cllr. Andrew 
McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Fidelis Doherty and agreed by all. 
 
Cllr. Cavanagh welcomed Cllr. Stephanie Doheny back to the Chamber after maternity leave and 
congratulated Conahy Shamrocks U40 on their recent win. 
 
 
Vótaí Comhbhrón - Votes of Sympathy 
 
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh together with the Elected Members extended votes of  
sympathy to the following: 
 
▪ 
Mary Guthrie, mother of Vincent Guthrie, Kilkenny Municipal District. 
▪ 
Francis Ivors, brother-in-law of Brigid Webster, Internal Audit, 
▪ 
Family of Cllr. Michael Creed, Cork County Council. 
▪ 
Fr. Odhrán Furlong, Parish Priest of New Ross. 
▪ 
Canon Lar Dunphy, Glenmore 
▪ 
Peggy Kirwan mother-in-law of Cllr. Joe Malone. 
▪ 
Family of Willie O’Keeffe, Thomastown. 
▪ 
Family of David and Ned Holohan, Kilkenny. 
▪ 
Family of John G. Lanigan, Kilkenny City 
 
1. 
Dearbhú Miontuairiscí  -  Confirmation of Minutes 
 
(i) 
Miontuairiscí ar Chruinniú Plé ar an Eanair - Minutes of January Plenary Meeting 
Proposed by Cllr. Fidelis Doherty, seconded by Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick and agreed: 
 
“That Minutes of Plenary Meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on Monday, 19th January, 
2026 as circulated with the Agenda be and are hereby approved”. 
 

2 
 
 
2. 
(a) 
Tithíocht & Díuscairt Eile  -  Housing & Other Disposal 
 
(i) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick, seconded by Cllr. Michael Delaney and 
agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 
2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the disposal of its interest in land 
at Ballynaslee, Ballyragget, Co. Kilkenny – as identified on the attached map - to Pat 
and Mary Doogue, Ballynaslee, Attanagh, Portlaoise, Co. Laois.  Each party will be 
responsible for their own legal costs associated with the sale.  Area measures 0.15 acres 
(0.061 ha).  The Consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
is not required. 
 
(ii) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh, seconded by Cllr. Michael 
Delaney agreed: 
 
“That, in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 
2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the disposal of its interest in a 
property at Rathpatrick, Crosspatrick, Co. Kilkenny (as identified on the attached map) 
to Mellissa Appleby, 42 Cherryorchard Court, Ballyfermot, Dublin 10 for the sum of 
€146,000 (one hundred and forty six thousand euro) with both parties being responsible 
for their own legal costs associated with the sale.  Site area measures 0.4568 ha (1.12 
acres).  The Consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is 
not required.” 
 
(iii) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick, seconded by Cllr. Michael Delaney 
agreed: 
 
“Notice is hereby given, that at a meeting of the Council to be held after the expiration 
of 10 days from the date of this notice, it is the intention of Kilkenny County Council, 
in accordance with Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 2001, to dispose of its 
interest in a plot of land at Gowran Road, Paulstown, Co. Kilkenny to Eugene and 
Margaret Kealy, Kellymount, Paulstown, Co. Kilkenny for a nominal consideration of 
€10 and Eugene and Margaret Kealy being responsible for all legal costs associated with 
the sale including those of Kilkenny County Council.  Plot measures 0.65 acre.” 
 
 
2. 
(b) 
Pleanail - Planning 
 
(i) 
Cuid 8 - Part 8:  62 Barrack Street, Castlecomer, Co. Kilkenny 
Mr. Colm O’Murchu provided an update on development at 62 Barrack Street, 
Castlecomer and gave a Presentation on the following: 
 
▪ 
Housing Demand in Castlecomer Area. 
▪ 
Proposed housing development at the former Dick Dooley’s Butchers (a 
protected structure dating from 1825) on Barrack Street, Castlecomer. 
▪ 
Plan to refurbish the existing building into a 2 bedroom home and 
constructing 4 one-bedroom apartments, delivered in two phases with 
Phase 2 subject to Uisce Éireann water connections. 
▪ 
Benefits of development 
o Provides 5 new homes in walking distance of all amenities. 
o Secures and restores at-risk vacant protected structure. 
o Repurposes vacant industrial/commercial site in Town Centre. 
o Improves streetscape and setting of Barrack Street. 
▪ 
Public Information evening held in January. 
▪ 
Two Submissions received in relation to shortage of on street parking and 
overlooking of opposite and adjacent properties. 
 
He advised that recommendation is being sought from the Members to proceed 
with the proposed development in accordance with the plans made available 
for public inspection and taking into account the proposed revisions to plans 
as outlined in the report and recommendations made by the Planning and other 
Service Departments. 
 

3 
 
 
Contributions were received from Cllrs. Pat Fitzpatrick, Michael Delaney, 
Fidelis Doherty and Maurice Shortall as follows: 
 
▪ 
Welcomed the development and thanked the team for all work done for 
housing in Castlecomer and acknowledged work efficiency and willingness 
to listen to concerns. 
▪ 
Concerns in relation to car parking and visitor parking. 
▪ 
Highlighted importance of progressing with Phase 2 and keeping pressure 
on Irish Water to ensure the development is not delayed. 
 
Mr. O’Murchu advised that as development is within walking distance to 
amenities consideration for parking was not required. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick, seconded by Cllr. Michael Delaney and 
agreed to amend resolution as follows: 
 
“We the Members of Kilkenny County Council approve the Part 8 in accordance with 
Section 179 of the Planning & Development Act 2000 as amended and Part VIII of the 
Planning & Development Regulations 2001 for the proposed Proposed refurbishment 
and all associated site works of existing two-storey structure to provide a 2-bedroom 
dwelling;  and the construction of 4 1-bedroom apartments and all associated site works 
at No. 62 Barrack Street, Castlecomer. 
 
(ii) 
Tuarascáil an Phríomhoifigigh Fheidhmiúcháin ar thiontú isteach maidir le 
hAthruithe Ábhartha ar Fhachtóir 5 Mholta: Plean Socraithe Chaisleán an 
Chumainn - Chief Executive’s Report on submissions to Material Alterations to 
Proposed Variation 5: Castlecomer Settlement Plan  
Mr. Tim Butler presented the Chief Executive’s Report on submissions to 
Material Alterations to Proposed Variation 5 to the Castlecomer Settlement 
Plan. 
 
He advised that the Chief Executive recommends to the Council that the 
proposed Variation No. 5 to the Kilkenny City & County Development Plan 
2021–2027 with the proposed Material Alterations with the exception of the 
Material alteration relating to Objective V3CC8 be adopted by the Members. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. John Brennan, seconded by Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick and 
agreed to: 
 
Make Variation No. 5 to the Kilkenny City and County Development Plan 
2021, which is: 
 
▪ 
To incorporate a Settlement Plan for Castlecomer into the Kilkenny City & County 
Development Plan, as part of a new Volume 3, Settlement Plans, 
▪ 
To make associated changes to Volume 1 to reflect this, and  
▪ 
To align the City and County Development Plan with the Specific Planning Policy 
Requirements (SPPRs) of the Sustainable Residential Development and Compact 
Settlements Guidelines for Planning Authorities (2024) as relevant. 
 
“We, the Members of Kilkenny County Council, having considered the proposal to make 
Variation 5 to the Kilkenny City & County Development Plan 2021 under Section 13 
of the Planning & Development Act 2000 as amended, and having considered the 
Material Alterations published on the 19th December 2025, and having considered the 
Chief Executive’s Report as circulated on the 10th February, prepared in accordance 
with Section 13 (6) of the above Acts, the recommendations as set out in the Chief 
Executive’s report, and with our decision made at a meeting of Kilkenny County 
Council held on the 16th February 2026, do hereby resolve to vary the Kilkenny City & 
County Development Plan in accordance with the Material Alterations to Proposed 
Variation 5, with the exception of the Material alteration relating to Objective V3CC8 
(see Submission KK-C358-7 from the Office of the Planning Regulator).” 
 
 

4 
 
 
(iii) 
Glacadh i gCúram/Taking in Charge: Estate (TIC 193) Cluain Glasan 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Eugene 
McGuinness and agreed that: 
 
“We, the Members of Kilkenny County Council approve the initiation of proceedings 
for the taking in charge of the following development in accordance with Section 11 of 
the Roads Act, 1993 and in compliance with Section 180 of the Planning & 
Development Act, 2000 as amended by Section 59 of the Planning & Development Act 
2010”. 
 
Development: 
[TC 193] Cluain Glasan, Granges Road, Kilkenny 
 
(iv) 
Glacadh i gCúram/Taking in Charge: Estate (TIC 200) Crokers Hill, Kennyswell 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Dunphy, seconded by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach and 
agreed that: 
 
“We, the Members of Kilkenny County Council approve the initiation of proceedings 
for the taking in charge of the following development in accordance with Section 11 of 
the Roads Act, 1993 and in compliance with Section 180 of the Planning & 
Development Act, 2000 as amended by Section 59 of the Planning & Development Act 
2010”. 
 
Development: 
[TC197]  Berkeley Terrace, The Beeches, Ferrybank, Kilkenny 
 
At this point Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin excused himself from the meeting. 
 
 
(c) 
Forbairt Eacnamaíoch – Economic Development 
 
(i) 
Scéim Deontais Féilte & Imeachtaí 2026 -  
Festival & Events Grant Scheme 2026 
Mr. Tim Butler, Director of Services, outlined that a provision of €120,000 has 
been included in the Council’s adopted Budget for 2026 for the Festival and 
Events Grant Scheme and he set out the criteria for project evaluation: 
 
▪ 
34 applications were received. 
▪ 
26 applications have been recommended for approval following evaluation. 
▪ 
8 applications have been deemed ineligible for funding under the Tourism 
Festival & Event Grant Scheme and will be directed to an alternative 
funding opportunity under our Community Events Grant Scheme. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Pat Dunphy 
and resolved: 
 
‘That the Festival & Event Grants 2026 are hereby approved by the Members of 
Kilkenny County Council, as per Report circulated”. 
 
Cllr. Ó hArgáin returned to the meeting. 
 
 
 
(d) 
Cultúr  - Culture 
 
(i) 
Deontais Dlí na nEalaíon 2026 - Arts Act Grants 2026 
Ms. Fiona Deegan, A/Director of Services, presented the 2026 Arts Act Grants 
Report and expressed her gratitude to Mary Butler, Arts Officer, for her 
significant work on the process.  She advised that a budget of €25,000 was 
provided for these grants in 2026.  47 applications were received.  An 
assessment was undertaken on all applications and the Assessment Panel 
recommended that 26 applications be funded. 
 
Cllr. Fidelis Doherty praised all applicants for their submissions and inquired 
about the supports available to those who were not successful. 
 
Cllr. Tomás Breathnach also acknowledged the merit of this scheme. 

5 
 
 
Ms. Deegan explained that feedback had been provided to unsuccessful 
applicants and that the Arts Officer would continue to work with them going 
forward. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Fidelis Doherty, seconded by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach 
and resolved: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council approves the allocation of €25,000 to the 26 applicants 
approved under the Arts Grants 2026, as per report circulated”.  
 
 
 
(c) 
Gnóthaí Corparáideacha – Corporate Affairs 
 
(ii) 
Tuarascáil Mhíosúil an Phríomhfheidhmeannaigh 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Report 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh advised that the Chief Executive Report will be 
taken as read and this was agreed by all. 
 
Cllr. David Fitzgerald sought clarification in relation to announcement from 
Greenstar that they are not in a position to take waste as limits are reached.  He 
requested assurance from the Council that the facility will remain available to 
the public, emphasising the importance of maintaining this service which is 
widely used by the community. 
 
Ms. Fiona Deegan, A/Director of Services advised that: 
 
• 
Council has been supporting Greenstar in addressing the issue. 
• 
Panda has made a decision to restrict the collection of waste skips. 
• 
Significant number of calls from the public seeking alternative waste 
disposal options. 
• 
Council did not instruct any reduction in waste acceptance and has 
communicated interim measures to manage the situation. 
• 
The waste permit is currently under review. 
• 
Contact has been made to arrange a meeting aimed at ensuring continuity 
of service for the public. 
 
 
(ii) 
Plean Seachadta Seirbhíse - Service Delivery Plan 
Ms. Margo Hayes, Senior Executive Officer presented the Service Delivery 
Plan.  The adoption of a Service Delivery Plan is a Reserved Function of the 
Council under Section 134A of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended. 
Margo outlined that the Plan is based on the objectives and strategies outlined 
in the Corporate Plan adopted by the Members in 2024.  In each of the Service 
Areas it sets out the actions which the Council intends to take in 2026 to meet 
its commitments and deliver services to our customers under its numerous 
policies, plans and programmes adopted by the Council. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach seconded by Cllr. David Fitzgerald 
and agreed that: 
 
“That the Draft Service Delivery Plan for 2026 is hereby approved by the Members of 
Kilkenny County Council.” 
 
 
(ii) 
Ainmniú Bonneagair - Naming of Infrastructure 
Ms. Margo Hayes, Senior Executive Officer referred to Report circulated with 
the Agenda.  She advised that the Committee had met to consider this and were 
assisted by the Heritage Officer, Conservation Officer, Architect and Arts 
Officer in carrying out research on appropriate name for the infrastructure.  
 

6 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. David Fitzgerald seconded by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin 
and agreed that: 
 
“We, the Members of Kilkenny County Council, hereby approve the placing of an 
Information Placque at Castleinch Graveyard as per Report circulated. 
 
Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin requested that the issue of signage be reviewed and that 
listing of graces is crucially important.  He welcomed that the signage be 
bilingual and accessible to all. 
 
 
3. 
Comhfhreagras  -  Correspondence 
 
None. 
 
4. 
Gnó ar athló ó chruinniúroimhe seo  -  Business adjourned from a previous Meeting 
 
None. 
 
 
5. 
Dátaí agus Amanta do chruinnithe a shocrú - Fix Dates & Times of Meetings 
 
(i) 
Sceideal na gCruinnithe  - Schedule of Meetings 
 
Cathaoirleach reminded Members of meetings due to take place on Thursday, 19th 
February: 
 
▪ 
Workshop on Update of Abbey Quarter at 3.00 p.m. 
▪ 
Special Meeting in relation to SID Ballyfasy Wind Farm at 4.00 p.m. 
 
Cathaoirleach also reminded Members that the March Plenary Meeting will be held on 
Monday, 23rd March, 2026 at 3.00 p.m. 
 
 
6. 
Plé ar Thuairiscí agus Moltaí ó Choistí an Comhairle 
  
Consideration of Reports & Recommendations of Committees of the Council 
 
None. 
 
 
 
7. 
Gnó Eile romhainn i bhFógra reachtála an Chruinnithe 
  
Other Business set forth in the Notice convening the Meeting 
 
None. 
 
 
8. 
Oideachas agus Oiliúint  -  Education & Training 
 
(i) 
Schedule of Conferences  
Schedule of Conferences was proposed by Cllr. Joe Lyons, seconded by Cllr. Joe Malone and 
agreed by all. 
 
 
9. 
Gnótha ag éirí as Miontuairiscí  -  Matters Arising from Minutes 
 
None. 
 
 
10. 
Aon Ghnó Eile  -  Any Other Business 
 
Cllr. Deirdre Cullen highlighted that the Kilkenny Schools Campus (Kilkenny City Vocational 
School and Coláiste Pobail Osraí) were omitted from the recently announced Schools Capital 
Funding list. The project received approval in 2015, with site acquisition, design, planning, 
and enabling works now fully completed.  The campus is at Stage 2B and ready for tender, but 
without the release of funding it remains a derelict construction site. Planning permission is 
also due to expire. 
 
 

7 
 
 
Cllr. Cullen emphasised that both schools currently operate with severely inadequate facilities, 
including no PE or recreational amenities, substandard classrooms, and insufficient toilet 
provision.  Kilkenny City Vocational School, the only DEIS secondary school in the City, also 
hosts four special education classes but has only one-fifth of the space required under 
Department specifications, resulting in unsuitable conditions for students with additional 
needs and long waiting lists for ASD places. 
 
Coláiste Pobail Osraí remains the only Irish-medium secondary school in the City and County. 
Both schools are central to the development of the Western Environs and are 
non-denominational, co-educational institutions essential to the City’s future educational 
provision. 
 
Contributions were received from Cllrs. Seán Ó hArgáin, David Fitzgerald, Jenny Catt 
Slattery, Joe Malone, Mary Hilda Cavanagh, Pat Fitzpatrick and Maria Dollard in relation to 
the following: 
 
▪ 
All Members fully support this.  
▪ 
It has been a decade of broken promises for vulnerable students and it is essential that this 
is finally addressed.  
▪ 
Situation is directly affecting the number of students enrolling in the schools.  
▪ 
Critically important that as a local authority we deliver on this commitment.  
▪ 
Children must be brought through the town for exercise and this is unfair and unsafe for 
the children. 
▪ 
Vulnerable children are left with nowhere suitable to go. 
Cllr. Cullen thanked the Members for their support and stated that it is important to stand 
together for future generations of Kilkenny County Council. 
 
Cllr. Cavanagh asked that a letter also be sent to An Taoiseach, the Tánaiste and the Minister 
for Education in relation to Johnstown School. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Deirdre Cullen, seconded by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin and agreed that: 
 
“that Kilkenny County Council write to An Taoiseach, the Tánaiste and the Minister for Education to 
urgently include the Kilkenny Schools Campus in the Schools Capital Funding list”. 
 
 
11. 
Fógraí Rúin - Notices of Motion 
 
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh reminded Members that the proposer of a Notice 
of Motion is allotted three minutes to speak and the Member seconding the motion may speak 
for no longer than two minutes. 
 
06 (26) Cllr. Stephanie Doheny 
It was proposed by Cllr. Stephanie Doheny, seconded by Cllr. Eugene McGuinness and 
agreed: 
 
“That this Council recognises that: 
 
The reunification of Ireland is an objective of Bunreacht na hÉireann and there is a growing national 
discussion around constitutional change and the possibility of Irish unity 
 
‘that Kilkenny County Council will write to the Office of An Taoiseach seeking the Irish Government 
to plan and prepare for Irish unity, through the following actions: 
 
▪ 
establish an all-island representative Citizens' Assembly or Assemblies and a Joint Oireachtas 
Committee on Irish Unity to enable careful planning 
▪ 
produce and publish a plan towards Irish unity in conjunction with civic society and key 
stakeholders; 
▪ 
engage with northern protestant/unionist opinion about the future of Ireland; 
▪ 
work to secure a date for the referendums on unity provided for in the Good Friday Agreement.” 
 

8 
 
 
07 (26) Cllr. Eugene McGuinness 
Cllr. Eugene McGuinness agreed to amend his original Notice of Motion to the following and 
it was proposed by Cllr. Eugene McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Maria Dollard and agreed: 
 
“To ask the Housing Strategic Policy Committee of Kilkenny County Council to review the policy of 
tenancy succession so that any “unintended consequences’ in relation to tenancy succession are 
eliminated.” 
 
Cllr. McGuinness spoke on this motion. 
 
08 (26) Cllr. David Fitzgerald 
It was proposed by Cllr. David Fitzgerald, seconded by Cllr. Maurice Shortall and agreed: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council calls on the Minister and Department of Housing to bring forward 
regulations to oblige all Local Authority and Approved Housing Body’s to register all of their tenancies 
with the Residential Tenancy Board (RTB) so that all tenants, both public and private, have equal rights 
to apply to the RTB regarding their tenancy and the standard of maintenance of the homes.” 
 
Cllr. Fitzgerald spoke on this motion stating that both private and public tenants should have 
equal rights to apply to the RTB in relation to their tenancy and the standard of maintenance 
of the homes. 
 
Mr. Ian Gardner, Director of Services responded stating that the Council currently operate a 
reactive maintenance system and they are moving towards a planned maintenance system.   
 
 
09 (26) Cllr. Tomás Breathnach 
It was proposed by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach, seconded by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin and agreed: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council write to the Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage to 
seek the amendment to planning legislation to ensure that applications related to the same project and/or 
which are otherwise intrinsically linked should receive the same allowance of nine days for the 
Christmas/New Year period, should have the same closing date for submissions and be subject to only 
one submission fee.” 
 
Cllr. Breathnach spoke on this motion. 
 
12. 
Fógraí i dtaobh Rúin ó Údaráis Áitiúla eile ag lorg tacaíochta ó Chomhairle Chontae Chill 
Chainnigh - Notices of Motion from other local authorities seeking support of Kilkenny 
County Council 
 
It was agreed by all that the following Notices of Motion be taken as read and noted: 
 
01 (26) Tipperary County Council 
“That Tipperary County Council write to the Minister for Transport requesting the 
introduction of legislation to ensure the compulsory wearing of hi visibility jackets by all E-
Scooter and E-Bike users, in addition to the lights they are already compelled to have on same 
said vehicles.” 
 
It was also agreed that Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin would submit a Notice of Motion on this to the 
next meeting. 
 
 
That concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
______________________________ 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
DATE 
