 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ AN CHRUINNIÚ SPEISIALTA DO IARRTHÓIRÍ ATÁ AG LORG 
AINMNIÚCHÁIN UACHTARÁIN AR AN LUAN, MEÁN FÓMHAIR 2025 AG 3.00 I.N. I 
SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, HALLA AN CHONTAE & VIA FOIRNE MS 
MINUTES OF SPECIAL MEETING FOR CANDIDATES SEEKING PRESIDENTIAL 
NOMINATION HELD ON MONDAY, 22nd SEPTEMBER  2025 AT 3.00 P.M. IN THE 
COUNCIL CHAMBER, COUNTY HALL & VIA MS TEAMS 
 
 
Attendance 
Chair:  
 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh 
 
Elected Members: 
Council Chamber and Online (MS Teams)  
Cllrs. Tomás Breathnach, Michael McCarthy, Jenny Catt Slattery, John 
Coonan, Deirdre Cullen, Michael Doyle, Fidelis Doherty, Patrick 
Dunphy, David Fitzgerald, Pat Fitzpatrick, Joe Malone, Andrew 
McGuinness, Eugene McGuinness, Seán Ó hArgáin, Joe Sheridan & 
Maurice Shortall, John Brennan, Brian Cleere, Ger Frisby, Joe Lyons,
  
 
Officials: 
Lar Power, Martin Prendiville, Mary Mulholland, Fiona Deegan, Tim 
Butler, Seamus Foley, Eimear Cody, Michael Leahy, Annemarie 
Shortall, Philippe Beubry, Caitriona O’Sullivan & Martina Walsh 
 
Apologies: 
Cllrs. Maria Dollard, Michael Delaney and Stephanie Doheny  
 
Meeting Procedure  
Cllr Mary Hilda Cavangagh Set out the Format for the meeting which would commence with 
Presentations by the candidates.  
▪ 
Presentation by Candidates (with 5 minutes speaking time and 5 minutes question and 
answers). A bell will be rung at the 5 minutes,  
▪ 
The Council will adjourn for 10 minutes. 
 
Order or Business to take place. 
 
(i) 
The first Order of Business will be a decision of Council whether to nominate a 
candidate or not based on candidates’ presentations.  A proposer and seconder of the 
decision to nominate any candidate will be sought.  An agreement will be sought from 
the Council.  If a counterproposal is put forward not to nominate any candidate, the 
motion will be put to a vote.  The motion will either be carried or not carried as an 
outcome of the vote in line with Standing Orders.  
 
If there is a decision not to nominate any candidate, the resolution not to nominate is 
carried and the meeting is ended.  
 
(ii) 
If it is agreed to nominate a candidate, a proposer and seconder will be sought for 
candidates.  
 
 
 

 
If there are two candidates proposed and seconded, a roll call vote will be taken with 
the candidate with the least votes being eliminated and the other candidate being the 
proposed nominee (see 3 below). 
If there are more than two candidates proposed, the candidate with the least number 
of votes to be eliminated in the first vote and continue the process with the remaining 
candidates. 
 
Elected Members may abstain, abstaining is not a vote. 
 
(iii) 
Once one potential candidate has been identified, a resolution will be put to the 
Members that this candidate will be put forward as the Presidential Nominee of 
Kilkenny County Council.  A roll call vote will be taken.  The Resolution must be 
carried or defeated by a clear majority.  
 
 Presentation by Candidates   
The Cathaoirleach Invited Walter Ryan Purcell to address the meeting 
Walter Ryan Purcell  
Mr. Ryan Pucells  spoke about Foord and Tourism and the risks to the economy and 
tourism by the Mercosur Trade Deals 
Lorna McCormack  
Ms. McCormack gave information on her background, she said it was time to write his 
new story and spoke of ‘choice hope and courage’.  she said leadership is not about 
power it's about connection.  She said she wanted to inspire change in a modern world 
she said it was important to generate debate and respond to needs both home and 
abroad saying that the Aras is more than just a resident for the president.  With regards 
to the nomination, she said she was disappointed with the way things had gone so far 
described it as an illusion of democracy saying it wasn't just about her but about all of 
us. 
Nick Delehanty  
Mr Delehanty said that the councillors should shine a light by doing the right thing 
today.  He said the meeting should have been spaced out.  Mr Delahanty mentioned 
fidelity to action and that it was the duty of all citizens as mentioned in our constitution 
He asked councillors to exercise their vote. Cllr. Shorthall wished him well with his 
campaign saying that Mr Delehanty had ran a brave campaign.  
In response Mr Delahanty said that he understands about aspects of immigration he 
said it is a delicate balance at the moment.  He spoke about the tax exemptions for the 
asylum seeking system he asked where the tax exemptions for schools and crashes are  
Anthony Corrigan  
Anthony Corrigan thanked everyone present for the opportunity to present. He 
mentioned that he was solicitor.  He spoke about the elder abuse that his mother had 
suffered mentioning correspondence he had sent to Jim O'Callaghan and Simon 
Harris. He said his campaign was very much around tackling gender and domestic 
based violence saying his mother's illness was used against her. 
 
 

 
  
Catherine Morrissey  
Catherine Morrissey gave her own background. Cllr Fitzgerald asked her about her 
motivation to become the president which is a non-executive role. Cllr Joe Malone said 
she was one of the first to come to him and he thanked her. Cllr Pat Fitzpatrick thanked 
Catherine as well. She responded by saying as president she would have influence, 
she was interested in the compliance area and that she would bring a lot to the 
presidency. 
 Dolores Cahill. 
Ms. Cahill introduced herself as a university professor saying she was had worked in 
the area of informed consent, she was an immunologist.  As such, she had a duty to 
warn people of potential danger.  She said her father and her parents had modelled 
integrity and by coming forward she had done serious harm to her career. finances 
and reputation. She spoke about her leadership, her management and organisational 
skills saying she was well qualified to be the president. She mentioned successful 
companies that she founded in 1996 saying that the County Council nomination was  
Diarmuid Mulcahy 
Diarmuid Mulcahy thanked all present for the opportunity. He said he was originally 
from West Kerry living in Galway now with his partner who is a member of the Coady 
family who had links to Kilkenny.  He mentioned the song Boulavogue. He spoke 
about the siege mentality and the line in ‘to fight for Irish freedom we must fight or 
die ‘ he said the role of president was to be as a voice for peace and freedom.  He spoke 
about his parents on the school that they formed saying that that his family were 
people of service. He spoke about his role in MABs in the West of Ireland and as chair 
of the community forum for local government Reform Act 2014. He said that the 
president's office did have some power and need to be utilised. 
Aodhan OhArrachtain 
Mr OhArrachtain noted that he doesn't have a big budget, he didn't have a scriptwriter 
and that  he was a bus driver.  He said that if councillors don't nominate that leads to 
a negative perception of democracy.  He mentioned voter apathy; he mentioned that 
government services all going online and that was discriminatory. 
Gerben Uunk 
Mr. Uunk spoke about animal welfare, he was coming from a platform against animal 
cruelty.  He spoke about treating animals with respect and empathy.  He asked for an 
end to state subsidies for fox hunting greyhound racing, horse racing and hare 
coursing.  He mentioned the mental health issues associated with these sports 
including gambling addictions he spoke about the fight against racism, as an 
immigrant himself he said we should be inclusive and work with the migrant 
community.  He mentioned the housing crisis he said that year on year the housing 
crisis was caused by planning mistakes and failed policy and that migrants were being 
blamed for the housing issues but that this was not the case. 
Charle Keddy 
Mr Keddy spoke of himself as an Irishman for an Irish nation he described himself as 
a ‘figurehead for the unborn’.  He was asked by Cllr Joe Malone where he was from, 
and he mentioned Wicklow. 
 
 

 
Charlotte Keenan 
Ms Keenan introduced herself an Irish woman from the Midlands, she wants to bring 
about change.  She spoke about solidarity with the less powerful and asked that we do 
not stand lightly by while innocent lives are lost to conflict.  She spoke about 
embracing peaceful negotiations which can foster growth and progress. She 
mentioned Palestine she said it is essential to offer refuge saying the Irish have a 
fighting spirit due to our own history of occupation. She spoke about working together 
for the common good and about suicide prevention and that needs to be a priority. 
She said we must appreciate our elderly people and support heritage and culture. She 
said as an artist ‘I love Ireland and all its people’.  Cllr E McGuinness asked her about 
peaceful new negotiation saying if she was invited to engage with the Israeli 
government what she would do? she responded to say yes she would, and everyone 
has the right to voice. She said that she would also have the Palestinians at the 
negotiation table.  
Seana Kerr 
Mr Kerr said her manifesto was around integrity over popularity she said she would 
endeavour to leave the world a better place in which she entered it she said that we 
have the power within us to impact the future. 
 
Nomination and Voting  
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh outlined the process  
A rolling vote to be taken with regard to the decision nominate any candidate. The 
Resolutions was out to the members  
 
“That under Section 16 of the Presidential Elections Act 1993, Kilkenny County Council 
hereby nominate a candidate for the Presidential Election.” 
A roll call vote was taken and: 
 
Four (4) voted in favour 
Cllrs. Tomás Breathnach, Maurice Shortall Eugene 
McGuinness 
 
Thirteen (3) voted against.  
Cllrs. Deirdre Cullen, Michael Doyle, Joe Lyons, Pat 
Fitzpatrick, Michael McCarthy, John Coonan, David 
Fitzgerald, Joe Malone, Andrew McGuinness, Jenny 
Catt Slattery, Fidelis Doherty, Pat Dunphy & Ger 
Frisby, Brian Cleere, Joe Sheridan, John Brennan, 
Mary Hilda Cavanagh & Seán Ó hArgáin 
 
 
Three (3) absent: 
Cllrs. Maria Dollard, Stephanie Doheny & Michael 
Delaney  
 
Therefore, the resolution was defeated by 18 votes to 3. The counter resolution ‘not to 
nominate was proposed by Cllr Seán Ó hArgáin and seconded by Cllr John Coonan and 
agreed. 
 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh thanked all present and closed the meeting.  
 
 
______________________________ 
______________________________ 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
DATE 
