MIONTUAIRISCi AR AN GCRUINNIÜ IOMLÅNACH DE CHI-JID
CHOMHAIRLE CONTAE CHILL CHAINNIGH TIONÖLTA AR AN
LUAN, 16 MEITHEAMH 2025 AG 3.00 1.N. 1 SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE,
HALLA AN CHONTAE & VIA FOIRNE MS
MINUTES OF PLENARY MEETING OF KILKENNY COUNTY COUNCIL
HELD ON MONDAY, 16TH JUNE, 2025 AT 3.00 P.M. IN THE COUNCIL
CHAMBER, COUNTY HALL & VIA MS TEAMS
Attendance
Chair:
Elected Members:
MS Teams
Officials:
Cllr. Michael McCarthy.
Council Chamber
Cllrs. Tomas Breathnach, Mary Hilda Cavanagh, Jenny Catt Slattery,
John Coonan, Stephanie Doheny, Maria Dollard, Michael Doyle, Fidelis
Doherty, Patrick Dunphy, David Fitzgerald, Pat Fitzpatrick, Ger Frisby,
Joe Lyons, Joe Malone, Andrew McGuinness, Eugene McGuinness, Sean
Ö hArgäin, Joe Sheridan & Maurice Shortall.
Cllrs. Deirdre Cullen, John Brennan, Brian Cleere and Michael Delaney.
Lar Power, Martin Prendiville, Mary Mulholland, Fiona Deegan, Ian
Gardner, Tim Butler, Seamus Foley, Mary Cashin, Majella Keating,
Claire Prendergast, Richard Vaughan and Catherine Cooney.
Fögrai - Announcements
• Cathaoirleach Cllr. Michael McCarthy extended congratulations to Kilkenny Senior
Hurling Team on defeating Galway at the weekend and winning their sixth Leinster
Hurling title in a row.
Cllr Michael McCarthy was congratulated on his role of Cathaoirleach by Cllr. Andrew
McGuinness.
V6tai Comhbhr6n Votes of Sympathy
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Michael McCarthy extended votes of sympathy to the following:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Patrick O'Neill, Sheastown, Kilkenny, Driver in Castlecomer Area.
Steve Coverdale on the passing of his father Colin Coverdale.
Denis Lawlor, A/ Senior Executive Engineer, Water Services on the passing of his mother Anne
Lawlor.
Family of John Walsh, Kilmacow [Retired Employee]
Family of William Lyons, Castlecomer [Retired Employee]
Monsignor Kieron Kennedy.
Cllr Michael McCarthy noted that Monsignor Kennedy was the Parish Priest in Freshford since
2017, Cllr. Andrew McGuiness noted the Monsignors contribution to Housing Charities and the
Good Shepard Centre while Cllr. Seån Ö hArgåin mentioned his legacy in terms of services for those
with special needs.
Family of the late Paddy McEvoy, Mullinavat, Co Kilkenny
Family of the late Wattie Walsh, Mooncoin, Co. Kilkenny
Family of the late Ellen Doran, Mooncoin, Co. Kilkenny
Family of the late Margaret Warner, Carrigeen, Via Waterford
Family of the late Hew Bowers, Mooncoin, Co. Kilkenny
Family of the late Eileen Bowe, Piltown, Co. Kilkenny
Family of the late Pat CYHanIon, Kilmacow, Co. Kilkenny
Family of the late Willie Ryan, Mooncoin, Co. Kilkenny
Family of the late Vincent Foskin, Ferrybank, Waterford
Family of the late Joe Mylett, Mooncoin, Co. Kilkenny
Family of the late Peadar Walsh, Kilmacow, Co. Kilkenny
1
•
•
•
•
•
Family of the late Bobby Grace, Ballyhale, Co. Kilkenny
Family of the late Fintan Flynn, Piltown, Co. Kilkenny
Family of the late Mary Grennan, Tullogher, Co. Kilkenny
Family of the late Valerie Walsh, Mooncoin, Co. Kilkenny
Family of the late Sonny Murphy, Mooncoin, Co. Kilkenny
Family of the late Ann O'Gorman, Piltown, Co. Kilkenny
Family of the late Michael Duggan, Piltown, Co. Kilkenny.
Family of the late John Cuddihy, Mooncoin, Co. Kilkenny
Family of the late Nan Phelan, Piltown, Co. Kilkenny
Family of the late Eileen Quinn, Mooncoin, Co. Kilkenny
Family of the late Vera Kiely, Piltown, Co. Kilkenny
Dearbhü Miontuairisci -u Confirmation of Minutes
Miontuairisci ar Chruinniü Buiséid Reachtüil - Minutes of Plenary Meeting
Proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness seconded by Cllr. Pat Fitzgerald, and agreed:
"That Minutes of Plenary Meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on Monday May 19th,
2025, as circulated with the agenda be and are hereby approved"
(a)
(b).
Tithiocht & Diuscairt Eile - Housing & Other Dis osal
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness seconded by Cllr. Pat
Fitzpatrick and agreed:
"That, in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local
Government Act, 2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the
disposal of its interest in a derelict house at 20 Vicar Street, Kilkenny to Ms.
Niamh Treacy, Ballyroe, Thomastown, Co. Kilkenny for the sum of €143,000
(one hundred and forty three thousand euro) with each party being responsible
for their own legal costs associated with the sale. The consent of the Minister
for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not required. "
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness seconded by Cllr. Eugene
McGuinness and agreed:
"That, in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local
Government Act, 2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the
disposal of its interest in plot of ground to the rear ofno.24 Corcoran Terrace,
Kells Road, Kilkenny R95 VW8A with the condition that plot of ground being
transferred will be ntade available to Kilkenny County Council for the provision
of footpaths and future road widening purposes, if required, at any time in the
future and that no compensation will be paid over at any time for the nominal
sum of €10.00 (ten euro) together with payment of the Kilkenny County
Council's legal fees . Plot of ground measures 57.04 m2 approx. " The Consent
of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not required. '
Cllr. Andrew McGuinness enquired as to whether there was a plan for
the area. Mr. Ian Gardner, Director of Services explained that several
backyards purchased years ago and while others were sold this was left
as stand alone.
Pleanail - Planning
Part 8: Development of Old Health Centre at Kelis, Co. Kilkenny
Mr. Richard Vaughan, Executive Architect, Housing Section delivered a
Presentation on the Part 8 Development of Old Health Centre at Kells, Co.
Kilkenny. The proposal is around converting the building to a three-bed
accessible dwelling. Cllr. Deirdre Cullen noted her approval for the project
enquiring about how many of these old Medical Centres are around the County
and have we any use for them. Ms. Mary Mullholland, Director of Services.
(c)
(d)
(i)
All HSE properties and assets are listed and the HSE always contact the Local
Authorities first but there are no properties listed at the moment.
It was proposed by Cllr. Joe Sheridan seconded by Cllr. Joe Lyons and agreed
"That we the Members of Kilkenny County Council approve the Part 8 in accordance
with Section 179 of the Planning & Development Act 2000 as amended and Part VIII
of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, to change the use of the existing
single storey Health Centre building into a three-bedroom dwelling and a proposed new
vehicular entrance at Kells, Co. Kilkenny. "
Cultlir-Cu1ture
Creative Ireland/Cruinniü na nÖg Update
Majella Keating Creative Communities Engagement Officer delivered a
Presentation outlining the background of the Creative Ireland Programme as
well as Cruinniü na nÖg and Nighttime Economy.
• Open Call Launch, January 6th 2025.
• Creative Ireland and Cruinniü na nÖg grant applications were assessed by
and independent panel.
Creative Ireland Grant
67 applications received (requesting €220,700).
• 39 have been approved.
28 were ineligible as they did not meeting the standard criteria.
Cruinniü na nÖg and Night Time Economy
• 24 applications: received (requested €57,851).
• 20 have been approved following the assessment, generating over 52
events across Kilkenny.
• All the applications were of a very high standard.
4 were ineligible as they did not meeting the standard criteria.
Ms. Fiona Deegan (DoS) thanked Majella Keating and commented on the
diverse range of work. Joe Lyions welcomed the funding and the inclusivity.
Cllr. Marie Dollard noted the power if the arts to bring people together. Cllr
John Coonan also thanked Majella Keating and the inclusivity and noted the
way older people really appreciated it
Timpeallacht- Environment
Kilkenny County Council Burial Ground Bye Laws 2024
Mr. Tim Butler (Dos) provided the report. Burial Grounds were up to now
governed by Guidelines in Kilkenny City and County with most Local
Authorities having byelaws. Initially the proposal was to bring in the Bye Laws
for St Keiran's Cemetery only. However, after bringing the proposal through
the Strategic Policy Committee the proposals was expanded to include all
opened Council Burial Grounds. Draft Bye-Laws were prepared and
considered by the Environment Strategic Policy Committee at its meeting on
2nd May and 5th December, 2024. It was agreed to proceed to advertise the
Bye-Laws and Draft Bye-Laws were subsequently placed on display from
Friday, 6th December, 2024 to Friday, 17th January, 2025. Submissions on the
Bye-Laws were invited up to Friday, 24th January, 2025. Mr Butler provided
[Em-pæxÅded and overview of the submissions and proposed amendment.
Chair of SPC 4 Cllr Eugene McGuinness welcomed the Bye-Laws which are
necessary to ensure all citizens can visit and pay respect to family and friends.
Cllr. David Fitzgerald noted that there has been significant disquiet where the
burial ground has become a place of gathering. , He asked that the byelaws be
resourced and that the staff be supported to implement them. Cllr. Andrew
3
(ii)
McGuinness asked what had changed in terms of the size of gravestones and if
the CCTV was active. Cllr Tomas Breathnach enquired about a register of all
graveyards, Cllr Fedelis Doherty asked that monument providers be involved
so that they would know what is acceptable. Cllr Maria Dollard requested a
campaign to make people aware of how to access the Columbarium wall.
Cllr Eugene asked the Gardai to redouble their efforts in relation to substance
use and Anti-Social Behaviour. Cllr Joe Malone congratulated Eugene as chair
of SPC 4 but said that he had consistently made Gardai aware of the drugs issue
and feels we are at a crisis point. Cllr Pat Fitzpatrick sought clarity about the
funding that was provided for CCTV and asked that we expedite that noting
here are legislation issues.
Mr. Butler replied to queries raised and noted that CCTV can be dealt with by
Local Community Safety Parblership (LCSP) once operational. Mr. Butler
noted that the Bye-Laws will come in to operation one month after their
adoption.
Sean Ö hArgåin cited a vacuum of information in the absence of the JPC and
delay in establishing LCSP.
It was proposed by Cllr. Eugene McGuinness seconded by Cllr. David
Fitzgerald and agreed:
'That we the Members of Kilkenny County Council hereby adopt the Burial Ground
Bye Laws of Kilkenny County Council 2024 as amended'
Climate Action Grants Update
Ms. Clare Prendergast Climate Action Officer provided a presentation on the
Climate Action Grant Leaflet Launched by the Climate Action Office to guide
local communities and individuals on climate action initiatives. This leaflet
provides essential information on what grants are available to assist and
support groups. The guide provides information on 31 sources of funding
available to communities and households for projects such as making homes
warmer, creating new community facilities such as cycleways and community
gardens; energy upgrades to community buildings; protecting monuments
from climate change.
Phase 2 of the Climate Action Fund will be open for applications in September
2025 , but the Climate Action team are taking expressions of interest now. Cllr.
Pat Fitzpatrick and Cllr. Joe Lyons complemented Clare and her team.
Cllrs. Tomäs Breathnach proposed a 10 minute adjournment which was seconded by Cllr.
Andrew McGuinness.
(f) Gnöthai Corparåideacha — Corporate Affairs
Cllr. Michael McCarthy advised that the Chief Executive Report will be taken
as read. Any questions can be taken up with the Chief Executive.
It was proposed by Cllr. Mary Hilda Kavanagh seconded by Cllr. Andrew
McGuiness and agreed.
Correspondence
Ms. Margo Hayes (SEO) provided a list of the correspondence. Cllr. Mary Hilda
Cavanagh asked that the response to letters be forwarded to members as opposed to
waiting for a Council meeting. If they are not to satisfaction, that we follow up again.
Cllr Eugene McGumnes asked that the Fianna Fäil members follow up and put
pressure on TDs.
4
Mary Mulholland (DOS) noted that we have a tracker in place and a summary which
is in the CE report. She pointed out that the vast majority are at the acknowledgement
stage and we will be doing the follow up and reminders regularly but sometimes it
takes some months as W s a policy issue.
at'lllö j-chri1inniiiroitnheseoV Business adjournedfQ0i11 avgyiousMecting3
None
5. shocrå TimesofMegtings
(i) Annual General Meeting
June 27th 3.00 p.m.
(ii) Workshop (Development Contributions & Capital Programme) June 30th 3.30 p.m.
(iii) CPG
(iv) July Plenary Council Meeting
June 14th 4.00 p.m.
July 21st 3.00 p.m.
7.
8.
JOY¯
11,
Committees
None
Gilj Eile ronlhainn i blirögra reücllttiliß an Chruiili/itjie - Other Business set forth in
the Notice convening the Meeting
None.
Oideachas agt1S Oililiint - Education & Training
None.
ag +iri as Al'ioutuai.•isci Matters Arising from Minutes.
None.
'Ion GhnöEiIe - Any Other Business
Cllr. Fedelis Doherty noted that she had supported the motion at the May meeting
regarding and she asked for that to be reflected in the minutes.
"That the Members zorite to the Minister for Transport in support of Waterford Airport in its
endeavours to secure funding from the Department to further develop the airport given its
strategic importance to the economic development of the Southeast Region
Fögvai Riiil! ,NJ0tices of Motion
12 (25) Cllr. Maurice Shortall
It was proposed by Cllr. Maurice Shortall seconded by Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick and agreed:
"To ask the Housing Minister James Browne to provide clarity on the housing grants for elderly
people when it pertains to heating. The advised eco solutions (biomass oil) are not available in
counties like Kilkenny and second-hand oil burners are not a viable solution. Vulnerable elderly
in our community are being forgotten about. "
5
Mr. Ian Garnder (DoS) spoke cited report he prepared in January 2025 on the issue. The
Housing Section have been in contact with the Housing Department. The Grant covers
the repair of an existing boiler as well as the repair of replacement of any other part of
the system. HVO Boilers can be funded, most boilers use both but they need to be used
with HVO and the Council require a declaration to confirm this.
13 (25) Cllr. Andrew McGuinness & Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness seconded by Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh
and agreed that:
"In recognition of the uncertainty caused by the absence of an up-to-date national
policy/regulation, this Council calls on the Minister to introduce a temporary pause on all large-
scale onshore wind farm developments, pending the finalisation and adoption of revised Wind
Energy guidelines/regulation. '
14 (25) Cllr. Seän Ö hArgäin
It was proposed by Cllr. Sean Ö hArgåin seconded by Cllr. Maria Dollard that:
"That Kilkenny County Council states its abhorrence of the continuing humanitarian
emergency in Gaza, brought about by the genocidal actions of the Israeli Government, led by
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his Government. This Council notes and agrees with
the description of the Israeli Government's actions as 'war crimes' by Taoiseach Micheål Martin
and by Tånaiste Simon Harris as 'genocide' and a 'blatant violation of international
humanitarian law. ' Along with llachtarån na hÉireann, Michael D. Higgins, they have clearly
spoken on behalfofthe Irish people.
We again condemn the actions of Hamas on October the 7th, 2023 and call for the immediate
release of all Israeli hostages held by them.
The reaction of Israel, however, has been catastrophic. The murder of over 53,000 Gazan
citizens, over a third of whom were children, is one of the worst death tolls of any conflict in the
21st Century. Israel's stated objective to now permanently occupy the Gaza strip and its two-
month blockade of all humanitarian aid and food to the area are in utter breach of all
international law. On behalf of the people of Kilkenny, we demand an immediate ceasefire and
the immediate allowing in of food and medical supplies.
until a permanent ceasefire is declared and delivered on by the Israeli Government, we will not
invite or welcome any visits by the Israeli Prime Minister or any Israeli diplomatic
representatives to our City and County.
We also request that the Ambassador of Palestine to Ireland, Dr. Jilian Wahba Abdalmalid be
invited to address our Council as she has done in other Councils"
Cllr. Maria Dollard noted that there is no neural position, we are being called on to take
A stand on this.
Cllr Andrew McGuiness as whip or Fianna Fåil and in conjunction with the whip of
Fianna Gael Cllr Mary Hilda Cavanagh (as agreed by both groups) proposed an
amended motion.
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuiness seconded by Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh
that
"As members of Kilkenny County Council we are very aware and deeply saddened by ongoing
conflicts In Gaza, Ukraine, Sudan and all areas experiencing war. We are mindful that the eyes
of the zoorld are now focused on the Israel — Iran conflict and it is important that we keep the
plight of Gaza and the West Bank to the fore. The immense suffering and loss of life resulting
from wars in so many parts of our world is horrific and unjustifiable. We stand in solidarity
with those affected and urge all parties to pursue dialogue, peace and a resolution that
safeguards human life and dignity.
6
We support the position of the Irish Government, acting for all Irish Citizens, in condemning
the actions ofagressors in conflict and in taking all actions possible to bring about dialogue,
cease fire and humanitarian assistance, to ease suffering and work towards lasting peaceful
settlements.
We want to acknozvledge the role Ofour peace keepers from James Stephens Army Barracks, who
actively contribute to maintaining peace and preserving life, in the Middle-East.
At a complex and volatile time in many conflicts, we want to ask global leaders to stand with
Ireland in condemning acts of war and to take action to support peaceful, just and lasting
solutions that uphold international law and human rights for all.
It is proposed that Kilkenny County Council write to the Minister for Foreign Affairs to clearly
outline our opposition to the occupation of Gaza and the resettlement of the West Bank and to
acknowledge the efforts made by government to advance dialogue and peace, in all conflicts"
Cllr Mary Hilda Cavanagh and thanked Cllr. Sean Ö hArgåin and stated all wars need
to be condemned and the solution is dialogue.
Cllr. Sean Ö hArgåin raised a point of order saying that this was not an amendment as
it was a 'direct negative' and that there was no foresight provided. CLIr Michael
McCarthy upheld the amendment and called for a roll call vote.
A roll call vote was taken on the proposed amendment and:
Eighteen (18) voted in favour: Cllrs. Deirdre Cullen, Michael Doyle, Joe Lyons, Pat
Thirteen (13) voted against:
Two (2) abstained:
Fitzpatrick, Michael McCarthy, John Coonan, David
Fitzgerald, Joe Malone, Andrew McGuinness, Jenny Catt
Slattery, Fidelis Doherty, Pat Dunphy & Ger Frisby, Brian
Cleere, Joe Sheridan, John Brennan, Mary Hilda Cavanagh,
Michael Delaney
Cllrs. Seån Ö hArgåin, Stephanie Doheny, Maria Dollard,
Eugene McGuinness,
Cllrs Tomås Breathnach & Maurice Shortall.
Therefore, the amendment was carried by 18 votes to 4
That concluded the business of the meeting.
CAT
IRLEACH
DATE
7
