1 
 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ AR AN GCRUINNIÚ IOMLÁNACH DE CHUID 
CHOMHAIRLE CONTAE CHILL CHAINNIGH TIONÓLTA AR AN LUAN, 20 
ÉANAIR 2025 AG 3.00 I.N. I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, HALLA AN 
CHONTAE & VIA FOIRNE MS 
 
MINUTES OF PLENARY MEETING OF KILKENNY COUNTY COUNCIL 
HELD ON MONDAY, 20 JANUARY, 2025 AT 3.00 P.M. IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, 
COUNTY HALL & VIA MS TEAMS 
 
 
Attendance 
Chair:  
 
Cllr. Michael McCarthy. 
 
Elected Members: Council Chamber 
Cllrs. Tomás Breathnach, Mary Hilda Cavanagh, Michael Delaney, Ger 
Frisby, Andrew McGuinness, John Coonan, Joe Malone, Maria Dollard, 
Jenny Catt Slattery, Stephanie Doheny, Michael Doyle, David 
Fitzgerald, Pat Dunphy, Pat Fitzpatrick, Eugene McGuinness, Seán Ó 
hArgáin, Joe Sheridan and Maurice Shortall. 
 
MS Teams 
Cllrs Deirdre Cullen, Joe Lyons and Brian Cleere. 
 
Apologies:  
Cllr. John Brennan and Fidelis Doherty. 
 
Officials: 
Lar Power, Martin Prendiville, Mary Mulholland, Fiona Deegan, Ian 
Gardner, Frank Stafford, Tony Lauhoff, Seamus Foley and Catherine 
Cooney. 
 
It was: 
 
Proposed by:  
Cllr. Michael McCarthy. 
Seconded by: 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh 
And Agreed 
 
“That the Plenary Meeting would end at 4.30p.m. to facilitate a Civic Reception for St. 
Lachtain’s Junior Hurling Team, Freshford.” 
 
1. 
Dearbhú Miontuairiscí  -  Confirmation of Minutes 
 
(i) 
Miontuairiscí ar Chruinniú Buiséid Reachtúil - Minutes of Statutory Budget 
Meeting 
Proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Michael Delaney and 
agreed: 
“That Minutes of Minutes of Statutory Budget Meeting of Kilkenny County Council 
held on Friday, 6 December, 2024 as circulated with the Agenda be and are hereby 
approved”. 
 
(ii) 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Iomlánach Éanair - Minutes of January Plenary 
Meeting 
“That Minutes of Plenary Meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on Monday, 16 
December, 2024 as circulated with the Agenda be and are hereby approved”. 
 
(iii) 
Miontuairiscí an chruinnithe speisialta – Minutes of Special Meeting. 
“That Minutes of Special Meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on Thursday, 19 
December, 2024 as circulated with the Agenda be and are hereby approved”. 

2 
 
 
Variation No. 3 of Kilkenny City and County Development Plan. 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh requested an update on the Members’ request for a 
proposed variation to the Development Plan in relation to a defined boundary for 
Kilmanagh.  Mr. Tim Butler outlined the position and stated an email would follow to all 
Members to confirm same. 
 
2. 
Fógraí - Announcements 
 
Cathaoirleach Cllr. Michael McCarthy extended congratulations and best wishes to: 
 
• St. Lachtain’s GAA Junior Hurling Team, Freshford, on winning the All Ireland 
Junior Hurling. 
• All involved in the organising of Yulefest Kilkenny 2024. 
• Kilkenny City Area Office, Keep Kilkenny Beautiful Committee and the Council’s 
Environment Department on the recent success of Kilkenny City in the Irish 
Business Against Litter (IBAL) Awards, securing an impressive second place out of 
40 towns and cities. 
Vótaí Comhbhrón - Votes of Sympathy 
 
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Michael McCarthy extended vote of sympathy to the following: 
 
Family of Mary Fennelly, Ennisnag, Stoneyford, Co. Kilkenny.   
Mrs. Stasia Wall, Skough, Carrick-on-Suir, mother of Carmel Brett, 
Callan/Thomastown Area Office. 
Thomas (Tommy) Coady – Father of John Coady, Water Services Section. 
Billy Murphy, Brownsford, Tullogher, Co. Kilkenny, father of Maggie Collins, Housing 
Section. 
Rose Kelly, Coon West, Co. Kilkenny, father of Kieran Kelly, Parks Department. 
Family of Mary Drennan, Park View, Coolnacritta, Galmoy, Co. Kilkenny. 
Family of Brigid Delaney, Viewmount, Dublin Road, Johnstown, Co. Kilkenny 
 
2. 
(a) 
Tithíocht & Díuscairt Eile  -  Housing & Other Disposal 
 
(i) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Jenny Catt Slattery, seconded by Cllr. Joe Sheridan 
and agreed that: 
“Notice is hereby given, that at a meeting of the Council to be held after the 
expiration of 10 days from the date of this notice, it is the intention of Kilkenny 
County Council, that, in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the 
Local Government Act, 2001, to dispose of its Freehold Interest in property at 
Aghaviller, Hugginstown, Co. Kilkenny to Liam and Kathleen Aylward, 
Aghaviller, Hugginstown, co. Kilkenny for the nominal sum of €10.00 (ten 
euro) with the Purchaser being responsible for all legal costs associated with 
the sale, including those of Kilkenny County Council.  The Consent of the 
Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not required.” 
 
(ii) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Dunphy, seconded by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach 
and agreed that: 
 
“Notice is hereby given, that at a meeting of the Council to be held after the 
expiration of 10 days from the date of this notice, it is the intention of Kilkenny 
County Council, that, in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the 
Local Government Act 2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the 
disposal of its interest in a plot of land at Main Street, Piltown, Co. Kilkenny, to 
Ms. Philomena Carroll for a nominal sum with each party being responsible for 
their own legal costs associated with the sale.  The Consent of the Minister for 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not required.” 

3 
 
 
 
(b) 
Pleanail - Planning 
 
(i) 
Cuid 8 Pleanáil – South East Greenway – Southern Connectivity Link – 
Slieverue to Kilmurry Lane.  
Frank Stafford, Senior Engineer, gave a presentation to the meeting on the 
proposed development outlining the following: 
• Background to the Project. 
• Public Consultation process and Route Selection. 
• Submissions received during public consultation process. 
• Modifications following consideration of submissions received. 
Elected Members thanked Mr. Stafford for his presentation and expressed 
their approval for the proposed development.  Elected Members raised the 
following queries: 
• Speed Limit reduction. 
• Timeframe for the completion of the development.  
Mr. Frank Stafford responded to queries raised.  
 
It was: 
 
Proposed by:  
Cllr. Ger Frisby 
Seconded by: 
Cllr. Tomás Breathnach 
And Resolved 
 
“We the Members of Kilkenny County Council approve the Part 8 in accordance with 
Section 179 of the Planning & Development Act 2000 as amended and Part VIII of 
the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, to the development of a pedestrian 
and cycle link connecting the South East Greenway to the village of Slieverue Co. 
Kilkenny (South East Greenway - Southern Connectivity Link – Slieverue to Kilmurry 
Lane).” 
 
(iii) 
Cuid 8 Pleanáil – Watergate Theatre Energy Upgrade, Parliament Street, 
Kilkenny. 
Seamus Foley, A/Senior Engineer, gave a presentation to the meeting on the 
proposed energy upgrade works project for the Watergate Theatre outlining 
the following: 
• Site Location. 
• Front, Rear and Side Elevations. 
• Submissions received during public consultation process. 
• Chief Executive Report and recommendation. 
Elected Members thanked Mr. Foley for his presentation and expressed their 
approval for the proposed development.   
 
Mr. Foley responded to all queries raised.  
 
It was: 
 
Proposed by:  
Cllr. Ger Frisby 
Seconded by: 
Cllr. Tomás Breathnach 
And Resolved 
 
“We the Members of Kilkenny County Council approve the Part 8 in accordance with 
Section 179 of the Planning & Development Act 2000 as amended and Part VIII of 
the Planning & Development Regulations 2001, to proposed Energy Upgrade of the 
Watergate Theatre at Parliament Street, Kilkenny. 
 
 

4 
 
 
(iii) 
Glacadh i gCúram - Taking in Charge:  [TIC140] Housing Estate at An 
Choill Rua, Paulstown, Co. Kilkenny. 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Eugene 
McGuinness and resolved that: 
 
“That the County Council of the County of Kilkenny, in exercise of the powers 
conferred on them by Section 11 of the Roads Act,1993 and in compliance 
with Section 180 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended by 
Section 59 of the Planning & Development Act 2010, hereby declares the road 
listed in the Public Notice and listed below, to be a Public Road: 
 
Development: 
TIC140 – An Choill Rua, Paulstown, Co. Kilkenny.” 
 
(c) 
Forbairt Eacnamaíoch – Economic Development. 
(i) Abbey Quarter Hotel Proposal. 
 
Tony Lauhoff, Abbey Quarter Partnership, gave a brief presentation on the 
project outlining: 
 
• Background to the Project. 
• Need for additional Hotel. 
• Hotel Development Options. 
• Role of the Elected Members – Disposal of plot of land. 
• Process for disposal of plot of land. 
• Proceeds from the sale of the plot of land. 
• Next Steps. 
 
 
Following the presentation, the Elected Members made contributions in relation 
to the following: 
 
• Need for another hotel in the City Centre. 
• Safeguards in place to ensure that the buyer would develop the site. 
• Why is hotel development coming before the development of housing. 
• Prudent use of land. 
• Positive news for local employment, tourism and competition. 
 
Mr. Tony Lauhoff responded to all comments and queries raised. 
 
 
It was: 
 
Proposed by: 
 
Cllr. David Fitzgerald 
 
Seconded by: 
 
Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin 
 
And resolved: 
 
 
“that pursuant to Clause 5.5.2 of a Limited Partnership Agreement relating to 
Kilkenny Abbey Quarter Development Partnership, (original agreement dated 
23rd December 2016, which was amended and restated on 1st Oct 2024), 
between Kilkenny County Council, The National Treasury Management Agency 
and Kilkenny Abbey Quarter Development Ltd, the consent of Kilkenny County 
Council is required in respect of the disposal of any of the Properties as defined 
in the said Limited Partnership Agreement. 
 
 
For the purposes of Cl 5.5.2 of the amended and restated Limited Partnership 
Agreement, Kilkenny County Council consents to the disposal of Plot 4 in the 
Abbey Quarter for Hotel use, subject to conditions to be agreed between 
Kilkenny Abbey Quarter Development Partnership and the preferred bidder.” 
 

5 
 
(d) 
Gnóthaí Corparáideacha – Corporate Affairs 
(i) Tuarascáil Mhíosúil an Phríomhfheidhmeannaigh 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Report 
Cllr. Michael McCarthy advised that the Chief Executive Report will be taken as 
read.  Any questions can be taken up with the Chief Executive. 
 
(ii) Taisteal Lá Fhéile Pádraig thar lear- St. Patrick’s Day Travel Abroad. 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Mary Hilda 
Cavanagh and agreed that the Cathaoirleach and Leas Cathaoirleach travel as 
part of a delegation to New York for St. Patrick’s Day. 
 
(iii) Freagra drochaimsire – Severe Weather Response 
The Cathaoirleach gave a statement to acknowledge and thank the Council staff 
for their exceptional response to the issues that arose during Storm Éowyn. 
 
Mary Mulholland provided a summary of the Council’s response to the recent 
severe weather event. 
 
Elected Members all acknowledged the work carried out by the Council Staff, 
volunteers, An Garda Síochána and Defence Forces at James Stephens Army 
Barracks. 
 
 
3. 
Comhfhreagras  -  Correspondence 
 
 
None. 
 
4. 
Gnó ar athló ó chruinniúroimhe seo  -  Business adjourned from a previous 
Meeting 
None. 
 
5. 
Dátaí agus Amanta do chruinnithe a shocrú - Fix Dates & Times of Meetings 
 
(i) 
Sceideal na gCruinnithe  - Schedule of Meetings 
Schedule of Meetings circulated with Agenda was proposed by Cllr. John 
Coonan, seconded by Cllr. Seán Ó hÁrgáin and agreed. 
 (ii) 
Aontaím dátaí do chruinnithe iomlánacha Márta agus Aibreán 
Agree Dates for March and April Meetings. 
 
It was: 
Proposed by:  
Cllr. Andrew McGuinness 
Seconded by: 
Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh 
And Agreed 
“that the March Plenary Meeting of the Council will be held on Monday 24th 
March due to it clashing with St. Patrick’s Day.  Additionally, the April Plenary 
Meeting of the Council will be held on Monday, 28th April due to it clashing with 
Easter Monday.” 
 
6. 
Plé ar Thuairiscí agus Moltaí ó Choistí an Comhairle 
  
Consideration of Reports & Recommendations of Committees of the Council 
 
None. 
 
 
7. 
Gnó Eile romhainn i bhFógra reachtála an Chruinnithe 
  
Other Business set forth in the Notice convening the Meeting 
 
None. 

6 
 
 
 
8. 
Oideachas agus Oiliúint  -  Education & Training 
 
 Schedule of Conferences circulated with the Agenda was proposed by Cllr. Deirdre 
Cullen, seconded by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness and agreed. 
 
 
9. 
Gnótha ag éirí as Miontuairiscí  -  Matters Arising from Minutes 
 
None. 
 
10. 
Aon Ghnó Eile  -  Any Other Business 
 
None. 
 
That concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
______________________________ 
CATHAOIRLEACH  
 
 
 
DATE 
