1 
 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ AR AN GCRUINNIÚ IOMLÁNACH DE CHUID 
CHOMHAIRLE CONTAE CHILL CHAINNIGH TIONÓLTA AR AN 
LUAN, 24 MÁRTA 2025 AG 3.00 I.N. I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, 
HALLA AN CHONTAE & VIA FOIRNE MS 
 
MINUTES OF PLENARY MEETING OF KILKENNY COUNTY 
COUNCIL HELD ON MONDAY, 24 March , 2025 AT 3.00 P.M. IN THE 
COUNCIL CHAMBER, COUNTY HALL & VIA MS TEAMS 
 
 
ATTENDANCE 
Chair: 
Cllr. Michael Delaney 
 
Elected Members: 
Council Chamber 
Cllrs. Tomás Breathnach, Jenny Catt Slattery, Mary Hilda Cavanagh,  
Fidelis Doherty, Michael Doyle, Patrick Dunphy, David Fitzgerald,  
Pat Fitzpatrick, Ger Frisby, Joe Malone, Andrew McGuinness, 
Eugene McGuinness & Michael Delaney, Maria Dollard & Joe 
Sheridan, Cllr Maurice  Shortall, Cllr Michael Delaney, Cllr 
Stephanie Doheny. 
 
MS Teams  
Cllrs. John Brennan, Brian Cleere, Joe Lyons, Deirdre Cullen 
 
Officials: 
Council Chamber 
Lar Power, Tim Butler, Mary Mulholland, Fiona Deegan, Margo 
Hayes, & Martin Prendiville, Michael Leahy, Mary Butler. 
Dearbhaile Ledwidge, Denis Malone 
 
Oireachtas Members: 
Natasha Newsome Drennan, TD & Senator Patricia Stephenson 
 
Apologies: 
Cllrs Seán Ó hArgáin & John Coonan. 
 
 
Cllr Michael McCarthy Cathaoirleach opened the meeting and invited the Leas Cathaoirleach to 
Cahir the meeting as he had a family bereavement. 
 
 
1. 
Dearbhú Miontuairiscí  -  Confirmation of Minutes 
 
(i) 
Miontuairiscí ar Chruinniú Buiséid Reachtúil - Minutes of Plenary Meeting 
Proposed by Cllr Pat Fitzgerald, seconded by Cllr. Eugene McGuinness and 
agreed: 
 
“That Minutes of Plenary Meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on 
Monday February 17th, 2025, as circulated with the agenda be and are hereby 
approved”. 
 
 
Fógraí - Announcements 
 
Leas Cathaoirleach Cllr. Michael Delaney thanked all involved in the St. Patrick’s Festival and 
all celebrations across the County in particular Marian Flannery and her team for the diverse 
range of events and the St. Patrick’s Festival Committee chaired by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness.  
 
Cllr. Andrew McGuinness thanked all those involved.  
 
Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick highlighted all the events throughout the County. Cllr Fidelis Doherty 
acknowledged the role of the Grand Marshall Mia Griffin. 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
Vótaí Comhbhrón - Votes of Sympathy 
 
Leas Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Michael Doyle extended vote of sympathy to the following: 
 
▪ 
Cllr. Michael McCarthy, Cathaoirleach on the passing of his sister-in law. 
▪ 
Frank Grogan, Housing Department on the passing of his brother Bernard. 
▪ 
Family of the late Seamus Freyne, Kilbride, Glenmore. 
▪ 
Family of the late Paddy McEvoy, Mullinavat. 
▪ 
Family of the late Wattie Walsh, Mooncoin. 
▪ 
Family of the late Ellen Doran, Mooncoin. 
▪ 
Family of the late Margaret Warner, Carrigeen. 
▪ 
Family of the late Hew Bowers, Mooncoin. 
▪ 
Family of the late Elieen Bowe, Piltown. 
▪ 
Family of the late Pat O’Hanlon, Kilmacow. 
▪ 
Family of the late Willie Ryan, Mooncoin. 
▪ 
Family of the late Vincent Foskin, Ferrybank. 
▪ 
Family of the late Joe Mylett, Mooncoin. 
▪ 
Family of the late Peadar Walsh, Kilmacow. 
▪ 
Family of the late Bobby Grace, Ballyhale. 
▪ 
Family of the late Fintan Flynn, Piltown. 
▪ 
Family of the late mary Grennan, Tullogher. 
▪ 
Family of the late Valerie Walsh, Mooncoin. 
▪ 
Family of the late Sonny Murphy, Mooncoin. 
▪ 
Family of the late Richard Murphy, Mooncoin. 
▪ 
Family of the late Ann O’Gorman, Fiddown, Piltown. 
▪ 
Family of the late Michael Duggan, Piltown. 
▪ 
Family of the late Ger O’Shea, Moopncoin. 
▪ 
Family of the late John Cuddihy, Mooncoin. 
▪ 
Family of the late Nan Phelan, Piltown. 
▪ 
Family of the late Eileen Quinn, Mooncoin. 
▪ 
Family of the late Vera Kiely, Piltown. 
 
2. 
(a) 
Tithíocht & Díuscairt Eile  -  Housing & Other Disposal 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach, seconded by Cllr. Pat Dunphy and 
agreed 
 
That, in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 
2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the disposal of its interest in land 
at Crowbally, Mullinavat, Co. Kilkenny – as identified on the attached map - to Patrick 
Thomas Gaule, Crawn, Kilmacow, Co. Kilkenny for the sum of €1,000 with each party 
being responsible for their own legal costs associated with the sale.  Plot areas combined 
measure 0.8 acre.  The Consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage is not required.” 
 
 
 
(b) 
Pleanail - Planning 
 
(i) 
Cuid 8/Part 8:  Kilkenny Local Studies Hub and Public Realm Enhancements 
at John’s Quay, Kilkenny  
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Mary Hilda 
Cavanagh and agreed: 
 
That the Members of Kilkenny County Council approve the Part 8 in accordance with 
Section 179 of the Planning & Development Act 2000 as amended and Part VIII of the 
Planning & Development Regulations 2001, to the proposed development comprising 
of the repurposing of the former Carnegie Library into a Kilkenny Local Studies Hub 
and Public Realm Enhancements at John’s Quay.” 
 
Cllr Andrew McGuinness requested that it be reverted to residents only 
parking would be reinstated  

3 
 
 
(ii) 
Tuarascáil an Phríomhfheidhmeannaigh maidir le hAighneachtaí maidir le 
hAthrú Beartaithe 4 a ghabhann leis an bPlean Forbartha Cathrach & Contae 2021 
Chief Executive’s Report on Submissions to Proposed Variation 4 to the City 
and County Development Plan 2021  
 
Denis provided the details in a presentation.  Cllr. Jenny Catt Slattery 
expressed her disappointed as development cannot happen as there is not 
adequate wastewater treatment facilities which she feels is detrimental to rural 
villages.  She was supported by Cllr. Pat Dunphy and Cllr. Michael Doyle. 
 
Denis Malone, Senior Engineer responded to say that the policy must be 
framed so as to facilitate development and protect environmental assets.  The 
challenge is to be pro-development while meeting legal obligations to protect 
ground water.  He advised that the Chief Executive’s recommendation 
provided the best way forward. 
 
Cllrs. Pat Dunphy, Maria Dollard, Deirdre Cullen, Eugene McGuinness, David 
Fitzgerald. Tomás Breathnach, Fidelis Doherty, Ger Frisby and Mchael Doyle 
spoke on the variation and the issue of housing provision being hampered. 
 
Cllr. David Fitzgerald asked if there is a list of priority towns so that Kilkenny 
is first in the queue when funding is made available.  Tim Butler, Director of 
Services outlined that there is a priority list based on compliance (where 
pollution is an issue) demand for social housing and County Development Plan.  
We have prioritised fifteen villages with  Bennetsbridge prioritised as the first. 
Cllr. Michael Doyle felt that demand is not a good metric as the lack of 
availability of housing is leading people to go elsewhere. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach, seconded by Cllr. Jenny Catt 
Slattery and agreed: 
 
“That the Members of Kilkenny County Council, having considered the proposal to 
make Variation 4A to the Kilkenny City & County Development Plan 2021 - 2027 
under Section 13 of the Planning & Development Act 2000, as amended, and having 
considered the Chief Executive’s Report as circulated on the 18th March, 2025, 
prepared in accordance with Section 13 (4) of the above Acts, outlining all submissions 
received on this proposal, the recommendations as set out in the Chief Executive’s 
report, and with our decision made at a meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on 
the 24th March 2025,  do hereby resolve to vary the current Kilkenny City & County 
Development Plan in accordance with Proposed Variation 4A.” 
 
A roll call vote was taken on the proposal not to vary the current Kilkenny City 
& County Development Plan in accordance with Proposed Variation 4B. 
 
Eighteen  (18) voted in Favour: 
Cllrs. Maria Dollard, Eugene McGuinness, Tomás Breathnach, Brian Cleere, 
Stephanie Doheny, Joe Sheridan, John Brennan, Mary Hilda Cavanagh, Michael 
Delaney, Maurice Shortall, Deirdre Cullen, Joe Lyons, Pat Fitzpatrick, Joe Malone, 
Andrew McGuinness, Jenny Catt Slattery, Fidelis Doherty and Pat Dunphy. 
 
Two (2) voted against: 
Cllrs. Michael Doyle and David Fitzgerald. 
 
Four (4) Absent: 
Cllrs. Seán Ó hArgáin, Ger Frisby, Michael McCarthy and John Coonan. 
 
Therefore, the resolution was passed by 13 votes to 4. 
 
“That the Members of Kilkenny County Council having considered the Chief 
Executive’s Report as circulated on the 18th March, 2025 under Section 13 of the 
Planning & Development Act 2000, as amended, and having considered the 
recommendation, hereby resolve not to vary the current Kilkenny City & County 
Development Plan in accordance with Proposed Variation 4B.”  

4 
 
 
(iii) 
Ag Glacadh i gCúram: Taking in Charge TC 158: Initiation - 9 Houses 
Moneenroe,  
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick, seconded by Cllr. Mary Hilda 
Kavanagh and agreed that: 
 
“That the County Council of the County of Kilkenny, in exercise of the powers 
conferred on them by Section 11 of the Roads Act,1993 and in compliance with Section 
180 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended by Section 59 of the 
Planning & Development Act 2010, hereby declares the road listed in the Public Notice 
and listed below, to be a Public Road.” 
 
ESTATE: 
TIC158 
Moneen View, Moneenroe, Co Kilkenny 
 
 
 
(c) 
(Pobol  Cultúr  - Community & Culture 
 
(i) 
Scéim Ealaíne Poiblí - Public Art Scheme  
Fiona Deegan, Director of Services introduced Mary Butler, Arts Officer.  Ms. Butler 
provided a comprehensive overview of the scheme including the project to be 
funded. 
 
Cllr. Maria Dollard spoke about how these Art Projects are the fabrics that hold 
communities together and how we understand ourselves is through the arts. She 
congratulated Mary Butler on the great work.  Cllrs. Andrew McGuinness and 
David Fitzgerald also congratulated and thanked Ms. Butler.  Mary acknowledged 
that conversation and engagement was key.  Cllr. Tomás Breathnach enquired if  the 
international dimension came through with the output of the assessments.  Mary 
noted that all the artists are all Irish with an international reputation.  
 
 
 
(d) 
Timpeallacht - Environment 
 
(i) 
Tuarascáil Cur Chun Feidhme an Phlean um Ghníomhú ar son na hAeráide 
de chuid Chomhairle Contae Chill Chainnigh 2024 
Kilkenny County Council Climate Action Plan Implementation Report 2024 
Dearbhala Ledwidge presented the Implementation Report and highlighted 
key areas. Cllr. David Fitzgerald enquired about Solar Panels.  Dearbhala 
outlined where they are located and where plans are to install them.  Cllrs. Joe 
Lyons, Eugene McGuinness and Maria Dollard thanked Dearbhala and her 
team for their efforts and congratulated them on other achievements. 
Dearbhala responded to enquiries in relation to funding for tree removal 
adjacent to electricity wires and she outlined how communities are being 
supported to apply for Community Climate grants.  Dearbhala asked that the 
Councillors share the Climate Action Team Newsletter with their constituents 
and through their networks . 
 
 
 
(e) 
Airgeadas- Finance 
 
(i) 
Ráiteas Airgeadais Bliantúil 2024 - Annual Financial Statement 2024 
It was proposed by Cllr. David Fitzgerald seconded by Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick and 
agreed that 
 
“That we, the Members of Kilkenny County Council, hereby adopt the Annual 
Financial Statement for year ending 31st December 2024.” 
 
Cllrs. Pat Fitzpatrick and David Fitzgerald thanked Martin Prendiville 
and team.  
 
 

5 
 
 
(ii) 
Faomhadh le haghaidh Saoráid Airgeadais Léasa 
Approval for a Lease Finance Facility 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness seconded by Cllr. Tomás 
Breathnach and agreed that: 
 
“That the Elected Members of the Council do hereby approve the terms and conditions 
applicable to the leasing facility in the amount of  €1,000,000.00 (the “Facility”) made 
available by Allied Irish Banks, p.l.c. trading as AIB Finance & Leasing (the “Bank”) 
to the Council under the Offer Letter dated 27th August, 2024. 
 
That each of Lar Power, being the Chief Executive of the Council and Martin 
Prendiville, being the Director of Finance of the Council, are hereby authorised 
to sign the Offer Letter jointly on behalf of the Council and such other 
authorities, documents and instructions that the Bank may require to be signed 
by the Council in connection with the Facility. “ 
 
 
(f) 
Gnóthaí Corparáideacha - Corporate Affairs 
 
(i) 
Tuarascáil Mhíosúil an Phríomhfheidhmeannaigh 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Report 
There were no clarifications required. 
 
(ii) 
Plean Seachadta Seirbhíse - Service Delivery Plan 
Mary Mulholland, Director of Services presented the Service Delivery Plan.  
The adoption of a Service Delivery Plan is a Reserved Function of the Council 
under Section 134A of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended. Mary 
outlined that the Plan is based on the objectives and strategies outlined in the 
Corporate Plan adopted by the Members on the 16th December, 2024.  In each 
of the Service Areas it sets out the actions which the Council intends to take 
in 2025 to meet its commitments and deliver services to our customers under 
its numerous policies, plans and programmes adopted by the Council. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness seconded by Cllr. Tomás 
Breathnach and agreed that: 
 
“That the Draft Service Delivery Plan for 2025 is hereby approved by the Members of 
Kilkenny County Council.” 
 
(iii) 
Tuarascáil Bhliantúil an Choiste Iniúchóireachta  
Audit Committee Annual Report  
Mary Mulholland presented the Audit Committee Annual Report 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick seconded by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach 
and agreed that: 
 
“That the Audit Committee Annual Report 2024 is hereby approved by the Members 
of Kilkenny County Council.” 
 
(iv) 
Cairt agus Clár Oibre an Choiste Iniúchóireachta  
Audit Committee Charter & Work Programme  
Mary Mulholand presented the Audit Committee Charter and Work 
Programme.  The committee has an important role in the governance 
framework of the Council.  It assists the Council to monitor the internal control 
environment, risk management, financial reporting and internal and external 
audit functions.  The Committee does not undertake Management 
responsibilities and is not a substitute for Management controls and 
accountabilities. Under the Local Government (Audit Committee) Regulations 
2014, the Audit Committee is required to operate in accordance with a written 
Charter that shall be adopted by the Local Authority.  

6 
 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness seconded by Cllr. David 
Fitzgerald and agreed that: 
 
“That the Audit Committee Charter is hereby approved by the Members of Kilkenny 
County Council.” 
 
 
(v) 
Review of Effectiveness of Kilkenny County Council’s Audit Committee  
The Review of Effectiveness of Kilkenny County Council’s Audit Committee 
was noted and agreed. 
 
 
3. 
Comhfhreagras - Correspondence 
 
(i) 
Admháil ón Aire maidir leis an N24 agus an N25 
Acknowledgement from Minister in relation to N24 & N25 
The Acknowledgement from the Minister in relation to N24  and the N24 was 
noted. 
 
 
4. 
Gnó ar athló ó chruinniúroimhe seo - Business Adjourned from a Previous Meeting 
 
There were no items for consideration. 
 
 
5. 
Dátaí agus Amanta do chruinnithe a shocrú - Fix Dates & Times of Meetings 
 
(i) 
Sceideal na gCruinnithe  - Schedule of Meetings 
The Schedule of meeting was proposed by Cllr. David Fitzgerald seconded by 
Cllr.  Pat Dunphy and agreed. 
 
 
6. 
Plé ar Thuairiscí agus Moltaí ó Choistí an Comhairle - Consideration of Reports & 
Recommendations of Committees of the Council 
 
There were no items for consideration. 
 
 
7. 
Gnó Eile romhainn i bhFógra reachtála an Chruinnithe - Other Business set forth in 
the Notice convening the Meeting 
 
There were no other business set forth in the Notice convening the Meeting 
 
 
8. 
Oideachas agus Oiliúint - Education & Training 
 
(i) 
Schedule of Conferences circulated with the Agenda was proposed by Cllr. Pat 
Fitzpatrick, seconded by Cllr. Fidelis Doherty and agreed. 
 
 
9. 
Gnótha ag éirí as Miontuairiscí - Matters Arising from Minutes 
 
There were no matter arising. 
 
 
10. 
Aon Ghnó Eile - Any Other Business 
 
(i) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick seconded by Cllr. Andrew McGuin-
ness that the Executive would convene a Special Meeting in relation the pro-
posed Wind Farm at Ballyknocken. 
 
 

7 
 
 
11. 
Fógraí Rúin - Notices of Motion 
 
02 (25) Cllr. Stephanie Doheny 
It was proposed by Cllr. Stephanie Doheny seconded by Cllr.  Eugene McGuinness 
and agreed: 
 
‘That the Council affirms that every endeavour is made to ensure that Kilkenny County Coun-
cil's tender processes are consistent with protecting international humanitarian law and pro-
hibiting the importation or sale of goods or services originating in occupied territories. 
 
This Council resolves to adopt a rights-based Ethical Procurement Policy (EPP) that takes fully 
into account existing obligations and standards. The primary aim of the EPP is to ensure that 
human rights obligations are properly acknowledged, observed and respected at all stages of the 
procurement process." 
 
04 (25) Cllr. Eugene McGuinness 
It was proposed by Cllr. Eugene McGuinness seconded by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach and 
agreed: 
 
“To ask the Council to write to the Minister for Sport asking the Minister to clarify the 
Government current transgender policy particularly as it pertains to women’s and girls’ sport. 
We urge the Minister to engage in meaningful dialogue with female athletes, sports scientists 
and safeguarding experts to find the necessary wording and guidelines that respects both 
inclusion and fairness.” 
 
05 (25) Cllr. Maria Dollard 
It was proposed by Cllr. Maria Dollard seconded by Cllr. Maurice Shortall and agreed: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council review its policy in calculating differential rents for its tenants 
and adopt the recommendation of Family Carers Ireland in their pre-budget submission 2024.  
The recommendations are as follows: 
 
(i) 
Carer’s Allowance will be disregarded at the basic Social Welfare rate in Kilkenny 
County Council Local Authority. 
 
(ii) 
Half-rate Carer’s Allowance will be disregarded in full in this Local Authority. 
 
(iii) 
Disability Allowance received by children aged between 16 and 18 years will be 
disregarded in full, in line with the existing uniform disregard of Domiciliary Care 
Allowance received by children under 16 years.” 
 
12. 
Fógraí i dtaobh Rúin ó Údaráis Áitiúla eile ag lorg tacaíochta ó Chomhairle Chontae 
Chill Chainnigh - Notices of Motion from other local authorities seeking support of 
Kilkenny County Council 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Fidelis Doherty, seconded by Cllr. Pat Dunphy and agreed 
that Notices of Motion 06 (25) to 12 (25) be taken as read and noted. 
 
06 (25)  Limerick County Council 
"That, this Local Authority would call on the Government to put in place a financial support 
scheme within the grant aid for older people form to include people in medical need that they 
would be able to apply for financial aid to help them purchase a generator to allow them to 
power electric medical devices where loss of power occurs." 
 
07 (25)  Limerick County Council 
"That, Limerick City and County Council expresses its fullest appreciation for all of the work 
done by the Council staff and staff of other agencies and volunteers who worked 24/7 to alleviate 
the hardships caused by the recent severe weather event. The Council now calls on the Minister 
for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to (a) immediately release funds to replenish 
Local Authority financial resources used to manage the emergency and (b) provide additional 
adequate funds (or otherwise provide financial arrangements) for Local Authorities impacted 
to arrange a local scheme to compensate homeowners and businesses for property damage, lost 
stock or foods or other reasonable uninsured damages caused by snowfall or electricity cuts, 
and that this Notice of Motion be circulated to all Local Authorities." 

8 
 
 
 
08 (25)  Limerick County Council 
"That, given the recent weather events, Limerick City and County Council (a) calls on Uisce 
Eireann to install generators at every pumping station in the country (b) calls on the ESB to 
cut back/ cut down all trees and/ or branches that are in danger of damaging the infrastructure 
and (c) calls on the Government to set up a special emergency phone number which is activated 
prior to and manned during all orange and red weather alerts." 
 
09 (25)  Roscommon County Council 
“In light of over 40 trees falling during Storm Darragh, damaging power lines and leaving 
homes and businesses without power for days, I propose this Council writes to Nicholas 
Tarrant, MD of ESB Networks, and Keith Leonard, Head of the National Emergency 
Coordination Group. They should ensure compliance with wayleaves and exclusion zones near 
overhead powerlines, requiring forestry owners to meet clearance standards. ESB Networks 
should take pre- emptive measures ahead of storms to prevent similar outages. Additionally, 
compliance with the DAFM Standards for Felling & Restoration near public roads must be 
enforced to prevent road safety hazards during extreme weather.  Subsequent to the submission 
of this motion the events of Storm Éowyn have further highlighted to need for action on this 
matter.  It was agreed to circulate this motion to all Local Authorities.” 
 
10 (25)  Roscommon County Council 
“To write to the Department of Agriculture, Department of Transport, and Department of 
Environment, for an incentive to be put in place for landowners to move trees off the roadside.  
It was agreed to circulate this motion to all Local Authorities.” 
 
11 (25)  Roscommon County Council 
“To write to the Minister for Communications that all emergency frontline services have access 
to the GOV NE system to use any network available in the major emergency events to ensure 
communication channels remain open. It was also agreed to circulate this to all Local 
Authorities.” 
 
12 (25)  Roscommon County Council 
“To write to the next Minister for Education requesting the introduction of extra time for 
students with Dyslexia, Dyscalculia and other learning difficulties sitting second level 
examinations. The lack of extra time is a severe disadvantage to such students at this crucial 
time in their lives. It was also agreed to circulate this to all Local Authorities.” 
 
 
That concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
______________________________ 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
DATE 
 
 
