1 
 
MIONTUAIRISCÍ AR AN GCRUINNIÚ IOMLÁNACH DE CHUID 
CHOMHAIRLE CONTAE CHILL CHAINNIGH TIONÓLTA AR AN LUAN, 17 
Feabhra 2025 AG 3.00 I.N. I SEOMRA NA COMHAIRLE, HALLA AN CHONTAE 
& VIA FOIRNE MS 
MINUTES OF PLENARY MEETING OF KILKENNY COUNTY COUNCIL HELD 
ON MONDAY, 17 FEBRUARY, 2025 AT 3.00 P.M. IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, COUNTY 
HALL & VIA MS TEAMS 
 
 
ATTENDANCE 
Chair:  
 
Cllr. Michael McCarthy. 
 
Elected Members: 
Council Chamber 
Cllrs. Tomás Breathnach, Jenny Catt Slattery, Mary Hilda Cavanagh, John 
Coonan, Deirdre Cullen, Fidelis Doherty, Michael Doyle, Patrick Dunphy, 
David Fitzgerald, Pat Fitzpatrick, Ger Frisby, Joe Lyons, Joe Malone, Andrew 
McGuinness, Eugene McGuinness & Seán Ó hArgáin. 
 
MS Teams 
Cllrs. Brian Cleere, Michael Delaney, Maria Dollard & Joe Sheridan. 
 
Officials: 
Council Chamber 
Lar Power, Tim Butler, Mary Mulholland, Fiona Deegan, Ian Gardner, Margo 
Hayes, Aileen McGrath & Catherine Cooney, & Catherine Callaghan, TD. 
 
MS Teams 
Jan McIntyre & Natasha Newsome Drennan, TD. 
 
Apologies: 
 
Cllrs. John Brennan, Maurice Shortall & Stephanie Doheny. 
 
1. 
Dearbhú Miontuairiscí  -  Confirmation of Minutes 
 
(i) 
Miontuairiscí ar Chruinniú Buiséid Reachtúil - Minutes of Plenary Meeting 
Proposed by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin, seconded by Cllr. Eugene McGuiness and agreed: 
 
“That Minutes of Plenary Meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on Monday 
January 20th, 2025, as circulated with the Agenda be and are hereby approved”. 
 
 
  
Fógraí - Announcements 
 
Vótaí Comhbhrón - Votes of Sympathy 
 
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Michael McCarthy extended vote of sympathy to the following: 
 
▪ 
Graham Clarke, Piltown Area Office on the death of his mother Cora Clarke, Dublin. 
▪ 
Niall O'Callaghan, Piltown Area Office on the death of his father Patrick Joseph 
O'Callaghan, Fedamore, Limerick. 
▪ 
Family of Gerald (Smiler) O'Shea, St. Anne's Terrace, Mooncoin. 
▪ 
Bernedatte Moloney, Climate Action on the death of her mother Maeve Moloney, 
Kiltoom, Athlone. 
▪ 
John Powell, Caretaker on the death of his father Willam (Willie) Powell, Kilkenny. 
▪ 
Family of the late James Coady Rahanna, Borris, Co Carlow. 
▪ 
Family of the late Michael O’Brien (Pensioner). 
▪ 
Family of the late Cllr. Anthony Waldron of Ballintobber, Roscommon. 
▪ 
Family of Jockey Michael O’Sullivan of Lombardstown, Co. Cork following a tragic accident. 
▪ 
Family of the late Phylliss Forristal, Glenmore. 
▪ 
Family of the late Mary Grennan, Tullogher. 
▪ 
Family of the late Christina Bartlett, Glenmore. 
▪ 
Family of the late Paddy Doherty, Glenmore. 
▪ 
Family of the late Billy and Peter Heffernan, Glenmore. 
 

2 
 
 
2. 
(a) 
Tithíocht & Díuscairt Eile  -  Housing & Other Disposal 
 
(i) 
It was proposed by Cllr Eugene McGuinness, seconded by Cllr John Coonan 
and agreed: 
 
“That in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 
2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the disposal of its interest in a 
small plot of land at 1 Breaghagh Court, Kennyswell Road, Kilkenny (as identified on 
the attached map) to Christine and Neil Kavanagh, 1 Breaghagh Court, Kennyswell 
Road, Kilkenny for the nominal sum of €10 (ten euro) with each party being 
responsible for their own legal costs associated with the sale.  Site area measures 9m².  
The Consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not 
required.” 
 
(ii) 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuiness seconded by Cllr. Seán 
ÓhArgáin and agreed: 
 
“That in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 
2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the disposal of its interest in 
Property at Garden Row, Kilkenny, as identified on the attached map, by way of Lease 
to Kilkenny Employment for Youth Limited (KEY) for a term of 5 years at a rent of 
€7,500 per annum for years 1, 2 and 3 with an increase to €9,975 per annum for Years 
4 and 5.” 
 
(iii) 
It was proposed by Cllr Deirdre Cullen, seconded by Cllr Joe Lyons and 
agreed: 
 
“That in accordance with the provisions of Section 183 of the Local Government Act, 
2001, Kilkenny County Council hereby approves of the disposal of its interest in strip 
of land at Annamult, Bennettsbridge, Co. Kilkenny (as identified on the attached map) 
to Richard Butler, Knock, Danesfort, Co. Kilkenny for the nominal sum of €10 (ten 
euro) with both parties being responsible for their own legal costs associated with the 
sale.  Site area measures 1200 m² (0.12 ha).  The Consent of the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage is not required.” 
 
 
(b) 
Pleanail - Planning 
 
(i) 
Aighneachtaí maidir le hAthrú Beartaithe 3 ar an bPlean Forbartha Cathrach 
agus Contae 2021 
Submissions to Proposed Variation 3 to City & County Development Plan 2021 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuiness, seconded by Cllr. John Coonan 
and agreed: 
 
“To clarify the settlement hierarchy in relation to small settlements in the City and 
County Development Plan 2021 (CCDP).  Specifically, the changes are as follows: 
 
▪ 
to change the zoning of an area of green space, covering approx. 0.18 hectares 
(0.45 acres), at Loughboy in Kilkenny City from ‘Open Space’ to ‘Existing 
Residential’, in order to accommodate housing suitable for older persons / persons 
with disabilities on the lands highlighted (See Figure 1 of CE’s Report). 
 
“We, the Members of Kilkenny County Council, having considered the proposal to make 
Variation 3 to the Kilkenny City & County Development Plan 2021 - 2027 under 
Section 13 of the Planning & Development Act 2000, as amended, and having 
considered the Chief Executive’s Report as circulated on the 11th February 2025, 
prepared in accordance with Section 13 (4) of the above Acts, outlining all submissions 
received on this proposal, the recommendations as set out in the Chief Executive’s 
report, and with our decision made at a meeting of Kilkenny County Council held on 
the 17th February 2025, do hereby resolve to vary the current Kilkenny City & County 
Development Plan in accordance with Proposed Variation 3.”  
 
 

3 
 
 
(ii) 
Ag Glacadh i gCúram Taking in Charge [TIC 177]  
Weir View Gardens, Castlecomer Road  
It was proposed by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin, seconded by Cllr. Eugene 
McGuinness and resolved that: 
 
“The County Council of the County of Kilkenny, in exercise of the powers conferred 
on them by Section 11 of the Roads Act,1993 and in compliance with Section 180 of 
the Planning & Development Act, 2000 as amended by Section 59 of the Planning & 
Development Act 2010, hereby declares the road listed in the Public Notice and listed 
below, to be a Public Road.” 
 
(c) 
Bóithre - Roads 
 
(i) 
Cuid 85: Naisc Inbhuanaithe Ferrybank  
Section 85:  Sustainable Links Ferrybank (Belmont Road & Abbey Road)  
Following a comprehensive presentation by David O’Brien, Senior Executive 
Engineer with the Road Section. 
It was proposed by Cllr. Ger Frisby, seconded by Cllr. Jenny Catt Slattery and 
resolved that: 
 
‘The Members of Kilkenny County Council approve the Section 85 in accordance with 
the Local Government Act 2001 and Section 14 of the Roads Act 1993 for the 
Sustainable Links Ferrybank (Belmont Road and Abbey Road) proposed scheme in 
Ferrybank, Co. Kilkenny.” 
 
  
(d) 
Forbairt Eacnamaíoch – Economic Development. 
 
(i) 
Scéim na bhFéilte agus na nImeachtaí 2025 - Festivals & Events Scheme 2025  
Tim Butler, Director of Services, outlined that a provision of €120,000 has been 
included in the Council’s adopted Budget for 2025 for the Festival and Events 
Grant Scheme and he set out the criteria for project evaluation.  Cllr. Dunphy, 
Cllr. Slattery, Cllr. Doherty, Cllr. Frisby and Cllr. Fitzpatrick expressed 
disappointment with the level of funding being provided to Iverk Show.  Cllr. 
Fitzpatrick asked that Management engage with the Iverk Show Committee 
to ascertain which support could be provided to them by Kilkenny County 
Council.  Tim Butler set out that other matters were considered when 
assessing grant applications including the financial standing of the entity and 
any other state grants received. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Pat 
Fitzpatrick and resolved: 
 
‘That the Festival & Event Grants 2025 are hereby approved by the Members of 
Kilkenny County Council, as per Report circulated”. 
 
(ii) 
Scéim Deontais Caipitil Áiseanna Pobail agus Cultúrtha (CCFCS) 
Community and Cultural Facilities Capital (CCFCS) Grant Scheme 
Ian Gardner, Director of Services, outlined that the Community & Cultural 
Facilities Capital Scheme is funded from development contributions and an 
annual budget of €250,000 is provided.  The Scheme now requires to be 
reviewed and a new Scheme agreed to cover the next three year period 2025-
2027.  The proposed changes to the scheme are to: 
 
• 
Increase in maximum grant funding to €50,000 (previously €45,000) 
• 
Reduction in match funding requirement to 10% (previously 25%) 
 
It was proposed by: Cllr. Andrew McGuiness, seconded by Cllr. Deirdre 
Cullen and resolved: 
 
“That the revised Community & Cultural Facilities Capital Scheme for the period 
2025 to 2027 is hereby approved by the Members of Kilkenny County Council, as 
per Report circulated.” 
 
 

4 
 
 
  
(e) 
Pobol Cultúr  - Community & Culture 
 
(i) 
Deontais faoin Acht Ealaíon 2025 - Arts Act Grants 2025  
Fiona Deegan, A/Director of Services, explained that in approving the 2025 
Budget, Elected Members provided an allocation in the amount of €25,000 for 
the assignment of the Arts Grants in 2025.  This recognises the provisions of the 
Arts Act 2003 whereby individual local authorities may provide financial 
assistance for the purposes of stimulating interest in the Arts, promoting 
knowledge and/or appreciation of the Arts and Enhancing standards in the 
Arts. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin, seconded by Cllr. Andrew 
McGuiness and resolved: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council approves the allocation of €25,000 to the 33 
applicants approved under the Arts Grants 2025, as per report circulated”.  
 
  
(f) 
Gnóthaí Corparáideacha – Corporate Affairs 
 
(i) Tuarascáil Mhíosúil an Phríomhfheidhmeannaigh 
Chief Executive’s Monthly Report 
Cllr. Michael McCarthy advised that the Chief Executive Report will be taken as 
read.   
 
Cllr. Tómas Breathnach queried the process of variation to the City and County 
Development Plan 2021.  Cllr. Michael Doyle sought clarity in relation to the new 
City and County Development Plan. There was a discussion around cluster 
development and settlement boundaries with Cllr. Mary Hilda Cavanagh 
seeking a report setting out the advantages and disadvantages of the settlement 
boundaries for the next meeting of the Council. 
 
Cllr. David Fitzgerald sought clarity of the term of the next County Development 
Plan.  Tim Butler, Director of Services, confirmed that the current Plan will be in 
place up to 2027.  New Regulation are proposing a ten year term with reviews 
included in that timeframe. 
 
Cllr. David Fitgerald enquired if funding for the Kilkenny Ring Road was 
included in last week’s announcement and Mary Mulholland, Director of 
Services confirmed that this was included and a Feasibility Study/Traffic 
Analysis will be funded.  Mary Mulholland noted that Management will 
continue to engage at every level and multi-annual funding commitment would 
be welcome. 
 
Cllr. Ger Frisby thanked Mary Mulholland for the work she had done in relation 
to the N24 and asked if the N25 could in included in the discussion which was 
agreed.  
 
Cllr Deirdre Cullen spoke about her disappointment in relation to postponement 
of the provision of wastewater treatment infrastructure in Bennettsbridge until 
post 2029, saying that the lack of this infrastructure is hampering development 
in villages as well as having an adverse impact on communities and schools.  Cllr.  
Fitzpatrick, Cllr. Doyle, Cllr. Breathnach, Cllr. Catt Slattery and Cllr Dunphy 
agreed.  Tim Butler replied that it is the intention of Management to develop a 
Policy and pilot to cater for rural villages where no waste water facilities are 
available.  A National Working Group is in place to examine this issue which 
includes input from Uisce Éireann. 
 
Cllr. Pat Dunphy requested that the Council would correspond with Uisce 
Éireann seeking a response to the issues raised by the Elected Members (asked 
that we should write to Irish water and ask them to respond to the issues as outlined).  
 
 

5 
 
 
(ii) Buan-Orduithe / Standing Orders  
Mary Mulholland advised that following a consultation process with Party 
Whips, the draft Standing Orders are before the Members for approval with the 
following amendments for consideration: 
 
• 
Section 15: Proposed amendment to categorise Notices of Motion. 
• 
Section 17: Amendment proposed to include speaking rights to Elected 
Member to amend or oppose a Notice of Motion wording.  Speaking to oppose 
a Motion at Cathaoirleach’s discretion 
 
Cllr. Tómas Breathnach acknowledged the work that has taken place but objected 
to the amendment in relation to Section 15.  Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin expressed 
approval for the modifications to Section 17 but believed that the proposed 
changes to Section 15 in the Draft Standing Orders were unnecessary.  Cllr. Ó 
hArgáin proposed the following amendment to the draft Standing Orders and it 
was seconded by Cllr. Tómas Breathnach: 
 
“That Section 15 to categorise the Notion of Motion would not be included’   
 
A roll call vote was taken on the proposed amendment and: 
 
Four (4) voted in favour: 
Cllrs. Maria Dollard, Eugene McGuinness, Seán Ó 
hArgáin & Tomás Breathnach. 
 
Thirteen (13) voted against: 
Cllrs. Deirdre Cullen, Michael Doyle, Joe Lyons, Pat 
Fitzpatrick, Michael McCarthy, John Coonan, David 
Fitzgerald, Joe Malone, Andrew McGuinness, Jenny 
Catt Slattery, Fidelis Doherty, Pat Dunphy & Ger 
Frisby. 
 
Seven (7) absent: 
Cllrs. Brian Cleere, Stephanie Doheny, Joe Sheridan, 
John Brennan, Mary Hilda Cavanagh, Michael 
Delaney & Maurice Shortall. 
 
Therefore, the resolution was defeated by 4 votes to 13. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. David Fitzgerald 
and agreed: 
 
“that we the Members of Kilkenny County Council hereby adopt the Standing Orders as 
amended with a review to take place after six months”. 
 
A roll call vote was taken and: 
 
Thirteen (13) voted in favour: Cllrs. Deirdre Cullen, Michael Doyle, Joe Lyons, Pat 
Fitzpatrick, Michael McCarthy, John Coonan, David 
Fitzgerald, Joe Malone, Andrew McGuinness, Jenny 
Catt Slattery, Fidelis Doherty, Pat Dunphy & Ger 
Frisby. 
 
Four (4) voted against: 
Cllrs. Maria Dollard, Eugene McGuinness, Seán Ó 
hArgáin & Tomás Breathnach. 
 
Seven (7) absent: 
Cllrs. Brian Cleere, Stephanie Doheny, Joe Sheridan, 
John Brennan, Mary Hilda Cavanagh, Michael 
Delaney & Maurice Shortall. 
 
Therefore, the resolution was passed by 13 votes to 4. 
 
 

6 
 
 
(iii) 
Comhalta Tofa a Cheapadh at Choistí 
Appointment of Elected Member to Committees 
 
It was proposed by Cllr. Andrew McGuiness, seconded by Cllr. Joe Malone and 
resolved: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council hereby appoints Cllr. Michael McCarthy to the Association 
of Irish Local Government.” 
 
”That Kilkenny County Council hereby appoints Cllr. John Coonan to Kilkenny Carlow 
Education and Training Board.” 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council hereby appoints Cllr. Brian Cleere to Water Safety 
Committee.”  
 
3. 
Comhfhreagras  -  Correspondence 
 
None. 
 
 
4. 
Gnó ar athló ó chruinniúroimhe seo  -  Business adjourned from a previous Meeting 
 
None. 
 
5. 
Dátaí agus Amanta do chruinnithe a shocrú - Fix Dates & Times of Meetings 
 
(i) 
Taisteal Eachtrach - Foreign Travel 
Mary Mulholland informed the meeting that Penvenan, France, which is twinned 
with Castlecomer in Kilkenny, is celebrating the 25th Anniversary of this twinning 
partnership.  Penvénan and Castlecomer Twinning Committee has invited the 
Cathaoirleach and his Partner to visit Penvenan, France in May 2025 for this event.  
As the approval of foreign travel by Elected Members is a reserved function approval 
for this trip is requested. 
 
It was proposed by Cllr Joe Malone, seconded by Cllr Andrew McGuinness and 
resolved: 
 
“that the Cathaoirleach will travel to Penvénan, France, to represent Kilkenny at the 25th 
Anniversary Twinning Event.” 
 
Cllr Fidelis Doherty said that it would be important that the Cathaoirleach of the 
Municipal District would also attend as they would be required to host a delegation 
in 2026.  Mary Mulholland outlined the issue with accommodation in the area but 
agreed to investigate the possibility of the Cathaoirleach of the Castlecomer 
Municipal District travelling pending being able to source accommodation. 
 
6. 
Plé ar Thuairiscí agus Moltaí ó Choistí an Comhairle 
  
Consideration of Reports & Recommendations of Committees of the Council 
 
None. 
 
 
7. 
Gnó Eile romhainn i bhFógra reachtála an Chruinnithe 
  
Other Business set forth in the Notice convening the Meeting 
 
None. 
 
 
8. 
Oideachas agus Oiliúint -  Education & Training 
 
Schedule of Conferences circulated with the Agenda was proposed by Cllr. John Coonan, 
seconded by Cllr. Jenny Catt Slattery and agreed. 
 
 

7 
 
 
9. 
Gnótha ag éirí as Miontuairiscí  -  Matters Arising from Minutes 
 
Deontais Oiriúnaithe Tithíochta – Rialacháin Athbhreithnithe 
Housing Adaptation Grants – Revised Regulations 
Following up from an item raised at the December 2025 Plenary Meeting, Cllr Pat Dunphy 
spoke about how replacement of fossil fuel boilers with a new fossil fuel boiler is not eligible 
for funding under the terms of the new regulations. Only second-hand boilers are funded as 
part of the scheme. Several Elected Members including Cllr. Joe Lyons, Cllr. Pat Fitzpatrick 
and Cllr. John Coonan agreed that new boilers should be funded. Cllr. Joe Sheridan 
requested that the Council write to the Department seeking a reversal of this decision.  
 
Ian Gardner responded by saying that it is an EU Directive that state funding cannot be used 
for fossil fuel equipment. He explained that they can provide funding for repair and ancillary 
works and assist applicants in any way possible.  
 
 
10. 
Aon Ghnó Eile -  Any Other Business 
 
None. 
 
11. 
 Fógraí Rúin - Notices of Motion 
 
01 (25) Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin 
It was proposed by Cllr. Seán Ó hArgáin, seconded by Cllr. John Coonan and agreed: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council commences the process of investigating the possibility of making a 
bid for Fleadh Cheoil na hÉireann to return to Kilkenny City in the future.” 
 
Tim Butler advised a Feasibility Study in relation requirement of accommodation, local and 
value for money. 
 
02 (25) Cllr. Stephanie Doheny. 
Due to the absence of Cllr. Stephanie Doheny it was agreed to defer this item to the March 
Plenary Meeting. 
 
03 (25) Cllr. Pat Dunphy 
It was proposed by Cllr. Pat Dunphy, seconded by Cllr. Fedelis Doherty and agreed: 
 
“That Kilkenny County Council write to the Department and Uisce Éireann asking them to resolve 
the ongoing water leaks in Mooncoin Parish in the Village of Mooncoin, Grange, Portnahully and 
Tubbrid.  Residents are without water every week at some stage and when they have it the pressure is 
to low to get to the tank in the attic. This is a weekly occurrence and there is an urgent need to replace 
the piping in these areas”. 
 
A number of Elected Members from the Piltown Electoral Area spoke at the meeting in 
support of the Notice of Motion. 
 
Water outage notifications were read out to the meeting by Cllr. Tomás Breathnach outlining 
daily interruption to supply in the area this week. 
 
Mary Mulholland agreed to write to the Senior Executive Engineer in Water Services 
Operations to ascertain whether it is proposed to seek funding for further Mains rehab and 
what efforts are being made to improve supply to affected householders in the interim. 
 
That concluded the business of the Meeting. 
 
 
______________________________ 
______________________________ 
CATHAOIRLEACH 
DATE 
