Comhairle Contae Thiobraid Årann
Tipperary County Council
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS OF ANNUAL MEETING OF NENAGH MUNICIPAL
DISTRICT HELD IN THE NENAGH MUNICIPAL DISTRICT CHAMBER AT 11.30 AM
ON 25th JUNE 2026
Present in
chamber
A 010 ies
Also Present
A olo ies
Item 1.
Election of
Cathaoirleach
Cllr's Fiona Bonfield, Séamus Morris, Phyll Bugler, J.P. O'Meara,
Louise Mor an Walsh Ph 11 Bu ler and Joe Hanni an
Cllrs. Michael O'Meara and John Carroll
Ms. Rosemary Joyce, District Administrator; Mr. Liam Brett,
Director of Services; Mr. Barry Murphy, Senior Executive
En ineer• and Ms. Sinead Moriart Staff Officer.
Mr. Kieran Malone Senior Executive Officer
Cllr. Bugler thanked the elected members and staff of Nenagh MD
for their work and support over the last year and highlighted a few
of the successes in the District. The Dromineer Platforms for
Growth scheme being developed by Tipperary County Council and
Failte Ireland will benefit visitors and locals and will extend the
tourism season. Funding of €500,000 was secured for work on
the Gaol Block in Nenagh and this will open the historic building to
the public and regenerate the historical and cultural quarter.
Terryglass secured a gold medal at the 2025 Entente Florale
Europe awards which recognised community pride. It is now one
of 8 "can't miss" towns in Ireland. The Unravelling Shane
MacGowan tour continues to be a success. The opening of the
Ballina Access Promenade in September 2025 has enhanced
accessibility from the Riverside Park to Ballina Town. The
extended SCEAL Community Shop and Tea Rooms in Lorrha and
Boher Burial Ground were both opened in June 2026. The 13 arch
historical bridge in Ballina was transformed on the 28th May into
an open-air catwalk for the Bridging Style Ballina Killaloe Fashion
show. ANZAC day in Lorrha honouring Sergeant Martin O'Meara
was another memorable occasion. The town teams in Newport and
Nenagh and the Sustainable Energy Centre of Excellence in
Nenagh are also progressing well.
All the members thanked Cllr. Bugler for her work and leadership
in the last 12 months. Mr. L. Brett, Ms. R. Joyce and Mr. B.
Murphy were also associated with the comments.
It was proposed by Cllr. Bugler and seconded by Cllr. Quirke
O'Meara and unanimously agreed that Cllr J.P. O'Meara be elected
Cathaoirleach.
Cllr. J.P. O'Meara was presented with the chain of office and stated
that it was a huge honour and privilege for him and his family to
be elected Cathaoirleach. He thanked Cllr. Bugler for proposing
him and Cllr. Quirke O'Meara and seconding him. He also thanked
his fellow councillors for their support this morning and over the
last 18 months since he joined them in the Chamber. He
con ratulated Cllr. Bu ler on her successful ear as Cathaoirleach
Minutes of Annual Meeting of Nenagh Municipal District 2026
Page | 1
Comhairle Contae Thiobraid Årann
Tipperary County Council
and Cllr. Bonfield before that. They have both set a very high
standard.
The number one issue for him and most Councillors is Housing.
While it is disheartening to see the number of people on the
waiting list for social housing, it is welcome to see progress on the
work on the WWTP in Nenagh which will help with the provision of
houses. The development of 70 social houses in Tyone is very
important, Investment in WWTPs in the District, amendments to
the County Development Plan and the Rural Planning Guidelines
should all lead to an increase in the provision of social and private
housing. The Roads programme is progressing, and the work of
the Council staff and contractors should be commended. However,
due to inflation there is need for an increase in funding from
Government.
The site boundary for the Centre of Excellence has been agreed,
and the initial design work has started. Funding application is
being prepared for the Historical and Cultural Quarter, and one
has been submitted for the Rialto. All these projects will be a
major development for the town. Road safety is an area that Cllr.
J.P. O'Meara will be very vocal on. Speeding is a very serious issue
and is affecting every town and village. Visibility of pedestrians
and cyclists, and e-scooter users is also an area of concern. He
also made a special mention of all the Tidy Towns groups that
carry out a vast amount of work in their communities, and he
would encourage more people to get involved. He stated that
there is a certain dynamic in the Nenagh MD Chamber that allows
the members to work together for the betterment of the district
and he hopes he can strengthen that over the next 12 months. He
thanked his Fianna Fåil party members for nominating him as
Councillor after the last General Election.
All the members wished Cllr. J.P. O'Meara well for the year ahead.
Ms. R. Joyce, Mr. L. Brett and Mr. B. Murphy were also associated
with the comments.
Item 2.
It was proposed by Cllr. Hannigan, seconded by Cllr. Bugler and
Election of Leas- agreed that Cllr. Morris be elected Leas-Chathaoirleach.
Chathaoirleach
This concluded the business of the meeting, a true copy of which we hereby certify:-
Signed:
Irleach
a
Cllr. J.P. O'Meara
Signed:
s. Rosemary Joy
District Administrator
Minutes of Annual Meeting of Nenagh Municipal District 2026
Date:
Date:
7/202 L
Page 12