Comhairle Contae Thiobraid Årann
Tipperary County Council
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS OF THE JUNE MEETING OF NENAGH MUNICIPAL
DISTRICT HELD IN NENAGH MUNICIPAL DISTRICT CHAMBER AT 12.30 PM ON
25th JUNE 2026
Present in
chamber
Apologies
Also Present
Apologies
Item 1.
To note any
Disclosures/
Conflicts of
Interest
Item 2.
To consider and
adopt Minutes
of the May
Meeting held on
21st May 2026
Cllr's Fiona Bonfield, J.P. O'Meara, Pamela Quirke O'Meara, Louise
Morgan Walsh, Séamus Morris, John Carroll, Phyll Bugler and Joe
Hannigan
Cllr. Michael O Meara
Ms. Rosemary Joyce, District Administrator; Mr. Liam Brett,
Director of Services; Mr. Barry Murphy, Senior Executive Engineer
and Ms. Sinead Moriarty, Staff Officer
Library & Cultural Services: Ms. Fiona Flavin, Assistant Arts
Officer
Economic, Community, Social Inclusion & Rural
Development: Ms. Marie Maher, Project Co-Ordinator and Tom
Dorney, Sports Officer
Mr. Kieran Malone, Senior Engineer; Mr. Damien Dullagahan,
County Librarian and Ms. Mary Ryan, Senior Enterprise
Development Officer
None
It was proposed by Cllr. Bonfield and seconded by Cllr. Morris
and resolved that the minutes of the May Meeting held on 21st May
be adopted.
Cllr. Morris stated that an invitation to the proposed meeting with
environmental groups should be extended to any of the groups
involved with Lough Derg including agencies in the Mid-West
dealing with environmental and climate matters. From the 505
discharge licences that have been issued to Uisce Éireann, 118 of
these are in breach of guidelines. The locals in Kilkee recently took
a Judicial Review Case to the High Court against Uisce Eireann and
had to raise €50,000 to do so, on the same day the case was
happening Uisce Éireann issued notice to landowners on CPOs.
Commitments were made by LAWPRO and TCC to address the
issues with Nenagh River, but nothing has been done to date. An
Coimisiun Pleanåla have contacted the Lough Derg Pipeline action
group inviting them to make a further submission on the answers
given by Uisce Éireann to the original submission.
Minutes of June 2026 Meeting of Nenagh Municipal District
Page | 1
Comhairle Contae Thiobraid Årann
Tipperary County Council
Item 3.
To receive
update from
Library
Services,
Culture and
Biodiversity
Item 4.
To receive
update
Economic,
Community,
Social Inclusion
and Rural
Development
Item 5.
To agree a date
for the Drainage
Committee
meetings
Cllr. Bugler said the upgraded plant in Ballina does not remove
nitrates and there is a boil water notice for the Newport area that
has been ongoing since February. All the filters must be changed,
and the controls will have to be automated. She asked that
contact be made with Uisce Éireann to get a get an update on how
long this will take.
Cllr. Hannigan agreed with the points raised. He also has concerns
about the water quality in Lough Derg and what will happen with
the sludge that will have to be removed from the upgraded WTP in
Nenagh.
The report from Library Services, Culture and Biodiversity was
circulated to members.
Cllrs. Morgan Walsh and Bonfield complimented the events in the
care homes for Bealtaine. Cllr. Bonfield asked about the possibility
of a concert venue becoming available in Tipperary. Cllr. Hannigan
asked if there were any events planned during the term of
Ireland's Presidency of the EU for the link between Tipperary and
Bulgaria. Cllr. Quirke O'Meara enquired about the possibility of
new heritage groups registering for iCAN.
Ms. F. Flavin will refer the query regarding iCAN to the Heritage
Officer. She stated that she is also hearing about the need for a
good concert venue in Tipperary. The space in Clonmel has been
well used. There will not be specific events for the
Tipperary/Bulgaria link, it will be more themes of shared culture
experiences. Corporate Services would be involved in the
organisation of the Ambassador's visit later in the year. Funding
has also been provided to some groups to include appropriate
elements in their planned Festivals and Events.
The presentation on LEO was circulated to members; any queries
can be referred back to LEO after the meeting.
A presentation on Sports Partnership was given. A video on sports
ability day will be circulated to members to show what this type of
day is about. Cllr. Quirke O'Meara welcomed the cycle to school
initiative but did have concerns about road safety. She also asked
if there was any engagement with St. Paul's boxing club. Cllr. J.P.
O'Meara supported this.
It was agreed to hold the Drainage Committee meeting on
Thursday, 16th July 2026, after the monthly meeting.
Cllr. Morris raised his concerns about the fact that there is no
drainage committee for the Clareen and Nenagh river and these
rivers are in difficulty. Cllr. Hannigan queried where the river in
Terryglass would come under.
Minutes of June 2026 Meeting of Nenagh Municipal District
Page | 2
Comhairle Contae Thiobraid Årann
Tipperary County Council
Item 6.
To update
members on
projects &
events
Mr. B. Murphy explained that the existence of the drainage
committees was determined in the 1800s and it is not possible to
set up a new drainage committee. There are three different areas
responsible for the drainage of rivers, they are covered by
drainage committees, OPW or adjoining landowners.
Cllr. Morris requested the inclusion of the OPW in the meeting with
environmental groups referred to earlier.
Newport Town Team/ Newport Town Centre First Plan:
A meeting of the Newport Town Team took place on 16th June
2026.
At the meeting updates were given on matters raised at the
previous meeting:
o Flier drafted for encouraging people to avail of the
Painting & Enhancement Scheme.
o Letter from Environment Section provided for delivery to
people who leave bins on footpaths on a continuous
basis.
o Commitment re assignment of outdoor worker to
Newport two days per week.
Selection of project(s) to advance in 2026 was discussed.
Suggestions put forward included mural, phone box/book
repository, window replacement at Bridewell/Courthouse.
Details were outlined of the LEAF project, and it was agreed
that members of the Town Team would meet on site to
consider options for an application to be led by the Tidy Towns
in collaboration with the Town Team.
Nenaqh Town Team (Town Centre First/ THRIVE:
• Meetings of Nenagh Town Team were held on 21st May and 4th
June 2026.
• Action Plan being drafted to progress implementation of Town
Centre First Plan based on priorities and resources. The Action
Plan is being compiled based on the four Themes of (1)
Cultural and Heritage; (2) Economic Development; (3)
Environmental and Public Realm; (4) Social and Community
based on the themes set out in the Town Centre First Plan.
• Logo for Nenagh.ie is in course of finalisation - meeting held
with design company on 24th June.
Work progressing on website for www.nenagh.ie.
Rialto Diqita\ & Enterprise Hub:
• Following extensive engagement with Enterprise Ireland an
application for funding has now been submitted by the Rialto
Regional Centre for Innovation & Enterprise (RRCIE) CLG to the
Smart Regions Team/Enterprise Ireland under the Smart
Regions Enterprise Innovation Scheme. The value of the
funding sought is in excess of €6 million.
Nena h own P rk Extension:
Minutes of June 2026 Meeting of Nenagh Municipal District
Page 3
Comhairle Contae Thiobraid Arann
Tipperary County Council
Following a tender process Lead Engineer, Ecologist and
Landscaper have been appointed to prepare a concept design
for the extension of Nenagh Town Park with a view to
progressing to planning stage.
Design is ongoing — ecologist reports/screening and
civil/structural drawings completed.
Submission of options from landscaper has been received and
is under consideration.
Aim is to submit for Planning (Part 8) Q3 2026.
Nenaqh Historic and Cultural Ouarter:
•
Works have been completed on the conservation works to the
windows of the Governor's House funded under the Built
Heritage Investment Scheme and the GMA. The additional
three windows that have been restored have been painted and
re-installed.
An Integrated Design Team has been appointed for stage (ii) to
(iv) of the Capital Works Management Framework for the
works on the 3-storey Gaol Block which has been allocated
funding under the Town & Village Renewal Scheme. In
addition to the funding for the conservation/ construction
works the project also involves the development of the
experience which will be delivered to the public. This will be
tendered for separately.
Work is on-going on the preparation of a funding application
under Cat 1 of the Rural Regeneration & Development Fund
(RRDF). Closing date for applications is 28th July. Fåilte
Ireland and the Tipperary Tourism Company have agreed to be
partners in this application which will focus on a tourism-led
regeneration project centring on the Gaol Complex. Part 8
planning is already in place for these proposals.
Nenaqh Centre of Excellence:
• Work is progressing on initial design and the red-line boundary
for the development has been agreed with the design team and
the property owners.
• Agreement has been reached with the property owners. Draft
contracts are currently being reviewed by our solicitors. These
contracts will be subject to Part 8 planning being secured.
• The Design Team have been requested to progress the design
and planning now that the site layout has been agreed.
• It is aimed to submit planning through Part 8 process in Q4
2026/Q1 2027.
RRDF call 4 - Cateqorv 2:
An allocation of €1 million has been awarded under RRDF Call 4 -
Category 2 for a Town Centre Regeneration Project in Killaloe-
Ballina. The lead authority for this is Clare County Council. The
funding is for design and planning with a view to submitting a
future a lication under Cate 0 1 for fundin to deliver the
Minutes of June 2026 Meeting of Nenagh Municipal District
Page | 4
Comhairle Contae Thiobraid Årann
Tipperary County Council
project. On-going meetings are taking place with Clare County
Council to progress the project.
Nenagh Transport Hub:
Engagement with NTA on the development of a Transport Hub and
the proposed relocation of the bus stops to the Railway Station is
on-going.
Platforms for Growth- Dromineer•
• Works are substantially complete.
• Snagging to be finalised before handover of the site.
• Signage to be erected and arrangements to be put in place in
relation to access control.
• Objective is to have facility open to the public early July.
• The official opening will be deferred until the Changing Places
facility has been provided.
Casual Tradinq Bye-Laws:
• Details of permits issued for Casual Trading 2026 are as
follows:
Ballina 4, Castlelough 1, Clare Glens 2, Dromineer 3,
Garrykennedy 3, Newport 2, The Lookout 1 - total valid
permits issued 16.
• 1 Event Licence was issued for St Patrick's Day, Nenagh.
Lands at Stereame:
Discussions are ongoing in conjunction with Housing Section on
options to progress the provision of private housing in Stereame.
Desiqnated Bathinq Area - Dromineer:
Interviews have been held for lifeguard positions for Dromineer.
Following training seven candidates have been successful. Garda
Vetting is being undertaken. It is planned to commence operation
at beginning of July.
Borrisokane CCTV:
The planned CCTV scheme for Borrisokane which has been
sanctioned by the Garda Commissioner is now being progressed.
Meetings have been held with consultants and property consents
for installation of cameras are in place. Application has been
made to ESB for required connections and Civils are now
progressing.
Outdoor Recreation Infrastructure Scheme:
• Clare Glens Project Development Measure — A planning
application was submitted to An Coimisiün Pleanåla thus
completing the project that was funded under ORIS.
• Four submissions were received following the public
consultation period, and we submitted our observations on
these submissions to An Coimisiün Pleanåla.
Further information was re uested and this was submitted.
Minutes of June 2026 Meeting of Nenagh Municipal District
Page | 5
Comhairle Contae Thiobraid Årann
Tipperary County Council
• An Coimisiün Pleanåla indicated that notice needed to be given
that further information had been submitted and an
opportunity must be given for submissions to be made on this
further information. The further information will be on public
display until 26th June.
Measure 3 of the Town Centre First Suite of Supports 2024:
•
An amount of €45,000 was allocated under Measure 3 of the
Town Centre First Suite of Supports 2024. This is for Project
Development Measure Funding for Newport.
The project provides for the development of a connection from
the historic Ball Alley site with the town centre and ancillary
public realm and amenity works through the provision of a
footbridge. Project elements included the engagement of a
multidisciplinary team to complete detailed design, planning,
professional fees and a topographical survey.
A Section 50 application has been approved by OPW to put
bridge over the river.
Planning was lodged to An Coimisiün Pleanåla on the 30th
October 2025. Four submissions were received by the closing
date and TCC submitted our observations on same.
The case was decided on 27th March 2026, and permission was
granted subject to conditions. The Commission was satisfied
that the proposed development would be in accordance with
the proper planning and sustainable development of the area.
Funding will be required to progress the project. Calls for
funding are being monitored to identify appropriate sources.
Participation Nation Outdoor Fund:
Funding was secured in 2025 under the Participation Nation
Outdoor Fund in conjunction with Sports Partnership for the
installation of 3x3 Basketball Court and biodiversity measures at
St. Paul's Playground, Nenagh. Works commenced in early
November on this project. The planting associated with the
biodiversity measures has been completed. The surface of the
basketball court has also been completed, and the basketball hoop
has been installed and is receiving a high level of usage. The
remaining item (white lining) has now been completed.
Grant Schemes:
•
•
Allocations under the Festivals & Events Grant Scheme were
approved at the March meeting of Nenagh MD.
Allocations under the Burial Grounds grant scheme were also
approved at the March meeting.
Allocations under the Residents' Associations, Tidy Towns and
Contributions to Clubs & Organisations Schemes were
approved at the April Meeting.
Payment will issue as quickly as possible once all required
documentation has been submitted.
Minutes of June 2026 Meeting of Nenagh Municipal District
Page | 6
Comhairle Contae Thiobraid Årann
Tipperary County Council
• All grant allocations are subject to compliance with the
associated terms & conditions of the relevant scheme and
budget availability.
Permits for use of Jetty in Ballina:
Advertisement has been published inviting applications for permits
for use of Jetty in Ballina for 2026/2027. One application was
received and permit has been issued.
Bus Stop Enhancement Proqramme:
In 2025 €500,000 was allocated to Tipperary County Council
under the Bus Stop Enhancement Programme. The following is the
position in relation to bus stops in the Nenagh MD:
Kilcommon- Design is done, a road safety audit needs to be
undertaken. It is expected that the bus stops will be
provided over the next few months.
Portroe - nearing completion.
Rearcross — nearing completion.
Dromineer — nearing completion.
Birdhill — tied in with Active Travel Scheme.
Newtown - tied in with Active Travel Scheme.
Placemaking Nenaah:
1.
2.
3.
Paintinq and Enhancement Scheme
New scheme launched for 2026.
Scheme has been advertised and applications invited.
Note: This is also available in other towns and
villages across the District.
The number of Painting & Enhancement
Scheme applications received to date for the Nenagh
Municipal District is five and these are for the
following areas: Ballina 1, Borrisokane 1, Nenagh 1,
Newport 1, Terryglass.l.
Nenaqh Roundabout Scheme 2026-2031
• Following the tendering process signage has now
been erected at three of the roundabouts covered by
the scheme.
• Two roundabouts advertised have not had any valid
proposals to date - further enquiries have been
received and are being followed up.
Nenaqh Tidy Towns
• Following active engagement with Nenagh & District
Tidy Towns there has been a significant increase in
membership on the Tidy Towns Committee.
• A team of volunteers have come on board to assist
with litter picking - areas being covered on a regular
basis are the N52b ass Gortlandroe the Dark
Minutes of June 2026 Meeting of Nenagh Municipal District
Page 17
Comhairle Contae Thiobraid Årann
Tipperary County Council
Road, area around the Abbey, Lisbunny Industrial
Estate, Silver Mews and the Nenagh River Walk.
Other areas are being picked as required.
Nenagh CBS TY Students carried out weeding in the
Castle Garden for three Wednesdays during May. A
group of volunteers are now continuing this work.
Gaelscoil have undertaken a project to the rear of
their school for biodiversity and enhancement
— this
was officially opened during June.
Nenagh College have been involved with the St.
Paul's playground mural project. The second phase
of the mural is currently underway.
4.
Events
Work is currently being co-ordinated by Nenagh
Tourist Office on a varied and interesting programme
for Heritage Week in August — this is in conjunction
with Nenagh Heritage & Genealogy Centre, Nenagh
Arts Centre, Nenagh Courthouse, Ormond Historical
Society and Nenagh Castle.
The programme for the Dromineer-Nenagh Literary
Festival which takes place later in the year will be
kickstarted with the DNLF Summer Series. This will
include Booker Prize-winning author Roddy Doyle in
conversation with Sarah Moore Fitzgerald at
Tullamore Park on Friday 26th June - tickets now on
sale.
Shane MacGowan Trai':
•
Guided tours are continuing every two weeks on Saturdays and
are proving very successful.
Recently there was a tourist who came from Australia having
received the brochure specifically to undertake the tour on a
self-guided basis — he plans to return next year for a guided
tour.
Piece recorded by Cian McCorrnack of Morning Ireland was
broadcast and this has generated a lot of further interest in the
tours.
Plans are being developed for other special tours.
The local community in Carney engaged artist Neil O' Dwyer to
provide a mural in Carney - this is now complete.
Feedback from accommodation providers in the area is that
there is an increased demand for accommodation directly
arising from the 'Unravelling Shane' Trail.
Cllr. Morris was on a recent boat trip on Lough Derg and thought it
was a great experience, everywhere looks well and the investment
that has been put into areas can be seen.
Cllr. Bugler requested an update on Ballina Quay and the
Washerwoman's Bridge. Cllr. Bonfield asked about getting work
done on the la round at Gar kenned . Cllr. uirke O'Meara
Minutes of June 2026 Meeting of Nenagh Municipal District
Page | 8
Comhairle Contae Thiobraid Årann
Tipperary County Council
Item 7.
To update
members on the
Works
Programme.
supported this and asked about the provision of facilities for
campervans and glamping pods, these types of facilities would be
especially beneficial in promoting walking trails.
Cllr. Hannigan also complimented the work that has been done
around the lake. He recently attended a webinar on the provision
of facilities for motor homes and there may be funding available in
early 2027. He asked about the work in the Dromineer
playground. Cllr. Carroll asked about the possible provision of a
path from Glencrue Cross to Portroe.
Ms. R. Joyce informed members that there has been a lot of
positive publicity about the area in recent times. The work on the
playground in Dromineer will start in September and
Garrykennedy playground will be considered for work should
funding become available.
Mr. L. Brett stated that the area did suffer from a lack of
infrastructure in the past but that has now changed and there is a
lot on offer in the area. He thanked the members for their ongoing
support on all the projects.
Mr. B. Murphy said he will continue to engage with Waterways
Ireland in relation to Ballina Quay, but it is too early in the process
to determine timelines. A survey is being undertaken on the
Washerwoman's Bridge at the moment, and a contractor will be
appointed as soon as possible but it will remain closed until the
work is completed.
The update on the Works Programme was circulated to members.
Cllr. Carroll asked if the work in Birdhill will be a road closure or
stop and go. He said sections of the road in Newtown need to be
cut out and a section of the R499 from Shallee Cross to Curraheen
is in very poor condition. There is overgrowth on the R445 near
the Five Alley and a fence needs to be repaired in the same area.
Cllr. Bonfield complimented the work in relation to the
Upperchurch windfarm. Cllr. Hannigan welcomed the work on the
Finnoe Road and asked if it would be possible to mark out the
parking spaces in Borrisokane to improve the parking. He also
enquired about the possibility of providing a wheelchair parking
space and a pedestrian crossing.
Cllr. Bugler enquired about the design for the raised platforms in
Ballina. She also raised issues regarding signage for the work on
the N 7, active travel funding for Quarry Lane and cutting the
hedges at junctions on the R496 especially covering tourist signs.
Cllr. Morris raised concerns about the quality of the grass cutting.
He said the contractor is making commitments and is not following
through on them. The tendering system does not work, the job is
too big, and it would be worthwhile having local authority staff
doin this work. The ram on the Dromin Road and the re air
Minutes of June 2026 Meeting of Nenagh Municipal District
Page 9
Cornhairle Contae Thiobraid Årann
Tipperary County Council
Item 8.
To consider
Notices of
Motion
work required on the Borrisokane Road needs to be done. Ramps
are required as people are consistently speeding.
Cllr. Quirke O'Meara also raised the quality of the grass cutting,
the possible start date for the work at Kilcommon Cross, work at
Ballinaclough and the repair to the pencil barrier at Rearcross
school.
Cllrs. J.P. O'Meara and Bonfield also expressed their
disappointment with the grass cutting contract. Cllr. Morgan Walsh
enquired about a review of the junction at Martyr's Road and the
Dublin Road and the junction at the Five Alley.
Mr. B. Murphy informed members that the work at Birdhill is under
an active travel scheme. The work in relation to the Upperchurch
windfarm is progressing well and is ahead of schedule. The layout
for the work in Ballina is currently being prepared, Quarry Lane
will be an active travel scheme. The cause of the problem in
Newtown will have to be investigated. The junction at Dublin
Road/Martyrs Road can be very busy at times, a junction analysis
has been completed, and this can be reviewed. He is unsure if
marking out parking spaces in Borrisokane will improve the issue,
but a potential pedestrian crossing can be examined, however
availability of budget will determine if the work can be done. In
relation to the grass cutting contract, it is two separate contracts,
but the same contractor has both areas. He will discuss the issue
with him again and it can be reviewed for next year.
Mr. L. Brett explained to members that a policy was adopted two
years ago in relation to raised tables/crossjngs and there is a
significant cost associated with the provision of these.
Notice of Motion No: 3161 submitted by Cllr. L. Morgan Walsh
That Nenagh Municipal District write to larnréd Éireann and the
National Transport Authority (NTA) seeking an urgent explanation
and action plan regarding the continued lack of service
improvements on the Ballybrophy—Limerick rail line, following the
recent reporting in the Limerick Leader which highlighted that
Irish Rail is unable to increase services due to a shortage of
gatekeepers and fleet resources.
Further, that this District request a clear and time-bound
commitment from both agencies on how and when these staffing
and operational barriers will be resolved, given Irish Rail's stated
long-term ambition to deliver trains every two hours on this route.
Notice of motion 3161 was proposed by Cllr. Morgan Walsh and
seconded by Cllr. Bonfield.
Response was given to Cllr. Morgan Walsh as follows:
Minutes of June 2026 Meeting of Nenagh Municipal District
Page | 10
Comhairle Contae Thiobraid Årann
Tipperary County Council
Item 9.
To note
Delegated
Employees
Orders
Item IO.
To consider
items of
corres ondence
Item 11.
Votes of
Sympathy/
Congratulations
Item 12.
Any other
business.
If this motion is agreed, we will forward the request for the
information on the Ballybrophy-Limerick rail line to larnröd
Éireann and the National Transport Authority (NTA).
Notice of Motion No: 3159 submitted by Cllr. S. Morris
That Tipperary County Council carries out a safety review of the
junction at AIBP/ BorrisokaneRoad/Puckane Road junction. There
have been several accidents at this junction and with more and
more vehicles now parking outside AIPB the sightlines are very
poor and highly dangerous.
Notice of motion 3159 was proposed by Cllr. Morris and seconded
by Cllr. Hannigan
Response was given to Cllr. Morris as follows:
Tipperary County Council will review the location in question, as
requested, and engage with the relevant stakeholders including
ABP and TII
None
None
Votes of Sympathy: None
Votes of Congratulations:
•
Larkins Pub, on being awarded pub of the year in Ireland.
Jack Donovan, on winning silver medal for his garden at
Bloom.
Danny Corbett, on opening new café, Fia's
Siobhan O'Leary, on opening her new yoga studio.
Éanna Tucker, on representing Nenagh Éire Ög in the All-
Ireland minor hurling final.
Nenagh Hockey Club, on winning Senior Munster League
and Club of the Year.
Nena h Cricket Club on winnin Senior Lea ue.
Cllr. Hannigan asked for the support of the members to bring a
notice of motion to the full council requesting the re-introduction
of the mortgage interest relief scheme. The members supported
this.
Minutes of June 2026 Meeting of Nenagh Municipal District
Page | 11
Comhairle Contae Thiobraid Årann
Tipperary County Council
This concluded the business of the meeting, a true copy of which we hereby certify: -
Signed:
oirleach
Cllr. J.P. O'Meara
Signed:
Ms. Rosemary Joyce
District Administrator
Minutes of June 2026 Meeting of Nenagh Municipal District
Date:
Date:
} 6 17 1202 L
7
Page 12