Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 1 July 2024 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
 
  
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 1 lúil 2022 i Seomra na Comhairle, Halla na 
Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an tArdmheara 
James Geoghegan sa chathaoir 
 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Ammar Ali 
Daryl Barron 
Emma Blain 
Janice Boylan 
Tom Brabazon 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Danny Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
Anthony Connaghan 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Jen Cummins 
Ray Cunningham 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Daniel Ennis 
Cian Farrell 
Alison Field 
Declan Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
James Geoghegan 
Eoin Hayes 
Barry Henegan 
Deirdre Heney 
Jesslyn Henry 
Rory Hogan 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Feljin Jose 
Leslie Kane 
Kourtney Kenny 
Patrick Kinsella 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Ray McAdam 
Séamas McGrattan 
Paddy Monahan 
Carolyn Moore 
Edel Moran 
Darragh Moriarty 
Naoise Ó Muirí 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Colm O'Rourke 
Gavin Pepper 
Cieran Perry 
Michael Pidgeon 
Gayle Ralph 
Punam Rane 
Conor Reddy 
Nial Ring 
Aishling Silke 
Supriya Singh 
Malachy Steenson 
John Stephens 
Catherine Stocker 
Philip Sutcliffe 
 
 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Prajwal K. Annibabu 
Lorraine Brogan 
Aisling Browne 
Frank d'Arcy 
John Flanagan 
Anthony Flynn 
Tatiana Kearney 
Derek Kelly 
Yvonne Kelly 
Natalie Leonard 
Victor Leonov 
Brendan O'Brien 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Michelle Robinson 
Richard Shakespeare 
 
 
 
 
  

 
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
In Memorium  
A minutes silence was held following the recent passing of two giants in public 
broadcasting, Mícheál Ó Muircheartaigh and Tommie Gorman and for John 
Fitzsimons, a community champion in the South East Area who was the heart and 
soul of the St. Andrew’s Resource Centre. 
  
Acknowledgement 
The Lord Mayor wished to recognise the efforts and hard work of DCC staff and front 
line services over the weekend.  Over 600,000 visitors came to our city for the multiple 
events that included Pride, Taylor Swift, Shania Twain, the Saw Doctors and also saw 
an unfortunate outcome for our Dublin GAA football team.  Their hard work ensured 
the city was kept clean and flowing. Dublin was at its best, showcasing what Dublin 
can be which was in stark contrast to the unfortunate events of last November, 
providing the momentum we need to build on in to the future.  
  
Joint Policing Forums  
The Lord Mayor advised members of an interim arrangement he agreed with the Chief 
Executive for a non-statutory Citywide Policing Forum to be put in place until such 
time as the Local Community Safety Forums are established.  This forum will be 
equivalent or akin to the former Joint Policing Committees.  It was agreed by members 
that this should be put in place.  
  
Affordable Housing Oscar Traynor Road  
A report was circulated to Councillors in advance of the meeting regarding the recent 
publication of the price structure for these affordable homes.  It was agreed that this 
item would be debated under Item 12: Report No.139/2024 Social Housing and 
Delivery Monthly updates Report. 
  
Citywide Transport Plan  
Following circulation of a report issued to members before the meeting, the Chief 
Executive provided an update on the plan.  Following debate, the Chief Executive 
confirmed that he had requested an Economic Impact Assessment and would not be 
implementing this new plan until this was received and reviewed.  
  
 
 
 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the 
questions lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the 
questions lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and 
Answers are set out in Appendix A to these minutes. 
 
10 - 64 
 
3 
  Correspondence was received from the following Local Authorities; 
 
• 
Fingal County Council  
• 
Monaghan County Council  
• 
Clare County Council  
• 
Wicklow County Council  
• 
Tipperary County Council  
 
 
 
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence listed. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
4 
  To confirm the minutes of the City Council Meeting held on 13th May 2024. 
 
The minutes of the City Council meeting held on the 13th May 2024 having been 
printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken 
as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor. 
 
 
 
5 
  Appointment of Members to the following Outside Bodies & Committees 
 
 
1. 
Association of Irish Local Government  
3 
2. 
City of Dublin Education and Training Board  
12 
3. 
Commissioners of Irish Lights  
3 & Ex-
Officio  
4. 
Dublin City BID Company trading as Dublin Town  
2 
5. 
Dublin City Council Cultural Company (Members of the Arts 
SPC) 
2 
6. 
Dublin City Gallery, The Hugh Lane (Board of)  
4 
7. 
Dublin City Leisure Services Company Ltd  
3 
8. 
Dublin Mid-Leinster Regional Health Forum (South Side LEA’s) 
6 
9. 
Dublin North East Regional Health Forum (North Side LEA’s) 
8 
10. Eastern & Midland Regional Assembly  
7 
11. Grangegorman Development Consultative Group  
2 
12. Irish Public Bodies Insurance 
1 
13. Little Museum of Dublin Limited (Board of)  
1 & Ex-officio  
14. Local Authorities Members Association  
1 
15. Local Community Development Committee  
3 
16. Local Travellers Accommodation Consultative Committee  
(Members from the Ballymun/Finglas; Artane/Whitehall; South 
West Inner City and Ballyfermot-Drimnagh LEA’s) 
5 
17. National Maternity Hospital, Holles Street (Board of)  
2 & Ex-
Officio 
18. Ringsend Toll Bridge Designated Activity Company (Members 
from South East and Central Area) 
2 
19. Rotunda Hospital (Board of)  
1 & Ex-officio 
20. Royal Hospital, Donnybrook (Board of)  
2 
21. Royal Irish Academy of Music (Board of)  
2 & Ex-officio  
22. Royal Victoria Eye and Ear Hospital (Board of) 
1 & Ex-officio 
23. City of Dublin Skin and Cancer Hospital Charity 
Ex-Officio 
24. St James’s Hospital Board (Members from Ballyfermot-
Drimnagh & Kimmage-Rathmines LEA’s) 
2 
25. Dublin City Council Audit Committee  
3 
26. Dublin City Council Protocol Committee  
16 & Ex-
officio 
27. Grangegorman Development Agency (*Ministerial appointment 
– currently Deborah Byrne) 
1 
28. Beaumont Hospital (Ministerial Appointment – North Central 
Area Committee member, currently Daryl Barron) 
1 
 
 
 
65 - 68 

 
A proposal from Cllr Ray McAdam regarding the appointment of Members to the 
outside bodies was circulated in advance of the meeting.  There were three remaining 
vacancies on the Protocol Committee to which nominations were sought from the 
floor. It was agreed that Councillor Conor Reddy, Councillor Mannix Flynn and 
Councillor Barry Heneghan would fill the remaining vacancies.  
 
It was then proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Dermot 
Lacey that the member listed be appointed to the outside bodies.  A copy of the 
appointments list can be found in Appendix B to these minutes  
 
  
 
 
6 
  Report No. 150/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Draft Strategic Policy 
Committees 2024-2029. 
 
  
It was agreed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by Councillor Dermot 
Lacey that the report no. 150/2024 Draft Strategic Policy Committees 2024-2029, as 
amended be approved.  The amendment agreed changes the name of the 
Community, Sport & Culture SPC to Community, Gaeilge, Sport,& Culture SPC. The 
motion was put and carried.  
  
It was proposed by Cllr Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll that 
the following councillors be appointed as Chairs to the Strategic Policy Committees 
set out in the draft report.  The motion was put and carried. A copy of this list can be 
found in Appendix C attached to these minutes.  
  
Strategic Policy Committee 
Chair 
Community, Gaeilge, Sport,& Culture 
Cllr. Darragh Moriarty   
Climate Action and Urban Resilience 
Cllr. Naoise Ó Muirí 
Economic Development and Enterprise 
Cllr. Tom Brabazon 
Finance  
Cllr. Séamas McGrattan  
Housing  
Cllr. Deirdre Heney 
Mobility and Public Realm 
Cllr. Janet Horner  
Planning and Urban Regeneration 
Cllr. Catherine Stocker 
  
  
 
69 
 
7 
  Report No. 149/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Annual Reports and 
Accounts 2023. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and Seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council adopts Report No 149/2024 and approves the 
Annual Report and Accounts 2023 as outlined therein.  The motion was put and 
carried.  
 
 
 
8 
  Report No. 134/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) a proposed 
development on 16 Castle Street, the former Newcomen Bank (Protected Structure) in 
compliance with the provisions of Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 
2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 
(as amended). 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Micheál 
MacDonncha that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 134/2024 and 
hereby approves the contents therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 

 
 
 
9 
  Report No. 152/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Phillips) - With reference to the 
proposed Extinguishment of the Public Right of Way over a laneway located at 6 – 
60a Annadale Drive and 1-59 Annadale Crescent, Marino, Dublin 9. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Naoise Ó Muiri, and seconded by Councillor Anthony 
Connaghan that we, the Lord Mayor and Members of Dublin City Council, being the 
Roads Authority for the City of Dublin and being of the opinion that the Public Right of 
Way over the laneway located at 6 – 60a Annadale Drive and 1-59 Annadale 
Crescent, Marino, Dublin 9 as shown on Drawing No RM-38267, is no longer required 
for public use, extinguish the public right of way in accordance with Section 73 of the 
Roads Act 1993. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
10   Disposal of Fee Simple and Freehold Interest:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 138/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Robinson) - With 
reference to the disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and 
Tenant (Ground Rents) (No. 2) Act, 1978.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Daryl 
Barron that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.138/2024 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 140/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) with reference to 
the disposal of the freehold interest in the former laneway between 63 and 65 
Foxhill Avenue, Ayrfield, Dublin 13.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Daryl 
Barron that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.140/2024 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 141/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) with reference to 
the disposal of the fee simple in land at 22 Finglas, Road, Glasnevin, Dublin 9.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Daryl 
Barron that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.141/2024 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
 
 
 
(d)   Report No. 142/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) with reference to 
the disposal of the fee simple in a site for an electricity supply substation at 
Finbar’s Court, Cabra Dublin 7 to the ESB.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Daryl 
Barron that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.142/2024 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
 
 
 
(e)   Report No. 145/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) With reference to 
the proposed disposal of the Council’s freehold interest in 2 Plots at 
Stannaway Drive (Factory Site), Dublin 12 to Finol Oils Unlimited Company.  
 
 
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Daryl 
Barron that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.145/2024 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
 
 
11   Disposal of Property:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 146/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - with reference to 
the disposal of a plot to the side of 24 Glasmeen Road, Glasnevin, Dublin 11.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Séamas McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No.146/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 147/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - with reference to 
the disposal of passageway and plot to the rear of 42 Casino Road, Marino, 
Dublin 3.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Séamas McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No.147/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 148/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - with reference to 
the disposal of a plot to the rear of 25c Cambridge Avenue, Dublin 4.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Séamas McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No.148/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
 
12   Report No. 139/2024 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (F. d'Arcy) - Social Housing 
Supply and Delivery Monthly Update Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Punam Rane 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.139/2024 and hereby assents 
to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
 
13   Report No. 143/2024 of the Executive Manager (D. Kelly) - Dublin Agglomeration 
Noise Action Plan (2024 - 2028). 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas McGrattan and seconded by Councillor Punam 
Rane that Dublin City Council notes the contents of report No. 143/2024. The motion 
was put and carried.  
 
 
 
14   Report No. 144/2024 of the A/Head of Finance (V. Leonov) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement EU IMF Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Punam Rane and seconded by Councillor Daryl Barron 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 144/2024. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 

 
 
 
15   Report No. 151/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 151/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
16   Report No. 135/2024 of the Area Committees - Breviates of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of May  2024. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Pat 
Dunne that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 135/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
17   Report No. 136/2024 of the Housing Strategic Policy Committee - Breviate of the 
meeting held on the 8th May 2024, Councillor Alison Gilliland, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Pat 
Dunne that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 136/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
18   Report No. 137/2024 of the Dublin Joint Policing Committee - Breviate of the meeting 
held on the 27th May  2024, Councillor Tara Deacy, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Pat 
Dunne that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 137/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
19   Topical Issues 
 
No topical issues were submitted for consideration. 
 
 
 
20   Motions on Notice 
 
1)    Motion No. 1 -  It was proposed by Councillor Nial Ring and seconded by 
Councillor Barry Heneghan that the following motion be taken without debate 
and that the motion be forwarded to the Lord Mayors recently announced Task 
Force to ensure it is implemented:  
  
In the Council meeting last November Lord Mayor Daithí De Róiste launched 
the plan to make Dublin the world’s first Autism Friendly Capital City. At the 
same meeting the following motion in my name was taken without debate, 
“That the members of Dublin City Council ("DCC") welcome the recently 
published Final Report of the Oireachtas Joint Committee on Autism and 
commit DCC to implementing the recommendations of the extensive report 
where 
applicable 
to 
DCC. 
In 
particular, 
DCC 
commits 
to 
the 
recommendations (in particular the provision of sensory rooms) pertaining to 
autism-friendly social housing, autism-friendly public buildings such as public 
offices and libraries as well as autism-friendly public spaces such as parks, 
playgrounds etc. In addition, the members note the recommendations that 
autism training should be provided to staff, and agree that this should be 
offered to Councillors if requested”.  
  
Having regard to the foregoing, the members now agree that it will be one of 
 

 
the priorities of this Council to implement the Lord Mayor’s plan and the 
Oireachtas recommendations and, as a first commitment to our plan, 
Sensory Calming Spaces will be created/installed in all public accessible 
buildings (Libraries etc.) and Sensory Activity Areas will be provided in public 
parks as soon as practicable. 
  
The motion was put and carried.  
  
2)    Motion No. 2 – It was proposed by Councillor Hazel de Nortúin and seconded 
by Councillor Vincent Jackson that; 
  
Dublin City Council recognises the Unveiling The Shadows; Dynamics of 
Domestic Violence and Abuse in Dublin 10 research report that was 
launched in Cherry Orchard in June. 
  
This report has highlighted the extreme violence women and children in the 
D10 area are subjected to.  
  
While recognising this report, Dublin City Council also agrees to recognising 
their commitment to making safe and liveable communities for all its citizens 
and therefore agrees to support the Local Area office with adequate 
resources from additional staff in Housing and Community Development. 
  
The Motion was put and carried.  
  
3)    Motion No. 3 – in the name of Councillor Hazel Chu.  It was agreed that this 
motion be deferred to the next Council meeting. 
  
4)    Motion No. 4 – in the name of Councillor Tom Brabazon. It was agreed that 
this motion be deferred to the next Council meeting. 
  
5)    Motion No. 5 – It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded 
by Councillor Fiona Connelly that; 
  
Dublin City Council welcomes the acknowledgement by the Taoiseach and 
Government that the housing development targets set in ‘Housing for All’ are 
inadequate and must be revised upwards by at least 50 per cent and, 
pursuant to section 130 of the Local Government Act 2001, determines that it 
is the policy of this Council – 
  
1.    That, in consequence, the targets handed down by the Government to this 
Council, and adopted in its Housing Delivery Action Plan, are also 
inadequate and need to be increased, 
  
2.    That such amended targets need to be further increased to take account of 
the reality that an ambitious target for an overall expansion in housing supply 
can only be met by significantly expanding the delivery of local authority 
housing, and 
  
3.    That the social housing delivery targets set out in the Dublin City Council 
Housing Delivery Action Plan should accordingly be and are hereby 
[doubled]. 
  
4.    To examine increasing the housing maintenance staff to enable a swifter 
and more efficient return to use of "voids" housing units. 

 
  
It was requested that in agreeing the motion that this motion be forwarded to 
the Housing Strategic Policy Committee for further debate and discussion. 
The motion was put and carried. 
  
  
 
 
21   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
No Emergency Motions were taken for debate.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
 

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY 1st  JULY 
2024 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR TOM BRABAZON 
To ask the Chief Executive how much money the council has spent in the last 5 years 
on roads or path maintenance in the ordinary course and how much it spent on 
repairing footpaths ,cracked due to tree root uplift. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s Road Maintenance Services’ Division has invested a total of €66 
Million on roads and footpath maintenance during the five year period from 2019 to 
2023. This investment equates to approximately €13.2 Million per year. The investment 
relates to the delivery of works that were included in the Division’s Annual Works 
Programme for each of those years. It is not possible to advise on the proportion of 
this investment that relates specifically to the repair of footpaths due to tree root uplift. 
 
In addition to this investment the Division’s crews repaired and made safe 
approximately 30,000 defects and hazards during the same period. These included 
the repair of potholes on the City’s roads and streets, the repair of damaged footpaths 
(either due to tree roots lifting the path or other non-tree related issues), the repair of 
damaged street furniture, treating oil spills, cutting back overgrown hedges, addressing 
utility reinstatement related issues, installing vehicular dishings, tending to collapsed 
manholes and fallen trees, installing street nameplates etc. 
 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can have the issues surrounding uncontrolled and 
potentially dangerous dogs as outlined in the email submitted with this question be 
examined as a matter of urgency and a report on what actions can be taken issued. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council Animal Welfare & Control unit manages a schedule of patrol of the 
parks and open spaces to enforce our obligations as described under the  Bye-Laws 
for the Control of Dogs 1998 | Dublin City Council) and the Control of Dogs Act, 1986 
as amended 1st December 2023. The most recent patrol in Pearse Square Park took 
place on 20th June 2024. The unit investigates any reports of breaches of the above 
legislation and will continue to issue fines and notices as appropriate. 17 fines were 
issued in the South East Area for breaches of the Control of dogs Act 1986 and the 
Council Bye-Laws to date in 2024.   
 
The Animal Welfare Warden Service has accompanied members of An Garda 
Síochána on patrols within the parks in the South East Area on a number of occasions 
and these multi agency patrols will continue whenever resources are available.  
 
The Warden Service has been informed of the issue with the un-muzzled XL Bull Dog 
roaming unattended in the Pearse Square Park and will engage with dog owners in 
the park to advise them of their responsibilities under the act. Any details regarding 
dogs off leash can be directed to the Animal Welfare email and phone numbers at 
animalwelfare@dublincity.ie and 01 222 6060. We encourage all Council Staff, 
Representatives and members of the public to continue to report any such breaches 
as this allows us to better deploy our resources. 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will have the following items examined for action in 
Sandymount Village: 

Flashing signs that tell drivers what speed they are driving on the main routes into the 
village, to slow traffic down – especially Sandymount Road and Gilford Road. 
1. Buses drive especially fast through the village, well over the 30km limit, and don’t 
always indicate when turning right at busy junctions, such as driving from Gilford Road 
to Seafort Terrace. 
2. The Gilford Road/Seafort Terrace Junction is dangerous as often cars and buses don’t 
realise they should be yielding and indicating before they turn. 
3. We need other traffic calming measures such as ramps, 30km /hour signs painted onto 
roads and more 30km /hour signage to remind drivers to slow down and watch out for 
small kids and the elderly. 
4. We need bikes off pavements! 
5. We don’t have enough pedestrian crossings. To get safely from AIB to Sandymount 
Pharmacy for example, you need to walk quite a distance, crossing four roads, to use 
two safer current pedestrian crossings. Even then you still need to cross two roads 
without pedestrian crossings. There really should be a pedestrian crossing to safely 
cross Seafort Terrace. 
6. We also need a pedestrian crossing/pedestrian lights when crossing Church Avenue 
from St Matthews Church to Tritonville Road as there are multiple car traffic routes 
converging on this road. 
7. The corner of Sandymount Road and Marine Drive, when crossing over/back to Tesco 
and other shops, is extremely dark in the winter and unsafe for pedestrians, especially 
as cars often park on that corner, blocking wheelchair access from the road to the 
pavement. 
8. Traffic has substantially increased along Sandymount Road and Tritonville Road, 
culminating in cars being stalled/blocked on these roads, and increasing carbon 
emissions/pollution as they queue to get onto Church Avenue, which is not at all fit for 
purpose as an exit to the East Link. 
9. Parking has become a free for all in the Village with cars ignoring yellow lines, disabled 
persons car spaces, bus stop spaces and wheelchair ramps which should allow 
wheelchairs access between pavements and roads, and parking on pavements. Can 
we find a way to communicate that this causes havoc for buses and those who really 
need these disabled spaces and to block cares from getting into pavements? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref:7039945) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.4 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that a space be made on the cycle lane at (Details 
supplied) to allow an ambulance to collect a person every day for clinics at a hospital 
as at the moment the ambulance parks on the other side of the road and the person is 
carried to the ambulance due to no space to park because the cycle lane prevents it 
from parking. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is an indented Pay and Display Parking Bay immediately outside (Details 
supplied) which an ambulance may use. There is no provision under current traffic 
legislation that restricts an area to ambulance parking only. 
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that Dublin city council carry out all the works at (details 
supplied). The tenant has not had works carried out in over 20 years. Also all windows 
were replaced in this complex except his. Could Dublin City Council install? 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance have made contact with the tenant and have agreed to have the 
works carried out to his property.   
 
Q.6 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive to make secure the boiler at (Details supplied) as the 
person in this house is on oxygen and the boiler is very low down in the kitchen. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance had previously installed a new boiler which is slightly bigger than 
the previous one.  The boiler is more visible than the previous model. However, it is 
working well and there is no necessity to change this.    
 
Q.7  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive to remove the overgrowth at (Details supplied) and if 
Dublin city council would provide some small plants to place in the bed at overgrowth 
as resident s will look after the area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Service will contact the Councillor shortly in relation to this issue. 
 
Q.8  
COUNCILLOR MICHEAL PIDGEON 
To ask the Chief Executive how many school traffic wardens are employed by the City 
Council, and for a list of where they are deployed? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently, as of 12th June, 2024 a total of 227 school wardens employed by 
Dublin City Council. 198 permanent school wardens and 29 reserve school wardens. 
Area 
 
 
 
     Full Time  
Reserve 
Central:  
 
 
 
41 
 
8 
North West 
 
 
 
39 
 
5 
North Central  
 
 
43 
 
7 
South Central  
 
 
42 
 
4 
South East 
 
 
 
33 
 
5 
 
Q.9 
COUNCILLOR HAZEL DE NORTÚIN 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding Grand Canal Way in Bluebell, who maintains the 
apartment complex?  
- Are DCC aware of the many maintenance issues that have been raised regarding the 
lift and how residents have been trapped within the lift Is there a maintenance plan for 
this? 
-is there a person responsible for the bin/sanitation of the complex? Is it on a schedule 
of works? 
- have the residents been included in the planned development of the LDA lands 
beside here? Considering they're DCC tenants? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The Ballyfermot Area Office will liaise with the other sections of Dublin City Council 
regarding Grand Canal View and will have a full report ready for the next meeting  
 
 
Q.10  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 

I have been made aware of a close relationship between RTB Adjudicators & a Vulture 
Fund, were a Building found not to be in breach of Minimum Standards over 14 times 
was later found to be in serious breach by both the Fire Officer & Environmental Health 
Officer. Given the need for public safety and that this Building still has areas of concern, 
I would like to know have the Council examined the relationship between the RTB & 
Landlords in this context before? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Residential Tenancies Board operates independently to Dublin City Council and 
 
it is not within the remit of Dublin City Council to investigate operational matters 
 
pertaining to that organisation.   
 
 
Dublin City Council enforces the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) 
 
Regulations 2019 and will investigate any complaints alleging contraventions of the 
 
Regulations and will enforce the legislation accordingly to ensure that private rented 
 
dwellings are brought into compliance with these Regulations. 
 
Q.11 
COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive to please give a breakdown of all State Contributions within 
the Dublin City Council area to all the NGOs. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Councillor agreed to withdraw this question. 
 
Q.12  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise me if any plans are in play to invest in much 
needed essential & beneficial Services such as Primary Care, a new Boxing Club & 
the Pony Club in the Ballymun Finglas LEA?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Ballymun Primary Care Centre currently operates on Main Street Ballymun. 
A Primary Care Centre in Finglas is being planned as part of the development of the 
lands on the Church of the Annunciation site 
There are two boxing clubs currently operating in the Ballymun Area. 
Current community facilities cannot accommodate the needs of a boxing club in the 
Finglas Area. However, it is anticipated that future housing projects in the area may 
include community facilities of sufficient size to accommodate the needs of a boxing 
club in conjunction with other community needs.  
There are no plans at present to provide a Pony Club in the North West Area 
 
Q.13  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Structural Damage by Tree Roots & similar are causing serious problems in 
the Ballymun Finglas LEA, can the Council advise if this matter is being addressed? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
If this request is in relation to repair of public pavement this is a matter for our Roads 
section. If there is a problem with an individual street tree this can be reported to 
parks@dublincity.ie and it will be examined on a case by case basis. 
 
Defects in the public pavement caused by tree roots can be reported to 
roadmaintenance@dublincity.ie . These locations will be inspected and repairs will be 
scheduled as required. 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 

To ask the Chief Executive can a tree replacement be installed as soon as possible at 
this location as requested in the email submitted with this question (Details attached). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The tree pit in question will be inspected in the coming weeks to check if the root plate 
has been removed. There is an overhead service line which will be a limit to what can 
be planted successfully here. There are also a significant number of underground 
services. A check will be carried out to ascertain the depth these are at before 
replanting can happen.  
 
Q.15  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive has planning permission being sought for the proposed 
Funeral Parlour on Carlingford Road Drumcondra? If not could planners look into what 
exactly is going on this site as it is causing major concerns for the residents of this 
area? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Planning GIS system indicates that there are no current planning applications for 
any such development on the site. 
 
The Planning Enforcement Section currently has this matter under investigation and 
appropriate enforcement action will be taken should our ongoing investigations reveal 
a breach of planning. 
 
Q.16 
COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive what plans he has in place to deal with tree pruning and 
maintenance throughout the Dublin Central area? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council (DCC) Parks, Biodiversity and Landscape Services are in charge 
of the maintenance and care of Dublin City urban forest, street trees included. 
Following a tender process, DCC parks, biodiversity and Landscape has selected an 
Arboricultural Consultant to carry out our new annual programme of street tree 
inventory and assessment. Each year, since 2020, the arborist contractor and Dublin 
City Council Parks staff inspect and systematically record over 4,000 street trees and 
park trees.  
 
The works consist in a combination of crown reduction, Crown Cleaning and crown 
lifting (250 cm over footpath and road; 450 cm over bus corridor) of 165 street trees 
located in Central District, Dublin City.  
 
The contractor is instructed to check trees for nests before tree works. In the event of 
a live nest being found, no work will proceed on that tree until September, unless the 
tree is a health and safety issue. In that case, the work will be postponed and National 
Parks and Wildlife Services will be contacted and their recommendations will be 
implemented by DCC Parks, Biodiversity and Landscape Services.  
 
All works will be carried out in accordance with guidelines set out in B.S.3998 
(Recommendations for tree work).  
 
Please see below the programme of tree care for Central District, Dublin City. Work is 
programmed to start the last week of June and it will take 16 to 18 weeks to complete 
the programme. 
 
Street 
Tree Work Quantity 

PEARSE SQUARE  
1  
BAGGOT STREET  
2  
NOEL PURCELL WALK  
2  
DAWSON STREET  
3  
CUFFE STREET  
5  
PEARCE STREET  
6  
PARNELL STREET  
12  
LIFFEY RIVER WORKS (City Quay, 
Bachelor Walk, Ormond Quay Lower, 
Ormond Quay Upper, Inns Quay, 
Sarsfield Quay, Wolfe Tone Quay, 
Victoria Quay, Usher Island, Ushers 
Quay, Merchant Quay, Wood Quay, 
Georges Quay, Burgh Quay, Aston 
Quay).  
84  
KEVIN STREET UPPER  
3  
SEVILLE PLACE  
6  
INFIRMARY ROAD  
17  
CHURCH STREET  
1  
PETER PLACE  
3  
RATHDOWN ROAD  
3  
DRUMALEE DRIVE  
4  
DRUMALEE ROAD  
10  
BULL ALLEY STREET  
`1  
 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive what plans he has in place to deal with illegal dumping on 
the streets in the Dublin Central area? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council executives held a meeting with the Minister for the Environment, 
Climate and Communications last year regarding the challenges of waste in the City. 
It was agreed that DCC would lead on a pilot project established in the North Inner City 
with a multi-agency working group consisting of Area Office staff, Litter Warden 
Services, Environmental Health, Dublin Fire Brigade, the Revenue Commissioners 
and Central Area Councillors. Three streets within the North Inner City were selected 
for this project as having a persistent problem with illegal dumping on a daily basis. 
The eircodes for each property was identified and a letter was sent to each property 
under the bye-laws, requiring the occupier to produce evidence of how they dispose of 
their household waste. Households that failed to respond have been issued with final 
warning notices. These will be followed up with litter wardens calling door to door 
asking for evidence of how the occupier disposes of their household waste. 
 
Litter wardens have been patrolling the streets and searching any dumped bags for 
evidence in an effort to identify the offender. With paperless billing very little evidence 
was found but it was noted that while the litter wardens were on the street, no illegal 
dumping was taking place 
 
A list of properties that are in poor condition have been shared with the Environmental 
Health department and Dublin Fire Brigade and inspections of the properties have 
taken place and improvement notices have been issued. 
 
Discussions are ongoing between DCC and the Revenue Commissioners in an effort 
to establish the identity of the owners of the properties. A lot of the properties are 

divided into multi let units and it will be more practical to engage with the owners than 
with the individual tenants.  
 
The group are investigating the changes required to the bye-laws and to the primary 
legislation to make owners and landlords of properties responsible for having a waste 
management contract in place for their property. 
 
Q.18 
COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive if there is a plan in place to deal with footpath repair and 
maintenance in the Dublin Central area? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Road Maintenance Services’ 2024 Annual Works Programme, will invest €15-Million 
in the upgrade of 32km of footpaths and 13km of carriageways across the City. Works 
will be delivered via twelve separate contracts. Five of these contracts have now been 
awarded to contractors and works have commenced on site. Tender documents are 
presently being prepared for the remaining seven contracts. Works are scheduled to 
be carried out between Now and November. In addition to the above, direct labour 
crews are targeting the repair of 6,000 defects and hazards this year, many of these 
repairs will be on footpaths. 
 
Q.19 
COUNCILLOR SEAMAN MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to carry out an inspection of (Details supplied) to ensure 
there is dishing’s for wheelchair access from the pathways. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (Ref.11161405) has been created and forwarded directly to the Area 
Inspector to investigate and schedule any missing wheelchair access dishing to be 
constructed when the crews become available in the area.   
 
Q.20 
COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what progress has been made on the plans to upgrade 
(Details supplied) since the Part 8 was withdrawn. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has withdrawn the current Part 8 proposal pending consideration 
of recommendations as contained in this submission and discussions, as necessary, 
with the DoHLGH. A report on the outcome of these considerations will be brought to 
the councillors later this year as well as a timeline for progressing plans for Martin 
Savage Park. A meeting will be arranged with St Oliver Plunketts GAA club as other 
commitments and schedule allows. 
 
Q.21 
COUNCILLOR SEAMAN MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange a meeting with the owners of the (Details 
supplied) with a view to preventing antisocial behaviour and illegal dumping at the 
site. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
A reply will be issued to the councillor within 2 weeks of the council meeting 
 
 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to introduce traffic calming measures in (Details supplied) 
to slow traffic down in the estate. 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
(Details supplied) is a residential estate, with no through traffic. Traffic volumes are 
low. The estate is currently traffic calmed with the provision of 9 No. speed ramps 
spaced to offer optimum traffic calming - as stated in the traffic management guidelines 
it is inefficient design to have traffic calming features that are spaced too close together 
as it encourages harsh braking and consequently heavy acceleration. 
 
Additionally, 30 km/h Slow Zone signs are located at both entrances to the estate, 
indicating the lower speed limit and that the area is a Home Zone/Slow Zone, which 
indicates to motorists that it is a residential area and to expect the presence of children. 
Therefore, additional traffic calming is not recommended on Dunard estate. 
Q.23 
COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive please organise for the repair of the damaged footpath 
outside (Details supplied) as it is a hazard for pedestrians (raised previously with the 
Council under reference RMS539111154 but never actioned) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A job has been raised (ref. 41175891) has been raised by the Area Inspector to fix the 
damaged footpath outside (Details supplied).  
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm if the bond lodged with Dublin City council 
underpinning the development of Brookwood Court is still outstanding? If so, what 
matters remain to be completed before bond return? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A review of records show that the bond required for the above development is still 
outstanding. The bond must be paid before the process to release it can be initiated. 
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive organise for the removal of the shrubbery/undergrowth in 
All Saints Park and for the removal of low-hanging branches from the trees there – 
local residents report persistent anti-social behaviour at this location with the 
shrubbery/undergrowth used as cover. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The work to crown lift the huge number of trees and open up views across this local 
park commenced last year and the next tranche of this work is scheduled for later in 
the year after the bird nesting season.   
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the pedestrian laneway running between 37 
and 38 St Lawrence Road can he: 
 
1. Confirm if the laneway is in charge and who is responsible for cleaning it 
2. Confirm who is responsible for the sewer line running under the laneway and 
maintenance of same including manholes 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above mentioned pedestrian laneway is in charge and is cleaned by Waste 
Management Services. We had it cleaned on the 20th June 2024.  
 
There are no public sewers within the laneway between numbers 37 to 38 nor within 
the laneway behind number 37 to 27. The pipeline within the laneway has been 

confirmed as a private shared drain which connects to the public sewer on St 
Lawrence’s Road. Responsibility for maintaining ‘shared’ drains rests with all 
households whose sewage is flowing in the drain at the point where maintenance is 
required. This responsibility extends all the way to the point the drain connects to the 
public sewer in the road. 
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive for any update on discussions with Diageo regarding the 
use of “Rupert Guinness Hall” at Watling St D8 as an artistic/theatre space for Dublin 
8 and wider community?” 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Arts Officer met with Diageo Executives and viewed the Rupert Guinness Hall 
in May 2023. Considerable restoration and refurbishment will be required of this facility 
at considerable cost. The City Arts Office provided Diageo with the Feasibility Study 
undertaken in Merchants Quay that has attracted considerable capital support. There 
has been engagement with Diageo by Elected Members and the City Arts Office over 
the past year and it is known that Diageo is considering other cultural facilities on new 
developments at James Gate. I have written to Diageo to seek further information. 
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive how many “fully furnished units” have been leased, why 
was that decision made, at what extra cost and what party is responsible for 
repair/replacement of furnishings? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Currently Dublin City Council have 1,525 long term leased units. All Dublin City Council 
leased units come fully furnished. This is part of the requirements under the leasing 
terms and conditions.  
The cost associated with this rests with the owner of the property. Once the tenant 
moves into a unit, they are responsible for all repairs and replacements of furnishings 
for the duration of their tenancy. Dublin City Council is not required to return furnishings 
at the end of lease to the owner. 
 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the Depot site at Marrowbone Lane Dublin 8 be visually 
improved. The fencing and barbed wire need to be maintained and “softened” with 
painting and planting to achieve a less hostile vista?” 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Marrowbone Lane Paving Depot is the base for all Road Maintenance activities 
on the Southside of Dublin City and is of strategic importance to the daily operational 
activities of Dublin City Council. Activities conducted from this depot include footpath 
and carriageway repairs, response/clean-up of storm damage and emergences (car 
crashes), winter maintenance. As a result there is a significant amount of plant and 
materials stored here that are valuable and need to be secured and protected. 
Unfortunately the barbed wire is required due to previous robbery attempts. 
You may be aware that Marrowbone Lane Paving Depot has been zoned to DCC 
housing and the process is underway to redevelop this land. There is limited if no scope 
to place planters on footpaths due to footpath widths. 
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive to ask for a list of contracts given to private companies (like 
grass cutting, tree works, weed control, road maintenance etc.) that are due for 

review/renewal over the future term of this council? And that they be discussed in a 
timely manner with Councillors so informed decisions can be duly agreed.  
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The following contract is in place for the control of weeds on public roads and footways, 
‘RFT 2231960- Single Party Framework Agreement for the Control of Weeds in Dublin 
City Council 2023-2027’. 
 
Road Maintenance Services’ Annual Work Programme is presented to Councillors 
each year. The ‘Programme’ sets out the roads and footpaths that the Division intends 
to upgrade during the year. Works are issued for tender by way of mini-competitions 
to established frameworks of contractors. One framework of contractors for 
carriageway resurfacing related works and one framework for footpath upgrade related 
works. 
Tender competitions and contract awards managed by Road Maintenance Services, 
comply with the relevant EU Procurement Directives 
 
The current contract for the removal of Graffiti and Gum from public paths and surfaces 
was advertised this month on the eTenders website in accordance with the 
requirements of the Tender Procurement Processes. It is currently at the tender 
submission stage and it is expected that this contract will be awarded in the 3rd Quarter 
of this year. 
 
The Environmental Health Section in the Housing & Community Services Department 
has one external contract with Civica UK Limited for the licencing, support and 
maintenance for the Civica APP computer system for the management and operation 
of Private Rented Houses Inspections and Enforcement of Standards.   
There is no alternative Supplier for the licencing, support and maintenance of this 
system.  This contract is currently renewed for the period 1/4/2024 to 31/3/2025. 
 
At present a new national IT system is under development through the Local 
Government Management Services Board which will take over this function.  The 
national system is currently at preliminary pilot testing stage in 2 local authorities in 
Ireland.  It is likely that, when the new system is introduced, there will be an overlap of 
systems which will require us to keep our licencing, support and maintenance for Civica 
APP in place until all data has transferred.   
 
For Housing Maintenance we have direct labour and contractors that we use under a 
Void Framework that is up for renewal in November of this year and is currently being 
worked on. We also have a Minor Works Framework that was established in January 
of this year and will run for a minimum of 2 years.  
 
The framework and contract for the Operation and Management of Civic Amenity Sites 
is due to expire in May 2025. Work has begun on the preparation of tender documents 
for a procurement process to establish a new framework. 
 
The framework and contract for the collection and processing of garden waste from 
DCC bring centres came into effect in July 2023, and will expire in June 2027. 
Following a series of delays, the tender documents for the collection and processing 
of clothing and textiles have finally been completed and will be published in the coming 
weeks, once the documents have been approved by the Central Procurement Unit. 
 

The following is a list of Parks Service Contracts. Tender competitions and contract 
awards managed by Parks Services, comply with the relevant National and EU 
Procurement Directives. 
 
The following is a list of Parks Service Contracts. Tender competitions and contract 
awards managed by Parks Services, comply with the relevant National and EU 
Procurement Directives. 
 
Landscape Architectural Consultants Panel 
Architect led Integrated Design Team Service 
Multi-Party Framework 2020 - 2023 for the provision of a maintenance repair service 
for machinery for Parks and Landscape Services 
Landscape/Minor Civil Contractors (extension) 
Extension of Indoor Plant Supply and Maintenance  
Tender for a concession to operate a community based market in Bushy Park 
Single Party Framework (SFA) 2023 - 2025 agreement for Floral Hanging Baskets 
Multi-Party Framework 2022 - 2025 for Leasing of Tractors and electric Ride-on 
Mowers 
Multi-Party Framework 2022 - 2026 Landscape Maintenance Services Contract 
Single Party Framework Arborist Services Annual Tree Inventory  
& Visual Tree Assessments 
Multi-Party Framework 2021 - 2025 for the design and execution of works in connection 
with the installation of playgrounds in Parks & Open Space 
Multi Party Framework for the provision of Tree Care Services 
Multi Party Framework for the provision of Christmas Trees 
Multi Party Framework Agreement for Specialist Conservation Contracts 2022 - 2026 
Multi-Party Framework 2023 - 2026 supply of annual supply of spring and summer 
flowering bulbs 
Multi Party Framework Agreement for Integrated Design Teams for Public Realm 
Projects (4 years) 
Multi-Party Framework Agreement for the Annual Supply of Trees for Dublin City 
Council  
Multi-Party Framework for the design, supply, planting and maintenance of flowering 
perennials, wild flowers and bulbs  
Multi-Party Framework Purchase of Machinery 
Multi-Party Framework for the Supply, Delivery & Installation of Outdoor Gyms/Fitness 
Equipment 
Multi-Party Framework for supply and installation of modular buildings and ancillary 
works 

Multi Party Framework Agreement for the Provision of Submersible water pumps to 
include the Service Maintenance and Repair for DCC Municipal fountains and 
waterfalls 
Appointment of TGM for Silloge, St. Anne's and Tolka Valley 
31  
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to publish a full report as to how Merrion Square Park, the 
only green public amenity in that part of the city, that many local residents and visiting 
citizens including the local elderly population rely on for their walks and exercise, was 
given over to A Taste Of Dublin’ without any consultation with local residents and local 
councillors. This situation of commercialising public parks is unacceptable.  With all 
the emphasis now on climate change and the greening of the city, notwithstanding the 
most recent EU laws regarding green and natural restoration, it is an act of contempt 
for Dublin City Council to conduct itself in this manner. There is no excuse for this and 
an apology needs to be issued to local residents and the citizens of Dublin who have 
forfeited a large part of their park for commercial enterprise. No park in the city centre 
should be treated like this and all such applications for such events should come 
through the planning process which gives residents and concerned individuals input. 
It is also important to note that A Taste of Dublin, which was formerly held at Iveagh 
Gardens was the subject of much public controversy because of its commandeering 
of the public space.  Dublin City Council must set out a clear policy in relation to this 
matter and a full and frank explanation on this incident and a guarantee that this is not 
going to happen again must be given.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
City Parks host a wide range of events each year from local community activities to 
larger scale events such as the International Literature Festival Dublin and Taste of 
Dublin both of which occurred in Merrion Square Park in June. 
2024 was the first time the Taste of Dublin event was held in Merrion Square Park. 
The Area Committee was informed of the event in February 2024 and the Taste of 
Dublin organisers were responsible for informing local businesses and residents in the 
vicinity of Merrion Square. 
While the event was well attended and there has been a lot of positive feedback, we 
are aware of complaints from local residents in relation to the communication of the 
event and the disruption to public access and the normal use of the park. Some of the 
complaints were compounded by the fact that there were two successive large scale 
events and that there was a refugee issue at the time which resulted in many other 
local public spaces being closed off to the public. 
We are reviewing the issues raised by the public and Councillors with the event 
organiser and we are confident that significant improvements can be put in place for 
2025.  
As set out in the City Parks Strategy, it is important that our parks are available to host 
cultural events and while most of these are free to access, some have to be ticketed 
to manage potential large numbers of people. Some events such as concerts in St 
Annes Park and Fairview Park, similar to The Taste of Dublin are commercial but their 
content is cultural. The promotion of quality food and cooking are important for food 
producers and restaurants in the city. Food quality and food sustainability issues are 
important to citizens of the city.  
 
We are conscious of not over commercialising our parks and our focus over many 
years has been the restoration and conservation of our historic parks and squares such 
as Merrion Square Park. This work is on-going. There is no reason however why these 
city centre parks cannot host events and the extent to which any particular park is 

taken up by events is a judgement call which is informed by councillors and which 
Parks management is continuously reviewing.  
 
Q.32 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report with regards the recent findings 
concerning the Peter McVerry Trust.  This report to include what investigations, if any, 
have Dublin City Council conducted into this organisation? What financial oversights 
Dublin City Council has regarding monies supplied to this organisation by DRHE? 
What safe guards were in place by Dublin City Council to protect its financial 
contributions to this organisation? What consequences, if any, are going to be initiated 
by DCC regarding this matter? Further, it is now imperative that Dublin city council in 
partnership with the Dublin Regional Homeless Executive carry out a full overview and 
examination of all monies that have been supplied to charitable organisations, 
particularly those who are approved housing bodies and the like. This is a wakeup call 
for DCC and the DRHE and they need to be proactive in this regard. There has been 
disquiet around the Peter McVerry Trust and other such charitable organisation for 
many years and the lack of proper governance resulting in the latest public scandal. 
This has a negative impact on many and now there is a lack of confidence by the public 
in this whole sector.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin Region Homeless Executive (DRHE) is an intermediary body between the 
DHLGH and recipients of Section 10 funding for homeless services. The DHRE’s 
primary role is to prepare a Homelessness Action Plan for the Dublin Region and to 
make arrangement with bodies for the provision of accommodation to persons 
experiencing homelessness.  
Regulatory oversight of the bodies is provided by the Charities’ Regulator and the 
Approved Housing Body Regulator (AHBRA). 
The (DRHE) has Service Level Agreements (SLAs) in place with PMVT and other Non-
Governmental Organisations (NGOs) for the provision of accommodation and services 
to persons experiencing homelessness. At an individual service level, SLAs are 
managed via performance reports, quarterly financial returns, KPI returns and site 
inspections. The overall performance under the programme spend is remitted to the 
DHLGH and published on a quarterly basis. SLAs contain an outline of the roles, 
outputs, funding, review, delivery and assurance requirements under the funding 
arrangement. As part of its assurance process, the DRHE has appointed an 
appropriate professional body to complete a high level review of the financial controls 
for a sample of services provided with funding in 2023. This is with a view to ensuring 
compliance with the SLA, in a regulated environment, supported by organisational 
financial controls. 
The DRHE initiated a review in 2023 to examine areas of concern within PMVT. The 
DHLGH established an Oversight Group, of which DRHE is a member, to ensure 
continuity of services in emergency accommodation or supported housing with PMVT. 
That work will continue until there is confidence in the organisation’s compliance with 
financial and governance requirements.  
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive issue a full report as to what DCC estate management are 
doing in relation to the ongoing catastrophic criminal behaviour and anti-social 
behaviour that is taking place in the vast majority of Dublin City councils housing 
estates? In particular, but not confined to, the Glovers Court flat complex at York 
Street/Mercer Street.  This flat complex and its immediate environment has become 
so dangerous for residents and indeed passer-byes that it’s bordering on a ‘no-go 
area’.  Residents have had to intervene here on a number of occasions where serious 
injury has taken place. There has been very little assistance from An Garda Siochana 

here to deal with this issue and a huge non-response from DCC estate management 
section.  It would seem that the tenants of this flat complex and the surrounding tenants 
of Mercer Street, Digge Street, York Street, and indeed the business community at this 
location have been abandoned by the local authority and the Garda authority.   This 
situation is dangerous and unacceptable and the fear is here is that this is going to 
result with residents in the main having to protect themselves and their children from 
gangs of individuals that are selling drugs and causing serious harm by assault to 
individuals in the area. Much of this is well documented over the years and all that has 
happened here is that the situation has got worse. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The South East Area Office is aware of an increase in anti-social and criminal 
behaviour in the vicinity of Glovers Court, York Street and Mercer Street, particularly 
over the last two months. The Area Office and the Housing Team are working 
proactively with An Garda Síochána in relation to these issues. When these matters 
came to our attention, there was direct contact between the Area Office and Gardai at 
Pearse Street and this contact has continued and is ongoing. Our Public Domain team 
has also been working with our Waste Management Division to improve street cleaning 
in the area. Criminal behaviour is a matter for An Garda Síochána and the City Council 
will continue to support the Gardai on a daily basis in relation to these issues. 
 
Q.34 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive issue a full report as to what plan Dublin City Council has 
and what involvement DCC has in managing the asylum seekers tents that are in and 
around the Canal area? Dublin City Council erected a series of fences all along the 
public amenity walkway to the dismay of many who can no longer use this amenity.  
These fences were unlit and made the whole area look like as if it was about to be 
demolished.  Notwithstanding the sensitivities and the human tragedy around this 
issue the fact that the citizens have been kept out of the loop and don’t know what is 
going to happen next is unacceptable.  Can DCC set out a clear statement of fact as 
to how they are going to cope with this situation into the future and what provisions 
they have in place to deal with this issue?  Further, can DCC obtain a very clear 
statement of intention and plan from Waterways Ireland as to how they intend to deal 
with this issue also?   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Dublin City Council has no role in processing or housing international protection 
applicants.  This falls to IPAS and the Department of Integration.  We understand the 
Government is working on a daily basis to co-ordinate its activities in response to the 
overall daily arrivals, and to assess capacity to accommodate those seeking 
international protection in a constantly-evolving situation. The City Council will continue 
to support the Government in its efforts. 
Dublin City Council with the support of An Garda Síochána carried out a number of 
operations to remove tents from public footpaths throughout the City over recent weeks 
under the 1993 Roads Act. 
 
The occupants moved without incident on each occasion and the tents and debris that 
were left behind were removed by City Council Waste Management staff.  IPAS are 
informed when these operations are planned and if accommodation is available they 
make offers to the occupants. 
In relation to the fencing that is currently in place along the Grand Canal.  This was not 
erected by Dublin City Council.  This area falls within the responsibility of Waterways 
Ireland and they arranged for the fencing to be erected following a number of 
operations that they carried out to remove encampments from the banks of the canal. 

Dublin City Council will write to Waterways Ireland to seek information on their plans 
for area of the canal that is currently closed. 
   
Q.35  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive if the footpath on (details supplied) could be re-laid. The 
footpath in question is a trip hazard and has caused numerous incidents for the elderly 
residents. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11161233) has been created and passed on to the Area Inspector who 
will carry out an inspection and add this to a works list.  
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive if the footpath on Cromcastle Road, Dublin 5 could be 
dished. The lack of a dished footpath outside the Primary Care Centre is causing health 
and safety concerns for a number of residents who are wheelchair users.  
The footpath is dished at certain points but has no access for anyone crossing the road 
and so means those residents must enter through the car park entrance.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11161235) has been created and passed on to the Area Inspector 
who will carry out an inspection and add this to a works list.  
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive of the status of the vacant property at 68 Kilbarron Road. 
The property, a vacant shop, has a large amount of rubbish at the back of the property 
with rats becoming an issue for the houses on either side of the property.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Enforcement have assigned a Waste Enforcement officer to investigate this 
matter. An update will be provided to the Councillor with regard to the officers findings. 
 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to install a pedestrian crossing on Clonshaugh Road as 
residents feel unsafe crossing. There is only one pedestrian crossing on the 
Clonshaugh Road, where it meets the Oscar Traynor Road. Many residents feel unsafe 
crossing from the Riverside, Priorswood and Clonshaugh areas to visit the shops or to 
go to work in the nearby industrial estate.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7030803) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for a progress update on the taking in charge of roads in 
the Royal Canal Park, Rathborne and Ashtown area including an estimated date for 
taking in charge.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please see below the status of Taking in Charge applications for developments known 
as Rathborne & Royal Canal Bank, Pelletstown and Ashtown. 
 
 
Royal Canal Bank Canal Bank Pelletstown – Ballymore Homes  

A Taking in Charge request was received November 2021. The request forwarded to 
Service Divisions in December 2021. The service department’s response outlined 
works that were required to be carried out prior to the area being taken in charge. 
Engagement between Dublin City Council is ongoing to resolve the outstanding issues 
prior to the development being taken in charge 
 
Rathborne Estate Pelletstown – Castlethorn Developments 
Taking In Charge Request was received May 2023.  The request forwarded to Service 
Divisions in May 2023.  The service department’s responses outlined works that were 
required to be carried out prior to the area being taken in charge. No response has 
been received to date. 
 
A completion date for the Taking in Charge in process cannot be provided at this time, 
as a response is required from the developers for the process to be completed  
 
 
Q.40 
COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for the plans to upgrade Phibsborough Library since the 
provision of a new library was removed from the scope of the Dalymount Park 
redevelopment project. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Libraries' management is exploring the feasibility of future improvement and 
refurbishment of Phibsboro Library. This is at a preliminary stage. 
 
Q.41 
COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive what arrangements are in place for the emptying of public 
bins during weekends and bank holidays especially at busy amenities such as public 
parks. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services have overtime shifts from 6am to 10am over weekends 
and bank holidays. We also have the Suburban 7 over 7 shift on duty on both sides of 
the city from 10am to 6pm. While litter bins are serviced over these periods if customers 
were to come across a full or damaged litter bin they can be reported by simply 
scanning the QR code on the particular bin and we respond as soon as possible. The 
city centre itself is covered in this regard over weekends and bank holidays from 6am 
to 9pm. 
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for a timeline for the redesign of Ashtown gate junction of 
the Phoenix Park to make it safer for pedestrians and cyclists.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The upgrade to the Ashtown gate junction is proposed to be carried out as part of the 
Blanchardstown to City Centre Bus Connects scheme, which recently received 
planning permission from An Board Pleanála. At this stage, there is no indication of 
when construction will commence.  
 
Q.43 
COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if the toilet facilities at the tennis courts in St Anne’s Park 
can be modernised, made accessible to people with disabilities and mobility issues 
and opened to the public. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

The existing pavilion at this location is to be demolished and replaced as part of the 
proposed upgrade to these facilities. Later this year it is intended to publish a tender 
for a small changing and toilet facility to serve the pitches in the southeast of the park 
which if successful will be repeated in this area to serve the all-weather pitch and 
visitors to this side of the park. 
 
Q.44 
COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what he and Dublin City Council can do to reinstate the 
playground at Belmayne Park, which has been derelict and non-functioning for a 
number of years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The previous play equipment was completely removed by the management company. 
Once the area has been confirmed as formally taken in charge the Parks Service will 
explore the redevelopment of appropriate play opportunities at this location.  In the 
meantime there are 2 existing playgrounds some 300m to the north at the large park 
on the opposite side of Belmayne Avenue. 
 
Q.45 
COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to examine the feasibility of double yellow lines on both 
sides of Foxfield Road, on the section between the Howth Road and the roundabout 
on St Assam’s Avenue / Foxfield Park. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A continuous white line is in place for a distance of approximately 20 metres on Foxfield 
Road from the junction with Howth Road and for a distance of approximately 22 metres 
from the junction with Foxfield Park. This is considered to be a suitable length and 
facilitates access and egress.  
These parking restrictions combined with the staggered vehicular parking act as traffic 
calming measure by physically narrowing the width of the carriageway. Further 
restrictions on this section of the road would lead to increased traffic speeds, whereas 
parked vehicles has a calming effect, helping to slow down the traffic, in accordance 
with the Design Manual for Urban Roads and Streets guidelines. 
Therefore, double yellow lines are not recommended. 
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what he and Dublin City Council can do to reinstate the 
traffic calming measures on Marrsfield Avenue, Clongriffin, in light of consistent 
speeding by cars in what is a residential area full of young families. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
I wish to inform you that the location concerned is private and not in the charge of 
Dublin City Council. As the area is not in charge, it is not possible for the City Council 
to consider requests or make any traffic management recommendations in relation to 
this location.  
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the roll out of dangerous and 
restricted dog breed notices in city parks and if the OPW are being engaged to place 
them in their parks within Dublin City. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Dublin City Council Animal Welfare & Control Services has no specific proposal or 
programme underway to roll out dog breed notices in city parks or OPW parks, 

however, there is ongoing collaboration with Parks & Landscape Services on general 
Control of Dogs issues including restricted breeds.  Section 5 of the Control of Dogs 
Regulations, 1998 (S.I. No. 442/1998) sets out dog owner responsibilities in relation to 
a prescribed list of dog breeds. 
 
In the past year Dublin City Council has invested additional resources in Animal 
Welfare & Control Services with the creation of Animal Welfare Inspectors posts and 
recent recruitment of five new Animal Wardens.  These appointments have significantly 
increased our capacity for enforcement of the legislation and citywide positive 
engagement with local communities on Animal Welfare & Control Services.  The 
impact of this will be evident on the ground, including city parks, over the coming 
months when the new Animal Wardens training phase has been completed. 
 
Earlier this year Minister for Rural and Community Development, Heather Humphreys 
TD established a Dog Control Stakeholder Group, which includes Local Authority 
representation.  We await the recommendations of this group on strengthening the 
policy and legislation around dog control, particularly in relation to restricted breeds. 
 
Q.48  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOL 
To ask the Chief Executive to create and implement a traffic calming and pedestrian 
safety plan for Baggot Road and Ratra Park, Dublin 7. Traffic between the Navan Road 
and Blackhorse Avenue is making the road unsafe and residents are very concerned?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Baggot Road is included on the Transport Advisory Groups’s Minor Works Package 
for this year, which includes the up-grade of both mini-roundabouts, new uncontrolled 
crossings at the roundabouts and a speed ramp along Baggot Road, aiming to provide 
a safer and more friendly environment for pedestrians. This project is currently with the 
consultant, and the works are scheduled to start within the next few months.  
Ratra Park will benefit from the upgrade of the mini-roundabouts, however, no other 
traffic calming measures are recommended on this road, as it does not meet the 
required warrant. Ratra Park is naturally traffic calmed by on-street parking and mature 
trees.  This gives the impression of an enclosed space which increases driver caution. 
 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to make the taking in charge of Pelletstown public areas a 
priority and to provide local councillors with an update on progress? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please see below the status of Taking in Charge applications for developments known 
as   Rathborne & Royal Canal Bank, Pelletstown  
 
Royal Canal Bank Canal Bank Pelletstown – Ballymore Homes  
A Taking In Charge request was received November 2021. The request forwarded to 
Service Divisions in December 2021. The service department’s response outlined 
works that were required to be carried out prior to the area being taken in charge. 
Engagement between Dublin City Council is ongoing to resolve the outstanding issues 
prior to the development being taken in charge 
 
Rathborne Estate Pelletstown – Castlethorn Developments 
Taking in Charge Request was received May 2023.  The request forwarded to Service 
Divisions in May 2023.  The service department’s responses outlined works that were 
required to be carried out prior to the area being taken in charge. No response has 
been received to date. 
 

A completion date for the Taking in Charge in process cannot be provided at this time, 
as a response is required from the developers for the process to be completed.  
 
Q.50  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive how many public benches and seats are being installed as 
part of the Royal Canal Greenway Phase 3 and when they will be installed? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY:  
The Royal Canal Greenway Phase 3 scheme extends from Cross Guns Bridge 
(Phibsborough Road) to Charleville Mall (junction with North Strand Road), approx. 
2km in length. The original design intent included two seating benches on the north 
side of Charleville Mall opposite the library. However, DCC received unanimous 
objection to this proposal from Charleville Mall residents who argued that DCC 
removed a similar bench from this location circa 15 years ago due to anti-social 
behaviour. In light of this objection the proposed benches on Charleville Mall have 
been de-scoped from the project works. 
 
As part of the Binns Bridge east-side ramp works a seating area is proposed. See 
below. These works are due to be completed in Q1 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposed seating  
area at Binns Bridge 

Q.51 
COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for a full update on the planned maintenance work to be 
carried out on Lissadel maisonettes, can you please include when were properties 
most recently visited, what works were carried out and what is the timeframe for any 
future works to be carried out 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance can confirm that a number of visits have been made by 
engineering staff from the Planned Maintenance Division between March and June 
2024.  The Planned Maintenance Division are coordinating various repair and 
maintenance activities related but not limited to gutters, ventilation equipment, 
windows, and repair of damage to some ceilings caused by historic leaks.  It is 
anticipated that the majority of these activities will be addressed by the end of July 
2024 and that the gutter repairs/replacement works will be substantially completed by 
the end of August. 
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the human remains and other historic 
artefacts found on the site of the former De La Salle site, Ballyfermot. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The archaeological excavation of the remains of a large double enclosure of early 
medieval date is currently underway at the De La Salle site in Ballyfermot.  
 
The excavation is inspected by Dublin City Council’s Archaeology Section on a bi-
weekly basis (latest inspection Monday 17 June 2024).  
 
Following a combined site inspection in May by the statutory agencies, the burial area 
and inner enclosure ditch was further archaeologically tested under licence. The 
additional testing programme confirmed that burials are concentrated towards the east 
of the inner enclosure.  
 
A total of 32 human remains (articulated and disarticulated) have been identified and 
lifted to date. The next step is to excavate and record the western half of the inner 
enclosure ditch and burial area.  
 
The approved development will be amended, in consultation with the planning 
authority, to facilitate the preservation of the eastern half of the burial area in situ 
beneath a green space. It is estimated that approximately 200 inhumations can 
preserved in situ in this way. 
 
Although very truncated previously, the preliminary evidence suggests that this was a 
cemetery settlement in use during the second half of the first millennium.  
 
The full findings of the site and any artefacts will become publically accessible once 
the excavation and post excavation work is complete, the data analysed and written 
up by the by the site director and specialists. 
 
Q.53 
COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an explanation as to why properties remain empty for 
so long in Davitt House, Drimnagh and to please confirm when will the units be 
allocated? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

There are currently six vacant bedsits in Davitt House, two of which are under offer 
and the remaining four are with contractors with an estimated completion date of 
2/08/2024. 
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive when will the matter (Details supplied) be resolved? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
IPB are awaiting their investigative report from their appointed claims handler.  The 
tenant can expect a response in writing on her claim by 5th July 2024.  
 
Q.55 
COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to organize a clean-up and maintenance of Herzog Park in 
Rathgar, as the verges are littered with cans and bottles and when this could be done 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The area mentioned above has been checked today and found to be clear of litter and 
debris.  
 
 
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide this committee with an update of the Bus 
Connects programme and the status of what will be implemented. Update on Bus 
Connects – Rathgar, Rathmines, Terenure 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
To date the following CBC schemes have been approved by An Board Pleanála: 
 
Liffey Valley to City Centre, 
Ballymun/Finglas to City Centre,  
Clongriffin to City Centre,  
Belfield/Blackrock to City Centre, 
 
The remaining 8 schemes remain with An Board Pleanála awaiting a decision.  
Following receipt of planning consents for the initial schemes, the focus of activity has 
now moved to the construction stage. The NTA are currently establishing a panel of 
contractors to build the schemes, with tender requests in respect of the first two 
schemes to be issued in June 2024. It is expected that the first two contracts will 
commence construction in the first half of 2025, followed subsequently by the award 
of an additional two schemes for construction. Given the traffic management impacts 
during construction, it is considered that a maximum of four schemes can be built 
concurrently, requiring three tranches of four schemes to deliver the full construction 
programme. 
 
Q.57 
COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE  
To ask the Chief Executive to report on the number of vacant social homes returned 
to the council in 2023 in this LEA and how many of these have been allocated. Vacant 
social homes recovered in the Kimmage-Rathmines LEA. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Voids System does not record Local Electoral Areas, however we do report based 
on Administrative Area i.e. South Central and South East, see below for details.   
 
Vacant (Void) Property Refurbishments completed in 2023  

 
 
 
 
Total re-let in 
2023 by Area  
South 
Central 
South East 
 
House  
60 
5 
 
Apartment 
97 
100 
 
Senior Citizens  
51 
61 
 
Total  
208 
166 
 
 
 
Current Refurbishment of Voids underway 
Status  
South 
Central 
 
South East 
Awaiting 
Vacant 
possession 
43 
23 
With 
Contractors  
60 
19 
Direct Labour  
49 
13 
Complete and 
Awaiting 
re-
letting  
56 
39 
Total  
208 
94 
 
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE  
To ask the Chief Executive if consideration has been given to allocate casual trading 
license/permission (in accordance with the Casual Trading Byelaws) for a coffee shop 
in Bushy Park 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are plans to construct a tearooms in Bushy Park. This project is subject to capital 
funding which has yet to be secured. The padel club house currently has a tea/coffee 
machine where other light refreshments are also available.  
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR EOIN HAYES 
To ask the Chief Executive if he would consider drafting and putting to the Council 
relevant bye-laws financially penalising the owners of properties that are derelict, in 
disrepair, or otherwise contributing to visual pollution or decay in the Dublin City 
Council area, in line with international best practices. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council, through the effective exercise of the legislative provisions in the 
Derelict Sites Act 1990, proactively strives to achieve the eradication of dereliction in 
the City and the return of derelict sites to active use. Section 23 provides for the charge 
of a levy on all derelict sites that are entered on the Derelict Sites Register. The Derelict 
Site Levy is 7% of market value, outstanding levies attract interest at the rate of 1.25% 
per month.  
The Council has prepared a formal procedure for registering the charge with Tailte 
Éireann (formerly the Property Registration Authority). If and when a derelict site with 

a charge is subject to a sale, purchasers will require vendors to have the charge 
removed as part of the conveyance process. The Council has experienced an increase 
in the number of derelict sites being brought to the market in recent years with a 
resultant increase in levy payments. 
 
The implementation of an ongoing acquisition strategy by the Council since 2017 is 
also a key part of our Active Land Management initiative.  The Derelict Sites Unit 
adopts a collaborative approach and works closely with the Area Offices, Conservation 
Section and the Vacant Homes Unit. The power to acquire derelict sites under the 
legislation is a key part of the Council’s strategy to eradicate underutilised, vacant and 
derelict lands and buildings in the city. It should be noted that the City Council will only 
acquire compulsorily as a last resort and in circumstances where all efforts to secure 
the carrying out of improvement works by property owners have been exhausted. In 
determining what sites to acquire, the Council prioritises those properties which can 
be most readily re-instated to active residential use by the Housing & Community 
Services for social housing purposes. All sites entered on the Register can be 
considered for acquisition and sites do not have to have been entered on the Register 
for a particular time before they can be considered for acquisition. 
The acquisition of derelict sites compulsorily is just part of the story and it is our 
experience that in the face of compulsory acquisition some sites have been 1) 
rendered non-derelict and removed from the Register, 2) owners have actively sought 
planning permission or have obtained planning permission for redevelopment, 3) 
derelict sites have been placed on the open market, all of which offers the very real 
prospect that they will be redeveloped and returned to active use.  
 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR EOIN HAYES 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the square meterage, and percentage of 
total, of unoccupied buildings and lands owned by Dublin City Council as of June 2024 
or most recent data available, and his current plans to bring these properties back into 
residential, commercial, or public use 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Development Plan sets out the strategic approach to ensure the best use is 
made of available land. Individual proposals are being developed for various sites 
throughout the city to ensure best use of land reducing vacancy and dereliction. Active 
Land Management, eliminating homelessness, greening the city and creating a 15-
minute city inform plans to bring properties into appropriate use.  
 
Dublin City Council has a significant amount of land and buildings that we own, 
manage, lease and use. This includes housing stock, development lands, offices, civic 
amenities such as libraries, sports centres and parks, heritage buildings, depots and 
other work locations, infrastructure such as pumping stations as well as commercial 
real estate. Information about our properties are held across a number of systems for 
a variety of different purposes. The specific data requested e.g. square meterage, % 
unoccupied buildings and lands is not available however in early 2024, the Planning & 
Property Development and Corporate Services & Transformation Department have 
initiated a project to define DCC-wide property management needs including  the 
development of electronic registers for this type of information.  As part of this work we 
are carrying out a detailed review of our data as it relates to buildings and land. This 
work is ongoing and is a significant, multi-year effort. This estimate is based on our 
discussions with other large institutional public property owners in Ireland and 
elsewhere. 
As this work progresses, we will report back to Councillors with updates.  Should the 
Councillor require additional information we’d be happy to facilitate. 
 

Q.61 
COUNCILLOR EOIN HAYES 
To ask the Chief Executive what service-level-agreements are in place for the upkeep 
and maintenance of social housing provided by Dublin City Council and what bye-laws 
the council might consider on the proper maintenance of private rental properties in 
line with relevant legislation and established international best practices and human 
rights on quality housing provision. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019 sets out the current 
minimum national standards for all rented accommodation.  These Regulations are 
enforced by the Environmental Health Section of Dublin City Council who actively carry 
out inspections and enforce the legislation where non-compliance with the Regulations 
are detected.  In 2023 Dublin City Council carried out 6,611 inspections of 5,608 private 
rented dwellings comprising 8,385 tenancies.  A total of 3,042 improvement letters, 
946 Improvement Notices and 106 Prohibition Notices were issued for non-compliance 
with the Regulations with 3,235 private rented dwellings achieving compliance during 
the year. 
 
Inspections of all private rented dwellings are carried out on a proactive and reactive 
basis and all complaints received regarding the standard of private rented 
accommodation and investigated. 
 
 
Leasing Section - 
Dublin City Council has long term lease agreements on 1,525 social housing 
properties. There is a service-level-agreement (SLA) in place with Tuath Housing for 
all internal maintenance of leased units provided by Dublin City Council. 
 
AHB Housing Section - 
DCC has Service Level Agreements in place with Tuath Housing for all properties in 
long term lease agreements. 
DCC also has SLA in place for the management and maintenance of 1,061 DCC 
owned social housing units with a number of Approved Housing Bodies. Service Level 
Agreements cover the management and maintenance of units, tenant engagement 
and tenancy agreements. Rent collection and arrears policy, nominations, tenant and 
landlord obligations. 
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR EOIN HAYES 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond to the questions in the 2024 Dublin Voter Guide 
(see https://dublinvoterguide2024.ie/), put to all local council candidates during the 
election campaign, some of which are relevant to how he plans to administer the city 
in line with his powers granted under the Local Government Acts to 2014. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please find below answers from Richard Shakespeare, chief executive, to the 
questions in the 2024 Dublin voter guide. 
 
 
How would you get more housing built in the city – especially social and affordable 
housing? Focus on direct delivery on our own sites.  
To this end I am currently establishing a multi- disciplinary team whose task it will be 
to fast track delivery across the City Council’s estate 
 
 
How would you help improve conditions in existing housing, both social and privately 
rented? 
In terms of our own housing stock, significant resources will be required. I believe that 
we need to set basic targets for consistent delivery of maintenance requests 

 
 
What would you do to help make the city feel less dirty, tackling the rubbish and dog 
poo all over the streets?  
We are currently in the process of recruiting an additional 105 General Operatives to 
work in our waste management and street-cleansing units. We have also recently 
invested in additional street sweepers and cleansing machines. The issue of waste 
presentation must also be tackled by enhanced bye-laws that puts more of an onus on 
the waste management companies operating in the city 
 
 
What would you do to help tackle vacancy and dereliction?  
This will require significant targeted investment in the acquisition of properties to 
encourage more people to live in city centre locations, creating a permanent vibrancy 
 
 
What needs to be done to make the city feel safer?  
The presentation of our streets is an important aspect to how people perceive safety. 
The development of a bustling evening and night-time economy. Also, the consistent 
excellent delivery of basic services such as street cleansing, road and footpath repair, 
street lighting enhancements etc. 
 
 
What needs to be done to improve public transport in the city?  
The rollout of the entire Bus Connects programme will be essential to achieving this 
along with the construction of the Metro and enhancements to the Dart network.  Dublin 
City Council will continue to work closely with the Public Transport Organisations in 
order to facilitate the implementation of these transport networks whilst also looking 
after the interests of the City. 
 
 
What should be done to make it nicer and safer for people to get around the city on 
foot and by bike?  
The completion of our cycle network as detailed in the Active Travel Works Programme 
 
 
What would you do to help counter the rise of the far right, anti-immigrant and anti-
LGBTQ+ hate, and anti-asylum-seeker arsons?  
 
Constantly promote the City as inclusive and promote inclusion and integration through 
our broad range of community, cultural, sporting and local development programmes 
and initiatives 
 
Q.63 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for (1.details supplied) a housing maintenance 
inspection 
The tenant has reported several issues in the last few months.  Can the tenant be 
contacted beforehand on (2.Details supplied) as workers have called when she has 
been out previously. 
Issues include: 
a) Leak from bathroom is causing damage to ceiling downstairs. This needs to be 
investigated. 
b) Kitchen sink corner unit is rotten and needs to be replaced 
c) There is a gap under the back door which needs to be filled as there is draught. 
The tenant reports that the door frame is loose. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance have had difficulties in the past gaining access to respond to 
repair requests, however, an arrangement has now been made to carry out an 
inspection and all necessary repairs will be carried out as soon as possible. 

 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the pathway through green area from 1 
Griffith Close which leads to Griffith Road to be cleared and edged as there is grass 
growing across it and there are trip hazards for less mobile people who live along here. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks services have arranged for this stretch of pathway to be edged and strimmed. 
The pathway will then be assessed to determine any other repairs required and will be 
added to our works programme for the area. 
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive is possible to lower the ESB meter for the tenant at (Details 
supplied) as the card meter is too high for him to reach. The back door is also not 
locking as there is key broke in the lock. Can this be repaired also? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance is not responsible for ESB meters, the tenant should contact 
ESB Networks in relation to the meter.   
The reported issue relating to the back door is being addressed.  
 
Q.66 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a Councillor Motion and Question tracker 
where a database can be searched to ascertain whether issues had been dealt with or 
not. This could assist with repeat queries also. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Chief Executive’s Office have been working with the Transformation Unit, 
Corporate Services Department in the creation of a Councillor Portal which will assist 
Councillors in the management of their duties. This Portal will provide elected members 
with a specific channel through which to make representations, receive timely and up 
to date responses, and manage their caseloads in a single tailored environment.  
 
Councillors will also submit Council Questions and Motions through this portal. 
Councillors can view the Questions they have sent through on a monthly basis. They 
will also be able to amend or replace the Motion they have submitted if it has not yet 
been reached on the Agenda. The timeline for roll out of this portal is August 2024 and 
full training will be provided. 
 
Further enhancements will come at a later date, including a search function, allowing 
the councillor to extract a list of Questions & Motions submitted. 
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to maintain or remove the tree at (Details supplied). The 
tree is overgrown and causing damage to the neighbour’s property and the roots are 
starting to pull up the resident’s garden 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In accordance with Dublin City Council’s Tenant Handbook (Pg. 7) responsibility for 
garden walls, gates, fences, railings, hedges and other garden boundaries rests with 
the tenant. However as the adjoining properties may be affected arrangements have 
been made by Housing Maintenance for a tree specialist to investigate the matter 
 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 

To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the exterior of the Shangan Hall Apartments 
to be painted and maintained. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above apartment scheme is in private ownership therefore the management 
 
company is responsible for the maintenance and management of the of the building    
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on cleansing of shop fronts in the Ballymun 
Finglas Area. How often are shop fronts/neighbourhood centres power hosed and/or 
weeds removed? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Shop fronts in the Finglas and Ballymun areas are classified as Category B locations. 
This means that they are serviced daily, 365 days a year. Shop fronts are not on a 
dedicated power washing schedule at present, however, requests can be made via the 
Citizen Hub portal for a power wash service and this work will be programmed for 
completion. 
 
Waste Management are planning on introducing a dedicated wash vehicle to the North 
West Area and a schedule of street washing will be created. This will include villages 
and shop fronts in the Ballymun and Finglas areas. It is anticipated that this service 
will be introduced towards the end of the summer. 
 
The removal of weeds is not a core duty for Waste Management. The local area offices 
have engaged a contractor to control weeds by spraying with an environmentally safe 
product. Where possible, Waste Management will manually scrape and remove weeds 
while completing daily detailed cleaning duties on pavements and road channels, but 
our main function is the removal of litter. 
 
Q.70 
COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for Planters to be installed in Carton Close, 
Ballymun. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The North West Area Public Domain Team will engage with the Councillor and the 
community to move this project forward. 
The criteria for the installation of planters in any location are as follows: 
A suitable location is identified. 
A site survey including risk assessment for Health & Safety within the identified area. 
Engage with the community to ensure ongoing maintenance of the planters. 
 
Q.71 
COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive please, in relation to trees at (Details supplied), say if he 
can arrange to seriously prune same as the growth is prohibiting pedestrians walking 
safely or at all at this location. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow and any 
works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care 
programme for the area 2024-25. 
 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please refer to road sign as per (details supplied) which 
was removed from low wall and arrange to have same reinstalled. 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11161100) has been created and passed on to the Area Inspector who 
will carry out an investigation on this matter.  
 
Q.73 
COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive please refer to trees at (Details supplied) and say if he 
can arrange to have same pruned/cut back as they have not been attended to for many 
years now. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow and any 
works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care 
programme for the area 2024-25. 
 
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive refer to trees at (Details supplied A and B) and say if he 
can arrange to cut back/prune same as they are in serious need of attention. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection of the trees listed in sections A and B of the question above will be 
arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow and any works deemed 
necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care programme for the area 
2024-25. 
 
Q.75 
COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a comprehensive update as to plans for the 
implementation of projects associated with (Details Supplied) this year; when he 
expects works to begin, an update on the various tender processes that have been 
undertaken, what on-site inspections have taken place, and which projects he 
anticipates will be completed by December 31st next, and if he will make a statement 
on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The 2024 NEIC Greening Strategy programme is currently underway with discussions 
taking place with DCC Traffic management staff to minimise inconvenience to local 
residents and businesses. The first project was completed in June. The second project 
will commence this month, and all works agreed with Councillors and local 
representatives will be with completed by December 31st next. The (details supplied) 
programme is in progress with work taking place in refining the design and it is 
expected that further consultations with stakeholders will take place in 2024. 
 
Q.76 
COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline what engagement the Housing Department has 
had with the Department of Housing, Heritage, Planning & Local Government 
regarding the upgrade of (Details supplied), given the upgrade works that were 
carried out on a number of flats there, the desire to increase the size of the individual 
units and upgrade the entire complex, and if he will make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
(Details supplied) was designed by housing architect Herbert Simms in the 1930s 
and is a protected structure. The (Details supplied) pilot amalgamation was a 
demonstration pilot project to carry out a retrofit within a protected structure and 
involved amalgamating two existing flats into one larger apartment, compliant with 

modern space standards. The purpose of the pilot was to show how flats such as those 
in (Details supplied) could be improved without changing anything about the building 
that is important to its history and character. This pilot scheme was funded by the 
Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage.  
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that the Derelict Sites Section investigate 
(Details supplied), and that the property owner is written to demanding that action be 
taken to refurbish it for future use otherwise indicate to them that Dublin City Council 
will seek to CPO the building, and if he will make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Derelict Sites have an active file on this property. The property has been inspected 
and reference of ownership received. Under the provisions of the Derelict Sites Act, 
1990 a letter has issued to the owners regarding the condition of the property and a 
reply is awaited which will inform the next steps to be taken. An update will issue to 
the Councillor as soon as possible.  
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive what action has been taken against the DCC tenant in 
(Details supplied) who is actively involved with criminality and if he will asked a 
statement on the matter 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This matter is under investigation by the Local Area Office and we are working with the 
Gardaí to resolve the matter. 
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive please arrange a set of Goal Posts for the Kick about area 
next to the Playground on Cherry Orchard Ave Ballyfermot Dublin 10, The area is 
getting more usage and needs to be cleaned properly in order to remove glass etc left 
on the surface, I am aware Ballyfermot Youth Service staff are working intensively with 
a group of 16 teenagers and this is something they have requested be done at some 
stage there were goal posts there as the ground spuds are still there. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks will arrange for replacement goals to be placed at this location. 
 
Q.80 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive that the following be looked into (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance are currently working on Lally Road under the continued rollout 
of our Energy Efficiency Retrofitting Programme and we can confirm that the 
aforementioned property above is on our current works programme. We expect all 
eligible properties on Lally Road to be completed in the coming months. Our Energy 
Liaison Officer will make contact with the tenant to update her directly on the progress 
of same. 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive to remove some of the hatching along Chapelizod Hill as 
we went overboard restricting parking a few months ago when we hatched the area 
just in front of the build out to restrict traffic going up the hill, some residents now has 
nowhere to Park along Chapelizod Hill Road and have lived here for many years. In 

future can we ensure residents are consulted when we are making substantial changes 
which will impact on their daily lives? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 11159954) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.82 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to please remove (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance have arranged to have the remnants of these trees removed for 
the tenant in the coming weeks. 
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a detailed update on the proposed community 
centre in the Belmayne Parkside area. Specifically, the reply should provide 
information in respect of the following; 
1. The current status of the development, including whether a contractor has been 
selected. 
2. The indicative time frame for the completion of the project. 
3. Detailed information regarding the scope and services to be offered by the 
community centre. 
4. An outline of the planned collaboration with the local community in the 
development and operational phases 
5. A comprehensive overview of the complete project package, including all planned 
facilities and services. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The provision of community facilities is one element being addressed by the Executive 
concerning the options for developing the lands owned by Dublin City Council at 
Belmayne. Once internal recommendations are finalized, a comprehensive 
presentation will be made to the elected members in the autumn. 
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a detailed update on the taking in charge process 
for the following areas: Belmayne, Parkside Estate, Beltree, and Marsfield Avenue in 
Clongriffin. Specifically, his reply should provide information on: 
 
1: The current status of the taking in charge process for each of the aforementioned 
areas. 
2: The sequential plan and timeline for completing the taking in charge process for 
these areas. 
 
3: Any outstanding issues or challenges that are delaying the process and the 
measures being taken to address them. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Report on the status of Taking Charge Requests received for the Belmayne 
/Clongriffin area 
 
Belmayne 
Belmayne Avenue: 

A query was received from a resident of Belmayne Avenue in April 2021 regarding the 
process required for the taking in charge of Belmayne Avenue and surrounding streets. 
An application was issued to the individual however to date no request for taking in 
charge has been received.  
 
Parkside 
Parkside: 
A query regarding taking in charge was received from a resident of “Parkside” in March 
2023. The resident was issued with an application form. No response has been 
received to date.   
 
Parkside Boulevard: 
A request was received from Cairns Development Ltd in October 2017 for the area 
surrounding the school to be taken in charge. The request was forwarded to the service 
divisions’. The service divisions’ response outlined works that were required to be 
carried out prior to the area being taken in charge. This was forwarded to the developer 
in February 2018. No response has been received to date. 
 
Clongriffin 
 
Beau Park Clongriffin:  
A request for taking in charge was received from Gannon Homes in November 2014. 
The request was forwarded to the service divisions’. The service divisions’ responses 
outlined works that were required to be carried out prior to the area being taken in 
charge. This was forwarded to the developer in February 2015. No response has been 
received to date. 
 
Clongriffin Main Street: 
A request for taking in charge was received from Gannon Homes in January 2022. The 
request was forwarded to the service divisions’. The service divisions’ response 
outlined works that were required to be carried out prior to the area being taken in 
charge. This was forwarded to the developer in February 2022. No response has been 
received to date. 
 
Wellfield Bridge Apartments Clongriffin: 
A request for taking in charge was received from High Garden Real Estates Limited in 
May 2022. The request was forwarded to the service divisions’. The service divisions’ 
response outlined works that were required to be carried out prior to the area being 
taken in charge. This was forwarded to the developer in August 2022. No response 
has been received to date. 
 
Marsfield Avenue: 
The Planning Department have no record of request being submitted for all of the 
services in Marsfield Avenue to be taken in charge.  
 
Q.85 
COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide information on any plans for the development of 
a library to serve the residents of the Belmayne, Parkside, and Beltree areas, which 
have experienced significant growth over the past five years. Specifically, can the Chief 
Executive provide information in respect of the following points? 
 
1: Are there any existing plans or proposals for establishing a library in the Belmayne, 
Parkside, and Beltree areas? 
2: If plans exist, what is the projected timeline for the development and opening of the 
library? 

3: What steps are being taken to address the increased demand for library services in 
these rapidly growing communities? 
4: How will the local community be involved in the planning and development process 
of the new library? 
5: What resources and services will the proposed library offer to meet the needs of the 
residents? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
1. A new library was included in the 2020 Belmayne & Belcamp Lane Masterplan. The 
proposal was for a library as part of the ‘Town Square Pavilion’ at the Malahide 
Road end of the site. 
 
2. We remain committed to developing a new library for the Belmayne/Clongriffin area; 
discussions as to the exact location are ongoing. 
 
3. The Library in the Community Team has been delivering outreach services in the 
area, engaging with a number of groups, including: the Belmayne Community 
Group; the Clongriffin Community Association ; Belmayne Educate Together 
National School; Tuath Housing complex Burnell Place; St. Francis of Assisi primary 
school, and Little Rainbows Creche Belmayne. Nine activities have been delivered 
since February, with more planned. 
 
4. As is our usual practice, and in addition to keeping the Area Committee up-to-date, 
Libraries will engage with the local community through the libraries' newsletter and 
dedicated information/consultation sessions. Members of the local community can 
also make submissions as part of the formal planning process. 
 
5. Any new library will provide the full range of library services, including: 
    - Book Lending: Access to a vast collection of books across various genres, 
including fiction, non-fiction, children's books, and more. 
    - Teenager and Children's Services: Dedicated spaces and resources for children 
and teenagers. 
    - Digital Resources: Free access to ebooks, audiobooks, online magazines, and 
newspapers through platforms like BorrowBox, PressReader, and Libby. 
    - Internet and Computer Access: Free use of computers and internet access, 
including Wi-Fi and laptop lending. 
    - Study and Workspaces: Quiet areas for studying and working, including dedicated 
study places. 
    - Events and Workshops: A variety of events and workshops for all ages, such as 
author talks, book clubs, storytelling sessions, and craft activities. 
    - Cultural and educational programmes: activities and events providing life-long 
learning and leisure opportunities for all-ages. 
    - Community Services: Support and information for community groups, including 
spaces for meetings and activities. 
    - Multimedia Collections: A wide range of DVDs, CDs, and other multimedia 
materials available online and for borrowing. 
 
Q.86 
COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the status of the opening of Main 
Street from Priory Hall. Specifically, this Council seeks clarity arising from the following 
questions: 
 
1: What is the current status of the planned opening of Main Street from Priory Hall? 
2: Are there any anticipated timelines for the completion and opening of Main Street? 
3: What factors or issues are currently affecting the progress of this project? 

4: What measures are being taken to expedite the completion and opening of Main 
Street? 
5: How will the local community be informed and involved in the process leading to the 
opening of Main Street? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
1: Works adjacent to the sections of the Main Street that have not been opened are 
progressing 
2: It is planned to have the Main Street open from the Hole in the Wall Road to the 
Avenue a bit before the schools reopen. 
3: The progress of the Bus Connects Route will affect the opening of the Main Street 
all the way to the Malahide Road. 
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council has provided the requested 
information to Revenue on foot of the Level 1 Compliance Intervention letter in respect 
of Relevant Contracts Tax (RCT) issued to Dublin City Council in October 2022. Also, 
has the requested self- review of DCC’s RCT obligations been completed and have 
any issues been raised in relation to the compliance intervention letter which remain 
unresolved. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has provided all necessary information on foot the Level 1 
Intervention concerning ‘off plan’/turnkey acquisitions issued to Dublin City Council in 
October 2022.  
The requested self-review of Dublin City Councils RCT has been completed under this 
intervention.  Revenue has requested that Dublin City Council proceed with reporting 
the payments made relating to turnkey acquisitions during 2022.  A single payment 
was notified to the Revenue and Dublin City Council is awaiting communication from 
the Revenue if any penalties will apply. 
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail what input either Dublin City Council officials or 
Dublin City councillors have in the planning and running of the St. Patrick’s Festival, in 
particular the selection of the annual theme of the festival, given that Dublin City 
Council makes an annual  financial contribution of over €400,000 to the festival. If no 
officials or councillors are members of the festival committee can the Chief Executive 
agree to address this situation to ensure that our input is not just of a financial nature 
but is also recognised in the ethos, ideology and annual theme of the festival? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Feilte Dhuibh Linne Cuideachta Faoi Theorainn Ráthaíochta (FDLT) deliver the St. 
Patricks Festival Programme. The programme is formally agreed with Dublin City 
Council with the full support of the FDLT Board of Directors.  Dublin City Council agree 
an annual funding contribution for the St. Patricks Festival with FDLT by away of an 
agreed Memorandum of Understanding (MOU). The MOU is prepared by DCC Events 
and approved by DCC senior management officials. Part of the MOU includes a 
marketing plan for which DCC Corporate Services have an input into. The permitting 
of the event is issued by DCC Planning Dept by way of an outdoor event licence. 
The current members of the FDLT Board can be found using the following link; 
https://stpatricksfestival.ie/about/board-and-governance 
St. Patrick’s Festival 2024 was curated around the theme of ‘Spréach’, the Irish word 
for Spark, which represented the unique essence of Ireland and of Irish people. This 

year's Parade in Dublin City Centre had the highest attendance on record in recent 
years of 525k, featuring 4,300 participants, consisting of 14 marching bands, 6 creative 
pageants and 11 showpieces. St. Patrick’s Festival created significant employment 
within the arts and live events sectors, employing 2 ,956 individuals with a total of 10 
,207 number of days employment created for artists, creators, events workers, 
technical crew and many more . 
The relaxed space initiative was introduced to the festival by the Lord Mayor of Dublin 
in conjunction with As I Am, to support the needs of neurodivergent families and 
individuals, and those with sensory processing differences. The feedback from 
attendees was overwhelmingly positive. 
The festival generated €130m to the economy (2023) and produced a social media 
reach in excess of 1 billion and a total of 386K RTÉ viewership thus promoting Dublin 
City Centre as an ideal place to visit and experience. 
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive In relation to the recently announced appointment of a 
design team for the College Green/Dame Street Public Realm project could the Chief 
Executive answer the following? 
 
A. How much has Dublin City Council spent on this project to date, including the 2018 
failed plan? 
B. In relation to stakeholder consultation mentioned in the press release on the 
appointment of the Design Team, can the Chief Executive outline the involvement, 
responsibilities and decision-making role of City Counsellors in this project both to date 
and, more importantly, going forward? 
C. Will the stakeholder consultation include business representative groups, motorist 
groups, Dublin Bus and cyclist groups? 
D. The proposal to remodel College green and Dame Street is a joint initiative by Dublin 
City Council and the National Transport Authority. Can the Chief Executive outline the 
exact roles and responsibility of each as in other projects around the city, for example 
the Clontarf to City Centre Project, the NTA seem to make all decisions to the exclusion 
of DCC, local communities and all relevant stakeholders. 
E. Dublin City Council has stated that the project aims to transform the historic city 
core… which prioritises universal accessibility. Can the Chief Executive confirm that 
universal accessibility includes family cars, buses and bicycles? 
F. Dublin City Council has also stated that the project aims include, inter alia, 
“…restoring and enhancing the history and heritage of this unique location”. Can the 
Chief Executive expand on this somewhat bald statement and explain what is meant 
by “restoring the history and heritage…”. What history and heritage has been lost to 
the area which is now to be somehow restored? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The delivery of the College Green Public Realm Project is an objective of the DCC 
Development Plan. 
The new Design Team , in conjunction with Dublin City Council’s  Project Team, have 
been appointed to take the project through the various project stages including 
preliminary design, the statutory planning process, detailed design and construction. 
As part of the project concept & preliminary design development and, as part of the 
statutory planning process, there will be extensive non-statutory and statutory 
consultation with all key stakeholders including Elected Members, Disability Groups, 
PPN, businesses, community groups, residents,  business representative groups, 
motorist groups,  public transport Bodies including Dublin Bus and cycling groups.  This 
is a new project that extends to South Great George’s Street junction and, to-date, 
there has been no costs accrued by the Design Team. 

Dublin City Council & the National Transport Authority are co-funding the project.  As 
part of the project governance, the NTA Project Management Guidelines will apply.  
A key objective of the College Green Dame Street Project is to use the principles of 
universal design to provide an accessible space for all to enjoy.  As part of the 
consultation process the Design Team will consult with key stakeholders, including the 
Disabled Persons Organisations, in order to develop an informed design that meets 
the needs of all users.  
One of the project’s key objectives is to provide a world class multi-functional public 
space, which complements the adjacent historical buildings & location.  
 
Q.90 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on DCC European Funded Programme 
Applications made via the European Programme Support office detailing the status of 
each application as follows: 
a. Secured grants 
b. Unsuccessful applications 
c. Placed on reserved list 
d. Currently under evaluation 
e. Progressed to stage 2 evaluation 
d. Non- progressed 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Under the current EU Programme period 2021 – 2027; Dublin City Council has 
submitted Fifty Three (53) European project applications to date (June 2024). These 
applications have been through a variety of the European programmes; including the 
Horizon Europe programme, COSME programme, Just Transition, InterReg North 
West Europe programme, InterReg Europe programme, CEF Telecom programme, 
European Urban Initiative, IURC, URBACT and Erasmus+ programme.  
 
Of these 53 applications, nine are continuing through the evaluation process; twenty 
one have been unsuccessful and twenty three have been successful. Providing a 
successful conversion rate of 43% (43.3%). An increase from a successful conversion 
rate of 23% in September 2023. 
 
A summary of the current status of the fifty three applications is outlined in Table 1 
below:  
 
Table 1: Summary of Dublin City Council EU Funding Applications 2021 – 2024: 
No  Project 
Area / Theme / Topic 
EU Programme 
Status 
1 
CITIPART 
Green 
HORIZON 
Evaluation – Not Successful  
2 
SIREU 
Digital  
COSME 
Evaluation – Not Successful  
3 
GreenFlow 
Green 
H2020 
Evaluation – Not Successful  
4 
DR RUBICON 
Digital  
H2020 
Evaluation – Not Successful  
5 
KAIROS 
Green 
H2020 
Evaluation – Not Successful 
6 
STARBOARD 
Digital  
HORIZON 
Evaluation – Not Successful  
7 
SWEET 
Green 
H2020 
Evaluation – Not Successful  
8 
REBECOS  
Green 
H2020 
Evaluation – Not Successful  
9 
DublinCoC 
Digital 
HORIZON 
Evaluation – Not Successful  
10 
DATASHOP 
Digital 
HORIZON 
Evaluation – Not Successful  
11 
EDRIM 
Inclusion 
JUST 
Evaluation – Not Successful  
12 
AICEP 
Green 
H2020 
Evaluation – Not Successful  

13 
LAROSI 
Inclusion 
COSME 
Evaluation – Not Successful  
14 
SRPP 
Inclusion 
COSME 
Evaluation – Not Successful 
15 
 ACCRED 
Culture 
Erasmus+ 
Evaluation – Not Successful 
16 
XChange 
Mobility 
HORIZON 
Evaluation – Not Successful 
17 
NB4U 
Sustainability 
HORIZON 
Evaluation – Not Successful  
18 
DUBHOUSE 
Inclusion 
EUI 
Evaluation – Not Successful 
19 
EUREKA 
Sustainability 
Interreg Europe 
Evaluation – Not Successful 
20 
EURADAPT 
Sustainability 
InterReg Europe 
Evaluation – Not Successful 
21 
CRUISING 
Mobility 
HORIZON 
Evaluation – On Reserve List  
No  Project 
Area / Theme / Topic 
Programme 
Status 
22 
Digital Ethicist  
Digital  
Erasmus+ 
Evaluation - Awaiting Results  
23 
IRECH 
Digital  
SFI Research 
Infrastructure 
Programme 2023 
Evaluation - Awaiting Results  
24 
FLOURISH 
Sustainability 
Horizon – 100 
Climate Neutral 
Cities  
Evaluation - Awaiting Results  
25 
GREENING CITIES 
Sustainability 
Horizon – 100 
Climate Neutral 
Cities  
Evaluation - Awaiting Results  
26 
GREET 
Sustainability 
Horizon – 100 
Climate Neutral 
Cities 
Evaluation - Awaiting Results  
27 
BUILDCONVERT 
Sustainability 
InterReg NWE 
Evaluation - Awaiting Results 
28 
EUREKA 
Sustainability 
Interreg Europe 
Evaluation - Awaiting Results 
(Resubmit) 
29 
EURADAPT 
Sustainability 
InterReg Europe 
Evaluation - Awaiting Results 
(Resubmit) 
30 
PRACTICE 
Inclusion  
URBACT 
Evaluation - Awaiting Results 
31 
BeProAct 
Mobility 
Interreg NWE 
Successful – Awarded 
32 
IURC Asia 
Sustainability 
IURC 
Successful - Awarded 
33 
CrAFt Cities 
Sustainability 
HORIZON 
Successful – Awarded 
34 
NetZero Cities 
Sustainability 
HORIZON 
Successful – Awarded 
35 
Mission Charter 
Sustainability 
EU Missions 
Successful – Awarded 
36 
CULTIVATE 
Sustainability 
HORIZON 
Successful - Awarded 
37 
REGEN 
Sustainability 
HORIZON 
Successful – Awarded 
38 
FOLLOW 
Mobility 
EIT Urban 
Mobility 
Successful - Awarded 
39 
EnrichEuropeana+ Digital  
CEF Telecom 
Successful - Awarded 
40 
Twin4Resilience 
Digital 
Interreg NWE 
Successful - Awarded  
41 
UAEU 
Sustainability 
EUI  
Successful - Awarded 
42 
European Capital 
of Smart Tourism 
2024 
Tourism  
EU Commission  
Successful - Awarded 

43 
IURC North 
America 
Sustainability 
IURC 
Successful - Awarded 
44 
Minority Report  
Sustainability 
HORIZON 
Successful - Awarded 
45 
Towards Active 
Cities  
Inclusion 
Erasmus+ 
Successful - Awarded 
46 
CAMPAIGNers 
Sustainability 
Horizon  
Successful - Awarded 
47 
C-NEWTRAL 
Sustainability 
Horizon  
Successful - Awarded 
48 
DELIVEree R 
Sustainability 
Horizon  
Successful - Awarded 
49 
Uforest 
Sustainability 
Horizon  
Successful - Awarded 
50 
Water and all Its 
Forms  
Inclusion 
Erasmus+ 
Successful - Awarded 
No  Project 
Area / Theme / Topic 
Programme 
Stage  
51 
Cumasú 
Inclusion 
Erasmus+ 
Successful - Awarded 
52 
Building Blue 
Sustainability 
InterReg NWE 
Successful - Awarded 
53 
WISH CITIES 
Inclusion 
URBACT  
Successful - Awarded 
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
After my motion passed on a major flood drill including a community at risk of flooding 
in 2023, I was informed that post the flooding in Clontarf there would be an update 
plan, could I have an update on the new emergency plan and when we might engage 
with the public on a flood drill, information and training for community volunteers to 
assist in future mayor flood events. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Further to this question and the previous motion from last year. Dublin City Council’s 
Emergency Plan, which is managed by DFB, deals with emergencies when people and 
the places they live are in danger. The Flood Emergency Plan, which is managed by 
the Environment & Transport Division, sits below this and is reviewed yearly. I will liaise 
with Dublin Fire Brigade who carry out inter agency flood exercises which involve 
external agencies including members of the community, to look at the feasibility of 
involving the community in such an initiative.  
 
Q.92 
COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the provision of a map of all council owned 
lands and properties, since my motion passed on this in 2019 and the ACA for Moore 
Street. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The Moore Street ACA is identified in this list of Priority ACA projects (Volume 1 
Chapter 11 Section 11.5.2 Architectural Conservation Areas (ACA). 
These 16 ACAs will be progressed over the development plan period subject to a 
prioritisation programme to be agreed as part of the implementation of the 
development plan and the availability of resources. 
 
As noted in the current Dublin City Council Development Plan 2022 – 2028) sixteen 
ACAs have been identified for prioritisation following careful consideration of the 

aspects required to identify areas for protection under an ACA, as set out in Chapter 
II, Part IV of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and expanded 
upon in Chapter 3 of the Architectural Heritage Protection Guidelines for Planning 
Authorities (2011).  
 
 
Q.93 
COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive an update on what plans and funding that DCC is applying 
for after the Nature restoration law was passed this week and further to my motion in 
2024. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Biodiversity Action Plan 2021-2025, the City Tree Strategy (to be reviewed 
and updated in 2024) and the Greening Strategies which are being implemented in 
The Liberties, North East Inner City and Stoneybatter, will align with the aims of the 
EU Nature Restoration Law when this legislation is enacted in Ireland. The EU Nature 
Restoration Law proposes to 
1. “increase green spaces in cities, towns and suburbs;” 
2. ensure “no net loss of green space by 2030, compared to the year when the 
nature restoration rules enter into force (unless the urban environment has 
already 45% of green space) 
3. “Increase in the amount of tree cover in cities.” 
4. Elimination of further harmful pesticides in all public parks and open spaces. 
 
It is estimated that the greening strategies to date have created more than 3Ha of new 
green space for trees and pollinator friendly planting in the last four years. In addition 
over 600 trees have been planted in those areas and glyphosate has been eliminated 
from parks maintenance operations. 
There has also been on-going research into the health of ecosystems and potential 
actions for habitat restoration as part of the City Biodiversity Action Plan and the Dublin 
Bay UNESCO Biosphere partnership work programme. 
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the plans the fire station on Alfie Byrne 
Road? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Proposed Fire Station at Alfie Byrne has received approval to proceed from 
DHLGH. A meeting with the integrated design team was recently held and updated 
program and design was requested. The preliminary design has been completed and 
the next phase will see the detailed design concluded with input from operational staff.  
It is expected that formal planning application will be submitted early next year. 
 
Q.95 
COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline all DCC contracts with external or outsourced 
providers (examples: grass cutting, parking) and the following details pertaining to 
each 
-        When the contract is due for renewal 
-        What the lead in time for renewal is, 
-        If new tender documents have been prepared or are due to be prepared 
-        Which council department and official is responsible for renewing them 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

The following contract is in place for the control of weeds on public roads and footways, 
‘RFT 2231960- Single Party Framework Agreement for the Control of Weeds in Dublin 
City Council 2023-2027’. 
 
Road Maintenance Services’ Annual Work Programme is presented to Councillors 
each year. The ‘Programme’ sets out the roads and footpaths that the Division intends 
to upgrade during the year. Works are issued for tender by way of mini-competitions 
to established frameworks of contractors. One framework of contractors for 
carriageway resurfacing related works and one framework for footpath upgrade related 
works. 
Tender competitions and contract awards managed by Road Maintenance Services, 
comply with the relevant EU Procurement Directives 
 
 
The current contract for the removal of Graffiti and Gum from public paths and surfaces 
was advertised this month on the eTenders website in accordance with the 
requirements of the Tender Procurement Processes. It is currently at the tender 
submission stage and it is expected that this contract will be awarded in the 3rd Quarter 
of this year. 
 
The Environmental Health Section in the Housing & Community Services Department 
has one external contract with Civica UK Limited for the licencing, support and 
maintenance for the Civica APP computer system for the management and operation 
of Private Rented Houses Inspections and Enforcement of Standards.   
There is no alternative Supplier for the licencing, support and maintenance of this 
system.  This contract is currently renewed for the period 1/4/2024 to 31/3/2025. 
 
At present a new national IT system is under development through the Local 
Government Management Services Board which will take over this function.  The 
national system is currently at preliminary pilot testing stage in 2 local authorities in 
Ireland.  It is likely that, when the new system is introduced, there will be an overlap of 
systems which will require us to keep our licencing, support and maintenance for Civica 
APP in place until all data has transferred.   
 
For Housing Maintenance we have direct labour and contractors that we use under a 
Void Framework that is up for renewal in November of this year and is currently being 
worked on. We also have a Minor Works Framework that was established in January 
of this year and will run for a minimum of 2 years.  
 
The framework and contract for the Operation and Management of Civic Amenity Sites 
is due to expire in May 2025. Work has begun on the preparation of tender documents 
for a procurement process to establish a new framework. 
 
The framework and contract for the collection and processing of garden waste from 
DCC bring centres came into effect in July 2023, and will expire in June 2027. 
Following a series of delays, the tender documents for the collection and processing 
of clothing and textiles have finally been completed and will be published in the coming 
weeks, once the documents have been approved by the Central Procurement Unit. 
 
The following is a list of Parks Service Contracts. Tender competitions and contract 
awards managed by Parks Services, comply with the relevant National and EU 
Procurement Directives. 
 
 
Landscape Architectural Consultants Panel 

Architect led Integrated Design Team Service 
Multi-Party Framework 2020 - 2023 for the provision of a maintenance repair service 
for machinery for Parks and Landscape Services 
Landscape/Minor Civil Contractors (extension) 
Extension of Indoor Plant Supply and Maintenance  
Tender for a concession to operate a community based market in Bushy Park 
Single Party Framework (SFA) 2023 - 2025 agreement for Floral Hanging Baskets 
Multi-Party Framework 2022 - 2025 for Leasing of Tractors and electric Ride-on 
Mowers 
Multi-Party Framework 2022 - 2026 Landscape Maintenance Services Contract 
Single Party Framework Arborist Services Annual Tree Inventory  
& Visual Tree Assessments 
Multi-Party Framework 2021 - 2025 for the design and execution of works in connection 
with the installation of playgrounds in Parks & Open Space 
Multi Party Framework for the provision of Tree Care Services 
Multi Party Framework for the provision of Christmas Trees 
Multi Party Framework Agreement for Specialist Conservation Contracts 2022 - 2026 
Multi-Party Framework 2023 - 2026 supply of annual supply of spring and summer 
flowering bulbs 
Multi Party Framework Agreement for Integrated Design Teams for Public Realm 
Projects (4 years) 
Multi-Party Framework Agreement for the Annual Supply of Trees for Dublin City 
Council  
Multi-Party Framework for the design, supply, planting and maintenance of flowering 
perennials, wild flowers and bulbs  
Multi-Party Framework Purchase of Machinery 
Multi-Party Framework for the Supply, Delivery & Installation of Outdoor Gyms/Fitness 
Equipment 
Multi-Party Framework for supply and installation of modular buildings and ancillary 
works 
Multi Party Framework Agreement for the Provision of Submersible water pumps to 
include the Service Maintenance and Repair for DCC Municipal fountains and 
waterfalls 
Appointment of TGM for Silloge, St. Anne's and Tolka Valley 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER 

To ask the Chief Executive to detail all progress to date on the provision of public toilets 
subsequent to the allocation of funding in the capital programme, including any tenders 
or EOIs issued, any discussions with potential providers and any decisions made.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services and the Office of City Co-ordination can confirm that the 
city-centre is to get two new permanent public toilets. These will replace the existing 
temporary unit in place outside Stephen’s Green Shopping Centre and the unit 
previously in place at Wolfe Tone Square.  
These temporary units were installed as an emergency measure due to the closure of 
retail and hospitality businesses during the Covid pandemic and the introduction of 
outdoor dining and socialising. They were always supposed to operate over a 
temporary period while the City stabilised post the pandemic. 
 
The City Council recognises the need for the provision of permanent public toilets and 
that the location and operational model will be crucial to their success.  
 
In order to offer an alternative public toilet service, we have been in discussions with 
two service providers following an Expressions of Interest process in 2023 which 
examined the various options and operating models available. It is now our intention 
to commence a Part VIII process once the options appraisal process has been 
completed. 
 
The proposed permanent city centre public toilet units will include robust security 
systems and we hope to be in a position to bring options forward to Councillors and 
commence the Part VIII process in Q3 of 2024. 
 
New public toilets are planned for St Anne’s Park as part of the Changing Places 
initiative. We are working with a consulting architect to develop a spec which will be 
fully compliant with building regulations and accessibility requirements. When that is 
complete we hope to go out to tender under a framework arrangement. 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for repair of the footpath at numbers 6-8 Croydon 
Terrace, Marino, Dublin 3 as a matter of urgency as it is in dangerous condition. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11161137) has been created and passed on to the Area Inspector who 
will carry out an inspection and add this to a works list.  
 
Q.98 
COUNCILLOR JEN CUMMINS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the square meterage of green space, per 
person, per LEA in Dublin City Council as of June 2024 and what plan is there to 
develop green spaces in the South West Inner City.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The square meterage of green space per person per LEA is not available. The only 
information to hand is for Stoneybatter and The Liberties where we are implementing 
Greening Strategies. 
 
The Liberties was assessed as having  0.68m2 per person of green space before the 
greening strategy and it now has 1.68m2 per person after the projects.    
The overall publicly accessible green space in Stoneybatter is 2.5ha which is less than 
1.6m2 per person. 
 

Overall there is an average of 49m2 per person for the Dublin City as a whole, however, 
neighbourhoods close to large parks such as the Phoenix Park or St Annes Park will 
have greater access to green space.   
 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR JEN CUMMINS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the plan to provide leisure, arts and sporting 
facilities for the South West Inner City. To know when they are expected to be delivered 
and what stage the development process for each of these is at.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin City Council Sports Plan 2024 to 2029 – Dublin City: More Active, More 
Often sets out the approach to the provision of leisure and sporting facilities across 
Dublin city.  This plan sets out the Purpose, Vision, Mission and Values of Dublin City 
Council in delivering a wide range of leisure and sporting facilities and programming 
across Dublin city.  An annual revenue budged of €20 million is allocated to Sports & 
Recreation as part of the Culture, Recreation and Economic Services Department, 
ensuring the continued provision of services to communities through our 30 facilities, 
and in the implementation of our Sports Officer programmes and initiatives.  While 88% 
of this budget is provided directly by Dublin City Council, additional grant funding of 
12% is allocated from a number of outside bodies including Sports Ireland, HSE, 
CDYSB, Pobal and CDETB.  The plan emphasises and encourages a collaborative 
approach when it comes to sports and physical activity across Dublin City.   
 
Pillar 1 of the plan addresses the provision of quality facilities and spaces to enable 
more people to be more active, more often utilising DCC Sports & Recreation Facilities, 
Green and Open Spaces, Pitches and Waterways.  The plan commits to developing a 
Facilities and Infrastructure Map, that will unlock facilities and infrastructure, which will 
empower the people of Dublin to lead more active, healthy and fulfilling lives.  This 
plan is supported by a number of national and local policies, such as the National 
Sports Policy 2018 – 2017, the Healthy Ireland Strategic Action Plan 2021 – 2025, 
Dublin City Parks Strategy, the Dublin City Local Economic and Community Plan and 
the Dublin City Development Plan 2022 – 2028. 
 
A business case has been made to provide dedicated staffing resources to drive the 
implementation of this plan. 
 
With regard to Arts provision, an Interim Arts Plan was passed by the Arts, Culture, 
Leisure and Recreation SPC in February 2024, setting out City wide priorities for the 
Arts Office as follows: 
 
Priority 1 - Inclusion and Diversity 
 
Priority 2 - Arts Infrastructure 
 
Priority 3 - Public Art  
 
Priority 4 - Young People and Children 
 
Priority 5 - Arts in Community and Neighbourhood. 
 
Priority 6 - Supporting the Artist and Arts Organisations. 
 
Priority 7- Festivals, Events and the Public Realm 
 
Priority 8 - An Ghaeilge 
Specific Area based Arts Plans have been a feature of recent years with the Arts Office 
supporting the development of plans in the North Central and North West Area.  The 
Arts Office focused on these areas, as they had been identified as areas that were 
traditionally lacking in Arts infrastructure. A specific arts plan for the South West Inner 
City is not in train at this time, but there are ongoing Arts Grants funding, contact and 
support for Artists and Arts Organisations in the South West Inner City.  
 

The Arts Office is supporting the Liberties Festival and is developing 40 Artists 
Workspaces at Merchants Quay and Bridgefoot Street, with construction to begin next 
year.  Support and funding has been provided to Pallas Studios to support the 
operation of a Theatre at The Coombe and there is regular communication and support 
with the Area Office on their Arts programming, such as the highly successful and 
collaborative annual event – A Culture Date with Dublin 8. 
 
Q.100 COUNCILLOR JEN CUMMINS 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the timeline for the development of the Marrowbone 
Lane sport pitch. At what stage of the development process is this at and how the 
community will be consulted on this development 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Chief Executive confirmed to Councillors in April 2024 that it was his intention to 
optimise the design of the Marrowbone Lane Depot to ensure that a FIFA accredited 
pitch is accommodated on the site. Procurement is currently underway to appoint a 
consultant who will commence the process of designing the overall site. 
 
The above position is based on the assumption that the Uisce Eireann depot will be 
located elsewhere by the end of 2026 and the existing Roads Depot at Forbes Lane 
will be accommodated within the Marrowbone Lane site. 
 
Once the design layout has been finalised the project team will liaise with the Area 
Committee to ensure agreement of all. A variation of the Development Plan will then 
be brought before the City Council. Following approval from Council it will be necessary 
to identify funding sources for the new depot and the synthetic pitch before detailed 
design can be progressed.  
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR JEN CUMMINS 
To ask the Chief Executive about the number of times per calendar year the streets 
and footpaths of the South West Inner City are deep cleaned and the expected dates 
of such cleaning will be for the remainder of 2024 and into 2025.   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The frequency of cleaning of streets and footpaths in the South West Inner City is 
determined by the category of each individual street involved. Main thoroughfares and 
shopping areas are on a daily cleaning schedule. Secondary streets and side turns 
here are on varying cleaning schedules as appropriate. Cleaning schedules for specific 
streets in this area can be found on our website www.dublicity.ie or by clicking the 
following link SCHEDULE Map (dublincity.ie). 
 
Q.102  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to trim/prune the trees in All Saints park and the rectory 
park on Wades Ave, St Annes Raheny.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The work to crown lift the huge number of trees on this local park to improve view 
across the open space commenced last year, the next tranche of this work is 
scheduled for after this year after the bird nesting season. 
 
Q.103 COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the new windows and doors at 
(Details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Housing Maintenance have been out to this property twice but have been unable to 
gain access.  The Joinery Workshop have prioritised these windows and they will try 
to gain access again in order to measure them up for urgent manufacture.   
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will examine parking prohibition measures at (details 
supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The location detailed above is currently a residential road without permit parking and 
therefore is open to the public for parking. 
The residents can contact the Traffic Advisory Group at traffic@dublincity.ie  regarding 
the introduction of traffic prohibition measures. These measures would need to be 
recommended by a Traffic Engineer. 
If residents of non-Permit Parking areas wish to introduce a scheme on their road they 
will have to submit a petition to include 35% of the households on the Road and submit 
it to the Traffic Advisory Group for assessment.  All details on introducing a scheme 
can be found on this link: https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/parking-dublin-city-
centre/start-parking-scheme. 
 
Q.105 COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that the trees at (Details supplied) are included 
in the winter works programme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Park services have inspected the trees on (Details supplied). These carpinus trees 
are relatively young and in reasonable condition. If there is any issue with any particular 
tree along this street please contact park@dublincity.ie 
 
Q.106  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the lay by at (details supplied) to be 
resurfaced.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This section of carriageway will be inspected and put forward for consideration for 
inclusion in our 2025 Carriageway Resurfacing Programme. (Enq. Ref. 11161132) 
 
Q.107  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
A pedestrian crossing has been approved for the junction at the top of Leinster Road 
where it meets the Harold’s Cross Road. What it the timeline for the installation of the 
crossing?  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Leinster Road and Harold's Cross Road 
The traffic junction at Leinster Road and Harolds Cross Road is part of the 
BusConnects Dublin - Templeogue/Rathfarnham to City Centre project. 
 
The proposal includes extensive civil works aimed at enhancing pedestrian safety at 
these crossroads, as depicted in the snapshot below. The proposed scheme is still 
undergoing the consultation phase. 
 
The latest newspaper notice dated 8th June 2023, can be found at:  
https://templeoguerathfarnhamscheme.ie/wp-
content/uploads/sites/10/2023/06/Newspaper-Notice.pdf  
 

For more information on the BusConnects Dublin - Templeogue/Rathfarnham to City 
Centre 
Core 
Bus 
Corridor 
Scheme, 
please 
visit: 
https://templeoguerathfarnhamscheme.ie/  . 
 
 
General Arrangement Drawings of the Templeogue/Rathfarnham to City 
Centre Core Bus Corridor Scheme – April 2023 - Volume 1 - Page 27 - Sheet No.23. 
Source:https://templeoguerathfarnhamscheme.ie/mwg-
internal/de5fs23hu73ds/progress?id=P3hsuiVABsqvXZA0taX-
Nz6kW8fPnn6nYxFH8syUZ2o 
 
Q.108  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive Could an onsite meeting take place as soon as possible to 
review the installation of bollards on Zion Road? Residents are reporting significant 
increase in traffic congestion. There is also an issue with adequate space for busses 
to turn. Residents are reporting that busses are frequently forced to mount the footpath 
to enable them to turn. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The removal of the left slip road and installation of bollards on Zion Road formed part 
of the measures included in the School Zone for Stratford National School and 
Stratford College, as part of the Safe Routes to School Programme which is funded by 
the National Transport Authority. The removal of the slip road using bollards was used 
as an interim measure as Bus Connects plans also include the removal of this slip road 
and the junction will be redesigned as part of these plans.  
A bus test was carried out in advance of the installation of the School Zone to ensure 
that a Dublin Bus could make the left turn at the junction without the slip road. DCC 
have been liaising closely with Dublin Bus and made some changes to the signal 
arrangement when it was first installed to assist with their buses. There have been no 
further issues reported to us by Dublin Bus and we are in regular contact with them.   
The traffic light sequence has been updated to give more time to vehicles turning left 
since the removal of the slip road. The team will continue to monitor this and make any 
adjustments needed. The bus priority system monitors the bus journey times, and 
when a 15B is detected, additional time to exit Zion Road is given. The bus priority 

team recently made further changes to the priority system at this junction and journey 
times have now decreased, as per the below graph.  
 
Q.109  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive what can DCC do to support the reopening of the canals 
for people to use for recreation? The current fencing along the canals is preventing 
many locals from using the green space for walking/running and other leisure activities. 
This is in areas where the green space per head of population is already low and this 
is having a big impact on wellbeing. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Councillor should refer all issues relating to the fencing along the Grand Canal to 
Waterways Ireland. Queries can be logged on their website at waterwaysireland.org 
or tel:+442866323004 (HQ in Northern Ireland)  
 
Q.110  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Reports of trees blocking lighting along Mount Tallant Avenue and on the Green in the 
Cloisters. Could these trees be assessed and pruning be scheduled after nesting 
season? There is one tree in particular on the Green that needs to be assessed for 
safety as soon as possible.  Please see attached photo of the tree in the Cloisters 
which is hanging particularly low to the ground.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The tree that is blocking the street light will be pruned as soon as possible. Parks will 
arrange a crown raise of any trees with low hanging branches on the green over the 
coming weeks. 
 
Q.111  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive can he take urgent action to address the rat infestation in 
(details supplied) particularly in the bin area and the areas of long grass within the 
complex. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance is constantly monitoring (details supplied) and bait is laid 
regularly.  Repairs have also been carried out on the drains.  The issue with the rats 
relates to the boarded up Countess (details supplied).  Housing Maintenance have 
been in touch with the owner who has committed to lay bait and these works should 
improve the situation.  
 
Q.112  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive can he take urgent action to address and respond to the 
concerns of residents (details supplied) surrounding safety, anti-social activity, 
repairs, lack of maintenance of the complex. The residents are asking to meeting with 
the area manager to address these concerns. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will respond to specific requests for maintenance in this 
complex, however we need an address in order to carry out an inspection.   
 
I will arrange for our Housing Team to liaise with residents in (details supplied). 
 
Q.113  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive can a net be installed over the bin area in (details 
supplied) in an effort to keep birds, rodents and foxes away from the bins? 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will arrange to have the bin area inspected.  A net will be 
installed to prevent seagulls, rats, etc. pulling at the bins.  
 
Q.114  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive can he arrange for the road on (details supplied) to be 
resurfaced as it is currently in a bad state of disrepair. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
(Details supplied) is on the Road Resurfacing Programme of Works 2023. This 
Programme of Works will be completed later this year. 
 
Q.115  COUNCILLOR CIAN FARRELL 
To ask the Chief Executive the current development status of “Chocolate Park” situated 
between Hanover Quay and Sir John Rogerson’s quay.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A meeting was held on 23rd May 2024 and was attended by DCC Docklands Office 
DCC Survey and Mapping, DCC Parks and the Law Agent for Docklands Office. This 
meeting was held to identify causes of delays in the development of the park and to 
take a proactive approach to resolve these issues. We are in constant communication 
on all sides to get this resolved.  
 
Q.116  COUNCILLOR CIAN FARRELL 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the status of the redevelopment of Portobello 
Plaza? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Portobello Harbour Park (Portobello Plaza) is currently out for consultation as part of 
the Part 8 process. The last day for comments is the 25th July, 2024. The development 
will be on the agenda for the council meeting in September with a briefing to the area 
committee prior to that.  
 
Q.117 COUNCILLOR CIAN FARRELL 
To ask the Chief Executive the timeline that the canal will remain fenced off. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The fencing that is currently in place along the Grand Canal was not erected by Dublin 
City Council.  This area falls within the responsibility of Waterways Ireland and they 
arranged for the fencing to be erected following a number of operations that they 
carried out to remove encampments from the banks of the canal 
 
Q.118  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive what actions he is taking to ensure that people with 
complex needs, be that through substance misuse or suffering mental ill health, who 
are placed by the city council in homeless accommodation in the city centre,  are 
receiving treatments appropriate to their needs and are not being facilitated to loiter 
outside nearby schools or children’s play areas partaking in the consumption of drugs 
and/or alcohol. This situation appears to be an everyday occurrence in the city centre 
and has led to some very serious incidents.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Private Emergency Accommodation Assertive Case Management Team (PACT) 
is a jointly funded initiative from the Dublin Region Homeless Executive (DRHE) and 

HSE Social Inclusion team with staff from Anna Liffey Drug Project, Coolmine and 
Focus Ireland.  
It is an integrated team that consists of Case Managers, Clinical Team and Specialised 
Case Managers (Dual Diagnoses, Domestic Violence Worker, Complex Case 
Manager), that operate across all private emergency accommodation (PEAs) 
accommodating homeless households in the Dublin Region. 
PACT aims to carry out an assessment within two weeks of a household being placed 
in emergency accommodation,  
i. 
to identify any supports required in areas such as addiction, healthcare and 
mental health, and 
ii. 
to make appropriate referrals / provide support directly, as required. 
Households accommodated in NGO run homeless services are linked with onsite key 
workers, case managers and specialist support workers, which again, identify supports 
required around issues such as addiction, healthcare and mental health and make 
appropriate referrals / provide supports, including addiction supports, as required. 
Each service operates a Good Neighbourhood policy. The DRHE and accommodation 
service providers are committed to positive community integration and respect for 
neighbouring residents, businesses and local amenities. As part of the guidelines 
issued to households on entering homeless accommodation, they are asked to be 
respectful of the local community while residing there.  
 
Q.119  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive what actions he is taking to improve the public realm on 
Manor Place and surrounding streets. Residents and small business owners have 
consistently raised with me the infrequency of street cleaning and the poor state of the 
footpaths. In particular, the poor conditions of ‘’Chicken Lane’’ – St. Marys Terrace – 
is in such a state of neglect, that is has become a focal point of anti-social behaviour 
in the community. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Division’s 2024 Annual Works Programme has been presented to the Elected 
Members, this sets out all carriageways and footpaths that the Division plans to 
upgrade in 2024, with the budget that has been allocated to the Division. Consideration 
for additional works are based on availability of additional budget, and resources to 
manage the delivery of these projects. We will inspect the areas in question in the 
coming weeks to determine the overall condition, and based on the outcome they will 
be added to a list to be considered for future works programmes should more budget 
become available to the division. Please note that; we prioritise the poorest conditions 
due to budget limitation and the long list of footpaths to be upgraded. In the meantime 
RMS will address any defects as they arise.  
Please contact Street Sweeping with regard to street cleaning: 
https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/environment/waste-and-recycling/street-
sweeping  
Q.120  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will respond favourably to the request from local 
residents, community groups and Iarnrod Eireann (Irish Rail) that the plot of land at 
Ossory Road, North Wall be turned over to Dublin City Council and used for 
recreational community use. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council contacted Iarnród Éireann in relation to their vacant site on Ossory 
Road, North Wall to commence discussions on future meanwhile temporary uses for 
the site. Iarnród Éireann are agreeable in principle to the site to be used for a temporary 
period of approxmately 2 years as this site is required for future rail expansion projects. 
Dublin City Council Area Office are hosting a community consultation on the 20th June 

2024  to gather community proposals to progress discussions with  Iarnród Éireann . 
Approximately 7,645 homes and 756 businesses in the area were issued invitations.  
Following consultation Dublin City Council will advise Iarnród Éireann of outcome from 
the consultation and all suggestions put forward.  Irish Rail have advised that the land 
will be available for temporary community use until mid-2026. 
 
This land is currently not in the charge of the Parks Department. Should we get access 
to this parcel of land Parks Service can examine it with a view to providing parks 
facilities here.  
 
Q.121  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive would he commit to engaging in a process with the Rotunda 
Hospital and the present lease holders of the Ambassador Theatre so that the historic 
building can be rejuvenated, and in some capacity, be that through Council 
Management or partnership with the operator, could reopen and be used as a cultural 
space venue for the citizens of Dublin. In its present condition, the Ambassador 
Theatre is the first point of dereliction on O’Connell Street frequent point of anti-social 
behaviour 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC is in contact with the Ambassador Management Company to discuss options for 
repurposing the venue as an event space. 
 
Q.122  COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if there is a pathway to expediting Local Area Plans for 
areas with extreme urgency, such as Donnybrook Village, and if he is willing to do so. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The 2022-2028 City Development Plan includes Table 2-13, which identifies three 
priority areas for local plans, and Table 2-14, which lists 15 proposed LAPs/VIPs, 
including Donnybrook. Work is currently underway on the three plans in Table 2-13, in 
accordance with their prioritization in the Development Plan. 
The Planning SPC will review the prioritization of the other 15 LAPs based on the 
criteria specified on page 76 of the Development Plan. At this stage, it is premature to 
predict the outcome regarding which LAPs from this list will be selected to progress. 
In the interim, the Development Plan provides a robust policy framework to manage 
the development of public and private land in Donnybrook. 
 
Q.123  COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide additional resources to the South East Area to 
ensure that the gates of Dartmouth Square Park are closed each night at a time agreed 
upon with the residents of the area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The practice of locking and unlocking gates to parks is not widespread. Where the 
practice remains, it is generally by local key holders that live adjacent to small parks. 
It is our experience that leaving parks unlocked allows easy entry by gardai should the 
need to respond to any disturbances require it. The vast majority of parks with railings, 
have railings that are low enough to easily scale and negate any security that a locked 
gate might imply. 
 
Q.124  COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline plans to deal with the ongoing vandalism and 
anti-social behaviour in the Sean Moore Park playground and to outline plans, if any, 
for how the Council may prevent further acts of destruction to the playground. 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There has been a recent spate of fires in Sean Moore Park playground, which have 
caused damage to a number of benches and the last tunnel & mound in the 
playground. These damaged items have been removed. The local gardai have been 
informed and requested to carry out additional patrols in the area. Parks are preparing 
a tender for the installation of a  container café with accompanying public toilet facility. 
It is anticipated, that once constructed, passive surveillance will have a positive impact 
on antisocial behaviour and reduce this activity. 
 
Q.125  COUNCILLOR BARRY HENEGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a comprehensive update on the current and 
proposed developments in the Clontarf Ward, specifically addressing the following 
area: 
Housing: Status and future plans for housing developments, including any affordable 
housing initiatives with disability access throughout the ward. Specifically, what are the 
current plans, timelines, and expected outcomes for increasing the availability of 
affordable and accessible housing for residents? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services empty the litter bins and clean the main thoroughfares 
and shop fronts in the Clontarf ward on a daily basis. Residential areas are regularly 
monitored and extra cleaning is arranged when necessary between scheduled 
cleanings. Illegally dumped rubbish in this ward is investigated and removed in as 
timely a manner as possible. We will continue to do everything possible to ensure this 
ward is kept as clean as possible. 
 
Dublin Bay: Updates on any projects or policies aimed at preserving and enhancing 
the environmental quality of Dublin Bay. 
Dublin City Council (DCC) effectively implements a wide range of EU regulations and 
local policies aimed at protecting and enhancing water quality in Dublin Bay and 
beyond. Within DCC, the Protection of Water Bodies Office (PWBO) implements the 
Water Framework Directive, Water Pollution Act 1977, as amended and the Bathing 
Water Regulations SI 79 of 2008.  
In the most recent water quality assessment conducted by the Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA), Dublin Bay was classified as ‘Good’. However, rivers and 
bathing water quality continue to be impacted by near shore pressures mainly caused 
by human and animal sources. DCC has specific measures in place to address these 
issues discussed below.  
Primarily prompted by the decline in bathing water quality particularly in South Dublin 
Bay, DCC proactively led the establishment of the Dublin Bay Bathing Water Taskforce 
(BWTF) in 2019. The taskforce seeks to protect and enhance water quality in Dublin 
Bay through collaboration and coordination of the various agencies responsible for 
identified pressures. A summary report outlines pertinent actions and ongoing activities 
led by individual stakeholders or as a collective is available to download 
here. Furthermore, DCC continues to be a contributing member of the National Bathing 
Water Expert Group, chaired by the Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage.  
Recent monitoring of bathing water quality indicates incremental improvements driven 
by targeted and prioritised actions of the BWTF. For example, a review of the 2023 
bathing season results found 100% of scheduled samples taken at Sandymount 
Strand met the required standard of ‘Sufficient’. In comparison to 90% in 2022 and 
75% in 2021. Similarly, the decline in bathing water quality previously observed at 
Merrion Strand has ceased, and is trending positively towards sufficient quality. 
Dollymount Strand remains consistent at ‘Good’ status, exceeding the bathing water 

quality standard required. Furthermore, DCC are pleased to announce that following 
assessment, the Half Moon satisfied the criteria for designation as a formal bathing 
location. This brings the number of designated waters within the UNESCO biosphere 
to three.   
 
Information on the status of all housing projects are available on the Monthly Housing 
Supply report as linked here: 
 
See the link to the July Housing Supply Report. 
https://councilmeetings.dublincity.ie/mgConvert2PDF.aspx?ID=45557  
 
Q.126  COUNCILLOR BARRY HENEGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the status of the temporary sandbags 
currently in place on the Clontarf seafront. Specifically, what are the plans and 
timelines for installing a permanent catchment wall that matches the effectiveness and 
size of the current sandbag solution? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The current sandbags on Clontarf promenade carry out a vital function in reducing 
flood risk to neignbouring businesses and homes close to them. They have prevented 
road and property flooding on a number of occasions since their installation. This area 
of Clontarf promenade is the lowest protected area from tidal flooding in the entire City. 
Dublin City Council and its councillors could have a large liability if the sandbags were 
removed and there was tidal property flooding in the area. The level of protection these 
sandbags give is currently estimated to be well below the National Flood Protection 
Guidelines. 
 
Various divisions of Dublin City Council and the Clontarf Ward Councillors are working 
with Clontarf Residents and Business Associations to procure a multi-disciplinary team 
of consultants including landscape architects to develop a scheme to deliver flood 
protection to National Standards along the whole of the promenade as well as a new 
cycleway while minimising the visual effect and maintaining passive surveillance. 
Environmental and social constraints are significant in the development of any 
scheme. The last meeting of this Joint Working Group was in May 2024 to which all of 
the Ward Councillors were invited. These sandbags will no longer be needed once a 
permanent scheme is in place. 
 
This consultants study will probably take 3 years to go to the planning stage assuming 
a viable option is possible. Planning permission from An Bord Pleanala is taking 1-4 
years currently. Procuring a contractor 1 year and construction 2-3 years partially due 
to environmental constraints. 
 
The effects of climate change are also playing a significant part in the development of 
coastal defences. Already this century the average sea level in Dublin Bay is recorded 
as having risen over 130mm which is roughly the same as the whole of the 100 years 
in the 20th Century. Predictions for the rest of this century appear to be close to a 
further 1m of sea level rise and when larger associated waves are added to this the 
extreme need for these temporary sandbag measures can be clearly seem. It takes 
only one significant flooding to devalue all property values in the area of the event. 
 
Q.127  COUNCILLOR BARRY HENEGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to urgently address the housing needs of (details 
supplied) 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The applicant is currently on the Medical Priority Band of the Housing List with a 
registration date of 08/01/2013. Her position on the list, based on the priority awarded 
on 18/02/2024, is as follows:   
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
Area B 
           3 
          14 
 
Dublin City Council are allocating properties based on time on the list and currently 
there are applicants on the Waiting List of longer standing who have to be considered 
as suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list. 
 
Housing Allocations are very aware of the applicants case and are linking in with the 
Darndale area office to try to identify a suitable 3 bed. 
 
The applicant is advised to contact the Family Support Team (01 222 6977 or 
family.support@dublincity.ie ) ahead of her termination date to ensure that she has 
access to advice and supports in the event that she requires emergency 
accommodation or requires an eligibility assessment for Homeless HAP supports. 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website 
on the following link;  
 
https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/housing/i-rent-my-home/i-rent-city-council/choice-
based-lettings  
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household.  
 
Q.128  COUNCILLOR BARRY HENEGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the efforts and measures being 
undertaken to address water pollution and runoff issues from the Dublin Waste 
Treatment Plant into Dublin Bay. This information is crucial for assessing the 
environmental impact and ensuring the protection of this vital natural resource. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As the issues raised are a matter for Irish Water they should be referred directly to Irish 
Water.  Please call the telephone number on 0818 178 178 / 0818 578 578 and identify 
yourself as an Elected Representative. You will be put through to the Local 
Representative Support Desk in Irish Water’s Customer Contact Centre who will deal 
with you directly. Alternatively, there is a specific e-mail address at Irish Water for 
Councillors: LocalRepSupport@water.ie.  
The Local Representative Support Desk at Irish Water operates from 9.00am – 
5.30pm, Monday to Friday. The following are the contact details for Irish Water:  
   
Q.129  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm the total number of ‘uncommenced’ active 
planning permissions for residential development in the Dublin City Council area. Can 
this be broken down by number of planning permissions, total number of housing units 
and by DCC Administrative Area. Can the CE further confirm how many of these sites 
are currently under negotiation, either by DCC itself, an AHB or the LDA for purchase 
to deliver public housing? 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Due to the volume of records required, the Planning Department requires additional 
time to respond. The response will issue directly to Councillor Moriarty within two 
weeks.   
 
Q.130  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm the total number of DCC housing units that have 
single-glazed windows and the total amount that has double-glazed windows. Can that 
information please be categorized by house, flat or apartment and broken down by 
administrative DCC Area? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council Housing Maintenance (DCC-HM) is responsible for the 
maintenance and repair of approximately 29,000 dwellings, and approximately 10% of 
these have at least one singled-glazed window in the property at present. This estimate 
is based on stock condition data derived by Stock Condition Surveys coordinated out 
by the Housing Maintenance Department between 2018 and 2022. The figure has 
been further broken down by dwelling type (i.e., residential flat complex, individual 
house, and senior citizens complex) and by committee area in the table below. At 
present, DCC-HM is coordinating the replacement of single-glazed units at Davitt 
House Flats in Dublin 8 (circa 50 units) and at Oliver Bond House in Dublin 12 (circa 
200 units), with further plans to replace single-glazed windows in DCC’s social housing 
stock in 2025. 
 
No. dwellings with at least one single-glazed unit (Estimated figures based on 
existing Stock Condition Data) 
Area 
Units 
within 
Flat 
Complex 
Individual 
Houses 
Units 
within 
Senior 
Citizen 
Complex 
Total 
Central  
330 
235 
62 
627 
North Central 
2 
338 
3 
343 
North West 
- 
178 
- 
178 
South Central 
471 
709 
30 
1210 
South East 
380 
126 
58 
564 
 
1,183 
1,586 
153 
2922 
 
Q.131  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm the total number of DCC housing units that have 
been retrofitted and to break this down as follows: 
       The total number of houses that have been retrofitted to date and what this 
number represents as a proportion of the target for retrofitting; 
       The total number of apartments that have been retrofitted to date and what this 
number represents as a proportion of the target for retrofitting; 
       The total number of flats that have been retrofitted to date and what this number 
represents as a proportion of the target for retrofitting. 
 
 
 
Q.132  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 

To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the housing file of (details supplied) and 
the likely timeframe of when she will be reached with an offer of housing in her 
preferred area of Whitehall, DUBLIN 9. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing Transfer List with a welfare priority, with an 
application date of 09/02/2021, the applicant holds the following position on this list; 
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
E 
2 
12 
 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household.  
 
Q.133  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive to convene a meeting with the residents of Cromcastle 
Court flats, the regeneration project team and local councillors as soon as possible to 
discuss the planned regeneration of the complex. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Currently the redevelopment of Cromcastle Court & the Old Coalyard site is at design 
development stage. Once the design has been completed the next step is to 
commence the planning process. Similar, to all Housing Regeneration projects, 
consultation with the residents, local elected members and the community will form 
part of the pre-planning and Part 8 planning process.  
 
A project newsletter was issued to residents in April 2024, and a presentation was 
given to the Local Area Committee in May 2024. It is envisaged that further 
consultation, including an event where residents, and local councillors, will have an 
opportunity to see the proposals, and discuss these with the project team, will be 
arranged through the Local Housing Manager and her office shortly 
 
Q.134  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a timeline for the completion of the new 
playgrounds in Kilmore West and McAuley Park. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
It is anticipated that the contractors will be on site towards the end of August but a firm 
date and schedule that takes cognisance of the builders holidays has not been 
received.  Once this firm date and schedule has been agreed the Parks Service will 
share same with the committee. 
 
Q.135  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a timeline for the delivery of the new all-weather 
football facility to be located beside the Glin Sports Hall, Glin Road, Coolock, Dublin 
17. 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The anticipated time line is that the planning requirements will commence in 2024 with 
construction to commence towards the middle of 2025 depending on funding. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Organisation/Committee 
 
 
 
 
       
Membership Nos. 
 
1. 
Association of Irish Local Government  
Nominees: 
Emma Blain 
Dermot Lacey 
Daryl Barron 
 
 
3 
2. 
City of Dublin Education and Training Board  
Nominees: 
Declan Flanagan 
Colm O’Rourke 
Gayle Ralph 
Rory Hogan 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Carolyn Moore 
Dermot Lacey 
Vincent Jackson 
Jesslyn Henry 
Cat O’Driscoll 
Micheál MacDonncha 
 
12 
3. 
Commissioners of Irish Lights  
Nominees: 
Fiona Connelly 
Danny Byrne 
Donna Cooney 
 
3 & Ex-Officio  
4. 
Dublin City BID Company trading as Dublin Town  
Nominees: 
Ray McAdam 
Clare Byrne 
 
2 
5. 
Dublin City Council Cultural Company (Members of the Arts SPC) 
Nominees: 
Supriya Singh 
Cat O’Driscoll 
 
2 
6. 
Dublin City Gallery, The Hugh Lane (Board of)  
Nominees: 
John Stephens 
Gayle Ralph 
Fiona Connelly 
Carolyn Moore 
 
4 
7. 
Dublin City Leisure Services Company Ltd  
Nominees: 
Fiona Connelly 
Rory Hogan 
Pat Dunne 
 
3 
8. 
Dublin Mid-Leinster Regional Health Forum (South Side LEA’s) 
6 

Nominees: 
Anmar Ali 
Emma Blain 
Dermot Lacey 
Vincent Jackson 
Jen Cummins 
Máire Devine  
 
9. 
Dublin North East Regional Health Forum (North Side LEA’s) 
Nominees: 
John Stephens 
Supriya Singh 
Gayle Ralph 
Donna Cooney 
Christy Burke 
Deirdre Heney 
Cat O’Driscoll 
Edel Moran 
 
 
8 
10. Eastern & Midland Regional Assembly  
Nominees: 
Deirdre Heney 
Rory Hogan 
Danny Byrne 
Declan Flanagan 
Feljin Jose 
Dermot Lacy  
Micheál MacDonncha 
 
7 
11. Grangegorman Development Consultative Group  
Nominees: 
Janet Horner 
John Stephens 
 
2 
12. Irish Public Bodies Insurance 
Nominee: 
Keith Connolly 
 
1 
13. Little Museum of Dublin Limited (Board of)  
Nominees: 
Dermot Lacey 
 
1 & Ex-officio  
14. Local Authorities Members Association  
Nominee: 
Danny Byrne 
 
1 
15. Local Community Development Committee  
Nominees: 
John Stephens 
Carolyn Moore 
Supriya Singh 
 
3 
16. Local Travellers Accommodation Consultative Committee  
5 

(Members from the Ballymun/Finglas; Artane/Whitehall; South West 
Inner City and Ballyfermot-Drimnagh LEA’s) 
Nominees: 
Darragh Moriarty 
John Lyons 
Jen Cummins 
Ray Cunningham 
Anthony Connaghan 
 
17. National Maternity Hospital, Holles Street (Board of)  
Nominees: 
Emma Blain 
Cian Farrell 
 
2 & Ex-Officio 
18. Ringsend Toll Bridge Designated Activity Company (Members from 
South East and Central Area) 
Nominees: 
Christy Burke 
Clare Byrne 
 
2 
19. Rotunda Hospital (Board of)  
Nominee: 
Janet Horner 
 
1 & Ex-officio 
20. Royal Hospital, Donnybrook (Board of)  
Nominees: 
Dermot Lacey 
Rory Hogan 
 
2 
21. Royal Irish Academy of Music (Board of)  
Nominees: 
Emma Blain 
Cat O’Driscoll 
 
2 & Ex-officio  
22. Royal Victoria Eye and Ear Hospital (Board of) 
Nominee: 
Danny Byrne 
 
1 & Ex-officio 
23. City of Dublin Skin and Cancer Hospital Charity 
Ex-Officio 
24. St James’s Hospital Board (Members from Ballyfermot-Drimnagh & 
Kimmage-Rathmines LEA’s) 
Nominees: 
Patrick Kinsella 
Máire Devine  
 
2 
25. Dublin City Council Audit Committee  
Nominees: 
Nial Ring 
Naoise O’Muiri 
Daryl Barron 
 
3 
26. Dublin City Council Protocol Committee  
Nominees: 
Naoise O’Muiri 
16 & Ex-officio 

Ray McAdam 
Punam Rane 
Michael Pidgeon 
Ray Cunningham 
Dermot Lacey 
Fiona Connelly 
Cat O’Driscoll 
Catherine Stocker 
Connor Reddy  
Anthony Connaghan 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Deirdre Heney 
Daryl Barron 
Mannix Flynn 
Barry Heneghan 
 
27. Grangegorman Development Agency (*Ministerial appointment – 
currently Deborah Byrne) 
Nominee:  
Ray McAdam 
 
1 
28. Beaumont Hospital (Ministerial Appointment – North Central Area 
Committee member, currently Daryl Barron) 
Nominee: 
Rachel Batten 
1 
 

