Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 6 October 2025 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 1 Deireadh Fómhair 2025 i Seomra na 
Comhairle, Halla na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i 
láthair an tArdmheara Ray McAdam sa chathaoir 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Ammar Ali 
Daryl Barron 
Racheal Batten 
Emma Blain 
Janice Boylan 
Kevin Breen 
Noelle Brown 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Lesley Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
David Coffey 
Anthony Connaghan 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Ray Cunningham 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Daniel Ennis 
Cian Farrell 
Alison Field 
Declan Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
Deirdre Heney 
Jesslyn Henry 
Rory Hogan 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Feljin Jose 
Leslie Kane 
Kourtney Kenny 
Patrick Kinsella 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Ray McAdam 
Séamas McGrattan 
Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
Paddy Monahan 
Carolyn Moore 
Edel Moran 
Darragh Moriarty 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Colm O'Rourke 
Gavin Pepper 
Cieran Perry 
Michael Pidgeon 
Gayle Ralph 
Punam Rane 
Conor Reddy 
Nial Ring 
Aishling Silke 
Supriya Singh 
Karl Stanley 
Malachy Steenson 
John Stepehens 
Philip Sutcliffe 
Ciarán Ó Meachair 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Aidan Blighe 
Lorraine Brogan 
Elaine Butler 
Dermot Collins 
Barbara Dawson 
Dennis Keeley 
Yvonne Kelly 
Natalie Leonard 
Victor Leonov 
Chris Manzira 
Mick Mulhern 
Ronan O'Byrne 
Eileen Quinlivan 
 
 
 
 
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
Well wishes 
The Lord Mayor wished to publicly state and declare his full support, on behalf of the 
full Council, to Councillor Cat O’Driscoll, following the recent incident that she was 
involved in on Dorset Street. He affirmed that she is a valued colleague and a trusted 
representative of the constituents of Cabra Glasnevin, and that we stand with her. 
 

 
 
He further extended best wishes on behalf of the full council to Councillor Hazel Chu 
and her family following her recent cancer diagnosis and for the journey that lies 
ahead.  
 
In memoriam  
A minutes silence was observed for Kathleen Ahern, Sister of former Lord Mayors 
Bertie and Maurice Ahern, who recently passed away. 
 
Special Council Meeting  
The Lord Mayor confirmed to Members his intention to convene a Special Meeting to 
be held on Thursday 16th September, 2025 at 7.00 p.m. to consider the following: 
• 
Incorporation of the National Planning Framework (NPF) Housing Growth 
Requirements into the Dublin City Development Plan 2022 – 2028 
• 
Notice of Proposed Variation No. 9 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022 
– 2028 – Broombridge-Hamilton Masterplan 
• 
Consideration of the Urban Redevelopment Working Group Report and 
Roadmap 
 
Other updates 
The Lord Mayor referred to the Freedom of the City ceremony he held last month for 
President Barack Obama in line with the wishes of the City Council in February 2017. 
 
Last week he joined other Mayors for Housing Alliance in Brussels to meet President 
Anotonio Costa, along with the Mayors of Paris, Barcelona, Athens and Rome.  They 
spoke with President Costa where the Lord Mayor took the opportunity to argue that 
the European Commission needs to act with strong regulation on a European Wide 
basis on short term rentals, investment in modern methods of construction and direct 
support for cities and respective housing delivery.   
 
Congratulations 
The Lord Mayor congratulated the Dublin City Council Events who in conjunction with 
Fáilte Ireland won the 2025 IFEA World Festival and Event Cities in Palm Springs.  
 
Congratulations were also extended to the Dublin Fire Brigade Pipe Band on their 14th 
Anniversary.  He will shortly be inviting them into the Mansion House.  An invitation 
will be extended to members.  
 
Appointment of Senior Management 
The Lord Mayor advised Members of appointments of senior managers at Assistant 
Chief Executive and Executive Manager levels.  Correspondence advising of the new 
appointments including an updated organisational chart was circulated to members.  
 
 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Anthony 
Connaghan that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering 
the questions lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the  
questions lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and 
Answers are set out in Appendix A to these minutes. 
 
14 - 80 
 
3 
  Correspondence was received from the following Local Authorities; 
• 
Carlow County Council 
• 
Sligo County Council 
 

 
• 
Limerick City & County Council 
It was proposed by Councillor Declan Flanagan and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence listed. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
4 
  To confirm the minutes of the City Council Meeting held on 1st September 2025, the 
Special meeting held on 15th September and the Special meeting held on 23rd 
September 2025. 
 
The minutes of the City Council Meeting held on 1st September 2025, the Special 
meeting held on 15th September, and the Special meeting held on 23rd September 
2025. having been printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the 
Members and taken as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor. 
 
 
 
5 
  Vacancies:   
 
 
(a)   One Fianna Fáil vacancy on the Climate Action and Urban Resilience Strategic 
Policy Committee following the resignation of Councillor Deirdre Heney.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Councillor Rory Hogan be appointed to the 
Climate Action and Urban Resilience Strategic Policy Committee.  The motion 
was put an carried.  
 
 
 
(b)   The nomination of Elected Members to the Local Community Safety 
Partnerships in each of the five Local Administrative Areas of Dublin City 
Council.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cieran Perry and seconded by Councillor 
Vincent Jackson that the following elected members be nominated to the Local 
Community Safety Partnerships in each of the five Local Administrative Areas 
of Dublin City Council. The motion was put and carried. 
 
Dublin South Central 
Councillor Amar Ali, Councillor Daithí Doolan, Councillor Michael Pidgeon, 
Councillor Hazel De Noirtúin, Councillor Lesley Byrne, Councillor Darragh 
Moriarty, Councillor Vincent Jackson 
 
Dublin South East 
Councillor Kourtney Kenny, Councillor Danny Byrne, Councillor Rory Hogan, 
Councillor Hazel Chu, Councillor Dermot Lacey, Councillor Noelle Brown, 
Councillor Pat Dunne 
 
Dublin Central 
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam, Councillor Janet Horner, Councillor 
Cieran Perry, Councillor Gayle Ralph, Councillor Janice Boylan, Councillor 
John Stephens, Councillor Daniel Ennis 
 
Dublin North Central   
Councillor Supriya Singh, Councillor Donna Cooney, Councillor Aoibheann 
Mahon, Councillor Michael MacDonncha, Councillor Jesslyn Henry, Councillor 
Alison Field, Councillor John Lyons 
  
Dublin North West 
Councillor Keith Connolly, Councillor Mary Callaghan, Councillor Conor Reddy, 
Councillor Anthony Connaghan, Councillor Leslie Kane, Councillor Gavin 
 

 
Pepper 
 
 
6 
  Reports of the Chief Executive in compliance with the provisions of Section 179 of the 
Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning and 
Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) and in compliance with the provisions 
of the Local Government Act 2001:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 228/2025 of the Chief Executive (R.Shakespeare) - With reference 
to the Redevelopment/Repurposing of Saint Werburgh's Church, Werburgh 
Street, Dublin 8.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor 
Vincent Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
228/2025 and hereby approves the contents therein.  The motion was put and 
carried.  
  
 
 
(b)   Report No. 212/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - With reference 
to the provision of a section of link road linking to Ballyfermot Road continuing 
from the road frontage of the granted Housing Development at Cherry Orchard, 
Dublin 10.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No. 212/2025 and hereby approves the contents therein. The motion was put 
and carried.  
  
 
 
7 
  Disposal of Property:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 215/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (D. O`Connor) - With 
reference to Disposal of a site at the Former 5-7 Halston Street, Dublin 7 to 
Tuath Housing Association.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Declan Flanagan and seconded by Councillor 
Daryl Barron, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 
215/2025 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put 
and carried.   
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 220/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (D. O`Connor) -With 
reference to Disposal of a site at Arran Street East, Dublin 7, to the ESB 
Networks.  
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam  and seconded by 
Councillor Declan Flanagan, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of 
Report No 220/2025 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion 
was put and carried.   
  
 
 
(c)   Report No. 221/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (D. O`Connor) -With 
reference to Disposal of a plot of land to the rear of 28 Broadstone Avenue, 
Broadstone, Dublin 7.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor 
Deirdre Heney, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 
212/2025 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put 
and carried. 
  
 

 
 
 
 
8 
  Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 213/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (D. O`Connor) - With 
reference to Grant of a 3-year lease of the premises at Churchwell Gardens, 
Ayrfield, Belmayne, Dublin 13 to Kilmore West Youth Project CLG.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Jesslyn Henry and seconded by Councillor 
Donna Cooney, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 
213/2025 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put 
and carried.   
  
 
 
(b)   Report No. 217/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (D. O`Connor) - With 
reference to Grant of a Short-Term Business Letting of a ground floor unit at 
the Ballyfermot Civic Centre, Ballyfermot Road, Dublin 10 to Dublin South 
Citizens Information Service. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No 217/2025 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put 
and carried.   
 
It was raised by Councillor Vincent Jackson that there are serious issues with 
this building and costly maintenance is needed on building that is not 20 years 
old yet.  The Lord Mayor requested that a report on exactly what are the issues 
with the building be circulated to members of the South Central Area 
Committee.   
  
 
 
(c)   Report No. 218/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (D. O`Connor) - With 
reference to Grant of a 10-year lease of Unit 1.2, Block 1, New Priory, Hole in 
the Wall Road, Dublin 13 to Carlisle Consult Construct Limited.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Declan Flanagan and seconded by Councillor 
Daryl Barron, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 
218/2025 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put 
and carried.   
  
 
 
(d)   Report No. 219/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (D. O`Connor) - With 
reference to Grant of 10-year lease of Unit 2, Block 19, New Priory, Hole in the 
Wall Road, Dublin 13 to Bersau Limited.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Declan 
Flanagan, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 219/2025 
and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
9 
  Disposal of Fee Simple:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 195/2025 of the Executive Manager (F. D'Arcy) - With reference to 
the Disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and Tenant 
(Ground Rents) (No. 2) Act, 1978.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor 
Vincent Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
195/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
 

 
put and carried. 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 216/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (D. O`Connor) - With 
reference to Disposal of the Fee Simple in No. 1 North Circular Road, Dublin 7.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Declan Flanagan and seconded by Councillor 
Cat O’Driscoll, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 
216/2025 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put 
and carried.   
  
 
 
(c)   Report No. 222/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (D. O`Connor) - With 
reference to Disposal of the Fee Simple & a right of way in a laneway to the 
rear of at 47-53 Keeper Road, Crumlin, Dublin 12 to Teabrook Ltd.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Pat Dunne and seconded by Councillor Conor 
Reddy, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 222/2025 and 
assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried.   
  
 
 
(d)   Report No. 223/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - With reference  
to the Disposal of the Council's Fee Simple interest in the property known as 
106 Sundrive Road, Dublin 12.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Declan Flanagan and seconded by Councillor 
Vincent Jackson, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 
223/2025 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put 
and carried.   
  
 
 
(e)   Report No. 224/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (D. O`Connor) - With 
Reference to the disposal of the Council's Fee Simple interest in the site at 144 
Harmonstown Road, Artane, Dublin 5, to The Harmonstown Partnership.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Declan Flanagan and seconded by Councillor 
Jesslyn Henry, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 
224/2025 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put 
and carried.   
  
 
 
(f)   Report No. 225/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (D. O`Connor) - With 
reference to the Disposal of the Council's Fee Simple interest in the property 
known as 41 Drury Street, Dublin 2.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor 
Declan Flanagan, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 
225/2025 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put 
and carried.   
  
 
 
(g)   Report No. 227/2025 of the of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (D. O`Connor) - 
With reference to the Disposal of the Council’s Fee Simple interest in 116 
Sundrive Road, Crumlin, Dublin 12, to Capital Credit Union Limited.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor 
Declan Flanagan, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 
227/2025 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put 
and carried.   
  
 
 

 
 
 
 
10   Report No. 207/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Housing Supply 
& Delivery Monthly Update. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by 
Councillor Séamus McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No. 207/2025. The motion was put and carried. 
 
The Lord Mayor informed members of the new approach that will be taken with this 
report going forward. High level issues on Housing Supply will be dealt with under the 
Housing Supply & Delivery Report (Item 10 on Agenda).  Area specific housing reports 
will be provided to Area Committees from November, and local issues on particular 
properties, projects or complexes will be dealt with by attending officials at Area 
Committee meetings.  
 
 
 
11   Report No 198/2025 of the Director of Hugh Lane Gallery (B. Dawson) - Hugh Lane 
Gallery Strategic Plan 2025-2029. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Jesslyn Henry and seconded by Councillor Fiona 
Connelly, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 198/2025.  The 
motion was put and carried.   
Barbara Dawson, Director of the Hugh Lane Gallery provided a presentation to 
members on the Hugh Lane Strategic Plan.  A copy of the presentation can be found 
attached to these minutes in Appendix B.  
  
81 - 89 
 
12   Report No. 209/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (D. Collins) - Quarterly Report 
of the Active Travel Programme Office. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 209/2025.  The 
motion was put and carried.   
 
 
 
13   Report No. 210/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (D. Collins) - Quarterly Report 
of the Traffic Department. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 210/2025.  The 
motion was put and carried.   
 
The Lord Mayor vacated the Chair to Councillor Patrick Kinsella at 20.35p.m. and 
returned to the chamber at 20.47 p.m. 
 
 
 
14   Report No. 208/2025 of the A/Executive Manager (C. Manzira) - Notification under 
Section 138 Local Government Act, 2001 intention to proceed with the upgrade of the 
Clontarf Road Bus Stop No. 1724. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Conor 
Reddy that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 208/2025.  The 
motion was put and carried.   
 
 
 
15   Report No. 230/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Annual Financial 
Statements 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
 

 
Séamus McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes Report No. 230/2025 and adopts 
the Annual Financial Statements as outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
16   Report No.197/2025 of the A/Head of Finance (V. Leonov) - Consideration by the 
Audit Committee of the Audited Annual Financial Statement (AFS). 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Séamus 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 197/2025.  The 
motion was put and carried.   
 
 
 
17   Report No. 229/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Audit Report of the 
Annual Financial Statement 2024 (AFS). 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Séamus 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 229/2025.  The 
motion was put and carried.   
 
 
 
18   Report No. 231/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Temporary Overdraft 
Accommodation on Capital and Revenue Accounts from 1st January - 31st Dec 2026. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council consents to the continuation of the same value of 
borrowing by way of temporary overdraft or other short-term borrowing arrangements 
up to a maximum of €80 million for the period 1st January 2026 to 31st December 
2026 as outlined in report 231/2025 subject to the sanction of the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage to this borrowing. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
19   Report No. 206/2025 of the A/Head of Finance (V. Leonov) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement and Reports as submitted under the EU/IMF Framework. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor Declan 
Flanagan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 206/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
20   Report No. 205/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Janice Boylan and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 205/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
21   Report No. 203/2025 of the Area Committees - Minutes of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of July 2025. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
203/2025. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
22   Report No. 226/2025 of the Mobility and Public Realm Strategic Policy Committee - 
Minutes of the meeting held on 28th May, 2025, Councillor Janet Horner, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council adopts Report No. 226/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 

 
23   Report No. 204/2025 of the Economic Development and Enterprise Strategic Policy 
Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on 13th May 2025, Councillor Rachel Batten, 
Chairperson. 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
204/2025. The motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
24   Report No 232/2025 of the Housing Social Inclusion Strategic Policy Committee - 
Minutes of the meeting held on 17th June 2025, Councillor Deirdre Heney, 
Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
232/2025. The motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
25   Report No. 233/2025 of the Community, Gaeilge, Sports, Arts & Culture Strategic 
Policy Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on 26th May 2025, Councillor Darragh 
Moriarty, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
233/2025. The motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
26   Report No. 234/2025 of the Climate Action and Urban Resilience Strategic Policy 
Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on 28th May 2025, Councillor Declan 
Flanagan, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
234/2025. The motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
27   Report No. 194/2025 of the Protocol Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on the 
26th June 2025, Councillor Ray McAdam, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 
194/2025. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
28   Report No. 211/2025 of the Protocol Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on the 
4th September 2025, Councillor Deirdre Heney, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 
211/2025. The motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
29   Topical Issues 
 
No topical issues were submitted for consideration. 
 
 
 
30   Motions on Notice 
 
Motion no 1. in the name of Cllr Hazel De Nortuin –  
 
That this Council calls for a more collaborative approach to be adopted in the delivery 
of large-scale developments within our LEAs. No allocations should be made until 
 

 
there is clarity on (a) who will fund the necessary infrastructure, and (b) who will 
manage the 5% community and arts facilities required under the Dublin City Council 
Development Plan.  
At present, these facilities remain unused in many developments despite full 
residential occupancy. 
 
Where the number of units acquired by DCC, or by an AHB on behalf of DCC, 
exceeds 75 units, the Housing Manager shall meet with the local housing team/Area 
Office and relevant community and statutory services to ensure that adequate 
planning is in place to meet the needs of the expanded community. This is in line with 
the recommendations of the LECP. 
Recognising that Ballyfermot has already been identified as an area of significant 
development, this Council requests that the Manager commits to providing an 
immediate response in this area, and to applying the same approach consistently 
across Dublin City. 
 
It was agreed to forward this motion to the Housing and Social Inclusion Housing SPC 
and the Community Gaeilge Sports Arts and Culture SPC for further discussion and 
agreement 
 
Motion No. 2 in the name of Cllr. Conor Reddy and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam:  
 
That this Council is deeply concerned by the continuing rise in homelessness both in 
our city and across the country. Homelessness has more than doubled over the past 
decade, and worryingly, there has been a sharp rise in the number of children and 
young people without secure homes, a situation that has damaging, long-lasting 
effects on health, education, and general wellbeing. 
 
Over the past year, the number of families in emergency accommodation in the Dublin 
region has risen by 11 percent. This increase, alongside the collapse of several PPP 
social housing bundles and the effective shut-down of the Tenant in Situ scheme, 
shows a worrying lack of ambition from central government to prevent and exit people 
from homelessness. Local authorities like ours have not been given the resources we 
need to meet the challenge effectively.  
 
This Council will write to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, 
calling on him to ensure that: 
• 
Councils are given the funds and powers to purchase any and all homes 
needed to prevent evictions. This must include a substantial increase in the 
Tenant in Situ scheme’s budget. 
• 
Social and affordable housing makes up at least 20% of total housing stock, in 
line with the Housing Commission Report recommendation. 
• 
An immediate moratorium is reinstated on “no-fault” evictions to stem the flow 
of people into homelessness.  
• 
Expand and fully fund Housing First so that at least 750 new tenancies are 
delivered each year with wraparound supports, as part of meeting Ireland’s 
commitment under the Lisbon Declaration to end homelessness by 2030. 
Staff-client ratios should be in keeping with international best practice, lower 
than has been seen in Housing First so far in Dublin City. 
• 
A successor Youth Homelessness Strategy is implemented from January 1, 
2026, complete with clear actions, deadlines, and genuine consultation with 
young people. 
• 
Those working in homeless services must be supported - pay parity for section 
10, 39 and 56 workers is essential to quality service provision. 

 
• 
Care-leavers who are homeless or at risk of homelessness are given clear 
priority for housing by local authorities, regardless of their age, past placement 
type or current engagement with Aftercare services. This is not a call for 
priority for all care-leavers, it is a call for priority for those who are homeless or 
at risk of homelessness, in recognition of the life-long impact of engagement 
with the Care system. 
• 
The State should begin to shift away from reliance on private emergency 
accommodation and move towards a fully-public model with stronger oversight, 
better funding and less strain on local authorities. 
• 
Resources and legislation to provide intervention at the earliest possible stage 
to prevent family homelessness. The recently announced €50 million allocation 
to help families exit long-term homelessness is pitifully low given the scale of 
the crisis and must be significantly increased. 
 
This Council also calls on Dublin City Council and DRHE management to: 
• 
Increase resourcing to Social Work, to relieve pressure on social workers and 
to ensure faster, fairer processing of Exceptional Social Grounds Applications.  
• 
Increase resourcing for case management to ensure households in emergency 
accommodation 
receive 
more 
support 
- 
households 
in 
emergency 
accommodation should receive timely support from case managers, who must 
be adequately resourced and not overstretched. 
• 
Improve the collection and publication of homelessness data, including data on 
youth homelessness, Section 2 assessments (numbers to include: emergency 
accommodation allocations, refusals, support services offered) and deaths in 
homelessness. 
• 
Publish quarterly reports on youth homelessness and submit them to the 
Housing and Social Inclusion Strategic Policy Committee for oversight. 
• 
Work with the Housing and Social Inclusion SPC to draft allocation procedures 
that give long-term homeless households priority for permanent housing. 
 
This motion was agreed with a caveat that the element mentioning Care -leavers who 
are homeless is not agreed as this is currently under discussion as part of the Scheme 
of Letting Priorities Review and will be addressed through this process.  
 
Motion No. 3 was agreed in the name of Cllr Supriya Singh and seconded by 
Cllr. Daryl Barron 
 
That this Dublin City Council acknowledges the rapid residential growth in Belmayne 
and Clongriffin and the increasing demand for essential community infrastructure. 
While significant housing developments have taken place, the provision of vital 
amenities such as community hubs, parks, schools, and sports facilities has not kept 
pace, placing undue strain on existing resources. 
 
With thousands of additional housing units still in development, this Council calls for a 
legislative requirement ensuring that no further residential developments in the area 
are approved unless infrastructure for essential amenities is incorporated into the 
design and formally approved as part of the planning process. 
 
Furthermore, this Council urges Dublin City Council to prioritize the immediate 
development of a fully funded, large-scale community hub and sports Centre on 
available land near Clongriffin Dart station or around the area. Such facilities are 
crucial to fostering a balanced, sustainable, and high-quality living environment for 
both current and future residents. Failure to address this infrastructural shortfall risks 
creating an unsustainable urban landscape that lacks the necessary services to 
support a growing population. Therefore, I call for immediate legislative and policy 

 
measures to ensure that future development is contingent upon adequate community-
supportive infrastructure. 
The motion was put and carried.  
 
31   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
Emergency Motion No. 1 in the name the Sinn Fein Group – taken without 
debate 
That Dublin City Council condemns the attacks by Israel on civilians and human rights 
activists including Irish citizens participating in the Global Sumud Flotilla, seeking to 
deliver aid to the beleaguered and starving population of Gaza; 
demands that: 
— the Israeli government immediate releases all the Irish citizens held in custody and 
allows their safe passage home 
-no action is taken by Israel that endangers the welfare or safety of peaceful Irish 
citizens and other human rights activists aboard the Global Sumud Flotilla; 
— international law is respected at all times and underlines that any activity targeting 
civilians or humanitarian workers is a breach of international law; and 
— Israel completely and immediately lifts its blockade and allows the full resumption of 
humanitarian aid into and throughout Gaza at scale; 
further condemns: 
— the ongoing actions of the current Israeli government which have led to an 
unconscionable genocide in Gaza where a manmade famine has been declared; and 
— the escalation of the Israeli military offensive in Gaza which will only lead to further 
bloodshed and suffering; and 
further demands: 
— an immediate ceasefire, the immediate and unconditional release of all hostages by 
Hamas, and immediate and unimpeded humanitarian access at scale into Gaza; and 
— parties engage in a political pathway to resolve this brutal conflict on the basis of 
implementation of the two State solution and the New York Declaration. 
 
The motion was put by Councillor Daithí Doolan and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson. The Lord Mayor agreed to write to the Taoiseach, Tánaiste, and Minister for 
Defence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
  

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY 6th 
OCTOBER 2025 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the number of people requiring wheelchair 
liveable housing currently on DCC's housing list by area; their positions on the list; the 
number of UD Home+ units being delivered in each area this year and every year up 
to 2028. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please find below figures as requested -  
 
Bedsize Required
Area B   
Area D   Area E  Area H   Area J  Area K   Area L   Area M  Area N  Grand Total
Grand Total
26
8
9
4
5
9
5
5
3
74
 
 
 
Across our current Housing Regeneration programme, the following UD+ homes have 
been granted planning permission and are due for delivery as per below:   
 
Project 
Area 
Due 
for 
Delivery 
Number of 
UD+ 
homes 
proposed  
St Finbars Court, 
Dublin 7 
Central 
Area 
Completing 
in Q3 2025 
2 
Dorset 
Street, 
Dublin 1 
Central 
Area 
2026  
8 
St Annes Court, 
Dublin 5 
North 
Central 
Area 
2028  
6 
St Andrew’s Court, 
Dublin 2 
South 
East 
2028  
3 
Glover 
Court, 
Dublin 2 
South 
East 
2028 
1 
 
 
The AHB section will review previous years delivery 2022 – 2024 and revert to the Cllr 
with further detail on these units.    
 
 
HB UD delivery 2025 - 2028  
 
On nomination or during the construction phase many of these units will be individually 
adapted to accommodate specific households on the waiting lists with particular needs. 
 
Year  
No UD 
Scheme 
Area 
2025 
28 
Richmond Avenue 
Central  
 
62  
Bethany House 
South East 
 
78 
Parkside 
North Central 
2026 
32 
Parkview 
North West 

 
52 
Millwood Court 
North Central 
 
42 
Philipsburgh Avenue 
North Central 
2027 
35 
Marrowbone Lane 
South Central 
 
19 
Broombridge 
Central 
 
30 
Clonmacnoise 
South East 
 
47 
Gulistan Terrace 
South East 
 
40 
Jamestown Court 
South Central 
 
7 
Meridian Court 
Central 
 
38 
Orchard Road 
Central 
2028 
86 + 
6UD+ 
Sillogue (11&13) 
North West 
 
26 
Ravensdale  
South East 
 
59 
Thatch Rd 
North Central  
 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the proposed all-weather football facility 
on the Glin Road and the convening of a meeting with public representatives and 
local football club representatives as soon as possible in September. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area office is awaiting results of a topographical survey and a GPR survey on this 
green space. I would expect to receive results of these surveys over the coming days 
and will then reply directly to the Councillor. All things going well I hope to appoint a 
consultant for the project and move directly to a meeting with clubs and public 
representatives. 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he could outline some basic facts about Housing in 
Dublin City: 
1. How many people in total are on the City Council Allocations and Transfer 
Lists 
2. How many Units does Dublin City Council own 
3. How many units are owned by Approved Housing Bodies that are available to 
Dublin City Council 
4. How many new Housing units were opened by Dublin City Council in 2024 
5. How many new Units are Dublin City Council likely to open in 2025 
6. How many new units are likely to be made available through AHBs over the 
course of 2025 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
1.The following is the total number of applicants currently on the Waiting Lists  
 
Housing List Total 
Transfer List Total 
Combined Total 
14544 
16926 
31470 
 
2.Dublin City Council owns 29400 properties. 

 
3. As of 31st August 2025, there are 8,962 AHB owned units in the Dublin City Council 
Area. These properties become available to DCC for nomination as vacancies arise.  
 
4. Socia homes delivered in 2024  
- 130 homes via Part V 
- 256 homes via DCC delivery, Turnkey and Buy&renew 
- 583 homes via AHB social housing   
 
5. Page 6 of the Housing Supply Reports (link below) provides information on the 
number of social and affordable homes projected for delivery by DCC, AHB and via 
Part V for 2025 
 
https://councilmeetings.dublincity.ie/documents/s50026/207.%20Housing%20Supply
%20Report%20October.pdf 
 
6.The AHB sector is on target to deliver 1,400 social housing units during 2025 in the 
Dublin City Council Area. This includes CALF and CAS construction and turnkey 
projects and AHB acquisitions for homeless exits.    
 
 
Q.4 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a full update on the proposed upgrade of 
cycle lanes along the N2, Finglas Road, from Phibsborough to Finglas village. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The cycle lanes along the N2 (Finglas Road), from Phibsborough to Finglas village, 
will be upgraded through Bus Connects and will be part of the Ballymun/Finglas to City 
Centre Core Bus Corridor (CBC) which is being delivered by the NTA.  
The planned upgrades include continuous segregated cycle tracks in both directions 
along the CBC, including between Finglas Village and Hart’s Corner in Phibsborough. 
The Core Bus Corridor Scheme received planning approval from An Bord Pleanála in 
March 2024.  
The scheme was tendered under a NEC4 Engineering and Construction Contract 
(Option C) Design and Build contract and will shortly be awarded to the successful 
candidate. 
The NTA expects to begin construction early in the CBC sequence (2026). The plan is 
for all 12 core bus corridors to be completed by 2030.  
A dedicated email address has been set up for public reps for the core bus corridors  
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a school safety zone to be installed along 
the old Finglas Road adjacent to St. Brigid’s GNS and St. Mary’s secondary school. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
St. Brigid’s GNS is an applicant to the NTA’s Safe Routes to School programme. As 
an adjacent school, St. Mary’s was included in the process. The Sustainable Mobility 
team held multiple meetings with both principals and shared draft designs for their 
School Zone. Unfortunately, these designs, which included narrowing the carriageway 
with footpath extensions and bike lanes, were rejected by St. Brigid’s Board of 
Management. The NTA would not fund works that did not narrow the carriageway and 
so no agreement could be reached, and no School Zone infrastructure was installed.  
 

Q.6  
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
Requesting an update on the housing file of (Details Supplied) and for serious 
consideration to be given to the Choice Based Letting applications she makes on 
behalf of her young family for a new family home, particularly the new homes at Chanel 
Manor Coolock Village.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Transfer list in receipt of Homeless Hap with an 
application date of 7/06/2018, the applicant holds the following position on this list. 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
2 
333 
E 
2 
407 
H 
2 
166 
 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
The Choice Based Letting for Chanel Manor closed on 22nd August, the Vacancies 
team are currently working through the application for selection.  
 
All applicants will be contacted directly by a member of the Vacancies team.  
 
 
Q.7 
COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
In March of this year, I submitted a question about a local business (Details 
Supplied) which was in breach of its planning permission. This breach has been 
ongoing for several years. The reply at the time said there had been further 
engagement with the owners, but this engagement has not yielded results. My 
question is, how long does this “engagement” have to continue before legal action is 
taken to remedy the situation? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Despite efforts to resolve this matter through engagement with the owners/operators 
of the premises the condition relating to the abatement of noise from the premises has 
not been complied with to date. The Planning Enforcement Section is currently 
initiating legal proceedings relating to non-compliance with the requirements contained 
in the enforcement notice served relating to this premises. It is hoped that this will 
ultimately lead to a resolution in this matter. 
 
Q.8 
COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
To ask the Chief Executive if it would be possible to open a library in Chapelizod – 
even a junior library to serve the schools in the village. There are several council-
owned properties in the village that could potentially host a library.  
 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We have no plans to open a library in Chapelizod. The village is well served by 
Ballyfermot Library, which is located just 1km away and provides a full range of 
services to local residents, including children and schools.  
 
In addition, we have a lot of targeted engagement through a number of programmes, 
including: 
 
• 
Outreach Collection placed in the Maryfield Nursing Home, Chapelizod (Sept 2022) 
• 
Storytime, Craft Sessions, and Pop-Up Library for the children of St. Michael's Special 
School Chapelizod as part of Ireland Reads Day 2024. Highly successful three-day 
event. The children who attend St. Michael's find it very difficult to attend events outside 
the school. We have maintained contact with the school. 
• 
Our Storyteller in Residence visited St. Michael's in March 2024. 
• 
Ballyfermot Library runs the Storytime Project with the Ballyfermot/Chapelizod 
Partnership. The Storytime Project introduces families to the importance of literacy for 
younger children. The Ballyfermot/Chapelizod Partnership connects local Early 
Learning Centres with the library. DCCL provides the reading materials. [There's a 
similar operation in Coolock Library with the Northside Partnership.] 
• 
All primary schools in the Chapelizod area visited Ballyfermot Library in 2024. These 
include St. Laurence's N.S. (Chapelizod) and St. Patrick's N.S. (As mentioned, LITC 
visited St. Michael's Special School.) 
• 
Not related to children, but LITC has an on-going relationship with St. Mary's Hospital 
in the Phoenix Park with regular visits and events. 
 
 
Q.9  
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a yellow box at the junction of Ratoath 
Avenue and Ratoath Road. There are times when cars can’t enter or exit at this 
junction due to traffic build up. There is a yellow box at entrance to Dunsoghly Estate 
further up Ratoath Road which assists people entering and exiting this estate. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7048147) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group. 
 
 
Q.10 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a complete review of traffic measures on 
Ballygall Road East where double yellow lines have been placed and are creating 
dangerous driving situations for vehicles driving along this stretch of road, near the 
bend towards Finglas village. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref : 7048148) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
 
 

Q.11  COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if an illegal dumping issue at Blackpitts can be 
investigated (details supplied) 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services had the skip bag removed from the above-mentioned 
location on the 17th September 2025 
 
Q.12 
COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if a traffic management plan has been produced for the 
vicinity of the National Children’s Hospital. If not, when will be produced. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Transportation Planning Division Response: 
 
The Strategic Infrastructure Development (SID) application to An Bord Pleanala (now 
An Coimisiun Pleanala) for the National Children’s Hospital included upgrade works to 
the James’s Street and Rialto entrances/junctions which have now been undertaken. 
It also included bus only vehicular movements as a through route across the campus. 
Other measures included in the planning permission comprise management and 
control of access to the car parks through signage and internal car park management. 
The application documentation including the decision can be viewed on An Coimisiun 
Pleanala’s website. See link below. 
 
PA0043 | An Coimisiún Pleanála - 
 
Externally, the Liffey Valley Bus Connects Scheme is underway. This runs along 
Jame’s Street, and the Active Travel Office are progressing a scheme along the 
SCR/Rialto boundary of the campus. 
 
 
Active Travel Programme Office response: 
 
As noted above the Liffey Valley Bus Connects scheme interacts with the North East 
junction of the St. James’s Hospital campus.  The Active Travel Scheme Kilmainham 
to Ballsbridge South City Loop runs past the St. James’s Hospital campus junction with 
the South Circular Road.  ATN Map 
 
The Active Travel Programme Office has a number of Scheme’s planned that would 
provide connectivity the St. James’s Hospital campus.  The Kilmainham to Thomas 
Street (Interim Scheme) which finishes at the junction of St. James’s Walk and Rialto 
Bridge is complete. The remainder of the Kilmainham to Thomas Street scheme is in 
design with the main scheme programmed to start on site in Q1 of 2027. The Suir 
Road Junction upgrade as part of Kilmainham to Thomas Street is programmed to 
begin construction Q2 2026.   
 
The section of the Kilmainham to Ballsbridge South City Loop - Brookfield Rd / SCR 
junction, that will connect the western entrance of the hospital to the Kilmainham to 
Thomas Street Scheme is programmed to begin construction Q1 2026 with completion 
in Q2 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 

Q.13  COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if consideration can be given to traffic issues on 
Kilmainham Lane. Namely, a request from residents for Kilmainham Lane to become 
a one-way system, with no access from the South Circular Road direction. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Transport Advisory Group (TAG) does not recommend a one-way system on 
Kilmainham Lane with no entry from South Circular Road as this would inconvenience 
residents and present difficulties to emergency services accessing the location, 
including the adjacent Garda Station. Furthermore, the removal of two-way traffic will 
likely lead to an increase in vehicular speeds in the remaining westbound direction that 
traffic would be permitted to travel. The TAG Area Engineer will assess the location for 
possible improvements to the traffic situation. 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive, that a date be provided Details Supplied  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance can confirm that the windows will be ready for installation by the         
end of September 2025. The tenant will be contacted directly to schedule an 
appointment for the commencement of works 
 
Q.15  COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive, if Harold Road Dublin 7 will be resurfaced this year? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 Harold Road will be considered for inclusion in 2026’s carriageway works programme.  
 
Q.16  COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive, that the traffic warden section agree to put in place a traffic 
warden at the infants Scholl Marlborough St to assist infants who attend school after 
9:am each morning and to assist infants when departing the school in the afternoon 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The school warden service is provided for older primary children who are 
unaccompanied, generally from 2nd class up. Children in junior classes must be 
accompanied by an adult when leaving the school premises. 
 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive, if the traffic department have any plans to install traffic 
calming on both sides of Summerhill 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Transport Advisory Group will be conducting a speed survey on Summerhill, for 
a week for 24 hours per day. 
 
When TAG receive the results of the speed survey, the team will make further 
assessments of the road. 
 
Any illegal or irresponsible driver behaviour, such a joy riding, is a matter for An 
Garda Síochána for enforcement and should be reported to the Gardaí. 
 
The proposed ‘Fairview to Parnell’ Active Travel project is currently at preliminary 
stage and is expected to begin construction in 2028. This project will require the re-

design of Summerhill Road and the re-design of the junction between Summerhill 
and Gardener Street Middle. 
 
Q.18  COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive to review the road layout and surface on Jame’s Street, 
Dublin 8 and the hazards it has created for cyclists. Could DCC implement necessary 
changes to improve road safety. (Details Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A contractor appointed on behalf of Dublin City Council, Road Maintenance Services, 
has carried out a repair of the carriageway between the rail and the kerb in the past 
two weeks.  
 
This is an interim solution to improve conditions for cyclists pending construction of the 
Bus Connects scheme. We are aware that a Contractor has been appointed by the 
National Transport Authority for the Liffey Valley to City Centre Bus Connects scheme 
which will include a redesign of this section of road. 
 
 
Q.19  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full statement in response to the recent 
criticism of Dublin City Council by An Taoiseach in relation to zoning and housing 
matters. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Chief Executive notes the recent commentary by An Taoiseach in relation to 
zoning and housing matters generally and in particular with reference to the need for 
Dublin City Council to urgently increase the supply of land zoned for housing. 
 
The Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage on 29th July issued 
Guidelines under Section 28 of the Planning and Development Act (2000) (as 
amended) to provide new housing growth requirements to planning authorities. 
Thereafter, the Minister wrote to Lord Mayor McAdam on Monday 11th August advising 
that Dublin City Council should now commence the process of revising and varying the 
development plan against the new housing growth requirements as quickly as possible 
to ensure that the new growth requirements are reflected in the City Plan, in 
accordance with the policies and objectives of the National Planning Framework. 
 
The Chief Executive notes that the Development plan is a statutory process, and the 
function of approving, making and varying policy is a reserved function of the elected 
members. This is subject to the existing statutory requirements with respect to 
prescribed timelines, public consultation and environmental assessment requirements. 
Noting statutory requirements, the Planning Department has already begun the 
process of expediting several projects under the current Development Plan to activate 
additional lands for future housing supply in recognition of the current challenges 
around housing delivery in the city. 
 
The Chief Executive issued Report No 199/2025 to elected members for discussion 
and noting at the City Council Meeting on Monday, 1st September. This report sets out 
Dublin City Council’s immediate strategic proposals to increase the supply of land 
zoned for housing, continuing to work collaboratively with elected members and in 
observance of existing statutory requirements. 
 
In summary, Report No 199/2025 sets out that the Planning Department has already 
commenced a review of existing Strategic Development and Regeneration Areas and 

a wider examination of zoned lands in the city in order to activate additional lands for 
housing supply. The report also clarified that work is also at an advanced stage in  
relation to the preparation of a regeneration masterplan at Glasnevin (Broombridge-
Hamilton Masterplan) with an estimated capacity of 8,500 units. The report additionally 
outlined that work is underway to bring forward draft variations to account for further 
housing capacity requirements beyond 2028 as per the Minister’s request. The report 
outlines that further details on all proposals will be bought to members as soon as 
possible. 
 
The work undertaken to date indicates that there is sufficient capacity within the 
existing Development Plan (2022-2028) core strategy on zoned and serviced housing 
land to meet the projected revised housing demand up to 2028. A planned variation of 
the Development Plan to incorporate the Broombridge-Hamilton Masterplan will 
provide the additional headroom capacity as required by the Guidelines in the 
immediate short term, in excess of the baseline housing growth requirements.  
 
The executive of Dublin City Council are committed to working closely with the 
members in the coming months to advance several projects under the current 
Development Plan to activate additional lands for future housing supply in recognition 
of the current challenges around housing delivery in the city.  
 
Dublin City Council is fully focused on housing delivery in the city and is proactively 
implementing the statutory Development Plan to facilitate increased housing capacity 
for the city. 
 
 
Q.20  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will conduct a review of the systems that led to the 
incredible delays in the opening of the Palmerston Park Tea Rooms - partially 
"opened " by the then Lord Mayor last November and still not open to the Public and 
if the Chief Executive the damaging reflection this has on the Council. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The event last November attended by the then Lord Mayor was not a formal opening, 
but a viewing arranged for councillors. The timing coincided with the departure of a 
councillor closely involved in the project, offering an opportunity to showcase progress 
to date. 
The Tea Rooms are leased through the Dublin City Council Property Department 
following standard commercial lease procedures. This process involves necessary 
legal steps and due diligence by both lessor and lessee, which takes time as queries 
and contractual issues are resolved.  
The Parks Department understand that the lease has now been finalised which will 
enable the operator to proceed with fit out works. Once these works are completed the 
lease will commence. 
 
 
Q.21  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will arrange for the severe mould and water entering 
(details supplied) under the windows in the sitting room to be examined and repairs 
carried out. 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance has completed an assessment, identified the necessary 
repairs and is currently working on a plan of works to address the issues. The tenant 
will be kept informed. 
 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report regarding the recent footpath and 
roadworks regarding safe crossing for students of the RCSI at the east end of York 
Street. This report to include a copy of all correspondence between the Royal 
College of Surgeons and DCC.  All decisions made by the Traffic Department and 
what person made these decisions? Confirmation of all financial contributions 
guaranteed or received by DCC from the RCSI.  What statutory process, if any, or 
non-statutory process that took place between the community at York Street, 
Whitefriar Street, Mercer Street, Dublin city Council and the RCSI that sought their 
consent for these works on York Street.   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following a request from the RCSI for traffic calming measures to assist the safe 
crossing of hundreds of students daily on York street, the Traffic department carried 
out an assessment. It was determined that a zebra crossing could be installed which 
due to the existing ramp meant that only minor works involving new tactiles and sign 
poles could be installed quickly and at low cost. This is similar to what was done on 
South William Street earlier this year. This traffic management measure was carried 
out under Section 38. 
 
Q.23  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report as to how the local community centre 
at York Street was handed over to one individual under the title ‘Whitefriar/Aungier 
Street Community Council’ without any due process to ascertain  
 
1. That this individual and the so called ‘community council’ were Garda vetted, 
were in compliance with employment law, had local involvement with the local 
community by way of democratic process.   
 
2. That the local community were informed that their community centre was being 
used by this entity and surely bearing in mind that the individuals involved live in 
the area, the issue of potential conflict of interest arises.   
 
Also, the issue of insurance and public liability.  At present there is a disposal to grant 
a 3-year lease to this entity.  Many in the local community are dismayed that such a 
lease is on offer.  The community have not been informed in relation to this matter.   
 
What is the criteria for such leases of community centres to individuals or entities? 
Surely, a thorough vetting and examination should take place before any such 
disposals are agreed. But what is more important here is that this entity is at present 
occupying spaces within the community centre and has been for quite some time 
without any formal agreement.  Surely, this is illegal and that no staff member of DCC 
can allow this?  
 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In 2023, the Whitefriar Aungier Street Community Council made enquiries with the 
South East Area Office to see if there was any community space available in the South 
East Inner City as their previous lease on a premises on Harcourt Street was coming 
to an end. I had visited their premises in Harcourt Street to get an overview of their 
activities in the area, namely, food distribution to families in need, homework club, after 
school, youth services etc.  
 
A full report on their activities was included in the Agenda for the South East Area 
Committee in September 2025.There was a small community space available in 
Mercer Street and the Whitefriar Aungier Street Community Council were keen to 
remain in the local area and this location suited their needs. It is a small community 
space and is not a community centre. A 12-month licence commenced on the 15th 
March 2023, and this was renewed in 2024. The Whitefriar Aungier Street Community 
Council provide a range of important services in the local area, and it is proposed to 
grant a 3-year letting for the use of this space. The S183 procedure does not apply in 
respect of a lease or licence of less than 12 months. 
 
The assessment and selection of community groups to use or occupy Council-owned 
properties is carried out by the instructing Council Department – in this case the local 
Area Office. Property Disposals becomes involved when a decision has been finalised 
and acts on instruction from the relevant department to proceed with a legal 
agreement. 
 
The Disposals Team’s role is to co-ordinate between the instructing Department, City 
Valuer's Office and the Law Department to ensure optimal use of Council-owned 
properties for local community needs, while protecting the Council’s property interests. 
 
Frequently, a group is granted a short-term licence which serves as an assessment or 
“trial” period. During this time, the group’s effectiveness on the ground or ability to 
adhere to the licence/lease terms is evaluated and may affect whether the 
arrangement is extended.  
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to call on An Garda Siochana to deal with the proliferation 
of drug dealing and criminality that is now taking place within the area of Aungier 
Street, Digg Street and Mercer Street.   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We liaise proactively with An Garda Siochana on a daily basis and have requested that 
they respond in relation to your query regarding the proliferation of drug dealing and 
criminality within the area of Aungier Street, Digges Street and Mercer Street. When I 
receive a response, I will revert to the Councillor. 
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report with regards to what properties DCC 
have taken in charge for the disgraced Peter McVerry trust?  Also, can the Chief 
Executive explain in detail all contract arrangements regarding procurement and 
service level contracts given by DCC to the Peter McVerry Trust?   
Can the Chief Executive give an update on the various investigations that are taking 
place into the Peter McVerry Trust and whether the Garda fraud squad have been 
informed of such investigations and their outcomes and findings.  
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In November 2023, Government approved, on an exceptional basis, funding of up to 
€15m to be paid to PMVT to ensure that services, including emergency 
accommodation, provided to many vulnerable people supported by PMVT could 
continue. One of the conditions of the funding was that the Minister reserved the right 
to recover the value of the exceptional funding provided, by way of transfer of assets, 
including unencumbered land/properties, by way of a creation of a second charge over 
an already encumbered property.  
 
Properties Already transferred to DCC Ownership: 
North Frederick Street: 12 x one-bedroom apartments requiring refurbishment   
Ashington: 1 residential property requiring refurbishment   
 
In Progress - PMVT Property Asset Transfer to DCC: 
 
DCC is in the process of accepting a transfer of 27 residential properties. This 
transaction is at closing stage and will compete in the coming weeks.  
 
Properties under assessment for transfer to DCC Ownership: 
 
DCC is examining other PMVT owned properties that may be suitable for transfer.  
 
The investigations into PMVT are the remit of the statutory regulators, the Charities’ 
Regulator and AHBRA.  
 
The article referred to the DRHE’s public notification that it was awarding a contract to 
PMVT until the National Housing First office’s tendering process for Housing First 
concludes. PMVT is the existing provider but as no entity applied for Lot 1 they are 
now out of contract. The DRHE requires continuity of service until Lot 1 is retendered 
and a successful tenderer awarded. The correct procedure to award a tender under 
Article 72 was followed.  
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
            To ask the Chief Executive to please provide, in tabular form by Administrative Area, 
the number of racist or anti-immigrant pieces of graffiti DCC has had to remove each 
year from 
 a) DCC/AHB housing properties 
 b) in the public domain from 2020-2025 YTD 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Service haven’t maintained records of anti-immigrant graffiti in previous years 
but the number of incidences would likely be similar for the past 3 years. 
 
2025 
South Central Area 
5 Incidents 
North West Area 
4 incidents 
South East Area 
6 Incidents 
Central Area 
None 

North Central Area 
None 
 
When dealing with the issue of graffiti, DCC’s priority is to remove the material in as 
timely a manner as possible; the aim in the case of racist or offensive graffiti is to have 
it cleaned within 48 hours. Depending on the situation and the scale of the graffiti itself, 
this may be done by DCC staff directly or by a contractor. Data relating to the type of 
graffiti is not captured and therefore the information requested by the councillor cannot 
be supplied.  
 
Housing Maintenance mobile caretaking team provides a graffiti removal service for 
Dublin City Council flat complexes (210). However, the specific content of graffiti 
removed is not formally documented as part of this process. 
 
 
 
 
Public Domain North West Area Ballymun and Finglas racist graffiti incidents from 
2020 to 2025, based on recorded data: 
Year 
Incidents 
2020 
0 
2021 
1 
2022 
1 
2023 
0 
2024 
10 
2025 
4 
 
Observations: 
• 
There was no reported racist graffiti in 2020 and 2023. 
• 
The number spiked significantly in 2024 (10 incidents). 
• 
2025 shows a decrease (4 incidents), but it's still higher than previous years before 
2024. 
 
Waste Management Section do not remove graffiti from DCC Housing complexes or 
properties, and we have no information on these details. 
 
Within the public domain it is not possible to provide historical data on the numbers or 
areas where racist or anti - immigrant graffiti was reported or removed as this 
information was not recorded separately prior to the introduction of the Citizen Hub 
facility in 2022. Even within this facility it is not possible to categorise reports under 
these two headings.  When reporting graffiti through the citizen hub the public is simply 
asked to identify if in their opinion the graffiti is offensive, political or racist. This is a 
single heading and the report is not broken down under any more specific categories. 
Graffiti reported under this heading is given priority by the area offices and within waste 
management itself and we endeavour to remove it as quickly as possible. 
 
Since the citizen hub went live in Oct 2022 with graffiti reports we have received a total 
of 3265 graffiti reports of which 1303 were designated by those persons who reported 
them as offensive, political or racist. 
 
The table below gives additional information on where these 1303 reports were located 
on an area by area basis. Please note that Waste Management designated areas are 

not exactly the same as electoral boundaries of those areas although they are broadly 
similar. 
 
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
            To ask the Chief Executive to please provide an update on the delivery of a community 
amenity at Bridgefoot Street Court. A letter of promise to deliver fully designed and 
fitted out community space was shared in July 2023. That was over two years ago and 
the need for this community space has only grown during that period. Can the Chief 
Executive please provide an update on when this project will be delivered and the 
timeline for delivery of same? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The proposed community facility is in a shell and core condition and requires 
substantial fit out works. The current status is that as the proposed works are in excess 
of €500,000 approval from the DCC Corporate Project Support Office is required.  An 
estimate of costing is needed as part of the CPSO application.  Quantity Surveyors 
have been requested to engage a consultant from the QS Framework to carry out this 
piece of work. On receipt of approval from CPSO to proceed with the project, a design 
team will be engaged to draw up detailed design drawings and a procurement process 
will then be initiated to engage a contractor to carry out the works.  It is difficult to 
estimate when the project will be delivered but it is anticipated this will be within two 
years. 
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
            To ask the Chief Executive what action DCC will take with regard to the erection of 
illegal gates at the Grand Canal Harbor development. The erection of these gates have 
been subject to planning enforcement infringement proceedings. The gates were not 
shown on the original planning application. The original planning application made a 
virtue of the openness and permeability of the development. Rather than building what 
was set out in the planning permission, the developer has created yet another gated 
community in the Liberties. Instead of complying with planning enforcement 
proceedings, the owner sought an extension to the period within which they were to 
comply. That extension period elapsed in August 2025. What action will DCC now take 
next to ensure these illegal structures are removed and to defend the integrity of DCC’s 
planning enforcement system? Further, can the CE please comment on what it says 
about the lack of follow-through from DCC Planning Enforcement that this developer 
has simply ignored warning letters and the initiation of infringement proceedings? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Planning Enforcement Section is initiating legal proceedings in respect of non-
compliance with the enforcement notice served relating to the provision of the gates 
and railing concerned. The Developer in this instance has been engaging with the 
Planning Development Management Section with a view to lodging an application to 
retain the gates and railings concerned for a period of time to deal with significant anti 
social issues in the area and for the protection of the residents in the development 
concerned. To date this application has not been lodged. Recent contact with the 
developer has revealed that it is their intention to lodge the application within the next 
2 to 3 weeks. As with all planning enforcement cases the legal proceedings will run 
separately and concurrently with any application for retention received in this matter.  
 
 
 
 

Q.29  COUNCILLOR HAZEL DE NORTUIN 
            To ask the Chief Executive for an itemised breakdown of the assessment process and 
costings for the application made for an adaptation grant in respect of (Details 
Supplied) and could the Manager provide a copy of the guidelines and QS cost 
caps used in determining the value of the grant awarded 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Housing Adaptation Grants for Older People and People with a Disability 
Scheme is a National Scheme devised by the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage.  Local Authorities are charged with administering 
the Scheme in their administrative areas.   
 
The method used to calculate the Grant allocation for the above Adaptation 
Grant is as follows: - 
The Architect drawings submitted are in square meters. As per Dublin City 
Council’s Quantity Surveyors cost items (please see below), the current 
amount is €350.00 per square foot. To ascertain how much it would be per sq. 
meter, we converted the square foot into square meter. There is 10.7639 
square foot in one square meter and in this case the area of the bathroom is 
4.3 m2. 
€350.00 x 10.7639  
= 
€3,767.37 per sq meter  
4.3 m2 x €3,767.37 
= 
€16,199.69 
In this particular case after using the formula and rates provided by the Quantity 
Surveyor, which were updated in February 2025 and are reviewed annually, an 
allowance was provided to round up the figure of €16,199.69 to €17,500.00. 
This was based on Housing Grants Inspectors previous experience for 
bathroom extension works of a comparable size.  
The Quantity Surveyors cost caps are as follows: - 
Market Values for cost items relating to Housing Adaption Grants for the 
disabled, Mobility Aids Grants and Housing Aid for Older People Grants 
 
Item 
 
2025 costs 
Bathroom Conversion 
(removal of bath and provision of 
walk in shower, rails and screens/ 
curtains in line with specifications 
attached   
€12,000 
Bathroom Extension 
€350 per square foot 
Bedroom Extension 
€300 per square foot or €40,000 
Garage conversion 
€300 per square foot or €35,000 

Straight Stair lift 
€3,200 
Curved Stair lift 
€7,500 
1 bedroom house rewiring 
€9,000 
2 bedroom house rewiring 
€10,000 
3 bedroom house rewiring 
€12,000 
4 bedroom house rewiring 
€13,000 
Boiler 
€4,000 
Central heating 
€9,000 
Low threshold door 
€2,800 
Windows 
€700 
Integrated smoke/heat detector 
€300 
 
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR HAZEL DE NORTUIN 
To ask the Chief Executive to point to where in the Application Form for Adaptation 
Grant it states that the amount awarded will be 100% of costs up to €40,000 or the 
valuation of the QS, whichever is the lower amount and to provide a copy. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Like most Local Authorities, Dublin City Council have Cost Caps or set prices on 
what can be spent on each Adaptation work.  This is to ensure that any quote that an 
Applicant forwards to Dublin City Council for Adaptation work is not overpriced by a 
Contractor.  The Cost Caps or set prices are devised by the Quantity Surveyor’s 
Section in Dublin City Council.  
The procedures in relation to the operation of the Grant Schemes is laid down in the 
FAQ’s Housing Adaptation Grants for Older People and Disabled People, prepared 
by the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage.  On Page 12 on this 
FAQ, Quotations/Standard Costings, this provides an explanation of why Local 
Authorities are recommended to engage a Quantity Surveyor (QS) to prepare a 
schedule of rates (Cap Costs or set prices) for works typically funded under the 
Grants Scheme.    
On Page 4, Paragraph 4 of the Application Form for Housing Adaptation Grants for 
Older People and Disabled People, it states “The most you can get is €40,000 or 
100% of the total cost of the work approved by your local authority (whichever is 
less)”. 
Full details on the Housing Adaptation Grants for older people and people with a 
disability (Private Houses) can be accessed via 
 
 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR HAZEL DE NORTUIN 
To ask the Chief Executive for a copy of the policy that sets out the protocol and 
rationale for exclusion of architect’s fees from the Adaptation Grant. 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Housing Grant Section administers three Housing Grants Schemes designed to 
provide assistance to people making adaptations to their privately owned homes to 
meet their medical needs and to older people in inadequate housing conditions 
carrying out essential repairs to their owner-occupied homes. These measures 
enable people to stay in their own communities and prevent or delay their placement 
in residential care thereby reducing social segregation, assisting their carer’s and 
strengthening families.   
 
The three Housing Grants are as follows: - 
 
1) Housing Adaptation Scheme. 
2) Mobility Aids Scheme. 
3) Housing Aid for Older People. 
 
I wish to confirm that Dublin City Council are including the payment of professional 
fees including Architect fees in relation to the Housing Adaptation Grants for Older 
People and Disabled People for owner-occupied homes. 
 
 
Q.32  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please make it a priority to carry out the necessary 
works that need to be done at this location? It is a green island on the junction of 
Townsend Street and Sandwidth Street lower. It has been long neglected, and it 
needs to be resurfaced. There is huge opportunity for this to be a much-needed 
pocket park for locals.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services have engaged an arborist to undertake a condition survey of the 
existing trees on the traffic island at Townsend Street. Based on the recommendations 
of this report, it may be necessary to remove certain trees that are identified as being 
of low quality or limited life expectancy. Following this, Parks Services will review the 
space and address the surfacing as appropriate 
 
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update for Lombard Court and Dowling’s 
Court in regard to residents permit parking. The council was in discussions with the 
residents to have residents permit parking and since they were told that there would 
only be pay and display. There are families who live there who deserve permit 
parking, can an update please be provided.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Traffic Advisory Group (TAG) Area Engineer assessed Lombard Court and 
Peterson’s Court (referred as Dowling’s Court, which already has Pay & Display and 
permit parking) (REF: 7047631 & 704630) for a Pay & Display and permit parking 
scheme. TAG recommends proceeding with the scheme and subsequent ballot of 
resident. Where there is a demonstrable and clear desire in favour of the scheme 
layout. 
 
Dublin City Council does not operate residents only parking on public roads, as all 
taxed and insured vehicles may legally park on the carriageway. 
 
 

Q.34  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please provide the figures on how much money Dublin 
city council has paid out in regard to ‘claims forms’ to residents from the years 2022, 
2023, 2024 and 2025 so far.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Irish Public Bodies, (IPB), Dublin City Council’s insurer, does not breakdown or classify 
the amounts paid out in regard to “claims forms” to residents and therefore the 
information requested cannot be extracted 
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please provide an up-to-date list of voids for the Dublin 
Bay South area? Particularly area M and L.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Type 
Address 
Beds  Status  
Apartment GEORGE REYNOLDS HOUSE 
2 
Awaiting Vacant 
Possession  
Apartment LEO FITZGERALD HOUSE 
2 
Awaiting Vacant 
Possession  
Apartment MCDONAGH HOUSE 
1 
Awaiting Vacant 
Possession  
Apartment MERCER HOUSE 
1  
Awaiting Vacant 
Possession  
Apartment MERCER HOUSE 
 1 
Awaiting Vacant 
Possession  
Apartment MERCER HOUSE 
2 
Awaiting Vacant 
Possession  
Apartment NICHOLAS STREET 
2 
Awaiting Vacant 
Possession  
Apartment RATHMINES AVENUE 
2 
Awaiting Vacant 
Possession  
Apartment THE MOORINGS 
1 
Awaiting Vacant 
Possession  
Apartment THE PUMPHOUSE 
1 
Awaiting Vacant 
Possession  
 
 
 
Type 
Address 
Beds  Status  
Apartment BRIDE STREET 
1 
Works under contractor  
House 
GROVE ROAD 
3 
Works under contractor  
Senior 
Citizens 
HOGAN COURT 
0 
Works under contractor  
Apartment LEO FITZGERALD HOUSE 
3 
Works under contractor  
Apartment MARKIEVICZ HOUSE 
2 
Works under contractor  
Apartment MERCER HOUSE 
1 
Works under contractor  
Apartment MERCER HOUSE 
1 
Works under contractor  
Apartment O CARROLL VILLAS 
2 
Works under contractor  
Apartment O RAHILLY HOUSE 
1 
Works under contractor  
Apartment  PEARSE HOUSE 
1 
Works under contractor  
Apartment PEARSE HOUSE 
2 
Works under contractor  

Apartment RATHMINES CRESCENT  
2 
Works under contractor  
Apartment SHERBORNE COURT 
1 
Works under contractor  
House 
SWAN GROVE 
3 
Works under contractor  
Apartment WHITEFRIAR GARDENS 
1 
Works under contractor  
Apartment WICKLOW COURT 
1 
Works under contractor  
Apartment YORK STREET 
2 
Works under contractor  
Apartment CUMBERLAND STREET SOUTH  
2 
Works under contractor  
 
Type 
Address 
Beds  Status  
Apartment 21, NEW STREET 
0 
Works under Depot  
Apartment 21, NEW STREET 
0 
Works under Depot  
Apartment 21, NEW STREET 
0 
Works under Depot  
Senior 
Citizens 
BEECH HILL COURT 
0 
Works under Depot  
Senior 
Citizens 
BEECH HILL COURT 
0 
Works under Depot  
Senior 
Citizens 
BEGGARS BUSH COURT 
1 
Works under Depot  
Apartment CONWAY COURT 
0 
Works under Depot  
Senior 
Citizens 
HESKIN COURT 
1 
Works under Depot  
Senior 
Citizens 
HESKIN COURT 
1 
Works under Depot  
Senior 
Citizens 
HESKIN COURT 
1 
Works under Depot  
Senior 
Citizens 
HESKIN COURT 
1 
Works under Depot  
Apartment MACKEN VILLAS 
0 
Works under Depot  
Senior 
Citizens 
MAXWELL COURT 
0 
Works under Depot  
Senior 
Citizens 
MAXWELL COURT 
0 
Works under Depot  
Apartment MERCER HOUSE 
1 
Works under Depot  
Senior 
Citizens 
MOUNT DRUMMOND COURT 
0 
Works under Depot  
Apartment O CARROLL VILLAS 
0 
Works under Depot  
Senior 
Citizens 
RANELAGH CLOSE 
1 
Works under Depot  
Apartment SAINT VINCENTS STREET SOUTH 
0 
Works under Depot  
Senior 
Citizens 
SHELBOURNE PARK 
1 
Works under Depot  
Senior 
Citizens 
VERSCHOYLE COURT 
0 
Works under Depot  
Senior 
Citizens 
BEGGARS BUSH COURT 
1 
Works under Depot  
 
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to engage with the GAA to see if their old ticket office on 
Dorset Street could be used for social housing? 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Housing Department will make contact with the GAA regarding this property and 
determine whether it is suitable for use as social housing. 
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the proposed part 8 plan for Martin Savage 
Park. What studies have taken place to date and is there a date when the part 8 
proposal will come before the Council again? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Christopher O’Sullivan TD, Minister of State for Nature, Heritage and Biodiversity has 
advised that the proposed development at Martin Savage Park will not have an 
adverse impact overall in relation to the population of Light Bellied Brent Geese LBBG 
in the wider Dublin area. The planned works at the park may proceed without prejudice. 
The ongoing work and planned surveys (Stage 2 study - overwintering surveys of 
LBBG 2026/2027) in relation to the development gives NPWS scientific confidence 
that sustainable conservation population and area targets can be set and achieved for 
LBBG population in the wider Dublin area. 
Dublin City Council will arrange a meeting with St. Oliver Plunkett Eoghan Ruadh GAA 
Club to discuss the development of an all-weather pitch in Martin Savage Park. 
 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, following the success of the roll out of communication 
boards in DCC playgrounds, would DCC consider making these boards available to 
other community and sports groups? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Sport & Wellbeing Partnership Response: 
In January 2025 Carmel O’Callagham, Sports Implementation Officer, secured 
Community Recognition Funding for the installation of physical activity equipment in 
Priorswood Park as part of the park upgrade project.  This funding can be used for a 
range of outdoor equipment including the installation of signage.   
 
The installation of communication boards (which were rolled out in DCC playgrounds 
in 2023 to support individuals and adults who have communication difficulties) was 
raised at a recent meeting of the Priorswood Park Working Group. The Sports 
Implementation Officer, along with members of the group, will scope the possibility of 
piloting the installation of communications boards to support use of the park as an 
inclusive physical activity space. 
 
Parks Services have rolled out communication boards in playgrounds. They are 
always included as a tender item in new playgrounds and playground upgrades as 
part of the ongoing programme of works. 
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the proposed building of a fire station at 
Alfie Byrne Road to replace the current station on the North Strand Road. In particular, 
can the Chief Executive indicate if, having regard to the recent decision of the 
Department of Housing to postpone the building of social houses on the Readymix 

site, the proposed relocation of the North Strand Road Fire Station site would increase 
the possibility of a joint Readymix site/North Strand Fire Brigade site achieving the 
financial feasibility requirements for building social houses on the enlarged site. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Ready-mix site was part of the National Social Housing PPP Bundle 3 programme. 
The Bundle 3 project is subject of judicial review proceedings. Accordingly, no further 
information can be disclosed until such time as those proceedings have been 
concluded. Once this process has concluded the housing team will provide Cllrs with 
an update and next steps. 
 
Q.40  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the following in relation to the ILAC centre car park: A. 
What are the terms of the lease agreement between DCC and the car park operator? 
B. What portion of the car park income is received by Dublin City Council and how 
much is retained by the operator? C. Could the Chief Executive give the basic income, 
expenses and share out of net profit of the car park operation for years 2020 to 2024. 
D. Since the lease agreement expired in 2018 how was it extended and under what 
terms? E. What role have City Councillors in the extension of the lease as described 
at D above? F. What is the current arrangement and again do Councillors have any 
role in the granting of a lease (short or long term)? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A. The Section 183 for this lease was approved at the City Council meeting on 2nd 
October 2023 (copy of S183 report attached) and granted a 5-year lease to the 
operator.  
B. The terms of the lease provides that 80.5% of the gross annual turnover is 
generated as income to DCC (having been 75% under terms of previous lease) 
C. The annual amount Dublin City Council received in -  
• 
2020   
 
€989,545 
• 
2021  
 
€1,050,914  
• 
2022  
 
€1,655,692  
• 
2023  
  
€1,601,571 
• 
2024  
 
€1,527,027 
D. The car park lease was extended initially to allow Dublin City Council to consider 
its options for the Ilac Centre car park and then to facilitate the public 
advertisement of the lease and the time needed to allow for negotiations and 
legal work to be completed.  The terms remained the same as the lease and each 
extension was for a period of 12months. 
E. As the extensions did not exceed 12 months approval of the Elected Members 
was not required. 
F. As per A above. 
Q.41  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the funding expected under the URDF/EU Grant 
scheme in respect of public realm works at the Five Lamps. Can the Chief Executive 
also explain why public realm works are planned for this location given the amount of 
works already carried out at the location as part of the Clontarf to City Centre Cycle 
Scheme? Also, can the Chief Executive confirm that URDF/EU funding is in no way 
subsidising or contributing to the cost of the Clontarf to City Centre Cycle Scheme 
public realm works already carried out at this location. 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In 2021, the North Inner-City Area Office submitted an application for Urban 
Regeneration and Development Fund (URDF) support. This application identified two 
key areas in need of physical regeneration: the public realm and community facilities. 
URDF funding was granted for public realm improvements.  
Following the initial funding, significant works have been completed along the Royal 
Canal Bank and Charleville Mall areas as part of the Royal Canal Greenway Phase 3 
Project and the upgrade of Charleville Mall Library in 2023. Key features delivered 
included a community plaza, a drinking water fountain, a bike maintenance station, 
tree planting, and soft landscaping.  
Improvements to the public realm at the Five Lamps junction were part of the Clontarf 
to City Centre Cycle Route. This included new paving and landscaping, bespoke tree 
pits, and pedestrian-priority side roads. The route was completed and opened in 2024. 
Finally, works on Portland Row are being delivered as part of the North Circular Road 
(Dorset Street Lower to Amiens Street) Active Travel Scheme, which began in 2022. 
Community consultation took place in early 2023, followed by a public information 
event showcasing the current designs in July 2025. 
As several of the originally proposed public realm improvements were delivered 
through other schemes, the remaining effort will focus on the principal streets within 
the block: Dunne Street, North William Street, and North Great Clarence Street. 
I can confirm that no URDF/EU funding subsidised or contributed to the cost of the 
Clontarf to City Centre Cycle Scheme.  
Below is a summary of the anticipated total costs. 75% is recoupable through the 
URDF. 
 
 
Est. Cost 
Road resurfacing and upgrade incl VAT 
875,000 
Traffic Calming Interventions incl VAT 
97,000  
Path replacement and upgrade incl VAT  
117,000  
Green buildouts and interventions incl 
VAT 
230,000       
Public Lighting; undergrounding of cable 
and recondition standards with LED incl 
VAT 
40,000         
Staff costs 
100,000 
Total  
1,459,000 
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm the following in relation to the Clontarf to City 
Centre Cycle Scheme: A. The original agreed tender price for the project was €36.48m 
B. The final cost is expected to be between €83.35m (overall budget) and €81.65m 

(expected outcome). C. What is the latest “expected” final cost? D. What did the €2.4m 
ex gratia payment relate to and who was it paid to? E. Are any further costs expected 
to be incurred as a result of the road safety audit undertaken in January 2025? F. Give 
that project was primarily an NTA led scheme, can the Chief Executive confirm if DCC 
incurred any costs, direct or indirect, in relation to the scheme and, if so, to detail these 
costs? G. Were any staff seconded from the NTA to DCC or vice versa during the 
period it took to complete the project? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please see below for a response to Questions A to G inclusive. The original overall 
budget for the Clontarf to City Centre Scheme was €62.5m and was based on the 
original Contractor`s tender submission of €41.4m (€36.48 plus 13.5% VAT). The 
overall approved budget for the Scheme has since increased from €62.5m to €83.4m 
(incl. VAT). The final cost is expected to be between €81.5m and €83.4m. This 
overall cost figure will reduce to between €74.5m and €76.4m following the 
recoupment of monies for works carried out on behalf of other agencies. 
Following a period of sustained inflation the Government introduced a process for 
public sector organisations to compensate their Contractors for an increase in costs 
for construction materials and energy. The €2.4m ex-gratia payment was paid to the 
Main Contractor by December 2024 in line with the Office of Government 
Procurement (‘OGP’) Inflation/Supply Chain Co-Operation Framework Agreement. 
The principal items identified in the road safety audit have been completed and are 
already accounted for in the budget. Minor works/snags which are required to fully 
close out the Scheme shall continue periodically at localised locations along the 
Scheme route up until the end of the Scheme Defects period (October 2026). Any 
additional works shall take account of feedback received from users of the Scheme.  
In the interest of conservation DCC refurbished heritage lighting columns on the 
Scheme to modern standards. These lighting columns are now available for use by 
DCC Public Lighting for installation, replacement and upgrade of other heritage 
columns in architectural conservation areas. Dublin City Council has committed 
€400k to these refurbishment works. All other cost associated with the Scheme are 
being funded by the NTA.  
There were no staff secondments from the NTA to DCC or from DCC to the NTA. 
However, the NTA did pay for the salaries of the DCC staff who were working full-
time on the Project. 
Q.43  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
            To ask the Chief Executive what targets Dublin City Council has set to ensure that a 
significant proportion of new housing developments comply with Universal Design and 
Universal Design Plus standards, and whether there are specific timelines for 
achieving these targets. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The targets for Universally Designed housing are set out in the Dublin City 
Development Plan 2022-2028. QHSNO11, Chapter 5 - Quality Housing and 
Sustainable Neighbourhoods, states that it is an objective of Dublin City Council: 
To ensure that 50% of apartments in any development that are required to be in 
excess of minimum sizes should be designed to be suitable for older people/mobility 

impaired people, people living with dementia and people with disabilities in 
accordance with the guidelines set out in the Universal Design Guidelines for Homes 
in Ireland 2015, the DHLG&H’s Design Manual for Quality Housing 2022 and the 
DHP&LG & DH’s Housing Options for Our Ageing Population Policy Statement 2019. 
The above objective has applied to all planning applications, public and private, since 
the adoption of the development plan, for new apartment schemes with 10 or more 
homes. 
 
Q.44  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive what plans are in place to retrofit or adapt existing 
housing stock to improve accessibility in line with Universal Design principles, and 
how many homes have been upgraded in this way in the past three years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In the last 3 years Dublin City Council Disabled Adaptations Section has completed 
the following works. 
 
❖ 28 wheelchair accessible extensions 
❖  67 Ramps  
❖ 194 stairlifts 
❖ 103 other alterations 
❖ 883 adapted bathrooms 
 
Dublin City Council is committed to continue to support tenants with adaptations, there 
is no set targets as each case is individual and has specific needs. However, the 
number Disabled Adaptions has increased and as the need increases, we will increase 
the adaptations we complete.  
 
 
Q.45  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report on any current or planned initiatives to 
expand the School Streets Initiative across Dublin City Council’s administrative area. 
Given the proven benefits of the scheme in improving child safety, reducing traffic 
congestion near schools, and encouraging walking and cycling, if there are no plans 
to expand the initiative, can the Chief Executive provide the reasons for this decision 
and outline any barriers preventing wider implementation? 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The existing School Street in Donaghmede, Dublin 13 was done as part of the NTA’s 
Safe Routes to School programme to which St. Kevin’s JNS was an applicant. Based 
on multiple visits and school-gate observation, a school street was deemed the most 
suitable approach to take. The Sustainable Mobility team is currently working through 
Round 3 applicant schools with no plans for additional school streets at this time.  
 
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a detailed report on the revenue raised by 
Dublin City Council through parking charges in 2022, 2023, and 2024. In addition, 
given the proposals contained in the Draft Parking Bye-laws, can the Chief Executive 
provide an estimate of the potential revenue that could be generated if these 
changes are implemented, projected for 2026? This information is requested to 
ensure transparency and to allow elected members and the public to understand the 
financial implications of the proposed changes. 
 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In 2022 Amount collected through Pay and Display machines €9,434,525.69 (please 
note that not all data was available for this year, this figure represents Feb to Dec 
2022) 
 
Amount collected through mobile app €17,766,486.16 
 
Amount collected through Parking Permits:  
1 year renewal €38,025               
 2year renewal €120,620 
New applications €60,284 
Visitor permits €245,902 
 
In 2023 Amount collected through Pay and Display machines €12,411,761.73 
Amount collected through mobile app €19,666,205.52 
 
Amount collected through Parking Permits:  
1 year renewals €37,175                
2year renewals €130,074 
New applications €51,910 
Visitor Permits €275,987.50 
 
 
In 2024 Amount collected through Pay and Display machines €13,129,377.56  
 
Amount collected through mobile app €23,435,992.62 
 
Amount collected through Parking Permits:  
1 year renewals €28,985                 
2 year renewals €108,370 
New applications €50,330 
Visitor permits €283,615.10 
 
The Dublin City Council Bye-Laws 2024 have yet to be amended and no draft has yet 
been circulated to the City Council members. Therefore, we are unable to give 
projections on any estimated potential revenue until a decision has been made on 
whether changes will be introduced and what those changes may be.   
 
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to introduce Autism friendly carpark spaces in car parks 
and shopping centres. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The situation regarding carparks in the control of DCC 
 
Multi Storey car parks - owned by DCC and leased to operators (x3) 
Dawson Street Car Park 
Drury Street Car Park 
ILAC Centre Car Park 
 
Surface car parks - Pay & Display (x8) 
Strand Road – there are 3 here (Gilford, Martello and Sydney Parade) 
Clontarf – there are 4 in total - 1 at Bus Garage, 1 at Dart, 1 on Hollybrook Road and 
1 for Vernon Avenue. 
Ballymun car park – on Ballymun Road 
 
DCC have no remit to answer regarding private carparks and shopping centres. 
 

 
 
 
Q.48 
COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive, to address the issue of availability of public litter bins in 
Terenure Village and surrounding streets. (Details Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services will assess the above-mentioned locations in the 
Terenure Village area regarding the requirement of litter bins there. 
 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive, to arrange for a traffic assessment due to serious issues 
around pedestrian safety at the junction adjacent to Mount Jerome Cemetery. (Details 
Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Additional line marking and signage are being assessed at this location. The Councillor 
will be kept informed of progress. 
 
Q.50  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive, to work with Parks and the Gardai in addressing ongoing 
anti-social behaviour at William Pearse Park in Crumlin. Over recent weeks, in the lead 
up to Halloween, there has been near constant fireworks and fires being lit in and round 
the park after dark. Fireworks are being set off and often pointed towards the houses 
near the park causing distress for the residents living nearby. Most of the issues occur 
around the entrance closest to the village on Windmill Road. Could the park be locked 
after a certain time each evening and can it be better lit at night to help alleviate this 
Situation for residents? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks continue to engage with local gardai reporting antisocial behaviour in Willie 
Pearse Park and all of our parks and open spaces. The park has a number of kissing 
gates into and out of the park which are not possible to lock. This is to facilitate access 
to the many sport facilities available within the park.  
We have had 4 fires in the park during September, three were small fires with limited 
damage.  
At the start of September two motor bikes were set on fire, which the gardai removed. 
Unfortunately, it is a feature of this time of year that we see more fires lit. The railings 
around parks are low enough to allow easy entry to people who are intent on causing 
damage so even if gates were locked access is still possible. 
 
Q.51 
COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive, for an assessment of areas of footpath that could be dished 
at Cremorne Apartments, Greenmount Road Terenure. Several residents have 
mobility issues and some use walking aids. Currently, the footpath on the public road 
is creating problems accessing the apartments freely and is a serious trip hazard for 
residents. (Details Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer will carry out a review of the section of Cremorne Road/apartments 
that is in Charge to Road Maintenance Services with a view to making mobility 
improvements. 
Please note that the section in charge is highlighted in green and orange as follows: 

 
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a timeframe for when the railings surrounding 
the pond in Palmerston Park will be completed. The work seems to have been 
abandoned some time ago. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services confirms that the work has not been abandoned. The railings are being 
completed in carefully planned stages by our in-house blacksmith, who is repurposing 
historic railings to suit the character and setting of the area. This is a highly skilled and 
time-consuming process, which forms part of his wider workload involving general 
repairs and maintenance across the area. 
 
Due to budget constraints, no external funding has been allocated to appoint a 
contractor for this work. Commissioning it externally would be extremely costly and, 
due to procurement processes, would not result in a significantly quicker outcome. By 
completing the work in-house, we are ensuring that it is done to a high standard, in 
keeping with the park’s heritage, and in the most cost-effective manner available to us. 
 
Parks Services appreciate the community’s patience and understanding as this 
important works progresses. Projects of this nature do take time when done properly, 
but the end result will be a high-quality and lasting improvement to Palmerston Park. 
 
 
Q.53  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if funding has been granted or if it will be made available 
to reinstate the burnt downplay item in Sean Moore Park. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Funding will be made available to reinstate the burnt down play item in Sean Moore 
Park Playground. 
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To Ask the Chief Executive for information on sports grants available through Dublin 
City Council.  

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Sport & Wellbeing Partnership (DCSWP) currently supports Dublin City 
sports clubs through the Club Support Small Grant Scheme. The grant was previously 
The Sport for Young People Small Grant Scheme but in 2024 it expanded to include 
participants of all ages. 
The grant is open to clubs in the Dublin City area that are affiliated to a National 
Governing Body of Sport and aiming to increase participation in sport and physical 
activity across all age groups. The allocation is provided by Sport Ireland (through the 
National Local Sports Partnership Programme) and Dublin City Council (DCC). Grants 
range between €500 - €1,000.  
The grant application process is communicated across multiple platforms to maximise 
reach and ensure clubs, sporting bodies, DCSWP Sport Officers and local councillors 
are notified in good time:   
➢ Email correspondence to councillors in DCC’s five electoral areas 
➢ Email correspondence to DCSWP Co-funded/National Governing Body Officers and 
DCSWP Sports Officers 
➢ Email correspondence to clubs listed on the DCSWP club database 
➢ DCC website 
➢ DCSWP Virtual Hub 
➢ DCSWP social media platforms 
Club applicants are directed to the DCC website, the DCSWP Virtual Hub and the DCSWP 
administrative team for advice and guidance on the application process.  
The grant seeks to alleviate or cover costs that a club/organisation may incur when seeking 
to increase participation.   
Examples include:  
➢ Training & coaching courses 
➢ Purchase of equipment 
➢ Administrative expenses 
➢ Community Club open day 
Applications for the funding of competitions/one-off events, foreign travel and high- 
performance competitors are not considered.  
In 2025 the grant opened for applications in early May and closed on 23 May. 195 
applications were received and are currently being assessed by the DCSWP grants team.  
The assessment team includes representatives from the DCSWP Sport Officer team with 
close connections to and knowledge of local clubs.  
Clubs will be advised of the amount awarded for 2025 in early October. An update on the 
grant is provided in all DCSWP area committee reports each month, from the date the 
application process commenced.  Once decisions are communicated to clubs, the area 
committee is provided with a list of successful clubs and the amount awarded.  
 
Q.55  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he could remove the signpost (Details Supplied) and 
approve a paving dish for the wheelchair parking space at (Details Supplied). The 
signpost is an obstruction (resident has a haul to help her in and out of the car) and a 
paving dish would make it more accessible.  

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
I have passed this on to our pole contractor and hope to have the pole removed in the 
coming days. 
 
Road Maintenance Services will review the request with our colleagues in Traffic to 
establish if a dishing is appropriate at this location. Providing a dishing at this location 
may indicate a road crossing point which could create a separate safety concern. We 
will review. 
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
            Can the Chief Executive outline line how many people have gone on to our homeless 
list since the tenant in situ was paused. Within that can the Chief executive outline how 
many people would have been eligible under the old Tenant In situ scheme, taking the 
assumption that the properties would have been appropriate. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The table below indicates the total monthly new presentations due to a Notice of 
Termination based on property to be sold for the period January – August 2025.  
 
 
Month 
Families 
Singles 
Total – NOT Property to be sold 
Jan-25 
19 
9 
28 
Feb-25 
19 
2 
21 
Mar-25 
17 
12 
29 
Apr-25 
19 
7 
26 
May-25 
20 
4 
24 
Jun-25 
13 
7 
20 
Jul-25 
19 
9 
28 
Aug-25 
12 
4 
16 
Total to date 
138 
54 
192 
 
 
It does not follow however, that these households could have been prevented from 
homelessness in all cases through use of Tenant in Situ. The Acquisitions section 
received 125 enquiries from January to September 2025 regarding the tenant in situ 
scheme. As these enquiries were not assessed it is not possible to determine whether 
these applicants would be eligible for the scheme or whether the properties would have 
been deemed suitable to purchase.   
 
 
Q.57  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
            Can the Chief Executive provide the figure of actual people that moved off the social 
housing list in 2025 to date and in 2024. 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Please find requested figures below -  
 
 
Combined Housing & Transfer List Lettings Jan- Dec 2024 
Dwelling 
Size 
Area 
B    
Area 
D    
Area 
E   
Area 
H    
Area 
J    
Area 
K    
Area 
L    
Area 
M   
Area 
N     
Area 
P   
Grand Total 
Bedsit 
32 
5 
26 
17 
5 
13 
21 
26 
13 
8 
166 
1 Bed 
177 
37 
76 
184 
172 
95 
273 
70 
31 
28 
1143 
2 Bed 
303 
43 
118 
134 
194 
117 
163 
39 
14 
21 
1146 
3 Bed 
87 
30 
75 
20 
65 
30 
32 
5 
2 
4 
350 
4 Bed 
13 
2 
6 
4 
5 
3 
2 
1 
  
  
36 
Grand Total 
612 
117 
301 
359 
441 
258 
491 
141 
60 
61 
2841 
 
 
Combined Housing & Transfer List Lettings Jan- Jun 2025 
Dwelling 
Size 
Area 
B    
Area 
D    
Area 
E   
Area 
H    
Area 
J    
Area 
K    
Area 
L    
Area 
M   
Area 
N     
Area 
P   
Grand Total 
Bedsit 
22 
2 
18 
14 
4 
6 
1 
3 
5 
3 
78 
1 Bed 
68 
10 
36 
50 
67 
29 
103 
19 
10 
17 
409 
2 Bed 
126 
13 
27 
27 
74 
36 
58 
8 
3 
8 
380 
3 Bed 
39 
8 
13 
4 
18 
6 
6 
2 
1 
2 
99 
4 Bed 
3 
2 
1 
1 
  
  
  
  
  
  
7 
Grand Total 
258 
35 
95 
96 
163 
77 
168 
32 
19 
30 
973 
 
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
Can the Chief Executive outline how many directly employed trade people in the 
Council in 2025 and the same in 2015. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The number directly employed trades in the City Council for the years 2015 and 2025 
is as follows: 
 
Year 
Total 
2025 
416 
2015 
414 
 
These numbers include all trades and all supervisory grades i.e. Chargehand, 
Assistant Foreman and Foreman 
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
            Can the Chief Executive please provide the figure of the amount of voids that were 
completed and the cost in 2020 and the same for 2024 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Year  
Number of Voids 
Cost  
2020 
616 
€13.5 Million  
2024 
1041 
€30 million 
 
 

Q.60  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask The Chief Executive, can a traffic report be done on Drapier Road at school 
collection and drop off times. The residents are having terrible trouble with illegal 
parking on footpaths and driveways which leads to residents been blocked in or 
blocked out. The footpaths on Drapier Road are exceptionally low so cars can park 
quite easily and whilst doing this they are blocking wheelchairs and parents with 
prams. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A school keep clear marking and single yellow line with time plate “08:30-09:30 
Monday-Friday” has been provided at the school entrance on Drapier Road. Double 
yellow lines have also been provided across the car park entrance, and all of these 
measures have been provided to keep parking at school times orderly and 
manageable.  
 
Non-compliance with traffic measures such as those listed above and parking on the 
footpath should be referred to Dublin Street Parking Services, DSPS (email 
info@dsps.ie or tel. no. 01 602 2500) or An Garda Síochána for enforcement. 
 
 
Parking Enforcement will instruct Dublin Street Parking Services to patrol this area 
and enforce all illegal parking encountered. 
 
 
Q.61  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive can a traffic warden be put in place in DNW, even on a 
temporary measure to combat the issues we are having with illegal parking in the 
area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently no parking wardens operating in siloes in any locations across the 
Dublin City Council administrative area. Dublin Street Parking Services operate the 
service for enforcing illegal parking and they arrange patrols and adjust patrols based 
on priority.  
All illegal parking can be reported to Dublin Street Parking Services directly on 01 602 
5200 or through their Report an Obstruction facility at the following website address ; 
Report an Obstruction - Dublin Street Parking Services. 
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the traffic situation at junction of the 
Balbutcher Lane, Jamestown Road and Hampton wood road be reviewed. When the 
bus is turning left from Balbutcher Lane on to the Jamestown Road there is extremely 
limited with space to allow the bus to turn safely and let the other traffic move safely. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following an assessment, the N6 bus route was observed turning left from Balbutcher 
Lane onto Poppintree Park Lane West without issue on several occasions. The stop 
lines for the western arm of this junction were provided in a staggered arrangement to 
allow for buses to turn. As such, no changes are recommended at this time. 
 
 
 
 
 

Q.63  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive when will the weeding programme begin in Ballymun. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Weeding Update - 2025 Season 
  
Weed spraying began in April in the North West Area including Ballymun and Finglas 
, with the contractor using acetic acid (vinegar) in the Ballymun and Finglas areas as 
per 2024.  
The first treatment occurred between the 22nd of April and 2nd of May yielding good 
results.  
The second treatment occurred between the 30th of June and the 11th of July. 
Unfortunately due to the extended warm and dry period we experienced from mid-
May the results of this second treatment were not as effective as anticipated due to 
the early uncharacteristic drought conditions in May, the weeds developed a waxy 
cuticle on the leaves to protect itself from evaporation which then worked the 
opposite way and gave a layer of protection from the herbicide to penetrate the leaf. 
This leading to the deep-rooted perennials not fully dying off. 
Resulting from these findings the third treatment was brought forward to an earlier 
date of the 1st of August and was completed on the 11th of August. 
Follow up inspections have shown more positive results in the Ballymun area. 
The Weeding program is complete in Ballymun and we envisage it restarting early 
April 2026.   
 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
            To ask the Chief Executive to have the slide in Father Collins Park repaired as soon 
as possible 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A repair and replacement of the damaged section was ordered immediately after the 
damage occurred and we are currently awaiting a firm date from the contractor to affect 
same.  It is anticipated that this will be in the coming 2-3 weeks. 
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
            To ask the Chief Executive, to have the laneway at the back of the row of businesses 
on Shantalla Road behind the middle child, P.Byrne & sons butcher etc cleaned. And 
for this to be done on a regular basis 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above-mentioned laneway is not in charge of Dublin City Council and does not 
come under our cleaning remit. 
 
 
Q.66  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
            To ask the Chief Executive to have speed ramps installed at Grange Park Grove. The 
speed on this road is an increasing safety hazard. In addition to ramps, I would also 
ask for signage to encourage drivers to slow down in the estate 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7046831) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  

Q.67  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to investigate and report on the efficacy of traffic calming 
and road safety measures in the vicinity of St Eithne’s, St Monica’s and St Malachy’s 
National Schools in Edenmore. These schools are in very close proximity, albeit 
separated by roads where speeding and dangerous driving are unfortunately 
common. Given the attraction of the shopping centre across the road, the area is 
dangerous for the hundreds of young children attending these schools. The roads 
need proper school signage, painted road markings and better traffic calming 
measures. Can the chief executive please also report on the suitability of this area for 
designation as a school zone? 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7047880) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Regarding School Zone designation: The Sustainable Mobility team is currently 
working through Round 3 of the NTA’s Safe Routes to School programme, to which 
none of the abovementioned schools were applicants. We do not currently have the 
resources to work outside of this list, but all three schools are on our waiting list and 
should we be in a position to work with the schools, we will be in touch.  
 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the chief executive what are the short to medium term plans to deal with the 
hostile conditions facing pedestrians and cyclists at the junction of Dame Street and 
George’s Street. The College Green Dame Street Public Realm Project is inspiring 
and will do wonders for this central area of our city. However, it is a project that will 
take many years to complete. In the meantime, the junction of Dame Street and 
George’s Street remains an extremely off-putting environment to those engaging in 
active travel. The waiting times for pedestrians are far too long and by the time the 
green man appears the crowds gathered number like fans exiting a football match or 
rock concert. The situation facing people on bicycles continuing straight on Dame 
Street at the George’s Street junction is one of the worst examples in the city when it 
comes to hostility to cyclists. When traffic gets a left turn filter light at this junction, are 
cyclists who are continuing straight supposed to merge into the outside lane of traffic 
while the lane to the left of them continues to move, often at speed? Or can the chief 
executive set out what a person on a bicycle continuing straight at this junction is 
supposed to do when faced with a red light and a green filter light for the left lane? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
ITS Response 
The junction of Dame Street with George’s Street serves key public transport routes 
into and out of the city. This junction is closely monitored on our SCATS and CCTV 
systems, and the pedestrian phase runs typically every cycle throughout the day. 
Inbound/outbound cyclist movements are with general traffic and, with the current 
number of lanes in the junction to serve all public transport movements, the junction is 
somewhat constrained in terms of dedicated cycling facilities for cyclists. In the 
absence of these facilities there is limited scope from an ITS / Traffic Signals 
perspective to offer a higher level of service to cyclists at the moment. However, we 
would expect that plans for College Green will offer more potential for cycling 
infrastructure at the junction at which stage we can review the operation of the signals 
at this junction. This would be a matter for the City Centre Projects team. 

 
Regarding the specific query for outbound cyclists - please note that cyclists do not 
have specific cycle signals as there is no dedicated cycle lane outbound and cyclists 
must proceed with caution under the straight ahead green arrow which comes on in 
the main traffic phase for the junction. When this signal is on red and the filter light for 
the left turning movement is on green, straight ahead cyclists must wait on this signal 
as indeed is the case for all straight ahead traffic and public transport movements as 
well. Regarding the operation of the junction for pedestrians the ITS team will continue 
to monitor and review the operation of the junction to seek opportunities to run the 
pedestrian phase more frequently when possible with reduced wait times.  
 
City Centre Projects Team Response 
In the longer term, the Dame St/George’s St junction is within the extents of the 
College Green project. The cycling infrastructure, along with the overall functionality 
of the junction, will be reviewed as part of the development of that design. 
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to set out who has priority when a pedestrian continuing 
straight reaches an intersection ahead of a car that is turning at the intersection. If it 
is the case that the pedestrian has priority, then this is not respected on the streets of 
Dublin where a “might is right” law of the jungle prevails, and pedestrians are 
expected to give way to turning cars until there is a break in the traffic. This is the 
case all over Dublin, but a good example is evident on Merrion Square West opposite 
Leinster House. A person walking straight from Merrion Square West towards 
Merrion St Upper must cross at the intersection with Merrion Square South. This is a 
soft left turn where cars and buses turn at speed. Pedestrians need to cross here 
with extreme caution due to turning vehicles. This lack of respect for the priority of 
pedestrians (assuming they have priority) is widespread in Dublin but exemplified 
here. I call on the Chief Executive to begin a programme of installing zebra crossings 
at all intersections in the city centre to clarify the priority of pedestrians at 
intersections. This should start with the installation of a zebra crossing from Merrion 
Square West to Merrion St Upper at the intersection with Merrion Square South. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In the situation described by the Councillor, motorists must yield to pedestrians that 
have already begun to walk across a junction. 
 
Regarding the junction of Merrion Square West and Merrion St Upper, the TAG Area 
Engineer will carry out an assessment and the Councillor will be kept informed of the 
outcome in due course. 
 
Q.70  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to install a pedestrian crossing from one side of Parnell St 
to the other at the intersection with Jervis Street. Failing that, can the Chief Executive 
explain how a pedestrian on Jervis Street is supposed to safely cross Parnell Street 
towards the Parnell Centre? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7048180) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  

Q.71  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the request from Residents for a solution 
to the Parking issues (Details Supplied). It is almost 12 Months since this request 
was submitted and the situation with parking has deteriorated more with the recent 
opening of a new DCU Building 
Was a ballot of all eligible residents on the proposed amendments carried out and if 
so, can the result be forwarded 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A ballot for the redesign of the current parking scheme on Details Supplied (---) was 
carried out on the 10th June 2025. The closing date for this ballot was the 17th July 
2025. Fifteen ballots were received, there was one vote in favour, ten votes against 
and four votes were spoiled/late. Therefore, this ballot was not successful. 
Residents were informed of this in letters dated the 12th September 2025. 
 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the question from March 2025 below: 
To have the previously submitted request for the installation of a Pedestrian Crossing 
/ Traffic Calming Measures on Closhaugh Road D17 adjacent to the Lidl and Range 
Retail units. This road is extremely busy, and Pedestrian access is not suitable 
according to Residents 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The installation of a Pedestrian Crossing at this location is not on the works programme 
for 2026. It will be considered for inclusion on a future works programme. 
 
Q.73  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the current measures being carried out 
by DCC and future plans  to deal with the severe Rodent infestation in the Rise 
/Hampstead Avenue area of Dublin 9 .Residents in the area are very anxious that this 
situation is worsening with no evidence on the ground of any mitigations in place from 
the HSE or DCC and with the colder months approaching there will be more incidents 
of rodents entering Gardens and Residences 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Environmental Health section in Dublin City Council has no statutory powers in 
relation to pest control.   
 
The Rats and Mice (Destruction) Act 1919 is enforced by the Health Service Executive, 
Environmental 
Health, 
Pest 
Control 
Section, 
Unit 
13F, 
Nexus 
Building, 
Blanchardstown Corporate Park, Blanchardstown, Dublin 15.  Tel: 1800 211 774 or 
email pestcontrol.north@hse.ie   
 
This question has been referred to the HSE. 
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive when he expects officials to liaise with (Details 
Attached) so that previously granted funding for the upgrade of changing room 
facilities takes place asap; and to explain why this project has not been advanced by 
now? 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

The Details Supplied on Details Supplied is not a Dublin City Council facility. It is I 
understand, owned and managed by the Details Supplied. 
 
 
Q.75  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many expressions of interest has there been for 
Tenant in Situ TIS for each month since January 2025 and many have been 
successfully processed? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
For statistical purposes the Acquisitions Section collated the number of enquiries 
regarding the tenant in situ scheme from Jan to August this totalled 125. None of these 
enquiries progressed to acquisition stage.   
 
As funding for the scheme is now reinstated queries from tenants under Notice are 
being directed through the following process.  
 
1 Households at serious risk of homelessness should contact the Central Placement 
Service in Parkgate Hall to complete an initial homeless assessment. 
 
2. A Prevention officer will contact the tenant to exhaust all alternatives. This may 
include contact with the Landlord, assessment for Homeless HAP and advice on 
applying for CBL of social housing. 
 
3.The Prevention officer may refer cases that fall into priority categories, meet the 
mandatory criteria and demonstrate evidence of all other options being exhausted, to 
the acquisitions team to commence the process of acquiring the property. 
 
 
Q.76  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to please outline in tabular form, how families are in 
emergency accommodation for more than 6 months, for more than 1 year, for more 
than 2 years and how many single people are in emergency accommodation for 
more than 6 months, for more than 1 year, for more than 2 years. Can I have this 
report for September 2025 and for September 2024? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
The figures in the tables below apply to the Dublin City Council region only, not 
the entire Dublin region. 
 
The September figures won’t be released until the end of October, provided are the 
figures for August 2024 & August 2025. 
 
As we can see from the tables below, there has been an increase in the number of 
Single Adults, Families and Children (under 18 years) who have been in emergency 
accommodation (EA) for 2 years or more in the Dublin City Council region. The number 
of Singles, Families and Children who are spending between 18-24 months, 12-18 
months, and 6-12 months in EA has also increased year-on-year since Aug 2025 and 
Aug 2024. 
 
This corresponds with the increase in the overall number of Single Adults, Families 
and Children who are currently in EA in the DCC region and the shortage of affordable 
private rented and social housing tenancies for people to exit EA  
 

Duration in EA –Aug 2025 (as at 31/08/25) One Night Only – Dublin City Council 
Region Only 
 
 
Duration in EA –Aug 2024 (as at 31/08/24) One Night Only– Dublin City Council 
Region Only 
 
 
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline in tabular form for each administrative area, 
how many people are on the DCC’s housing list and transfer list, for singles, different 
family sizes, outline in bands of 1-2 years, 2-4 years, over 5 years, over 10 years? 
 
Can I have this report for September 2025 & September 2024? 
Please note, we used to receive this report on a regular basis but haven’t received it 
in a number of years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please see attached figures as requested -  
 
Duration 
in EA 
Total 
Singles 
% 
Breakdow
n Singles 
Total 
Families 
% 
Breakdown 
Families 
Number 
Dependents 
% 
Breakdown 
Dependents 
24+ months 
653 
19.9% 
232 
28.4% 
666 
35.4% 
18-
24months 
306 
9.3% 
96 
11.7% 
222 
11.8% 
12-18 
months 
394 
12.0% 
119 
14.5% 
234 
12.4% 
6-12 
months 
683 
20.8% 
167 
20.4% 
361 
19.2% 
6 months or 
less 
1,253 
38.1% 
204 
24.9% 
400 
21.2% 
Total 
3,289 
100% 
818 
100% 
1,883 
100% 
Duration 
in EA 
Total 
Singles 
% 
Breakdow
n Singles 
Total 
Families 
% 
Breakdown 
Families 
Number 
Dependents 
% 
Breakdown 
Dependents 
24+ months 
608 
19.8% 
211 
29.0% 
588 
35.3% 
18-24months 
239 
7.8% 
74 
10.2% 
157 
9.4% 
12-18 months 
326 
10.6% 
84 
11.5% 
166 
10.0% 
6-12 months 
578 
18.8% 
141 
19.4% 
302 
18.1% 
6 months or 
less 
1,325 
43.1% 
218 
29.9% 
453 
27.2% 
Total 
3,076 
100%  
728 
 100% 
1,666 
100% 

July 2025 Housing List Figures by Bedsize requirement and Time on List 
Size 
Years 
Area 
B    
Area 
D    
Area 
E   
Area 
H    
Area 
J   
Area 
K    
Area 
L    
Area 
M   
Area 
N   
Area 
P    
Grand 
Total 
One bed 
0 to 1 year 
650 
155 
281 
209 
203 
138 
105 
76 
85 
15 
1917 
  
1 to 5 years 
1516 
405 
696 
552 
454 
405 
320 
255 
250 
59 
4912 
  
5 to 10 
years 
457 
100 
251 
190 
149 
137 
150 
136 
130 
51 
1751 
  
over 10 
years 
282 
42 
221 
118 
83 
98 
76 
80 
117 
33 
1150 
One Bed Total 
  
2905 
702 
1449 
1069 
889 
778 
651 
547 
582 
158 
9730 
Two Bed 
0 to 1 year 
217 
58 
76 
37 
87 
49 
20 
12 
17 
3 
576 
  
1 to 5 years 
701 
158 
307 
112 
274 
192 
74 
61 
70 
15 
1964 
  
5 to 10 
years 
152 
42 
82 
34 
56 
50 
25 
26 
26 
5 
498 
  
over 10 
years 
77 
13 
59 
20 
31 
38 
11 
23 
33 
10 
315 
Two bed Total 
  
1147 
271 
524 
203 
448 
329 
130 
122 
146 
33 
3353 
Three Bed 
0 to 1 year 
45 
10 
11 
11 
12 
12 
7 
4 
3 
2 
117 
  
1 to 5 years 
173 
38 
72 
42 
36 
50 
21 
16 
21 
6 
475 
  
5 to 10 
years 
84 
34 
41 
16 
36 
29 
18 
5 
8 
3 
274 
  
over 10 
years 
111 
22 
76 
16 
53 
62 
13 
16 
15 
8 
392 
Three Bed 
Total 
  
413 
104 
200 
85 
137 
153 
59 
41 
47 
19 
1258 
Four Bed 
0 to 1 year 
4 
3 
2 
3 
2 
2 
  
  
1 
  
17 
  
1 to 5 years 
21 
6 
15 
6 
10 
8 
3 
2 
4 
1 
76 
  
5 to 10 
years 
9 
4 
5 
2 
1 
8 
1 
1 
3 
1 
35 
  
over 10 
years 
9 
3 
6 
3 
5 
17 
  
3 
8 
1 
55 
Four bed Total 
  
43 
16 
28 
14 
18 
35 
4 
6 
16 
3 
183 
Five Bed 
0 to 1 year 
2 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
2 
  
1 to 5 years 
5 
1 
  
3 
  
1 
  
  
  
  
10 
  
5 to 10 
years 
  
1 
2 
  
1 
1 
  
  
  
  
5 
  
over 10 
years 
  
  
  
1 
1 
1 
  
  
  
  
3 
Five Bed Total 
  
7 
2 
2 
4 
2 
3 
  
  
  
  
20 
Grand Total 
  
4515 
1095 
2203 
1375 
1494 
1298 
844 
716 
791 
213 
14544 
 
July 2025 TRANSFER Waiting List figures by Waiting Time 
Time on List 
Area 
B    
Area 
D    
Area 
E   
Area 
H    
Area 
J   
Area 
K    
Area 
L    
Area 
M   
Area 
N   
Area 
P    
Grand 
Total 
0 to 1 year 
302 
71 
164 
97 
139 
117 
96 
78 
45 
25 
1134 
1 to 5 years 
1454 
322 
800 
432 
389 
425 
346 
264 
262 
80 
4774 
5 to 10 years 
1833 
337 
1021 
536 
567 
505 
451 
337 
334 
98 
6019 
over 10 years 
1177 
237 
873 
483 
505 
512 
432 
384 
289 
107 
4999 
Grand Total 
4766 
967 
2858 
1548 
1600 
1559 
1325 
1063 
930 
310 
16926 
 
 
July 2024 Housing List Figures by Bedsize requirement and Time on List 
Size 
Years 
Area 
B    
Area 
D    
Area 
E   
Area 
H    
Area 
J   
Area 
K    
Area 
L    
Area 
M   
Area 
N   
Area 
P    
Grand 
Total 
One bed 
0 to 1 years 
591 
184 
245 
184 
152 
124 
87 
70 
77 
13 
1727 
  
1 to 5 years 
1281 
304 
664 
520 
423 
386 
336 
237 
262 
94 
4507 

  
5 to 10 
years 
586 
122 
309 
282 
187 
186 
171 
133 
150 
49 
2175 
  
over 10 
years 
342 
61 
257 
152 
108 
130 
105 
106 
156 
42 
1459 
One Bed Total 
  
2800 
671 
1475 
1138 
870 
826 
699 
546 
645 
198 
9868 
Two Bed 
0 to 1 years 
243 
47 
91 
33 
55 
48 
17 
14 
18 
4 
570 
  
1 to 5 years 
683 
173 
332 
112 
278 
200 
75 
55 
72 
19 
1999 
  
5 to 10 
years 
206 
35 
105 
42 
86 
62 
24 
33 
36 
8 
637 
  
over 10 
years 
96 
11 
58 
19 
59 
56 
13 
23 
38 
8 
381 
Two bed Total 
  
1228 
266 
586 
206 
478 
366 
129 
125 
164 
39 
3587 
Three Bed 
0 to 1 years 
45 
10 
25 
11 
11 
12 
3 
3 
8 
  
128 
  
1 to 5 years 
145 
26 
61 
49 
32 
49 
20 
15 
24 
8 
429 
  
5 to 10 
years 
106 
18 
44 
25 
30 
43 
17 
15 
14 
4 
316 
  
over 10 
years 
117 
24 
86 
27 
64 
59 
13 
18 
24 
11 
443 
Three Bed 
Total 
  
413 
78 
216 
112 
137 
163 
53 
51 
70 
23 
1316 
Four Bed 
0 to 1 years 
4 
  
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
  
  
  
12 
  
1 to 5 years 
25 
7 
10 
9 
9 
7 
3 
1 
3 
1 
75 
  
5 to 10 
years 
4 
3 
3 
3 
1 
9 
1 
1 
3 
  
28 
  
over 10 
years 
8 
3 
13 
4 
3 
16 
5 
3 
7 
2 
64 
Four bed Total 
  
41 
13 
28 
17 
14 
35 
10 
5 
13 
3 
179 
Five Bed 
0 to 1 years 
1 
1 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
2 
  
1 to 5 years 
2 
  
  
3 
  
1 
  
  
  
  
6 
  
5 to 10 
years 
  
1 
  
  
  
1 
  
  
  
  
2 
  
over 10 
years 
  
  
3 
1 
2 
1 
  
  
  
  
7 
Five Bed Total 
  
3 
2 
3 
4 
2 
3 
  
  
  
  
17 
Grand Total 
  
4485 
1030 
2308 
1477 
1501 
1393 
891 
727 
892 
263 
14967 
 
 
 
 
 
July 2024 TRANSFER Waiting List figures by Waiting Time 
Time on List 
Area 
B    
Area 
D    
Area 
E   
Area 
H    
Area 
J   
Area 
K    
Area 
L    
Area 
M   
Area 
N   
Area 
P    
Grand 
Total 
0 to 1 years 
236 
55 
149 
96 
107 
88 
101 
62 
36 
14 
944 
1 to 5 years 
1323 
252 
782 
432 
385 
407 
331 
260 
275 
85 
4532 
5 to 10 years 
1770 
331 
1024 
513 
564 
474 
455 
299 
296 
77 
5803 
over 10 
years 
1134 
244 
842 
453 
512 
491 
422 
345 
262 
99 
4804 
Grand Total 
4463 
882 
2797 
1494 
1568 
1460 
1309 
966 
869 
275 
16083 
 
 
The Housing Allocations report has now been issued to all Councillors for Quarter 1 and 2 of 
2025.  Going forward this will be issued quarterly in advance of Area Committee meetings.  
 
 
 

Q.78  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to have the tree from (Details Supplied) removed. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
In accordance with Dublin City Council Tenant Handbook (Pg. 7) external  
maintenance (gardens) falls under the responsibility of the tenant.   
 
Housing Maintenance does not provide a gardening service; however, an inspection 
will be carried out to assess the circumstances of the case and determine whether the 
problematic tree is within or outside the scope of routine garden maintenance. 
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the number of people currently requiring 
wheelchair livable homes (UD Home +) on Dublin City Council’s housing list by 
broken down by administrative area; how long each applicant has been on the 
housing list; the number of wheelchair livable homes (UD Home+) provided in each 
administrative area in 2022, 2023 and 2024; and the projected number of wheelchair 
livable homes (UD Home+) to be delivered in 2025, 2027, 2028 and 2029. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Size
Years
Area B   Area D   Area E  Area H   Area J  Area K   Area L   Area M  Area N  
Grand Total
1 Bed
0 to 1 year
2
2
2
1
1
1
9
1 to 5 years
12
1
5
2
3
2
4
1
30
5 to 10 years
3
2
1
1
1
1
9
over 10 years
2
1
1
4
1 Bed Total
19
5
8
3
4
3
4
4
2
52
2 Bed
0 to 1 year
1
1
2
1 to 5 years
4
2
1
7
5 to 10 years
1
2
3
over 10 years
1
1
2 Bed Total
5
2
1
1
2
1
1
13
3 Bed
1 to 5 years
2
1
1
2
6
5 to 10 years
1
1
3 Bed Total
2
1
1
3
7
4 Bed
0 to 1 year
1
1
4 Bed Total
1
1
5 Bed
5 to 10 years
1
1
5 Bed Total
1
1
Grand Total
26
8
9
4
5
9
5
5
3
74
 
 
In the last 5 years Dublin City Council Disabled Adaptations Section has completed 
the following works. 
 
❖ 30 wheelchair accessible extensions 
Central 
Area 
North Central 
North West 
South Central 
South East 
6 
4 
10 
6 
4 
 
❖  94 Ramps  
❖ 232 stairlifts 
❖ 353 other alterations 

❖ 987 adapted bathrooms 
Dublin City Council is committed to continue to support tenants with adaptations, there 
is no set targets as each case is individual and has specific needs. However, the 
number of Disabled Adaptions has increased and as the need increases, we will 
increase the adaptations we complete.  
 
Year  No UD UD+ 
Scheme 
Area 
2025 
28 
 
9/9A Richmond 
Avenue 
Central 
AHB Oaklee 
Older Persons 
AHB 
 
62 
 
Bethany House South East AHB Cluid 
AHB 
 
32 
 
Glin Court 
North 
Central 
Regeneration 
Regeneration 
 
78 
 
Parkside 
North 
Central 
AHB Cluid 
AHB 
 
44 
2 
St. Finbar's 
Central 
DCC 
2026 
32 
 
Parkview 
North West AHB O Cualann 
Older persons 
AHB 
 
4 
8 
Dorset Street 
Central 
DCC 
Regeneration 
 
52 
 
Millwood Court North 
Central 
AHB Fold Older 
persons 
AHB 
 
42 
 
Philipsburgh 
Avenue 
North 
Central 
AHB Cabhru 
Older persons 
AHB 
2027 
35 
 
Marrowbone 
Lane 
South 
Central 
AHB Circle 
AHB 
 
19 
 
Broombridge 
Central 
AHB Tuath 
Older Persons 
AHB 
 
30 
 
Clonmacnoise South East AHB Fold 
AHB 
 
47 
 
Gulistan 
Terrace 
South East AHB Cluid 
AHB 
 
5 
 
Constitution 
Hill 
Central 
Regeneration 
Regeneration 
 
40 
 
Jamestown 
Court 
South 
Central 
AHB Alone – 
Older persons 
AHB 
 
7 
 
Meridian Court Central 
AHB Respond 
Older Persons 
AHB 
 
38 
 
Orchard Road Central 
AHB Fold 
AHB 
2028 
86 
6UD+ 
design 
Sillogue 
(11&13) 
North West 
AHB Cluid 
61 Older Persons 
25 UD design 
AHB 
 
26 
 
Ravensdale  
South East AHB Fold 
AHB 
 
5 
3 
St. Andrew's 
Court 
South East Regeneration  
Regeneration 

 
96 
6 
St. Anne's 
Court 
North 
Central 
Regeneration 
Regeneration 
 
59 
 
Thatch Road 
North 
Central 
AHB 
AHB 
 
5 
1 
Glovers Court South East Regeneration 
Regeneration 
2029 
10 
 
Constitution 
Hill 
Central 
Regeneration 
Regeneration 
 
34 
 
Cromcastle  
North 
Central 
Regeneration 
Older Persons 
Regeneration 
 
 
Q.80  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the allocation of new social homes to 
people and families in temporary emergency accommodation in each of the last four 
years (2021-2024). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please find attached figures as requested -  
 
Lettings to Homeless 2021-
2024 
Year 
Total 
2021 
393 
2022 
488 
2023 
470 
2024 
811 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a progress report on the Community Wealth Building 
approach within Dublin City Council’s recruitment, spend and procurement areas of 
responsibility; information on the support for growing social enterprises in the city and 
information on an existing and/or planned pilot area approaches to community wealth 
building. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council (DCC) has been at the forefront of supporting, enabling and 
promoting the social economy for over eleven years in partnership with ICE (Inner 
City Enterprise) and with the support of the Department of Rural and Community 
Development. Nationally, Ireland’s first National Social Enterprise Policy (2019–2022) 
provided a framework with three core objectives:  
 
Building awareness of social enterprise,  
Growing and strengthening social enterprises, and  
Achieving better policy alignment.  
 
DCC, through its Economic Development Office and the Dublin City Social Enterprise 
Committee, made a significant contribution to the development of both national 
policies and continues to align local implementation to these objectives. In July 2024, 
the Government launched Trading for Impact, Ireland’s second National Social 
Enterprise Policy, which expands the focus to five objectives, including sustainability 
and impact measurement. This updated strategy provides a vital foundation for 
DCC’s ongoing work at city level.  

 
Support for Growing Social Enterprises  
 
The Dublin City Social Enterprise Awards, managed by DCC’s Economic 
Development Office, remain central to building and strengthening the sector. Over 
the past eleven years, €574,500 has been invested in supporting 77 social 
enterprises across diverse fields – from gardening projects and cafés to training 
providers, educational initiatives and community-based hairdressing businesses. 
These awards provide both financial grants and tailored mentoring.  The annual 
awards event raises the profile of social enterprises and celebrates their work 
through tailored videos developed and showcased as part of the ceremony. 
Furthermore upon review, over 70% of the Social Enterprises supported are still 
trading after 10 ten years.  
 
In addition, DCC has facilitated social enterprise events during the national local 
enterprise week, and hosted networking events between social enterprises, Council 
buyers and contractors to create supply chain opportunities, further embedding social 
enterprises within the city’s economic and enterprise fabric.  
 
From a policy perspective, the potential of social enterprise aligns with European 
policy and is recognised in DCC’s key strategies, including the Economic 
Development Office Strategy, the Local Economic and Community Plan, the 
Community Wealth Building Plan and the Corporate Plan.  
 
 
The Irish social enterprise sector continues to expand.  
 
As of 2023, there were:  
 
4,335 social enterprises,  
84,382 employees,  
74,825 volunteers,  
Generating €2.34 billion in income in 2021 – equivalent to around 1% of Ireland’s 
modified GNI.  
 
Most enterprises are structured as companies limited by guarantee, many with 
charitable status (Source: Social Enterprises in Ireland – A Baseline Data Collection 
Exercise, Department of Rural and Community Development, 2023).  
 
At national level, DCC’s Head of Economic Development sits on the Trading for 
Impact Stakeholder Engagement Group (TFISEG). This forum is important in 
ensuring that Dublin’s local initiatives are aligned with national policy development 
and stakeholder input.  
 
Dublin City Council is also supporting the establishment of a Social Enterprise Hub – 
the Hub on the Hill which is being developed by ICE (Inner City Enterprise) to provide 
enterprise space for social enterprises from a former Housing Maintenance depot in 
the North Inner City. 
 
 
Q.82  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on Dublin City Council’s procurement of 
Microsoft services, including dates when contracts with Microsoft were entered into, 
what services are currently being provided by Microsoft and whether or not a review 
of the contracts with the corporation has been undertaken recently in light of 

Microsoft’s failure to fulfil its corporate obligations to prevent genocide, war crimes 
and crimes against humanity. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC utilises the critical Microsoft services based on a procurement that is run by the 
LGMA for the whole of the LA sector. They have procured the Enterprise agreements 
based on a mini competition from the national OGP framework which is run and 
manged by the Office of Government Procurement. The master contract is signed by 
the OGP for the whole of government and the LGMA sign the contract for the LA 
sector. DCC has no contract with Microsoft. 
The critical services provided include Microsoft Office 365, security software and 
Azure hosting services. 
 
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
            To ask the Chief Executive for detailed information on all parties involved in the Drone 
Innovation Project and to ask specifically, what country/companies’ drones, and 
software used in the project are procured from? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Drone Innovation Partnership (DIP) project is a Research Ireland, Lero Centre 
funded project, coordinated by Maynooth University in close collaboration and co-
funded by Dublin City Council and Irish Aviation Authority. 
Dublin City Council has not procured any drones, companies or software as part of the 
project. 
The project webpage is being built at the moment, more information will be published 
soon. You can keep updated by accessing: https://droneinnovationpartnership.com/  
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
            To ask the Chief Executive to give a detailed summary of events that led to end of the 
Civic Alliance in Ballymun - why was the Alliance wound up? Who made the decision? 
Outside of the administration of Social Regeneration funding by the Social 
Regeneration Assessment Panel, how is development and regeneration monitored 
and managed in Ballymun?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following the winddown of the Ballymun Regeneration project, the Civic Alliance was 
set up in 2014 to promote Ballymun town in relation to the continuing economic, social, 
environmental and physical development of the area.  The Civic Alliance, through its 
collective expertise, aimed to champion the area locally and nationally.  It advised the 
City Council on development and implementation of existing social, economic and 
environmental strategies in Ballymun, and collaborated with relevant service providers 
in relation to the delivery of quality services. 
During this time, a number of key objectives were delivered, including the Ballymun 
Local Area Plan (LAP) which was adopted in 2017, the recruitment of a Ballymun 
Economic Development Officer the establishment of the Rediscovery Centre, Innovate 
Communities.   
Delivering the objectives of the Ballymun LAP became the central focus of the 
Ballymun regeneration project. As part of this, a new Ballymun LAP Implementation 
Team - chaired by the Head of Planning and comprising of the City Planner, Chief, 
Valuer, Head of Planning and other senior officials - was established. While there is 
no record of the Civic Alliance being officially wound up, it appears that a combination 
of change at senior management level, members vacating the alliance, key projects 
being successfully delivered and a general lack of demand among the stakeholders to 
keep it going, saw the alliance come to a natural end in 2019. 

Currently, regeneration is monitored by the Ballymun LAP Implementation Team, 
which meets bi-monthly to review targets and objectives.  In addition, the Ballymun 
Area Office, Housing Dept, Parks Dept. and Roads & Traffic all have a role to play in 
delivering and monitoring the LAP. Progress reports and presentations are regularly 
provided at monthly Area Committee meetings which are open to scrutiny by areaf 
Councillors. 
 
Q.85  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
            To ask the Chief Executive the current status of PPP Social Housing projects, 
particularly Bundle 3. Is there a contingency in place to deliver these badly needed 
homes and if so, what is the timeline for delivery? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The PPP Bundle 3 project is subject of judicial review proceedings. Accordingly, no 
further information can be disclosed until such time as those proceedings have been 
concluded. Once this process has concluded the housing team will provide Cllrs with 
an update and next steps.  
 
 
Q.86  COUNCILLOR CONNOR REDDY 
            To ask the Chief Executive how many social housing units in Ballymun-Finglas have 
been retrofitted up to BER B2 standard since 2022 and what are the targets for the 
area for the rest of the current council term? How do these targets compare with other 
electoral areas?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Under the Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage, Energy Efficiency 
Retrofit Programme (EERP) a total of 437 Dublin City Council occupied dwellings in 
the Ballymun-Finglas LEA have been upgraded to a B2/CoE level as per the 
requirements of the programme since 2022, of these 324 achieved B2 or greater post 
works.  
 
The programme has proved hugely successful to date and will run for a number of 
years, subject to continued external Departmental funding support, until it reaches its 
conclusion. The level and scale of works in each area is determined by the 
Departmental allocation received for the programme on an annual basis. 
 
Housing Maintenance endeavour to spread the works across all electoral areas in an 
equal and fair manner where possible. Outstanding works are allocated equally across 
all electoral areas pro rata where possible. 
 
 
Housing Maintenance voids section have upgraded 99 properties to a BER B2 under 
the voids programme since 2022.  
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive what the plan is, to make sure that walking and cycling 
routes are not closed without alternative safe routes on a consistent basis during 
construction works.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
All cycle and pedestrian routes will not be closed for the carrying out of construction 
emergency flood alleviation works without safe alternatives. These safe alternatives 
will be assessed by DCC Roadworks Control who issue the roads licences, the Project 
Supervisor Design Process who is responsible for co-ordinating all safety features on 
and adjacent to construction sites, the Project Supervisor Construction Stage who is 

responsible for all site and site affected safety once the construction contract is signed. 
All of these look to maximise Health & Safety associated with the construction of any 
project. 
 
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive could the clothes banks be closed in the interim before 
the new tendered operators begin, as regular dumping at the sites is of concern and 
costly for DCC to maintain.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The incumbent service provider Textile Recycling Ltd., T/A Clothes Pod will continue 
to provide textile collection services until a new contract is in place. Waste 
Management Services has no plans to close any banks in the interim period. 
 
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive when we will have the roll out of CCTV to help prevent 
dumping in the North Central Area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Phase 1 of the CCTV Pilot Scheme “NIC CCTV Scheme Project 1” was rolled out in 
in August 2025 across 3 locations in the North Inner City, (Summer Street North, 
Sherrard Street Lower and Belvedere Place) 
 
We are currently working on the Business Case and DPIA for Phase 2 of the CCTV 
Scheme which is Bottle Banks and Bring Centres. 
 
When approval is granted for Phase 2, we will move to prepare the CCTV scheme for 
Phase 3 – sites nominated by the Area Offices.  
 
Q.90  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if DCC dog wardens can engage with DCC parks on 
North Bull Island to deal with the issue of dogs off leads in restricted areas after 
evidence that protected wildlife, and their habitat have been damaged by dogs let of 
leads in sensitive areas.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Animal Welfare Inspector has engaged with Conservation Officers from the North 
Bull Island and Parks Staff to discuss how best to apply the Control of Dogs Act 1986 
and Parks Bye Laws in the area. Further meetings will be scheduled to build a strategy 
for enforcement.  
 
The Animal Welfare Warden Service has patrolled the North Bull Island on several 
occasions and has engaged with dog walkers to discuss responsible dog ownership. 
The Warden Team will continue to patrol but have highlighted issues with accessing 
certain parts of the conservation zone without access to the normal fleet of vehicles 
and safety equipment.  
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that a report is provided to Malachi Road 
including timelines for the completion of requested actions; and if he will make a 
statement on the matter. The road surface & kerbs are in a very poor condition & 
unsightly, many of the surrounding roads / streets have been resurfaced. How much 

will it cost to resurface, the timeline involved and examine the potential for new 
planters to be installed.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is currently no record of any outstanding requests concerning the road surface 
on Malachi Road. 
While Niall Road in the vicinity has been resurfaced recently, the condition of other 
nearby roads is broadly similar to that of Malachi Road. 
Malachi Road will be considered for inclusion in the 2026 Works Programme. 
 
Q.92  COUNCILLOR DANNY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive for a list of DCC owned properties on the derelict sites 
register with an explanation for each one and a timeline for when each one will be 
brought back into use or disposed of.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Location  
Date entered 
on the DSR 
Date Vested in 
DCC 
Current Status  
Bass Place, 11, Dublin 2. 
04/04/2023 
25/8/2023 
Approved by the 
Elected Members for 
disposal under 
S.183.  
Cadogan Road, 18, Fairview, Dublin 3. 
08/07/2022 
22/08/2024 
Subject of legal 
proceedings 
Clonliffe Road, 57, Ballybough, Dublin 
3. 
08/07/2022 
03/10/2023 
Refurbishment 
Works carried out 
and completed. 
Currently with 
allocations. 
Connaught Street 19, D7 
23/03/2018 
19/08/2019 
Connaught Street 21, D7 
23/03/2018 
19/08/2019 
A structural issue 
was discovered 
within the last 12 
months. This has 
been rectified, and 
the property is 
getting prepared for 
renovation 
Creighton Street, 6, Dublin 2 
16/11/2016 
16/10/2017 
DCC are in the 
process of trying to 
acquire a 
neighbouring 
property to renovate 
both at the same 
time 
Ferguson Road, 10, Drumcondra, D9. 
26/09/2017 
14/01/2019 
Ferguson Road, 8, Drumcondra, D.9. 
28/09/2017 
14/01/2019 
Under Part 8 
Planning Housing 
received some 
additional 
recommendations 
which we are 
currently 
investigating 
Frederick Street North, 30, Dublin 1. 
18/04/2023 
 
20/9/2024 
Under consideration 
for appropriate future 
use and 
refurbishment of this 
Protected Structure 

Harold's Cross Road, 144, Dublin 6W. 
08/06/2007 
17/04/2018 
This property has 
severe structural 
issues which are 
currently being 
monitored by our 
structural team. A 
decision on how best 
to proceed has yet to 
be reached 
Main Street, 39a, Chapelizod, Dublin 
20. 
23/01/2023 
 
 
09/02/2024 
Not considered 
suitable for DCC 
housing 
requirements.  
Consideration may 
given to disposal for 
sale on open market 
and future 
development, subject 
to approval of 
Elected Members. 
Mulberry Cottages, 1, Martin's Row, 
Chapelizod, Dublin 20. 
26/06/2015 
02/06/2022 
 Mulberry Cottages, 10, Martin's Row, 
Chapelizod, Dublin 20. 
26/06/2015 
02/06/2022 
Mulberry Cottages, 11, Martin's Row, 
Chapelizod, Dublin 20. 
26/06/2015 
02/06/2022 
Mulberry Cottages, 2, Martin's Row, 
Chapelizod, Dublin 20. 
26/06/2015 
02/06/2022 
Mulberry Cottages, 5, Martin's Row, 
Chapelizod, D.20. 
10/04/2019 
02/06/2022 
Mulberry Cottages, 6, Martin's Row, 
Chapelizod, D.20. 
10/04/2019 
02/06/2022 
Mulberry Cottages, 7, Martin's Row, 
Chapelizod, Dublin 20. 
26/06/2015 
02/06/2022 
 
 
Not considered 
suitable for DCC’s 
housing 
requirements.  
Consideration may 
given to disposal for 
sale on open market 
and future 
development, subject 
to approval of 
Elected Members 
Parnell Street, 77, Dublin 1 
14/01/2022 
10/5/2024 
Subject of legal 
proceedings 
Parnell Street, 78, Dublin 1 
14/01/2022 
10/5/2024 
Subject of legal 
proceedings 
Ranelagh, 2, Dublin 6. 
12/11/2021 
 
10/5/2024 
Consideration being 
given to disposal 
under URDF Call 3 
Programme 
Richmond Avenue, 21 & 27-29 & lands 
at rear, D.3. 
13/12/2012 
20/05/2021 
Subject to legal 
proceedings 
Saint Assam's Park, 24, Raheny , 
Dublin 5. 
26/03/2024 
13/2/2025 
Refurbishment 
almost complete 
Terrace Place, 6 (rear 23 Rutland St. 
Lr.), D1. 
20/10/2008 
01/04/2022 
Terrace Place, 7 & 8, Dublin 1. 
14/06/2019 
01/04/2022 
Under Part 8 
Planning Housing 
received some 
additional 
recommendations 
which we are 
currently 
investigating. 
Thomas Court, 37, Dublin 8. 
18/02/2016 
 
30/03/2020 
Area Office – funding 
approved for 
refurbishment for use 
as community based 
project. 

 
The Housing Department initially acquired the majority of the properties listed above for 
refurbishment projects aimed at social housing. However, the department has recently 
decided to focus on sites that can yield multiple units for the city, rather than these smaller 
infill refurbishment projects, which can be costly and resource intensive. 
 
Subject to consent from the Housing Department, the Property Development Department 
intends to pursue the disposal of selected properties as part of a broader strategy to 
combat vacancy and dereliction across Dublin. This initiative will be developed in close 
collaboration with elected members through the Urban Vacancy and Dereliction Cross-
Party Working Group, with the aim of establishing a robust and transparent framework for 
property disposal. 
 
The proposed framework will prioritise outcomes that support community regeneration and 
housing access. International best practise is being reviewed, and preference may be given 
to first-time buyers, key workers, housing co-operatives, and small-scale builders, ensuring 
that redevelopment efforts contribute to inclusive urban renewal. The framework will also 
incorporate safeguards such as covenants and development agreements to prevent land 
hoarding and ensure timely activation of sites. 
 
This proposal will be brought to the Planning SPC for its consideration in the first instance. 
 
 
Q.93  COUNCILLOR DANNY BYRNE 
           To ask the Chief Executive to state how many compulsory purchase orders for vacant 
or derelict properties have been completed in the last 5 years 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Derelict Sites Act 1990 provides Local Authorities with the power to acquire 
properties that have fallen into dereliction either by agreement or compulsorily. Under 
this legislation, 27 properties have been acquired between October 2019 to 
September 2025. 
Twenty-one (21) of these were retained by DCC under the control of the Housing & 
Community Department with the intended purpose of being used for social housing.  
One property was approved by the Elected Members for disposal and the remaining 
5 are currently included on the programme approved by the Department of Housing, 
Local Government & Heritage under URDF Scheme Call 3. 
 
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
           To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the ornamental pear tree replacement in 
Marino. To include how many trees have been replaced to date and what is the 
envisaged completion time for the program. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
To date approximately 70 problematic pear trees identified by the Marino Residents 
Association have been removed.  Unfortunately, the replacement programme has not 
kept up with the prioritised plan agreed with the residents as the stumps, root plates 
and major roots of the previous occupants of the planting pits have not degraded as 
quickly as anticipated preventing timely replacements.   
 
The Parks Service is continuing to monitor the situation and will plant as many planting 
pits as are suitable each year.  The programme agreed with the residents did not 
envisage completing the replacement of the problematic trees on a street-by-street 

basis.  Rather the plan was devised whereby the most problematic trees adjacent to 
most vulnerable residents were frontloaded in the programme.  It was also a priority of 
the plan that not too many trees would be removed from any one street at any one 
time as this was seen as a priority to the residents’ association.  The planned removal 
of these trees continues until 2029-30 with fewer and fewer trees being replaced each 
year. 
 
12 small canopy trees were planted in the Marino area as part of this programme in 
the winter of 2024/25.  Inspections will be taking place of potential planting location to 
include in this winter’s tree planting programme in the coming weeks. 
 
Q.95  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
           To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report on the new library planned for Fairview 
Park, including a summary of all work completed to date and a proposed timeline 
outlining key milestones and the expected delivery date for the project. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The proposed Fairview library is combined with the proposed tearoom, as a single 
project. 
The project is currently at Stage 1 in the procurement of an architect led integrated 
design team (IDT). It is anticipated that the IDT for the project will be in place first 
quarter of 2026. 
 
The key projected milestones are: 
• 
Q1 2026 – IDT Commission 
• 
Q4 2027 – Pre-Part 8 & Part 8 Process 
• 
2029 -2030 – Construction (2-year construction period) 
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the work that has been carried out to 
date by DCC parks on the grass and playing surfaces on the top and bottom circles 
in the Marino estate and what work will be carried out in future. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Other than routine maintenance no pitch improvement works have been carried out or 
scheduled on the playing surfaces here in 2025.  Consideration can be given to 
including this location on the prioritised pitch improvement programme for 2026. 
 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the tree pruning on Griffith Avenue. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As part of our ongoing citywide tree inventory, a professional arborist conducted a 
comprehensive survey of the trees along Griffith Avenue Road. Over 1,000 trees were 
assessed and recorded in April 2021.  
 
The survey found that 63% of the tree population is constituted by mature trees. It is 
likely that they are the remaining trees of the tree planting carried out in late 
1920’s/1930’s. The tree population is dominated by two species: Platanus x hispanica 
(58%) and Tilia x europaea (17%). 
 

The survey conducted identified 29 trees in poor condition, which were subsequently 
removed in 2021. Additionally, crown cleaning was performed on 166 trees. 
 
In 2024, the first cycle of crown reduction commenced along Griffith Avenue, 
specifically in the section between Malahide Road and Philipsburgh Avenue. During 
this phase, 196 street trees underwent crown reduction. Furthermore, four trees that 
were under close observation due to deteriorating health were removed to ensure 
public safety. 
 
The second cycle of pruning in 2025 focused on the stretch of Griffith Avenue between 
Philipsburgh Avenue and Drumcondra Road. This phase involved crown reduction of 
approximately 270 trees identified as requiring maintenance to enhance tree health 
and longevity. 
 
In 2026, pruning operations will target the trees located between Saint Mobhi Road 
and Drumcondra Road. This will continue the systematic approach to tree 
management along Griffith Avenue, ensuring consistent care across the entire 
corridor. 
 
The final phase of the current pruning cycle is planned for 2027, addressing the trees 
between Saint Mobhi Road and Glasnevin Down. This will complete the 
comprehensive maintenance program initiated in 2024. 
 
In 2029, the cycle will recommence with crown reduction activities resuming between 
Malahide Road and Philipsburgh Avenue, thereby establishing a continuous, multi-
year tree management strategy aimed at preserving the health, safety, and aesthetic 
value of the street trees in Griffith Avenue. 
 
 
Q.98  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive what specific actions is Dublin City Council taking to 
address the use of Irish flag on lampposts etc, as a way to cause intimidation, hate or 
division in local communities?    In particular, could the following be addressed -  
1. An update on what criteria are being used to decide when and where flags will be 
removed? 
2. An update on what engagement has happened with the Gardai and local area 
management? 
3. An update on how the Council is engaging with residents and community groups to 
ensure the flag remains a symbol of unity rather than exclusion 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This issue is one that needs careful consideration due to the broader context in which 
flying the flag has been interpreted. The City Council is also very cognisant of the risks 
associated with any unauthorised installations on public infrastructure. With this in 
mind, a comprehensive risk assessment is required before any action can be 
considered; these assessments are currently being carried out and will inform any 
decision made. With regard to community engagement, discussions are ongoing with 
local and national stakeholders, including elected members, on the best way of 
identifying and then addressing the issues signified by raising of flags across the city.  
 
 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an urgent update on the status of the derelict 
car wash site on Conyngham Road, which has become a hotspot for drug use and 
hazardous waste, including used needles? What immediate steps will be taken to 

secure the site, ensure regular clean-ups, and explore long-term redevelopment 
options to eliminate this serious public health and safety risk to local families and 
children? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Derelict Sites have an active file on this site, an inspection was carried out on the 25th 
August 2025, and a Section 10 (warning) letter issued to the owners on the 10th 
September 2025 with a request to attend to the site. It is our understanding that a lease 
to CIE has been granted, with a view to future development of the site, and a Section 
10 letter has also been issued to CIE. Failure to engage with requests to appropriately 
secure the site, arrange for site clearance and clean up will result in Derelict Sites 
Section implementing the statutory procedures and adding to the Derelict Sites 
Register. 
 
 
Q.100  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm whether The Liberties is included in the 
implementation of the ‘Urban Communities Initiative’ and the review of the 
concentration of services in Dublin City Centre, as outlined in the ‘Rejuvenating Our 
Capital City Centre’ section of the Programme for Government? Given that The 
Liberties is part of the central city area and is zoned accordingly in the Development 
Plan, can the Council also clarify which Government Department is leading on these 
commitments and what the implementation timelines are? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As part of the roadmap for delivery of the Taoiseach’s Taskforce on Dublin City the 
commitment was made to enhance community support, this included reviewing 
services for vulnerable persons and a mapping of existing services and facilities for 
vulnerable persons, both at a statutory and voluntary level.  
 
The Department of An Taoiseach are currently co-ordinating various agencies 
(including DCC.DRHE.HSE) to carry out the necessary audit to inform next steps. 
The area in scope in the first instance is outlined in the “Dublin City Taskforce, 
Roadmap for Delivery” but it will need to take cognisance of the full city in terms of 
service provision. 
 
The DRHE are also working with voluntary service providers at present on the most 
inclusive way to support vulnerable persons while ensuring a safe, dignified and 
secure service is provided for all. 
 
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm whether Colonel Grey Wolf Ltd was always the 
legal owner of land at (details supplied) including when it was taken in charge by 
Dublin City Council; why it was taken in charge if this was the case; and whether proof 
of said ownership can be furnished to Councillors and to residents who are concerned 
about this matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
The small parcel of land in question at Details Supplied was taken in charge by Dublin 
City Council DCC in 1998 as public open space.  However, Grey Wolf Colonel Ltd are 
registered owners of the land which is in front of a proposed development site.  Grey 
Wolf Colonel Ltd have asserted their ownership rights in respect of this area and 
instituted legal proceedings against DCC in this regard. 
 

It is important to note that the land use zoning objective of this parcel of land is Z1 
Sustainable Residential Development. It is anticipated that the Developer will apply for 
Planning Permission. The treatment of the piece of land will be in accordance and 
subject to the requirements of the grant of any planning permission that may be 
determined.  An area of 8m x 4m outside of the hares fencing will continue to 
be maintained by Parks Services as open space. 
 
 
Q.102  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure the provision of road safety measures at Killester-
Raheny Clontarf Educate Together National School is prioritised for the safety of young 
children attending the school, including:  
• 
Pavement markings  
• 
Bollards or other measures to prevent illegal parking on footpaths 
• 
Speed reduction measures such as signage, road bumps, and enhanced 
enforcement at school pick-up and drop-off times 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Sustainable Mobility team is currently working through Round 3 of the NTA's Safe 
Routes to School programme to which this school was not an applicant. We don’t 
currently have the resources to work outside of this programme at the moment, but I 
can confirm that the school is on our waiting list for School Zone treatment and if/when 
we are in a position, we will liaise with the school.  
 
Q.103  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive that a decision be made on traffic calming measures at 
Brookwood Crescent, Artane which has many elderly residents as well as young 
families, as soon as possible. It is the only street in the area with no traffic calming 
measures and as a result has become attractive to joyriders who use the road to 
speed.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 11183431) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR MARY CALLAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on all housing developments in 
the Ballymun/Finglas LEA with current status, expected completion time, 
expected dates for commencement of allocation and any expected delays, in 
tabular form. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The link below is the Housing Supply Report that is presented to Council each month. 
This report provides information by both Council Area and by housing delivery stage 
 
Q.105  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive, given the ongoing issues with drug use and anti-social 
behaviour in our local parks, and considering that a previous request for a dedicated 
park warden was refused by the area council, would Dublin City Council now 
reconsider assigning a park warden to areas that need it for example Mellowes park, 

to help improve safety and ensure our parks remain safe and welcoming for all 
members of the community. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Service operate a ranging system which ensures Mellowes Park is locked 
after hours. Generally, Park wardens are only employed at Parks which have sports 
facilities and pavilions. These facilities attract a high volume of footfall into the evening 
period, outside normal park staff hours. Mellowes Park is a small community park 
which does not attract such volume of users to justify the placement of a dedicated 
warden. Any antisocial behaviour or criminal activity should be reported immediately 
to An Gardai Siochana. 
 
Q.106  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive, in light of the ongoing issues with drug use and anti-
social behaviour in our parks and considering that a previous request was refuse by 
the council would DCC now reconsider installing public CCTV in this area to help 
deter criminal activity for example burning of playgrounds and improve public safety 
for park users.      
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In general, Parks Services do not install CCTV in our parks or public open spaces. We 
do not have any staffing resources available to monitor such equipment.  Any antisocial 
behaviour or criminal activity should be report immediately to An Gardai Siochana.   
 
Q.107  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive if a letter could be sent to the government regarding 
much needed legislation to prevent the supply of the Nitrous Oxide canisters to 
young people, as our communities are being destroyed by this serious problem.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Correspondence will issue, as requested. 
 
Q.108  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
            To ask the Chief Executive to provide immediate release of traffic survey taken for 
Details Supplied and a clear timeline for the trialling of filtered permeability at Details 
Supplied  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Traffic survey taken for Details Supplied will be sent to all Councillors via the 
North Central Area office before Friday the 3rd of October 2025. Once this report is 
released, a meeting will be organised by the North Central Area office to discuss this 
report. 
 
Q.109  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
            Can the Chief Executive what plans he can put in place to safeguard Details Supplied 
as locals are concerned about its condition and can he make a statement on the 
matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The vegetation overgrowing this wall was cut right back in the last 2 weeks.  This will 
allow a visual inspection of the wall to ascertain if a more detailed condition survey is 
required. 
 
 
 

Q.110  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
           To ask the Chief Executive in relation to Details Supplied  
a.      Why no safe routes to school project has been installed at this school in order 
to prevent unlawful parking and to safeguard the lives of the children attending the 
school  
b.      Say when same can be installed 
c.      Say what other interim/long-term measures can be taken by City Council to 
reduce speeding at this location so as to safeguard pedestrians crossing the main 
road at this point, as currently, navigating their way across the road and along the 
footpath is regularly hazardous, with motor vehicles accessing/egressing the 
footpaths there 
d.      Can the location be re-examined with a view to the introduction of a school 
traffic warden being re-considered due to the unusually demanding set of 
circumstances that exist at this school. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Sustainable Mobility team is currently working through Round 3 of the NTA's Safe 
Routes to School programme to which this school was not an applicant. We don’t 
currently have the resources to work outside of this programme at the moment, but I 
can confirm that the school is on our waiting list for School Zone treatment and if/when 
we are in a position, we will liaise with the school.  
 
If speeding is an issue at the location, the Gardaí should be informed and asked to 
monitor and enforce the law as needed.  
 
D. The Traffic Advisory Group at its August meeting has recommended a school 
warden at the above location. Once the statutory process has been completed the 
School Warden Unit will be in touch with the Details Supplied   
 
Q.111  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
            To ask the Chief Executive, in relation to location as per details Supplied say if he 
can arrange to inspect same from a health and safety aspect, with the view of installing 
pencil bollards along details attached to safeguard children accessing/egressing local 
school and nearby property (which property was recently damaged when a motor 
vehicle hit same) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
a. Details Supplied was a participant school on the Safe Routes to School 
programme funded by the National Transport Authority. As part of the programme 
the Council engaged with the school and local community about possible School 
Zone designs. Following an extensive consultation process it was not possible to 
arrive at a traffic management solution for this School Zone so we will not be able 
to progress the project at this stage.  
 
b. Bollards are only considered in exceptional circumstances, where there is a 
demonstrable health and safety issue. Bollards are not accident prevention devices 
and are not impact resistant. The placing of bollards would hinder the movement 
of pedestrians and reduce the footpath width, impacting on wheelchair users and 
prams. 
 

Instances of illegal parking should be reported directly to Dublin Street Parking 
Services by phone 01 602 2500 or e-mail info@dsps.ie, or An Garda Síochána as 
infringements occur. 
 
Q.112  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive can he provide a detailed report of footpath repairs for 
the Cremore Estate and surrounding areas including when they are due to be repaired. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Cremore Estate footpaths will be considered for inclusion in 2026’s works programme. 
 
Q.113  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive when will the Double-Yellow Lines be installed at Botanic 
Park. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Double Yellow Lines on Botanic Park have been recently recommended by the 
Area Engineer. The recommendation is required to go through the Transport 
Advisory Group (TAG) process, which can take between 6 – 8 weeks. Once it has 
gone through the TAG process the Line Marking team is notified and it is added to 
their schedule of works.  
 
Q.114  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive how long after reporting an abandoned vehicle does it take 
to remove the vehicle? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
 
Q.115  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 

          To ask the Chief Executive can a moratorium and a zero-tolerance approach for the 
use of E-Scooters, E-Bikes and Scramblers be put in place in the city of Dublin until a 
solution is found to deal with this ever-increasing problem. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The issues associated with the use of Scramblers and powered personal mobility 
devices are recognised by Dublin City Council and by other relevant authorities. The 
Council acknowledges public concern regarding the dangerous or antisocial use of 
these vehicles, particularly in pedestrian areas, public parks, and on roads. 
However, implementing a citywide moratorium or a zero-tolerance approach is not 
currently feasible, for the following reasons: 
1. Legal Framework: 
The use of powered personal transporters is now regulated under the Road 
Traffic and Roads Act 2023, which permits their legal use under defined 
conditions. Dublin City Council does not have the authority to ban or suspend 
the use of devices that are permitted under national legislation. 
2. Enforcement Powers: 
The enforcement of road traffic laws, including the regulation of scramblers 
and the misuse of powered personal transporters, lies primarily with An Garda 
Síochána. While the Council supports the Gardaí in enforcement activities, it 
does not have the statutory powers to confiscate or prohibit these vehicles. 
3. Scramblers and Off-Road Vehicles: 
The illegal and unsafe use of scramblers, particularly in public parks and open 
spaces, is a safety concern and public order issue.  
4. Sustainable Transport Policy: 
E-Scooters and E-Bikes, when used legally and responsibly, form part of 
Dublin’s wider efforts to promote sustainable and active travel. The Council is 
working closely with the National Transport Authority and other stakeholders 
to ensure that these modes are safely integrated into the city’s transport 
network, including the development of designated infrastructure, appropriate 
regulations, and public awareness campaigns. 
In conclusion, while Dublin City Council shares the concerns about misuse and 
supports stronger enforcement, a moratorium or zero-tolerance policy would require 
national legislative changes and coordinated action between the Council, An Garda 
Síochána, the Department of Transport, and the NTA. The Council will continue to 
engage with all relevant agencies to seek practical and enforceable solutions to this 
ongoing issue. 
  
 
Q.116  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the upgrade of Martin Savage Park 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Christopher O’Sullivan TD, Minister of State for Nature, Heritage and Biodiversity has 
advised that the proposed development at Martin Savage Park will not have an 
adverse impact overall in relation to the population of Light Bellied Brent Geese LBBG 
in the wider Dublin area. The planned works at the park may proceed without prejudice. 
The ongoing work and planned surveys (Stage 2 study - overwintering surveys of 
LBBG 2026/2027) in relation to the development gives NPWS scientific confidence 
that sustainable conservation population and area targets can be set and achieved for 
LBBG population in the wider Dublin area. 

Dublin City Council will arrange a meeting with St. Oliver Plunkett Eoghan Ruadh GAA 
Club to discuss the development of an all-weather pitch in Martin Savage Park. 
 
Q.117  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
            To ask the Chief Executive what steps have been taken to re-municipalise waste 
collection as recommended by the Taoiseach's Taskforce or to operate a franchise 
system through the local authority 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has no legal basis to re-municipalise waste collection within its 
administrative area. However, the Executive Manager, Environment and 
Transportation Department via his position on the County & City Management 
Association (CCMA),  Environment, Climate & Circular Economy Committee is 
currently engaging with the Department of Climate, Energy and Environment and 
their consultants RPS, as part of the Public Consultation on the Feasibility of 
Transitioning Ireland’s Waste Collection Market from its current Side-by-Side 
licensing system to a Franchise Tendering System. 
Big Move 6 of the Taoiseach’s taskforce makes a number of recommendations for 
improvements to waste collection in the city. The Environment & Transportation 
Department is engaged directly with the Waste Collection industry in relation to 
recommendation 1, “to provide immediate alternative solutions to presentation of 
bagged waste and full withdrawal of derogation of bagged waste”.   
Following 12 months of engagement with the Waste Collectors that operate in the 
City, we will launch during October 2025 the Phase 1 removal of the derogation on 
90 Streets within the South Commercial area of the City.  In this area, 2 alternative 
options for disposal of waste, in addition to the preferred Wheelie Bin solution will be 
made available to customers , 1) Disposal of Waste at Street waste compactors 
located within the pilot area and 2) a door to door collection service.  The Waste 
Collectors have been engaging with their customers to offer the various options in 
advance of the pilot commencing.  The Council will then turn its attention to the area 
of the 2nd Phase of the Pilot which will cover approx. 110 streets in the North 
Commercial area of the City (Gardiner Street – Capel Steet and Parnell Square – the 
Quays).  We aim to have the necessary infrastructure in place to commence this 
phase by January 2026. 
 
 
Q.118  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
          To ask the Chief Executive to outline the next phases of the City Centre Transport Plan 
including timelines for each phase 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The main focus for 2025/2026 of the City Centre Transport Plan is the College Green 
Dame Street project.  
Additionally, work on the Gardiner Street cycle lane and the Beresford Place/ Amiens 
Street gyratory has commenced and will also be further developed during 2026. 
 
 
Q.119  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
          To ask the Chief Executive for the number of fines issued for littering, illegal dumping 
and dog fouling for the years 2023, 2024 and 2025 broken down by LEA 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

2023 
Central 
North 
Central 
North West South 
Central 
South East 
Illegal 
Dumping/Litter 
307 
94 
6 
340 
333 
Dog Fouling  
0 
4 
2 
0 
0 
 
2024  
Central 
North 
Central 
North West South 
Central 
South East 
Illegal 
Dumping/Litter 
91 
19 
7 
169 
108 
Dog Fouling 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
 
2025 (to End 
September) 
Central 
North 
Central 
North West South 
Central 
South East 
Illegal 
Dumping/Litter 
145 
2 
1 
55 
84 
Dog Fouling 
0 
2 
0 
0 
0 
 
 
 
Q.120  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
          To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the work of the LAIT and the development 
of an integration strategy of the city? 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The national strategy for Migrant Integration is due for publication by June 2026.  
Once the strategy is published the City Council will begin development of a Local 
Migrant Strategy, as required. Local Migrant Integration Strategies adopt a broad 
definition of 'migrant,' encompassing all non-native individuals, their Irish-born 
children, and new citizens.  
The LAIT mandate is to provide a specialised support structure for specific, identified 
cohorts. While the development of the Local Migrant Integration Strategy is explicitly 
outside the scope of work of the Local Authority Integration Team (LAIT), the LAIT is 
positioned as a key stakeholder in both the development and effective delivery of the 
local strategy.  
While awaiting the national strategy, the LAIT is proactively engaging in international 
collaboration, consulting with Eurocities to benchmark and learn best practices from 
other EU urban centres regarding highly effective integration models. This ensures 
the work of the LAIT remains informed by global expertise whilst operating within the 
defined local mandate. 
With regard to the achievements of the LAIT since its introduction to Dublin City 
Council in January 2025, a significant body of work has been completed including the 
following: 
 
- 
90 Meetings with partners and centre managers 
- 
In person clinics since June 2025 offering supports to 114 individuals and 
addressing over 230 queries relating to education, training, accommodation, justice 
and rights, employment, work experience, sport, health and child and family 
services.  

- 
14 events organised or supported by the LAIT including the inaugural meeting of the 
Community Integration Forum chaired by Lord Mayor, Cllr Ray Mc Adam, a Culture 
night event in Hill Street Community Centre in partnership with Comhairle na nÓg, 
Africa Day in Royal Hospital Kilmainham and participated in several conferences 
such as the Migrant Women’s Leaders Seminar and various expos   
 
 
Q.121  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
          To ask the Chief Executive for a list of the greening projects in the North Inner City 
which have taken place over the past 5 years and are due to take place in the next 
year? Along with the budget associated with them and the increase in tree coverage 
as a result 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please see Excel table showing Greening projects as requested.  Some more detail 
to follow on numbers of trees and budgets, as discussed directly with Councillor 
Janet Horner.  
  
Completed Projects  
Year 
complete  
AC 
Areas  
Strategy  
New 
Trees  
Depaving 
m2 
Amiens Street (Connolly Station) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
4 
4 
Annesley Avenue/Annesley Close 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
5 
50 
Annesley Bridge Road (Installation) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
Ballybough (Bridge Greening) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
110 
Ballybough (Bio Fencing) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
Ballybough Suicide Plot (Pocket Park) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
0 
150 
Belvedere Place (Triangle) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
3 
45 
Belvedere Ave 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
Beresford Place (Central Median - 6 
trees)  
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
6 
150 
Beresford Place (Central Median)  
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
6 
80 
Buckingham Street Upper (HSE) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
1 
15 
Buckingham Street (Fesibility Study) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
Buskingham Str (Plaza Refurb Works 
(Ground works)) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
Bus Aras (Triangle) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
0 
600 
Campbells Row (Square) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
1 
  
Church Road, North Wall  
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
1 
  
Commons Street (Green Wall) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
1 
Crosscare Centre 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
6 
70 
Diamond Park/Gardiner Street Lower 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
150 
950 
Dorset Street (Phase 1) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
11 
160 
Dorset Street (Phase 2) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
7 
70 
Dorset Street (Phase 3 & 4 & 5) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
32 
220 
Dorset Street (Car Crash Repairs) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
3 
  
Dorset Street (Extension) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
10 
East Wall Road /Alfie Bryne Junction 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
3 
260 

Emmet Street 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
7 
70 
Forth Street, East Wall 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
4 
50 
Gardiner street Flats  
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
6 
5 
Georges Quay  
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
6 
80 
Gloucester Place (Bio Garden) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
4 
100 
Gloucester Place (SUDS) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
1 
80 
Gloucester Place (Control) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
1 
50 
Greenville Street 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
10 
3 
James Joyce Street  
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
12 
120 
James Joyce Street (Liberty House) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
32 
  
James Joyce Street Park  
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
22 
140 
Kings Avenue (Bio Garden) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
1 
20 
Liberty Park (Planting - Seating) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
Liberty Park (Interim Works - Bins) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
Liberty Park (Interim Works - Gym) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
Liberty Park (Interim Works - New 
Entrance) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
Liberty Park (Interim - 
Creche/Hedging/Play Trail) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
Mountjoy Parade, Drumcondra 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
3 
25 
North Richmond Street  
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
4 
20 
North Strand Road - Planters  
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
O'Connells School - Adopt a Tree  
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
20 
  
Oriel Street Upper (Sheriff Street Lower) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
5 
200 
Poplar Row (Central Median) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
1 
10 
Poplar Row (Ballybough House)  
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
26 
  
Poplar Row (Repair/replacements) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
Poplar Row (Planters)  
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
Poplar Row (Tree Planting/Hse) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
1 
  
Portland Street North 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
7 
70 
Royal Canal Greenway (Liner Park) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
150 
6000 
Royal Canal Greenway  (Phase 2 (Quay 
Walls)) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
Royal Canal Greenway  (Exercise Mile) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
Royal Canal Greenway (Remedial 
Works) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
10 
  
Russell Street (Cancelled) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
Sackville Avenue (Bio Garden) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
3 
280 
Sackville Avenue (Bio Garden/Fencing) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
  
Sean MacDermott Street 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
7 
90 
Seville Place (Plaza) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
3 
65 
Seville Place (Green Walling) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
1 
Sherrard Avenue 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
4 
30 
Sherrard Street Lower 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
9 
90 
Sillouge Road 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
50 
  

Spring Garden Street (Planters Pilot) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
4 
  
St Brigid's Rd Upper 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
10 
90 
Store Street  
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
5 
5 
St Joseph's Terrace, Drumcondra 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
0 
1 
Summer Street North 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
11 
100 
Summer Hill Parade (HSE Tree 
Planting) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
6 
50 
Summer Hill Parade (HSE Hedging) 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
0 
60 
Summer Hill (Central Median)  
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
6 
400 
Talbot Street 
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
  
100 
Summer Hill (Terrace)  
  
Central  
NEIC GS 
3 
40 
Murals - Ben Edair, Malachi, Aughrim & 
Viking Place  
2021 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
  
  
Arbour Hill Phase 1  
2020 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
100 
6 
Stoneybatter Green planting  
2022 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
  
  
Planting pits on Lucky Lane  
2022 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
  
  
Haliday Park Improvements 
2022 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
  
  
Altona Lane Climbers  
2022 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
  
  
Drumalee Green, Court, Rd & 
Avenue  Tree planting  
2023 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
20 
700 
Montpelier Drive planting  
2022 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
  
  
Montpelier Nature Play Space  
2021 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
10 
400 
Harold Road Tree planting  
2022 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
10 
57.6 
Ostman Place Tree planting  
2022 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
9 
40 
Viking Place Tree planting  
2022 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
9 
2 
Thor Place Park Improvements 
2023 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
  
  
Arbour Hill Rain garden  
2024 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
6 
100 
Niall & Murtagh Street Tree planting  
2023 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
10 
43 
Sigurd Road Tree planting  
2023 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
7 
30 
Fitzwilliam Place North Tree planting  
2025 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
3 
21 
Swords Street Tree planting  
2023 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
26 
6 
Ben Edair Tree Planting  
2025 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
11 
47,5 
Moira Road Tree Planting  
2025 
Central  
Stoneybatter 
GS 
8 
32 
 
 
Q.122  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 

To ask the Chief Executive whether any consideration is being given to working with 
the NTA and TFI to develop a Dublin Transit App as many other cities have which 
would integrate various bike sharing platforms along with public transport options 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
I have been informed by the National Transport Authority that they have no plans to 
develop a dedicated Dublin Transit application. 
 
Q.123  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to (i) detail and approved amendments to Clery’s original 
planning application and (ii) to confirm that this part of the application/s has been 
realised according to planning application/s as approved and detail any outstanding 
elements approved but not yet realised? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A response will issue directly to the Councillor within the next two weeks. 
 
Q.124  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to Brookwood Crescent as to why it is the only 
road in the area without speed ramps.  I would be grateful if this road could be tested 
with a view to installing speed ramps. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 11183431) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
 
Q.125  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to major problems with illegal parking in many 
areas such as Killester, Harmonstown, Raheny.  Our Parking Enforcement section 
seems to be over stretched with work.  I was wondering if we could increase the staff 
in this section.  I have had so many issues raised from residents in relation to people 
parking across their driveways, parking on yellow lines etc.  I understand that they 
can ring the Garda, but they are also over stretched.  I was wondering if this section 
could be looked at for more staffing.  Residents are very frustrated.   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council engages the services of Dublin Street Parking Services to enforce 
all illegal parking across the Dublin City area. They have been requested to keep a 
focus on Harmonstown Road and surrounding areas as part of their patrols. Since the 
start of August there have been 25 visits to Harmonstown Road at varying times of the 
day. On 16 occasions the area was all clear when inspected and there were 9 incidents 
of Fixed Penalty Notices issued on the road. 
It should be noted that Dublin Street Parking Services have a finite number of crews 
and vans, each assigned to a different geographical area of the city. While they do 
their best to patrol as much of the city as possible on a daily basis, due to the number 
of enforcement requests received from members of the public, the density of people, 
the proliferation of illegal parking and the huge number of vehicles on the road in their 
catchment area this is not always possible. However, they will continue to focus on 
these areas and enforce all illegal parking in this area when encountered. 
 

 
Q.126  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to Camper Vans parking in carparks at 
beaches, at the side of roads etc.  If an area could be given for them to park and 
have some facilities.  Like in other countries.  I have raised this issue before and 
maybe we could link in with Bord Failte on this issue. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking of camper vans in parks is not permitted under Park Bylaws.  Enforcement of 
this is a matter for An Gardai Siochana as authorised agents under these Byelaws. 
Q.127  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
           To ask the Chief Executive please look at the enclosed Housing application of 
DETAILS SUPPLIED as a matter of priority this family is waiting years for 
consideration. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant holds their housing application with South Dublin County Council, 
they have a crossover with Dublin City Council and are on Band 2 of the Housing List 
with an application date of 13/05/2013 and hold the following positions on the waiting 
list -  
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
J 
3 
52 
 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 
number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list. 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
The applicant should be advised to keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being 
advertised that may be of interest to her and to ensure she makes an application for 
same. 
 
Q.128  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to look at housing application of DETAILS SUPPLIED and 
provide an update. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing List with a medical priority and an application 
date of 14/01/2025 and holds the following positions on the waiting list -  
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
J 
3 
5 
J 
4 
4 
K 
3 
14 

K 
4 
7 
L 
3 
6 
L 
4 
1 
 
I note from the applicant’s housing file that they recently refused the offer of 
accommodation in Stonemount which they had applied for through Choice Based 
Lettings. The applicant’s interest in the above properties has been noted on her 
housing file. 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 
number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list. 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
The applicant should be advised to keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being 
advertised that may be of interest to her and to ensure she makes an application for 
same. 
 
 
Q.129  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to look at the enclosed DETAILS SUPPLIED  
Can DCC please look into the following requests from DETAILS SUPPLIED. It is vital 
for the continued growth of this business that DCC allows some flexibility here with the 
enclosed proposals in order that modular offices or a re-fit of existing buildings 
happens ASAP. The company has increased it work-force from 90 plus to over 140 in 
the past year.   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC is committed to supporting the growth of businesses and is considering the 
proposal, which was also submitted directly by the tenant, in the context of the terms 
and conditions of the lease.  It is expected that a response will issue to the tenant 
shortly from the Property Disposals Section. 
 
Q.130  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
           To ask the Chief Executive to please put additional pressure on Pobal to release 
monies agreed to allow construction on the new extension to the Childcare Facility, 
Cherry Orchard Childcare Project Croftwood Crescent Ballyfermot Dublin 10. The 
project has received planning permission, funding was agreed with Pobal however it 
is becoming impossible to draw down the funding leaving the project management 
team at their witts end, I regret if not sorted they will lose the preferred contractor thus 
delaying the project for up to 2 years. I am asking DCC write / correspond with Pobal 
in relation to delays which are unacceptable. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Correspondence will issue, as requested. 
 
Q.131  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
            To ask the Chief Executive what solutions is the council devising to deal with 
the Parking at Crestfield x Collins Ave Junction please? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Parking restrictions are currently enforced through double yellow lines and a 
continuous white line. 
 
Instances of illegal parking should be reported directly to Dublin Street Parking 
Services, Dublin City Council’s Parking Enforcement Contractors (www.dsps.ie; 01 
602 2500, info@dsps.ie) or to An Garda Síochána, as they occur. 
 
Under The Road Traffic (Traffic & Parking) Regulations, Section 36 paragraph (2); a 
vehicle shall not be parked: 
 
( a ) on that side of a section of roadway along the edge of which traffic sign number 
RRM 008 [double yellow lines] has been provided; 
 
(c) within 5 metres of a road junction; 
 
 
( d ) on a section of roadway with less than 3 traffic lanes and where traffic sign number 
RRM 001 [continuous white line] has been provided. 
 
 
Q.132  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the littering on the pathway lining 
the Glenveagh site linking Castletimon Road to Coolock Lane continues to be a 
problem. I reported it to DCC last week, but nothing seemed to have been done. I 
had to submit yet another report today. It seems like the pathway is only cleaned by 
DCC when a request is made. Can DCC add this laneway to their weekly clean-up 
list? 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services had the above-mentioned location cleaned, and power 
washed on the 25th September 2025. This location is on a twelve week area based 
cleaning schedule and is monitored on a regular basis. Extra cleaning can be 
arranged between scheduled cleaning here if found to be badly littered or on foot of 
citizen hub requests. 
 
 
Q.133  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive can the bin be reinstated at Ardmore drive park. There 
were 2 bins at each end, one bin has been removed. Can bin be reinstated asap 
please? 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services had the above-mentioned bin re-instated on the 27th of 
September 2025. 
 
 
Q.134  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
            To ask the Chief Executive to follow up on the state of the road and paths in Beaumont 
Crescent. Work started early in the year on water mains, and the crescent has been 
left in a dangerous state for months now with uneven tarmac, cracks and holes on the 
paths and in the road. It not only looks a mess but is dangerous, particularly for our 
older and younger residents, and it’s unacceptable. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

These temporary reinstatements on Beaumont Crescent have been referred to Uisce 
Eireann for permanent reinstatement as soon as possible. 
 
 
Q.135  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can arrange for the appropriate person in the 
relevant Department to speak with details supplied about her application for parking 
space. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Planning application reference: 3024/25 refers. Transportation Planning Division’s 
report which recommended refusal is attached. The application was refused for the 
below reason: 
 
The proposed parking area depth is substandard and would endanger public safety 
by reason of a traffic hazard and obstruction of pedestrians and would be contrary 
to Section 4.3.1, Appendix 5 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028, 
which aims to ensure that vehicular entrances are designed to avoid creation of a 
traffic hazard and adequate car parking space is provided to accommodate a car 
safely without overhanging the public footpath. The proposed development would 
set an undesirable precedent for similar developments and would be contrary to 
the proper planning and sustainable development of the area. 
As outlined in the report and referred to in the refusal reason above, the parking areas 
are substandard in depth and would result in parked cars overhanging and obstructing 
the adjacent footpath. This would present a safety hazard for pedestrians which is not 
acceptable. 
 

Hugh Lane Gallery
Strategic Plan
 Dublin City Council Meeting
6th Oct  2025

Hugh Lane Gallery
Strategy
2025 - 2029

1. Our Strategic Vision
Our vision for the next five-year period consists of five vision elements:
A leading  Irish Art 
Gallery, deeply rooted 
to Dublin and globally 
connected
A collection which is a 
key part of Ireland’s 
visual heritage that 
continues to grow and is 
preserved for future 
generations. 
An inclusive cultural 
environment for all to 
enjoy
A leader in the 
preservation and 
development of Parnell 
Square as a dynamic 
cultural quarter
A great place to work
1
2
3
4
5
3

Appendix to Hugh Lane Gallery Strategic Plan
2025 - 2029
• Due to the closure of HLG for refurbishment works and the construction of the new City Library  HLG’s 
Strategic Plan 2025- 2029 has been reviewed and the below amendments made.
 1 Develop our Physical Spaces  p5
•   Include Refurbish No 18 and bring into use for a) staff accommodation and b) to facilitate HLG events while 
the Gallery building is closed
 3. Deliver critically acclaimed exhibitions p7
• During closure we will plan and organise a ‘blockbuster’ exhibition to mark the reopening of the Gallery 
building, enhancing HLG’s  reach and reputation and supports Dublin as a leading capital of culture
4. Understand and Engage with our audiences p8
•  Replace  Extend HLG opening hours with
• Stay connected with our communities and education institutions by developing offsite centres of 
participation and learning and citywide salons

2. Our Strategy “Map”
We will deliver our vision through eight inter-connected strategic 
pillars:
5
Drive organisational capacity 
and culture
Continue to Develop our 
Physical Spaces
Celebrate the people’s  collection 
– part of the Nation’s heritage
Nurture our Communities
Understand and Engage with 
our audiences
Enhance our Stakeholder and 
Partnership Engagement
Deliver critically acclaimed 
exhibitions
Climate action and 
environmental sustainability
8
1
2
5
4
6
3
7

World Class Museum
Hugh Lane Gallery, a proud part of Dublin City Council is acknowledged as a 
world class museum. It has developed strategic partnerships with our 
national cultural institutions - National Gallery of Ireland, Irish Museum of 
Modern and Cultural Ireland. Abroad HLG has a Government/DCC legal 
partnership with the National Gallery London due to the Sir Hugh Lane 
Bequest 1917. 
Physical spaces
By developing our physical spaces, we will breathe new life into the vacant 
buildings adjoining us. These will house our dynamic and rotating collection 
displays and  vibrant ‘blockbuster’ exhibitions and will be a considerable 
cultural tourist attraction. It will also be a expanded centre for community 
engagement, participation  and learning. It will accommodate an artist in 
residence programme.
 Celebrate and care for HLG collection 
To care for and  preserve the city’s collection for future generations HLG 
conservation  and scientific research team has built up formidable 
expertise. One of the key focuses of our strategy is to create conservation 
studios in the building adjoining the gallery with possible an exhibition 
space for the public to engage with .
. 

Vibrant exhibitions and international networking
Following on the success of our blockbuster exhibition Andy Warhol Three Times Out  which saw 
135,000 visitors visit the exhibition in three and half months, HLG is planning a series of 
blockbuster exhibitions spaced out in two and half year intervals. This will require the support of 
museums and galleries nationally and internationally
Nurture our communities
In 2025, HLG curated 1,000  education engagements with over 22,000 participants ranging from 
guided tours, to early years artist-in-residency programmes, to art talks, art classes, film 
screenings, after-school art clubs, city wide primary schools sessions, TY courses and Young 
Visionaries exhibition, socially engaged projects, the street party Art and the Outdoors, Study 
mornings and more. 
During closure we are staying connected through HLG  ‘Citywide Salons’ in sites throughout the 
city. Our current Salon is with  Raid.  Our weekly coffee conversation talks and People’s College 
lectures are taking place in Dominic Community Centre; Our Basic Talks will happen in TU Dublin ; 
The After School Club will be held in Charleville Mall Library  and Art in the Classroom in NEIC 
primary schools. We plan more venues in continuing bringing artists and communities together 
enabling dialogues and deepening creative connection. 

National /International  Collaborations
HLG conservation team is working closely with the 
Conservation and Scientific department  in the National Gallery 
London on the conservation of our shared paintings in 
preparation for re-opening
We are working with museums and galleries internationally in 
preparation for ‘blockbuster exhibitions on re-opening  
New Ireland – UK Partnerships 2030 A new Phase in the 
Government’s Shared Ireland Initiative 
HLG will join the national cultural institutions in participating in 
this initiative engaging with culture and heritage in both 
countries and supporting arts exchanges. 

Dublin City Taskforce Report
Expansion of Hugh Lane Gallery
In the Dublin City Taskforce Report on the redevelopment of O’Connell Street and its environs ,it lists 
the expansion of Hugh Lane Gallery alongside the new city library as one major landmark projects.
By developing HLG physical spaces we will:-
•
Contribute to the development of the city centre cultural hub
•
“Turn the curve” for the city centre.
•
Be one of the interconnected key hubs in the city centre
•
Be a major cultural tourist attraction in the city centre
•
Convert vacant properties into dynamic spaces with rotating collection displays, spectacular 
exhibitions and a dedicated centre for diverse community engagement and participation 
embracing EDI for all
•
Attract Dubliners and visitors to the city centre through opening seven days a week and late night 
openings with After Hours events including creative classes, talks and  guided tours of the 
collections and  exhibitions.
