Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 4 November 2024 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
 
  
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 4ú Samhain 2024 i Seomra na Comhairle, 
Halla na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an 
tArdmheara James Geoghegan sa chathaoir 
 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Ammar Ali 
Daryl Barron 
Racheal Batten 
Emma Blain 
Janice Boylan 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Danny Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
Anthony Connaghan 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Jen Cummins 
Ray Cunningham 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Máire Devine 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Daniel Ennis 
Cian Farrell 
Alison Field 
Declan Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
James Geoghegan 
Eoin Hayes 
Barry Heneghan 
Jesslyn Henry 
Rory Hogan 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Feljin Jose 
Leslie Kane 
Kourtney Kenny 
Patrick Kinsella 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Ray McAdam 
Séamas McGrattan 
Paddy Monahan 
Carolyn Moore 
Edel Moran 
Darragh Moriarty 
Naoise Ó Muirí 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Colm O'Rourke 
Gavin Pepper 
Cieran Perry 
Michael Pidgeon 
Gayle Ralph 
Punam Rane 
Conor Reddy 
Nial Ring 
Patricia Roe 
Aishling Silke 
Supriya Singh 
Malachy Steenson 
John Stephens 
Philip Sutcliffe 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Prajwal K. Annibabu 
Lorraine Brogan 
John Flanagan 
Anthony Flynn 
Dennis Keeley 
Yvonne Kelly 
Natalie Leonard 
Victor Leonov 
Mick Mulhern 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Michelle Robinson 
Deirdre Scully 
Richard Shakespeare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
Birth 
The Lord Mayor congratulated Councillor Michael Pigeon & his wife Kate on the recent 
birth of their baby Ned. 
  
Special Meeting of Dublin City Council 
The Lord Mayor informed members that a Special Meeting of the City Council will be 
held on Monday 11th November, 2024 at 6.15pm to discuss the Dublin City Taskforce 
Report. 
  
Congratulations 
The Lord Mayor extended congratulations to Shelbourne FC Womens team who won 
their FAI Cup Final on the 20th October and the Shelbourne FC Men’s Team who 
became the League of Ireland Premier Division Champions.  
  
A Safe City 
The Lord Mayor informed members that on Saturday night last, he joined with 
members of An Garda Síochána including Superintendents Dermot McKenna and 
Cormac Brennan and walked through the city from Grafton Street and Pearse Street, 
through Temple Bar and to Capel Street.  He ended the evening at Dublin by Night 
Fest on Capel Street which was organised in partnership with Dublin Town, Dublin 
City Council, Fáilte Ireland and the Department of Tourism.   Dublin by Night Fest  was 
a two-day celebration of the night-time economy and purple flag status.    A total of 
nearly 40,000 people attended across both nights.  Friday night was based in Central 
Plaza / South William Street / Drury Street and Saturday night in Capel Street.  Over 
the two nights there were 66 business stalls and upwards of 70 paid artists and 
performers including up and coming Dublin bands, city centre buskers, samba band 
and samba dancers, trad band and Irish dancers, brass band, live interactive art 
workshops and top Dublin drag artists – supporting Dublin based arts and culture was 
a priority of the event. He thanked all involved in organising this family friendly event 
which was a real celebration of Dublin.  
  
Neurodiverse Friendly / Autism-Friendly City 
Next week is Equality and Inclusion Week.  The Lord Mayor advised that further 
announcements will be made to further embed the initiative into DCC to see 3 year 
plan delivered on.  
  
Taskforce on Integration 
The Lord Mayor advised the members that he chaired the first meeting of the 
Taskforce for Integration which was held last Wednesday.  
  
Halloween at the Mansion House 
Halloween at the Mansion House ran from Wednesday 30th October to Saturday 2nd 
November with almost 1,000 people coming through the Mansion House for “A 
Paranormal Investigation”.  This was aimed at teenagers with 68 spooky tours through 
the house including 10 of them reserved for children with neurodiverse needs. The 
Pumpkin Patch in the Lord Mayor’s Garden which was aimed at younger children 
welcomed 735 people.  He thanked Neil, Natasha, Hazel and all involved in the event. 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 

 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Christy Burke and seconded by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll 
that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the questions 
lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the questions 
lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and Answers are set 
out in Appendix A to these minutes. 
 
9 - 67 
 
3 
  Correspondence was received from the following Local Authorities; 
 
         Roscommon County Council  
         Westmeath County council  
         Fingal County Council  
  
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Conor Reddy 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence listed. The motion 
was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
4 
  To confirm the minutes of the City Council Meeting held on 7th October 2024 & the 
Special Council Meeting held on 15th October 2024. 
 
The Minutes of the City Council meeting held on 7th October 2024 having been 
printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken 
as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor 
 
 
 
5 
  Report No. 232/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Nomination of 
External Members to the Dublin City Council Audit Committee. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Keith Connolly and seconded by Councillor Janet 
Horner that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 232/2024 formally 
ratifies the establishment of an Audit Committee, approves the councillor 
membership, as agreed on the 2nd July 2024 and that the above nominees be 
appointed as external members of the Dublin City Audit Committee. The motion was 
put and carried.  
 
 
 
6 
  Report No. 235/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Borrowing for 
Housing Capital Planned Maintenance 2024 & 2025. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and Seconded by Councillor Fiona 
Connelly that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 235/2024 and 
hereby approves the borrowing requirement as set out therein, subject to the sanction 
of the Minister of Housing, Local Government and Heritage. The motion was put and 
carried.  
  
 
 
 
7 
  Report No. 233/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Dublin City Council 
Strategic Policy Committees 2024 – 2029 Sectoral and Public Participation Network 
Membership. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Mannix Flyn
that Dublin City Council Council hereby approves the SPC membership 2024-2029 an
the nominations included therein. The motion was put and carried.  
 

 
  
 
 
8 
  Report No. 216/2024 of the Area Manager (B. Phillips) - With reference to the 
extinguishment of the public right of way between 233-235 Glasnevin Avenue and 10-
11 Beneavin Park Dublin 11. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Anthony 
Connaghan that we, the Lord Mayor and Members of Dublin City Council, being the 
Roads Authority for the City of Dublin and being of the opinion that the public right of 
way between 233-235 Glasnevin Avenue and 10-11 Beneavin Park Dublin 11 as 
shown on the attached Map SM 2022-0027 is no longer required for public use, 
extinguish the public right of way in accordance with Section 73 of the Roads Act 
1993. The Motion was put and carried. An updated version of the report is attached to 
this minutes in Appendix B.  
  
The following councillors wished for their objections and abstentions to be noted;  
  
         Cllr. Mannix Flynn – Abstain 
         Cllr. Patrick Kinsella – Abstain 
         Deputy Lord Mayor Donna Cooney – Against  
         Cllr. Feljin Jose – Against 
         Cllr. Ray Cunningham – Against 
         Cllr. Michael Pidgeon – Against 
         Cllr. Hazel Chu –Against  
         Cllr. Claire Byrne – Against 
  
The Lord Mayor vacated the Chair to Councillor Ray McAdam at 7.15 p.m. and 
returned to the chamber at 7.17 p.m. 
  
 
68 - 72 
 
9 
  Report No. 211/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive (A. Flynn) - With regards 
proposed development known as Codling Wind Farm, an offshore wind farm in the 
Irish Sea. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Patrick Kinsella and seconded by Councillor Claire 
Byrne that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 211/2024. The Motion 
was put and carried.  
 
 
 
10   Report No. 218/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - The Traveller 
Accommodation Programme 2025-2029. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Daryl Barron 
that Report no. 218/2024 be adjourned to the December Council meeting. The motion 
was put and carried.  
 
 
 
11   Report No. 215/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Robinson) - With reference to 
the disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and Tenant (Ground Rents) 
(No. 2) Act, 1978. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas McGrattan and seconded by Councillor John 
Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.215/2024 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
 

 
12   Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 219/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - Grant of a 20 
year lease of the Ground Floor Unit at 19 Dawson Street Joshua Dawson 
House to BO and WEI Ltd t/a Musashi Sushi.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor 
Janice Boylan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No.219/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 220/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - Grant of a 5 year 
short term letting of 46/47 Mellowes Court, Finglas, Dublin 11 to Finglas 
Support and Suicide Prevention Network CLG.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor 
Janice Boylan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No.220/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 222/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - Grant of 10 year 
Lease of Ground Floor Unit at 31-33 Gloucester Street South, Dublin 2 to Viera 
Martial Arts Ltd.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor 
Janice Boylan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No.222/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
(d)   Report No. 224/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - Grant of a 5 year 
licence of Tennis Courts, St. Anne's Park, All Saints Road, Dublin 5 to the 
Trustees of St. Anne's Park Tennis Club.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor 
Janice Boylan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No.224/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
(e)   Report No. 225/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive (A. Flynn) - Proposed 
Lease of 19 Manor Street, Dublin 7.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor 
Janice Boylan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No.225/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
13   Disposal of Property:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 221/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - Disposal of a plot 
to the rear of 25c Cambridge Avenue, Dublin 4.  
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Janice 
Boylan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.221/2024 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
  
  
 
 
(b)   Report No. 223/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - Disposal of 
former walkway adjacent 73a Belcamp Avenue, Coolock, Dublin 17.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Janice 
Boylan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.223/2024 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
  
  
 
 
 
14   Report No. 217/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Social Housing 
Supply and Delivery Monthly Update. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Daryl Barron 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 217/2024. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
15   Report No. 228/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Dublin City 
Development Plan 2022 – 2028: Two-Year Progress Report 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Daryl Barron 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 228/2024. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
 
16   Report No. 234/2024 of the Deputy Chief Executive (E. Quinlivan) Social Media 
Governance in Dublin City Council. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 234/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
17   Report No. 231/2024 of the Area Manager (K. Mitchell) - Local Community Safety 
Partnerships. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor John Stephens and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 231/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
18   Report No. 226/2024 of the A/Head of Finance (V. Leonov) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas McGrattan and seconded by Councillor Conor 
Reddy that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 226/2024. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
19   Report No. 227/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report. 
 
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 227/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
20   Report No. 212/2024 of the Area Committees - Breviates of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of October 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Anthony 
Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 212/2023. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
21   Report No. 214/2024 of the South Central Area Joint Policing Sub-Committee - 
Breviate of the meeting held on 14th October 2024, Cllr. Daithí Doolan, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daithí Doolan and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 214/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
22   Report No. 229/2024 of the Protocol Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 
2nd May 2024, Councillor Deirdre Heney , Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor Anthony 
Connaghan that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 229/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
23   Report No. 230/2024 of the Protocol Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 
26th September 2024, Councillor Ray McAdam , Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Conor Reddy 
that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 230/2024. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
24   Topical Issues 
 
The following Topical Issues was proposed for debate: 
“DCC says free Enoch Burke now.” 
  
In accordance with Standing Orders the topical issue was put to a vote and did note 
achieve the requisite two thirds support to be debated. Full details of the vote can be 
found in Appendix C to these minutes.  
  
 
73 
 
25   Motions on Notice 
 
Motion No. 1  
  
It was proposed by Councillor Ray Cunningham and seconded by Councillor Mannix 
Flynn. 
  
That this City Council supports expanding the area served by Dublin Bikes and 
requests a report on how to do so from the relevant SPC. 
  
The motion was put and carried.  
 

 
  
  
  
 
 
26   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
Emergency Motion No. 1 in the name of Cllr. Daithí Doolan 
Dublin City Council notes with deep concern the ongoing annual shortfall of €9m in 
funding to City Council from the Department of Health for the provision of the 
ambulance service, 
  
Dublin City Council calls on an tArd Mheara to write to the Minister for Health before 
our Budget meeting demanding that the Department resolve this funding crisis as a 
matter of urgency and commits to covering the cost in the future. 
  
It was agreed that this motion be taken without debate.  The Lord Mayor also agreed 
to write to the Minister for Health Stephen Donnelly TD.  
  
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
 
 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
 

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY 4th 
NOVEMBER 2024 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the various Active Travel 
programmes throughout the city, are the timescales being met and how much has the 
projects cost to date. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A detailed report on the activities of the Active Travel Programme Office in Q3 2024, 
report no 181.2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer, was submitted 
to the Lord Mayor and Elected Members for the October Full Council Meeting. 
The Active Travel Programme Office have been allocated funding of €47 million from 
the National Transport Authority (NTA) for projects in 2024. This is a reduction on the 
funding which was allocated in 2023, where €58.8 million was spent on the Active 
Travel Network.  
This prompted a review of the delivery programme. Arising from this, the 2025 to 2028 
programme for delivery has been prepared in consultation with the National Transport 
Authority. It is informed by the likely funding levels expected over the period.  
Under this programme, at least ten projects are planned to construction in 2025. The 
map below highlights the action areas for construction in 2025. 
 
 
 
It is planned that design work will have been completed at least half of the network by 
end 2028. Over the same period, the pace of construction will depend on availability of 
funding with a third of the AcTPrO programme planned to be constructed by end 2028. 
 
Further information about the Active Travel Network, including an interactive GIS map 
of all routes and a complete list of roads and streets where activities are proposed is 
available on www.dublincity.ie/activetravel. This information is currently being updated 
to reflect the revisions discussed above. 
 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise if businesses have been adversely affected due 
to the new traffic restrictions that have been implemented in the City Centre. Has the 
CEO had any meetings with the small business owners and what have the updates 
been? 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Meetings were held with small and individual businesses both prior to and post the 
implementation of the north and south quays traffic management measures by the 
Project Team. Additionally all businesses directly on Bachelors walk and Aston Quay 
were called into before and post the implementation. The Project Team are continuing 
to work with any business who raises a query. 
 
Additionally the first meeting of the Dublin City Centre Transport Working Group was 
held on the 24th of September which had representatives of multiple business 
organisations. The second meeting is due to be held early November. 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm what Dublin City Council has done to help 
Kilmore Celtic football club to date and what plans has DCC to help the club in the 
future? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Office have met with Kilmore FC representatives on numerous occasions to 
work towards their objectives. They have been seeking winter training facilities and 
use of the St Luke’s building. We will be arranging a meeting of the four local clubs, 
Local Councillors, representatives from Parks & Sports sections to move forward with 
the proposed All Weather pitch on Glin Road. We are working internally on Pre part 8 
requirements for the development of the All Weather pitch. The Property Management 
Section in Dublin City Council are working on necessary maintenance in order to bring 
the St. Luke’s Building back into use.  
 
Q.4 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive can the road at Belmayne beside St. Francis of Assisi 
primary school and the Educate together school be resurfaced please as it is an 
appalling state. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please be advised that this road is not in the charge of Dublin City Council and 
therefore we are not in a position to undertake any repairs.   
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a comprehensive report on the removal of the illegal 
commercial dump in Belcamp Dublin 17. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Executive began a two part Tender Process in February/March this year to procure 
a preferred Contractor to install a wall and to remove the waste/soil from the illegal 
dump site in Belcamp/Moatview. The first stage was a request on eTenders for 
Expressions of Interest to carry out this work. The work included the build & installation 
of the pre-designed wall, the removal of the waste from the illegal landfill and the 
installation of a new foul sewer on Belcamp Lane to service the nearby Traveller 
Accommodation sites. Six interested parties were then asked to apply for the second 
stage of the process. There were some delays between the two processes due to 
numerous questions and clarifications that were sought by the interested parties. In 
September the Executive appointed their preferred Contractor and held a pre-contract 
meeting. It was agreed that there was a plan in place ready to go but a letter of 
acceptance could not be sanctioned until the site was cleared of the five trailers that 
were in place there. These five trailers are in the process of being removed so the 
letter of acceptance should be signed over the coming week or so. Site works should 
begin then to prepare the site and Haul Road for the removal of waste. 

Q.6 
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive the inspection of the very large trees outside Numbers 13 
and 22 Howth Park View Dublin 13 both of which need to be properly cut back and 
maintained; and an inspection of the dirt and damage caused by the tree outside No. 
13 to the front garden wall of that address and the path at that location. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow and any 
works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care 
programme for the area.   
 
Q.7  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive if his office would contact senior Garda management to 
seek extra Garda personnel for the north inner city. 
Given the amount of anti-social and open drug dealing day by day 7 days a week 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Council will write to the Chief Superintendent regarding the matter raised and 
request a response. Upon receipt, the Councillor will be given the details. 
 
Q.8  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive how many checks per year are carried out by Dublin City 
Council to hostels and B&Bs who house family’s and single persons, to be satisfied 
that the properties are complying with fire and other regulations for fire and health and 
safety compliance carried out this year in DRHE facilities. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The DRHE appointed Eamon O’ Boyle Fire Consultants to visit all homeless facilities 
once a year to inspect for compliance with fire and health and safety regulations and 
these inspection reports are published on the DRHE website.  
DRHE teams will also visit homeless facilities at least once a year to check for fire 
compliance.  The DRHE also meets with Dublin Fire Brigade on a regular basis to 
discuss any fire compliance issues at homeless facilities. 
In total there are 467 inspections for fire and health and safety compliance carried out 
this year in DRHE facilities. 
 
Q.9 
COUNCILLOR CHRSTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive what it cost Dublin City Council to provide a bike shed in 
the parking area at civic offices and who carried out the build? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A mesh bicycle cage was provided in the Civic Offices Car Park by Farrar engineering 
at a cost of €4,400 + VAT.  
Q.10  COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive when will new windows be fitted at (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has a number of single glazed windows throughout the city. As part 
of the standards for rented houses we are upgrading all single glazed windows to 
double glazed in the first instance.  The windows fitted in (details supplied) are double 
glazed.  If specific details are supplied maintenance@dublincity.ie arrangements will 
be made for any defects to be inspected and repaired. 
 
 

Q.11 
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report on the capital allocation and expenditure 
on Traveller Accommodation for each of the years 2019, 2020, 2021, 2023 and 2024 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Traveller Accommodation Unit breakdown for capital allocation and expenditure for 
2019 to September 2024 is detailed below.   
 
 
Traveller Capital Spend 2019-2024 
  
  
  
Year  
Capital 
Allocation 
Expenditure 
 
2019 
                             
5,028,800  
                        
803,788  
 
2020 
                             
3,805,550  
                        
421,808  
 
2021 
                             
3,790,000  
                      
  1,427,943  
 
2022 
                             
4,359,910  
                        
7,430,643  
 
2023 
                             
7,623,874  
                        
4,254,810  
 
Sep-
24 
                             
7,340,000  
                        
255,691  
 
Total 
Spend 
                             
31,948,134  
                    
  14,594,682  
 
Q.12  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the housing file of (Details supplied): the 
report should address how the applicant has not been reached with an offer of housing, 
what her current housing options are and for her applications for Choice Based Lettings 
to be seriously considered given that she has been on the housing list for such a 
significant number of years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing List, with an application date of 01/03/2021, the 
applicant holds the following position on this list: 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
2 
243 
D 
2 
113 
E 
2 
319 
 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
If a number of applicants apply for the same property on a Choice Based Lettings 
competition, the final offer will be made to the applicant with the highest position on 
list. The applicant may wish to make an application for HAP which would provide 
financial assistance towards the cost of renting a property.   

Q.13  COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the Public Sector Duty Plan, currently being prepared, 
include a study of how this Duty could be applied with regards to the environmental 
quality of different parts of the city and show the benefits that provision of green spaces 
etc have on the population. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Access to green space, the presence of trees and being close to nature have multiple 
benefits for people and the environment. The Parks, Biodiversity and Landscape 
Services team has been implementing Greening Strategies in The Liberties, North 
East Inner City and Stoneybatter as well as other locations since 2017 and the success 
of this work is evident and acknowledged. 
 
Going forward, the new Corporate Plan for Dublin City Council 2025-2029 will articulate 
the Council’s ongoing commitment to the implementation of the Public Sector Duty and 
the elimination of discrimination; our commitment to promoting equality of opportunity 
& treatment of our service users and staff, and to protect the human rights of our 
members, service users and staff. 
 
In line with this commitment, the Culture, Recreation and Economic Services 
Department has developed its own Public Sector Duty Implementation Plan for 
2024/2025.  
 
In 2025, the current Parks Strategy will be reviewed, in consultation with the 
Community, Gaeilge, Sport, Arts & Culture SPC. This review will apply the to the Public 
Sector Duty Process to the strategy.  
   
There are 3 steps in giving effect to the Public Sector Duty Process: 
1. Assess:  Undertake an assessment of the equality and human rights issues 
facing the identified groups for the Duty that are relevant to Dublin City Council. 
   
2. Address: Identify and communicate the plans, policies and actions being taken 
or proposed, to address the issues identified. 
 
3. Report: Report annually on developments and achievements in implementing the 
Duty. 
Through this process, the Parks, Biodiversity and Landscape Services team will strive 
to ensure that the communities and staff from the identified groups can fully benefit 
from the provision of green spaces, in line with our values:  
• 
Dignity & Respect 
• 
Diversity & Accessibility 
• 
Inclusion & Social Justice 
• 
Participation & Engagement 
• 
Choice & Autonomy 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR HAZEL DE NORTÚIN 
To ask the Chief Executive Can the Planning Department in Dublin City Council clarify 
if the long-term leasing of DCC in Tristan Square contravenes the Development Plan 
of 5% cultural and art spaces by leasing the 181 units without any plan or knowledge 
of what is to happen with the empty 4 office units and a crèche? The developer is no 
longer onsite, Tuath has requested on numerous occasions that they have an office 
on site to support their management of tenant’s concerns.  
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The provision of the space has been provided in line with the approved planning 
application and therefore accords with Development Plan policy. It is not a breach of 
planning permission for the space to remain unoccupied.  
 
The non-residential elements of this development are outside the scope of the DCC 
lease agreement. However DCC has been informed that these non-residential spaces 
are not yet ready to let and that the owner is working with his contractor in this regard.  
 
One of the spaces is intended to be used as a crèche and is currently being publicly 
advertised for rent. Tuath are free to engage with the owner/agent as is any other 
group should they wish to rent any of the vacant spaces in this development  
 
Q.15  COUNCILLOR HAZEL DE NORTÚIN 
To ask the Chief Executive Can Dublin City Council also explain, in detail, what plans 
they have put in place in long leasing developments, if the Department of Housing 
won’t supply funding for the recreational 5% that DCC has insisted is in all new 
developments, as included in the Dublin City Development Plan. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Of the 24 multi-unit Long Term Lease developments there are 3 developments which 
have vacant spaces Table A. below outlines these developments.  
The LTL Scheme does not facilitate the fit out, rental or lease of spaces outside the 
residential unit’s itself.  The non-residential elements of such development are outside 
the scope of any the LTL agreement with DCC.  
Cultural or community organisations who wish to lease these spaces should contact 
the agent acting for the owner. DCC has no plans to lease these spaces. 
 
Table A: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regarding Tristan Square in Chapelizod, none of the non-residential spaces are at 
final fit out stage, we have been informed that the owner is still engaged with his 
contractor in this regard.  
 
We have been advised that one or two of the spaces are intended to be leased for use 
as a crèche and negotiations are ongoing to progress this.  
 
With regards to the other non-residential space in Tristan Sq, Tuath is considering 
leasing space here to use as an office to support tenant management, when this unit 
is complete and ready to let.  
 
Q.16 
COUNCILLOR HAZEL DE NORTÚIN 
To ask the Chief Executive will Dublin City Council accept applications from 
organisations to rent these units, once their services are functional for DCC tenants, 
within these developments. 
Development Address 
BTR 
Non Resi -space 
Vacant Space 
Broomhill House, Swords Road, 
Whitehall, Dublin 9. 
Y 
Y 
Y   space unfinished 
Tristan Square,Chapelizod Hill Road, 
Chapelizod, D20 
Y 
Y 
Y  space unfinished 
Heatly Block A, Newtown, Malahide 
Road, Dublin 17.  
Y 
Y 
Y  space unfinished 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Enquiries regarding the rental of spaces/ units in private developments where DCC 
has leased residential units should be submitted directly to the owner/agent of the 
development for their consideration.  
Community or cultural groups who wish to lease/rent such spaces will need to enter 
into their own legal agreement with the owner/agent of these developments.  
 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive what assurances of additional funding has he received from 
An Taoiseach towards implementing the recommendations of the Dublin City Task 
Force and if he will further request the Task Force Chairperson to arrange for all 
submissions and minutes of the Task Force meetings to be available to Dublin City 
Councillors. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Department of An Taoiseach has established an Inter Departmental Working 
Group to assess the recently published Taskforce report. The group is tasked with 
reporting back to Government by mid -December on the possible areas that could be 
actioned, the respective timelines and what are the resourcing implications going 
forward. An update will be provided to members once the Department has carried out 
its processes. The Taskforce Chair will present to members on the working of the 
Taskforce, consultations and the work that was undertaken that culminated in the 
recently published City Centre Taskforce report. 
 
Q.18 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report with regards how much money was 
spent regarding the acquisitions of the two Harry Clarke works.  This report to include 
a full account of all monies, where the monies came from and who the works were 
acquired from? Also, that a full account of all monies that were made available for the 
purchase of all the works that were acquisitioned by the Hugh Lane Gallery totalling 
21 pieces of art that were outlined in the CEO’s reply to me on the 7th October 2023.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Margaret Clarke’s ‘Portrait of Harry Clarke’ was purchased from Bonhams Fine Art 
for the sum of €53,776 
- Purchase made from CRES Reserve. 
 
Harry Clarke’s ‘Angel of Peace and Hope’ purchased from Adams Fine Art for the 
sum of €31,250 
- Purchase made from CEO Fund. 
 
No funds from Hugh Lane involved in these purchases. 
 
Purchases for the Hugh Lane Gallery collection made in the last two years. 
 
Hannah Levy, Untitled, 2019 
€24,357.10 
Mairead O’hEocha, Antelope, Natural History Museum, 
Dublin, 2020 
€22,700 
Na Cailleacha, Child’s Play 2, 2021 
€9,000 
Patrick Graham, As I roved out, 2018 
€15,000 
Perry Ogden, Three photographs from the Pony Kids series, 
1999 
€12,500 
Mark Dion, Emperor Penguin, 2016 
€42,500 
Richard Gorman: Blam, 2021 
€13,620 

John Beattie, Reconstructing Mondrian, 2022 
€30,000 
John Beattie, Yellow, Red and Blue, 2023 
€5,000 
Jasper Johns, Regrets, 2014 (x 2) 
$75,030 USD 
Edouard Vuillard, Vuillard Family, c.1902-4 
£47,500 GBP 
John Kindness, Odysseus in Hades, 2009  
£4,500 GBP 
John Kindness, Bust of Poseidon, 2022 
£4,000 GBP 
Ailbhe Ní Bhriain, Interval III, 2024 
€54,480 
Fergus Martin, Smoke, 2024 
€32,688 
 
Q.19 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report that would indicate the extent of the 
area of public lands that have been transferred under street licences to private 
enterprise. This report also to include the extent of the area of public streets and 
footpaths that have been converted from traffic use to food and beverage enterprise. 
Also can the manager indicate the amount of rates that have been collected from 
enterprises using such public lands for food and beverage businesses? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The licencing section of the City Co-ordination office issue street furniture licences for 
outdoor dining. There is no transfer of public lands under street furniture licences to 
private enterprises. 
The total area of public streets and footpaths that have been converted from traffic use 
to food and beverage enterprise including footpaths and public streets for the 261 
businesses is 3032 square Meters.  
Each business that is successfully approved for a street furniture licence pays a licence 
fee to Dublin City Council. These fees are calculated from a cost of €125 per table and 
€200 to €500 per square meter depending on the total area. 
The Rateable Valuation of any temporary street furniture is determined by Tailte 
Éireann, which is an independent statutory body. Any additions that are deemed fixed 
and permanent in nature will be captured in any revaluation of the city which will be 
conducted by Tailte Éireann.  
Dublin City Council will levy rates on foot of any revaluation and the Commercial Rates 
will be calculated by multiplying the Rateable Valuation of a property by the Annual 
Rate on Valuation which is set by the members of the City Council at their annual 
Statutory Budget meeting.  
 
Q.20 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive in light of the recent revelations concerning financial 
governance and other matters at the Fr. Peter McVerry Trust outline in full detail what 
measures DCC and the Dublin Regional homeless executive have put in place with 
regards future governance of the Peter Mc Verry Trust and the monies it receives from 
the Dublin Regional homeless executive and also, what measures, if any, of financial 
oversight and governance does DCC and DRHE have over the many entities such as 
approved housing bodies, homeless charities and other such organisations that it 
financially supports.  And can you supply me with all such information as to when, in 
the past three years, Dublin City Council or its audit committee conducted any financial 
governance checks on these organisations.  While indeed its founder, were negligent, 
there would be absolutely no excuse for the local authority to have such failings 
particularly when it concerns substantia amount of tax payers money. In that regard, 
can the CEO initiate a full financial audit of all monies that were spent on the acquisition 
of Avalon House, on Aungier Street that was acquired by the Peter McVerry Trust from 
finances supplied by the Dublin Regional Homeless executive and their offices 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

The (DRHE) has Service Level Agreements (SLAs) in place with PMVT and other Non-
Governmental Organisations (NGOs) for the provision of accommodation and services 
to persons experiencing homelessness. At an individual service level, SLAs are 
managed via performance reports, quarterly financial returns, KPI returns and site 
inspections. The overall performance under the programme spend is remitted to the 
DHLGH and published on a quarterly basis. SLAs contain an outline of the roles, 
outputs, funding, review, delivery and assurance requirements under the funding 
arrangement.  
The DRHE initiated a review in 2023 to examine areas of concern within PMVT. The 
DHLGH established an Oversight Group, of which DRHE is a member, to ensure 
continuity of services in emergency accommodation or supported housing with PMVT. 
That work will continue until there is confidence in the organisation’s compliance with 
financial and governance requirements.  
PMVT has ongoing engagement with the DRHE and the Department of Housing in 
relation to financial and governance matters. The DRHE is concerned with ensuring a 
continuity of services to people experiencing homelessness and that none of PMVT’s 
service users are negatively affected during this time.  
The Charities Regulatory Authority have recently published their report on their 
investigations into the affairs of PMVT.  
The Peter McVerry Trust entered a 20 year lease for Avalon House in 2019 for use as 
emergency accommodation. This was funded through Section 10 funding. Local 
stakeholders began legal proceedings in December 2019 and an application for an 
injunction was lodged with the High Court to prevent the use of the facility as 
emergency accommodation for single adults.  
Following intensive negotiations, senior management agreed to a re-assignment of the 
lease from PMVT to Dublin City Council (DCC) on the basis the hostel would be used 
to accommodate families. 
The building currently costs €2m per annum plus utilities and security costs. The 
outcome of the judicial review was a settlement agreed by all parties and the costs 
incurred during this process were legal costs and ongoing rent on the building. The 
estimated cost of planned works to the building is €6m. 
 
Q.21 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many approved housing bodies that are associated 
with Dublin City Council are using private security firms to protect their housing estates 
and tenants. Many of these tenants are from the DCC’s housing list and homeless list 
and many of these tenants are subject to gross anti-social behaviour and criminal 
activity in and around their homes. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Four of the larger Approved Housing Bodies have advised that they use the services 
of private security companies in certain circumstances, for example for the protection 
of new housing developments where there has been a delay with final completion. 
These properties can be vulnerable to vandalism.  
Also where there is an escalation in anti-social behaviour in an estate AHB’s have 
advised that private security has been used to provide a visible presence in specific 
areas.   
 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive that a public consultation be undertaken to ascertain what 
type of outdoor spaces/hangouts young people between 12-18 years want?”  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This issue is being considered and a response will be issue to the councillor in due 
course. 

Q.23 
COUNCILLOR JEN CUMMINS 
To ask the Chief Executive about the progress of the Marrowbone Lane development: 
I note that the closing date for the submission of quotations from planning/urban design 
consultants for the preparation of a masterplan of the Marrowbone Lane site was 
20th September 2024. Can the Chief Executive please advise whether the Consultant 
has now been engaged? Can the Chief Executive also advise on anticipated dates for 
the consultant's engagement with key Council and South West Inner City community 
stakeholders, and the process for initiating this engagement? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following receipt of submissions on 20th September 2024, those submissions are 
being assessed and once a consultant is appointed, the Local Area Committee will be 
advised of the proposed timeline and programme for engagement. This will include 
engagement with relevant City Council departments, local Elected Representatives 
and community stakeholders as part of the work. 
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a detailed breakdown of the criteria required for 
individuals to meet the eligibility threshold for housing across this Council, specifically 
in the following areas: 
1.    Social/Local Authority Housing 
2.    Affordable Purchase Housing 
3.    Cost Rental Housing "? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
For an applicant to be eligible for social housing they must provide the following criteria 
–  
- 
Fully completed application form  
- 
Photographic identification (current passport or Irish driving licence) 
- 
Birth certificates for all household members  
- 
PPSNs for all household members  
- 
Marriage certificates for all applicants, where applicable 
- 
Proof of current address (utility bill, lease or rental statement) for all applicants, where 
applicable 
- 
If renting proof of tenancy agreement and Residential Tenancies Board (RTB) 
registration, where available  
- 
Proof of citizenship or permission to remain in Ireland for all household members  (e.g. 
letter from the Department of Justice or similar from Garda National Immigration 
Bureau  
 
- 
Evidence of income as set out below –  
Employed  
Documentary evidence of the preceding 12 months income through a combination of 
the following –  
The previous years’ Statement of Liability and the Employment Details Summary, both 
available from Revenue  
Proof of the households current income e.g. payslips for the intervening period from 
Statement of Liability to date of application or a Pay and Tax Summary (year to date) 
where additional superannuation contribution (ASC) is payable, the previous years’ 
final payslip and the most recent payslip must be provided  
Social Welfare Income  

A statement from the Department of Social Protection detailing all welfare payments 
received over the preceding 12 months, this should include the commencement and 
cessation date of receipt of such payments, if a household is in receipt of social welfare 
for less than 12 months, evidence of employment income must be provided to cover 
the duration of the employment  
Self Employed  
A minimum of 2 years accounts with an Auditor’s report and a notice of assessment 
and/or self-assessment acknowledgement letter for the preceding 12 months  
Documentation required in relation to separation/divorce 
- 
Copy of separation /divorce agreement for both applicants, where applicable  
The agreement must identify 
The extent of maintenance being received or paid by the applicant  
The circumstances under which the maintenance can cease  
 
If there is no agreement, a letter from the applicant’s solicitor or a legal affidavit signed 
by a practising solicitor must be included with the application. The letter should confirm  
- 
That there is no formal separation agreement  
- 
That there are no court proceedings pending under family law legislation  
- 
The position in relation to maintenance and other payments  
- 
Overnight access/custody arrangements for children 
- 
Property ownership 
- 
Evidence of maintenance payments received for previous 12 months, prior to the date 
of application  
Property Ownership 
- 
If an applicant or any member of the household owns property, an affidavit or any other 
documentation requested by the local authority is required outlining the location, value, 
current status of the property and any monies being received in respect of the property 
Other Documentation required  
- 
If an applicant is not resident in the local authority area where they are seeking housing 
support, an applicant must provide evidence of their local connection within the area 
- 
If an applicant or any member of the household was previously a local 
authority/Approved Housing Body tenant, they must provide a letter from the local 
authority/Approved Housing Body where the applicant or member resided setting out 
details in relation to the previous tenancy, his letter should include the duration of 
tenancy, reason for leaving, arrears, any other relevant information  
- 
If it has been deemed that an applicant’s mortgage is no longer sustainable and they 
have exited from the Mortgage Arrears Process (MARP), they should include a letter 
from the Arrears Support Unit of the applicant’s lender  
2. Affordable Purchase Housing 
 
The Scheme is aimed at people who cannot afford to purchase a home at its full 
purchase price, based on their ability to receive a 90% mortgage from a financial 
institution. The prices of the home on offer will vary from development to development 
as they are linked to the open market value of the home.  
 

In general, the maximum household income limit for an affordable home is 85.5% of 
the open market value of the home divided by 4.  
 
The table below includes a notional ‘open market value’ of €400,000 and the 
methodology to arrive at the max income limit.  
 
Open Market Value 
€ 400,000 
85.5% of Open Market Value 
€ 342,000 
Divided by 4 
€   85,500 = max income limit 
 
Other eligibility criteria are: 
• 
You are over 18 years of age. 
• 
You are a First-Time buyer or qualify under the Fresh Start principle. 
• 
Your purchasing power (mortgage + deposit + savings) must not exceed 95% 
of the open market value of the home. 
• 
You have a minimum deposit of 10% of the purchase price. 
• 
You have a right to reside indefinitely in the State. 
• 
The affordable home will be your principle place of residence. 
 
3. Cost Rental Housing 
An applicant may qualify for Cost Rental housing if: 
• 
Their net household income is €66,000 or below per annum;  
• 
They are not in receipt of any social housing supports, including the Housing 
Assistance Payment (HAP); 
• 
They do not own a property; 
• 
Their household size matches the size of the home advertised. For example, 
a two-bed unit may be suitable for two adults, a couple, or a lone parent with 
1 or more children. 
• 
All members of the household are living in Ireland at the time of applying; 
• 
They can afford to pay the rent for the home. 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on all of the Council’s capital projects 
that were completed or are in progress throughout 2024. Additionally, could the Chief 
Executive provide a summary update, including projected costs, for all planned capital 
projects expected to commence in 2025, broken down by each electoral area?" 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Capital Programme 2025 – 2027 will be presented to Council in February 2025 
and detail the planned expenditure for next 3 years.  
 
The Capital Programme 2024 -2026 can be accessed by the link below; 
 
HOUSING CAPITAL ACCOUNT 
 
Report 192/2024 was presented to the October 2024 Council Meeting and Appendix 
C provided a review of the performance of the Capital Account to Q2 2024. 

 
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
 
Question withdrawn 
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide this committee with an update on the pitch 
allocation and annual letting process for sports facilities that are maintained and 
managed by Dublin City Council (DCC). Specifically, I would appreciate detailed 
information on the following: 
1.     The criteria and timeline for pitch allocation. 
2.     The steps involved in the annual letting process. 
3.     How the Council addresses double bookings and other challenges arising from 
the current system. 
 4.    Any plans for reviewing or updating the allocation process to ensure fair access 
for all teams. 
Given the issues that have been raised regarding pitch availability and double 
bookings, I believe a review of the process could be beneficial for both the Council and 
the sports teams involved. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The use of playing fields in public parks is based on an annual application process.  
The letting is for an 11-month period from mid-January to mid-December and each 
pitch is let on a morning/afternoon basis on Saturdays and Sundays, taking into 
account that teams play away from home on alternative weeks.  Application forms are 
circulated to clubs in November each year and are required to be returned by a date 
specified to a dedicated email account parkpitches@dublincity.ie 
Once the applications have been processed, insurance documents received and the 
appropriate fee paid in the case of adult teams, permits are issued to clubs advising 
them of their pitch allocation/s for the year. For transparency, the pitch allocations are 
also placed on the City Councils website  
In reality, from year to year there is little change in allocations as clubs seek the 
continued use of the same pitches and so any change is incremental. In the event of 
decisions having to be made in relation to pitch allocations where there are competing 
requests from clubs we are guided by the principle of facilitating local clubs in their 
nearest local park and the needs of junior teams over adult teams.   
Over time however, it is evident that there is a significant increase in the demand for 
playing fields due to expanding club membership. This issue was the subject of 

discussion in the preparation of the City Development Plan and a webinar which was 
held as part of the Development Plan review. As part of that engagement the 
councillors were advised that Dublin City Council is experiencing increasing demand 
from clubs for more playing fields, however there is little spare capacity on existing 
pitches and there is little likelihood of new playing fields being achieved through the 
planning process as residential development in the city are now almost exclusively 
high density on relatively small sites.  
Historically, in the 1960/70’s/80’s when open spaces were being planned in the city 
suburbs (outside the canals), 10% of the site area was required to provide green space 
(public open space) and in most cases the landscape design was minimised in favour 
of levelling the open space to create playing fields and kickabout space. Today public 
open space in any new development is planned for a more diverse range of habitat for 
biodiversity other than amenity grassland and open spaces now incorporate 
sustainable drainage swales and other such features. This combination of factors 
inevitably means that space for active recreation and playing fields is not being 
achieved through the development control planning process.  
Based on population growth, the assumption that more people are playing sport, 
people are playing to a later age in life and female participation is increasing, the 
demand for playing fields will increase. While the 2022 – 2028 Dublin City 
Development Plan provides increased protection of existing and established sport and 
recreational facilities in the city (Policy GI49 refers) if the quantity of playing fields is to 
increase this can only be achieved by gaining access to under-utilised recreational 
grounds in the City or acquisition of lands outside of the City.    
In relation to the specific query about double bookings, we are not aware of any such 
instances.  
In relation to Crumlin United FC, the all-weather pitch in Willie Pearse Park was the 
subject of a licence agreement 15 years ago. Any further information on this can be 
sought from DCCs Property and Development Department.  
There are a total of five playing fields in Willie Pearse Park, two of which are allocated 
to Crumlin United, one full-sized and one 7-a-side.  Crumlin United apply annually for 
the use of these pitches for their 27 juvenile and 2 adult teams. 
The use of the pitch and gym at CBS Captains Road is a private arrangement between 
the club and the school.   
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR EOIN HAYES 
To ask the Chief Executive to reverse the planning enforcement order on Shaku Maku 
in Rathmines, Dublin 6, to paint over a mural depicting a Palestinian child. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council Planning Enforcement Section are aware of the publication of 
recent media reports relating to a mural on Shaku Maku Restaurant on Rathmines 
Road Lower, and the associated social media outcry from some quarters relating to 
the removal of the mural concerned. It is important to make you aware of the actual 
facts in respect of this matter. 
1. Dublin City Council did not remove the mural concerned. 
2. Dublin City Council did not issue an enforcement order or notice, or initiate legal 
action, requiring its removal. 
3. Nobody from Dublin City Council proactively brought this mural to the attention 
of, or made a complaint relating to it to the Planning Enforcement Section within 
this Department.   
 
A complaint was received from a third party local resident to the Planning Enforcement 
Section of Dublin City Council relating to the provision of a mural on the gable wall of 

Shaku Maku Restaurant, 192 Rathmines Road Lower, Dublin 6, in the absence of a 
prior grant of planning permission.  
As required under Part 8 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) a 
Section 152 Warning Letter was issued to the Owner and Manager of the restaurant 
on the 1st of October 2024 outlining the allegation made in the complaint concerned.  
This warning letter outlined that the matter was under investigation. It did not order the 
removal of the mural. It also importantly outlined in bold that submissions or 
observations in writing to Dublin City Council could be made within 4 weeks of 
service of the letter regarding the subject matter of the letter. Direct contact details 
including the mobile phone number of the Planning Enforcement Case Officer were 
also provided should the restaurant owner or manager wish to discuss the matter. The 
latest date for submissions or observations was the 28th of October 2024. 
No contact was made to the Planning Enforcement Case Officer, or to the A/Planning 
Enforcement Manager by anybody from, or representing the restaurant following the 
issuing of the Warning Letter concerned. No submission or observation was made on 
foot of the letter sent. 
As a point of clarity murals on the façade or gable wall of a premises require planning 
permission, regardless of their content. The owner of the restaurant had a number of 
options following receipt of the warning letter, including making a planning application 
to retain it. The restaurant owner chose to remove it. 
This matter was dealt with in a fair and balanced manner by the Planning Enforcement 
Section, in compliance with our statutory requirements. The actions of the owner of the 
restaurant in this instance pre-empted any consideration by Dublin City Council to 
issue an Enforcement Notice, or seek an order relating to this matter. 
 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR EOIN HAYES 
To ask the Chief Executive what alterations to commercial rates to specific business 
sectors (e.g. restaurants) he might consider or suggest for adoption to help struggling 
local businesses, as well as asking larger multinational corporations to pay more 
towards city council services in a way that enhances the financial position of the city. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Commercial Rates are a property based charge on commercial and industrial 
properties and are a key source of funding for Dublin City.  The levying and collection 
of commercial rates by local authorities is legislated for under the Local Government 
Rates and Other Matters Act 2019, as amended by the Historic and Archaeological 
Heritage and Miscellanous Provision Act 2023. This legislation came into effect on 1st 
January 2024.  
 
The City Council, at the Statutory Budget meeting, determines the rate on valuation 
each year which is applied to the valuation of all rateable properties and from which 
commercial rates are determined.  
 
The Local Government Rates and Other Matters Act 2019 was passed by the 
Oireachtas and enacted on 11th July 2019.  The Act contains a provision, in section 15, 
relating to potential alleviation schemes.  These provisions empower the Elected 
Members of local authorities to devise and achieve policy objectives through locally 
targeted rates waiver schemes.  This will enhance the capacity of local authorities to 
address important issues and challenges particular to their local areas and to enable 
them to support specific objectives to promote community, social and economic 
development and urban planning.  
Any waiver scheme implemented by a Local Authority will be funded from its own 
resources. Under SI No. 349 of 2024 (Local Government Waiver of Rates 
Regulations). The following conditions apply;  
 

Per section 3,  
1. A waiver scheme shall not be made, or an existing waiver scheme amended, 
by a local authority unless it is proposed to the authority by a strategic policy 
committee established by the authority under section 48 of the Act of 2001. 
 
2. A proposal to the strategic policy committee of a local authority in respect of a 
local financial year to recommend a waiver scheme shall, subject to paragraph 
(3), be made to the committee before 30 June in any year before that financial 
year. 
 
3. The proposal referred to in paragraph (2) in respect of the local financial year 
2025 shall be made before 30 September 2024. 
 
4. The strategic policy committee of a local authority may, in respect of a rates 
waiver scheme proposal before it— 
o Endorse or reject a new scheme 
o Endorse the renewal of an existing waiver scheme with or without  
amendment 
o Reject the renewal of an existing waiver scheme. 
 
5. A proposal for a waiver scheme (whether new or existing) which is rejected by 
the SPC of a local authority has no effect. 
 
6. A local authority shall not have in operation more than one waiver scheme 
within each local financial year. 
 
A report estimating the financial effect of the making of a waiver scheme shall be 
prepared under the direction of the Chief Executive. A public consultation must be held 
for at least 14 days and a report on any submissions shall be prepared. Once a waiver 
scheme is made a local authority shall publish on its details of the scheme and the 
procedure for making an application. 
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR EOIN HAYES 
To ask the Chief Executive what plans there are to extend the number of dog bins in 
the Dublin City Council area, the process to secure them, and the options available to 
councillors to amend the bye-laws to increase dog fouling fines, given the recent rise 
in dog populations in the city. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council no longer provide bins for the sole use of disposing of doggie bags.   
Instead we advise dog owners and dog walkers to dispose of doggie bags in the public  
litter bins provided or else take the doggie bag home and deposit in their household 
bin, i.e. the black/grey bin. 
Fines in relation to dog fouling is included in the Litter Pollution Act 1997 as amended. 
Any amendments made to this Act is a matter for the Government of the day. 
 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to expedite all steps in order to prepare a Neighborhood 
Traffic Scheme in (1.Details Supplied) that includes measures to reduce traffic 
speeds by installing ramps, cushions or the chicaning of streets, especially the lights 
of (2.Details supplied) given the fact that drivers are blatantly ignoring speed limits 
from as early as 5.30am and where existing measures like (3.Details supplied) are 
ineffective in tackling this road safety issue; and if he will make a statement on the 
matter. 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The TAG Area Engineer will assess the issues raised at the locations identified along 
with an overview of the wider vicinity. A report will be issued with recommendations 
and possible traffic interventions. 
Q.32 
COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive Executive to provide a comprehensive update including 
indicative timelines for the completion of the (Details supplied); when works are 
expected to start; the overall funding that has been provided; the name of contractors, 
etc. and if he will make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council received Part 8 approval for the redevelopment of (Details 
supplied) in 2014 and vacant possession Q3 of 2019. Tender documents were 
prepared for a Design Build Finance and Operate model of delivery.  However, the 
Covid Pandemic and associated impact on Markets in particular made this approach 
unattainable, as providers in the industry were not in a position to invest. Dublin City 
Council advanced the first phase of the project, which was delivery of a Multi-use 
Games Area, improved public realm to St Michan’s Street and St Mary’s Lane and a 
car park with high-density cycle parking.   This was delivered while awaiting the 
outcome of grant funding to implement the Refurbishment Phase.  
 
Grant funding was secured in 2022 and tender issued for an Integrated Design Team 
who were appointed in February 2023 to develop the design detail, Fire cert and 
Disabled Access Cert applications and bring forward construction tender documents. 
Design Team lead is Louise Cotter of Cotter Naesean Architect’s. Design detail 
completed and tender for construction/ conservation works issued to a Dublin City 
Council Framework in August 2024. There have been several queries and requests for 
extension of time due to the complexity and scale of the project. Tenders are due back 
November 5th. 
The timeline thereafter is expected to be as follows: 
Tender Assessment – 5 weeks  
Standstill and authorisation period - 4 weeks  
Contract Assignment and mobilisation – Q1 2025  
Construction - 26 weeks 
The final contract price will not be available until tender assessment. 
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive the next steps in the delivery of (Details supplied); the 
indicative timeframe of same; the likely measures to be introduced; what 
communication plan is being prepared for the delivery of same; and if he will make a 
statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The indicative timeframes are as per Section 24 “Delivery” of (Details supplied);. 
These are the likely measures to be introduced over the lifetime of the plan. The 
recently published “Taoiseach’s Taskforce for Dublin” includes (Details supplied);. 
This is currently being looked at as to how this can be met. A communication plan for 
each measure, similar to the initial measures on the north and south quays, will be 
prepared as the individual measure is being progressed. 
 
Q.34 
COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive the number of housing complexes owned or maintained by 
Dublin City Council in (Details supplied); the number of homes in each complex; what 
the Estate Renewal Plan proposed in terms of upgrading or expanding each of the 

complexes and the additional number of homes that could be provided; the indicative 
cost per complex to delivering on these proposals and to outline what engagement has 
taken place to date with the Department of Housing, Planning, Heritage and Local 
Government in terms of seeking and securing such funding; and if he will make a 
statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The current Housing Regeneration programme for the Dublin 1 and Dublin 2 areas is 
outlined below. There is regular engagement between the DHLGH and the Housing 
Regeneration Team across all projects, and both work together to progress projects to 
deliver new homes. Regeneration Projects are funded by the Department of Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage (DHLGH) in accordance with its 4 Stage Approval 
Process. At each of the stages/gateways, updated costs are provided to the DHLGH 
for funding approval. Due to commercial sensitivities around our public tendering 
processes, indicative costs cannot be disclosed.  
 
Project 
Status 
Information 
Expected date 
of Delivery 
Dorset Street, Dublin 1 
Onsite 
The former housing development 
consisted of 113 flats. The demolition of 
the existing blocks is in progress and the 
new housing scheme will provide 163 
new homes 
Q4 2026  
Matt Talbot Court, 
Dublin 1 
Stage 3 
The current scheme provides 72 flats. 
Proposals are for the demolition of 
existing flat blocks and delivery of 92 
new homes 
Q3 2027 
Dominick Street West, 
Dublin 1 
Stage 1  
The former housing development 
consists of 90 flats. The new proposed 
scheme will provide approx. 59 new 
homes through deep retrofit of the 
current blocks 
Q1 2029 
St Andrews Court, 
Dublin 2 
Stage 2  
The former housing scheme consists of 
16 flats. The proposals for the new 
scheme, is for the demolition and 
delivery of 33 new build homes 
Q4 2027 
Pearse House, Dublin 2. 
Phase 1 
Stage 1 
The Blocks due to be redeveloped in 
Phase 1 contain 78 flats. As this is a 
protected structure, redevelopment 
options are limited. The proposals for 
Phase 1 will deliver 44 new homes (39 
deep retrofit & 5 new build) 
Q4 2027 
Glover Court, Dublin 2 
Stage 1 
The current scheme contains 38 flats, 
the proposals for the new scheme will 
deliver 53 new homes through deep 
retrofit & extension 
Q4 2027 
 

The undertaking of regeneration projects require case by case assessment of each 
site where all options for enhancement, redevelopment and delivery are considered. 
The impact of lead in times for projects to start onsite and the necessity for decanting 
also requires understanding and managing.  
 
Below is a list of DCC owned complexes in the Dublin 1 & Dublin 2 areas.  Examination 
of each complex is required to understand how best to upgrade or expand, and to 
explore if additional homes can be provided within specific complexes. Options 
available that inform feasibility studies include enhanced works, retrofit, amalgamation, 
infill, extension, demolition and new build.  
 
DCC Housing Complex 
No. of Existing Units 
Dominick Hall, Dublin 1 
72 
Matt Talbot Court, Dublin 1 
72 
Dominick Street West , Dublin 1 
90 
Dunne Street & Nth Clarence Street, Dublin 1 
63 
Gardiner  Street, Dublin 1 
38 
Henrietta House, Dublin 1 
48 
James Larkin House, Dublin 1 
34 
Sheridan Court, Dublin 1 
50 
Alfie Byrne House, Dublin 1 
30 
Georges Place, Dublin 1 
60 
Hill Street, Dublin 1 
30 
Fitzgibbon Court, Dublin 1 
53 
Charleville Mall, Dublin 1 
26 
North William St, Dublin 1 
47 
Rory O'Connor House, Dublin 1 
133 
Dermot O' Dwyer House, Dublin 1 
77 
Fitzgibbon Court, Dublin 1 
53 
Dominick  Court, Dublin 1 
29 
Summerhill Court, Dublin 1 
39 
Liberty House, Dublin 1 
181 
Brendan Behan Court, Dublin 1 
51 
Oriel Street Lower, Dublin 1 
8 
Saint Laurence O'Toole Court, Dublin 1 
28 
Sheridan Place, Dublin 1 
28 
Wolfe Tone Close, Dublin 1 
71 
Pearse House, Dublin 2 
345 
Glovers Court, Dublin 2 
38 
Leo Fitzgerald House, Dublin 2 
46 
Mercer House, Dublin 2 
104 
Countess Markievicz House, Dublin 2 
165 
O'Carroll Villas, Dublin 2 
32 
Conway Court, Dublin 2 
36 
Macken Villas, Dublin 2 
24 
Cuffe Street, Dublin 2 
27 

York Street Flats, Dublin 2 
37 
Digges Street, Dublin 2 
30 
Saint Andrews Court (Exc. Block 3), Dublin 2 
51 
Powers Court, Dublin 2 
8 
Stephens Place, Dublin 2 
4 
Verschoyle Court, Dublin 2 
11 
Rostrevor Court, Dublin 2 
4 
Greenore,  Dublin 2 
6 
Cambridge Court,Dublin 2 
12 
Boyne Street, Dublin 2 
78 
Charlemont Court, Dublin 2 
30 
Smock Alley Court, Dublin 2 
49 
York Street Apartments (New),Dublin 2 
64 
Crampton Court/Crampton Buildings,Dublin 2 
28 
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to install roadside bollards on Watermill Road, Raheny, 
from Watermill Lawn to The Village / Bettyglen, to ensure cars do not park on the grass 
and among the trees.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The DCC Transport Advisory Group does not favour the extensive use of bollards, 
however the issue raised will be assessed by the Area Engineer and in addition will 
liaise with colleagues in the Council’s Parks Department. A report will be forwarded to 
the Councillor when the assessment is complete. 
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a full list of the conditions and commitments, 
including planning conditions, that need to be met by private developers, builders and 
land owners in the areas of Belmayne, Parkside, Belltree and Clongriffin in order to 
facilitate Dublin City Council in taking these areas fully in charge. When questions are 
raised with Dublin City Council with regard to the provision of a wide range of services 
and amenities in these areas the answer is almost always that nothing can be done 
until the area is taken in charge. This has been the response for a number of years. 
We need to know specifically what needs to be done so Dublin City Council can take 
the areas in charge. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Discussions are ongoing with Developers in relation to Belmayne, Parkside, Beltree 
and Clongriffin regarding the works that are required to take these developments in 
charge.  All services must be to a required standard that would allow Dublin City 
Council to consider the taking in charge of these developments. All necessary work 
must be carried out by private developers, builders and land owners prior to the 
services being taken in charge. The issues are varied and complex and involve a cross 
section of service departments within DCC who continue to liaise with the Developers.    
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to set out the actions it has taken to compel private 
developers to fulfil their obligations in terms of conditions and commitments, including 
planning conditions that need to be met to facilitate Dublin City Council in taking these 
areas fully in charge. Has Dublin City Council examined the potential for legal action 

seeking the remedy of specific performance to compel private developers to fulfil their 
obligations and thus facilitate the taking in charge process. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Taking in Charge process is a legislative process and as such the procedure 
around the process must be complied with by the Council and the applicant in 
accordance with the legislation. The Taking In Charge process of the services within 
an estate can only be considered when requested by the applicant/developer or the 
residents of an area. An application must be summited in the first instance to the 
Planning and Property Development Department. All works that are required to be 
carried out to the specific standards must be completed before the services can be 
taken in charge.  
 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to examine the species of tree that lines the road in Belmont 
Park, Raheny. These trees appear to produce excessive amounts of sap that then 
drips onto cars and property in the area. Can the Chief Executive investigate this and 
report as to whether anything can be done to minimise this issue?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The substance in question is not sap but honeydew the sugary excretion of sap-
sucking insects such as aphids. This is a wholly natural phenomena and a feature of 
all broad leaved tree species to a greater or lesser extent.  Honeydew can be more 
evident in certain years most likely depending on the summer weather and aphid 
populations and corresponding populations of predators such as lacewings and 
ladybirds.  Honeydew is essentially sugar and water and is usually washed away by 
seasonal rains.  The effect is most pronounced during dry spells in late summer when 
the trees are in full leaf.  Affected residents might consider parking elsewhere during 
these periods to avoid the worst of the problem or investing in a car cover.   
 
Dublin City’s Tree Policy, adopted as policy in 2016 does not consider the reduction or 
removal of Honeydew as a valid reason to prune or remove an otherwise healthy tree. 
Leaves, seeds and honeydew are defined in the policy as ‘natural and seasonal 
occurrences and are judged to be a relatively-minor, short-lived inconvenience when 
considering the many benefits of having trees in the urban environment’. 
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if there is a possibility for the provision of Sustainable public 
lighting along the pathways in Belcamp Park, Dublin 17? Local Residents have raised 
this request as the Park is widely used for recreation and access and the lack of lighting 
in the Park restricts the use through the dark evenings and mornings, effects public 
safety and encourages anti-social behaviour. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As parks are officially closed after dark the Parks Service does not install such 
lighting unless there is a recognised commuter route connecting residential areas to 
transport links etc. such as those in Rockfield. 
 
Q.40 
COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the Programme for the completion/re-
introduction of the Public Playground in Kilmore West, Dublin 5. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Delays in processing the tender and contract documentation prepared by the Parks 
Service under the new procurement and finance system introduced this summer led to 

inordinate delays in issuing the order to the preferred contractor.   The contractor 
understandably did not place the order with the suppliers for the necessary equipment 
until the order was confirmed.  The supplier has confirmed that the equipment will be 
dispatched to Ireland in January 2025 and will be with the contractor a week later.  
While we do not have a firm start date from the contractor as yet as they have not fixed 
their work programmes for early 2025 it is expected that the works will commence soon 
thereafter and the playground will be in place for the improving weather in spring 2025. 
 
Q.41 
COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if there have been confirmed reports of construction 
vehicles from local Construction sites in the Dublin 5 , 9 and 17 districts discharging 
waste into Manholes in housing estates in those localities? There have been reports 
of this activity occurring from Resident groups in the Area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A complaint made on behalf of the Woodlawn Residents Association was received by 
the Water Pollution Control (WPC) section on the 09/10/24. It reported the 
unauthorised discharge to drains in Woodlawn Park, Kilmore, Dublin 17 by an 
environmental contractor. 
Upon receipt of the complaint, an investigation promptly commenced into the matter. 
The complainant was updated accordingly and was requested to provide any further 
evidence (photographic/videos) to support the investigation. No explicit evidence was 
provided.  
WPC visually inspected the surface water network in Woodlawn Park for evidence of 
contamination. The inspector noted there was heavy rainfall before the inspection, 
which may have impacted findings. No definitive evidence was found at the time of 
inspection to support enforcement measures at this time.  
Additionally, the complainant suspected a construction site near the estate as the 
source of the dumped effluent. The site was visited as part of the investigation, where 
the allegations were put to them. The site denied any unauthorised off-site activities 
and advised they are conducting an internal investigation into the matter.  
As a precautionary measure and in response to the concerns raised, Dublin City 
Council conducted non-routine cleaning of the gullies in Woodlawn Park.  
The complainant was provided with the investigation outcomes and encouraged to 
contact Water Pollution Control directly in the unlikely event of a reoccurrence. 
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive can a system be set in place to organise, or a booking 
system be set up for housing maintenance as so many people are missing the repair 
men as they have no way of knowing if or when someone is calling to carry out the job. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In general, tenants are given an indication of timeframe for call outs.  Schedules can 
change depending on volume of calls, complexity and changes in priority.  If a tenant 
has limited availability due to work commitments etc. this should be flagged when the 
repair request is being logged. 
 
The matter will be raised with the maintenance depots as part of our customer service 
monitoring processes with a view to identifying any gaps and improving communication 
with our tenants. 
 
Q.43 
COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive how many DCC retail units are currently lying vacant in 
area D and E. 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC does not maintain an ongoing record of the volume of vacancy of retail units 
across the City.  Where a particular study is being undertaken of a location (such as a 
local area plan) or a Special Scheme for Planning Control is being reviewed (current 
schemes cover the O’Connell Street area and Grafton St area); surveys of retail use 
and vacancy are undertaken to inform the study/scheme.  
A number of operators and commercial entities undertake regular assessments of the 
retail sector, such as the Society of Chartered Property, Land and Construction 
Surveyors which are publicly available. 
 
Q.44 
COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive can DCC and NTA please move the bus shelter down to 
the bus stop at (details supplied) as this stop is close to Burren Court many of our 
senior citizens use this stop and have experienced falls while trying to make it form the 
bus shelter to bus stop. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The NTA has requested that correspondence received by DCC regarding the Core 
Bus Corridors Infrastructure Works is sent directly by the Cllr to the NTA for response.  
Councillor queries should be sent to oireachtasliaison@nationaltransport.ie 
 
Q.45 
COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 
To ask the Chief Executive detail the number of DPRO's currently recognised by Dublin 
City Council 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
 
There are currently 11 DPOs known to Dublin City Council: 
• 
Voice of Vision Impairment 
• 
National Platform of Self Advocates 
• 
Independent Living Movement Ireland  
• 
AsIAm 
• 
Irish Deaf Society 
• 
Disabled Women Ireland  
• 
Physical Impairment Ireland 
• 
Disability Power Ireland 
• 
National Disabled Postgraduate Advisory Committee (NDPAC) 
• 
Dublin City DPO 
• 
Headway National Advocacy Group  
There is a dedicated intranet webpage for the Access Officer with contact information 
for each of the DPOs, details of their communication preferences and accessibility 
needs.  The site also contains links to National Disability Legislation, DCC Accessible 
Guidelines and information on the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities.  
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 
Question withdrawn 
 
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 

To ask the Chief Executive to provide an estimate of the average time taken for the 
completion of the Tenant Purchase process 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The process for purchasing a property through the Tenant Incremental Purchase 
Scheme is approximately 6 – 12 months.  There are numerous steps involved in the 
process of purchasing a Council property, these include liaising with outside Agencies 
e.g., An Garda Síochána and The Housing Agency (if a tenant wishes to purchase 
their Tenancy with a Local Authority Home Loan). 
 
Further information for tenants can be obtained from the Tenant Purchase Section at 
Phone Number 01 222 5449 or by emailing tenant.purchase@dublincity.ie  
 
Full details of the Tenant Incremental Purchase Scheme can be found via the following 
link 
https://www.gov.ie/en/service/12558-incremental-tenant-purchase-scheme-for-
existing-local-authority-houses/ 
 
Q.48  COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the annual loss of revenue due to the Planning 
and Development (Street Furniture Fees) Regulations waiving fees for street furniture 
 
There are 261 businesses in DCC Administrative area with street furniture licences 
with a total of 1333 tables.  Each of these licences expire at some stage in 2024. The 
fee per table licence is €125 each. The Government decision taken in 2024 to waver 
the street furniture table fees amounts to a total reduction of revenue of €166, 625. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are 261 businesses in DCC Administrative area with street furniture licences 
with a total of 1333 tables.  Each of these licences expire at some stage in 2024. The 
fee per table licence is €125 each. The Government decision taken in 2024 to waver 
the street furniture table fees amounts to a total reduction of revenue of €166, 625. 
 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive when exactly the footpaths on Hollybank Road are going 
to be repaired? These footpaths are in extremely bad condition and need immediate 
attention 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A number of footpath repairs have been carried out on Hollybank Road recently by a 
RMS direct labour crew. Also, Hollybank Road footpaths will be considered for 
inclusion in the 2025 works programme. 
Q.50  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a complete report on the tree pruning schedule for the 
Ashington/Priory Area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Ashington area has been recently surveyed by our independent qualified tree 
arborist and any recommendations made in this report will inform our Tree Care 
Programme for the area.  A report will be issued to all local reps detailing tree works 
scheduled for 2025, by the end of the year.  
 
Q.51 
COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 

To ask the Chief Executive if a Yellow Box be placed outside St. Vincent’s on the 
Navan Road. It is impossible for motorists to enter and leave this building 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
St. Vincent’s has three entrances, one of which already has a yellow box installed. 
Additional details on the exact location are needed to assess the installation of another 
yellow box. 
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive to set up a Task Force to tackle the whole development of 
the Phibsborough/Dalymount Area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Phibsborough Key Urban Village is 1 of 15 plans identified in Table 2-14 of the Dublin 
City Development Plan 2022-2028 in a schedule of other LAPs / VIPs to be progressed 
over the lifetime of the Plan in line with a prioritisation programme to be agreed as part 
of the implementation of the development plan, subject to the availability of resources. 
 
In February 2024, a Part 8 Planning Application was granted for the Dalymount Park 
redevelopment. The plan for the redevelopment is to construct a four-sided enclosed 
stadium with a capacity of circa 8,000. The development will also include a new public 
community facility for Phibsborough, and significant improvements to the public 
domain. The redeveloped stadium will house Bohemian FC. 
An application for funding from LSSIF stream 2 was submitted on 1st July 2024. The 
completion and construction of the project is dependent on significant funding being 
allocated under Stream 2 of the LSSIF. 
 
The Cabra Glasnevin Area Office will examine the proposal for a task force in the 
Phibsborough / Dalymount area and will revert to the Councillor in this regard. 
 
Q.53 
COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive, I refer to all my unsatisfactorily answered questions from 
July to last Month regarding an ongoing Electrical / ETCI matter to with the ESB 
confirmed to me on Monday 14th, that a supply referred to is overloaded despite 
referrals to the RTB & Environmental Health going back many years. 
Can the Chief Executive now advise best course? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection of the private rented property referred to can be arranged to check 
compliance with the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2019.  To 
do this, please provide the property address, and, if available, the tenant and landlord 
contact details.   
 
Alternatively, the tenant can contact the Environmental Health Section directly at 
 
012226500 or privaterented@dublincity.ie to request an inspection. 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise if DCC & Fingal can co-operate to solve the 
ongoing problems at St Joeseph’s Horse & Pony Club, a much need facility for the 
local community 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
St. Joseph’s Horse and Pony Club does not fall under the remit of Dublin City Council.  
However in March 2024 DCC Traveller Accommodation Unit arranged for the gullies 
and drain-lines to be unblocked as a gesture of goodwill.  DCC are not aware of any 

ongoing problems as the area is under the administrative remit of Fingal County 
Council and DCC TAU have contacted Fingal County Council in relation to this query 
 
Q.55 
COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive any plans to erect signs throughout the City to make the 
public aware of pickpockets especially for tourists and those most vulnerable Members 
of our Society 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Council has worked with An Garda Siochana, Transport providers and various 
state agencies /retail representative groups in the past on campaigns to promote 
community safety and pro social activities in Dublin City. 
 
The Garda Siochana have been running a crime prevention operation (Táirge) in an 
effort to reduce the detrimental impact on retail businesses, customers and their staff 
when criminals are involved in theft. 
 
The Transport providers also use in transport messaging to warn passengers of the 
possibility of pick pockets operating on the Network. 
 
Dublin City Council will continue to work with these partners on messaging around 
public safety and the prevalence of criminal behaviour by a minority of individuals in 
the City. 
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive any plans to install CCTV in parks in Finglas and 
Ballymun especially Mellowes park and the Northway estate park, and to hire 
park rangers due to the open drug use and anti-social behaviour. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In general, Parks Services do not install CCTV in our Parks/Open spaces, we do not 
have the resources or infrastructure in place at these locations to monitor or maintain 
such systems. There are no current plans to introduce a ranger or warden service to 
the above mentioned parks.  Parks regularly liaise with local Gardai and offer our 
assistance where possible.  It is our understanding that regular patrols of these parks 
are undertaken and Gardai are generally onsite for the Sunday Park run event. 
 
Q.57 
COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive why Dublin City Council painted over a mural on the exterior 
wall of Shaku Maku restaurant in Rathmines; how many exterior murals have been 
removed in the past year; and if he could outline if there are any further plans to remove 
similar murals around the city. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council did not paint over the mural on the exterior wall of Shaku Maku 
restaurant in Rathmines.  
Dublin City Council Planning Enforcement Section are aware of the publication of 
recent media reports relating to a mural on Shaku Maku Restaurant on Rathmines 
Road Lower, and the associated social media outcry from some quarters relating to 
the removal of the mural concerned. It is important to make you aware of the actual 
facts in respect of this matter. 
• 
Dublin City Council did not remove the mural concerned. 

• 
Dublin City Council did not issue an enforcement order or notice, or initiate legal 
action, requiring its removal. 
• 
Nobody from Dublin City Council proactively brought this mural to the attention 
of, or made a complaint relating to it to the Planning Enforcement Section within 
this Department.   
A complaint was received from a third party local resident to the Planning Enforcement 
Section of Dublin City Council relating to the provision of a mural on the gable wall of 
Shaku Maku Restaurant, 192 Rathmines Road Lower, Dublin 6, in the absence of a 
prior grant of planning permission.  
As required under Part 8 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) a 
Section 152 Warning Letter was issued to the Owner and Manager of the restaurant 
on the 1st of October 2024 outlining the allegation made in the complaint concerned.  
This warning letter outlined that the matter was under investigation. It did not order the 
removal of the mural. It also importantly outlined in bold that submissions or 
observations in writing to Dublin City Council could be made within 4 weeks of 
service of the letter regarding the subject matter of the letter. Direct contact details 
including the mobile phone number of the Planning Enforcement Case Officer were 
also provided should the restaurant owner or manager wish to discuss the matter. The 
latest date for submissions or observations was the 28th of October 2024. 
No contact was made to the Planning Enforcement Case Officer, or to the A/Planning 
Enforcement Manger by anybody from, or representing the restaurant following the 
issuing of the Warning Letter concerned. No submission or observation was made on 
foot of the letter sent. 
As a point of clarity murals on the façade or gable wall of a premises require planning 
permission, regardless of their content. The owner of the restaurant had a number of 
options following receipt of the warning letter, including making a planning application 
to retain it. The restaurant owner chose to remove it. 
This matter was dealt with in a fair and balanced manner by the Planning Enforcement 
Section, in compliance with our statutory requirements. The actions of the owner of the 
restaurant in this instance pre-empted any consideration by Dublin City Council to 
issue an Enforcement Notice, or seek an order relating to this matter. 
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if he expects additional funding to Dublin City Council from 
the Department of Housing on foot of the report from the Dublin City Taskforce; and if 
he could outline what he would hope to achieve in the next 12 month period if additional 
funding is provided 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Department of An Taoiseach has established an Inter Departmental working 
Group to assess the recently published Taskforce report. The group is tasked with 
reporting back to Government by mid -December on the possible areas that could be 
actioned, the respective timelines and what are the resourcing implications going 
forward.  
An update will be provided to members once the Department has carried out its 
processes. 
 
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many derelict properties have been purchased by the 
council by way of CPO in the last 12 months; whether these derelict properties were 
commercial or residential; and if he could outline any intentions to purchase derelict 
properties by way of CPO in the coming 12 months; both commercial and residential. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Section14 of the Derelict Sites Act 1990 empowers a Local Authority to acquire by 
agreement or compulsorily any derelict site situated within their functional area. Since 
August 2023, the Derelict Sites unit have acquired ten derelict properties, nine of which 
were acquired compulsorily under the legislation and one by agreement following the 
issue of notices by the unit.  The type of properties is broken down as follows -  
• 
1 residential property by agreement.  
• 
7 residential properties compulsorily (2 in 2023) (5 in 2024) 
• 
2 commercial properties. 
 
Regarding how many sites the Unit intends to acquire for the next year it is impossible 
to say as acquiring properties under S.14 the Derelict Sits Act 1990 is used as a last 
resort in circumstances where all efforts to secure the carrying out of improvement 
works by property owners have been exhausted.  
 
Currently Derelict Sites have one site with An Bord Pleanála seeking consent to the 
Council’s acquisition and one with the City Valuer’s regarding acquiring by agreement.  
 
 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if he could provide an update on the playing fields study 
that was outlined as an objective of the council in Chapter 10 (GIO46) of the Dublin 
City Development Plan 2022-2028; and if this study is complete, if he could outline the 
level of pitch provision required as a result of planned population growth 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The objective in Chapter 10 (GIO46) followed on from discussion and a webinar which 
was held as part of the Development Plan review in the preparation of the City 
Development Plan. As part of that engagement the councillors were advised that 
Dublin City Council is experiencing increasing demand from clubs for more playing 
fields, however there is little spare capacity on existing pitches and there is little 
likelihood of new playing fields being achieved through the planning process as 
residential development in the city are now almost exclusively high density on relatively 
small sites.  
Historically, in the 1960/70’s/80’s when open spaces were being planned in the city 
suburbs (outside the canals), 10% of the site area was required to provide green space 
(public open space) and in most cases the landscape design was minimised in favour 
of levelling the open space to create playing fields and kickabout space. Today public 
open space in any new development is planned for a more diverse range of habitat for 
biodiversity other than amenity grassland and open spaces now incorporate 
sustainable drainage and other such features. This combination of factors inevitably 
means that space for active recreation and playing fields is not being achieved through 
the development control planning process.  
Based on population growth, the assumption that more people are playing sport, 
people are playing to a later age in life and female participation is increasing, the 
demand for playing fields will increase. While the 2022 – 2028 Dublin City 
Development Plan provides increased protection of existing and established sport and 
recreational facilities in the city (Policy GI49 refers) if the quantity of playing fields is to 
increase this can only be achieved by gaining access to under-utilised recreational 
grounds in the City or acquisition of lands outside of the City.    
The only information which is required for the completion of the study in question is a 
Geographic Information System survey of lands within the city which are suitably zoned 
and which could be considered under-utilised for recreational playing fields and the 
location and usage of all-weather training facilities in schools, colleges and other 
institutional zoned lands. This work will be carried out in the next couple of years in 

time for the next Development plan review. Consideration is also being given to the 
acquisition of lands outside of the city in the medium to long term. 
With regard to playing field provision relating to planned population growth the most 
relevant standard is the UK Fields in Trust guidance for outdoor sport which 
recommends a standard of 1.15 hectares per 1,000 population for playing pitches in 
urban areas and a 15 minute walk to be a reasonable distance for people to walk to a 
playing field, which equates to a 1.2km distance.  
Using this buffer distance for each playing pitch Dublin City is reasonably well catered 
for as regards proximity to playing fields, however, there are unique circumstances that 
relate to Dublin such as the prevalence of GAA games (the size of a senior GAA pitch 
is almost twice the size of a senior soccer pitch) so the UK standards are not exactly 
transferrable. 
 
 
Q.61 
COUNCILLOR CIAN FARRELL  
To ask the Chief Executive In relation to homelessness accommodation currently 
being provided by the DHRE, how many units are being engaged via the private market 
(as opposed to owned by a charity or by DCC). What is the total cost of this annually 
to the council, and what is the average cost per private unit in comparison to the cost 
of a public/DCC owned unit. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The annual cost for the provision of both PEA & NGO homeless accommodation 
through the DRHE in 2023 is set out below. 
Cost of provision of accommodation and operation of PEA Facilities in 2023 was 
€120,106,678.74 
Currently there are 8926 PEA Beds available to the DRHE. 
Cost of provision of accommodation and operation of NGO Facilities in 2023 was 
€82,300,432.54 
Currently there are 3870 NGO Beds available to the DRHE. 
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR CIAN FARRELL 
To ask the Chief Executive How many derelict sites are under consideration of being 
added to the derelict sites register. What is the average review time from when a site 
is reported to the council, and being added to the register? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently 127 Derelict Sites included on the Register.  There are approx.450 
active files - made up of new complaints due for inspection, files under investigation, 
or files being monitored for works to be completed to render the site non-derelict.  In 
October there were 15 Section 8(2) notices of intention to add to the Derelict Sites 
Register issued.  The owners of these properties have one month from date of receipt 
of S8 (2) to make representations to the Council. 
Timeline from complaint to entry on the Derelict Sites Register is subject to many 
factors, as there are a series of procedures to follow and these can take a considerable 
amount of time to complete.   Files are opened following receipt of complaints / queries 
regarding the condition of a site. Inspections are arranged and the site assessed to 
determine what action, if any, is warranted under the Derelict Sites Act 1990.  The 
public’s view of what constitutes a derelict site can be very varied and not always in 
accordance with the legislative definition set out in the Derelict Sites Act 1990. For a 
site to be determined derelict it must meet the criteria set out in the Act. Sites are 
viewed from the public road / footpaths as we do not have the authority to enter 
privately owned properties.  
Definition of derelict site. 

3.—In this section “derelict site” means any land (in this section referred to as “the land 
in question”) which detracts, or is likely to detract, to a material degree from the 
amenity, character or appearance of land in the neighbourhood of the land in question 
because of— 
(a) the existence on the land in question of structures which are in a ruinous, derelict 
or dangerous condition, or 
(b) the neglected, unsightly or objectionable condition of the land or any structures on 
the land in question, or 
(c) the presence, deposit or collection on the land in question of any litter, rubbish, 
debris or waste, except where the presence, deposit or collection of such litter, rubbish, 
debris or waste results from the exercise of a right conferred by statute or by common 
law. 
If the site is deemed derelict within the above, a reference of ownership is obtained 
from the Law Department.  Then follows a process of engagement with the owner to 
secure the carrying out of necessary improvement works to render the site non-
derelict. Engagement with owners can prove successful but if not, then formal 
procedures under the Derelict Sites Act are invoked which can culminate in the site 
being entered on the Derelict Sites Register.  
 
Q.63 
COUNCILLOR CIAN FARRELL 
To ask the Chief Executive How many applications, approvals, commencements and 
completions have taken place across the: 
1. Living city initiative 
2. Buy and renew scheme 
3. Repair and lease scheme 
4. Vacant property refurbishment grant 
 
What is the total funding available across these 4 schemes, and how much has been 
deployed since their inception. A yearly breakdown would be appreciated from their 
inception until now. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
1. Living City Initiative 
The Living City Initiative (LCI) is a tax incentive scheme to assist and encourage people 
to live in the historic inner city areas of Dublin City. It allows owners and investors to 
claim tax relief for money spent on refurbishment and/or conversion of residential 
property either as tax relief or capital allowances. 
The total No. of Approved Applications (since 2015 to date) is 225 and 131 Letters of 
Certification have issued. These can be broken down further: 
Residential applications (Owner Occupier) 128 
Rented residential applications received 97 
Total valid applications received 225 
Year All Residential Property Applications 
2015 10 
2016 15 
2017 15 
2018 25 
2019 34 
2020 35 
2021 24 
2022 39 
2023 21 
2024 7 
Total 225 
 

 
2. Since its inception in 2018 DCC has taken on 108 properties under the Buy and 
Renew Scheme. We have completed 61 units. We are currently at the construction 
stage on 9 projects and we are at various design stages with the remaining 38 projects. 
The Buy and Renew Scheme is fully funded by the Government and funding must be 
sought and approved at the design stage. 
3. Under the repair and Lease scheme we have 6 projects completed with another 6 
currently being worked on. These projects are again Government funded. 
4. Under the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant (Which began in November 2022) 
we have had 597 applications of which 381 have been approved, 30 have been 
rejected, 5 have been withdrawn, 412 have been finalised, 29 have been closed out 
and grants issued and 152 are in progress. The funding available on this scheme is a 
grant of up to €50,000 or €70,000 if the property is derelict. The grant is subject to 
specific works being carried out on the property and the property has to meet certain 
conditions such as being uninhabitable for 2 years. 
 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR CIAN FARELL 
To ask the Chief Executive How many homes has the vacant homes officer inspected 
and referred to the register since the role was created. A yearly breakdown would be 
appreciated. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Vacant Homes Officer was appointed by the City Council in late November 2027. 
The role of the Vacant Homes Officer is to meet the City Council’s Objective under the 
Government’s and the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage’s 
(DHPLH) strategic objectives under the Rebuilding Ireland and or subsequent Housing 
For All Initiative. 
The Housing Department through the Vacant Homes Officer has identified a potential 
of 1585 Long term vacant Residential Properties over the period 2017-2024 (October 
2024).  
The properties recorded by the Vacant Homes Officer are for the processing of data 
by the Housing Department and are independent of the Derelict Sites register which is 
administer by the Planning Department and available online by members of the public. 
A total of 417 files pertaining to the reporting of long term vacant residential properties 
have been closed as upon investigation and or site inspections they were not deemed 
to be long term vacant as per the above Departmental Initiatives.  
The following is a breakdown of the identification of active properties from 2017-2024. 
 
2017: 307. 
2018:146. 
2019:109. 
2020: 70. 
2021:107. 
2022:319. 
2023: 90. 
2024: 20. 
 
The Vacant Homes Unit continues to engage with the owners of these properties to 
return them to use as per the Rebuilding Ireland and Housing for All Initiatives 
 
The process of reducing the level of long term vacancy in the built environment is also 
supported through the administration of subsequent schemes that the DOHLGH has 
implemented since 2017 namely: 
Repair and Lease Scheme. 
Buy and Renew Scheme. 

Croi Conaithe Scheme.  
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
 
Congratulations on the successful launch of the new bin shelf in the city centre. Is there 
a date for the completion of the trial? Is there a plan to roll this scheme out beyond the 
city centre? If so could Rathgar village be considered for inclusion of this excellent 
scheme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services have an initial trial review planned for early Q1 2025 on 
the bin shelves. The current trial is based in the core city centre where the density and 
majority of issues have been identified.  
There are currently no roll out or expansion plans of the shelves until a review of the 
trial. Any expansion plan will be based on funding, need and appropriate locations as 
the city council has circa 3500 public litter bins.  
Rathgar Village will be included for consideration for any potential expansion.  
 
 
Q.66 
COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive With the rise of commercial bike rental companies using 
public bicycle parking facilities would there be the possibility of increasing the capacity 
of the bike parking around the city centre and urban villages? People are regularly in 
contact seeking an increase in the availability of bicycle parking including the 
availability of cargo bike parking which if installed correctly would encourage more 
people to use active travel and not hinder footpath users. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council with the support of the National Transport Authority provides on-
street cycle parking across its administrative area. The number of on-street cycle 
parking spaces increased considerably from 2018 onwards in direct response to the 
anticipated demands from bike rental companies. DCC will continue to respond to 
requests for bike parking in the city centre and urban villages and install them subject 
to the identification of suitable locations and the funding being available.  
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive Regarding the use of laneways for parking and access to 
the rear of properties – what are the legal requirements for parking on laneways? Often 
residents are blocked from turning into their private parking space due to cars parking 
too close to their entrance. This is becoming more challenging as the cities laneways 
are being developed with muse houses. Are there laneway markings available to 
residents to enhance the usability of the laneways? This could be a way to promote 
good parking and maintain access for emergency vehicles. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking enforcement can only enforce illegal parking in laneways that are in DCC 
charge. Most laneways would have unrestricted parking and therefore we would not 
be able to enforce. The enforcement of vehicles blocking access would only be 
possible if the laneway allows for the size of the enforcement vehicle. 
 

Q.68  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the demand for playing pitches from sports clubs 
in this season? Has this increased from last year or has the availability of pitches 
increased? I understand that the potential of some grounds were identified previously 
and would like to know if there is any update on these potential solutions to the 
shortage of pitches. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is an increased demand for juvenile teams and the available playing fields in 
public parks are fully allocated. Unfortunately, there is little likelihood of new playing 
fields being achieved through the planning process as residential development in the 
city are now almost exclusively high density on relatively small sites.  
Historically, in the 1960/70’s/80’s when open spaces were being planned in the city 
suburbs (outside the canals), 10% of the site area was required to provide green space 
(public open space) and in most cases the landscape design was minimised in favour 
of levelling the open space to create playing fields and kickabout space. Today public 
open space in any new development is planned for a more diverse range of habitat for 
biodiversity other than amenity grassland and open spaces now incorporate 
sustainable drainage swales and other such features. This combination of factors 
inevitably means that space for active recreation and playing fields is not being 
achieved through the development control planning process.  
Based on population growth, the assumption that more people are playing sport, 
people are playing to a later age in life and female participation is increasing, the 
demand for playing fields will increase. While the 2022 – 2028 Dublin City 
Development Plan provides increased protection of existing and established sport and 
recreational facilities in the city (Policy GI49 refers) if the quantity of playing fields is to 
increase this can only be achieved by gaining access to under-utilised recreational 
grounds in the City or acquisition of lands outside of the City.    
The only information which is required for the completion of the study in question is a 
Geographic Information System survey of lands within the city which are suitably zoned 
and which could be considered under-utilised for recreational playing fields and the 
location and usage of all-weather training facilities in schools, colleges and other 
institutional zoned lands. This work will be carried out in the next couple of years in 
time for the next Development plan review. Consideration is also being given to the 
acquisition of lands outside of the city in the medium to long term. 
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a right turn filter light (details supplied) 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
It was noted that this item is on our programme of works for 2024. For your reference, 
please see our full previous response copied in (Details supplied) 
 
Q.70 
COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive as to when CCTV will be rolled out across litter blackspots 
(Details supplied) in the Cabra-Glasnevin Ward ? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Circular Economy and Miscellaneous Provisions Act 2022  amended the Litter 
Pollution Acts 1997 to allow for the use of CCTV schemes to facilitate the deterrence, 
prevention, detection and prosecution of offences. The Local Government 
Management Agency (LGMA) produced a Code of Practice for the Operation of CCTV 
that sets out the processes which must be undertaken before CCTV schemes can be 
deployed. These processes include establishing the need for and necessity for  the 

use of CCTV, the completion of site specific Data Protection Impact Assessment 
(DPIA),  the preparation of a Business  Case and a number of Standard Operation 
Procedures (SPO’s) for the deployment of CCTV cameras. Local consultation must 
also be undertaken before a CCTV Scheme is implemented.   
 
To form a CCTV Scheme the DPIA must be approved by the Data Protection Officer 
(DPO) and all documentation (and consultations) must be completed and submitted to 
the Executive Manager for their approval. Once approved, the CCTV Scheme is then 
presented to the Oversight Board for consideration and approval. When approved, the 
Oversight Board will recommend the CCTV Scheme to the Chief Executive who must 
sign off on the Scheme in order for it to be implemented. 
 
There is significant work in preparing the documentation for a CCTV Scheme to ensure 
compliance with all the stages and all the documents as required under the Code of 
Practice. It is planned to roll out CCTV Schemes on a phased basis initially. At present 
work is ongoing with Phase 1 “NIC CCTV Scheme Project 1.” A draft DPIA and 
Business Case are being reviewed by the Law Department prior to submission to the 
Executive Manager. A number of SoP’s are also being drafted to be included as 
appendices to the scheme. 
 
We plan to arrange information and consultation sessions with stakeholders and a 
walkabout the area with elected representatives before the scheme is submitted. It is 
hoped that we will be in a position to submit the CCTV Scheme to the Executive 
Manager by quarter 4 for his approval.  
 
Phase 2 of the scheme will be “Bottle/Textile  Banks CCTV Scheme Project 2”. 
Sites must be identified to establish the necessity to deploy CCTV cameras.  
Preparation of the CCTV Scheme includes, site inspections,  surveys of illegal 
dumping, retrieving records of requests/complaints received, consultation with 
stakeholders and information sessions with Councillors,  preparation of  DPIA and  
Business cases and  then submit for approval as above. 
 
Area Based CCTV Scheme Project 3 
Some sites have already been identified for Phase 3 of the scheme. There is now a 
need to establish the necessity to deploy CCTV cameras at specific sites.   Preparation 
of the CCTV Scheme includes, site inspections,  surveys of illegal dumping, retrieving 
records of requests/complaints received, consultation with stakeholders and 
information sessions with Councillors,  preparation of  DPIA and  Business cases and  
then submit for approval as above. 
 
Meanwhile, a procedure which contains details of how to request the deployment of 
CCTV will be available.  This procedure will enable Councillors and other stakeholders 
to understand the rationale and necessity for the deployment of CCTV cameras and 
the criterion that must be followed before a request is submitted.   The procedure will 
be forwarded to all Councillors, Senior Management Team, Area Office staff and the 
Communications Unit in DCC. 
 
A contract is nearly complete for the provision of CCTV services by the successful 
tenderer. 
 
Q.71 
COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond and take action regarding the following traffic 
issue.  
The amount of through traffic through Cabra is ever increasing and needs to be 
addressed, but in ways that take residents and businesses needs into account.  

However, the increasing traffic on (details supplied) needs urgent action.  
We have: 
1. The road used as a free Luas parking area.  
2 the road used as a free bus and commercial lorry area. 
3. Some patrons of the school making it a no-go area for residents between 8am to 
8.40am and 12.30pm and 3pm daily. You cannot get in or out of your drive due to drive 
ways being blocked by cars. It's very upsetting to residents. You have to stand on the 
road to keep your gate clear if you’re getting anything done or if someone is expected, 
that’s if you have an exact time of arrival.  
 
Can someone from traffic or area engineer please examine the above major traffic 
issue immediately 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
After the assessment on (details supplied) the area engineer concluded that this is a 
residential and industrial area, and the traffic team suggests implementing: 
Parking Restrictions: Implement Pay & Display permit parking to prevent the road 
from being used as an informal Luas park-and-ride area, and include resident-only 
parking permits or time-limited parking to discourage commuter parking. 
Additionally, regular monitoring and enforcement are recommended to conduct 
ongoing assessments, enforce parking and traffic regulations, and apply fines for 
infractions to ensure compliance. 
Any instances of illegal parking should be reported to the Gardaí or Dublin Street 
Parking Services (DSPS) 01-602-2500 or Email: info@dsps.ie, as it is a matter for 
enforcement under the Road Traffic Regulations. 
 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond and take action re the following major traffic 
issue (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
(details supplied) has been added to Transport Advisory Group’s Minor Works 
programme for an upgrade of both mini-roundabouts, new uncontrolled crossings and 
a speed ramp/raised table.   
Dublin City Council (DCC) generally does not provide signage to restrict access on 
public roads. 
 
Q.73 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive That Dublin City Council please look at the following 
Details Supplied  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above person does not hold an active housing application with Dublin City Council. 
Their previous housing application, ref 124285, was cancelled in 2017 as they were 
not linked in with homeless services or accessing emergency accommodation.  
Allocations have provisionally booked the next available appointment for the individual 
on Tuesday the 12th of November at 2pm to submit a new housing application. If this 
appointment does not suit, he is advised to phone Allocations on 01 222 2201 to 
reschedule to a more suitable time. 
When Allocations have confirmed the individual’s eligibility for social housing supports, 
we can discuss his housing options and make a suitable recommendation. 
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive the following (details supplied) 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The matter will be referred to the Local Area Housing Office to engage with the tenant 
with a view to addressing any nuisance caused for the adjoining property. 
Housing Maintenance will arrange for pest control services to attend in response to the 
reported vermin.  Remedial action will be taken as appropriate. 
It is open to the resident at Clifden Rd. to make a formal request to acquire the plot in 
question for incorporation into their garden.  The application will be processed through 
the normal channels. 
 
Q.75 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive That I be given a full report on the housing request of 
(details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing List, with an application date of 15/10/2013, the 
applicant holds the following position on this list; 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
J 
3 
56 
 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list. I have noted the 
applicant’s interest in Cleggan Road.  
 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household.  
Furthermore, the applicant may also wish to make an application for HAP which would 
provide financial assistance towards the cost of renting a property.   
 
Q.76 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive Can Dublin City Council please ensure that (details 
supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Housing Grant Section administers three Housing Grants Schemes designed to 
provide assistance to people making adaptations to their privately owned homes to 
meet their medical needs and to older people in inadequate housing conditions 
carrying out essential repairs to their owner occupied homes. These measures enable 
people to stay in their own communities and prevent or delay their placement in 
residential care thereby reducing social segregation, assisting their carer’s and 
strengthening families.   
 
The three Housing Grants are as follows: - 
 
1) Housing Adaptation Scheme. 
2) Mobility Aids Scheme. 
3) Housing Aid for Older People. 

 
We have not received a completed Application Form in the Home Grants Section from 
the above named.   
 
I wish to confirm an Application Form has been forwarded by post to the above named.  
 
If the above named requires any further information in relation to the Housing 
Adaptation Grants, please contact the Housing Adaptation Grants Section at 01 222 
2195. 
 
I have also attached the hyperlink to the Housing Adaptation Grants for People with a 
Disability.   
 
https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/housing/i-own-my-home/grants-
homeowners/housing-adaption-grant-people-disability 
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to repaint the double yellow lines in Kilmore West. The new 
footpaths along this road are very welcome but unfortunately the construction work has 
left the double yellow lines either gone completely or patchy at best. The area already 
has significant traffic management issues and the lack of double yellow lines is causing 
increased difficulty for residents. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The location will be inspected in the coming days. Any requirement for repainting will 
be carried out within the next 30 working days of the Council Meeting of the 4th 
November 2024. 
 
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to install a pedestrian crossing at the junction of 
Greencastle Road and Barryscourt Road, Coolock, Dublin 17 (at Stardust Memorial 
Park). A number of residents have been in touch to request this due to some serious 
incidents in the last months.  
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7042651) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to install speed ramps on Mask Road, Dublin 5. The road 
in question is used frequently for rat running and with a primary school located very 
close by residents feel this would assist in slowing down motorists and keeping children 
safe.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7042653) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
 

Q.80 
COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to look at pruning trees along Clonshaugh Avenue, Dublin 
17. The trees in question are blocking light from street lighting which has resulted in a 
number of accidents and injuries. A number of residents have reported slips and trips 
due to poor lighting, particularly those from the Coolock Running Club who have now 
altered their route. For many others this is not possible.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection was recently carried out and 3 number street trees were identified that 
were obscuring the street lights to an excessive degree.  As these trees are planted 
far too close to the street light it is felt that heavy pruning is not an effective solution 
to ensure the proper functioning of thee lighting as this will merely result in a lopsided 
tree and an ongoing maintenance demand.  Rather these 3 number trees have been 
listed for appropriate replacement planting and will be removed when local schedules 
and resources allow.  Locations for replacement planting have been identified on the 
same road further down the road. 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive can he arrange for the tree at (details supplied) to be cut 
back as a matter of urgency. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will have the trees located at the rear of (details supplied) 
inspected and followed up with any pruning works required. 
 
Q.82 
COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive can he arrange for the property at (details supplied) to be 
inspected with a view to carrying out insulation works on the property. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The property, (details supplied), is a red brick house and, due to the external 
construction material unsuitable for external insulation. Housing Maintenance do not 
have an internal insulation programme at present. However we can confirm the tenant 
was provided with a heating upgrade in 2021 receiving a new energy efficient 
condensing boiler, modern heating controls and a new higher efficiency hot water 
cylinder. Additionally the boiler was serviced in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, 
July 2024 and is due for servicing again next year. 
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive can he arrange for the property at (details supplied) to be 
inspected and can he arrange for the council to carry out any improvements that they 
can to make the place more liveable for the tenant. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance has carried out an inspection of this dwelling and due to the  
extent of works required we are liaising with the area housing office to find alternative  
accommodation for the tenant within Mercer House. We would envisaged that we will 
have something available over the next 3 to 4 weeks. 
     
Q.84  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive can we please be given information on why medical and 
exceptional social grounds applications are taking longer to be processed and 
approved or denied? Can we be given up to date numbers for the amount of 
applications for medical and exceptional social grounds that have been  
 

1. Applied for and approved for area M in 2024. 
2. Applied for and denied for area M 2024.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The current wait time for decisions to issue on applications for Priority on Exceptional 
Medical Grounds is due to the high volume of applications being received on an 
ongoing basis.  It takes 12-16 weeks generally for applications to be processed. 
Applications for Priority on Exceptional Medical Grounds: 
 
1. applied for and awarded in 2024 Area M – 49 
2. applied for and denied in Area M in 2024 – The IT system in place does not 
currently capture this data. However an updated IT system is being developed to 
improve several areas. It is intended that the new IT system will be in place 
during 2025  
Q.85 
COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE  
To ask the Chief Executive that a dedicated council official be appointed to coordinate 
and lead the implementation of the Social & Economic aspects of our Regeneration 
projects which are essential for creating sustainable communities 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Per Circular N11/2007 Policy for Regeneration of Local Authority Estates, funding is 
available from the Department of Housing, Local Government, and Heritage for social, 
educational and economic initiatives. All funding submissions are made through the 
Housing Regeneration Programme Manager. Submissions are usually made at 
gateways through the 4-Stage Approval Process, however separate submissions can 
also be made throughout the project stages.  
Dublin City Council has been successful in applying and receiving funding through 
Circular N11/2007 under social initiatives for the appointment of Community 
Development Officers for our Dolphin House and Oliver Bond Regeneration projects. 
 
Q.86 
COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to install road safety signage on Beresford Lawn Dublin 9, 
similar to the signs in neighbouring estates, to promote safer driving and to protect 
children playing in the area 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref:7042654 ) will be referred to the Area Engineer for  
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive in recognition of the dearth of childcare facilities in 
Drumcondra and Glasnevin, to commit to an audit of any council owned properties in 
these areas to establish if any such properties are suitable for future use as childcare 
facilities.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Presently Dublin City Council does not have vacant units at market or tender in the 
above areas. Most DCC owned properties are occupied by tenants who have 
established tenancy rights under various occupancy agreements. 
Dublin City Council’s Property Management Section in conjunction with the Local Area 
Office will review DCC owned buildings excluding residential to determine if there are 
any vacant properties in the designated areas.  
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to review the Parking Permit policy to address the 
challenges faced by residents who share or part own a vehicle. Residents sharing 
vehicles with friends or family, living at different addresses, support our ambition for 
less car use but rules about min days parked are exclusionary 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Permit Parking for residents are issued under the Dublin City Council Parking Control 
Bye-Laws 2024, Part III, 16 (2) which states:  
A resident’s parking permit may be issued by the Council or its agents subject to the 
provisions of paragraph 5 of this Bye-Law in respect of one vehicle where the Council 
are satisfied, following production of acceptable evidence, that the applicant is a 
resident on the residential parking permit road to which the permit will relate and that 
the vehicle is normally kept at the resident’s normal dwelling place on that road.  The 
resident’s parking permit shall be granted for a period of either one year or a period of 
two years from the date of issue in respect of that vehicle and for the residential parking 
permit road to which the permit relates. 
Therefore the sharing of parking permits with friends and family is prohibited as each 
permit is specific for each property and vehicle. 
Dublin City Council will be carrying  out a review of the Parking Control Bye-Laws in 
2025 and this will be brought to the mobility and public realm SPC and then through 
the statutory process.  
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the road safety measures 
requested for Richmond Road. High speed traffic, rat running and rising traffic volumes 
are putting pedestrians and cyclists at risk 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A number of requests for traffic calming on Richmond Road are currently with the North 
Central Area Engineer for assessment. The councillor will be notified of any 
recommendations following the completion of the assessment. 
 
Q.90 
COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive the legal basis on which Croke Park and the Gardaí are 
operating to restrict residents' access to their homes in this residential area during 
commercial events. Additionally, what measures does Dublin City Council have in 
place to engage with the local community regarding these impacts, and how will the 
council address the concerns about noise and litter during such events. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services are engaged by Croke Park to supply a clean-up team 
before, during and after events hosted in the stadium. Croke Park management, the 
Croke Park Community Team and An Garda Síochána are in contact with our duty 
inspector to report/request any waste/litter issues to be completed by our team 
regularly during the shift. Should residents need to report any issues, the free phone 

number 1800303593 is the Community team who will in turn pass it on to our duty 
inspector. 
 
For all outdoor concerts that take place in Dublin City a music noise level of 75 decibels 
averaged over a 15 minute period must not be exceeded at the nearest noise sensitive 
premises. 
This level is prescribed in the UK Guidance “the Noise Council Code of Practice on the 
Control of Noise from Concerts”. 
This is a condition of the licence (where applicable) and a pre-emptive Section 107 
Environmental Protection Agency Act Notice served on the Concert Promoter. 
For all outdoor concerts to ensure compliance, monitoring is carried out by Dublin City 
Council Environmental Health Officers. 
In addition an Acoustic Consultant employed by the promoter monitors noise levels 
and advises the sound engineer accordingly to ensure that the noise limit is not 
exceeded”.   
For all concerts that took place in Croke Park for 2024 the monitoring carried out by 
the EHOs and the Acoustic Consultant, indicated that the music noise level was not 
exceeded at the nearest noise sensitive premises.   
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider hosting a reception in the Mansion House to 
honour the Shelbourne Women's Team for their recent FAI Cup victory, recognising 
their contribution to women's sports and their achievements in representing Dublin at 
a national level. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The hosting of events in the Mansion House is at the discretion of the Lord Mayor of 
the day.  Requests should be e-mailed to lordmayor@dublincity.ie and they will be 
brought to the Lord Mayor for his/her consideration. 
Q.92 
COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive In recognition of the dearth of childcare facilities in Dublin 
7, will the Chief Executive commit to an audit of any council owned properties in 
these areas, to establish if any such properties may be suitable for future use as 
childcare facilities. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Presently Dublin City Council does not have vacant units at market or tender in the 
above areas. Most DCC owned properties are occupied by tenants who have 
established tenancy rights under various occupancy agreements. 
Dublin City Council’s Property Management Section in conjunction with the Local Area 
Office will review DCC owned buildings excluding residential to determine if there are 
any vacant properties in the designated areas.  
 
Q.93 
COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive to intensify street cleaning and waste management 
enforcement in the Stoneybatter and Aughrim Street areas. Residents have 
consistently raised the issues of illegal dumping in the area and the issue seems to 
only be getting worse. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services regularly clean and remove dumped waste from the 
above mentioned area. We will monitor the cleaning of this area to see what 
improvements can be made. 

The litter wardens attend Aughrim Street and the Stoneybatter area regularly to 
investigate illegally dumped waste but are struggling to find any evidence within the 
bags to issue fixed penalty notices to offenders. Ongoing enforcement with the 
takeaways in Stoneybatter has seen a slight improvement with one business but the 
other is continuously dumping. Waste Enforcement is involved and is taking 
appropriate action. Fines have been issued in Stoneybatter for illegally dumped waste 
over the past six weeks to two months. The litter wardens will continue to monitor the 
area and investigate dumped waste to try and resolve the problem going forward. 
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive to implement, as a matter of urgency, traffic calming and 
illegal parking deterrent measures at the entrance to Rutland Grove, D12. The present 
situation is seriously compromising pedestrian and driver safety due to haphazard 
parking that results in poor visibility of oncoming traffic and pedestrians forced to walk 
on the road 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement will request that DSPS continue their patrols of this area and 
enforce all illegal parking. 
 
Following a preliminary assessment by the Transport Advisory Group (TAG) area 
engineer at Rutland Grove, Dublin 12, it was noted that the site currently has 7 speed 
ramps and a "School Ahead" sign (W 141) as traffic calming measures. To further 
improve safety, 2 ‘SLOW DOWN CHILDREN PLAYING’ signs will be upgraded to 
Children Crossing W142. 'RAMP' signs and 30 km/h road marking roundels will be 
installed at the entrance to Rutland Grove.  
Additionally, a request will be sent to the lining team to repaint missing double yellow 
lines (RRM 008) at the bend opposite to Eamonn Ceannt Park gate on Rutland Grove 
/ Clogher Road to deter illegal parking and improve visibility. It was also observed that 
vehicles are parking on the pavements TAG recommends sending parking 
enforcement to inspect for any illegal parking. However, instances of illegal or 
obstructive parking should be referred to Dublin Street Parking Services, DSPS (email 
info@dsps.ie or tel. no. 01 602 2500) or an Garda Síochána for enforcement. 
 
Q.95 
COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive about the sandbags placed along the seafront in 
Clontarf.  The residents are looking for a date as to when they will be removed.  They 
informed me that they have been visually destroying the seafront for the past 12 years. 
I fully understand that they are there for protection of flooding.  When can we move 
forward on this issue as the residents are not one bit happy. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The sandbags form a significant flood defence for businesses and residents in the area 
and must remain in place until more substantial permanent tidal flood barriers can be 
installed. We have looked at a large number of alternative options suggested by 
residents and Councillors but none to date have proved to be feasible. Dublin City 
Council continue to liaise with Clontarf Residents and Business Associations towards 
the provision of permanent flood defences. Once these are in place, the temporary 
measures can be removed.  
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to remove a Tree (details supplied)) 
The resident has engaged an engineer regarding their concerns about the tree outside 
their home.  

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow and any 
works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care 
programme for the area.   
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to survey with a view to a plan to possibly remove a Tree, 
(details supplied) this iconic gorgeous little Lodge is living in a protected structure and 
at risk of severe damage from the tree. The owners have been requesting DCC to 
address this issue, but nobody has done anything.  If that tree falls, it’s not just their 
wall that will come down but will cause catastrophic damage to their home.  
Picture provided 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Service does not maintain the green and planted areas in this small estate 
where this tree is growing.  The matter should be referred to the management entity 
responsible for the maintenance of these landscaped areas. 
 
Q.98 
COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to look at installing more Sensory play areas, for example 
like one in the Sean O’Casey Park, it has a Sensory tower and a Dendrophone 
playgarden.  This would be fantastic for families struggling on CDNT waiting lists.  This 
would be something that would really help with their lives.  This could be placed in 
several locations for easy access for families.  I can discuss this further with you. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We can consider the provision of more sensory play areas in parks and it would be 
useful if the councillor could meet with the Parks team to impart their knowledge on 
this matter. A meeting will be arranged. 
 
 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will publish the Maher report into allegations of 
improper practices at Dublin Street Parking Services; what steps he has taken to 
ensure such practices are prohibited in any future tender for parking enforcement in 
Dublin. 
 
Q.100 COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive whether Dublin Street Parking Services still operates an 
early-leave incentive scheme or similar, and if so what the details of this scheme are. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Councils Service Level Agreement with DSPS have Key Performance 
Indicators which have to be met in order for services to be completed. Any incentive 
Scheme that DSPS have with their employees would be a private arrangement which 
DCC is not party to.  
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for a list of active Dublin bikes stations that were removed 
between 2015 and 2024, reasons for removal and whether they were replaced 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 

Table of dublinbike stations removed, re-installations and comments; 
Bike 
Station 
Removal 
Date 
Re-
Installation 
Date 
Comments 
Barrow 
Street 
18.07.2019 
September 
2024 
Station 
was 
removed 
to 
accommodate works on this 
street, re-instatement began in 
September 2024 
Strand 
Street 
Great 
29.05.2019 
N/A 
Station 
was 
removed 
to 
accommodate a development 
on 
Abbey 
Street 
Upper, 
development on Strand Street 
Great itself is holding up its re-
instatement 
St 
James 
Hospital 
14.12.2020 
N/A 
Station removed as requested 
by St James Hospital due to the 
pandemic 
  
 
Q.102  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive if polystyrene is accepted at Dublin City Council's bring 
centres and whether this material is recycled or not 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Polystyrene is accepted at Dublin City Council’s Civic Amenity Sites in Ballymun, North 
Strand and Ringsend, where it is dealt with as bulky waste and as such is recovered 
for use as solid recovered fuel for use in the cement making industry.  
Polystyrene is not accepted in our network of neighbourhood bring centres. 
 
Q.103 COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a full inspection and prune of the trees at 
(details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above area has been listed for consideration and inclusion in our tree survey 
programme 2025/26. All our tree works are carried out on a prioritised basis. A report 
will be issued detailing program for 2025, by the end of the year. 
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive if a full review of the medical housing adaptation application 
for (Details supplied) could be carried out. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Housing Grant Section administers three Housing Grants Schemes designed to 
provide assistance to people making adaptations to their privately owned homes to 
meet their medical needs and to older people in poor housing conditions carrying out 
essential repairs to their owner occupied homes. These measures enable people to 
stay in their own communities and prevent or delay their placement in residential care 
thereby reducing social segregation, assisting their carer’s and strengthening families.   
 
The three Housing Grants are as follows: - 
 
1) Housing Adaptation Scheme. 

2) Mobility Aids Scheme. 
3) Housing Aid for Older People. 
 
We have not received a completed Application Form in the Home Grants Section from 
the above named.   
 
I wish to confirm an Application Form has been forwarded by post to the above named.  
 
If the above named requires any further information in relation to the Housing 
Adaptation Grants, please contact the Housing Adaptation Grants Section at 01 222 
2195. 
 
I have attached the hyperlink to the Housing Adaptation Grants for People with a 
Disability.   
 
https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/housing/i-own-my-home/grants-
homeowners/housing-adaption-grant-people-disability 
 
Q.105 COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the Council’s contract and relationship with 
Clothes Pod and if there is any remuneration involved. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Textile Recycling Limited (TRL), T/A Clothes Pod, has provided a textile collection 
service to Dublin City Council since approximately the mid-1990s, as the successful 
tenderer in a series of competitive tender competitions, which are typically held every 
four years. On foot of each tender competition, a two year contract is typically awarded 
with provision for two, 1 year extensions, subject to review. A new tender is currently 
in preparation and it is anticipated that a new framework will be established, and a new 
contract awarded in late Q1 2025. 
Waste Management Services has a very good business relationship with TRL. TRL 
respond quickly to any requests for additional collections, reports of overflowing banks, 
replacement of damaged clothes banks and removal of graffiti. TRL also provide 
reports to DCC on illegal dumping of non-textile items at DCC bring bank locations.  
In terms of remuneration, TRL pays DCC a set price per tonne of textiles collected 
from DCC sites each month, as specified in the tender submission for each new 
framework agreement. 
Waste Management Services acknowledges that in recent years, illegal dumping, 
scavenging of clothes and discarding of unwanted items in the surrounding areas has 
risen to unmanageable levels at many locations across the city.  
Textile and glass bottle banks at Dublin City Council’s network of bring bank facilities 
are serviced multiple times per week, with clothing collections at many sites taking 
place six to seven days per week, and in some cases twice per day. Additional cleaning 
and removal of illegal dumping by DCC Cleansing operatives is also undertaken every 
day, either by the pilot north city Bring Bank Maintenance Team (BBMT), or by area 
based Cleansing staff who attend to sites on the days they are not scheduled for 
cleaning by the BBMT. However, these activities typically only occur once per day, 
usually in the morning, and it may be up to 24 hours, or longer, before Cleansing 
personnel return, leaving ample opportunity for illegal dumping, and scavenging and 
scattering of clothes to take place. However, within this time period, should WMS 
receive reports of illegal dumping or overflowing banks, Cleansing staff are deployed 
or the contracted service provider is notified to take the relevant action. 
 
Q.106  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 

To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the reinstatement of the double 
yellow lines at (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The location will be inspected in the coming days. Any requirement for the 
reinstatement of DYL’s will be carried out within the next 30 working days of the Council 
Meeting of the 4th November 2024. 
 
Q.107  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive What steps is the Council taking to ensure that the City 
Council Community Grants Scheme is sufficiently funded to meet the growing needs 
of senior citizen groups like the one in Grange Woodbine? Are there plans to increase 
the budget or introduce new funding streams for community groups in the upcoming 
fiscal year 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The revenue budget is being presented to full council by the end of November 2024.  
After this meeting the Community Grants Scheme allocation for 2025 will be confirmed. 
 
Q.108  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive Can the Council outline any available funding or grants that 
could support the renovation and expansion of community spaces, such as the Grange 
Woodbine Club? What assistance can be provided to help secure government grants 
for this project? 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Department of Rural and Community Development (DRCD), through the Dublin 
City Local Community Development Committee (LCDC), funds a Local Enhancement 
Programme (previously called the Community Enhancement Programme).  
 
The aim of the LEP fund is to support non-profit, community-based and/or voluntary 
sector organisations or groups who are seeking funding for capital costs.  
 
It is expected the DRCD will announce funding for the LEP 2025 in the New Year.  
  
Q.109  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive With ongoing concerns about dog waste in public areas, 
what is the Council’s strategy to improve signage and enforce regulations? Are there 
plans to increase the visibility of signage? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In recent years, Dublin City Council have put a number of initiatives in place to create 
awareness that dog owners and dog walkers have a responsibility to immediately clean 
up after their dog or face a fine of €150.   Some of the initiatives included signage, 
audio visual messages and stencils.  If the Councillor wishes to contact the Litter 
Management Office by emailing LMO@dublincity.ie with a list of locations where 
signage is required, arrangements will be made to have the signage put in place. 
 
Q.110  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive Given the concerns raised by residents about traffic safety, 
particularly in residential areas, what traffic calming measures are currently being 
considered or implemented? How can the community have a say in prioritizing these 
efforts 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Transport Advisory Group (TAG) assesses locations throughout the city for traffic 
measures in accordance with the relevant Road Traffic Acts, traffic standards and 
guidelines. 
In practice, TAG conducts assessments of various sites raised by the community, 
Councillors or identified by the Area Engineer. After this assessment, some 
recommendations can be implemented straight away, whilst others may require further 
design input and procurement of contractors.  
The community can play a role in this process by submitting requests for traffic calming 
measures via the Citizen Hub or by raising concerns through their local 
representatives. 
The input from Councillors and residents is valuable to the engineers during the TAG 
assessment process, as it helps to clarify the issues involved and develops solutions. 
 
 
Q.111  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline Dublin City Council’s understanding of HSE plans 
to deliver a Primary Care Centre in Drimnagh 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
There is an existing planning permission for a primary care centre at the existing HSE 
Health Centre, Mother McCauley Community Centre, Curlew Road, Dublin 12 granted 
permission under Register Reference 3571/13. 
This permission was extended in 2019 and is due to expire on the 31st January 2025. 
There is currently no new planning application on this site. 
It is policy of Dublin City Council (QHSN52) to support the HSE and other agencies in 
the provision of appropriate healthcare facilities and the Planning Authority will assess 
any future planning application in accordance with the 2022-2028 City Development 
Plan. 
 
Q.112  COUNCILLOR DARRGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm the status of its plans to prepare drawings of the 
Marrowbone Lane depot site, which will include a consolidated DCC depot and a full-
size playing pitch adjacent to St. Catherine’s Sports & Community Centre. Can the CE 
confirm when this drawing will be made public? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Council issued a request for quotation to a number of planning/urban design 
consultants for the preparation of a masterplan for the redevelopment of the lands. The 
master planning exercise will assess the feasibility of providing: 
·A South City Operations Depot – facilities needed to meet the operational 
requirements of the City Council for the south city and consolidate operations into 
shared facilities on the site 
· New outdoor sporting and recreational facilities – the feasibility of providing a new 
allher pitch (FAI/IRFU specifications are desired) and ancillary facilities 
· Opportunities for improved public realm – proposals for improved public realm, active 
travel and greening along the boundary of the lands 
·The feasibility of accommodating a continuing presence for Uisce Eireann on a portion 
of the site is also to be considered 
The consultants will engage with relevant City Council departments, local Elected 
Representatives and community stakeholders as part of the work.  
The deadline for submission of quotations was 20th September. Submissions are now 
being assessed and once a consultant is appointed, the local Area Committee will be 
advised of the proposed timeline and programme for engagement. 

 
Q.113  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive the following with respect to Dolphin House – please 
respond to each item below in turn: 
 
•confirm who, if anybody, is the current Project Manager of the Dolphin House 
Regeneration on behalf of Dublin City Council; 
• confirm when plans will be lodged for ‘Phase 1B’ of the Dolphin House Regeneration; 
• commit to ensuring that all single-glazed windows within the existing and dilapidated 
Dolphin House complex will be replaced as a matter of urgency and accept it is 
intolerable to continue to leave residents living with single-glazed windows with no 
clear end in sight for the regeneration to be completed;  
• commit to allocate funding through the Area Office for landscaping and delivery of an 
interim playing pitch surface adjacent to Dolphin House Community Centre 
•to provide his Housing Department’s best guess at when the Dolphin House 
regeneration will be completed? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We are currently reviewing the resourcing requirements of the Dolphin House project 
and while the Housing Delivery Project Manager assigned to the project has had to 
step away recently, the Programme Manager for Housing Regeneration Projects is 
continuing to progress the proposals alongside the DCC City Architect and Quantity 
Surveyor project teams. In the interim, the Dolphin House Regeneration forum is 
attended by DCC staff members from sections including the local area office, housing 
maintenance and others as available.  
Following concerns received from the Dolphin House Regeneration Forum on the 
Dolphin 1B proposals, the project has been paused in order to review design and 
delivery options. The prompt delivery of homes remains an important objective and will 
inform our decision making. The Regeneration Forum, Dolphin House tenants and 
local elected members will be kept updated on all proposals.   
As part of the Standards for Rented Houses, Dublin City Council are working through 
a list of our properties that have single glazed windows. Staff from our Housing 
Maintenance team recently met representatives from Dolphin House in order to 
examine the possibility of adding the windows to next year’s window replacement 
project.  
The Area Office are responsible for the day to day running of the Dolphin House estate. 
Funding for new landscaping proposals and an interim playing pitch surface needs to 
be examined in terms of how it fits in with the overall Dolphin House Masterplan 
proposals.   
The regeneration of Dolphin House is a major investment in housing delivery and 
requires the examination of  all options available to DCC in leading out the project and 
probing how best to deliver the regeneration project in terms of project success and 
value for money. The need for due diligence around the delivery of quality, mixed 
tenure homes, within a reasonable timeframe while also ensuring the necessary 
funding is available are matters that the current housing delivery team are working on. 
The internal team is currently being reviewed in terms of resourcing requirements and 
while this exercise is taking place, it would be prudent not to provide timelines that we 
may not be able to deliver upon. However, I wish to assure you that all is being done 
to expedite the delivery of the Dolphin House Masterplan.  
 
Q.114  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm, in light of the recent recommendations of the 
Taoiseach’s Dublin City Taskforce, if it will consider the purchase of the Dublin Central 
Mission, 9c Abbey Street Lower, which is currently for sale. Can the CE confirm what 

consideration the City Council has given to purchasing this historical building and 
utilising the space for community use? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The acquisition of this building was considered but it has been decided not to pursue 
at this time. The recommendations of the Taoiseach’s Dublin City Taskforce report are 
being assessed by the Council’s City Co-Ordination Office. 
 
 
Q.115  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
 
Problems with overgrowth of trees is a very common issue in the Foxhill estate in 
Donaghmede; residents have been in touch with me raising issues with trees 
outside/near the following locations: (Details Supplied) 
 
Can the CEO organise for inspection of the trees at the above 3 locations. Can the 
CEO also confirm if Foxhill can be included on a broader programme for assessment 
as these issues are widespread and will only become more acute for local residents? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Consideration will be given to the inclusion of part or all of this area in the annual 
recorded inspection of significant trees in 2025. However there are a number of such 
mature areas within the North Central area with very large trees.  In the meantime an 
inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow and any 
works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care 
programme for the area.   
 
Q.116  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive organise for the tree obscuring the public lighting to the 
front of (details supplied) to be pruned as it currently results in the immediate 
surroundings being very dark at night. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This tree is not directly obscuring the street light located at the end of the cul-de-sac.  
An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow and any 
works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care 
programme for the area.   
 
Q.117 COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive to organise for tree outside (1.details supplied) to be 
pruned so that the public lighting across the road casts better local light as (2.details 
supplied) 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As highlighted in the question above the nearest street light is located on the opposite 
side of the road.  Such lighting is designed to cast light onto the public road for road 
and as such pruning of this tree would have a negligible effect on the light cast on the 
pavement.  An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules 
allow and any works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree 
care programme for the area.   
 
 
Q.118  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 

To ask the Chief Executive organise for the reinstatement of ramps on Ardlea Road to 
be adjusted to take account of the issue raised in the correspondence below (details 
supplied): 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The speed cushions outside 135 Ardlea Road shall be relocated. These works will be 
completed in November 2024. 
 
Q.119  COUNCILLOR PATRICIA ROE 
To ask the Chief Executive to look at the parking situation at (details supplied).  Most 
children attending the school next door arrive by walking along the footpath at this 
location.  There are 4 car park spaces in front of (details supplied) and frequently, at 
drop off and collection time, cars reverse out of these spaces, across the footpath the 
children are running by on. It is only a matter of time before a child is seriously injured.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The school warden service is provided for unaccompanied children, over the age of 8, 
crossing a road to and from school. School wardens are not provided to direct traffic. 
Applications for a school warden must be made by the school by emailing  
schoolwardens@dublincity.ie  
 
The parking spaces outside the property in question appear to be on private property 
and therefore we are unable to enforce or remove these spaces. 
 
Contact: Suzanne Lacey, Administrative Officer, Parking Enforcement 
Tel: 01 222 7075 
Email: suzanne.lacey@dublincity.ie 
 
Q.120  COUNCILLOR PATRICIA ROE 
To ask the Chief Executive why, during the current open call for artist’s residences, 
leases are only for an eleven month period? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The initial offering of 11 month leases at Artane Place and Chatham Row is for trial 
period reasons. This has been recommended by the City Arts Office for good reasons. 
A small but significant percentage if Artists’ Studios have historically not been used by 
the occupier to full capacity. In a shortage of such spaces such as a sought after 
resource has be to effectively managed. For new occupants in the spaces referred to 
above a one year trial Licence is used to make sure the space is used. Thereafter a 
three year Licence will be offered if all is is in order. 
 
Q.121  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report on the number of maintenance requests 
for new doors and windows in the Ballymun area in the last 5 years. There is a serious 
problem with rotten window frames and doors installed during the Ballymun 
Regeneration and this has led to further issues with mould and damp in people’s 
homes. Has any consideration been given to a programme for replacement of windows 
and doors across the area as this seems to be a recurrent issue. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Maintenance requested on properties in the Ballymun area over the last 5 years. We 
would need to go into every address individually in the Ballymun area and check the 
repair requests that mentioned windows and doors. This would not be possible due to 
resources available.  

Dublin City Council has number of single glazed windows throughout the city. As part 
of the standards for rented houses we are upgrading all single glazed windows to 
double glazed in the first instance. The windows fitted in Ballymun under the 
regeneration programme are double glazed. 
Can the councillor supply specific addresses and Housing Maintenance will arrange
 
for any defects will be inspected and repaired. 
 
Q.122  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive for the Housing and Community Development Section to 
comment on the extent of overcrowding in HAP rentals in Dublin City and to provide 
an account of any proposals to address this growing problem. Currently HAP tenants 
experiencing overcrowding are told to find new HAP tenancies but given current rental 
market conditions this is proving almost impossible. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The HAP office does not approve HAP where it will result in overcrowding. However, 
household size may change over time. The Hap scheme is a tenant led scheme and 
applicants are expected to source their own properties; where families seek to move 
due to overcrowding, this is facilitated by approval to source another property.  
 
 
Q.123  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive for Housing and Community to outline criteria used to 
assess Medical Grounds Priority Applications involving people with Autism, 
neurodevelopmental and intellectual disabilities. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
All decisions to award a medical priority, including those involving people with Autism, 
neurodevelopmental and intellectual disabilities, having regard to the Scheme of 
Lettings Priorities Section 7.4, are made on the grounds that an applicant has 
demonstrated that their current accommodation is unsuitable by reason of a household 
member’s disability or illness and that the medical circumstances and housing 
conditions are exceptional and that the management of the course of the illness will be 
significantly helped by a change in housing.  Dublin City Council can also seek medical 
opinion from the medical examiner when assessing an application on medical grounds. 
 
Q.124  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive if a compulsory purchase order has been considered for 
the long term derelict house at 14 Lorcan Crescent and if not, to provide a reason for 
this. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The property at 14 Lorcan Crescent has been acquired by the Council following 
engagement with the owner, the sale closed on the 9th September 2024 and will be 
brought back to use through the Buy and Renew section of Housing.  
 
Dublin City Council have purchased this property and we have a crew working on it at 
present to bring the property onto our social housing portfolio. 
 
Q.125  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what consultation was had with residents in (Details 
supplied) before the installation of bike bunkers there. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

There were no bike bunkers installed in (details supplied). 
 
Q.126  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive when was the continuous white line installed on (Details 
supplied) and what consultation was done with residents in advance 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There was a service request (SR no.7013402) submitted by Councillor Mary Fitzpatrick 
requesting the installation of a stop sign associated with a continuous white line road 
marking, which was recommended back in April 2020. 
 
Engineers Reply: 
“It is recommended to install a STOP sign and associated road markings on (details 
supplied) to ensure vehicles stop before proceeding through the junction. The 
associated continuous white line road marking will also serve as a parking restriction 
to prevent parked vehicles from obscuring driver/pedestrian visibility.” 
 
The installation of Stop Road marking and associated Stop Sign does not require a 
public consultation. 
 
Q.127  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive when the new boiler and immersion switch will be installed 
for the tenants in (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance has no record of these maintenance requests.  Contact has 
been made with the tenant and jobs have now been logged for inspection with a view 
to having any necessary works carried out as soon as possible. 
 
Q.128  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the status of the inter transfer application of (details 
supplied) 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is no record of a transfer application having been received by Housing 
Allocations in respect of (details supplied).  
 
Q.129  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING   
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the Lump Sums paid on retirement in 2023 and 
2024 to date. I note that just under €5m was paid in the second quarter this year and 
would ask the Chief Executive to detail the number of staff involved and to also ask 
how much is budgeted for the full year 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
 
Year 
Total 
No. of 
Employees 
Lump sums paid in 2023 
18,181,076 
233 
Lump sums paid to Oct 2024 
13,881,652 
189 
Lump sums Budget Year 2024 
16,455,964 
200 
 
 
Q.130  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive In noting that Section 42 of the Irish Human Rights and 
Equality Commission act 2014 requires a public body, in the performance of its 
functions, to have regard to the need to, inter alia, eliminate discrimination … and 
protect the human rights of its members, staff and a person to whom it provides 
services, can the Chief Executive give assurances that Dublin City Council will not 
discriminate against any citizen who does not have access to the Internet or is 
unable to use same in dealing with DCC at any level? 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Ensuring access to services is a fundamental part of the City Council’s approach to 
customer service. Our objective is that the public can access our services how, where 
or when they need them, with options that give access for all. 
  
We will continue to offer digital and non-digital channels, as long as there is a citizen 
demand for this.  
The constructive and valued feedback from Elected Members with regards the draft 
Digital Transformation Strategy has been incorporated and assimilated into our 
thinking.  
Accordingly, an overarching commitment and principle to ‘leave no-one behind’ will 
permeate the draft Digital Transformation Strategy.  
We are actively working with our teams and stakeholders to ensure our platforms and 
digital initiatives meet diverse needs, recognising the variety of backgrounds, abilities 
and perspectives within Dublin City.  
With providing more online services, we anticipate freeing up some of our staff 
resources to concentrate on assisting people with more complex queries and tasks 
who require and/or prefer to interact with us in person. 
 
 
Q.131  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive for a progress report on the refurbishment works being 
carried out on the Fruit and Vegetable Market in Smithfield (St. Mary's Lane) to include 
works done to date, planned works and completion date, budgeted amount and 
amount spent to date 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council received Part 8 approval for the redevelopment of the Wholesale 
Fruit and Vegetable Market in 2014 and vacant possession Q3 of 2019. Tender 
documents were prepared for a Design Build Finance and Operate model of delivery.  
However, the Covid Pandemic and associated impact on Markets in particular made 
this approach unattainable, as providers in the industry were not in a position to invest. 
Dublin City Council advanced the first phase of the project, which was delivery of a 
Multi-use Games Area, improved public realm to St Michan’s Street and St Mary’s 
Lane and a car park with high-density cycle parking.   The redevelopment of the former 
Fish Market site and the upgrade to public realm was delivered while awaiting the 
outcome of grant funding to implement the Building Refurbishment Phase.  
 
Grant funding was secured in 2022 and tender issued for an Integrated Design Team 
who were appointed in February 2023 to develop the design detail, Fire cert and 
Disabled Access Cert applications and bring forward construction tender documents. 
Design Team lead is Louise Cotter of Cotter Naessens Architect’s. Design detail 
completed summer 2024 and approval secured to tender for construction/ 
conservation works.  
 
Works to date include topography, measurement, ground penetrating radar, drainage 
surveys, utility assessment, survey of adjoining properties and archaeological 
investigations, which included sample and opening up works, application for Fire Cert 
and DAC Cert, both granted. All of these were required to inform the detailed design 
and specification for conservation and construction.  
 
Amount spent to date on the Fish Market redevelopment, new boundaries, car park, 
Multi Use Games Area and public realm improvements €1.799m and on the Wholesale 
Market Building refurbishment €903,292.  The Budget amount is financially sensitive 
until tenders are received. The final contract price will not be available until tender 
assessment is complete. 
 
The Construction Tender issued to a Dublin City Council Framework in August 2024. 
There have been several queries and requests for extension of time due to the 
complexity and scale of the project. Tenders are due back November 5th. A separate 
tender will issue in 2025 for Operation and fit out. 
 
The timeline thereafter is expected to be as follows: 
 
Tender Assessment – 5 weeks  
Standstill and authorisation period - 4 weeks  
Contract Assignment and mobilisation – Q1 2025 (dependent on winning tender) 
Construction Phase - 26 weeks (dependent on winning tender, DCC estimate) 
 
Q.132  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the URDF projects DCC have been funded for, 
including amounts received, pending claims and future amounts which can be claimed 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The URDF was established to support compact and sustainable development through 
the regeneration and rejuvenation of cities and towns. To date, the Department of 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage has issued three calls for funding under 
URDF.  
 

Under Call 1 the DHLGH approved six projects for Dublin City Council – these projects 
contribute to compact sustainable growth and improve the liveability of our capital city. 
   
Projects  
Approved URDF 
Funding  
Amounts 
received   
Total Future  
Amounts  
Pending 
Claims 
Refurbishment and 
Redevelopment of 
Rutland St School 
21,135,864 
5,151,577 
15,984,287 
- 
Santry River 
Greenway 
Restoration 
feasibility study 
750,000 
455,817 
294,183 
- 
Artists Workspaces 
(Merchants Quay & 
Bridgefoot Street) 
feasibility study 
200,000 
200,000 
- 
- 
Inchicore - St 
Michael's Estate & 
Environs 
Regeneration 
feasibility study 
150,000 
150,000 
- 
- 
Study - Naas Road 
LAP lands 
200,000 
200,000 
- 
- 
Park West/Cherry 
Orchard Industrial 
Lands Analysis 
150,000 
150,000 
- 
- 
TOTAL  
 €22,585,864  
 €6,307,394  
 €16,278,470  
€     -    
 
 
As part of Call 2 of the URDF, the Department approved two major projects DCC – the 
North Inner City Concept Area and the South Inner City Concept Area with multiple 
projects under each. The aim of these projects is to achieve economic and compact 
urban growth, enhance connectivity and mobility, build social and cultural amenities 
and ensure climate resilience and sustainability.   
North Inner City Concept Area: 
 
North Inner 
City Projects  
Approved 
URDF Funding 
Amounts 
received   
Total Future 
Amounts  
Pending 
Claims 
Markets & 
Public Realm 
Study & Works 
14,535,750 
- 
14,535,750 
- 
Fruit & Veg 
Markets  
5,625,000 
441,449 
5,183,551 
- 
Ryders Row  
1,875,000 
71,112 
1,803,888 
- 
Parnell Sq 
Public Realm 
Works  
14,187,041 
- 
14,187,041 
- 
Parnell Sq 
Cultural 
Quarter  
56,634,459 
3,325,026 
53,049,826 
259,607 
Mountjoy Sq 
Conservation  
2,625,000 
148,354 
2,476,646 
- 

Five Lamps 
Public Realm  
4,826,850 
44,280 
4,782,570 
- 
Moore St 
Public Realm  
1,350,000 
- 
1,350,000 
- 
41 Parnell Sq  
2,250,000 
665,056 
1,584,944 
- 
Uillean Piping 
Centre  
9,366,561 
68,626 
9,297,935 
- 
TOTAL  
€ 113,275,661 
€ 4,763,902 
€ 108,252,152 
€ 259,607 
 
South Inner City Concept Area: 
 
South  Inner City 
Projects  
Approved 
URDF 
Funding  
Amounts 
received   
Total Future 
Amounts  
 Pending 
Claims 
Liberties Greening 
Strategy  
412,500 
217,933 
194,567 
0 
Francis Street EIS  
300,000 
300,000 
0 
0 
Newmarket Square EIS  
3,375,000 
0 
3,375,000 
0 
Dolphins Barn EIS  
1,387,500 
0 
1,387,500 
0 
Cork Street EIS  
225,000 
0 
225,000 
0 
Meath Street EIS  
2,842,500 
0 
2,749,223 
93,277 
Exchange Street  
1,312,500 
318,750 
993,750 
0 
Public Lighting Upgrade 
721,027 
0 
721,027 
0 
3,900,000 
2,287,500 
1,612,500 
0 
Werburgh St Ship 
Street/ Gateway Site  
787,125 
0 
773,772 
13,353 
Rindgsend - Library Sq 
5,250,000 
148,913 
5,101,087 
0 
Ringsend Prk 
75,000 
0 
75,000 
0 
Ringsend - Sean Moore 
Roundabout 
12,114,962 
159,494 
11,955,468 
0 
Iveagh Markets 
9,017,438 
0 
8,697,249 
320,189 
Pear Tree Crossing/ 
Digital Hub  
3,400,275 
906,725 
1,629,543 
864,007 
TOTAL  
€ 45,120,827  
€ 4,339,316  
€ 39,490,685  € 1,290,826  
 
Call 3, as issued by the DHLGH is a dedicated revolving fund to address the financial 
barrier and risk faced by local authorities in seeking to tackle long term vacant and 
derelict buildings and sites. DCC has been allocated €10M of which with 20% has been 
prefunded i.e. €2M. There are 16 potential properties identified, of which actions have 
commenced in relation to 5. 
In Summary: 
 
Summary Approved URDF 
Funding 
Amounts 
received 
Total Future Amounts 
Pending 
Claims 
Call 1 
22,585,864 
6,307,394 
16,278,470 
0 
Call 2 
158,396,488 
9,103,218 
147,742,837 
1,550,433 
Call 3 
10,000,000 
2,000,000 
8,000,000 
0 
Total 
190,982,352 
17,410,612 
172,021,307 
1,550,433 
 

 
 
Q.133  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please refer to tree at (details supplied) and say if it 
possible to say when same will be replaced as agreed previously. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This tree was not listed for replacement in the multi-annual phased replacement 
programme of problematic tree in the area agreed with the residents association.  The 
tree does not appear to be a fruiting pear tree.   An inspection will be arranged in the 
coming weeks as local schedules allow and any works deemed necessary will be listed 
for inclusion in the prioritised tree care programme for the area.   
 
 
Q.134  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive please refer to seriously broken and dangerous footpath at 
(details supplied) and say if he can arrange to repair same as local person fell and 
seriously injured herself at this point. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11167526) has been created and passed on to the Area Inspector who 
will carry out an inspection and add this to a works list for repair. 
 
Q.135  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please refer to area at (details supplied) and say if he 
can clear same of weeds. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection of this location will be carried out with a view to having necessary works 
completed as resources allow. 
The open space is maintained by way of contract which includes bi-annual strimming 
of such peripheral weeds.  The weeds inside the wall of the open space have been 
referred to the contracts manager to bring to the attention of the contractor to schedule 
a maintenance visit to attend to same.  
 
 
Q.136  COUNCILLOR DERIDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to  install a yellow junction box at (1.details supplied) as 
traffic is backing up since the installation of new traffic lights as (2.details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7042655) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
 
Q.137  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
To ask the Chief Executive if double yellow lines can be put on Ravensdale Park Road 
opposite the KCR as all the houses there have driveways.  
Allowing cars park there means that large trucks and vans move to the wrong side of 
the road to pass the parked cars and as a result making exiting the industrial estate 
very hazardous. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

This request (Enquiry Ref: 7042626) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.138  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
To ask the Chief Executive if there has been review of the temporary bollards that were 
put in at the end of Zion road outside Stratford College? 
And if no review has been done can the manager under take one to access the success 
or otherwise of the bollards.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The removal of the left slip road and installation of bollards on Zion Road formed part 
of the measures included in the School Zone for Stratford National School and 
Stratford College, as part of the Safe Routes to School Programme which is funded by 
the National Transport Authority. Stratford Schools applied for the School Zone in order 
to improve safety for their students on their journey to school. The School Zone was 
designed in consultation with the schools and a non-statutory public consultation took 
place on the design from 12-26th October.  
The yellow pencil bollards were installed to prevent cars parking on the footpath in 
order to improve the safety for students walking to school and to increase the visibility 
of the school. The slip road was removed to facilitate safe passage of children from 
the island to the school gate. Bus Connects plans also include the removal of this slip 
road.  
 
The team has been monitoring the bus times along this stretch of road before and after 
the removal of the slip road. The graph below shows in blue the bus journey times 
before the removal of the slip road and the red and orange show bus journey times 
after the removal of the slip road. The journey times since the removal of the slip road 
are in line with those beforehand, with decreased journey times during some parts of 
the day. We are in regular contact with Dublin Bus and no further issues have been 
reported to us from them on this location.  
 
 
 
 

 
Q.139  COUNCILLOR BARRY HENEGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if the contract for the toilets at Dollymount Beach was 
broken by the contractor, why the Council could not change to another contractor to 
ensure the much-needed toilets, including accessible facilities, are created as a matter 
of urgency 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The automatic public convenience on Bull Island is on a long term lease from JC 
Decaux and this contract has not been broken. Lease is on review within contract terms 
and conditions”    
 
Q.140  COUNCILLOR BARRY HENEGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if the lights at Stiles Court could be urgently upgraded to 
modern LED lighting, as the current lights are continuously breaking, causing ongoing 
issues for residents 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
It is planned to upgrade the street Lighting on Stiles Court before the Christmas break. 
In the meantime the existing street lighting will continue to be maintained in accordance 
with current maintenance regimes. 
 
Q.141  COUNCILLOR BARRY HENEGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to urgently address the incoming housing application of 
(details supplied), given the housing situation she is facing. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is no record in Housing Allocations of having received a housing application in 
respect of (details supplied), upon receipt of same it will be processed accordingly.  
 
Q.142  COUNCILLOR BARRY HENEGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to request that Dublin Port clean up and maintain the area 
around the Clontarf slipway, which is continuously being dumped on and left in an 
unsafe condition, with trip hazards and waste from the sea accumulating regularly. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin Port has no role in the maintenance of this area.  The entire promenade is 
subject to regular inundations due to high tides and storm surges and the Parks 
Service does remove excessive detritus deposited after such events.  With regard to 
the area at the slipway the Parks Service has met with the yacht club and agreed to 
carry out a temporary tidy up and resurfacing of the area to present the location at its 
best for the clubs anniversary celebrations next year.  As previously discussed there 
is a major piece of water infrastructure to be installed along the prom which will have 
a significant impact on the site.  A permanent reinstatement will be sought after these 
essential works.  
 
 
 

To the Lord Mayor and 
 
 
 
 
Report No. 216/2024 
Members of Dublin City Council 
Report of the Area Manager,  
 
North West Area 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With reference to the extinguishment of the public right of way between 233-235 
Glasnevin Avenue and 10-11 Beneavin Park Dublin 11. 
 
Proposal 
 
A request has been submitted to the North West Area Finglas Office by a number of residents 
in Glasnevin Avenue and Beneavin Park who live around the vicinity of the public right of way. 
 
The reason for this extinguishment is due to antisocial behaviour, dumping, drug related 
activities etc. which is proving very difficult for local residents directly living around the 
laneway. The extent of this proposed extinguishment is shown outlined in red on the attached 
map SM-2024-0027. 
 
The North West Area Committee, at its meeting on the 20th February 2024, agreed to initiate 
the statutory procedure to extinguish this public right of way. At its meeting on the 17th 
September 2024, it was agreed to recommend the procedure to City Council to extinguish this 
public right of way under the provisions of Section 73 of the Roads Act 1993.   
 
Statutory 
 
The proposal was advertised in the public press on Wednesday 3rd April 2024 and signs were 
erected on site in accordance with Section 73 of the Roads Act 1993.  The latest date for 
receipt of submissions regarding this proposal was 18th May 2024. 
 
Service Check 
 
There were no objections raised by Statutory Bodies. 
 
In response to the advertisement 
 
Of the sixty written submissions that were received by Dublin City Council, forty eight 
submissions were in support of the measure (with a number from the same household) and 
twelve submissions opposing it (with some objections from the same household).  
This was in response to a petition signed by forty eight residents of Glasnevin Avenue & 
Beneavin Park supporting the closure of the public right of way.   
 
➢ Twelve objections were received from Glasnevin Avenue and Beneavin residents. 
➢ Of these twelve objections, one oral hearing was requested and three residents were 
in attendance. 
Oral Hearing 
 

The oral hearing (held Tuesday 18th June 2024) was attended by three residents which 
advised that the allegations of anti-social behaviour was exaggerated and was not confined to 
the public right of way. Also stated was that only half the residents of Beneavin Park were 
canvassed by proposers of the extinguishment. 
 
The main issues raised by the households opposed to the closure can be summarised as 
follows: 
1. 
The level of anti-social behaviour detailed in the original submission was exaggerated 
and nuisance and anti-social behaviour happened as frequently in other parts of the local area 
and were not confined to the lane. 
2. 
Only half of the residents in Beneavin Park were canvassed by the proposers of the 
lane closure. 
3. 
The right of way is a key pedestrian link to amenities that will become more needed 
when the proposed Bus Connects changes are made in order to access public transport links. 
4. 
There was concern around who will have access to the lane if the public right of way 
is extinguished and who would be the key holder. 
 
Chairpersons observations in relation to the points raised at the oral hearing: 
 
1. 
The claim that not all households in Beneavin Park were canvased is worthy of 
investigation by the local area office as the loss of a pedestrian right of way will affect all 
residents. 
2. 
It would be worth checking the number of reports of anti-social behaviour reported to 
An Garda Síochána in relation to the lane in the last three years. 
 
Recommendations following oral hearing are as follows: 
 
➢ Establish the number of reported incidents in the lane over the last three years (see 
response 1A) 
➢ Ascertain whether or not all residents of Beneavin Park were canvased in relation to 
the proposal before a decision is made to present a final report to the North West Area 
Committee for their consideration. (See response 1B) 
In response to the recommendations following the oral hearing 
 
1A. Dublin City Council requested the total number of reported incidents from An Garda 
Síochána over the past four years. A total of five incidents (in 2023) related to the laneway 
were reported. It is highly likely that some local residents call the local Garda station rather 
than dialling 999/112 and so those calls were not logged.  
Local residents also have expressed serious concerns for safety due to the blind spot (dog 
leg) in the laneway and numerous other instances unreported 
 
1B. Responding to the recommendation from the Oral Hearing, it was decided that a further 
survey of all households should be undertaken. A Dublin City Council Official surveyed a total 
of one hundred and seventeen households to include forty one in total on Glasnevin Avenue 
(side of laneway, nineteen on one side and twenty two on the other side) and all 76 households 
in Beneavin Park on the 1st, 3rd and 5th of July. Houses surveyed at different times in the 
afternoon and evening. 
 
Out of one hundred and seventeen households surveyed a total of fifty nine households did 
not answer. Out of the fifty eight households that did take part: 
 
➢ Thirty three households were in favour. 
➢ Eighteen households were not in favour. 

➢ Seven households did not feel the survey was relevant to them. 
 
Households directly located around the public right of way on both Glasnevin Avenue and 
Beneavin were in favour of the lane closure with some households further from the lane 
entrance advising against the closure.  
 
The report below are summary points of an onsite meeting with residents at 11.00am Monday 
24th June 2024. 
Pat Teehan, Finglas Area Manager and Patricia Quirke, Administrative Officer 
➢ Meeting was attended by a number of residents in Beneavin Park and Glasnevin 
Avenue with a good majority of attendees in favour of lane closure. 
➢ A  resident emailed Patricia Quirke following meeting to request that the following be 
noted 
“Could you just take note that the people who sent in objections to the lane were unable to 
make the meeting due to the start time of 11am and the short notice.  They all had work 
commitments.”  
➢ Residents in favour of closure highlighted the following  
o Daily drug dealing 
o Escape route for individuals running from An Garda 
o Excessive littering 
o Living in fear due to numerous antisocial behaviour 
o Does not impact residents requiring access to public transport, lane way does 
not impact time to get to bus stop 
➢ Residents against the closure highlighted the following 
o Cases of antisocial behaviour are isolated 
o Use lane as a short cut for amenities and transport 
o Never have witnessed daily drug dealing 
o Laneways that are closed are not being maintained 
➢ Residents have been informed that an independent adjudicator was engaged to hear 
oral objections that were requested and their report will accompany final 
documentation to the Council Meetings for consideration. 
➢ Residents asked about opening the gates between certain times, gate installations etc. 
The Area Manager advised the following: 
o In the event of the extinguishment being approved by the City Council, 
residents will have to fund and source installers for the gates themselves and 
will be responsible for the upkeep of the laneway. 
o Public lighting will be removed. 
o The City Council would relinquish all responsibility for the enclosed area 
including public liability. 
o Arrangements such as opening and closing times of lane if any will be managed 
by the residents, at either side of the lane, who agree to take the lane in charge.  
o Dublin City Council will have no involvement with the lane should closure be 
agreed by the Councillors at the North West Area Committee and at the 
following full City Council meeting. 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
This item was discussed at the North West Area Committee meeting held 17th September, 
2024 and the committee members decided (unanimously) to recommend extinguishment of 
the laneway as shown on Map SM 2024-0027 (attached) to the City Council.  
 
A further discussion relating to the closure was held at the North West Area Committee 15th 
October 2024 relating to the level of stakeholder engagement and the impact on the residents. 
It was suggested that the additional time to walk around instead of through the lane is approx. 

30-40 seconds. There were sixty submissions relating to the original advertisement, forty eight 
were for closure and twelve were against. The nature of the design of the laneway is awkward 
in that there is an area where the laneway bends and provides a hidden area where anti-social 
behaviour seems to occur regularly. 
 
The extinguishment of a public right of way is a function reserved to the City Council. 
 
Resolution 
  
 
 
That We, the Lord Mayor and Members of Dublin City Council, being the Roads Authority for 
the City of Dublin and being of the opinion that the public right of way between 233-235 
Glasnevin Avenue and 10-11 Beneavin Park Dublin 11 as shown on the attached Map SM 
2022-0027 is no longer required for public use, extinguish the public right of way in accordance 
with Section 73 of the Roads Act 1993. 
 
Bruce Phillips 
Director of Services 
North West Area 

 

Appendix C 
RECORD OF DIVISION AT 4TH NOVEMBER COUNCIL MEETING  
 
FOR: 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
ABSTAIN: 
 1 
AGAINST: 
49   
 
 
 
 
ABSENT: 
  
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
 
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
Councillor Ammar Ali 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Janet Horner 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daryl Barron 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Vincent Jackson 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Racheal Batten 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Feljin Jose 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor  Emma Blain 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Leslie Kane 
 
 
 
 
Councillor  Janice Boylan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Kourtney Kenny 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Tom Brabazon 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Patrick Kinsella 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor  Christy Burke 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Dermot Lacey 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Claire Byrne 
 
 
 
 
Councillor John Lyons 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Danny Byrne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Micheál MacDonncha 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Mary Callaghan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ray McAdam 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Hazel Chu 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Séamas McGrattan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor  Anthony Connaghan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Paddy Monahan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor  Fiona Connelly  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Carolyn Moore 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor  Keith Connolly 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Edel Moran 
 
√ 
 
 
 Deputy Lord Mayor Donna Cooney  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Darragh Moriarty 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Jen Cummins 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Naoise Ó Muirí 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Ray Cunningham 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Cat O’Driscoll 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Hazel de Nortúin 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Colm O’Rourke 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Maire Devine 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Gavin Pepper 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Daithí Doolan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Cieran Perry 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Pat Dunne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Michael Pigeon 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daniel Ennis 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Gayle Ralph 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Cian Farrell  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Punam Rane 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Alison Field  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Conor Reddy 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Declan Flanagan 
 
 
√ 
 
Councillor Nial Ring 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Mannix Flynn 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Patricia Roe 
 
√ 
 
 
Lord Mayor James Geoghegan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Aisling Silke  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Eoin Hayes  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Supriya Singh 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Barry Heneghan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Malachy Steenson 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Deirdre Heney 
 
 
 
 
Councillor John Stephens 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Jesslyn Henry 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Philip Sutcliffe 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Rory Hogan 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
