Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 10 February 2025 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
 
 Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 10 Feabhra 2025 i Seomra na Comhairle, Halla na 
Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an tArdmheara Emma 
Blain sa chathaoir 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Ammar Ali 
Daryl Barron 
Racheal Batten 
Emma Blain 
Janice Boylan 
Kevin Breen 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Danny Byrne 
Lesley Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
David Coffey 
Anthony Connaghan 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Ray Cunningham 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Tara Deacy 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Daniel Ennis 
Alison Field 
Declan Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
Deirdre Heney 
Jesslyn Henry 
Rory Hogan 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Feljin Jose 
Leslie Kane 
Kourtney Kenny 
Patrick Kinsella 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Aoibheann Mahon 
Ray McAdam 
Séamas McGrattan 
Ciaran Meachair 
Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
Paddy Monahan 
Carolyn Moore 
Edel Moran 
Darragh Moriarty 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Colm O'Rourke 
Gavin Pepper 
Cieran Perry 
Michael Pidgeon 
Gayle Ralph 
Punam Rane 
Conor Reddy 
Aishling Silke 
Supriya Singh 
Malachy Steenson 
John Stephens 
Catherine Stocker 
Philip Sutcliffe 
 
 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Lorraine Brogan 
Enda Currid 
John Flanagan 
Anthony Flynn 
Dennis Keeley 
Yvonne Kelly 
Natalie Leonard 
McAleer 
Mick Mulhern 
Brendan O'Brien 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Richard Shakespeare 
 
  
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
In Memorium 
A minutes silence was observed for the passing of former Lady Mayoress Mary (May) 
O’Halloran who was Lady Mayoress in 1984 / 1985 while her husband Michael 
O’Halloran was Lord Mayor.  
 

 
Tributes 
The Lord Mayor spoke to members regarding the horrific attacks that took place in 
Stoneybatter on Sunday 9th February 2025.  She paid tribute to the wonderful people 
of Stoneybatter who looked after and looked out for each other in a real demonstration 
of their close community bond.  She also paid tribute to the first responders, Dublin 
Fire Brigade and the Gardaí, for their swift and decisive action.  She expressed that all 
our thoughts and prayers are with the injured and those affected by the events of 
yesterday and wished them a speedy recovery.  
  
Welcome back 
The Lord Mayor welcomed back Councillor Catherine Stocker on her return to the 
office of Councillor following her recent absence and thanked Councillor Patricia Roe 
for her work over the past few months. 
  
Ethics Declaration  
The Lord Mayor reminded members that their Annual Ethics Declarations are due by 
the end of February.   
  
Meeting as Gaeilge 
Following on from last year’s March City Council meeting being held through Irish, the 
Lord Mayor informed Council that she had received some enquiries and also a request 
from Councillor MacDonncha on behalf of the City Council’s Coiste na nGaeilge in 
relation to holding the March City Council meeting in Irish.  She advised that having 
discussed with the Corporate Policy Group and staff within the City Council that it is 
proposed that a Special Meeting be held in March to highlight the work being done by 
the City Council to promote and support the delivery of services in Irish.   A 
commitment is also given that from 2026 onwards, the March City Council meeting will 
be conducted through Irish with early planning to assist both the elected members and 
staff to deliver the meeting. 
  
 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Christy 
Burke that Dublin City Council approves the Chief Executive answering the questions 
lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the questions 
lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and Answers are set 
out in Appendix A to these minutes. 
 
8 - 65 
 
3 
  To confirm the minutes of the Special City Council Meeting held on 18th December 
2024 and the City Council Meeting held on 6th January 2025 
 
The minutes of the City Council meeting held on the 18th December 2024 and the 6th 
January 2025 having been printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated 
to the Members and taken as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor. 
 
 
 
4 
  Vacancies:   
 
 
 
(a)   To fill one Fianna Fáil vacancy on the Housing and Social Inclusion Strategic 
Policy Committee following the resignation of Councillor Racheal Batten  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Racheal Batten and seconded by Councillor 
Ammar Ali, that Councillor Daryl Barron be appointed to the Housing and 
Social Inclusion Strategic Policy Committee. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 

 
 
 
(b)   To fill one Non-Party vacancy on the Mobility and Public Realm Strategic 
Policy Committee following the resignation of Councillor John Lyons.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cieran Perry and seconded by Councillor 
Vincent Jackson that Councillor Kevin Breen be appointed to the Mobility and 
Public Realm Strategic Committee.  The Motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
(c)   To fill one Fianna Fáil vacancy on the Eastern and Midlands Regional 
Assembly following the resignation of Councillor Rory Hogan.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Racheal Batten and seconded by Councillor 
Ammar Ali that Councillor Aoibheann Mahon be appointed to the Eastern and 
Midlands Regional Assembly.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
5 
  Report No. 32/2025 of the Chairperson of the Audit Committee - Annual Report of the 
Audit Committee for the year ended 31/12/2024. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daithí Doolan and seconded by Councillor 
Séamas McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 32/2025 
and hereby approves the Annual Report of the Audit Committee as set out therein.  
The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
6 
  Reports of the Chief Executive, in compliance with the provisions of Section 179 of 
the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning 
and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) and in compliance with the 
provisions of the Local Government Act 2001:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 22/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Proposal to 
carry out upgrades and alterations works to the Hugh Lane Gallery, Parnell 
Square North, Dublin 1 (Protected Structure)  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
22/2025 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
 
(b)   Report No. 41/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Proposal to 
construct 288 apartments/duplex units/houses at sites bounded by Balcurris 
Park, Balbutcher Lane, Balcurris Gardens and Ballymun Road  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor 
Mannix Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
41/2025 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 42/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Proposal to 
construct 108 apartments at the site of the Road Maintenance Depot, Forbes 
Lane, Dublin 8  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
Mannix Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
42/2025 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 

 
 
 
(d)   Report No. 43/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Proposal to 
construct 171 apartments at Basin Lane Flat complex, Basin View, Dublin 8 
 
The following motion to amend Report 43/2025 Basin Street Part 8 was 
proposed in the names of Cllrs. Darragh Moriarty, Ciaran Ó Meachair, Michael 
Pidgeon, Ammar Ali and Lesley Byrne. 
  
This Council supports the redevelopment of Basin Street and amends the 
following on pg.2-3 of the Report: 
Reorder the Community, cultural and arts space; Public Open space; and 
Communal Open Space to retain proposed playground, exercise equipment, 
smaller amphitheatre space, planting and to provide for a larger enclosed Muti-
Use Games Area (MUGA) – at least 500-600sqm in size. 
  
This motion to amend was put and carried.  
  
It was proposed by Councillor Darragh Moriarty and seconded by Councillor 
John Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
43/2025 as amended and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The 
motion was put and carried. 
  
A copy of an illustrative map outlining the potential change that is subject to 
agreement of the planning authority is attached to this minutes as Appendix B. 
  
 
66 
 
7 
  Disposal of Fee Simple and Freehold Interest:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 31/2025 of the Executive Manager (F. D'Arcy) - With reference to 
the disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and Tenant (Ground 
Rents) (No. 2) Act, 1978.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by 
Councillor Daryl Barron that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No. 31/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 36/2025 of the Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - Disposal of Orchard 
Road Depot, Drumcondra, Dublin 3 to Fold Housing Association Ireland CLG  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Christy Burke that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
36/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
 
(c)   Report No. 37/2025 of the Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - Disposal of a plot of 
land to the front of 17 Howth Junction Cottages, Kilbarrack, Dublin 5  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Micheál MacDonncha and seconded by 
Councillor Vincent Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of 
Report No. 37/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The 
motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
 

 
8 
  Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 38/2025 of the Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to the 
proposed grant of a short term business letting of the Ground Floor, 53 Dorset 
Street, Dublin 1 to North Dublin Money Advice and Budgeting Services CLG  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by 
Councillor Cat O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No. 38/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
  
 
 
9 
  Report No. 35/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Social Housing 
Supply and Delivery Monthly Update Report 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Conor 
Reddy that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 35/2025. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
10   Report No. 48 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - The Proposed 
Borrowing for the delivery of 441 Cost Rental homes on Lands at Emmet Road, 
Inchicore, Dublin 8 (formerly St. Michael's Estate). 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Cieran Perry 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 48/2025 and hereby 
approves the borrowing requirement as set out therein, subject to the sanction of the 
Minister of Housing, Local Government and Heritage. The motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
11   Report No. 45/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Annual Service 
Delivery Plan 2025. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Feljin Jose 
that Dublin City Council in accordance with Section 134A of the Local Government Act 
2001 as amended, notes the contents of report no.45/2024 and herby adopts the 
Annual Service Delivery Plan 2024. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
12   Report No. 30/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Capital Programme 
2025 to 2027. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Jesslyn Henry and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report Number 30/2025 - 
Capital Programme 2025 to 2027.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
13   Report No. 44/2025 of the A/Head of Finance (V. Leonov) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Jesslyn 
Henry that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 44/2025. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
14   Report No. 46/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 46/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 

 
 
 
15   Report No. 29/2025 of the Area Committees - Breviates of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of January 2025. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 29/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
16   Report No. 33/2025 of the North Central Area Joint Policing Sub Committee - Breviate 
of the meeting held on 20th January 2025, Cllr. Daryl Barron, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor Ray McAdam 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 33/2025. The motion was put 
and carried. 
 
 
 
17   Report No. 34/2025 of the Community, Gaeilge, Sports, Art and Culture Strategic 
Policy Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 16th December 2024, 
Councillor Darragh Moriarty, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor Fiona 
Connelly that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 34/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
18   Report No. 40/2025 of the Finance Strategic Policy Committee - Breviate of the 
meeting held on the 16th January 2025, Councillor Séamas McGrattan, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas McGrattan and seconded by Councillor Mannix 
Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 40/2025. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
19   Report No. 47/2025 of the Corporate Policy Group - Breviate of the meeting held on 
25th October 2024, Lord Mayor James Geoghegan, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 47/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
20   Report No. 39/2025 of the Protocol Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 
19th December 2024, Councillor Ray McAdam , Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Mannix Flynn 
that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 39/2025. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
21   Topical Issues 
 
The following Topical issues were proposed for debate:  
  
1.    “DCC V Fingal Build Delivery Timelines” 
2.    “Debate Crime Crisis” 
  
In accordance with Standing Orders both topical issues were put to a vote and both 
topics did not achieve the requisite two thirds support to be debated. Full details of the 
votes can be found in Appendix C attached to these minutes. 
  
67 - 68 

 
 
 
22   Motions on Notice 
 
Motion No. 1  
It was proposed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll 
  
That the Council recognises the efforts of Dublin City Council staff over the past few 
years and calls for a plan to recruit an appreciable number of new staff, especially in 
outdoor operational areas with a view to further improving the City and its environs 
and we call on the Chief Executive to give a report on this plan at the March 2025 
Council meeting. 
  
The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
23   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
No Emergency Motions were accepted for debate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
 

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY 10th 
FEBRUARY 2025 
 
Q.01  COUNCILLOR MICHEAL PIDGEON 
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council operates any dog parks/runs in its 
parks, and if it has considered doing so 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The only Dublin City Council Park which has a dedicated dog park is St. Anne’s Park. 
Requests for same are considered on their own merit however, no other dedicated dog 
parks/runs have been provided as city parks in general are so intensively used that it 
is not feasible to enclose a space of sufficient size for this purpose.  
 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive why Dublin Port Tunnel has being closed for 2 and 3 nights 
a week .This is having a knock on effect for local residents on East Wall Road Dublin 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The control and management of the Dublin Port Tunnel including closure due to 
accidents, incidents, maintenance, etc., comes under the remit of Transport 
Infrastructure Ireland (TII) and not Dublin City Council   
 
Any enquires regarding the closure of the Dublin Port Tunnel must be addressed 
directly by Transport Infrastructure Ireland at website www.tii.ie, email info@tii.ie  and 
or Tel: +353 1 6463600 
Details of all future planned closures of the Port Tunnel, can be found listed on the 
external website below: - 
https://dublintunnel.ie/tunnel-closures/ 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive what plans will be put in place to address the IBAL report 
on illegal dumping at Dublin Central 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services and the Central Area Office have met and reviewed the 
recent IBAL reports. A number of actions will be progressed to tackle the issues of the 
sites mentioned and also a meeting between IBAL and Dublin City Council is being 
arranged.  
Increased enforcement of the Waste Bye Laws will also be progressed and private site 
engagement with owners will be escalated.   
The Litter Wardens are active in Dublin Central daily removing illegally dumped bags 
for investigation. It is getting increasing difficult to catch offenders this way due to the 
knowledge around fraud, identity theft and GDPR regulations. Paperless billing has 
also reduced the amount of bills or other items disposed of in bags of waste. We will 
continue to remove bags and investigate instances of illegal dumping to try and gather 
evidence to issue fines to offenders. 
 
Q.4 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on discussions with the HSE regards the 
outstanding funding due to DCC for DFB and ambulance services Details Supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council / Dublin Fire Brigade and colleagues in the other Dublin Authorities 
are committed to resolving the DFB Ambulance service funding arrangements.  

Discussions with the HSE are currently active and DCC management is seeking some 
additional time to attempt to negotiate an arrangement that satisfies all parties.  
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive when the bin bag ban will be in place in Details Supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has decided to remove the derogation allowing waste to be 
presented for collection in plastic bags across its administrative area. In the first 
instance an area consisting of 90 streets surrounding Grafton Street is currently a pilot.  
Waste collection is a private and commercial market, extensive engagement with the 
operators is continuing as part of our plans to remove the Bag derogation. This 
significant change to Waste presentation in the city has to consider many aspects, 
mainly for the residents and businesses that cannot store bins when not presented. 
A number of alternative options for residents and businesses to dispose of their waste 
have been proposed by the operators and Dublin City Council are supporting these 
proposals.  
One of these proposals is the installation of shared on street waste compactors. 
Delivery and installation is imminent and we are currently awaiting an electrical 
connection from ESB Networks. 
Once these compactors are in place the derogation will be fully removed from this pilot 
area and we will then turn our attention to the north side of the River Liffey and in 
particular a similar sized area to Phase 1 but surrounding Henry Street/O'Connell 
Street/Abbey Street. It is hoped that this will happen during late Q2 2025. 
It's is our intention to remove the derogation City wide over the next 12 months but this 
needs to be carefully planned to ensure the necessary communication occurs between 
the Waste Collectors and their customers and that suitable methods for the 
presentation and collection of waste are in place. 
 
Q.6 
COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the progress of the permit parking 
in Seven Oaks estate in Drumcondra 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The balloting of the residents of Seven Oaks is currently on hold until the introduction 
of a new Parking Permit System. Parking Enforcement and Customer Services are 
currently in the final testing phase before launching this System. We expect the 
system will go live within the next month. Once active, the balloting of all Parking 
Permit Schemes that are on hold will proceed. 
 
Q.7  
COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the junction of Kilmore Road and 
Ardmore Close and when it is expected to be functional 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The designs for the new pedestrian crossings at the junction of Ardmore Drive/Kilmore 
Road are complete and a contractor has been appointed. The contractor is due to 
commence the installation works at the junction of Ardmore Drive/Kilmore Road in 
February 2025. 
 
Q.8  
COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the 3 year old request to have 
sensor lighting on the lane between Lorcan Avenue into Lorcan Grove. To also ask 
after the commitment to paint the laneway 3 years ago why it has not been done. Also, 

ask why the council sought to promote Clean the Lane under the pretext of safety but 
did not cut the overhanging branches 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services had the above mentioned lane inspected on the 15th 
January 2025 and it was found to be in a clean condition. 
The overhanging of branches from private property along the lane is a matter for Road 
Maintenance Services, an enforcement notice under Section 70 of The Roads Act 
1993 will be issued by The Area Inspector.  
Public Lighting Services is not aware of any request to provide sensor lighting in the 
laneway between Lorcan Grove and Lorcan Avenue. The lane is already lighted and 
the street lighting there is controlled by a photocell that switches the lights on at dusk 
and switches them off at dawn.  
Providing sensor lighting would mean that the street lighting would only come on when 
the sensor detects movement and would switch off after a period of inactivity. Most 
street lighting is supplied from unmetered supplies and there are no electricity tariffs 
available to cater for ‘sensor’ controlled lighting other than providing a metered supply 
that wouldn’t make sense for a few lights. 
The lampposts in this lane were painted just over a year ago. 
 
Q.9 
COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
To ask the Chief Executive about the provision and occupancy of community arts 
spaces. It is a requirement that all new regeneration areas (SDRAs) and large scale 
developments above 10,000 sq. m. in total area must provide for 5% community, arts 
and culture and artist workspaces. How many of these spaces have been created, and 
how many are currently without tenants? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The engagement with the 5% requirement by Developers and Planning consultants 
and agencies like the LDA with the Arts Office has been extensive. Developments are 
consulted with at pre-planning, planning and onsite.  
The Arts Office is unaware of any major development incorporating the 5% being 
completed as yet.  
A full report on the progress of this provision has been requested under another 
Council Question and this is expected from Planning at the end of February with input 
from the Sections involved. 
 
Q.10  COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
To ask the Chief Executive about plans to replace plastic bollards with permanent 
infrastructure. Plastic bollards are useful as a cheap, rapid-build measure to protect 
pedestrians and cyclists, but they should only be an interim measure while a route is 
being finalised. Is there a schedule for the replacement of these bollards with more 
durable and attractive segregation? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Active Travel Programme Office (AcTPrO) published the Dublin City Active Travel 
Network in October 2022, a network that will ensure that 95% of us will be within 400m 
of a connected 314km network. AcTPrO is responsible for the delivery of 214km of this 
network, through an agreed portfolio of 80 no. projects funded by the National 
Transport Authority (NTA). The NTA’s BusConnects program will deliver an additional 
90km.  
During the lifetime of the programme, the active travel network will grow from its 
existing 10km in 2022 to a connected network of 310km across the city. This will offer 
a network of projects that are safer, inclusive and more sustainable. It is planned that 
design work will have been completed at least 50% of the network by end 2028. Over 

the same period, the pace of construction will depend on availability of funding with a 
third of the AcTPrO programme planned to be completed construction by end 2028. 
The Active Travel Network will enhance quality of life by connecting all people through 
the delivery of a walk-wheel-cycle network. This will be achieved by improving access, 
connectivity and sustainable mobility and will also contribute to a citywide reduction of 
transport-related carbon emissions. When the Active Travel Network is complete, it is 
proposed that the entire 310km will be made up of permanent, sustainable and 
attractive infrastructure.  
During the early years of the Active Travel Network and prior to its implementation; 
plastic bollards were used as a useful, rapid-build measure to protect pedestrians and 
cyclists. However, these measure were only an interim measure. It is proposed that 
during the lifetime of the programme all interim measures (such as plastic bollards) 
along the network will be replaced with permanent infrastructure.    
 
Q.11 
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if an audit can be done in relation to Planning Applications 
not being validated, is there a common reason and can anything be done to clarify 
matters so that this waste of time can be limited to the benefit of applicants and the 
Council 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
A Guide to the Planning Application Process - Applicant’s Guidance Checklist 
can be accessed on Dublin City Council’s Planning website by following the link below: 
https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/planning/planning-applications/make-planning-
application/planning-process-application/about-planning-process-application  
The checklist is a helpful document for applicants and agents wishing to make a 
planning application and helps reduce the likelihood of an invalid application being 
made. 
Dublin City Council’s Planning Registry Section monitors and reviews on an ongoing 
basis the content of invalid planning applications, to identify frequently occurring 
reasons that cause invalidation with a view to keeping numbers as low as possible. 
Invalid applications are down 23.7% on last year.  
Following a recent analysis of invalid planning applications, the most common reasons 
to cause invalidation are outlined below: 
 
Admin Invalidation 
• 
Description of proposed works on News Paper Notice, Site Notice and 
Application form not corresponding.  
• 
News Paper Notice or Site Notice out of date or post-dated (not within the 14 
day statutory timeframe). 
 
• 
Incomplete or incorrect statutory wording within the News Paper Notice or Site 
Notice. 
 
Technical Invalidation 
 
• 
No dimensions included on drawings submitted. 
• 
Drawings not scaling/measuring correctly. 
• 
Mandatory drawings not submitted. 
 
As an additional measure to help reduce the number of invalid applications, a 
document is being prepared that will outline the findings of this analysis. It shall be 
circulated to applicants and agents who availed of the Council’s planning service within 
the past 12 months. It shall offer clear guidance on how to prevent invalidation by 

outlining many of the common reasons which lead to the invalidation and how to avoid 
them.  
 
Q.12  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to clarify the rules regarding the erection of posters for 
Seanad Eireann candidates in the City and how they align with the City Councils Bye-
Laws. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are no Bye-Laws relating to the erection of election posters. The advertising of 
election potters is dealt with under Section 19.7 of the Litter Pollution 1997 as 
amended.  The advertising of posters relating to a Seanad Eireann election is not 
referenced in Section 19.7 of the Litter Pollution as amended. 
 
The only reference to advertising election posters relates to: 
(i) 
A presidential election within the meaning of the Presidential Election Act 1933. 
(ii) 
A general election or a bye-election, within the meaning, in each case, of the 
Electoral Act 1992. 
(iii) 
A local election within the meaning of the Local Government Act 2001. 
(iv) 
A referendum, within the meaning of the Referendum Act 1994. 
(v) 
An election of representatives to the European Parliament under the 
European Parliament Elections Act 1997.  
(vi) 
An election of members of Údarás na  Gaeltachta under the Údaráss na 
Gaeltachta Act 1979. 
 
Q.13  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can advise if there are any formal parking available 
for residents within Oliver Bond House as there are no clearly marked parking within 
the complex. Additionally, can he advise if the lack of provision of a formal parking 
arrangement is related to accessibility concerns for emergency services. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is no formal parking or designated marked spaces available in Oliver Bond 
House and Residents Park informally in the complex. DCC suggested at a residents 
meeting that they would examine the possibility of marking spaces for residents and 
engaging a Parking Management service provider to monitor and enforce same but 
the residents were not open to this option at that time. 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive when recommended measures to provide a safer junction 
at Dolphin’s Barn Bridge will be implemented given it is one of the most dangerous 
crossings in the city 
 
Q.15  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive for an assessment of the boundary wall at (Details 
Supplied) be inspected for stability as it appears to be deteriorating 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will carry out a structural assessment of the boundary wall 
during w/e 14/02/25 and any necessary remedial work will be arranged. 
 
Q.16 
COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if an update can be given in relation to agreed 
improvements at Vicar Street children's playground 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC Parks and Public Lighting have been in contact with Councillor Daryl Barron 
about the paths leading up to the church and attach a map showing the lights that are 
currently being maintained by DCC. From the attached map the globe light(s) on the 
path are not shown and consequently are not being maintained by DCC. DCC is of the 
view that these are supplied from the church. If permission from the church is obtained 
DCC can check the source of supply to the globe lights. 
 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNANGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the footpath (kerb) at 35/37/39/41 McKee 
Avenue to be repaired. It’s badly broken in places 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The footpath at 35 to 41 McKee Avenue will be inspected and any repairs deemed 
necessary will be added to our Works List. 
 
Q.18 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council is continuing with the Tenant in Situ 
acquisitions scheme and to provide details on same. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In March 2024 the Department of Housing issued Dublin City Council with an allocation 
of 350 acquisitions, which allowed DCC to acquire properties to prevent homelessness 
and properties for specific categories of need, without having to seek Departmental 
approval in advance.     
As DCC has yet to receive guidance from the Dept. on what delegated sanction may 
apply for 2025 we are not in a position to proceed with negotiations on any newly 
proposed acquisitions at this time.  Tenant in Situ Acquisitions which were agreed and 
approved in 2024 are being processed these purchased will complete over the coming 
weeks and months.   
 
Q.19 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council has been liaising with Fingal County 
Council to co-ordinate efforts to eradicate the invasive species, The North American 
along the Tolka River and if so how has this project been proceeding 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services were liaising with Fingal County Council on this issue to develop a 
treatment programme. We will contact FCC with a view to progress programme over 
the coming weeks. 
 
Q.20 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the wall separating Barnamore and Kippure 
Estates in Finglas South to be repainted 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Finglas Area Office commit to working with the residents of Barnamore Park and 
Kippure Park with a view to repainting the wall from both sides as part of a community 
improvement high impact-low cost initiative. 
 
Q.21 
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he could respond to the following issues all relating to EV 
charging: 

In the context of electric vehicles, communal charging areas are viewed as necessary 
emergency top-up options rather than routine charging destinations - who wants to sit 
in front of a bus garage for 30 minutes every day? 
 
1. Is there and update on the following 2022 Report and will the Chief Executive 
issue me with same. 
https://www.dublincity.ie/sites/default/files/2022-
08/dublin_la_ev_charging_strategy.pdf 
 
2. The footnote on the bottom of Page 23 refers to: “the required meter in Ireland 
is too large to fit within the lamppost column making deployment within the 
lamppost unfeasible. It will be necessary to agree a metering system with the 
DNO that does not require a large metering box" 
 
Is Dublin City Council (Executive) only opposed to on street charging because our 
only meter doesn't fit inside our lamp posts or are there other reasons? Does DCC 
have an approved meter that can fit into our lampposts? 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
High capacity communal EV charging hubs are recognised as a viable and necessary 
solution to help meet the demand for public EV charging. Other solutions include 
domestic charging and workplace charging. 
Current EV battery and charging technology has improved significantly since the 
Dublin Regional EV Charging Strategy was published in 2022. An EV driver can expect 
to achieve a range of between 300 and 500 km on a fully charged battery and for the 
majority of drivers, this is more than sufficient daily or weekly use. 
The Dublin Local Authorities EV Charging Strategy 2022 has not been updated. The 
document is still available to view or download from the link above. 
DCC does not support on-street EV charging for a number of reasons including; 
• 
Unregulated market / service / commercial use of public parking space. 
• 
Management of local electricity grid capacity. 
• 
Managing parking enforcement. 
• 
Proliferation of equipment of streets. 
• 
Additional hazards to public safety 
• 
Private wire legislation (Only ESB can own distribution networks) 
 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a report regarding the use of DCC public bike stand 
and what arrangements are in place or permissions for commercial entities such as 
Moby bikes etc. to use them to dump their bikes after customer use particularly in the 
City Centre area where it becomes a nuisance to many who wish to park their bikes 
See photos attached.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Neither of the stationless public bike hire operators, Bleeper or Moby, deliver or deposit 
shared bikes at this location. They do not distribute bikes to - or target - specific 
locations across the city. The bikes are free-floating and bikes parked in the City centre 
are there as a result of trips taken to the various locations by members of the public. 
The bikes are a source of footfall for businesses in the City centre. Certain locations 
can prove to be particularly popular due to events taking place or as a lunch destination 
for workers in the City centre. Shared bikes offer a convenient and sustainable mode 
of transport for those taking short journeys. 

Cycle parking stands are in public use when they are occupied by shared bikes: 
Members of the public use these bikes - they are not restricted or exclusive - so any 
claims that the parking stands are not in "public use" when they are occupied by shared 
bikes are not correct. In fact it was the introduction of the stationless bike hire service 
which prompted the huge roll out of cycle parking throughout the City with several 
thousand new cycle parking spaces introduced since their operations began in 
2018.The numbers of shared bikes operating is capped by the Council. 
The operators have however been directed to pass through this particular area more 
frequently and to remove any excess bikes 
 
 
Q.23 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to supply a full report on the cost to date of the restaurant 
that is being built at Merrion Square Park also bearing in mind the closure of many 
cafes and restaurants, is this project still viable, also who has financial oversight and 
budget control on this project 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Merrion Square Park originated as a private ‘garden square’ in the Georgian era for 
the exclusive use of the residents of the square. As such it is over two hundred years 
in place. In 2014, Dublin City Council commissioned and published a conservation plan 
for the park which was approved by the Area Committee. This plan also included 
guidance on how the park could be improved for the needs of visitors including a 
tearooms and public toilets. 
The project in question therefore involves the construction of a tearooms, public toilets 
and associated improvements to the infrastructure of the park including pavements 
and public lighting.  
The cost of the construction works was provided to the October 2024 meeting of the 
South East Area Committee as follows: 
The contract is in the order of €3.7m excl VAT and includes an up-grade of the external 
areas and the provision of public lighting.  
 
In relation to governance and budgetary control, the project has been managed in line 
with a robust, tiered governance structure which Dublin City Council has in place for 
overseeing, managing, monitoring and evaluating capital projects in line with the Public 
Spending Code. The tiers are:  
1/ Corporate Project Governance Board (CBGB) 
2/ Corporate Project Support Office (CPSO) 
3/ Departmental Steering Group 
4/ Nominated Project Manager (PM) who manages the project on a day-today basis 
including –  
• 
Managing the contract in line with approval given including regular reporting to 
the Steering Group and CPSO/CPGB.  
• 
Notifying the Steering Group and CPSO/CPGB of variations in cost and/or 
contractual issues.  
• 
Submitting Project Appraisals, Reports and Progress Reports to CPSO/CPGB 
for approval.  
• 
Implementing a change control process and report on changes to cost, 
programme or scope.  
  
Dublin City Council now has tearooms and public toilets in nine of its parks and three 
more will open in 2025 including Merrion Square Park. All are operated by local 
enterprises and the quality of the offering in each case is excellent. These facilities are 
much appreciated by the local community and each business is understood to be 

economically sustainable and viable. It is anticipated that the construction of the 
Merrion Square tearooms and public toilets will be completed in the third quarter 2025.  
 
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to order a full examination of all concrete supplied by 
Keegan concrete to ascertain that all concrete supplied was of the appropriate 
strength, it has been reported in the media that this company is before the courts facing 
a lawsuit for supplying defective concrete to a construction site in Dublin. Keegan 
concrete from their own website have supplied many construction sites with services 
and goods, including the national Children’s Hospital on the construction, can CEO 
supply me with test certificates regarding the concrete fit for purpose at the National 
Children Hospital site, also how many visits have Building Control conducted to this 
site over the past years 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In response to the query raised by Councillor Mannix Flynn regarding concrete 
supplied by Keegan Concrete. 
The role and function of the Building Control Authority is set out within the Code of 
Practice for Inspecting and Certifying Buildings and Works published by the 
Department of Housing. This role involves: 
 
(a)Processing applications for Fire Safety Certificates and Disability Access 
Certificates and issuing decisions on those applications;  
(b) Validating and registering Commencement Notices/ 7 Day Notices and the 
accompanying Certificates of Compliance (Design), and other notices provided for 
under the Building Control Regulations. 
(c) Undertaking a risk analysis of submitted Commencement Notice/ 7 Day Notice in 
order to inform its own inspections; 
d) Advising Assigned Certifiers, in relation to issues of compliance, 
(e) Validating and registering Certificates of Compliance on Completion and 
accompanying documentation, 
(f) Maintaining the statutory Register; and  
(g) Maintaining records, including inspection records. 
It is not the role or function of the Building Control Authority to undertake an 
examination of concrete supplied to site by a supplier. Concrete supplied to site is 
specified by the design engineer for the works who has responsibility for designing the 
work to meet the requirements of the Building Regulations. Site management generally 
take representative concrete cube samples for the purposes of testing so as to satisfy 
themselves as to the adequacy or otherwise of the concrete delivered to site. There is 
no requirement under current legislation for these test results to be submitted to the 
Building Control Authority. 
Upon completion of the works the Assigned Certifier appointed by the building owner 
along with the builder certify the works to be compliant with building regulations once 
they are satisfied with the adequacy of the works and the supporting technical 
documentation, including any test certificates. 
The Assigned Certifier appointed to certify the Children’s Hospital in accordance with 
the Building Regulations has not notified the Building Control Authority of any issues 
of concern regarding the concrete supplied to site. To date Building Control have 

undertaken 42 inspections of the site and it is expected that inspections will continue 
until the building is complete and certified. 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a report regarding the strings of coloured bulbs 
that are now being strung up in and around the City Centre area particularly in the 
Southside such as South William Street, Coppinger Row, Dame court etc. This report 
to include what planning permissions have been obtained, who is responsible for 
placing these lights on the streets, what evaluations from the Heritage Section of 
Dublin City Council has taken place regarding the negative impact of such lighting on 
our historical streets 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We are not aware of any festoon lighting or similar installations on South William Street 
or Dame Court. The lights on Coppinger Row were initially installed around ten years 
ago at the request of local businesses. Last year, they were upgraded to energy-
efficient, programmable, colour-changing bulbs, again in response to requests from 
the local business community. 
Festoon lighting improves visibility in poorly lit areas, enhancing pedestrian safety and 
reducing the risk of accidents. It also creates a warm, inviting atmosphere, 
transforming public spaces into vibrant, welcoming environments. By animating 
otherwise dull areas, festoon lighting contributes to a more engaging urban 
experience. 
Moreover, festoon lighting is temporary in nature, requiring minimal infrastructure 
changes and offering a flexible, low-impact solution compared to permanent 
installations. It has been assessed that these lights do not negatively impact the built 
heritage or streetscapes, nor do they cause any harm to buildings in the surrounding 
area. 
To date, no negative feedback has been received regarding these installations. 
Overall, the festoon lighting is seen as a positive addition, enhancing the local 
environment and providing improved safety through additional illumination. 
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive In relation to DCC's role in the provision of homeless advice 
and accommodation can he provide the following information: 
 
A. Amount spent by DCC on direct accommodation per annum since the setup of the 
DRHE (Dublin Region Homeless Executive). 
B. Amount refunded by central government in relation to A above and, if there is a 
deficit, to confirm whether, or not, this is due and payable to DCC. 
C. Amount spent by DCC indirectly in relation to DRHE function including staff 
provided, DCC units provided, office space utilised etc. 
D. Amount refunded by Central Government in relation to C above and, if there is a 
deficit, to confirm whether, or not, this is due and payable to DCC. 
E. Details of any Service Level Agreements in place with central government in relation 
to DCC's role in homeless accommodation sourcing, provision and payment thereof. 
F. Duties and/or responsibility of DCC in accepting homeless applicants from other 
local authority areas and monetary compensation for same 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A. 
Please see chart provided on page 2 
 
B. 
Under Exchequer funding arrangements, local authorities must provide at least 
10% of the cost of services from their own resources. Furthermore, local 

authorities may also incur additional expenditure on homeless related services 
outside of the Exchequer funding arrangements provided by the Department.  
C. 
Please see chart provided on page 2 
 
D.  
Please see the answer for B 
 
E.  
DCC funds voluntary and private service provision in addition to delivering core 
homeless services to people in the region and is subject to Protocol 
arrangements with the Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage (DoHLGH) which are published each year on the Department’s 
website.  
 
F.  
Each local authority assesses households presenting as homeless, in 
according with legislation and households entering should   have an identified 
exit through the provision of social hosing supports. 
 
There are occasions when an out of region household will present to Dublin City 
Council Homeless services, in order to deal with this consistently across Local 
Authorities, the Local Connection Protocol for Homeless Presentations outside of 
region is in place since July 2023.  
If a household contacts Dublin City Council and upon initial assessment is determined 
as outside of the region and are assessed as not having links to Dublin city Council 
then the following actions will be put in place. 
 
• 
Emergency Accommodation may be provided where required on an 
emergency basis for the night of presentation. 
• 
Contact is made with the relevant Local Authority to advise of presentation and 
to arrange for supports and homeless assessment to be put in place. 
• 
Household will also be advised to contact the relevant Local Authority. 
• 
In circumstances where delays in providing this support happens, then 
emergency accommodation can be provided to a maximum of 5 days.  
• 
The responsibility of provision of support after five days then rests with the 
county of origin. 
 
There is no compensation for any such temporary placements 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Q.27  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive is he aware of the provisions/definition of "household 
member" and "family home" in Articles 2 (4) and (5) of the Commission implementing 
regulation (EU) 2019/2181 and if these definition and regulations  are relevant to DCC 
tenants/tenancies insofar as DCC's rules regarding period of residence required to 
attain succession rights are concerned. In other words, does the definitions refer to 
impact on the DCC Allocations Scheme Section 10.1.3 (b) where a person claims to 
have resided in the dwelling without having been included in the family household for 
rent assessment purposes. 
 
 
 CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Articles 2 (4) and (5) of the Commission implementing regulation (EU) 2019/2181 are 
set out below. 
 
(4) ‘household member’ means the usual resident of a private household; 
(5) ‘family home’ means a housing unit occupied by the members of a multi-person 
household, as well as by a person who spends some time elsewhere but retains close 
ties with the members of the multi-person private household, especially through family 
relationships or regular stays 
 
DCC’s Scheme of Lettings is adopted by local Councillors and has been informed by 
these definitions.  
 
10.1 Succession to Tenancy: 
 
1. 
No succession to Tenancy will apply where the accommodation is designated 
for Older Persons. 
2. 
In all cases, there must be no alternative suitable accommodation available to 
the applicant(s) for succession of tenancy and the applicant(s) must have been 
included in the household details for rent assessment purposes for the requisite 
period(s) (as per Scheme of Lettings). 
3. 
Departure of the tenant by way of purchasing or providing own accommodation 
will not be grounds for a person over 18 years to remain in the dwelling and 
apply for succession. 
4. 
No further consideration will be given where the above eligibility criteria 1-3 are 
not met 
 
Section 10.1.3 (b) of the Scheme of Lettings which deals with succession applications 
applies as follows.  
 
A person other than a spouse, partner, son or daughter who has resided in the dwelling 
for at least five years immediately prior to the death or departure of the tenant may be 
allowed to succeed where: 
 
a. They have been included in the family household for rent assessment purposes 
for the requisite period; and 
b. There is no spouse, partner, son or daughter eligible to succeed; and 
c. Where the dwelling size is appropriate to his/her needs  
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the relationship DCC has with the NTA (National 
Transport Authority) as it would appear that this body has carte blanche to do whatever 
it likes on managing public transport services, bus connects project, cycle lane 

installation etc. without regard for the DCC Development Plan, concerns/queries of 
local communities and interest groups, queries from public representatives, 
financial prudence and value for money etc. Please detail any and all meetings 
between DCC officials and NTA officials in the past year and also whether meetings 
have been held at CE level 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The National Transport Authority have statutory functions in regard to the provision of 
public transport services and infrastructure.  In relation to Dublin City Council (DCC), 
they are responsible for the implementation of the Greater Dublin Area Transport 
Strategy and the funding allocation to the City Council in a number of areas.  
DCC and the NTA work together to implement the Greater Dublin Area Strategy and 
this is set out in SMT1 of the Dublin City Development Plan, and furthermore within 
Chapter 8 of the Dublin City Development Plan there is a clear commitment for Dublin 
City Council to work with the NTA as set out below:  
The NTA’s Transport Strategy for the Greater Dublin Area 2022 – 2042 provides a 
framework for the planning and delivery of transport infrastructure and services in the 
Greater Dublin Area (GDA) over the strategy period. The Council will continue to work 
with the NTA, the statutory authority responsible for long term strategic transport 
planning in the GDA, to focus on the delivery of additional and extended public 
transport routes to service newly developed and existing areas, to address gaps in 
existing areas, to improve access to public transport stops and services and to improve 
the integration between high density development and public transport nodes. The 
Council will seek to safeguard existing public transport infrastructure to ensure future 
resilience is maintained. 
Within the City Council’s Environment & Transportation Department there are multiple 
meetings with the NTA across a range of sections including Roads, Traffic and Active 
Travel ranging from formal weekly and monthly meetings to almost daily informal 
interactions.  The NTA over the last three-years have provided funding to DCC in 
excess of €150 million in the areas of Roads, Active Travel and Traffic improvements.  
The Chief Executive of Dublin City Council is a member of the NTA Board and attends 
their regular Board Meetings.  
 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the recently (nearly) completed Clontarf to 
City Centre scheme, is he aware of the concerns and objections of local residents in 
North Strand and Ballybough at the attempt by the NTA to remove two bus stops on 
the North Strand Road, and the huge amount of representations made by me and my 
fellow inner city councillors to have this decision reversed, only to be informed by the 
NTA that these bus stops would be reinstated but would only facilitate one bus route 
(No 130) out of 10 plus routes. Requests for all routes to use these stops through 
further motions and questions have been ignored by the NTA, who acknowledge that 
distance to the next available stops exceeds their own desirable spacing criteria, and 
I would ask the Chief Executive if DCC is prepared to stand by while the NTA 
discriminates against elderly and infirmed residents of my area (including my own 90 
year old mother!). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Matters relating to bus stop locations and routes is under the NTA’s jurisdiction,  
however, Dublin City Council have and will again forward this question to the NTA, and 
request that they respond directly to the Councillor. 
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive to have the footpath at (Details Supplied) repaired. The 
tree roots are causing the footpath to lift” 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (Ref. no. 11172661) has been created, regarding this defect. This has been 
forwarded to the RMS Area Inspector for repair. 
 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON  
To ask the Chief Executive for the bin to be removed (Details Supplied). This bin is 
not outside a house and is used for illegal dumping. Regular calls to report the bin 
overflowing and has now led to rats in the area 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services regard the removal of a litter bin because of domestic 
waste dumping in and around it very much as a last resort. We will monitor the usage 
of this bin and have a litter warden also includes this bin as part of his regular patrol. 
 
Q.32 
COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive how many void senior citizen units are there currently in 
the North Central Area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance are currently working on 13 Senior Citizen void units in the North 
Central Area. 
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive when the first tenants are expected to move into Glin Court. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The allocation of the 32 new older person homes will start shortly and residents will 
commence moving in during early Q2 2025. 
Information on the completion of this project will be circulated to councillors in advance.   
 
Q.34 
COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline who has responsibility for electric vehicle (EV) 
charging points in the Dublin City Council area and whether the Council can exert 
influence in this regard. In particular, can the Chief Executive address the relative lack 
of EV charging points on the north side of Dublin and in the Donaghmede LEA 
specifically 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The responsibility for the provision of Electric Vehicle EV charging points across the 
City and indeed the Country is with the property owner, and is subject to available 
capacity on the local electricity grid to service the charge point.  
The vast majority of EV charge points in the City are on private property (including 
private homes with off street parking, service station forecourts, private carparks 
operated by public and private enterprises, supermarket carparks, sports facilities 
carparks). Dublin City Council does not maintain a register of EV charge points. 
EV charge points are usually managed by Charge Point Operators such as EasyGo 
and ePower who have expertise in equipment and account management software. 
Dublin City Council have engaged ePower to install public EV fast charging hubs on 
DCC property across the city. Phase one (pilot) of this project is currently underway. 
Planning legislation is in place for developers to provide EV charging facilities at, and 
to futureproof, new carparks, 
DCC acknowledge the need for additional EV charging services across the City 
including in the Donaghmede LEA. There are currently public EV charge points at; 
Donaghmede Shopping Centre 

Clarehall Shopping Centre 
Raheny Shopping Centre 
DCC will be installing an EV charging hub in Raheny under the pilot project and will 
look at additional suitable locations for the next phase.  
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to set out in detail plans for the vacant area of Belmayne 
known as the “L-shaped lands”. Specifically, can the Chief Executive outline the 
community resources that will be provided in this space, for example, a community 
centre, library etc? Can the Chief Executive give a timeline for construction in this area 
of Belmayne 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A cross-department team has been established in the City Council to review current 
development at Clongriffin and Belmayne and consider the development options of the 
Council owned lands at Belmayne. Councillors will be updated on progress made by 
this team in early 2025.  
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline the current provision of wheelchair-accessible 
play equipment in Dublin City Council-run playgrounds. To further has the Chief 
Executive plans for the future provision of wheelchair-accessible play equipment in 
Dublin City Council-run playgrounds with reference to specific playgrounds 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are an estimated 391 accessible play pieces in our 69 playgrounds, such as 
accessible swings, hammocks, rockers and other play units which open to assisted 
inclusive play. 97 of those units accessible to people while on their wheelchair such as 
roundabouts, raised sand tables, mazes, play panels, musical instruments, 
trampolines, rotating disks, table tennis and We-Go-Swings.  
 
In 2025 we are proposing to up-grade the playground at Pelletstown, Crescent Park 
which will include inclusive elements such as a jungle dome explorer which promotes 
physical activity for all ability levels, a nest swing which caters for all abilities and most 
ages allowing it to be a shared experience. Also the design incorporates sensory items 
such as play panels, mirrors and colour wheels. We will be installing 3 new wheelchair 
accessible We-Go-Swings this year in St Anne’s Park, Fr Collins Park & Johnstown 
Park. The refurbished Belcamp Playground will have a Wheelchair Carousel. We are 
adding an inclusive swing and trampoline to the Herzog Park Nature Playground. 
We are final consultation stages with the children who helped us co-design the 
playground in the Liffey Valley Park at Chapelizod which will have features like 
accessible trampoline, roundabout, percussive units and a We-Go-Swing.  
 
We have a programme for upgrading playgrounds on an annual basis and we 
intentionally use this opportunity to introduce multiple accessible high play value 
pieces with each upgrade. This means that our upgraded playgrounds can provide a 
range of experiences for disabled children, which all children can enjoy.   
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive whether he has noted the increase in anti-social behaviour 
in the Clongriffin-Belmayne area. In light of Garda acknowledgment that much of this 
stems from groups of boys in their early teens and in view of the limits of what a law 
and order approach to such matters can achieve in isolation, can the Chief Executive 
set out the community resources and diversion programmes planned for the area 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The operation of diversionary programmes to deter ASB does not fall within the remit 
of the City Council.  The terms of the question have been referred to Dublin City North 
Children & Young People Services Committee for response. 
When a response is received it will be forwarded directly to the Councillor. 
 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the ongoing Maintenance and Upkeep 
regime for the Cromcastle Flats and complex. The remaining residents are reporting 
of neglect in this regard and are suffering with the degradation of the buildings and 
environs. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance have a caretaker assigned to Cromcastle Flat Complex. Please 
can the Councillor provide specific details on outstanding maintenance requests and 
these will be addressed accordingly. 
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to have an inspection carried out regarding the ongoing 
and recurring issues with dampness and leaking in the dwellings (Details Supplied)  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will carry out an assessment of both units by end February and 
follow up with any remedial work identified. 
Q.40 
COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if there are plans to increase the presence and the 
frequency of inspections / inspectors to ensure Compliance and Quality Assurance of 
the Construction Works on the Oscar Traynor Road development in light of recent 
developments on the project 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Among the Glenveagh team who design, inspect and certify works in accordance with 
Building Regulations are the Assigned Certifier, Project Architects, Structural 
Engineers, Fire Safety Consultants, Access Consultants and other specialist technical 
advisors as required.  
Glenveagh have identified improvements to their structure and are proposing a full-
time site Architect to the site, they will also have a Part time engineer 2-3 days per 
week. While Glenveagh have the relevant Health and Safety personal on-site they are 
proposing an Independent Health and Safety auditor to conduct inspections of the site 
on a monthly basis. Glenveagh have also noted the Assigned Certifier will increase the 
number of inspections.     
Separately, Dublin City Council have a Technical Due Diligence Team made up of 
technical experts in the area of building construction for the purposes of monitoring 
works and ensuring the developments’ compliance with building regulation standards 
and quality generally. This team includes Clerk of Works, Architects and Engineers. 
These inspectors have been engaged in daily inspection of construction works since 
the project commenced.  
Building Control have noted the Risk profile of this site has increased and consequently 
increased inspections will be undertaking by Building Control.  
 
Q.41 
COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive can hazardous waste bins be placed in areas with high 
volume of the fast gas cylinders be dumped, and a weekly collection of them be picked 
up. They have areas destroyed and unfortunately, we cannot pick them up and just 

throw them in the bin, at least if there is a hazardous waste bin they can be thrown in 
to that bin 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services can report that there are no plans to install Hazardous 
waste bins for the purpose of disposal of fast gas cylinders. Hazardous waste is subject 
to strict regulations and practical considerations. Hazardous waste products should 
not be placed in public litter bins due to risks of contamination, explosions or fire.  
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive can an urgent maintenance inspection be conducted on 
address (Details Supplied). The resident has had on going issues, poor ventilation, 
mould, and a lot of dampness in her home, the issue is ongoing since 2023 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will arrange an immediate inspection of the above unit. Any 
repairs identified will be completed. 
 
Q.43 
COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive can a report be done on trees in DNW to see how many 
have overgrown their area and caused problems with ESB poles in our latest storm, 
and can action be taken.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks services have engaged an independent arborist company to conduct a city wide 
inventory of our tree stock. These surveys have been on a rolling basis for a number 
of years now. These reports inform our prioritised tree work programme for each area. 
The ESB have an independent programme of works to keep electricity infrastructure 
clear. 
 
Q.44 
COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive a deep clean of (Details Supplied), the car parking spaces 
and foot paths, there are piles of leaves, twigs and general rubbish in them and have 
been for some time. I am aware that the next date on the cleaning schedule is March, 
but they need to be tidied up prior to that 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services will have a deep clean carried out here as requested 
before the middle of February 2025. 
 
Q.45 
COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on all Active Travel projects that were 
completed in 2024 and the ones that are currently in progress or planned for 2025, 
including a breakdown of their projected costs? Additionally, could you provide a 
summary of these projects, detailing their scope, objectives and expected impact on 
Dublin’s transportation infrastructure and mobility goals 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin City Active Travel Network aims to connect communities in Dublin with 
secure, inclusive pedestrian and cycling infrastructure, which encourages more people 
to walk, wheel and cycle. Upon completion, 95% of people in the city will be within 
400m’s of the Active Travel Network. This will play an important role in the City 
Council’s commitment to reduce transport related carbon emissions by encouraging 
and supporting sustainable modes of transport 
A number of projects within the overall network were completed in 2024. 

• 
The Dodder Greenway – Herbert Park to Donnybrook was officially opened on 
the 8th of February 2024.  
• 
As part of the overall Royal Canal Greenway Phase 3 project, the Linear Park 
between Cross Guns Bridge and Binns Bridge was opened on Friday 19th of 
July. The overall project is expected to be completed in Q3 2025. 
• 
The East Coast Trail North Phase One project was commissioned on 
Wednesday 7th of August, 1km of new cycleways delivered as part of the 
project are now open and in use. 
• 
The Clontarf to City Centre scheme was substantially completed in October 
and officially opened on 28th November 2024. 
• 
The South Grand Canal Junction Improvement Scheme, which involved the 
upgrade of existing signalized junctions, and ‘tightening’ of wide junctions to 
improve safety for pedestrians and cyclists was substantially completed in Q4 
2024. 
 
A number of other projects within the overall network are at various stages of design 
with more projects envisaged to go to construction in 2025. 
A comprehensive report on the activities of the Active Travel Programme Office is 
issued to the Lord Mayor and Elected Members on a quarterly basis, the latest report, 
no.13/2025, was issued for the January meeting. The next report will issue for the April 
meeting. 
A complete list of Active Travel projects funded within Dublin City Council for 2025 is 
appended to this report. 
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive if they could engage with the NTA and Go-Ahead Ireland 
to address the frequent cancellations and irregular service on the S4 bus route? The 
residents of Hazelbrook Road in Terenure have been impacted, particularly the 
students who rely on the service to commute to UCD. The repeated disruptions, both 
in the morning and evening, have been highly inconvenient and frustrating for regular 
passengers. 
Despite raising this issue with Go-Ahead, there has been no response and therefore 
this would require intervention by the council to ensure a more reliable service for those 
who depend on it. What steps can be taken to improve the consistency of the S4 route 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has raised this issue with the NTA and Go Ahead Ireland. 
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider the installation of toilet facilities in Eamon 
Ceannt Park? A recent visit highlighted the absence of such amenities, which is 
particularly surprising given the park’s size and the wide range of activities it 
accommodates. Adding toilet facilities would greatly enhance the experience for 
visitors and support the park’s continued enjoyment by the community. 
Could this be prioritised to improve the usability of this wonderful public space and 
what steps can be taken to facilitate this much-needed addition 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Service has been installing public toilets in association with tearooms in 
public parks where there is a significant footfall. This arrangement was trialled in 
Eamon Ceannt Park commencing November 2021. The operation was not 
economically viable however, and the concession closed. There is a public toilet within 
the pavilion that is accessible when the pavilion is in use i.e. sports clubs/bike hub are 
present. Parks do not have staff available to man the unit.  

 
Q.48  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide guidance and support in the following areas for 
a proposal to build a community enrichment centre in Rathmines, Dublin 6 called the 
Stray Cat Café 
Given the proposed establishment of the Stray Cat Café, a community enrichment 
centre in Rathmines that aims to provide a safe, inclusive, and supportive space for 
individuals facing homelessness, addiction, and social isolation, 
 
    1.    Permits and Licensing: What permits and licensing would be required for 
the establishment of a not-for-profit café operating 24 hours a day in Rathmines, 
particularly with regard to food service, opening hours, and the provision of a petting 
area for cats? 
 
      2.    Funding and Grants: Are there any specific funding opportunities, 
grants, or subsidies available for not-for-profit organisations focused on community 
enrichment, homelessness, addiction services, and social integration? If so, could you 
provide details on how to apply? 
 
      3.     Public Space Usage: Can the Council provide any assistance or 
resources for ensuring that the Stray Cat Café’s location is easily accessible to the 
public, including any potential collaboration on public space usage, accessibility 
enhancements, or community integration? 
 
      4.     Collaboration with Local Services: Is there any opportunity for 
collaboration with existing local services, shelters, or social enterprises, particularly 
those focused on mental health, homelessness, or youth services, to ensure the café 
can serve as a fully supportive community resource? 
 
      5.    Regulations and Safety: What health and safety regulations should be 
considered for a café that aims to operate 24 hours a day, and what support or 
guidance can the Council offer regarding security, insurance, and staffing 
requirements? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In relation to the use of a premises as a café/centre operating 24 hours, this may 
require planning permission. The relevant applicant/organisation should contact the 
Planning Department (email: planning@dublincity.ie or Phone 01 222 2288) for a pre-
application consultation once a premises has been identified in order to discuss future 
proposals.  
 
 
1. Permits and Licensing: 
Any such proposals would be subject to planning approval and would necessitate 
identifying a building in the first instance. 
 
2.  Funding and Grants: 
Community 
Grants 
may 
be 
available 
and 
the 
Group 
should 
contact 
scott.watson@dublincity  to discuss. 
 
3.  Public Space Usage: 
There is no current building available. However, both Area Managers for SEA are 
currently exploring options in conjunction with the Valuers Office for additional 
community space in the Area. 
 

4. Collaboration with Local Services: 
The Area Community Officer would be available to discuss any possible synergies with 
other Groups 
 
5. Regulations and Safety: 
Any proposal as outlined by the Councillor would be subject to Planning Regulations 
 
No.1 Planning permission may be required depending on the current approved use of 
any building. This would need to be addressed with the planning team as part of a pre-
planning meeting.  
 
No. 2. Minister Humphreys and Minister O’Brien announced the Local Enhancement 
Programme (LEP) for 2025 on Thursday 7 November 2024 with a total of €7 million 
available nationally (€6 million available for capital costs and €1 million available for 
energy and running costs). Dublin City’s allocation is €656,750 (€562,929 for capital 
costs and €93,821 for energy and running costs).  
 
The scheme is designed to ensure local priorities are identified, met and that 
community facilities are improved / enhanced with a particular focus on small capital 
works and purchase of equipment for community use.  
 
The capital funding may be used but is not limited to improved access for persons with 
a disability, enhancing community participation for disadvantaged and marginalised 
groups, and improving energy efficiency of community facilities to reduce ongoing 
costs. The funding will be available to a diverse range of community group’s including 
but not limited to Men’s and Women’s sheds/ groups, community centres, parish halls 
and local voluntary groups.  
 
DRCD have stipulated that the grant must close for applications by the 7th March 2025 
with LCDC approvals returned no later than Friday 28th March 2025.  The Dublin City 
LEP fund will be opened for applications mid-February 2025.   
 
No.3 As it stands there is currently no Council owned building in this area that perform 
this function. However, the Area Office would be able to advise if this changes in the 
future and if a space becomes available. 
 
No.4. Stray Cat Café can contact the Local Area Community Managers and the Dublin 
South City Partnership regarding local services and networks as follows: 
- 
Silé.mcnultygoodwin@dublincity.ie 
- 
Scott.watson@dublincity.ie 
- 
Reception@dscp.ie 
 
There are grants for homeless services and these are made annually according to the 
priorities identified by the DHLGH and in the Regional Homeless Action Plan. The 2025 
DRHE budgetary process is complete but advice can be given on the application 
process by contacting rachel.reddy@dublincity.ie  
 
No.5 Any future operator would need to engage with the HSA as to what health and 
safety standards would need to be complied with.  
 
 

Q.49  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please provide an update on the following: 
a)      The total number of office developments granted planning permission 2020-2025 
inclusive broken down by DCC Administrative Area; 
b)      To confirm the total number of office developments granted permission during this 
period which have commenced construction; 
c)      To confirm how many office developments have been purchased by DCC as part 
of its ‘Adaptive Reuse’ housing initiative, and how many housing units have so far been 
delivered and are in the pipeline; 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The information for a) and b) is being collated and a reply will issue to Cllr Moriarty in 
the next two weeks. 
As of February 2025, three vacant commercial properties have been purchased by 
DCC as part of the Adaptive Reuse Programme. The acquisition process can take 
between 3 months and 24 months. 
No new apartments have yet been completed. There are currently 6 projects on the 
adaptive reuse programme, with three properties having been acquired, two properties 
already in DCC ownership, and one property yet to be acquired. These 6 projects have 
the potential for the creation of 59 new apartments. An adaptive reuse design team 
framework will be established in February 2025 after a 12 month procurement process, 
and appointments from the framework to each project will be progressed over the 
coming months. At that time updated delivery programmes can be prepared and 
shared. 
 
Q.50  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm when the Dublin 8 community can expect the 
Donore Avenue Community Centre to reopen and for the full-size playing pitch to be 
delivered at Teresa’s Gardens 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As previously indicated, Dublin City Council and the appointed Design Team are 
committed to issuing the tender documents to the relevant framework in February 
2025 with the building expected to open in summer 2026. Donore Avenue Youth 
and Community Centre remains as the highest priority to Dublin City Council and 
all efforts to efficiently progress the implementation of the programme will 
continue, particularly once the main contractor is appointed. 
 
DCC housing Development are working with the LDA to deliver complete the pitch 
at Donore the current programme shows a completion date for December 2027.  
 
Q.51 
COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm when all DCC Housing Complexes will be 
provided with segregated waste facilities – general, recycling and compost bins 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance has statutory obligations under Dublin City Council’s own Bye-
Laws i.e. Waste Management (Storage, Presentation and Segregation of Household 
and Commercial Waste) Bye-Laws 2018, in particular  
2.9. Provisions affecting Multi-user Buildings, Apartment Blocks, etc  
2.7. Segregation of Household Waste and Contamination Prevention 
2.2. Maintenance and Management of Waste Containers 

 
The roll out of bin chambers is in progress with new chambers now in place in 
approximately 40% of complexes.  The roll out programme will continue until all flat 
complexes are compliant.  There is no specific timeline on the roll-out programme but 
it will be progressed as quickly as possible as resources permit. 
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide the latest update with respect to DCC’s support 
for redevelopment of Richmond Park, Inchicore. The last update received in 
September 2024 stated: 
•       Preparation of the CPO Map was ongoing – where is this at now and when will it 
be completed? 
•       St. Patrick’s Athletic was requested to provide further information to DCC, 
specifically regarding detailed design of the stadium and the Club’s plans to fund the 
project – has this information been provided? 
•       The Club was expected to enter pre-planning discussions – has this started? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Valour’s Office is continuing to secure the acquisitions by agreement of 
adjacent properties and to seek all necessary information from St. Patrick’s Athletic in 
relation to the redevelopment of the stadium and grounds.  
 
The record of any relevant S.247 pre-application meetings including details of 
attendees and key issues raised shall be placed on the public planning file should a 
relevant planning application be submitted in due course.   
 
Q.53 
COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD  
To ask the Chief Executive review the paths at the end of Richmond Road, from 
Fairview up.  The paths are very dangerous and way too narrow, it is a hazard to 
people, especially people with disabilities.  There is construction going on in this area, 
and the place is very neglected.  It would be fantastic to widen some of the paths and 
restore them with a view to placing planters along that stretch 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The annual works program for this year has not been finalised yet, but footpath 
improvements on Richmond Road will be considered. Road Maintenance Service’s 
remit is to maintain existing footpaths & carriageways. Any request for changes to 
widths of footpaths or carriageways should be referred to DCC’s Traffic Division. The 
Confirm reference number for this inquiry is 11172722. 
 
 
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to fix the large hole in the road at the traffic lights on the 
Howth Road at the side of the Manhattan Public House in Raheny. I have been 
informed it has been there many years 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (Ref. no. 11172723) has been created, regarding this defect. This has been 
forwarded to the RMS Area Inspector for repair. 
 
Q.55 
COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive about placing pet waste stations on the causeway 
(Clontarf/Raheny) as many dog walkers are requesting this.  They have informed me 

there are none there.  I would be grateful if pet waste stations could be placed along 
there 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Service does not install nor service dog waste bins, waste management 
services may consider provision of same.  There are existing general waste bins at 
each end of the causeway road where such waste can be disposed of. 
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive for traffic to investigate the right hand turn coming from 
Howth on the James Larkin Road onto Mount Prospect.  The Residents have informed 
me if just one car is turning, it creates a major tailback 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Intelligent Transport Systems team have reviewed the operation of the traffic 
signals at this junction. Please note that there is insufficient space on approach for a 
dedicated right turn filter lane at this junction. To mitigate against this, currently, the 
traffic signals on the outbound approach turn red well in advance of the inbound signals 
going red in order to permit any vehicles waiting to turn right the opportunity to do so. 
Right turning vehicles also have opportunities to turn right using gaps in oncoming 
outbound traffic. 
The operation of the traffic signals will be monitored and changes to the timing of this 
feature can be made as required where there is scope to do so. 
Thank you for your query. 
 
Q.57 
COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider the following regarding EV Charging: 
As part of the EV charging pilot project in conjunction with DCC and relevant 
stakeholders, can Homefarm Road be considered for inclusion in the programme?  I 
note from the current locations there are no plans to facilitate the many houses in 
Drumcondra and Glasnevin that have no gardens, thus not allowing them to use an 
EV. There is an ideal space outside Corpus Christi Hall on Homefarm Road. Can this 
be considered as part of the pilot? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s strategy is to support the installation of Fast Charging EV Hubs. 
There are currently public EV chargers close to Homefarm Road, behind the DCU 
Institute of Education near St. Patrick’s GAA Pitch and in the LIDL carpark in 
Drumcondra and at Bon Secours Hospital, Glasnevin. Both the chargers in the DCU 
Campus and at Bon Secours are fast chargers. 
DCC will review additional locations for suitability assessment for subsequent phases 
of the EV charging project. 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive do they plan to retain the existing lampposts in Drumcondra 
when upgrading to LEDs? The current lampposts are in keeping with the area and they 
should not be replaced with galvanised steel poles. Can they please be included in the 
painting programme for this year? I’ve previously asked for this to be included so it 
would be great to get an update please. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following clarification the roads referred to are Homefarm Road and side streets off it. 
With regard to the side streets such as Arran Road, Achill Road, Clare Road, Walsh 
Road etc. the existing heritage columns on these roads will be retained in any 

improvement or upgrade works that may be carried out on these streets and thus will 
be in keeping with the area. 
On Homefarm Road there are a few concrete lampposts that will be replaced under 
the Public Lighting upgrade project and these will be replaced with standard lighting 
columns in line with what already exists on this road.  
 
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive address the following regarding: speeding  
There is excessive speed of vehicles while passing on Kinvara Road and a need for 
double yellow lines at Kinvara Road / Kinvara Park junction. 
Residents are concerned about the corner near the Navan Road Scouts Den, as 
speeding vehicles pose a danger to pedestrians, children, and other road users. This 
issue is compounded because these 2 roads are the only roads in the area without 
speed ramps, making them a preferred route for vehicles moving through. Kinvara 
Drive and Kinvara Road are the 'natural routes' to/from the Navan Road for many 
residents on adjoining roads, it is also the natural route for the members of Phoenix 
FC and SOPER and visiting teams to access MSP. The Scouts Den is used by 
Disability Services. St Vincents, (many of the service users are in wheelchairs) and 
sports/ social groups.  Yellow lines are needed at Kinvara Road/ Kinvara Park 
Junction.  Motorists' view can be blocked due to parking on footpaths at both corners, 
due to increased business at the shops and new café. 
I understand a traffic survey was done but I have witnessed these issues first hand 
and believe that the installation of speed ramps and yellow lines would assist in this 
matter.   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer does not recommend the installation of double yellow lines at 
Kinvara Road / Kinvara Park junction. 
It is not the policy of Dublin City Council to provide parking restrictions where 
restrictions are already covered under the law. Under the Road Traffic (Traffic and 
Parking) Regulations, Section 36, paragraph (2), “a vehicle shall not be parked…..(c) 
within 5 meters of a road junction; (i) on a footway, a grass margin or a median strip;  
Please note that instances of illegal parking should be reported to Dublin Street 
Parking Services, the City Council’s parking enforcement contractor (Ph: 01-602 2500 
or Email parkingenforcement@dublincity.ie), or to the local Gardaí, as it is a matter for 
enforcement under the Road Traffic Regulations.  
It was observed that vehicles were illegally parked on the footpath creating a wider 
carriageway for motorists to speed. On-street parking offers a natural traffic by 
reducing the available carriageway width, raising driver’s attention and reducing 
speeds. In accordance with the Road Traffic (Traffic & Parking) Regulations 1997, 
Article 36 (1), (2), (i), it is illegal for vehicles to be parked on the footpath or on the 
grass verge. 
The road is 6.2m wide and is suitable for one-sided parking, which works as a passive 
form of traffic calming.  
A speed survey will be carried out on Kinvara Road to assess the level of speed and 
the total number of vehicles using these roads. The results of the speed survey will 
determine how the Transport Advisory Group proceeds with reference to the above 
request. 
 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to have the following trees urgently pruned  
Is there a programme of tree pruning in Ashington Estate? Some of the trees are over 
40 years old and are in need of attention. I’m aware the Council did an examination of 
the trees in the area. Can I get an update on this 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A full survey of the trees in the Ashington estate was carried out late last year by our 
independent contracted arborist.  Any recommended work will be included our Tree 
Care programme for the area, subject to available budget. 
 
Q.61 
COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive if there has been a full report done identifying vacant 
property in the Dublin. Identifying ownership and identifying the sites for refurbishment 
and/or repurposing 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Vacant Property Unit has established an internal database for the identification 
and recording of potential vacant properties in the City as reported to it by members of 
the public and or by its own investigate means. 
 
Once a property has been identified as long term vacant then we identify its owner(s) 
and issue them with correspondence requesting them to return the property to use in 
a timely manner.  
 
When the City Council identifies a vacant property we notify the owner of the different 
Housing Initiatives administered by the City Council that facilitates them refurbishing a 
property and returning it to use. 
 
• 
Buy and Renew Scheme. 
• 
Repair and Lease Scheme. 
• 
Croi Conaithe Scheme.  
 
 
Any failure by the owner to comply with a City Council request to return a long term 
vacant property to use may result in the City Council invoking its legislatives powers to 
acquire same and return the property to use in a timely manner. 
The City Council is processing 675 applications from Private Property Owners for the 
Croi Conaithe (Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant). 
 It has acquired 110 long term vacant properties under the Buy and Renew Scheme 
60 of which have been refurbished and returned to housing stock and the remainder 
of which are currently in the process of being refurbished and returned to housing stock 
in the near future. 
It has completed the long term leasing of 4 number properties from private owners who 
have presented refurbished vacant properties under the Repair and Lease Scheme 
and is in the process of finalising the Repair and leasing arrangements for an additional 
17 properties which will be leased by the City council in the very near future. 
 
 
 
 
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive how much money was spent on cleaning graffiti in the year 
2024. If there is no data available for the year 2024, could he furnish statistics on 2023 
instead. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
€351,311 was spent on cleaning graffiti in the year 2024. 

 
Q.63 
COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an estimated timeline on the production and 
drafting of proposed by laws that concerns on-street soup kitchens 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Since early 2024, the Dublin Region Homeless Executive has been carrying out a 
number of consultations with on-street services and this process is expected to finalise 
in Q2 2025. Following that, there will be feedback to the Housing SPC. This would 
normally be followed by a period of public consultation before a report would go to 
Council for adoption or amendment.  
 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to address the ongoing structural issues in the (Details 
Supplied) and to transfer the tenant to a suitable alternative while this work is being 
carried out 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This is a Tuath Housing property; in February DCC Housing Section will make contact 
with Tuath Housing regarding this request. A response will then issue directly to Cllr 
McGrattan.  
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive (to install a yellow box on the junction of. (1 Details 
Supplied) to allow traffic turn right from (2. Details Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer recommends the Yellow Box, which was previously provided, to be 
re-painted on Ballyboggan Road, at the junction with Broombridge Road.  
 
Q.66 
COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive does DCC still replace boilers in private homes under the 
housing adaptation grant scheme 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Housing Adaptation Grants for Older People and People with a Disability Section 
administers three Housing Grants Schemes designed to provide assistance to people 
making adaptations to their privately owned homes to meet their medical needs and to 
older people in inadequate housing conditions carrying out essential repairs to their 
owner occupied homes. These measures enable people to stay in their own 
communities and prevent or delay their placement in residential care thereby reducing 
social segregation, assisting their carer’s and strengthening families.   
 
The three Housing Grants are as follows: - 
1) Housing Adaptation Scheme. 
2) Mobility Aids Scheme. 
3) Housing Aid for Older People. 
 
The Housing Adaptation Grants for Older People and Disabled People Scheme cannot 
be provided for any applications received on or after 1st January 2025 for new 
standalone fossil fuel boilers. 
 
However, the Grant Scheme continues to be available for: - 

• 
The repair of an existing fossil fuel boiler by a qualified contractor (oil or gas) 
or 
• 
The purchase and installation of a second hand fossil fuel boiler by a qualified 
contractor (oil or gas). 
• 
Repair or replacement of radiators and oil tanks, wall mounted electric heaters 
or wood pellet stoves. 
 
This change is following an instruction from the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage in accordance with (Article 17(15) of Directive (EU) 
2024/1275 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 April 2024). 
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the status of the lease agreement with Dublin 
Salmon Anglers to fish on the banks of the Liffey following new restrictions introduced 
by the government 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following the approval of the Elected Members in accordance with the statutory 
Section 183 process, the lease held by The Dublin and District Salmon Anglers 
Association was renewed for a further 35 years from 1st February 2021. 
The land leased to them by Dublin City Council refers to the land and its use (as a 
Fishery). Their lease (extract below) states their obligation to adhere to any 
government restrictions that may be introduced – 
 
“The Lessee shall observe the close seasons and observe and preform all provisions 
regulating the management of fisheries which may be applicable to the premises 
hereby demised which now are or shall be in force by virtue of any Act of Parliament 
or Government Order or other. 
 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide an update on the Adaptive Reuse 
Scheme. Can he please provide figures on the number of buildings that have been 
investigated, the number of potential projects and the number of confirmed projects 
and the timelines for each 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In the past two years, the Adaptive Reuse Unit in DCC has assessed over 500 commercial 
properties for potential adaptive reuse to create housing, viewed over 30 properties, 
completed 17 feasibility studies, and submitted funding applications for 8 projects to the 
Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage. 6 adaptive reuse projects have 
received funding approval and are being progressed. These projects will create 59 new 
apartments. 3 vacant commercial properties have been acquired by DCC to date. An adaptive 
reuse design team framework will be established in February 2025 after completion of 
a 12 month procurement process, and appointments from the framework to each 
project will be progressed over the coming months. Once team appointments are 
finalised, timelines for each project will be prepared and this can be shared.  
 
In terms of potential projects, it is estimated that there are approximately 4,000 vacant 
or partially vacant commercial properties in the Dublin City Council administrative area. 
A majority of these buildings will have the potential for the creation of apartments, 
either through conversion of the entire property, or mixed use conversion to create 
residential over commercial or cultural space.   
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 

To ask the Chief Executive what plans are in place to address the increasing vacancy 
in the Cows Lane area / Essex Street West end of Temple Bar 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently three vacant commercial properties in the Cows Lane/Essex Street 
West area; one unit is owned by Temple Bar Cultural Trust (TBCT), with the other two 
being privately owned. The property owned by TBCT has been subject to a legal case 
in recent years. TBCT have taken steps to regain possession of the unit and there are 
plans to re-open in the coming months. The other two properties are privately owned. 
TBCT has spoken with one of the owners and a re-launch of a new business is due to 
happen in the near future. We have not been able to contact the other property owner 
ahead of this deadline 
 
Q.70 
COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide an update on the masterplan for the 
Ship Street Little area and can he provide details on discussion with the OPW on the 
redevelopment of this area  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The archaeological and geotechnical site investigations for the Werburgh Street/ Ship 
Street/ Castle Street area have been underway since Thursday 30th January and are 
expected to take approximately 4 weeks on site. This will complete Step 1 of the 
Masterplan which is a Policy & Site Review.  The Design Team have prepared a draft 
report of this stage and are due to present it to the DCC/OPW Steering group in the 
coming weeks. Once agreed the Policy & Site Review will then be presented to the 
elected members. This stage will be followed by the preparation of a Strategic 
Masterplan and Preliminary Design Options for the site as per the Masterplan brief in 
conjunction with the relevant stakeholders including the OPW.  Following the 
successful completion of the Masterplan, it is the aspiration to bring the designs of the 
relevant site to Planning Stage, under Part 8 of the Planning and Development 
Regulations 2011, as amended. 
 
 
Q.71 
COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to please outline when did DCC decide to put a freeze on 
processing ESG applications for those leaving State Care; why was this decision 
made; who made that decision; why were City Councillors and in particular why was 
the Housing SPC not informed of this important decision; how many ESG applications 
from care leavers are waiting to be processed and what efforts are being made to 
resolve this situation 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The DHLGH issued the first Protocol on Young People Leaving Care in 2014. This 
placed an obligation on TUSLA to provide an aftercare plan for all young people leaving 
state care. Aftercare Steering Committees were set up to ensure inter-agency 
partnership to meeting the needs of young people leaving state care and aftercare. 
Both Local Authorities and TUSLA are represented on the committees with 2 
operational in Dublin, one Northside and one Southside.  
In 2017 the Department issued a ‘CAS call’ for the delivery through construction or 
acquisition of housing to cater for priority groups, including care leavers exiting State 
care on reaching the age of 18. It was to enable priority to be given to homeless or at 
risk of homelessness care leavers for this scheme that the care leaver priority was 
introduced in DCC’s Scheme of Lettings Priorities in 2018. To give a sense of the 
numbers, it was predicted from the numbers in state care at June 2017 that 205 units 
would be required nationally with 21 of those units in DCC.  

The CAS scheme started well with 5 properties coming on stream in 2019, 9 in 2021, 
15 in 22 but the supply dwindled to 2 in 2023 and 2 in 2024. Given the unreliable CAS 
supply, more causal vacancies were directed to the Exceptional Social Grounds list by 
DCC.  
The administrative process for managing care leaver priority was originally via the 
homeless section, later changed to an Exceptional Social Grounds (ESG) application 
managed by the Social Work section.  
During 2024, the Social Work section highlighted a concern with using the ESG 
process for care leaver priority. This is largely based on an increasing number of 
referrals per annum and that the criteria for care leavers is straightforward and does 
not require a second Social Worker to assess, as a report is provided by the Aftercare 
Social Worker. 
The Allocations and Social Work department reviewed the working of applications for 
Care Leaver priority and 2 improvements were suggested: 
1. An amendment to the existing wording of the scheme (i.e. a policy change 
requiring Council approval). 
2. An administrative change clearly setting out the criteria for priority by which 
Allocations, instead of a Social Worker would assess the applications for 
priority. Allocations met with a Tusla Aftercare Manager to discuss same in late 
December and it was agreed the criteria were reasonable to reach the target 
group.  
It was agreed that this issue would be included under Allocations report at the next 
Housing SPC when Operations was on the agenda. (March 2025) 
While this process was ongoing, ESG applications based on care leaver status were 
on hold, not the applicant’s housing application, to allow for an examination of how it 
the scheme was working. There was no risk that anyone who applied for Care leaver 
priority missed out on an offer of housing under that priority category, because, as of 
today there are 40 individuals with ESG priority based on care leaver status waiting to 
be allocated social housing.  
50 Exceptional Social Ground priority applications based on Care Leaver status were 
put on hold, of these, 3 have since been housed based on their general housing list 
positions and 5 were not eligible for social housing, leaving 42. The review identified a 
further 87 care leavers on the social housing list, where an ESG application was not 
made by either applicant or Aftercare Social Worker. 
The proposal for the March SPC is that applications will no longer go through the ESG 
application process but be assessed by allocations according to the following criteria:  
a) Care Leavers eligible for social housing; 
b) Care leavers primary application with Dublin City Council; 
c) Care Leavers will have been in state care for a minimum of 12 months; 
d) Care Leavers will be availing of the TUSLA Aftercare service; 
e) Care Leavers will be living in a residential care placement; 
f) Care Leavers will have no other options for housing support on leaving care, 
other than homeless accommodation; 
g) Report from the Aftercare social worker outlining all of above criteria. 
 
This means that the administrative process to apply for care leaver priority would 
change, but not the policy. The change is intended to free up the ESG application 
process for serious cases requiring social worker assessment. The changes will be 
communicated to the Aftercare Steering Groups which are attended by all the main 
stakeholders. 
The change would not preclude any care leaver applying in their own right for 
Exceptional Social Grounds priority, but if the applicant fits the criteria described in a-
g above, they would no longer have to apply via the ESG application process.  If they 
wish to and have other extenuating circumstances they may continue to apply for ESG 
priority.  

It is still considered that any Scheme of Lettings review should examine the 
effectiveness of this priority, given the low level of CAS care leaver properties 
available.  
There have been 174 lettings to Care leavers since the scheme change in 2018. While 
this is a success, the Allocations section is flagging a clear risk that we will no longer 
be prioritising the applicants who already are, or are at serious risk of becoming, 
homeless after leaving state care.  
 
 Year 
Total 
2018 
7 
2019 
26 
2020 
15 
2021 
9 
2022 
36 
2023 
37 
2024 
44 
Grand Total 
174 
 
 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive please give this Councillor an update on the proposed 
playground for Chapelizod 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A contractor has been appointed and a further round of consultation with local children 
is planned for end Feb. Commencement on site will be determined and notified to the 
councillors after this. 
 
Q.73 
COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure Councillors receive a housing allocations report 
every quarter as was the practise until a few years ago  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The allocations quarterly report is sent to the Local Area Committees for circulation, 
we will review the process and ensure that all councillors have access to the quarterly 
report 
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to please give serious consideration to transferring, 
(Details Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The above applicant is on the Transfer List with an application date of 16/03/2022, the 
applicant holds the following position on this list; 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
L 
3 
244 
M 
3 
203 
N 
3 
266 
 

Housing Welfare process applications for an ESG priority, they will notify the household 
directly of the outcome. It is important that the family report their experience of racism 
to An Garda Síochána.  
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household.  
 
Q.75 
COUNCILLOR AMMAR ALI 
To ask the Chief Executive to take immediate and effective action against the growing 
issue of illegal dumping and litter in Dublin's Inner City. The situation has deteriorated 
significantly. Also to outline any plans to be taken by Dublin City Council in order to 
tackle this issue 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The litter wardens are present in Dublin’s NEIC every day removing a sample of illegal 
dumping for investigation to try and issue fines to offenders. Gathering evidence for 
fines relating to illegal dumping is becoming increasing difficult due to paperless billing, 
GDPR and identity theft. People are no longer disposing of bills, or anything with their 
personal details due to this risk. The litter wardens will have to be present at the time 
of the dumping and have the assistance of An Garda Siochana to issue fines for illegal 
dumping. This makes tackling this issue and making real change very difficult. 
 
CCTV is being trialled in three streets within the NEIC in the near future. It remains to 
be seen if this will have a real impact on the level of illegal dumping taking place. 
 
Q.76 
COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive what steps are taken by Dublin City Council to monitor 
underwater pollution in Dublin Bay and to outline the level and nature of underwater 
pollution at present 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Water quality in Ireland is assessed and classified under the Water Framework 
Directive (WFD). The directive requires EU member states to achieve water quality of 
at least Good Status in water bodies by 2027.  
Dublin Bay is identified as a coastal water body under the WFD, draining a total area 
of 1,616km2. Its catchment includes the area drained by the River Liffey and all 
streams and rivers entering tidal water between Sea Mount and Sorrento Point in 
County Dublin. Dublin Bay is currently classified as "Good" status (2016–2021), 
meeting the stringent requirements set in the Directive. Its status is identified by the 
EPA as "Not at risk", which is encouraging for a water body serving a catchment 
population of approximately 1,255,000 persons. Its overall chemical and ecological 
status supports safe bathing waters and the protection of the internationally recognised 
UNESCO biosphere. 
Furthermore, Dublin City Council (DCC) manages the implementation of the Bathing 
Water Regulations SI 79 of 2008, as amended. The regulations require surveillance of 
bathing water quality in order to protect bather health.  DCC manage six bathing water 
locations north and south of the city.  

Dollymount Strand, Sandymount Strand, and Half Moon are recognised as designated 
waters, while the North Bull Wall, Shelley Banks, and Merrion Strand are recognised 
as other monitored waters. The Environmental Protection Agency provide annual 
classification to designated waters based on water quality results from the preceding 
four bathing seasons. The 2024 classifications for DCC’s waters are as follows: 
Excellent bathing water quality at Half Moon, Good at Dollymount Strand and Poor at 
Sandymount Strand.   
DCC exceeds the Bathing Water Regulations (SI 79 of 2008) minimum sampling 
requirements, taking 20 scheduled samples per bathing water location during the 
bathing season, supplemented by investigative monitoring as required. Sampling 
continues fortnightly throughout the year, with results made available online and in 
hardcopy format at bathing water entrances. 
The UCD Acclimatize research project, now in its second phase, confirms DCC 
findings that near shore anthropogenic pressures affect the water quality in Dublin Bay. 
A programme of works has commenced to address diffuse and point source pollution sources 
impacting bathing water quality in South Dublin Bay, through monitoring, modelling and 
catchment assessments. 
Additionally, through the Acclimatize research, the impact dog fouling has on bathing water 
quality was quantified and verified. They found that one dog stool had the potential to 
pollute a volume of water the area of a tennis court. In response to this finding, DCC 
ran a season long communications campaign to promote responsible dog 
management, collaborated and promoted a Leave Only Paw Prints informative 
animation, and installed poo bag dispensers on bathing water cabinets located at 
bathing water entrances.  
In addition to the aforementioned statutory sampling, DCC conducts Polymerase 
Chain Reaction (PCR) analysis to better inform pollution investigations. PCR analysis 
is used as an analytical tool in Microbial Source Tracking (MST) of faecal pollution. It 
looks for species-specific genetic markers to identify human, canine and marine bird 
sources in bathing water samples with elevated faecal indicator bacteria. The 2024 
bathing water results indicated a positive response to DCC’s dog fouling campaign and 
a downward trend in dog marker identification in samples compared to previous years. 
In response to declining water quality at Sandymount Strand and Merrion Strand,  
Dublin City Council (DCC) established the Dublin Bay Bathing Water Taskforce 
(BWTF) in 2019. Consistent with the EU Water Framework and Bathing Water 
Directives, the scope of the taskforce since establishment has been to protect and 
restore water quality in a unified manner.  
This required the establishment of regular communications and collaborations with 
pertinent stakeholders who had a pivotal role in protecting and enhancing water quality 
in Dublin Bay. DCC is the lead authority and chairs monthly meetings with the taskforce 
to manage and coordinate actions arising. The Dublin Bay BWTF continues to study 
and identify existing and potential sources of pollution entering Dublin bay, particularly 
at Sandymount and Merrion Strands. A detail report on the activities being progressed 
under that platform are available for review at the following link  to Dublin Bay Bathing 
Waters Report – June 2023.  
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on illegal dumping at a location in Dublin 3 
(Details Supplied) and what measures have been taken by Dublin City Council to 
prevent same.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Litter Enforcement Manager will instruct the litter wardens to visit Richmond Ave/ 
Melrose Ave more regularly to remove a sample of any bags dumped for investigation 
to try and gather evidence of an offender. Fixed penalty notices will be issued should 

any evidence be found. If the council is made aware of any properties responsible for 
the illegal dumping, the landlord will be contacted to intervene and hopefully rectify the 
issue. 
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive is it policy of DCC to convert Homeless Hostels to IPAS 
Centres by stealth or otherwise 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is no policy to convert or transition homeless facilities into accommodation that 
would be used by IPAS or DECEIDY. 
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive with regards to crown paints in Coolock, why was it 
changed from a Zone 6 to a Zone 10 on the 1st of November 2022. After the previous 
Chief Executive, Richard Shakespeare previously made an Executive Order that Zone 
6 of crown paints was not to be rezoned and 6 weeks later it subsequently was. I’d like 
to know if there was any political influence in relation to that decision been made from 
it being rezoned from a 6 to a 10? As I am aware that the entire building has asbestos 
and ammonia (pH AND LEAD) which as we all know are highly dangerous toxins and 
chemicals. So why would anyone in all good conscience want to put 754 human beings 
in that building 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The two year process of preparing and making of a Development Plan by the Elected 
Members is an open and inclusive process that involves three stages of public 
consultation. 
For the total of the three public consultations DCC received several thousand 
submissions which included ideas, proposals, criticisms and suggested amendments 
to the proposed Development Plan; all of which were welcomed as contributing to 
improving the document. 
Following the agreement of the Draft Plan by the Elected Members the Draft Plan 
was put on public display for 10 weeks and over 4,000 submissions were received 
during this consultation process.  Following a detailed examination of all 
submissions, the Chief Executive presented a summary of the content of the 
submissions received and recommended several hundred changes to the text and 
the maps as a result of this consultation process (See CE Report 119/2022).  With 
regard to the zoning maps specifically; over 200 submissions were received seeking 
just over 300 changes; and of these 88 changes were recommended – for some the 
suggested zoning in the submission is recommended, and for others, a different 
zoning policy change was recommended to the Councillors to consider.   
All submissions received during the consultation process were published on the 
Council website within 10 days of receipt and a list of all submissions received was 
published with the CE Report.  These submissions remain available to view on the 
Council website.  
The summary of the submission and the response by the CE in Report 119/2022 is 
attached to this response, setting out the reasons the change of zoning was 
recommended. 
The Report of the CE 119/2022 and the subsequent CE Report 120/2022 (which is 
the CE Report on the Motions submitted by Councillors following consideration of 

119/2022) were debated at a series of Special Council meetings held on the 5th, 6th 
and 7th of July 2022. 
The recommendation as outlined in 119/2022 was passed by the Elected Members 
at this July meeting and this proposed change, alongside all of the other changes 
passed by the Members, went on public display from the 27th of July to the 1st of 
September 2022.  Over 1,000 submissions were received during this 3rd phase of 
consultation. 
Following consideration of the CE Report on the Submissions at Material Alterations 
Stage (CE Report 261/2022) and the Motions proposed by the Elected Members and 
the CE response (CE Report 262/2022) the proposed change on this site was 
retained and the plan made by the Elected Members at the Special Meeting of the 
Council on the 1st and 2nd of November 2022. 
 
Extract of CE Report 119/2022 
 
Map Reference: B-0017 
Site Address: 1-3 Malahide Road, Coolock, Dublin 17 
Draft Plan Zoning:  Z6 
Requested Zoning: Z1/Z4 or Z14 
CE Recommended Zoning: Z10 
 
Summary:  
 
A submission was made seeking the rezoning of the subject site at 1-3 Malahide 
Road from Z6 to Z1/Z4 or Z14 on the basis of its largely vacant/ underutilised 
condition and optimal location proximate to public transport, local services and 
amenities.  The submission stated that the rezoning of the site would provide a 
regeneration opportunity and support the plan’s Core Strategy.  
 
Chief Executive’s Response:  
 
 
The subject lands are located within a well-established residential area that is well 
served by public transport bus routes, community and social uses. The CE considers 
that the rezoning of the lands to Z10 would provide a mix of uses and coherent 
streetscape given their prominent location fronting onto the Malahide Road. 
Furthermore, in the interests of providing for coherent land use zoning at this 
location, the CE proposes to rezone a larger area of land surrounding the subject site 
from Z6 to Z10 in order to provide for a substantial block of urban development 
fronting the junction of Malahide Road and Greencastle Road, and extending to 
Greencastle Parade. 
 
Chief Executive’s Recommendation 
It is recommended that these lands are rezoned from Z6 to Z10. 
Q.80 
COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the cost of all the new traffic lights being installed 
throughout the city and what is the energy cost of the traffic lights costing the tax payer. 
For example the traffic lights on Hill Street that has caused congestion back up Hill 
Street and back up on Summer Hill 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Each year Dublin City Council typically install a number of newly signalised junctions, 
standalone signalised pedestrian crossings and/or upgraded junctions where new 
pedestrian crossings are added. These projects are typically funded by the National 
Transport Authority (NTA) under a number of headings (including Active Travel, Local 
Authority Pedestrian Crossing programmes, Safe Routes to School Schemes, Bus 
Priority etc.) but in some instances are developer funded where planning permission 
grants have conditioned developers to construct a new signalised pedestrian crossing 
as part of a housing development, for example. The tender costs of installing a new 
signalised crossing are very location specific as many factors are at play including the 
scope of the civils works required (i.e., whether an existing junction is being upgraded 
or constructed from scratch), availability of ducting for services, traffic management 
costs etc. For example, last year the City Council’s Area Engineers delivered 4 work 
packages which included the construction or upgrade of 18 signalised junctions and/or 
standalone pedestrian crossings. The tender costs for these was in the order of €3.5 
million. Most of the standalone pedestrian crossings installed are in response to 
requests from elected representatives.   
 
Regarding the issue of energy costs – for all new junctions with modern controllers and 
LED signal heads the energy costs are negligible in the context of the increased safety 
provided to all road users but in particular pedestrians where new signalised pedestrian 
crossing facilities are provided. We have requested an estimate of typical energy costs 
for some junction types and will revert to you directly when this information becomes 
available.  
 
Regarding the congestion referred to at the Hill Street/Parnell Street junction, the 
operation of the junction was reviewed shortly after it opened and changes were made 
to alleviate some of the resulting delays here. It is our experience that there are 
sometimes delays immediately after a new junction is commissioned as traffic in the 
area adapts to the change and as the signals are optimised. In the coming weeks we 
will conduct a follow up review to see can delays here be mitigated further.  
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER  
To ask the Chief Executive with regards to a previous question I have asked about 
needing CCTV and a park warden in Mellows park due to syringes being found and 
drug use happening. We now have knives being found. This is a danger to the 
residents who use the park especially children who play in the park. I am asking again 
if we could have CCTV and a park warden as to limit this happening 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In general, Parks Services do not install CCTV in our Parks, we do not have the 
resources or infrastructure in place to monitor or maintain such systems.  Park services 
do not have park wardens on duty at any small local parks.  A thorough inspection of 
the park was carried out on report of a knife found. A small number of items were 
cleared. Parks have met onsite with local Gardai on a number of occasions and 
arranged clearance of certain areas for drug taking and storage and will continue to 
assist the Gardai where possible. 
 
Q.82 
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for all correspondence between the Building Control 
Authority and Glenveagh in relation to the Oscar Traynor Woods housing 
development, and all correspondence between Glenveagh and the Housing Section 
of Dublin City Council during the period February 2024 to January 2025 with respect 
to the development of Oscar Traynor Woods 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

DCC Housing Development have received a FOI request in relation to a similar 
question outlined above. Housing Development are currently engaging with the 
Freedom of Information section to determine what information should be released.  
 
Building Control have previously noted they have a statutory regulatory and 
enforcement role under the provisions of the Building Control Acts, and it was not 
proposed to comment in any further specific detail as the compliance issues remain 
under active consideration. This is an on-going process and DCC Housing 
Development need to ensure that the process can be concluded between Building 
Control and Glenveagh in order to ensure homes will be completed in accordance with 
the Building Regulations. Housing Development will keep Councillor’s updated as and 
when information can be shared to bring this development in line with Building Control 
requirements.   
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the number and location of public 
toilets currently open in Dublin City Council's administrative area and the number and 
location of all currently closed public toilets that were once operational in the city 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services have 3 public toilets within their remit locations of 
which are, Bull Island, Sandymount and St Stephens Green 
The Parks Service has been installing public toilets in association with tearooms in 
public parks where there is a significant footfall. We now have eight parks where public 
toilets are available and we will be opening three more locations in 2025. The parks in 
question are as follows: 
Red Stables, St Annes Park. Raheny/Clontarf. 
Herbert Park, Ballsbridge. 
St Patricks Park, The Liberties. 
Harolds Cross Park. 
Albert College Park, Glasnevin. 
Griffith Park, Drumcondra 
Bridgefoot Street Park, the Liberties. 
Dollymount Beach off Causeway Road (two eco toilets) 
Johnstown Park, Finglas (new 2025) 
Palmerston Park, Rathgar (new 2025) 
Merrion Square Park. (new 2025) 
 
We are also providing additional toilets in St. Anne’s Park at the Red Stables which we 
anticipate will be completed by late spring/early summer 2025. The toilets in St. Anne’s 
will include a ‘changing places’ facility the first public one in the City. 
The toilet on the North Bull Wall on North Bull Island is managed by Waste 
Management Services under a long standing contract with J C Decaux. This contract 
will end in late 2025 and the Parks Service has committed itself to procuring 
replacement toilets for the existing unit. We are envisaging three or four units where 
there is only one at present and these new toilets will be managed by the Parks Service 
in the future. The procurement for these will commence shortly. 
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the status of the former Credit Union 
building on Blunden Drive, Dublin 13 and requesting serious consideration be given to 
the proposal that Ayrfield United become the new anchor tenants of the building 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council have been in regular contact with representatives from Ayrfield 
United and are in receipt of a submission made by the Club in relation to their proposals 
for the occupancy of the CU building. 
It is incumbent upon DCC to consider all options for the future use of this premises and 
in the context of the various demands of the area.  The Club’s submission is being 
considered as part of these options. 
 
Q.85 
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the number of complaints received by Animal 
Welfare in relation to horses in Dublin in the years 2022, 2023 and 2024, the number 
of times Animal Welfare have seized horses in that time period, the location of the 
horse seizures and the total cost incurred in each of those years 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
It is not possible to accurately assess the number of complaints regarding horses using 
the existing IT. Calls often reflect issues relating to both horses and dogs or even other 
animals. The Animal Welfare Unit are actively examining the market for a solution to 
gather information to provide more granular reporting. A new system should be 
available in late 2025.  
 
 
Seizures 2022- 41 Horses Seized  
 
1. R139, Dublin 17 
2. Ballyfermot, Dublin 10 
3. R139, Dublin 17 
4. R139, Dublin 17 
5. Crumlin, Dublin 12 
6. Saint Margarets, Ballymun, Dublin 9 
7. Ballyfermot, Dublin 10 
8. Darndale Park, Dublin 17 
9. Ballyfermot,Dublin 10 
10. Ballyfermot,  Dublin 10 
11. Kilshane Drive, Finglas , Dublin 11 
12. Cherry Orchard, Park West Avenue, Dublin 10 
13. Cherry Orchard, Park West Avenue, Dublin 10 
14. Cherry Orchard, Park West Avenue, Dublin 10 
15. Cherry Orchard, Park West Avenue, Dublin 10 
16. Cherry Orchard, Park West Avenue, Dublin 10 
17. Barry’s Park, Finglas , Dublin 11 
18. Ballygall Road, Finglas , Dublin 11 
19. Ballygall Road, Finglas , Dublin 11 
20. Tyrconnell Road, Inchicore , Dublin 8 
21. Tyrconnell Road, Inchicore , Dublin 8 
22. Ratoath road, Finglas Dublin 11 
23. Ratoath road, Finglas , Dublin 11 
24. Kylemore Way/ Jamestown, Dublin 8 
25. Labra Park, Kylemore , Dublin 10 
26. Labra Park, Kylemore , Dublin 10 
27. Labra Park// Bluebell canal, Dublin 10 
28. Labra Park// Bluebell canal, Dublin 10 
29. Ratoath Road, Finglas , Dublin 11 
30. Ratoath Road, Finglas , Dublin 11 
31. Ratoath Road,Finglas , Dublin 11 

32. Ratoath road, Finglas , Dublin 11 
33. California Hills, Ballyfermot , Dublin 10 
34. California Hills, Ballyfermot , Dublin 10 
35. California Hills, Ballyfermot , Dublin 10 
36. Cloverhill, Ballyfermot, Dublin 10 
37. Cloverhill, Ballyfermot , Dublin 10 
38. Cloverhill, Ballyfermot, Dublin 10 
39. Farnham Drive, Finglas,Dublin 11 
40. Labre Park, Dublin 10 
41. Labre Park, Dublin 10 
 
Seizures 2023- 38 Horses Seized 
 
1. Crumlin, Dublin 12 
2. Walkinstown Ave, Dublin 12 
3. Kilshane Drive, Finglas , Dublin 11 
4. Canal, Bluebell, Dublin 12 
5. Canal, Bluebell,Dublin 12 
6. Killeen Hall Apts, Cherry orchard , Dublin 10 
7. Glin Road, Coolock, Dublin 17 
8. Kilmore Flats, Coolock, Dublin 5 
9. Darndale Park, Dublin 17 
10. Darndale Park, Dublin 17 
11. Darndale Park, Dublin 17 
12. Darndale Park, Dublin 17 
13. Darndale Park, Dublin 17 
14. James O’Connor Road Inchicore , Dublin 8 
15. James O’Connor Road Inchicore , Dublin 8 
16. James O’Connor Road Inchicore , Dublin 8 
17. James O’Connor Road Inchicore , Dublin 8 
18. James O’Connor Road Inchicore , Dublin 8 
19. Play Ground Cherry Orhcard, Dublin 10 
20. Virgina Ave, Finglas, Dublin 11 
21. Park West Ballyfermot, Dublin 10 
22. Park West Ballyfermot, Dublin 10 
23. Park West Ballyfermot, Dublin 10 
24. Belcamp Green , Dublin 17 
25. Bow Lane stables, Kilmainham , Dublin 8 
26. Bow Lane stables , Kilmainham , Dublin 8 
27. Bow Lane stables, Kilmainham , Dublin 8 
28. Ballyfermot Parade, Dublin 10 
29. Hampton Court, Finglas , Dublin 11 
30. Belcamp Crescent, Dublin 17 
31. Belcamp Crescent, Dublin 17 
32. Belcamp Crescent, Dublin 17 
33. Rathoath Rd, Cabra, Dublin 7 
34. Ballymun Road, Ballymun , Dublin 9 
35. Cardiff Castle Road, Finglas, Dublin 11 
36. California Hills, Ballyfermot , Dublin 10 
37. California Hills, Ballyfermot , Dublin 10 
38. Clogher Road, Crumlin , Dublin 12 
 
Seizures 2024- 64 Horses Seized 
 
1. Bernard Curtis Flats, Bluebell , Dublin 12 

2. Bernard Curtis Flats, Bluebell, Dublin 12 
3. Belcamp Grove, Dublin 17 
4. Sillogue Ballymun , Dublin 9 
5. Summerhill parade, Dublin 1  
6. Belcamp Crescent, Dublin 17 
7. Turvey Park, Kilmainham Dublin 8 
8. Darndale Park, Dublin 17 
9. Darndale Park, Dublin 17 
10. Ballymun, Dublin 9 
11. Tulip Court, Darndale, Dublin 17 
12. Tulip Court,  Darndale, Dublin 17 
13. Tulip Court,  Darndale , Dublin 17 
14. Smithfield horse fair protest, Dublin 7 
15. Smithfield horse fair protest, Dublin 7 
16. Drumalee, North Circular road, Dublin 7 
17. Dolphin House, Saint James, Dublin 8 
18. Dolphin House, Saint James, Dublin 8 
19. Saint Margaret’s, Ballymun, Dublin 9 
20. Saint Margaret’s, Ballymun. Dublin 9 
21. Saint Margaret’s, Ballymun, Dublin 9 
22. Saint Margaret’s, Ballymun , Dublin 9 
23. Saint Margaret’s, Ballymun , Dublin 9 
24. Marigold, Darndale, Dublin 17 
25. Marigold, Darndale, Dublin 17 
26. Marigold, Darndale, Dublin 17 
27. Marigold, Darndale, Dublin 17 
28. Northwood Ballymun, Dublin 9 
29. Northwood Ballymun, Dublin 9 
30. Smithfield horse fair protest, Dublin 7 
31. Le Fanu Park Ballyfermot, Dublin 10 
32. Waste ground beside Parkwest train station, Ballyfermot , Dublin 10 
33. Waste ground beside Parkwest train station, Ballyfermot ,Dublin 10 
34. Molynuex Lane Liberties Dublin 8 
35. Edenmore ave. Dublin 5 
36. Bow Lane Stables , Kilmainham Dublin 8 
37. Bow Lane Stables Kilmainham Dublin 8 
38. Bow Lane Stables Kilmainham Dublin 8 
39. Stables on Concolbert Road , Kilmainham ,Dublin 8 
40. Stables on Concolbert Road, Kilmainham , Dublin 8 
41. Stables on Concolbert Road, Kilmainham , Dublin 8 
42. Stables on Concolbert Road, Kilmainham , Dublin 8 
43. James street , Kilmainham Dublin 8 
44. Store Street, Dublin 1 
45. Guinness StoreHouse (Market street) Dublin 8 
46. Bluebell , Dublin 12 
47. Ballyfermot , Dublin 10 
48. Balcurris Park, Ballymun , Dublin 9 
49. Bernard Curtis Flats , Bluebell , Dublin 12 
50. Bernard Curtis Flats, Bluebell Dublin 12 
51. Ballymun , Dublin 9 
52. Guinness Store (Market street) Dublin 8 
53. Meakstown equestrian centre , Dublin 11 
54. Meakstown equestrian centre, Dublin 11 
55. Meakstown equestrian centre, Dublin 11 
56. Meakstown equestrian centre, Dublin 11 

57. Meakstown equestrian centre, Dublin 11 
58. Meakstown equestrian centre, Dublin 11 
59. Meakstown equestrian centre, Dublin 11 
60. Meakstown equestrian centre, Dublin 11 
61. Meakstown equestrian centre, Dublin 11 
62. Meakstown equestrian centre, Dublin 11 
63. Meakstown equestrian centre, Dublin 11 
64. Edenmore , Dublin 5 
 
Total cost incurred in each of those years: 
 
The amounts stated below are estimated based on the budget for each year. 
Expenditure for the Animal Welfare & Control Services Unit are split equally between 
the Control of Horses and the Control of Dogs. Where possible exact figures are used 
where the expense can be accurately assigned to the control of horses but in some 
cases the figures may not fully reflect the effort assigned to horse or dog warden 
activities.  For example vehicles, IT and Training are allocated equally.  
 
 
 
➢ 2022= €420,378 
➢ 2023= €570,149 
➢ 2024= €582,175 
 
Q.86 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN  
To ask the Chief Executive can EV points be provided at (Details Supplied?) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s strategy is to support the installation of Fast Charging EV Hubs. 
There are currently public EV chargers close to Homefarm Road, behind the DCU 
Institute of Education near St. Patrick’s GAA Pitch and in the LIDL carpark in 
Drumcondra and at Bon Secours Hospital, Glasnevin. Both the chargers in the DCU 
Campus and at Bon Secours are fast chargers. 
 
DCC will review additional locations for suitability assessment for subsequent phases 
of the EV charging project. 
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise when building inspectors will be next calling to 
the Oscar Traynor development 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Among the Glenveagh team who design, inspect and certify works in accordance with 
Building Regulations are the Assigned Certifier, Project Architects, Structural 
Engineers, Fire Safety Consultants, Access Consultants and other specialist technical 
advisors as required.  
Glenveagh have identified improvements to their structure and are proposing a full-
time site Architect to the site, they will also have a Part time engineer 2-3 days per 
week.  
Separately, Dublin City Council have a Technical Due Diligence Team made up of 
technical experts in the area of building construction for the purposes of monitoring 
works and ensuring the developments’ compliance with building regulation standards 
and quality generally. This team includes Clerk of Works, Architects and Engineers. 

These inspectors have been engaged in daily inspection of construction works since 
the project commenced and continue to have a daily presence on-site.  
Building Control will continue to carry out unannounced inspections to the site. It is not 
possible to share these dates in advance.  
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that the local area office have a meeting with 
(Details Supplied).  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Office will be arranging a meeting with (details supplied) and other clubs 
to discuss progressing the proposed All Weather pitch on Glin Road in the coming 
weeks. 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on (Details Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The 2022-2028 City Development Plan includes Table 2-13, which identifies three 
priority areas for local plans, and Table 2-14, which lists 15 proposed LAPs/VIPs, 
including Donnybrook. Work is currently underway on the three plans in Table 2-13, in 
accordance with their prioritization in the Development Plan. 
The Planning SPC will review the prioritization of the other 15 LAPs based on the 
criteria specified on page 76 of the Development Plan. At this stage, it is premature to 
predict the outcome regarding which LAPs from this list will be selected to progress. 
In the interim, the Development Plan provides a robust policy framework to manage 
the development of public and private land in Santry. 
 
Q.90 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
 I have asked for the past few years that serious action be taken to stop the following 
(Details Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement Section have requested that DSPS continue to patrol this area 
and enforce all illegal parking in this area. 
Over the last two months, the area has been inspected 18 times and 9 Fixed Penalty 
Notices were issued. DSPS will continue to patrol the area. 
The Parking Enforcement Officer is willing to attend a meeting if arranged to discuss 
the issues on site. 
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive that the Housing Manager please look into the following 
(Details Supplied) 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing List with an application date of 19/08/2016, the 
applicant holds the following position on this list; 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
J 
3 
103 
 
Housing Allocations have contacted the Ballyfermot Area Office and requested that 
the Project Estate Officer make contact with Ms. Kearney to discuss her housing file 

and options available to her. With regard to Ms. Kearney having suicidal thoughts, I 
would strongly advise her to seek help from a medical professional in this regard.  
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household.  
It is noted from the applicant’s file that she has two areas of choice with South Dublin 
County Council through a crossover, she can also make an application for Choice 
Based Lettings suited to her need through South Dublin County Council.  
 
Q.92 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive that the broken footpath outside no 23 Colepark Road 
Ballyfermot Dublin 10 be repaired as a matter of urgency, the current footpath surface 
has lifted due to the growth of the tree root structure and now poses a very serious 
accident risk 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Thank you for your correspondence, in response to your query Road 
 
Maintenance visited this location and logged this defect to our works list for repair. 
 
This tree trip will be repaired when we have a crew available in the area. 
 
Q.93 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive that DCC look into the following housing allocation (Details 
Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing List with an application date of 01/08/2023, the 
applicant holds the following position on this list; 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
J 
2 
390 
K 
2 
494 
 
I note from the applicant’s file that she has submitted an application in respect of a 
medical priority, which will be reviewed, upon a decision being made the applicant will 
be informed of the outcome.  
Based on the applicant’s positions, it may be some time before they are reached for 
an offer of housing. Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list 
and currently there are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be 
considered as suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the 
prospect of an offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a 
determining factor in the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting 
list.  
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household.  

 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive will the environmental study on MSP be completed by the 
end of March 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Council is coordinating with the other Dublin local authorities on this matter to 
carry out an in-depth study of the information available on Brent geese feeding 
grounds. This study and survey work will not be completed until 2026 at which time a 
report will be published on the findings.    
 
Q.95 
COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive how many social housing units if any will be built on the old 
Smurfit Printing site in Glasnevin 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Housing Department have agreed to acquire 20 apartments at Daneswell Place, 
Botanic Road, Glasnevin, Dublin 9 as Part V compliance for ABP-315062-22. The 
breakdown is as follows: 
 
• 
10no. 1 bed 
• 
9no. 2 bed 
• 
1no. 3 bed 
 
An Approved Housing Body is in discussion with the Developer regarding acquiring 
additional units in the scheme, no final agreement on this acquisition has been 
reached.  
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive can extra Litter Wardens be immediately introduced into 
the North Inner City especially around the Dorset Street Area 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Council are in the process of recruiting additional litter wardens. These 
wardens will be in place this year, with Dorset Street being part of their area of 
responsibility. 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive can Traffic Calming Measures be commenced immediately 
on Kinvara Road and Kinvara Drive? Speeding is a huge concern for residents and 
their young children 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer will request that a speed survey will be carried out on Kinvara Road 
to assess the level of speed and the total number of vehicles using these roads. The 
results of the speed survey will determine how the Transport Advisory Group will 
proceed with reference to the above request. 
Recently a speed survey was conducted on Kinvara Drive. The resultant 85% 
percentile speed was 23 kph and does not indicate the presence of speeding motorists 
which indicates that motorists are complying with the speed limit. Traffic volumes are 
low and do not meet the warrant for traffic calming. 
 
The criteria used to determine the need for traffic calming measures are as follows: 
• The road should have a straight run of approximately 200 metres.  

• The 85th percentile speed (speed exceeded by 15% of vehicles) should exceed the 
speed limit of the road.  
• Traffic volumes should exceed 60 vehicles per hour. 
 
Q.98 
COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he could confirm if the large block of grass verge beside 
(Details Supplied) is on a contractor cutting list as it is not being maintained 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The larger sections of grass verge here are included on our landscape maintenance 
contract for cutting, this area will be highlighted with our contractor for cutting as soon 
as grass cutting season commences.  
 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the roll out and selection of the 
neighbourhood traffic schemes in Finglas Ballymun 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following some recent reassignments within Dublin City Council’s Traffic & 
Transportation section, the Traffic Advisory Group (TAG) Area Engineers will assess 
possible traffic measures in areas to help reduce speeds and rat running. The TAG 
section will work with colleagues in other units within DCC Traffic, along with wider 
stakeholders, to implement these improvement measures. 
 
Q.100 COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he has considered employing Community Wardens 
similar to Cork City Council who will have dual role for helping to manage parking 
enforcement, litter and dog fouling and if a costing has been done for same 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Council directly employs litter wardens who deal with dog fouling and litter. 
Further Litter wardens are currently being recruited. The Council’s parking 
enforcement service is carried out, under contract, by Dublin Street Parking Services. 
It is felt that the employment of experts in each area of responsibility provides the best 
results in terms of enforcement. 
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a break down in tabular form of the staff assigned 
to the Home Grants Section and Vacant Homes (including Croi Conaithe Vacant 
Grants) Section for the past 5 years and if he feels that the sections are sufficiently 
staffed 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Vacant Property Unit administers 3 number Department of Housing Local 
Government and Heritage Initiatives: 
These schemes are: 
 
Repair and Lease Scheme (2017). 
Buy and Renew Scheme (2018). 
Croi Conaithe Scheme (November 2023. 
 
The Housing Department has allocated the following administrative and technical 
resources to these schemes: 

Vacant 
Property Unit. 
Year 
2025
. 
Year 
2024
. 
Year 
2023
. 
Year 
2022
. 
Year 
2021
. 
Repair and 
Lease. 
1.5 
1.5 
1 
1.5 
1.5 
Buy and 
Renew. 
1.5 
1.5 
1.5 
1.5 
1.5 
Croi Conaithe 
(Vacant 
property 
Refurbishmen
t Grant) 
4 
3 
2. 
0. 
0. 
 
There have been some vacancies for a variety of reasons, but the team is now working 
at its full complement of staff which should be sufficient to cover the work-load required.  
 
Q.102  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to my question number 34 Area Committee July 
2023 in relation to dwelling as per (Details Supplied) to say when necessary repairs 
will be carried out as agreed were necessary by inspector on two previous occasions, 
namely 
(a)   Replacement windows 
(b)   Replacement front door 
 
And explain the reason for the delay to date 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance can confirm that this dwelling has been surveyed and deemed 
eligible for inclusion on the EERP (Energy Efficiency Retrofit Programme).  The 
dwelling is due to be upgraded during 2025 with wall insulation and new windows / 
doors.  Continued roll out of the EERP is dependent on external government funding. 
A pre-works BER is required in order to submit a property for funding approval to the 
Department under the EERP.  The pre-works BER was issued on 31/07/2024, 
unfortunately, this was too late in the year to be included on the works programme for 
2024. 
 
 
Q.103 COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to dangerous bend at location as per (Details 
Supplied) and say if he can examine same and recommend a solution that would alert 
oncoming motorists of the hazard and make this bend safer for all users 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are two speed cushions on Mount Prospect Avenue before the bend at the 
junction with St. Gabriel’s Road, as well as a SLOW road marking near No. 106. A 
supplementary SLOW road marking was recommended before No. 102 and will be 
installed in due course. 
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive refer to bollards at location as per (Details Supplied) which 
are, according to my constituent, (and the business premises outside of which the 
bollards are located) a constant cause of accidents due to their location and unobvious 
nature and what steps he can take to make these bollards more obvious to motorists 
so as to avoid continuing collisions with same 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Bollards are a necessary safety measure to prevent vehicles from intruding on the 
footpath and potentially injuring pedestrians. The bollards in place are the standard 
type used throughout the city for pedestrian safety and include a reflective collar to aid 
visibility for all road users.  
 
 
Q.105 COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive please refer to tenancy at location as per (Details 
Supplied) and say if he can provide a definitive date for long promised repair to front 
door and explain why this work has been delayed for such a long period of time 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance have called to the property on three occasions to repair/replace 
door. Contact will be made again on mobile number provided above. 
 
Q.106  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive please arrange for a yellow box to be placed outside of the 
houses on (see photo attached) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following an initial site assessment in June 2024 under service request no. 7040122 
and now following the Councillor’s request, the Traffic Advisory Group (TAG) has 
reviewed the junction of Pearse Street / Pearse Grove again. Based on this 
assessment, the Traffic Advisory Group (TAG) Area Engineer has determined that the 
location does not meet the necessary criteria for the installation of a Yellow Box. 
The criteria used to prioritise the installation of Yellow Boxes are as follows: 
1. Regular blocking of the junction, occurring daily and at least during peak 
periods. 
2. Significant traffic flows on the side road, serving a minimum of fifty houses or a 
major traffic-generating facility. 
3. Visibility of approaching vehicles at the junction is significantly impeded by 
parked vehicles or congestion. 
 
As a result, the installation of a Yellow Box at this junction is not warranted at this time. 
 
Q.107  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please arrange for the relevant traffic measures to be 
installed at (see photo attached). There is a children's school close by, when the cars 
are leaving the estate there are cars parked, blocking the view for drivers if there are 
children oncoming 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The area engineer has assessed the Pearse Grove/Pearse Street junction and, based 
on a preliminary review, visibility at the junction appears to comply with Transport 
Infrastructure Ireland (TII) standards for roads with speeds above 30 km/h. However, 
during the assessment, vehicles were observed parking on the Double Yellow Lines 
(DYL) at the exit point of Pearse Grove. The Parking Enforcement Unit will be notified, 
and enforcement patrols will be arranged for the area. 
 
Q.108  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 

To ask the Chief Executive to please arrange for much needed works to be done to 
the stairwell of (Details Supplied). The stairwell is collapsing and there is scaffolding 
in place since July with no works being taken to improve it 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council Housing Maintenance have engaged a contractor to carry out 
repair works to the stairwell and the works are expected to commence before the end 
of this month. 
 
Q.109  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please provide a report on the listed air B&B’s in the 
region of Dublin Bay South 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Since the introduction of the short term letting legislation in 2019, Dublin City Council 
have received approximately 275 Form 15 submissions for the South East Area to 
avail of the exemptions from the requirement for planning permission.  
The Planning Enforcement Section have investigated a total of 818 properties in the 
South East Area, regarding alleged short term letting use and following enforcement 
action, 640 cases have been resolved.  
There are approximately 178 properties currently under active investigation in the 
South East Area.  
 
Q.110  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive could the recently removed bin in Bushy Park be 
reinstated? I have reports that a large solar belly bin was removed recently. It is 
really important that there is adequate bin provision to support all park users in 
particular dog owners. Would it be possible to audit the bins in Bushy Park to ensure 
that requirements of park users are being met 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This bin was recently burnt out and had to be removed due to the damage caused to 
it.  It is planned to replace this bin.   
We have had no issues raised with us, other than this now, on the number & location 
of bins in Bushy Park. 
 
Q.111  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive work on a dedicated emergency contact number for 
Councillors on weekends, as a matter of urgency. It’s needed more than ever as we 
saw with the widespread water and gas outages and particularly, in the Ballybough & 
North Strand areas. There was a lack of communication, updates and information from 
all the parties involved and there was a subsequent scramble to contact the respective 
authorities 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Calls can be taken on the out-of-hours emergency telephone number for Dublin City 
Council at: 01 679 6186 
 
Q.112  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive what actions are being taking to improve the public realm 
on Manor Place and surrounding streets. Residents and small business owners have 
consistently raised with me the infrequency of street cleaning, the poor state of the 
footpaths and constant illegal dumping on particular streets 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Waste Management Services regularly clean Manor Place and surrounding area and 
remove illegal dumping from there on a regular basis. We will certainly monitor this 
cleaning to see if some improvements can be made. A litter warden also includes this 
are as part of his regular patrol. 
Letters have been issued to all households on Manor Place and Norseman Place to 
establish what arrangements are in place to dispose of their waste. Most households 
have responded. Litter wardens will be calling out to any households that have not 
responded. A request has been sent to Waste Management to carry out Regular Street 
sweeping on Manor Place. Sections of the footpath on Harold Road are being replaced 
at present. Sustainable Urban Drainage System (SUDS) tree planting and greening 
has been installed on Harold Road and a number of the adjoining streets. 
 
Q.113  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive to address the concern regarding the ongoing issue of 
illegal parking on Sherrard Court, Portland Place, Dublin 1. The court has become an 
unofficial parking area for local construction workers, hospital staff and rail users from 
Drumcondra train station. This situation is causing considerable stress for local 
residents. The parked vehicles are severely obstructing access, and in the event of an 
emergency, it is highly concerning that emergency vehicles would be unable to reach 
the area due to the blocked roads. This situation poses a significant safety risk and is 
unsustainable for the community. Residents request that double yellow lines be 
installed along Sherrard Court at the earliest possible opportunity to alleviate this 
problem and ensure that emergency access is maintained for the safety of all residents 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parking Enforcement Section will request that DSPS patrol the area and enforce 
all illegal parking in the area. 
The Double Yellow lines were recommended in a Service Request 7031941.  
“Recommended - to preserve ingress and egress from Sherrard Court, the Area 
Engineer recommends 15.5m double yellow lines on east side of Sherrard Court 
extending from junction with Portland Place to Lamp Stand No. 1. “ 
 
Q.114  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON  
To ask the Chief Executive what DCC Policy is on Yellow Warning Signs for the green 
waste, which seem mainly to be in the Donaghmede area, they have led to reduced 
cleaning of our roads by local people and can we have the policy of bag collection and 
usage of Blue Bags clarified? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Yellow warning signs came into place at the request of Local Residents Groups 
to ask members of the public to stop illegally dumping household and Green waste on 
their local green spaces and outside their homes on a daily basis. 
The Local Public Domain Team helped out with this request by having signs fabricated 
and consulting with Residents Groups as to where these signs should be located. 
The installation of these signs at agreed locations has significantly reduced the volume 
of green waste disposed of illegally throughout the area.  
There is no green waste door to door bag collection carried out by Dublin City Council 
as this is done by private Bin contractors which collect residents’ Brown bins. 
“Blue bags” are no longer distributed to individuals or Groups by the Area Office as the 
only bags given out by the Area Office are to registered Community groups and these 
are clearly marked as Community Clean up bags to be collected by arrangement at 
designated locations.  
It should be noted that the Blue bags became widely abused and are still stockpiled 
today by some individuals and groups which leads to bags been dumped around the 
area with all types of waste involved. 

The Local Environmental Liaison Officer has worked tirelessly in the area setting up 
Compost workshops to educate Groups how to compost Green waste and these have 
been greatly attended and welcomed by all involved. 
 
Q.115  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON 
To ask the Chief Executive to request pathway upgrade on (Details Supplied) as a 
full resurfacing of woks required locally 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The annual works program for this year has not been finalised yet, but footpath 
improvements on Grangemore Grove will be considered. The Confirm reference 
number for this inquiry is 11172802. 
 
Q.116  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON 
To ask the Chief Executive to request three new Lights on Pathway, (Details 
Supplied) as it is extremely dark in the area 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC Parks and Public Lighting have been in contact with Councillor Daryl Barron 
about the paths leading up to the church and attach a map showing the lights that are 
currently being maintained by DCC. From the attached map the globe light(s) on the 
path are not shown and consequently are not being maintained by DCC. DCC is of the 
view that these are supplied from the church. If permission from the church is obtained 
DCC can check the source of supply to the globe lights. 
 
Q.117 COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON  
To ask the Chief Executive to request Pathway upgrade at the (Details Supplied) as 
it has got extremely dangerous to park users and locals kids and young adults using 
the facility 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow with a 
view to programming any works deemed necessary to ensure the safety of users of 
the facility. 
 
Q.118  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive what engagement the Council has had with Revenue in 
relation to enforcement of bye-laws requiring licences for amusement halls and 
casinos in the Dublin City Council area 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
I am not aware of any recent engagement between the Dublin City Council and the 
Revenue Commissioners in relation to enforcement of licences for amusement halls 
and casinos in the Dublin City Council Area. To the best of my knowledge the 
Compliance Procedures for Gaming and Amusement Licences comes under the 
control of the Revenue Commissioners. Attached is a detailed “amusement and 
gaming licence compliance procedures manual” recently produced by the Revenue 
Commissioners in December 2024. Should the Revenue Commissioners wish to 
discuss any relevant part of this document with the City Council we would be happy to 
meet them should such a request be made. 
 
 
Q.119  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 

To ask the Chief Executive what progress there has been on the regeneration of the 
premises previously occupied by D-Light studios and what is the timeline for works on 
this building 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has had significant discussions with the occupants in respect of 
the remedial works and regularisation of the occupation of the building. There is no 
further update at this time.  
 
Q.120  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive for an overview of the work taken place to develop an 
integration strategy since 2020 and the resources dedicated to the work of integration 
over the past 5 years 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The following staff resources have been assigned to support and expand the 
integration system at local level in the City Council: 
 
• 
Integration Co-Ordinator x 1 
• 
Integration Support Worker x 2 
• 
Sports Inclusion and Integration Officer x 1 
 
 
In addition an Intercultural Development Coordinator has been assigned to the North 
East Inner City to produce a work plan to implement the Government’s Migrant 
Integration Strategy in the area. 
 
Q.121  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive For a breakdown of current vacancies in the housing offices 
across the various area offices of the Council 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Council is currently carrying out a comprehensive review of the existing 
workforce as part of the Strategic Workforce Plan process.  This will enable the Council 
to proactively manage our current and future workforce to support the delivery of the 
business strategy, in line with our Corporate Plan, ensuring we reflect the changing 
needs of the organisation and the evolving environment within which we operate. 
When this process has been completed and the plan has been finalised, the resource 
requirement for each Department will be determined for the period of the 5 year 
Strategic Workforce Plan. 
 
Q.122  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to indicate when a review into the Busking Bye Laws is set 
to take place and the timeframe for the adoption of updated bye laws in this area; and 
if he will make a statement on the matter 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The review of the Casual Trading Bye Laws is currently in progress by the City Co-
ordination Office Licencing Section and the DCC Law Department and they are due to 
be presented in the April SPC. It is intended to review the Street Performers Bye Laws 
which Buskers fall under after this.   
 
Q.123  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 

To ask the Chief Executive whether the City Council owns (Details Supplied) and if 
so, what the lease or licence arrangements are with the current proprietors of the 
building; and if he will make a statement on the matter 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Kent Playgroup was granted a 10-year lease of 28 Stoneybatter and 30 Arbour 
Place on 21st September, 2017. 
 
This lease was subject to a Section 183 Disposal. 
 
Q.124  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a comprehensive report into each of the issues 
below raised with me by residents and householders in (Details Supplied); and if he 
will make a statement on the matter. 
 
1.      A public health issue during the preceding Christmas involved a 6-inch overflow of 
raw sewage in the underground carpark. It remained unresolved for nearly a week. 
Consequently, it caused extensive damage to residents' property in the storage facility 
area (i.e. (the resident storage cages) and left a pungent smell of sewage. Previously, 
there were ongoing water leaks in the car [park area for months, as was previously 
reported. 
2.      The car-park gate has been broken for four months now. This has led to the 
criminal damage of several cars, three in total just today. Residents have serious safety 
concerns about accessing the carpark at night—an increase of youths from outside 
the complex engaging in antisocial behaviours. Consequently, Homeless drug addicts, 
rough sleepers, defecations and urination in the apartment complex halls have become 
a common occurrence. The issues have been reported many times to the Parnell 
Street office. 
3.      The electronic door at the 46-55 apartment block has been broken and open to 
the elements since last year.  
4.      The issue with the electronic entrance gates has not been resolved. Evidently, the 
gates are not fit for purpose; a design flaw in their mechanisms affects their 
functionality, which causes them to malfunction frequently. Resulting in external 
instances of anti-social behaviour 
5.      There is an ongoing issue with the fire alarm going off constantly. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance responded to a report of a sewage overflow in the basement car 
park of Dominick Hall on Saturday 28th December 2024.  The choke car team and 
senior depot personnel attended that morning and worked on the issue until resolved 
that afternoon.  The issue on that occasion was mechanical failure.  Housing 
Maintenance returned on Monday 30th December and power washed the affected 
areas of the carpark. 
Any tenant whose personal property was damaged as a result of the incident may 
submit a claim in this regard.  Tenants can contact Dublin City Council’s Law 
Department at claims@dublincity.ie directly to request a claim form.  All claims will be 
processed through the normal channels. 
Housing Maintenance are working with City Architects Division regarding a resolution 
to the ongoing issue with electronic entrance gates and doors at the development. 
In relation to the vehicular gate to the rear of the development, repair is in hand via an 
external contractor who have been requested to prioritise it to prevent anti-social 
behaviour. 
Fire alarms are checked on a quarterly basis and any faults found are rectified, 
additionally any issues logged through maintenance@dublincity.ie re the fire alarm 

would be acted on immediately by Electrical Services.  A request has been logged for 
a non-routine assessment of the fire alarm system at Dominick Hall. 
 
Q.125  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the conversion of residential properties into 
short term lettings across Dublin City (Air BnB etc.). The report should specifically 
include the number of applications for change of use planning permission (for 
residences that are not “principal primary residences” and for those renting their 
principal private residence for more than the 90 day per year threshold. It should also 
include a breakdown of the number of “Form 15” notifications received in relation to 
short term lets as required by the Planning and Development Act (as amended) and 
other legislation, since the 1st July 2019. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An application for planning for the change of use of a property to short term letting is 
required when the property to be let, falls within property type (i) or (ii) below: 
i. 
Not a principal primary residence  
ii. 
Principal private residences and rented for more than the 90 day per year 
threshold. 
As a planning application for change of use of a property to short term letting does not 
differentiate between the two types, the Planning Department is unable to report using 
this criteria. 
However, a report shall be generated to determine since 1st July 2019, the number of 
applications for change of use planning permission to short term letting 
accommodation, encompassing both types of properties.   The report when available 
shall issue directly to Councillor Reddy within 2 weeks. 
 
Q.126  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive for Housing and Community Services to provide a 
detailed update on delivery timelines for Traveller Specific Accommodation in the 
North West Area (namely, works at Avilla Park, St Margarets Park, St Marys’, St 
Josephs and on the Energy Retrofit programme for group schemes) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Traveller Accommodation Unit has set out the programme of works in the Traveller 
Accommodation Programme 2025-2029. Below is estimated delivery timelines for 
works in respect of DCC traveller specific accommodation in the North West Area: 
 
Avila Park 
• 
1 x medical extension due to commence in February 2025 with a completion 
date of Q3 2025. 
• 
3 x new house builds – Part 8 planning in place.  Work is expected to 
commence in Q4 2025 with a completion date of Q4 2026. 
 
St Margaret’s 
• 
1 new bay – works will commence March 2025 with a completion date of Q2 
2025. 
• 
Drainage remedial works will commence March 2025 with a completion date of 
Q2 2025. 
• 
Negotiations and discussions due to re-commence in Q2 2025 for the 
redevelopment of the site. 
 
St Mary’s 

• 
1 x medical extension completion date February 2025. 
• 
1 x complete refurbishment of unit due to commence March 2025 completion 
date of Q3 2025. 
• 
2 x new bays to be installed due to commence March 2025 completion date of 
Q4 2025 
 
St Joseph’s 
• 
Drainage, ground works and connection to trailers/caravans (as required) 
currently in progress with a completion date of end of February 2025. 
• 
1 bay to be fully resurfaced commencing Q1 2025 completion date of Q2 2025 
• 
6 bays require minor resurfacing works commencing Q1 2025 completion date 
of Q2 2025. 
 
Retro Fit Programme 
DCC will commence the tender process for an energy retro fit programme in Q2 2025.  
The energy retro-fit programme will include: external wall insulation, new windows and 
doors, new heating systems 
 
In addition to the above DCC TAU will continue to carry out all maintenance works that 
is reported and is under DCC’s remit in a timely manner. 
 
Q.127  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive what the average wait time is for a decision on the 
Exceptional Social Grounds and Exceptional Medical Grounds Schemes at present. 
There are several cases that I am aware of where applicants have waited in excess of 
20 weeks. What measures have been taken to address any staffing challenges that 
may exist in the relevant sections? What other measures have been 
considered/implemented to address backlogs 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We are currently experiencing a high volume of applications to the Exceptional Social 
Grounds (ESG) scheme. While we endeavour to respond to applicants to the 
Exceptional Social Grounds (ESG) scheme as quickly as possible, response times are 
impacted by the volume of applications and the resources available. In addition to this 
many applications require us to request further reports and information which adds to 
the time it may take to process an application in some cases. We have introduced a 
more streamlined administrative system for ESG application including a new 
application form and information sheet aimed at increasing efficiencies in the 
application process. Applications are processed in order of date received and where a 
priority is recommended it is backdated to the date the ESG application was received 
by the Social Work Section. 
 
Q.128  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive for Housing and Community Development to provide a 
breakdown of estimated social housing delivery on the Northside of the city by Area, 
up to the end of the current Council term and to ask for a breakdown of numbers on 
housing/transfer lists for the same areas, along with average wait times for allocation 
in each area for different property types 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Details of all proposed social housing delivery, regeneration, AHB development, 
turnkey, PPP development and Part V projects are available in the monthly Housing 
Supply report.  This report is broken down by local area and project status and it is 
updated on a monthly basis.   

https://councilmeetings.dublincity.ie/documents/s47355/35.%20Housing%20Supply%
20Report%20February.pdf 
 
 
Time on List
Area B   Area D   Area E  Area H   Area P   Grand Total
0 to 1 year
1069
258
491
314
37
2169
1 o 5 years
3348
769
1756
1060
167
7100
5 to 10 years
2559
488
1415
791
135
5388
over 10 years
1660
321
1240
646
157
4024
Grand Total
8636
1836
4902
2811
496
18681
Bedsize Required Area B   Area D   Area E  Area H   Area P   Grand Total
1 Bed
3870
865
2284
1797
297
9113
2 Bed
3176
629
1672
644
130
6251
3 Bed
1443
297
844
326
58
2968
4 Bed
136
39
88
40
10
313
5 Bed
11
6
14
4
1
36
Grand Total
8636
1836
4902
2811
496
18681
October 2024 COMBINED Waiting List figures by Waiting Time
October 2024 COMBINED Waiting List figures by Bedsize Req
 
 
Q.129  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive could Grosvenor Lane, Rathmines be audited to ensure 
the safe access of emergency vehicles? In particular the stretch on the lane towards 
Rathmines is compromised with inconsiderate parking. This would mean that should 
emergency vehicles need to access the pitches where a local GAA club train they 
would not be able to do so. In this audit I request that double yellow lines are 
considered to support considerate and safe parking. Many residents have been in 
touch and are very concerned about this safety issue 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following the South East Area Committee Meeting on 11th November 2024 (Q.17, 
Service Request No. 7042692), the area engineer assessed the site for the potential 
installation of double yellow lines (DYLs) and a yellow box. 
 
As a result of this assessment, it was recommended that double yellow lines be 
installed at the bend of Grosvenor Lane near No. 71, Rathmines, Dublin 6. The 
recommendation is currently progressing through the TAG process and these road 
markings will be installed in due course. 
 

 
Snapshot of the engineering report issued during the South East Area Committee 
Meeting on 11th November 2024 for Q.17 (Service Request No. 7042692) 
 
 
Q.130  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive has there been any advancement in tackling the issue of 
dog fouling? It is a health hazard and is hugely problematic in some areas. What can 
we do to support more responsible dog ownership 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services have in recent years ran a number of awareness 
campaigns to remind dog owners and dog walkers of their responsibility to immediately 
clean up after their dog and to “ Bag it and Bin It”. Free doggie bags are available at 
all council offices and libraries. Dog foul signage continues to be put up in areas 
blighted by this problem. Our Litter Prevention Officer keeps the tackling of this issue 
under constant review. 
 
Q.131  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive is there an update on the roll out of the bike bunker 
scheme? Many residents would benefit from a quick delivery of this scheme providing 
secure storage for bicycles and supporting green transport Dublin. In particular in areas 
such as Harold’s Cross where houses are terraced and with little or no outdoor space 
or opportunity for storing a bicycle 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Road Safety and Micromobility Section is currently progressing the Bike Bunker 
tender process.  
Stage one of the procurement process is complete, stage 2 began on 02.12.24 and 
will closed on 04.02.2025.  
It is hoped that this procurement process will run smoothly and the contract will be 
awarded in Q1 2025. 
 
 
 

Q.132  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider the development of Basketball pitch at Father 
Collins Park? 
Given the growing number of teenagers in the area and the lack of recreational 
amenities to keep them engaged in positive activities, the addition of a basketball pitch 
would provide a much-needed space for young people to play, socialise, and stay 
active. Investing in such facilities can also help reduce antisocial behaviour by offering 
structured, healthy alternatives. Can the council take steps to assess and deliver this 
facility for the community? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Fr. Collins Park is a relatively small park which already contains a range of sporting 
and recreation facilities including 3 full-sized and 3 juvenile pitches, 2 playgrounds, a 
skate park and an events space.  With a considerable proportion of the park also given 
over to a system of ponds and reed beds to support biodiversity there isn’t really the 
space within the park to develop a basketball court.  There are a number of basketball 
facilities in the immediate vicinity of the park including 3 semi-courts at Balgriffin Park, 
Parkside Square and Belmayne Park and a MUGA including a full-sized court at 
Churchwell Avenue. 
 
Q.133  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to kindly check with the Transport Advisory Group to 
reconsider their decision regarding the addition of speed ramps on Foxfield Road? 
While the existing ramps are located some distance away, residents have expressed 
concerns that these measures do not adequately address the speed-related safety 
issues along the 500m stretch of Foxfield Road. The majority of traffic, particularly 
construction and delivery vans, enters from the Howth Road and can quickly build up 
speed before reaching the green area. Given the feedback from residents and the 
safety risks highlighted, can the Chief Executive request that the Transport Advisory 
Group re-evaluate their decision and consider additional traffic calming measures for 
this section of the road? (Response and case reference number attached) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The entire area is currently covered by the 30 km/h Slow/Home Zone signage, Children 
Crossing Signs, and SLOW road markings indicating the lower speed limit and the 
area is a Home Zone/Slow Zone, which warns motorists they are driving in residential 
areas and to expect children. The signage are provided on the following locations: 
- 30 km/h Slow Zone signage are provided at the entrance from Howth Road and 
Killbarack Road 
- Children Crossing Sign at the entrance on Foxfield Park from Greendale Road 
- SLOW road markings near no. 32, 72, 98 and 132 Foxfield Park 
In addition, Foxfield Park is already traffic calmed with the provision of speed ramps, 
and currently contains on street parking which acts as traffic calming by way of 
increasing driver caution. The tree lined appearance of the road also creates an 
enclosed nature to area which further enhances traffic calming. 
The Transport Advisory Group (TAG) will raise your concerns with An Garda Síochána 
at the next TAG Meeting, as the Gardaí are responsible for enforcing road traffic 
legislation to ensure that drivers comply with speed limits and Rules of the Road. 
 
Q.134  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to take decisive action to hold developers accountable for 
the ongoing delays in the Taking In Charge (TIC) process for the Balgriffin and 
Clongriffin estates? Residents are repeatedly told that necessary developments and 
improvements cannot proceed because 'Dublin City Council has not yet taken the 
estate or roads in charge,' leading to significant frustration within the community. 

These delays are preventing essential upgrades and infrastructure from being 
delivered. What steps can be taken to expedite this process and ensure the 
community’s needs are addressed without further setbacks 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Discussions are ongoing with developers regarding the works that are required to take 
the above developments in charge. All services must be to a standard that would allow 
Dublin City Council to take the services in charge. 
 
Please find below the current position for developments in Belmayne/ Clongriffin: 
 
Belmayne 
 
There have been several meetings with Cairn Homes relating to the issues surrounding 
taking in charge in the Belmayne / Parkside area. 
 
Belmayne Avenue: 
A query was received from a resident of Belmayne Avenue in April 2021 regarding the 
process required for the taking in charge of Belmayne Avenue and surrounding streets. 
An application was issued to the individual however to date no request for taking in 
charge has been received.  
 
Parkside: 
A query regarding taking in charge was received from a resident of “Parkside” in March 
2023. The resident was issued with an application form. No response has been 
received to date.   
 
Clongriffin 
 
Beau Park Clongriffin:  
A request for taking in charge was received from Gannon Homes in November 2014. 
The request was forwarded to the services divisions. The services divisions responses 
outlined works that were required to be carried out prior to the area being taken in 
charge. This was forwarded to the developer in February 2015. No response has been 
received to date. 
 
Clongriffin Main Street: 
A request for taking in charge was received from Gannon Homes in January 2022. The 
request was forwarded to the services divisions. The services divisions response 
outlined works that were required to be carried out prior to the area being taken in 
charge. This was forwarded to the developer in February 2022. No response has been 
received to date. 
 
Wellfield Bridge Apartments Clongriffin: 
A request for taking in charge was received from High Garden Real Estates Limited in 
May 2022. The request was forwarded to the services divisions. The service divisions 
response outlined works that were required to be carried out prior to the area being 
taken in charge. This was forwarded to the developer in August 2022. No response 
has been received to date. 
 
Q.135  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive provide details on the new bus line 727 from Dublin Airport 
to Clongriffin? Residents are eager to know when this service will begin operating and 

if there are any updates on the timetable or plans for its rollout. This route will be a vital 
connection for the community, and clarity on its launch date would be greatly 
appreciated. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Bus Connects team has no information on the start date of this route. This route 
is not part of the NTA network redesign.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
10 February 
 
Dear Cllrs 
Please see attached drawing for illustrative purposes only regarding Report No. 43/2025. 
The hatched blue line in the drawing outlines a potential 420sqm MUGA area subject to 
detailed design and agreement of the planning authority.  
 
 
Yours sincerely 
Mick Mulhern 
______________ 
Assistant Chief Executive 
Appendix B

Appendix C           DCC V Fingal Build Delivery Timelines 
 
 
RECORD OF DIVISION AT 10TH  FEBRUARY 2025 COUNCIL MEETING  
FOR: 
 
17 
 
 
 
 
ABSTAIN: 
  
AGAINST: 
 41 
 
 
 
 
ABSENT: 
  
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
 
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
Councillor Ammar Ali 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Feljin Jose 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daryl Barron 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Leslie Kane 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Racheal Batten 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Kourtney Kenny 
 
√ 
 
 
Lord Mayor Emma Blain 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Patrick Kinsella 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Janice Boylan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Dermot Lacey 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Kevin Breen 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor John Lyons 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Christy Burke 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Aoibheann Mahon 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Claire Byrne 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Micheál MacDonncha 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Danny Byrne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ray McAdam 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Lesley Byrne 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Séamas McGrattan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Mary Callaghan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Paddy Monahan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Hazel Chu 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Carolyn Moore 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor David Coffey 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Edel Moran 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Anthony Connaghan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Darragh Moriarty 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Fiona Connelly  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Keith Connolly 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Cat O’Driscoll 
√ 
 
 
 
Deputy Lord Mayor Donna Cooney  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ciarán Ó Meachair 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ray Cunningham 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Colm O’Rourke 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Tara Deacy 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Gavin Pepper 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Hazel de Nortúin 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Cieran Perry 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daithí Doolan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Michael Pigeon 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Pat Dunne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Gayle Ralph 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daniel Ennis 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Punam Rane 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Cian Farrell  
 
 
 
 
Councillor Conor Reddy 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Alison Field  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Nial Ring 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Declan Flanagan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Aisling Silke  
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Mannix Flynn 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Supriya Singh 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Deirdre Heney 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Malachy Steenson 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Jesslyn Henry 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Catherine Stocker 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Rory Hogan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor John Stephens 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Janet Horner 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Philip Sutcliffe  
 
 
 
 
Councillor Vincent Jackson 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix C   Debate Crime Crisis 
 
RECORD OF DIVISION AT 10TH  FEBRUARY 2025 COUNCIL MEETING  
 
FOR: 
12 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTAIN: 
  
AGAINST: 46   
 
 
 
 
ABSENT: 
  
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
 
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
Councillor Ammar Ali 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Feljin Jose 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daryl Barron 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Leslie Kane 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Racheal Batten 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Kourtney Kenny 
 
√ 
 
 
Lord Mayor Emma Blain 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Patrick Kinsella 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Janice Boylan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Dermot Lacey 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Kevin Breen 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor John Lyons 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Christy Burke 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Aoibheann Mahon 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Claire Byrne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Micheál MacDonncha 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Danny Byrne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ray McAdam 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Lesley Byrne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Séamas McGrattan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Mary Callaghan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Paddy Monahan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Hazel Chu 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Carolyn Moore 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor David Coffey 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Edel Moran 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Anthony Connaghan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Darragh Moriarty 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Fiona Connelly  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Keith Connolly 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Cat O’Driscoll 
 
√ 
 
 
Deputy Lord Mayor Donna Cooney  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ciarán Ó Meachair 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ray Cunningham 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Colm O’Rourke 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Tara Deacy 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Gavin Pepper 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Hazel de Nortúin 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Cieran Perry 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daithí Doolan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Michael Pigeon 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Pat Dunne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Gayle Ralph 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daniel Ennis 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Punam Rane 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Cian Farrell  
 
 
 
 
Councillor Conor Reddy 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Alison Field  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Nial Ring 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Declan Flanagan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Aisling Silke 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Mannix Flynn 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Supriya Singh 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Deirdre Heney 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Malachy Steenson 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Jesslyn Henry 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Catherine Stocker 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Rory Hogan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor John Stephens 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Janet Horner 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Philip Sutcliffe  
 
 
 
 
Councillor Vincent Jackson 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
