Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 7 October 2024 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
 
  
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 7ú Deireadh Fómhair 2024 i Seomra na 
Comhairle, Halla na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i 
láthair an tArdmheara James Geoghegan sa chathaoir 
 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Ammar Ali 
Daryl Barron 
Racheal Batten 
Emma Blain 
Janice Boylan 
Tom Brabazon 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Danny Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
Anthony Connaghan 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Jen Cummins 
Ray Cunningham 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Máire Devine 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Daniel Ennis 
Cian Farrell 
Alison Field 
Declan Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
James Geoghegan 
Eoin Hayes 
Barry Heneghan 
Deirdre Heney 
Jesslyn Henry 
Rory Hogan 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Feljin Jose 
Leslie Kane 
Kourtney Kenny 
Patrick Kinsella 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Ray McAdam 
Séamas McGrattan 
Paddy Monahan 
Carolyn Moore 
Edel Moran 
Darragh Moriarty 
Naoise Ó Muirí 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Colm O'Rourke 
Gavin Pepper 
Cieran Perry 
Michael Pidgeon 
Gayle Ralph 
Punam Rane 
Conor Reddy 
Nial Ring 
Aishling Silke 
Supriya Singh 
Malachy Steenson 
John Stephens 
Catherine Stocker 
Philip Sutcliffe 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Prajwal K. Annibabu 
Lorraine Brogan 
Enda Currid 
John Flanagan 
Anthony Flynn 
Yvonne Kelly 
Natalie Leonard 
Victor Leonov 
Mick Mulhern 
Brendan O'Brien 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Michelle Robinson 
Deirdre Scully 
Andy Walsh 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
In Memoriam 
A minutes silence was observed in remembrance of former Assistant Commissioner 
John O’Driscoll, former Minister Mary O’Rourke who served as Councillor, TD, 
Senator and Minister from 1974 to 2011 who died last Thursday 3rd October and 
Councillor and General Election candidate John Naughten who died Friday 4th 
October 2024. 
  
Births 
Best wishes were expressed to Councillor Racheal Batten on the birth of her baby 
boy, Cathal. 
  
City Councillors event with Dublin Chamber of Commerce 
A reminder was given to Councillors about the networking event to be held on the 8th 
October at 7pm with Dublin Chamber of Commerce. 
  
Retirement 
The Lord Mayor wished City Architect, Ali Grehan, a very long and happy retirement.  
Ali is leaving on 18th October and has made a valued contribution to Dublin City 
Council during her term as City Architect. 
Dublin City Architect since 2008, Ali previously worked in private practice and with 
Ballymun Regeneration, Fingal County Council and with the RPA (now TII) delivering 
Dublin’s first LUAS Light Rail system.   With Dublin City Council, she has led a multi-
disciplinary team responsible for developing a broad urban design agenda including 
delivery of public housing, public realm, community and cultural infrastructure 
projects.   A priority for Ali has been sustainable housing development and ways to 
ensure Dublin’s built environment mitigates and adapts to climate change.  She also 
delivered several initiatives to promote the importance of design as a way of engaging 
citizens in addressing complex urban challenges – from the Dublin’s 2011 bid for 
World Design Capital to the 2017 collaboration with the American Institute of 
Architects on issues facing the north city retail core. 
  
Welcome 
The Lord Mayor welcomed Assistant Chief Executive Mick Mulhern to Dublin City 
Council and he is looking forward to working with him.  
  
A Safe City 
The Lord Mayor spoke to members regarding the interim Dublin City Policing Forum 
which he chaired on 19th September.  Crime in the city and anti-social behaviour on 
public transport was discussed and he welcomes the statement from Dublin Bus about 
the launch of its new Safer Journeys Team, a 20 week pilot aimed at enhancing safety 
and security across its networks.  Notification of the next meeting will be circulated to 
Councillors.  
  
A clean city - Update on Presentation on plastic bag bin waste in city centre 
The Lord Mayor gave a brief update on the changes that have taken place since 
September in relation to the plastic bin waste in the city centre.  A meeting with the 
waste collectors was held on the 7th October, the Lord Mayor confirmed that they will 
offer three waste collection options in this phase 1 area of the city where derogations 
are being removed. 
  
Options to be offered include:- 
 

 
1.    The preferred option is to persuade more customers  to transition from using 
plastic bags to reusable waste receptacles i.e. wheelie/euro bin 
Significant progress has been made with this option and Panda have reported 
that 36% of their commercial customers that previously used plastic bin bags 
have moved to wheelie bins, and are in discussion with a further 38% of their 
customer base to determine if it is feasible for those customers to use a 
reusable receptacle. Keywaste have advised that 30% of their customers have 
moved to wheelie bins and discussions are still ongoing.  Combined, Panda 
and Keywaste represent approximately 90% of the city centre waste collection 
2.  The second option to be offered is a business to business collection service, 
and this option will be offered to those customers who dispose of a significant 
number of bags on a daily basis, and who cannot use reusable receptacles. 
The waste collectors are currently developing an “app notification system” 
which will notify customers of collection arrangements, and will assist in 
coordinating times for the presentation and collection of waste. 
3.  The third option will involve placing mobile compactors in specific areas of the 
city to facilitate the single bag customer or the customer who only disposes of 
waste occasionally. Dublin City Council are currently considering feasible 
locations in the Temple Bar area and Grafton Street area that would facilitate 
these units. The current proposal is for two compactors in each of these areas, 
one to facilitate residual waste and the other for dry mixed recyclables.  
  
In summary, Dublin City Council welcome these initiatives and along with the waste 
collectors feel that the range of collection options offered should cater for all customer 
and business needs in this phase 1 area. 
  
Neurodiverse / Autism-Friendly City 
The Lord Mayor confirmed that work is progressing towards advancing his goal of 
having 11 Autism friendly villages within Dublin City Council.  In relation to the City 
Initiative further measures are being taken to ensure that initiatives are embedded into 
the Dublin City Council system over the lifetime of the 3 year plan.   
  
Taskforce on Integration 
The Lord Mayor advised that good progress has been made and the make-up and 
structure of the taskforce is being finalised.  An e-mail will be issued to Group Leaders 
very shortly. 
  
Halloween at the Mansion House 
The Lord Mayor announced a new experience at the Mansion House to celebrate 
Halloween.  It will run from Wednesday 30th October to Saturday 2nd November and 
comprises three elements: 
  
         The Mansion House will be decorated and lit to give it an eerie experience 
         Pumpkin Patch family experience for all ages on Friday and Saturday in the 
Lord Mayor’s Garden with photo opportunities and a pumpkin to take home  
Free of charge 
         The Mansion House Paranormal Investigation for ages 13+.    Running over 
the four days from 4pm to 9pm with four theatrical shows an hour – walk 
through the Mansion House if you dare for an immersive Halloween 
experience. Nominal charge 
Both the Pumpkin Patch and the Paranormal Investigation will have dedicated times 
for Neurodiverse friendly performances and we are also working with our Community 
Officers to distribute tickets to teenagers in the city centre.  More than 1,500 people 
will have the opportunity to experience this Haunted Mansion House. 

 
 
 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Christy 
Burke that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the 
questions lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the  
questions lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and 
Answers are set out in Appendix A to these minutes. 
 
12 - 69 
 
3 
  Correspondence was received from the following Local Authorities; 
 
         Roscommon County Council  
  
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Naoise Ó 
Muirí that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence listed. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
4 
  To confirm the minutes of the City Council Meeting held on 2nd September 2024. 
 
The minutes of the City Council meeting held on 2nd September 2024 having been 
printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken 
as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor. 
 
 
 
5 
  Vacancies   
 
 
 
(a)   Co-Option of a new member of Dublin City Council following the temporary 
absence of Councillor Catherine Stocker.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor 
Vincent Jackson that Patricia Roe be co-opted as a new member of Dublin City 
Council following the temporary absence of Councillor Catherine Stocker as 
per the Local Government (Maternity Protection and Other Measures of Local 
Authorities) Act 2022. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
(b)   To fill two vacancies on the Planning and Urban Regeneration Strategic Policy 
Committee following the temporary absence of Councillor Catherine Stocker 
and the resignation of Cllr. Aisling Silke on 30th September 2024.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Jesslyn Henry and seconded by Councilor 
Janice Boylan that Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and Councillor Patricia Roe be 
appointed to the Planning and Urban Regeneration Strategic Policy 
Committee. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
(c)   To appoint a Chairperson on the Planning and Urban Regeneration Strategic 
Policy Committee following the temporary absence of Councillor Catherine 
Stocker.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Aisling Silke and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Councillor Cat O’Driscoll be appointed as Chair of the Planning 
and Urban Regeneration Strategic Policy Committee.  The Motion was put and 
carried.  
 
 
 
(d)   To fill once vacancy on the Protocol Committee following the temporary 
absence of Councillor Catherine Stocker.  
 
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Councillor Patricia Roe be appointed to the Protocol Committee.  
The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
6 
  Report No. 205/2024 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (M. MacSweeney) - Local 
Economic and Community Plan 2024 - 2029 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Conor 
Reddy that Dublin City Council hereby adopts the Draft Local Economic and 
Community Plan 2024 – 2029. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
7 
  Reports of the Chief Executive, in compliance with the provisions of Section 179 of 
the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning 
and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) and in compliance with the 
provisions of the Local Government Act 2001:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 179/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) ) proposal to 
upgrade the floodlighting of the existing track at Donore Harriers Sports 
Centre, Chapelizod Road, Chapelizod, Dublin 20  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
Mannix Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
179/2024 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried.  
  
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 184/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) proposal to 
improve the public realm within Portobello Harbour Plaza, Dublin 8 into a new 
community focused park, called Portobello Harbour Park.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
Mannix Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
184/2024 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried.  
 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 190/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) proposal to 
construct a residential development comprising 138 no. dwellings on the 
Balbutcher Lands at Ballymun, Dublin 11.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
Mannix Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
190/2024 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried.  
  
 
 
 
8 
  Report No. 185/2024 of the A/Head of Finance (V. Leonov) - Draft Budget Strategy for 
Financial Year 2025 in compliance with the Local Government (Financial and Audit 
Procedures) Regulations 2014 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Christy 
Burke that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 185/2024. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
9 
  Report No. 186/2024 of the A/Head of Finance (V. Leonov) - Budget 2025 Local 
Property Tax Public Consultation Process 
 

 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Christy 
Burke that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 186/2024. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
10   Report No. 187/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Consideration of the 
Local Property Tax Local Adjustment Factor in respect of the financial year 2025 
 
The Lord Mayor informed members that several motions had been received in relation 
to the LPT Local Adjustment Factor and that the motions would be dealt with in the 
order they had been received. 
  
Motion No.1 
It was proposed by Sinn Féin, that Dublin City Council determines, in accordance of 
the provisions of Section 20 of the Finance (Local Property Tax) Act 2012 (as 
amended), that the basic rate of local property tax should stand varied downwards by 
15 per cent for 2025 in respect of relevant residential properties situated in the 
administrative area of Dublin City Council.  The motion was put to a vote and carried.  
A copy of this vote can be found attached to these minutes in Appendix B.  
  
For full details of all motions submitted please see Appendix C. 
 
70 - 76 
 
11   Report No. 207/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - With Reference to 
Temporary Overdraft Accommodation on Capital and Revenue Accounts for the 
Period from 1st January to 31st December 2025. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council consents to the continuation of the same value of 
borrowing by way of temporary overdraft or other short-term borrowing arrangements 
up to a maximum of €80 million for the period 1st January 2025 to 31st December 
2025 as outlined in report 207/2024 subject to the sanction of the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage to this borrowing. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
12   Report No. 180/2024 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (M. Igoe) Park West - Cherry 
Orchard Local Area Plan 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Mannix 
Flynn that Dublin City Council, in accordance with Section 19 (1) (d), (e) & (f) of the 
Planning & Development Act 2000 (as amended) Dublin City Council notes the 
opinion of the Chief Executive in Report 180/2024 that the Local Area Plan remains 
consistent with the objectives and core strategy of the Development Plan and that the 
objectives of the Local Area Plan remain to be secured  and hereby approves, by 
resolution the extension of the Park West – Cherry Orchard LAP 2019, and defers the 
sending of a notice under section 20(3)(a)(i) and publishing a notice under section 
20(3)(a)(ii), for a further period of five years to the 4th November 2029.  The motion 
was put and carried.  
 
 
 
13   Report No. 191/2024 of the Director of the Active Travel Programme Office (A. Walsh) 
- Notification under Section 138 Local Government Act, 2001 Intention to proceed with 
the Dodder Greenway – Beatty’s Avenue to Herbert Park. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Mannix 
Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of report no. 191/2024.  The motion 
was put and carried.  
 
 
 

 
14   Report No. 200/2024 of the Director of the Active Travel Programme (A. Walsh) - 
Notification under Section 138 Local Government Act, 2001 Intention to proceed to 
with the Sandyford  to Charlemont Scheme – Ranelagh Rd/ Ranelagh from Mander’s 
Terrace to Woodstock Gardens. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Mannix 
Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of report no. 200/2024.  The motion 
was put and carried.  
  
 
 
  Report No. 204/2024 of the Chief Fire Officer (D. Keeley) - Special Inter Local 
Authority Committee on Fire/Ambulance Services and Emergency Management. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Naoise Ó 
Muirí that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 204/2024 and hereby 
approves the contents therein.   
  
The following councillors were appointed to the Special Inter Local Authority 
Committee for Fire/Ambulance Services and Emergency Management. 
  
         Cllr Hazel de Nortuin 
         Cllr John Stephens 
         Cllr Alison Field 
         Cllr John Lyons 
         Cllr Daniel Ennis 
         Cllr Aisling Silke 
         Cllr Daithi Doolan 
         Cllr Gayle Ralph 
         Cllr Danny Byrne 
         Cllr Donna Cooney 
 
 
 
16   Disposal of Fee Simple and Freehold Interest:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 188/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Robinson) - With 
reference to the disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and 
Tenant (Ground Rents) (No. 2) Act, 1978. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
John Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
188/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 193/2024 of A/Assistant Chief Executive (M. Igoe) With reference 
to the disposal of the fee simple in a site for an ESB substation at Eamonn 
Ceannt Park Depot, Rutland Avenue, Dublin 12  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
John Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
193/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 199/2024 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (M. Igoe)- With 
reference to the proposed disposal of the Council's Fee Simple interest at 41 
Newtown Avenue, Coolock Industrial Estate, Dublin 17 to E TO INFINITY- For 
Blacklion Real Estate Fund.  
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
John Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
199/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
Deputy Lord Mayor Councillor Donna Cooney raised a typo in Report No. 
199/2024  having been approved by the Central Area Committee but it should 
read North Central Area Committee. 
 
 
(d)   Report No. 201/2024 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (M. Igoe) With 
reference to the Disposal of the Council's Fee Simple interest in the property 
known as 65 Keeper Road, Crumlin, Dublin 12 to Gerard Bone, Lerma 
Properties, Paul Byrne and JP Byrne Entities.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
John Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
201/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
17   Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 194/2024 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (M. Igoe) With 
reference to the Short Term Letting of a Community Facility at Springvale 
Grove,Chapelizod, Dublin 20 to the 139th Chapelizod Scout Group.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Patrick Kinsella that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
194/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 196/2024 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (M. Igoe) - With 
reference to the lease of a part of cellar and part of car park area adjacent No. 
89 Swords Road (Viscount Pub), Whitehall, Dublin 9 to Costigo Taverns 
Limited.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Patrick Kinsella that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
196/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
 
  Report No. 197/2024 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (M. Igoe) - With 
reference to the grant of a lease of Units 1 and 2, The Turnpike, Santry Cross, 
Dublin 11 to Hair Together CLG.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Patrick Kinsella that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
197/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
 
(d)   Report No. 202/2024 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (M. Igoe) -With 
reference to the proposed grant of a short term business letting of a portion of 
the Waste Management Section's Depot at Aldborough Parade and three 
Railway Arches to Sunflower Recycling Limited.  
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Patrick Kinsella that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
202/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
18   Disposal of Property:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 195/2024 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (M. Igoe) - Disposal of 
property at Sarsfield Road, Ballyfermot, Dublin 10 (former OLV Building) to 
Respond an Approved Housing Body.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Punam Rane that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
195/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 198/2024 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (M. Igoe) Disposal of a 
plot of land at Ballyfermot Road, Dublin 10 to Orivo West Estates Limited.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Punam Rane that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
198/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
 
19   Report No. 181/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (J. Flanagan) 
- Quarterly Report of the Active Travel Programme Office. 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor James Geoghegan and seconded by Deputy Lord 
Mayor Donna Cooney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
181/2024.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
20   Report No. 208/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (J. Flanagan) 
- Quarterly Report of the Traffic Department. 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor James Geoghegan and seconded by Deputy Lord 
Mayor Donna Cooney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
208/2024.  The motion was put and carried.  
  
 
 
21   Report No. 189/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Social Housing 
Supply and Delivery Monthly Update Report 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor James Geoghegan and seconded by Deputy Lord 
Mayor Donna Cooney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
189/2024.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
22   Report No. 192/2024 of the A/Head of Finance (V. Leonov) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement and EU IMF Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Mannix Flynn 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 192/2024. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
23   Report No. 203/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report 
 
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Punam Rane 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 203/2024. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
24   Report No. 182/2024 of the Area Committees - Breviates of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of September 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by Councillor 
Janice Boylan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 182/2024. 
The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
25   Report No. 183/2024 of the Corporate Policy Group - Breviate of the meeting held on 
30th August 2024, Lord Mayor James Geoghegan, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Seamás McGrattan and seconded by Councillor 
Anthony Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
183/2024. The motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
26   Report No. 206/2024 of the North West Area Joint Policing Sub-Committee - Breviate 
of the meeting held on 23rd September 2024, Cllr. Keith Connolly, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor Anthony 
Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 206/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
27   Topical Issues 
 
No topical issues were submitted for consideration. 
 
 
 
28   Motions on Notice 
 
a)    Motion No. 1 in the name of Councillor Hazel Chu.  It was agreed that this 
motion be taken without debate.  The motion was put and carried.  
  
b)    Motion No. 2 in the name of Councillor Ray Cunningham. It was agreed that 
this motion be deferred to next council meeting.  
  
c)    Motion No. 3 in the name of Councillor Michael Pidgeon.  It was agreed that 
this motion be deferred to next council meeting.  
  
d)    Motion No. 4 - It was proposed by Councillor Daithí Doolan and seconded by 
Councillor Michael Pidgeon that Dublin City Council, in light of the recent ruling 
by the International Court of Justice on the illegality of Israeli settlements in 
Occupied Palestinian Territories, calls on the Irish Government to enact the 
Occupied Territories Bill, to cut Irish trade ties with Israeli goods and services 
produced in these illegal settlements. 
  
This motion was debated together with Emergency Motion in the name of Councillors 
Cieran Perry, Nial Ring, Mannix Flynn, Barry Heneghan, Christy Burke, Pat Dunne, 
Vincent Jackson and John Lyons. 
  
 
 
 

 
29   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
Emergency Motion No. 1 in the name of Councillors Cieran Perry, Nial Ring, 
Mannix Flynn, Barry Heneghan, Christy Burke, Pat Dunne, Vincent Jackson and 
John Lyons 
 
Noting that today is the first anniversary of the Hamas attack on Israel, this Council, in 
condemning the targeting of civilians in that incident, also unequivocally condemns the 
totally disproportionate response of the Israeli Government and the IDF (Israel 
Defence Forces)  which has resulted in the genocide of over 42,000 people (including 
over 16,000 children) in Gaza, the instructed displacement over 2 million citizens in 
Gaza, the murder of civilians in the occupied West Bank and the escalation of the 
conflict to Lebanon and Iran with a real threat to the political stability of the Middle 
East. 
  
Furthermore, we request An Taoiseach, Simon Harris, to convey the above, which is 
the position of those representing the citizens of Dublin City, to President Biden on his 
visit to Washington this week. 
  
This motion was debated together with Motion no. 4 in the name of Councillor Daithí 
Doolan.  Both motions were put and carried.  
  
Following the debate on both motions, it was agreed that the Lord Mayor would issue 
correspondence to the office of the Taoiseach.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
 

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY 7th 
OCTOBER 2024 
 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the housing file of (1.details supplied) & 
that her choice-based letting application for (2.details supplied) be seriously 
considered. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing Transfer List and in receipt of HAP, with an 
application date of 07/11/2020, the applicant holds the following position on this list; 
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
2 
696 
E 
2 
831 
 
Based on these positions, it may be some time before the applicant is reached for an 
offer of housing.  
 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
 
With regard to Choice Based Lettings, if a number of applicants apply for the same 
property on a Choice Based Lettings competition, the final offer will be made to the 
applicant with the highest position on list. 
 
Furthermore, the address supplied above for the applicant is not the address on the 
applicant’s file, if the applicant has moved she will need to notify Housing Allocations 
and submit proof of address for the new address for her housing file to be updated to 
reflect her current address.  
 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to comment on the issues raised in the correspondence 
(details supplied) from the Board of Directors of the Owners' Management Company 
(OMC) for Clare Village.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As outlined above the Remediation Scheme is a national scheme administered by the 
Housing Agency. Remedial works will be funded under a statutory scheme and work 
is currently under way to draft legislation to allow for the implementation of the Scheme. 
Further information on the Scheme including eligibility, works to be covered by the 
scheme and how the scheme will be operated is available at  
https://www.housingagency.ie/housing-information/multi-unit-developments-
managed-estates/apartments-duplexes-defects 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the temporary closure of the 
Ballymun recycling centre and the other issues identified in (details supplied). 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following a short temporary closure, (details supplied) reopened on Monday 26th 
August with additional security measures in place to ensure compliance with site rules 
and the Waste License under which the facility operates, and to provide a more 
efficient environment for patrons and facility staff. 
   
Due to the busy urban nature of the city, space is at a premium. Recycling facilities in 
more rural settings such as those in Wexford or the Estuary Recycling Centre in 
Swords are typically developed on expansive green field sites, where split level 
facilities are feasible.  
 
(details supplied) is a very confined space, both in terms of the actual footprint, and 
the design/layout of the facility. The containers are situated where they are to facilitate 
their servicing. All are of suitable size, structure and material for the particular waste 
streams they contain. Furthermore, each container is signposted to indicate which 
particular waste steam it contains. There are “sandwich board” type moveable signs 
for each waste stream and these signs are manually relocated between containers, 
e.g. when one bulky waste skip fills, the door is closed, the next skip opened and the 
sign moved to the door of the container in use. 
 
Waste Management Services continually review services available at our recycling 
facilities, and plan to introduce additional services to (details supplied) in the coming 
weeks. It is likely that there will be some rearranging of existing containers at this time. 
 
Q.4 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the playground build in McAuley 
Park.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Unfortunately delays in processing the suite of documentation prepared by the Parks 
Service after the tendering, consultation and contracting processes under the newly 
introduced financial system lead to delays in the issuing of the order to the contractor.  
The order has been issued and the contractor has scheduled the installation early in 
the New Year. 
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive For an update on the planning application for Ballymore 
Oxley development knowing as (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Details supplied 
 
Q.6 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive to re-enter the yellow box at (details supplied)  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
(Detail supplied) is part of the Clontarf to City Centre Active Travel Scheme, that will 
support integrated sustainable transport usage through infrastructure improvements 
for active travel (both walking and cycling), and the provision of enhanced bus priority 
measures for existing and all future services. Yellow boxes are intended to prevent 
blocking of major traffic generating junctions. Side road traffic flows should be 
significant and the side road should serve a minimum of fifty houses or a major traffic 
generating facility. These guideline are in place to avoid a proliferation of yellow boxes 
in the city, which have substantial maintenance costs associated with their 
implementation.  

Historically, the junction with (detailed supplied) did not have a yellow box, however 
one was installed in 2022 as a temporary measure to assist traffic flow during 
construction works.  The active travel team have examined the road, and noted that 
the traffic volumes from (detailed supplied) are very low, and no problems were 
observed on-site. When the scheme is fully operational, a yellow box in that location 
may affect the level of service/capacity of the five lamps junction. Additionally, the 
proximity to the pedestrian traffic lights at the junction with (detailed supplied) would 
leave inadequate space for a vehicle (other than a standard sized car) to stop at the 
lights.  Therefore, a Yellow Box will not be provided at (detailed supplied) 
 
Q.7  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that double yellow lines be placed along the small section 
of road alongside (details supplied) as this is an entry into a Seniors complex and 
vans and SUV’s park there every day. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Transport Advisory Group has recommended installation a small section of double 
yellow lines near (details supplied) to prevent parked vehicles blocking the access 
road to the Senior Citizens’ complex. This measure will be implemented subject to the 
completion of the necessary statutory consultation process with the Gardaí. 
 
Q.8  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that a camera be placed on the corner of (Details supplied) 
as illegal dumping is out of control at this section. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The request to deploy CCTV cameras for the purposes of Prevention, Detection and 
Prosecution of litter offences should be submitted to the Area Office in the first 
instance. The Area Office having knowledge of their area will consider the purpose and 
rationale of the request in accordance with the Code of Practice for the Operation of 
CCTV for the purposes of Prevention, Detection and Prosecution of Litter Offences. 
When the Area Office is satisfied that the request to deploy CCTV cameras is 
necessary and proportionate, the request will be forwarded to the CCTV Project Team, 
Litter Management Office, Waste Management Services. I have forwarded your 
request to the Area Office for their consideration. 
 
Q.9 
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline how many 1 bedroom, 2 bedroom and 3 bedroom 
homes are currently vacant in Area M and the reason for same. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
South East Area  
Status  
Bed 0 
Bed 1 
Bed 2 
Bed 3 
Total  
Awaiting 
Vacant 
possession 
0 
7 
10 
0 
17 
With 
Contractors  
0 
17 
7 
4 
28 
Direct Labour  
7 
7 
1 
0 
15 
Total  
7 
31 
18 
4 
60 

Q.10  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to give a response to the issues referred to in the email 
submitted with this question relating to road maintenance works. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Roads Maintenance Engineer has been made aware of issues raised by 
some residents on Beechwood Ave. Lower, in relation to works carried out by Road 
Maintenance Services (RMS). 
 
Beechwood Ave. Lower is a one way road with on street parking approaching 100% 
occupancy at any given time of the day. In addition, to the high volume of parked cars 
the narrow width of the road adds to the difficulty of carrying out footpath works on this 
road. In order to minimise disruption to residents and to maintain as much on street 
parking as possible for the duration of the works, DCC’s RMS crews remove sections 
of parking for a period of time to allow for trucks delivering concrete to the works 
location on Beechwoood Avenue Lower. While also directing traffic safely past the area 
where these essential works are taking place. This process also applies where a HGV 
is required to carry away excavated concrete as the old pavement is being removed.  
There was an incident recently where the DCC RMS Crew working on the 
aforementioned road cordoned off a section of parking to allow for the delivery of 
concrete only to find a resident removed the barriers in order to park their vehicle 
resulting in delays and cancellation of a Concrete delivery which had a cost implication 
for DCC. Work has been delayed further due to inclement weather which prohibits 
pouring of concrete.The alternative solution to the current situation would have been 
to completely close the Beechwood Avenue Lower to be opened only to 
pedestrians/residents. A road closure would have enabled the RMS crew work more 
efficiently.  However the Area Engineer considered that a road closure would not have 
been a popular decision with residents. It is anticipated that the pavement 
reconstruction works will be completed the week beginning the 7th October 2024. 
 
Q.11 
COUNCILLOR JANICE BOYLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to work with the managers of housing maintenance and 
caretaking sections to address the serious issues in Marmion Court. I have attached 
all the issues below.  
 
A. Water issues -  
Sewage smells coming through taps.  
All residents buying bottles of water for drinking.  
Constant over flow from tanks on roofs flooding down into people’s homes. This causes 
pressure to be even lower than usual.  
One pump for whole complex.  
Water pressure is reduced here at certain times (usually from afternoon) this means 
everyone is home by then and using water for washing etc leaving residents (mostly 
top floor) with little to no water.  
When normal pressure returns that one pump gets over whelmed causing it to choke 
and no water coming through. It also sends annoying loud chugging noise and pipes 
banging through homes for hours.  
 
B. Dampness -  
All homes very damp. Some worse than others. Mould all inside homes as a result. 
Some residents found mold growing up the backs of wardrobes and as well insects 
that come with dampness. These walls have had so much water through them from 
flooding’s and dampness that they turn to dust if one simply tries hanging a photo up.  
 
 

C. Windows and Balconies -  
Windows falling in on top of residents and some windows unable to open or close due 
to handles breaking off.  
Very unsafe especially where children are. Rain pouring in flooding bedrooms and 
homes because windows are not being replaced or repaired as they are no longer 
manufactured. DCC will not replace windows with new type.  
 
D. Balcony railings.  
We have metal railings for Balconies out the back and stairs are also metal. They have 
gone from rusting to now falling apart. The metal frames are now hanging off. Unsafe 
to lean on balcony and heavy metal frames now hanging off which is very dangerous.   
 
E. Grounds throughout complex -  
Ground is completely deteriorating throughout to such degree that there are large holes 
everywhere and this increases with rain. Elderly and children falling getting seriously 
hurt.  
There is also a worry of debris getting into water pipes.  
The level of dust in our homes from this also, is unmanageable. Residents mostly 
children to teenage years are suffering from nose bleed. Dust levels are very high and 
these flats have no appropriate ventilation.  
 
F. Electric meters -  
All electric meters are outdoors. To get a meter reading residents have to send in a 
request for DCC to come out to do this. These electric boxes are then being left 
unlocked so anyone can get at them even a child. I'm sure everyone is aware how 
dangerous that is. They are also located right under the overflow. So when the water 
tanks flood the water is pouring down into electricity.  
Residents of the back block had an explosion from this happening a couple of years 
back where fire services had to evacuate the whole complex yet safer electric 
boxes/coverings have not been put in place.  
 
G. Health and Fire Hazards -  
We have a number of abandoned vehicles on the complex that we have not been able 
to get DCC to remove. They're taking up residents spaces which means cars are 
parking In front of gates blocking emergency service from getting in. They're also 
providing shelter for rats. We have a serious issue with rats in the flats to the point 
children have come running out of playground because the rats are running in there. 
DCC response is that they will not remove because they have plates on them. These 
vehicles in the flats years. No investigation been done.  
 
H. Playground -  
The playground in the flats is not been maintained regularly. The material used as 
flooring is sponge like. There a deep holes under that so children and parents have 
been really hurt where their foot sunk through into the holes. DCC had someone come 
out place another layer over without filling in holes. The stuff they use falls apart 
straight away.  
The playground equipment’s are not being inspected or maintained. So for example, a 
small child had her arm torn from a piece of metal that came through a rope on the 
monkey bars.  
Ropes were removed not replaced leaving no net under bars when kids climb on it. 
Playground was then locked for about 2 weeks but no record was logged. No work has 
been carried out as of up to the time of sending this email.  
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance is aware of the recent establishment of a new Residents 
Committee for Queen Street flat complex.   We are also aware from correspondence 
received that there is concern among residents and public representatives on a range 
of maintenance issues including water supply, damp and mould, windows, balconies, 
fire safety, outdoor surfaces and play area.  
 
The measures necessary to address and/or resolve the issues are varied in scale, 
complexity and timeframe but can be categorised into immediate, short, medium and 
long term.  
 
Housing Maintenance welcomes the opportunity to form a stronger working 
relationship with the new Residents Committee as a forum to work through the 
outstanding issues in an open and constructive way.   Arrangements will be made in 
the coming week, via the contact details provided, to set up an initial meeting with the 
new Committee.   If there is consensus that it is a productive forum a schedule of 
further meetings can be agreed.  
 
Q.12  COUNCILLOR JANICE BOYLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to look at the Choice Base Lettings scheme and make 
these much needed changes: 
a) To make sure people are notified if they are not successful  
b) To make sure those who can’t apply on line can still avail of paper applications in their 
local area office with help giving for those who have literacy issues.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In response to your queries above please find response(s) below –  
 
A – This is currently a work in progress in conjunction with the Transformation Unit, it 
is anticipated that this will be a service provided going forward 
 
B – Paper copies are available from any local are office and any area office staff 
member would be able to assist with the completion of the form for anyone that 
requires assistance 
 
Q.13  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report as to how many acquisitions of art 
works Dublin City Council has acquired in the last two years.  Further, what 
involvement if any, did the former CEO of DCC have in acquiring any artworks? Also, 
what procedures are required for the acquisition process and what governance and 
policies are associated with this remit?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Over the past two years DCC acquired two works with the support of the CEO’s Office 
in connection with Harry Clarke and the proposed Harry Clarke Museum of Irish 
Stained Glass. These are a Portrait of Harry Clarke by his wife Margaret Clarke The 
other acquisition was of a large scale charcoal cartoon by Clarke of the Angel of Hope 
for the Church of the Holy Trinity in Killiney. Both works are very rare items connected 
with Harry Clarke. Regarding the procedures required for the acquisition process and 
governance and policies are associated with this remit DCC has a Collections 
Management Policy. The most relevant information is on page 6 of the Collections 
Management Policy. ‘The Council acquires collections through a variety of methods 
including, purchase, gift, donation and bequest.’ The Council will occasionally agree to 
acquire or temporarily house material deemed to be at risk of destruction or loss.’ 
 

Q.14  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive give a full report as to whether the Iveagh Trust Ltd are in 
breach of their planning obligations and their statutory climate action policy 
implementations and are therefore in breach of DCC’s development plan in future 
proofing the retrofitting of old buildings for energy saving with particular regard to fuel 
poverty for the elderly.  Iveagh Trust have undertaken the replacement of windows 
along the Bride Street section of their housing estate.  These buildings are listed and 
are of high heritage value.  Unfortunately, Iveagh Trust are not using this opportunity 
to double glaze these windows to ensure effective insulation and as a guard against 
fuel poverty. This may be in clear breach of DCC’s climate action policy and retro fitting 
rebuild policy for social housing.  It beggars belief that this organisation was granted 
planning permission without a full explanation or indeed planning exemption regarding 
this issue. This issue has serious implications for the city and its residents particularly 
those that are most vulnerable in local authority housing and indeed those that are 
housed by approved housing bodies.  The local authority DCC has a statutory 
obligation here not just to protect the building and its structure but to protect its 
vulnerable tenants, many of who exist below the poverty line, including children who 
are most effected.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Blocks C & D, the Iveagh Trust, Patrick Street & Bride Street, Dublin 8 are on the 
current Record of Protected Structures (Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028). 
The reference number is 1011 and the description reads ‘Iveagh Trust Flats (Blocks 
A-H)’.  They are two attached five-bay, four-storey, T-plan west-facing residential 
tenement blocks, built in 1901-1903 and occupied in 1904. They were built as part of 
a group of eight blocks with four facing on to Patrick Street and four on to Bride Street. 
 
In relation to the windows, a Section 5 Exemption Certificate was granted for the 
refurbishment of 338 windows at the facade, sides and rear of Blocks C & D (0179/24). 
The works are limited to routine maintenance tasks, necessary to keep the windows in 
good working order and to prevent deterioration, and therefore are not replacement 
windows. The submitted method statement outlined that the works are in keeping with 
the conservation principles and practices outlined in the Department of Housing Local 
Government and Heritage ‘Architectural Heritage Protection Guidelines for Planning Authorities’ (DHLGH 2011), and the 
advice series publications ‘Maintenance: a guide to the care of older buildings’ 
(DHLGH 2007) and ‘Windows: a guide to the repair of historic windows’ (DHLGH 
2007).   
 
The works form part of an ongoing programme of maintenance and repairs to the 
historic windows undertaken by the Iveagh Trust for the upkeep of the estate.  A similar 
programme of repairs to the windows in blocks A and B were granted an exemption in 
2021 (0165/21). The refurbishment works would not materially alter the appearance or 
character of the Protected Structures and were therefore considered exempted 
development. 
 
The Iveagh Trust is a separate legal entity to Dublin City Council.  All queries regarding 
their actions and intent regarding Climate Action should be directed to the Trust.  Their 
actions have no implications for the continuing programme of delivery of the 
refurbishment of Dublin City housing stock to higher insulation standards. 
 
Q.15  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive give a clear directive as to whether the Parks Department 
are exempt from the legislation and policy that govern licensing and disposals that are 
part of the statutory function of councillors such as leases on property, community 
halls, and sale and disposal of various properties and sections of land.  It is the norm 

that the Parks Department bring before the City council leases and licenses for the use 
of tearooms in many of the Parks yet increasingly events that have taken place in 
Merrion Square Park and other such spaces have not come before the council for 
scrutiny and approval. This has given rise to great public concern and a lack of 
transparency both for public engagement on such matters and scrutiny by public 
representatives.  Can the CEO provide a very clear statement on the matter and a 
legal response? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Department is not exempt from the legislation and policy that governs 
disposals for licences and leases in relation to DCC buildings. It is the norm that the 
Development Department on behalf of the Parks Department brings before the City 
Council disposals for the leasing or licensing of tearooms and community sports 
pavilions and all-weather facilities.  
 
“The holding of events in parks is not a “disposal” for the purposes of Section183 of 
the Local Government Act 2001.” Events are managed by way of an application 
process and/or by way of a negotiated agreement depending on the complexity of the 
matter.   
 
There are hundreds of events and activities in City Parks each year from local 
community events to the music concerts in St. Anne’s Park. The larger events are 
communicated to the Area Committee in which they are held and the outcome of the 
events including complaints and compliments are considered in a de-brief each year.  
With Merrion Square Park, the concern was in relation to the concurrence of two events 
in June, the International Literature Festival Dublin and the Taste of Dublin. Changes 
are proposed for 2025 to reduce the impact on park users by reducing the number of 
days for set up and de-rigging. We will also ensure that there is minimal closure of the 
perimeter footpath and promenade.  
 
Q.16 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive can he ascertain whether the Dublin Fire Brigade handball 
court at Blanchardstown Fire Brigade station could facilitate on/off use by the clients 
who are part of the residential program at the Coolmine Centre?  The Coolmine Centre 
is an exceptional place of best practice and excellence in the treatment of chronic 
addiction.  Its track record over the many years is exceptional and many of the clients 
who have had the benefit of this facility go on to live full and productive lives in our 
society and our communities.  Indeed, many of these individuals are now employed 
into the services of trauma counselling and addiction counselling, in the many 
hundreds of centres and programs we have throughout Dublin and the State.  There 
are very little facilities for sporting activities at Coolmine and the use on a temporary 
basis of the handball court would achieve a hell of a lot by way of enhancing the 
programs through health and sports wellbeing which DCC promotes on a very regular 
basis for all of our citizens.  There is great potential in this possible engagement and 
sharing of facilities.  I know only too well the extraordinary work of our DCC Fire and 
Ambulance services, indeed, on many occasion they have come to the rescue of those 
in grave difficulty because of drug overdose on our streets and in other settings and I 
am sure that they will give great consideration ,if asked, to this request.  There is 
potential here for handball competitions.  This is a sport that is remerging and fast 
growing.  There was a time in Ireland when handball alleys were the norm, now there 
is an opportunity to reengage with this sporting activity and Blanchardstown Fire 
Station and fire officers in collaboration and association with Coolmine and its clients, 
could be to the forefront of this possibility.  
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin Fire Brigade recognise the great work that the Coolmine Centre does for 
communities in the area. Having considered the request, DFB is not in a position to 
facilitate the request on the basis that each fire station is a work location and is subject 
to the conditions of the Health and Safety at Work Act. Strict arrangements exist at all 
existing fire stations for induction, safety and security responsibilities and station 
management.   The regular movement of emergency service vehicles transiting the 
stations yard also present significant health safety and welfare concerns.  
 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide details of the assessments undertaken of 
(Details Attached) within the context of the preparation of the Estate Renewal Plan 
by the Housing Department in 2019; the condition of the water supply to the complex; 
the assessment of window condition; the state of the balconies; the situation with 
regards to insulation of homes in the complex and for the Housing Maintenance 
Department to provide a full record of all maintenance requests submitted to either 
local Housing Office or directly to the Maintenance Section in Civics since 2019 and to 
specify the nature of each of request or complaint; and if he will make a statement on 
the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
(Details attached) while listed in the Estate Renewal Plan 2018, was not assessed as 
part of this plan.   
 
(1) Water Quality 
A sample of water was retrieved from one residential unit in the Details supplied (a) 
complex on the 3 September 2024 and was analysed by the Uisce Éireann (UÉ) 
laboratory on Marrowbone Lane, D8. The initial results indicate that the sample is 
compliant with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Drinking Water Parameters 
based on the 2014 Drinking Water Regulations 2014. The final results will be provided 
to Council when available. Furthermore, DCC has ordered further testing of water from 
the cold water storage tanks at Details supplied (b) and the results will be provided 
to Council when available. 
Windows 
Housing Maintenance will arrange an inspection of the windows. We currently have 3 
number complexes in our programme for window replacement in 2025 and following 
our inspection we will look to add (details supplied) to this list. 
Balconies 
DCC have responded to previous leaks at balcony thresholds in the past and remedial 
works including waterproofing and other repairs have been carried out in affected 
dwellings. DCC carries out repairs as issues are reported to the DCC Maintenance 
and Repairs System.  
 
Q.18 
COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive provide an update on the preparation of the draft 
Background Issues Paper with regards to (Details Attached); when he anticipates the 
local Area Committee being consulted on the document and an indicative timeline for 
the publication of the Issues Paper and subsequent public consultation; and if he will 
make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Whilst some background work was prepared in relation to this LAP, no structured 
document as yet exists to bring forward for discussion.  Progress on this Local Area 
Plan has been paused until the completion of the work currently underway in relation 
to the Task Force for O’Connell Street and until resources allow the re-establishment 

of a team to lead the work.  The Plan remains a priority of the City Development Plan 
and for the team, and it is hoped that the completion of other projects in 2025 will create 
the opportunity to move this Plan forward under the new planning legislation.   
 
Q.19 
COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a comprehensive update on the status of 
individual projects to be advanced this calendar year as part of the (Details Attached); 
the timeframe for completion of informal consultation and local engagement and when 
he anticipates works starting on each project and how long is each expected to take in 
terms of completion; and if he will make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Throughout 2023 and early 2024, we actively engaged with stakeholders within the 
(Details Attached) area to discuss and advance the agreed-upon projects. The 
following table outlines the status of these projects. Details supplied 
 
Q.20 
COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline the list of projects to be included in (Details 
supplied); the timeframe for their completion and to indicate his thinking in terms of a 
similar initiative for 2025; and if he will make a statement on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please find below – (Details supplied) 
  
Q.21 
COUNCILLOR SÉAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider working with the GAA to create a festival event 
around the All Ireland finals next summer 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council Events have supported Dublin GAA winning all Ireland teams by 
providing civic reception and homecoming events, and will continue to do so. There is 
currently no provision for Dublin City Council to provide anything beyond that. 
 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR SÉAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive has Dublin City Council had any engagement with the 
owners of the former Assisi House Nursing home on the Navan Road with a view to 
purchasing the property for social housing? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has had no engagement directly with the owners of this property 
regarding the potential development of social housing at this location.  
 
Q.23 
COUNCILLOR SÉAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for a breakdown of tenants per LEA waiting on insulation 
in their homes, and how many inspectors does Dublin City Council have to inspect 
these houses in advance of the work. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The following is a breakdown of properties per LEA awaiting upgrade works, including 
insulation, under the current phase of the Energy Efficiency Retrofitting Programme: 
 
LEA 
No. of Properties Remaining 
Finglas West 
451 
Finglas East 
160 

Artane/Whitehall 
54 
Donaghmede 
6 
Clontarf 
47 
Cabra/Glasnevin 
195 
North Inner City 
85 
South Inner City 
274 
Ballyfermot West 
249 
Ballyfermot East/Drimnagh 
286 
Kimmage/Rathmines/Pembroke 
345 
 
There are two Dublin City Council inspectors who inspect these houses in advance of 
the work. 
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR SÉAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what implications does the recent decision of ABP on 
(details supplied) have for Dublin City Council? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Permission was granted by ABP for the following development on the site; 
 
Demolition of all existing buildings and structures on the site New 2-6 storey building 
with the top floor set back with a gross floor area of 6,478 sq.m. providing for a mix of 
uses comprising: • 3 no. licenced restaurant/café units with takeaway/collection facility 
at ground floor level • Offices – (5753 sq.m.) on 1st to 5th floors with office lobby at 
ground floor level and 3 terraces at 2nd, 3rd and 5th floor levels • Part of new public 
plaza (168 sq.m.) • 58 no. bicycle parking spaces • Plant at basement and roof level • 
Delivery Hub. The permission included 33 conditions one of which allowed for a 12 
year permission. It is considered that the proposal will help secure the redevelopment 
of underutilised urban land in a prominent city centre location which forms part of a key 
opportunity site in the North east Inner City (Area 10), Strategic Development 
Regeneration Area in the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028 which is identified 
as a civic/cultural hub and focus for quality retail and mixed use development. The 
proposed development would assist in the redevelopment and rejuvenation of this part 
of Dublin City in accordance with the development plan’s policies and objectives and 
its potential to contribute to the positive transformation of O’Connell Street and its 
immediate area is of strategic importance to Dublin City.     
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a detailed breakdown of the affordable rent, 
affordable purchase, and social housing units planned for Phase 5 of the upcoming 
apartment developments in Parkside Estate. Additionally, could the Chief Executive 
outline the anticipated pricing for these units and confirm when they will be available 
to the public 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Clúid in partnership with Cairn Homes are delivering the following unit numbers 
Parkside, Dublin 13.  
 Block 1B (mixed tenure) – Total 198 units – Delivery November 2024 
Cost Rental - 80  
Social - 118 
Block 2 (fully social) – Total 173 units – Delivery September 2025 
Social Older Persons - 78 
Social General needs - 75  

Cost Rental rates will be set at a minimum of 25% discount on local market rents, exact 
rental rates for this development have not yet been published.   
Social Housing rental rates will be in line with DCC Differential rent scheme 
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for an urgent remedial action be taken to address the 
overgrown tree between (1.details supplied), which has caused significant damage 
to the public path and private wall and driveway of (2. Details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow and any 
works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care 
programme for the area 2024-25. 
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for the installation of a playground in Streamville 
Park/Donahies Field and an update on the proposed all-weather football pitch for 
Streamville Park/Donahies Field. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are no proposals to install a playground at this location at this time.  The priority 
for the Parks Service for the next few years is to bring the last 3 remaining existing 
playground of older designs up to modern standards of play value, accessibility and 
inclusivity. Streamville Park is a recorded feeding site for Brent Geese, a protected 
species.  Further geese surveys need to be carried out over the winter months and 
pending the outcome of these surveys a consultative Part 8 process can be considered 
for 2025.  If the necessary approvals can be achieved installation of an all-weather 
facility could proceed in 2026. 
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive when will the Palmerston Park Tea rooms open? What is 
estimated cost and how much funding will be allocated to the required related 
landscaping of same Park? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Value’s Office has issued a letter to letting agencies seeking tenders for the 
marketing of the Tea Room, with a view to securing an operator.  The closing date for 
this is the 9th October and an agent will then be instructed and marketing discussed.  
Following this, the letting agent will be ready to advertise the facility on behalf of the 
Council.   Depending on the number and calibre of interested parties expressing an 
interest, an assessment will take place before selecting an operator.  The opening date 
of the Tea Rooms can then be negotiated and agreed with the operator. 
In relation to environs of the tearoom, Parks Projects, managing the Palmerston Park 
Tea Rooms Project, is currently seeking quotes for planting of beds and expect to have 
works completed by November 2024. 
 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can establish who the owner is of the decaying Baths 
at Sandymount/Merrion Strand 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Our records indicate that the Sandymount Baths are owned by the Earl of Pembroke 
and are subject to a lease from the Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery to the Merrion 
Pier and Baths Co. Ltd. for a term of 150 years from 29.09.1882. 
The property is not registered with the Land Registry.  

 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR MICHEAL PIDGEON 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
“In regard to the premises at (details supplied), an eyesore at the entrance to the 
Phoenix Park and noting the reply to the Council Question 37 from Cllr. Darcy 
Lonergan to the Chief Executive Council at the Meeting of 8th January 2024 which 
stated that ‘The owner has been contacted regarding the appearance of the property 
and a reply is awaited which will inform the next steps to be taken by the Derelict Sites 
Section’ can the Manager provide me with: 
• 
a copy of any reply received from the owner;  
• 
the name and address of the owner;  
• 
state what steps have been taken and will be taken by the Derelict Sites Section to 
place the premises on the Derelict Sites Register; and  
• 
to make a statement on the matter? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Representation were received from the owner(s) of (details supplied), outlining plans 
to have works carried out but they had issues with their contractor.  After a recent 
inspection we have written to the owners again with a request to carry out a specific 
schedule of works to render the building non-derelict.  A period of two weeks has been 
given to the owner to commence these works. The site will be monitored and a Section 
8(2) Notice of intention to enter onto the register will be served if no improvements are 
made. The details of the owner can be provided only after they are entered onto the 
Derelict Sites Register and become public record. 
 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
To ask the Chief Executive how many people subscribed to Dublin Bikes in 2023, and 
how many journeys were taken that year (or the last year for which numbers are 
available. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The statistics for dublinbikes for 2023 are; 
• 
29,047 long term subscribers  
• 
64,386 short term subscribers  
• 
2,034,075 journeys were taken, and  
• 
96% of journeys for the year were free journeys 
 
Q.32 
COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
To ask the Chief Executive for the timetable for the installation of communications 
boards in all Dublin parks, and the replacement of damaged boards.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The installation and replacement of communication boards in all Dublin parks will be 
in place in Q4 2024. 
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
To ask the Chief Executive how many houses are currently on the waiting list for 
maintenance, and how long the average wait is for repairs?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance Repair Team take an average of 750 calls per week and answer 
approximately 300 emails. While it is not possible to calculate the exact number of   
outstanding maintenance requests at any given time the overall response time, by 
category of request, are met in 80% of cases.  

Within the three categories of Emergency, Urgent and Routine, all Emergency 
requests are dealt with within the given timeframe 24-48hrs; Urgent requests are dealt 
with within the given timeframe of 3-5 days in 90% of cases; and our Routine requests 
are dealt with within up to eight weeks in 70% to 80% of cases. We are currently in the 
process of updating our systems and IT infrastructure, which will provide improved 
systems for our staff and our tenants and this will enhance our reporting going forward.    
 
Q.34 
COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
To ask the Chief Executive in regard to the Ryders Row/Parnell Street/Capel Street 
Area Compulsory Purchase (Residential/Commercial Development), Order 2019 
enacted in 2022, could the Chief Executive clarify what stage the plans are to retain 
the older buildings on the site (including the National Monument) and develop a 
scheme that would be largely residential in nature on the upper floors with some retail 
at ground level? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Stage 1 Design Proposals have been prepared. These are aligned with the 
Development Plan 2022-28 SDRA 13 Markets Area and Environs guidance for the site 
including; 
“A site of considerable visual prominence, its redevelopment should contribute a 
building of significant architectural merit, befitting its location at a key nodal point and 
vista termination along Parnell Street. 
With respect to built form and height, it should respond to the prevailing built form, 
character and grain of the established buildings to its west along Parnell St. 
However, at the corner it could accommodate a slender building of up to 6-8 storeys.”  
The National monument is retained in these proposals and, pending detailed surveys, 
are the other historic buildings.  
Following detailed surveys we will finalise how these structures can best be 
accommodated within the new development.  
Generally, the scheme is for residential use on the upper floors and as part of the 
ground floor.  
Confirmation of the most appropriate and sustainable use of the remainder of the 
ground floor will form part of the design development process. 
A site meeting with the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage will 
be held shortly following which a Stage 1 submittal will be made.  
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR MÁIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive that an information panel be installed at a suitable space 
beside the Quaker Burial Ground/Weir Home for Nurses at Cork Street Dublin 8 
providing locals and tourists with historical background of these unique spaces. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A heritage panel, covering the history of Cork Street and features of note on the street, 
was installed earlier this year by the South Central Area Office at the junction of Cork 
Street and Donore Avenue, quite close to the Quaker Burial Ground. This references 
the James Weir Home for Nurses. 
Following discussion with the City Heritage Officer, it is recommended that further 
interpretation of the Quaker Burial Ground be considered if and when the ownership 
and potential public access to this heritage site is decided and as part of a future 
conservation strategy for the site.  
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR MÁIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the Council engage with local community groups and 
schools in Dublin 8 area so a rotating “pop-up Citizens Garden” be temporarily installed 
at the junction of Brabazon Row/St Luke’s Avenue Dublin 8 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The site was assessed by Parks, Biodiversity & Landscaping Services at the end of 
2023 for its potential use as an amenity/open space. At that time, Parks Services 
offered a number of reasons as to why the site is unsuited to such use. 
There are no plans (or capacity) within the Area Office to support a meanwhile use of 
this site at this time. 
This site is a development site and the Area Office has asked the Planning & Property 
Development Department to consider whether there is a suitable alternate use for the 
site.  
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR MÁIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive that a dedicated team be established to plan for and 
oversee the future use of iconic buildings that include Iveagh Market, Rupert Guinness 
Theatre and Kilmainham Mills. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Culture, Recreation and Economic Services Department is currently managing 
capital works relating to Iveagh Market and Kilmainham Mill and given the significant 
time and expertise required to move these projects forward, considering is being given 
as part of the wider workforce planning exercise underway to ensure sufficient staff 
resources are assigned to these projects going forward.  
 
The objective of this review is to ensure that we build on the positive work that has 
been accomplished to date and ensure appropriate staff resources are in place to 
move these projects forward.  
 
The Rupert Guinness Theatre is not a building that is in the ownership of Dublin City 
Council, however our Arts Officer has engaged with Diageo and viewed the building at 
the invitation of the building owners. 
 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the Housing Department’s plans for the 
refurbishment and return to residential use of 38 and 39 Bolton Street, Dublin 1. I 
understand from media reports that the Department of Housing had approved a 
funding application and consultants had been appointed in 2018. I also note that in a 
reply to a question to the Chief Executive tabled by Councillor Caroline Conroy 
answered on 5th September 2022 it was stated that there would be a the part 8 
planning process, and it was is envisaged that the construction works to these 
properties would be completed by  late 2024. In his reply can he state what stage the 
Part 8 process is at, and whether Arlington Novas Ireland, an Approved Housing Body, 
are still involved in the process?” 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The proposals developed by Arlington Novas did not progress due to issues relating 
to conservation. In 2023, the Adaptive Reuse Unit in the Housing Department 
developed a proposal for the creation of six apartments from the buildings at 38/39 
Bolton Street Dublin 1. Partial funding from the DHLGH was granted to advance to 
detailed design stage and a tender competition to appoint a design team was run. 
However, vacant possession of the site could not be secured due to an issue with 
partial occupation, and this has resulted in the redevelopment project being placed on 
hold. This issue is being dealt with by the Planning & Property Development 
Department, and once resolved, the project will be advanced as a priority.  
 
 
 

Q.39  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
“The building at 54 Arbour Hill, Dublin 7, D07C2P5 was uninhabited for many years 
but has recently undergone significant works. The building was known as the 
‘Carpenters’ Alms-houses’ and in the National Inventory of Architectural Heritage is 
assessed as being of regional importance. I understand that requests have been made 
in recent years to place the building on the record of Protected Structures.  
Can the Chief Executive state: 
• 
what stage has the request for inclusion on the Record of Protected Structures 
reached, 
• 
can he investigate whether the building is in residential use, and if so state whether 
Planning Permission, a Fire Safety Certificate or a Disability Access Certificate has 
been applied for or obtained for the building, and can he take the necessary 
enforcement action, and  
• 
Can he make a statement on the matter? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
PART REPLY: 
No 54 Arbour Hill, formerly known as the Widows’ Alms House has a Regional rating 
on the NIAH, and a Stage 2 Ministerial Recommendation.  The building is on the 
Conservation Section’s Priority List to progress to protected status as it satisfies two 
of the priority headings – it is an early building and is located in the north city centre 
area. This will be progressed as resources are available. 
 
Part reply regarding residential use 
The Planning Enforcement Section has recently investigated the use of this property 
as 6 self-contained residential units. Documentary evidence has been provided 
indicating that the premises was in use pre 1963 as six self-contained residential units. 
Therefore no issue arises in respect of the buildings use for residential purposes. 
 
Part reply regarding residential use 
Dublin Fire Brigade have no records of a Fire Safety Certificate application for this 
building.  
 
A Fire Safety Certificate is required when a material alteration, material change of use, 
extension or construction is undertaken on a building. It is to demonstrate compliance 
with Building Regulations part B. 
 
Unless such changes have occurred since 1992 a fire safety certificate would not be 
required. 
However, the person in control of this premises has responsibilities under section 18.2 
of the Fire Services Act 1981 & 2003. DFB will follow up in line with our processes. 
 
Part Reply: 
We have no Record of a Disability Access Certificate been applied for.  
 
Q.40 
COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive outline the strategy for the implementation of the XL bully 
ban and the resources assigned to it? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council Animal Welfare & Control Services will implement the XL bully ban 
in accordance with the Control of Dogs (XL Bully) Regulations 2024 and any further 
instructions that may be issued in this regard by the Department of Rural & Community 

Development. In keeping with the regulations, this will commence with processing of 
Certification of Exemption applications received during the period 1st October 2024 – 
1st February 2025 from current XL Bully owners who wish to keep their dog until the 
end of their natural life. 
 
The Department of Rural & Community Development launched a public information 
campaign on 23rd September 2024, Full details of the ban and how it will operate are 
available at https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/e5d55-xl-bully-ban-ireland/ 
 
The Council’s Animal Welfare team currently consists of 4 no. administrative staff and 
7 no. operational (Animal Welfare Inspector, Assistant Inspector and 5 Animal 
Wardens).  The City Council will keep the situation under review during the first phase 
of implementation of the new Regulations and a case will be made for additional 
resources if deemed necessary. 
 
Q.41 
COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive whether monthly reports have been approved for the 
residents in Castlecourt and Auburn who experienced significant flooding. Many 
residents have not received information about the progress that has been made so far. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The residents were given a short update on progress and the current monitoring of the 
flood storage pond in Clontarf Golf Club last Thursday 26th September. A further 
update will be issued to them on these on Thursday 3rd October covering the current 
status of six queries previously requested by them. Another progress report will be 
issued to them early in November 2024. 
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to reinstall plaques marking the trees in the Millennium 
Arboretum in St Anne’s Park. The plaques that were placed there in 1988 have largely 
disappeared. The new plaques should denote the genus/species of tree, its natural 
source and be linked to an app offering more information on the arboretum and the 
trees therein. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The trees have been surveyed and uploaded to DCC’s GIS based digital inventory of 
trees.  The surveying process proved somewhat problematic as the tablet struggled to 
connect to connect to the GIS satellites due to the tree canopy cover.  So before 
modern solutions are explored it is planned to have the trees labelled which will allow 
lists, maps etc. be published and then maybe an online version.  It is planned to label 
the herbaceous planting in the double border at the clock tower and then begin 
labelling the trees in the arboretum in 2025.  
 
Q.43 
COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to give a full report on all efforts made thus far to reinstate 
the playground in Belmayne Park and to outline what Dublin City Council can and will 
do to ensure the playground is opened as soon as possible. This playground, in the 
centre of a heavily residential area with huge numbers of children, has been derelict 
for years. Meanwhile lucrative construction and private development in the area has 
continued non-stop. It is not acceptable to direct parents, children and families to 
playgrounds elsewhere, involving traversing busy roads such as Belmayne Avenue. 
The Belmayne Park playground should serve the families of Belmayne and this needs 
to be rectified immediately. 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The small playground at Belmayne Park was removed by the management company 
who control and maintain the park.  While the process to have this area taken in 
charge is underway it remains private property at this time.  Once taken in charge 
consideration can be given to the replacement of the small amount of play equipment 
previously located here.  In the meantime the Belmayne playground located 300m to 
the north is available for local residents. 
 
Q.44 
COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for a full explanation of the decision to change the plan for 
the Sybil Hill Road section of the Gracefield Road to Vernon Avenue cycle route from 
one-way on each side of the road to two-way on one side of the road. Can the Chief 
Executive confirm that this decision was based largely on submissions via public 
consultations and not research or best practice? The original route was parking-
protected on the St Anne’s side and offered by far the most direct route - including 
direct access for children to St Paul’s secondary school. The new plan now includes 
numerous yield points for cyclists and requires them to cross the road twice in the 
space of a few hundred metres. Moreover, the crossing points are dangerous and 
inconvenient to the extent it is doubtful cyclists will use this section of the route.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In 2023 DCC’s Active Travel Programme Office in conjunction with the NTA developed 
preliminary design drawings for the Gracefield Road to Vernon Avenue Active Travel 
scheme. The proposals included a one way cycle track along both sides of Sybill Hill 
Road with a parking protected cycle lane on the eastern side and a one-way stepped 
cycle track on the western side. A non-statutory public consultation was held in August 
2023 to obtain the views of the public on the design. Following  the public consultation, 
further analysis of the original design was undertaken including a  review of the 
proposed design  against the new NTA  Cycle Design Manual ( Sep 2023).  This 
assessment determined that a two-way cycle track on the west side of the road was 
the preferred cross section along Sybill Hill Road for the following reasons: 
 
• 
A two-way cycle track can be accommodated within existing road with less 
impact on kerbs and grass verge over the length of the scheme. It is therefore more 
cost effective and more straight forward to construct.  
 
• 
As the two-way cycle track will retain most of the existing kerbs it will greatly 
minimise impact on Public lighting infrastructure. It is expected that the relocation of 
two Public Lighting columns will be required. The one-way parking protected cycle 
track would require the relocation of 18 columns and associated utility works on Sybil 
Hill Road. 
 
• 
There are many Grade B trees (semi-mature trees with moderate value and 
conservation), along Sybil Hill Road with some of the tree roots protruding above the 
grass verge. The one-way cycle track proposal would have a significant impact on 
the tree roots and could result in the potential removal of c. forty trees. The one-way 
cycle track will result in the removal of three trees. 
 
• 
There are a high number of cars parking along Sybil Hill Road adjacent to St. 
Anne’s Park especially during the weekend. The two-way design will eliminate the 
parking protected cycle track and the need for the drivers and passengers to cross 
the cycle track which could create conflicts with cyclists. The proposed two-way cycle 
track is to be located on the west side of Sybil Hill Road, away from the parallel 
parking area.  

 
• 
Design considerations as per Cycle Design Manual:  
 
Two-way cycle tracks can be well suited to inter-urban routes and other 
locations where there are few side roads. There are no side road and minimal 
accesses along Sybill Hill Road. Two-way cycle tracks require less overall width than 
one-way cycle track whilst also providing more opportunities to safely overtake.  
The interfaces between the two-way cycle track and Howth Road/Sybil Hill and Sybil 
Hill/ Vernon Avenue junctions along the route were carefully considered to provide 
an easy and intuitive merge and diverge at the transitioning from one-way to two-way 
cycle track and vice-versa. 
 
• 
A one-way cycle track on both sides of the road would require cyclists to stop 
at several signalised pedestrian crossing locations along Sybill Hill Road. These 
delays will reduce the directness, comfort and attractiveness of the cycle scheme. 
The new two-way cycle track does not require cyclists to fully stop as they will be 
entering large shared spaces.   
 
Q.45 
COUNCILLOR CIARAN PERRY 
To ask the Chief Executive provide an update on the Leakage Reduction Programme 
run by Irish Water in partnership with Dublin City Council? Has this programme 
completed and if so, what areas in Dublin 7 were included? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Uisce Eireann have sole responsibility for Water Services including Leakage 
Reduction. The Councillors query should be referred directly to Uisce Eireann at: 
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR CIARAN PERRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm whether the council have a policy or strategy for 
the roll out of EV charging stations in the city? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently eleven (11) Disabled Persons Organisations also known as 
Disabled Persons Representative Organisations Dublin City Council is aware of and 
communicates with.  This number is expected to grow and newly formed Disabled 
Persons Organisations wishing to become involved should contact the Access Officer 
accessofficer@dublincity.ie   
 
There is no rigid or exclusive national or international criteria for recognising Disabled 
Persons Organisations but the guidance in General Comment 7 of the United Nations 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD) does provide 
information on the typical characteristics of Disabled Persons Organisations.   
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR CIARAN PERRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the Local Employment clause in 
the O’Devaney Gardens contract? Can he provide details of the following? 
 
a)      The number of local people employed on the project? 
b)      The type of work local people working on the project are engaged in? 
c)       Have any local apprentices been employed? 
d)      Have any local tradesmen been employed 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please note the following response:  
 
a. Number of local people employed = 88no. 

b. Type of work = formwork carpenters, plant operatives, plumbers, pipe layers, 
engineers, site management, steelworkers, general labourers, security, traffic 
controllers. 
c. Of the 88no.above, 12no.are apprentices 
d. Of the 88no above, 41 are tradesmen 
  
Q.48  COUNCILLOR CIARAN PERRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a comprehensive update on the plan to upgrade 
the section of Blackhorse Avenue between Baggot Road and Darling Estate? This 
section of Blackhorse Avenue was part of a planned Dublin City Council road 
improvement scheme in 2001. The surrounding sections have been upgraded in 2017 
but this section, the most hazardous section on Blackhorse Avenue, has not been 
improved. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We have no resources to provide a comprehensive plan, but this road will be 
considered for future works programmes. In the meantime, Road Maintenance 
Services will continue to address any localised defects as they arise. 
 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to organise for the wall to be fully repaired as soon as 
possible at (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance has appointed a contractor to rebuild the wall at the above 
address.  Arrangements will be made in consultation with the tenant and work will be 
progressed as quickly as possible. 
 
Q.50  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what alternative sites were explored to erect the 5G mast 
at the entrance to Bluebell on the Nass Road and why were these sites rejected? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Cignal Infrastructure LTD applied to Dublin City Council for a licence under Section 
254 of the planning and Development Act in April 2022 (Ref TIL007-22).  A licence was 
granted by Dublin City Council in June 2022. As part of their application a planning 
report was submitted, which included a detailed report setting out the criteria for 
selecting this location plus the consideration given to other locations in the vicinity.  In 
response to this question, the application planning documentation included in the 
response. Dublin City Council’s remit covers the determination of these licences by 
either granting or refusing the licence. 
 
Q.51 
COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure the appropriate action is taken to ensure the 
landlord, (details supplied) carries out this essential work as a matter of urgency. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Under the HAP scheme as the rental agreement is between the landlord and the tenant 
any maintenance issues should be reported to the landlord to be resolved. Inspections 
are carried out by Environmental Health officers within 8 months following move in 
dates to HAP properties. The HAP section issue a weekly list of new tenancies to 
EHO’s. Any issues identified at inspection date are to be addressed and resolved by 
the landlord within 12 weeks. An inspection was carried out at (details supplied) by 
an Environmental Health Officer in 2017 and was closed off in 2018. I have contacted 
the Environmental Health Section and they have advised me that they have an open 

case on this address and an improvement notice has been served to the landlord. A 
follow up inspection will be carried out after the notice period expires to determine if 
issues have been resolved.  
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to investigate the complaints from resident’s living in and 
around, (details supplied). Residents state that the development does not have 
enough protective netting to stop dust spreading, this is causing a nuisance and 
breathing problems. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Planning Enforcement Section have been in contact with the developer on this 
site regarding additional dust suppression netting at this location. The Planning 
Enforcement Officer for the area will follow this up by way of site inspections to ensure 
that appropriate measures in this regard are in place.  
 
Q.53 
COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a detailed up to date list of tree pruning/tree 
maintenance in the Cabra, Glasnevin, Drumcondra, Navan Road and North Inner City 
Areas. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We have just achieved our 2024 Tree Care Programme which consisted on the 
prioritized and planned pruning of over 1200 trees and the removal of over 200 trees 
for health and safety reasons.  
The 2025 Tree Care Programme, which is informed by our arborist inventory is in 
preparation and will be communicated in early 2025 when the budget is confirmed. 
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive to repair and resurface the Footpaths on HollyBank Road 
urgently. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Division’s 2024 Annual Works Programme has been presented to the Elected 
Members, outlining all carriageways and footpaths scheduled for upgrade in 2024, with 
the budget that has been allocated to the Division. Hollybank Road Footpaths is not 
part of the current programme. However, consideration for additional works will depend 
on the availability of further budget allocations. HollyBank Road Footpaths is already 
on our list for consideration in future works programmes, should additional funding 
become available to the Division. In the meantime, Road Maintenance Services will 
continue to address any defects as they arise. 
 
Q.55 
COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive what are Dublin City Council’s plans for the collection of 
leaves during the autumn period. Are there any provisions in place to help elderly with 
the collection of leaves? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As we do every year, Waste Management Services will operate a leaves clearing 
programme throughout the city over the autumn and winter months. Priority is given to 
tree-lined streets, footpaths with heavy pedestrian use and areas particularly prone to 
flooding. In addition we assist resident groups in clearing leaves from their areas and 
remove the collected leaves for them. Elderly residents requiring the footpaths in their 
area to be cleared of leaves or removal of leaves they have gathered, will be given as 
much priority as possible. 

Q.56  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on The Martin Savage Park Development. 
Has an environmental study taken place? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is engaging with NPWS / DoHLGH along with other local authorities 
in the Dublin area in order to consider the possible combined effects of other presently 
considered developments of artificial pitches on playing field sites utilized by the Brent 
geese in the Dublin area as well as that proposed in Martin Savage. These discussions 
are ongoing.  
 
Q.57 
COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to develop and implement a traffic management plan for 
Griffith Ave, Mobhi Road, Homefarm Road. Botanic Ave and Drumcondra Road Upper. 
There have been ongoing concerns from residents regarding speeding and disregard 
for traffic signals at the Mobhi Rd/Botanic Ave intersection, which recently led to a 
near-fatal accident. What immediate measures are being considered or planned to 
improve pedestrian, cyclist and driver safety in this area? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Traffic calming would not be appropriate for Griffith Avenue as it is a main Orbital link 
road and emergency service route, and is therefore not recommended. The Transport 
Advisory Group (TAG) will raise your concerns with An Garda Síochána at the next 
TAG Meeting, as the Gardaí are responsible for enforcing road traffic legislation to 
ensure that drivers comply with speed limits and Rules of the Road. 
 
The Transport Advisory Group will not be providing additional traffic calming on 
Homefarm Road or Botanic Avenue:- both roads are currently traffic calmed with a 
number of speed ramps, and the junctions are signalised with traffic lights and 
controlled pedestrian crossings. All the other roads and junctions mentioned in this 
question are being redesigned as part of the the National Transport Authority funded 
Active Travel and Bus Connects projects. Griffith Avenue forms part of the DCC Active 
Travel Glasnevin to Clontarf Route. The Active Travel measures have been installed 
on Griffith Avenue from Philipsburgh Ave to Ballygall Rd East. The remainder of the 
Glasnevin to Clontarf Route is currently not part of NTA / DCC Active Travel 
Programme Office current programme, which runs from 2024 – 2028. Construction in 
not scheduled to happen until after this period.  However, should additional funding 
becomes available, construction could start before 2028. 
Drumcondra Road Upper forms part of the NTA Swords to City Centre Bus Connects 
Project. The remainder of the roads are not part of the DCC Active Travel Network. 
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to explore installing SUDS style flood supports in some of 
the 13 empty tree pits around Christ the King, Cabra. The prevalence of concrete 
increases flood risk, shown by the Council's action to install a pump. The tree pits are 
as follows: 2 on Leix Roadd, 3 on Newgrange Road, 4 on Annaly Road, 2 on Eris Road, 
1 on Offaly Road, 1 on Galmoy Road. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Drainage Planning, Policy and Development Control Section are actively 
promoting the implementation of SuDS throughout Dublin City Councils administrative 
area and have developed a Sustainable Drainage Design & Evaluation Guide to aid 
this. With regards to the empty tree pits in the Christ the King area of Cabra we would 
encourage the use of SuDS at this location and will talk to the Parks Section to see 
how this can be developed. 

Q.59  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to address overgrown grass verges which gather rubbish 
and cause issues for older persons and people using wheelchairs and buggies. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Service carried out an inspection of the location in question (details 
supplied) and there was no evidence of overgrown grass verges, gathering rubbish 
which might cause issues for older people.  We have emailed the Councillor on this 
matter with photographs.  If there are any other issues please contact the undersigned. 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to conduct a tree audit in Claremont Estate, Finglas Road. 
This could be a useful pilot for estates where trees planted decades ago are aging out. 
The safety of footpaths where tree roots are developing trip hazards also need 
attention. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
All our tree work is carried out as per the guidelines of our DCC Tree Strategy. Tree 
work is predominantly carried out for health and safety reasons, following an arborist’s 
inventory and assessment. An inventory of the street trees in Claremont Estate is 
programmed for 2025/2026. 
 
Q.61 
COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if the funding is in place to allow the construction of the 
Proposed All Weather Football Facility adjacent to the Glin Road community Centre in 
Coolock Dublin 17. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The funding is in place for this facility however, the project still requires plans to be 
drawn up, Part 8 planning permission processed and a tender to proceed to 
construction. The facility is proposed to be located adjoining the DCC Community 
Recreation Centre and so it will be a project for the Sports and Recreation team to 
progress when a new SEO is in place.   
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on footpath remedial works in Kilmore West 
and the surrounding communities. There have been many reports of raised pavements 
and sunken Utility Chambers across the Area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
More than 4,000 m2 of Footpath Reconstruction works have been carried out since 
July 2024, in the above-mentioned area. Please state exact locations for the reported 
defects, so we can add them to our works list.  
 
Q.63 
COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if there is a possibility to have the timing sequence of the 
traffic signals at the crossing point of Swords Road and Griffith Avenue? For many 
years now the traffic on Griffith Avenue crossing Swords Road is provided with short 
time periods of approx. 10 seconds which many motorists and cyclists have reported 
as not adequate and requests have been submitted for the possibility of a longer 
sequence for this traffic movement at this Crossroads. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
At the junction of Swords Road/ Griffith Ave, the Swords Rd approaches receive a 
majority of available green time each cycle of the traffic signals as the Swords Road is 

a main public transport artery to/from the city and the main city transportation route to 
Dublin airport, Northern Ireland and the north Eastern commuter belt. 
 
Allocation of extra green time to Griffith Ave approaches necessitates the reduction in 
green signal time available to the Swords Road approaches and thus increases public 
transport journey times through the junction, potentially delaying thousands of 
passengers, contrary to Dublin City Council policy to prioritise sustainable modes of 
transportation across the city. 
 
However, a review of the junction operation was undertaken recently to determine 
current traffic movements and volumes. Following this review, some minor additional 
timings were allocated to the Griffith Avenue approaches to allow some additional time 
for these movements while keeping the main public transport corridor working and 
protecting the safety of pedestrians and cyclists. 
 
There is however, currently, very limited scope for any further changes to traffic signals 
timings for the Griffith Avenue approaches without impacting public transport users on 
the main Swords Road corridor. 
 
The operation of the junctions is under constant observation and review and further 
changes will be made, as required, where there is scope to do so. 
Thank you for your query. 
 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive what the plan is to address the current rat infestation in 
(details supplied). 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing maintenance will arrange to have the area inspected. Any issues will be dealt 
with at source.  
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive for any updates regarding the Ambassador Theatre. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC will arrange to contact Live Nation to request details of any proposals they may 
have for the Ambassador Theatre and update the councillor with details when received. 
 
Q.66 
COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider an alternative use for the waste ground to the 
side of the Poppintree shops, it is currently just a dumping ground. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Manager will look at the location with a view to carrying out environmental 
improvements to enhancements to the green space. This location may form part of the 
Ballymun Local Area Plan, as the adjoining shops at the Poppintree Neighbourhood 
Centre were part of the original masterplan, this will be investigated and a full reply will 
issue directly to the Councillor as soon as possible.  
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive can a report on what housing maintenance has been 
carried out on (details supplied) as the resident’s home is still with mould and it’s 
extremely cold except for the living room. 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In 2012, Housing Maintenance pumped the walls of this house bringing it up to a C3 
rating. The heating, windows and doors were also upgraded at the time. In 2023 further 
insulation works were carried out and all the internal walls were dry lined. This property 
does not qualify for any further works under the current Energy Efficiency Retrofit 
Programme.  
 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief to report on the Roads Project that has been undertaken by Dublin 
City Council as to which roads are being fixed or will be fixed as part of the 2024 
Programme of Works?" 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The 2024 Programme of Works for the resurfacing of roads in Dublin South East are: 
 
Clare Street 
College St – D’Olier St to Westmoreland Street 
Dame St - Church Lane to Fownes St 
Garville Road 
Harmony Avenue 
Kenilworth Park - Wilfrid Road to Harold's Cross Road 
Lennox Street - Florence St 
Northbrook Lane 
Nutley Lane – Stillorgan Rd to hospital entrance 
Pearse Street at junction of Shaw St. 
Percy Lane 
Peter Row 
Rugby Villas 
Saint James's Terrace 
Wellington Quay/Wood Quay at Parliament St junction 
Wellington Road - Pembroke Rd to Elgin Rd 
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide information about the current status of the 
anticipated additional revenue expected from cigarette companies in addressing the 
widespread issue of discarded cigarette butts and disposable vapes?” 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The allocation of any anticipated additional revenue from cigarette companies in 
addressing the issue of discarded cigarette butts and disposable vapes is a matter 
for central government’s Department of Finance/Department of Public Expenditure, 
NP Delivery and Reform. 
Q.70 
COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive for information about the total number of trees pruned, over 
the last 2 years, that obstructed footpaths and/or cycle lanes, a breakdown of this 
information in details i.e. the number of trees pruned, the electoral ward and the year 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Most of the tree pruning is carried out by our local crews in each Parks District and 
data in relation to this routine work is not recorded in a way that it can be broken down 
by electoral area. Tree pruning is carried out to maintain the health, shape and vigour 
of the trees themselves, to remove any potential hazard to people and property and to 
alleviate any blocking of pubic lighting, traffic lights or signage.  
 

Q.71 
COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report with a break down by Local Electoral 
Area (LEA), the footpaths that have been repaired or fixed in the last 1 year by Dublin 
City Council?” 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The following is a list of pavements that have been reconstructed as part of the Road 
Maintenance Sections Programme of works for Dublin South East:  
Approximately 428 defects/potholes have been repaired by DCC’s Direct Road 
Maintenance Crew within the south east area since beginning of January 2024. 
 
Derravargh Road 
Fergus Road 
Harold's Cross 
Road 
Leeson Park 
Lennox Street 
Mountpleasant 
Square 
O'Connell 
Gardens 
Parnell Road 
Raglan Road 
Rathfarnham 
Road - Fergus 
Road to Terenue 
Village 
Tivoli Avenue 
Vavasour Square 
Larkfield Grove 
Ramhleh Close 
Frankfort Ave at 
Tesco 
Digges St Upper 
Shelbourne Road 
(Lansdown Rd to 
Lansdown Park 
inbound side) 
Kells Road (cul de 
sac Nos. 46 to 54 
and gable at No. 
57) 
Lismore Road 
(Clonmacnoise Rd 
to Bangor Rd) 
Havelock Square 
Cowper Gardens 
Park Drive 
Mount Tallant 
Avenue 
Charlston Road 
(Oakley Rd to 
Belgrave Sq) 
 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many social and affordable homes he anticipates will 
be completed and ready for use in 2025, and if he could outline in which areas these 
homes will be. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Details of all Social and Affordable Housing projects including expected completions 
dates, location of developments are contained in the monthly housing delivery report.  
https://councilmeetings.dublincity.ie/documents/s46133/189.%20Housing%20S
upply%20Report.pdf 
 
Q.73 
COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if plans exist to increase the funding for local arts centres 
for events and festivals 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The primary funding agency that funds Arts Centres is often the Arts Council. Arts 
Grants  in Dublin City Council have been increased in 2024 by almost 50% and Arts 
Festivals are supported through Arts Grants and through Festivals specifically 
supported such as Culture Night supported by the Arts Office or the Bram Stoker 
Festival supported by the City Events Unit or the History Festival supported by 
Libraries. These Festivals have received increased support in 2024. 
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive to please re-examine a residents appeal to Dublin City 
Council regarding their Disabled Persons Scheme application for a sensory room and 
bathroom for their son (details supplied). 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance has reviewed the application from the above address and letter 
has been sent out to the Tenant outlying the outcome. 
 
Q.75 
COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that a pothole at (details supplied) be repaired as soon 
as possible due to the severity of it. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This repairs at this location were carried out last week. 
 
Q.76 
COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive to install a digital speed sign to display the speed of a 
vehicle which flashes when the speed limit is exceeded at (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Radar Controlled Driver Feedback signs are provided in specific circumstances where 
an engineering assessment and speed survey data have indicated that motorists’ 
speeds are greatly in excess of the speed limit, even though appropriate engineered 
traffic calming measures have been provided, and there continues to be a high risk 
that there could be a collision between a pedestrian or cyclist with a motorist on the 
road. 
Another circumstance where Radar Controlled Driver Feedback signs are provided is 
on roads where there is a significant change from a higher speed limit to a lower speed 
limit on the same road.   
Radar Controlled Driver Feedback signs are expensive to install and to maintain and 
therefore a road needs to meet the criteria for the provision of these signs.  The (details 
supplied) does not meet the criteria for this type of signage. 
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive if there are any plans to address persistent illegal and 
dangerous parking around (details supplied) as residents on surrounding streets 
have difficulty passing parked cars.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parking Enforcement Section will request that Dublin Street Parking Services 
patrol this area and enforce any illegal parking. 
 
Residents can consult with the Traffic Advisory Group (TAG) regarding a viable parking 
strategy for this area. They can be contacted at traffic@dublincity.ie. 
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive when the trees next to (details supplied) will be pruned 
as they are very tall and have been on the pruning list for some time.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow and any 
works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care 
programme for the area 2024-25. 
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive when the traffic lights on (details supplied) will be 
upgraded as they are difficult to see and frequently break so pose a real hazard to 
pedestrians crossing on a green pedestrian light.  
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The upgrade of the pedestrian signals equipment on (details supplied) is scheduled 
to be undertaken by end of Q4 2024, as part of an ongoing scheduled programme of 
works for 2024. This upgrade will enhance the safety of the pedestrian crossing at this 
busy location. 
 
Q.80 
COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive do the Officers of Environmental Health Dept accept Draft 
ETCI Periodic Inspection Reports for compliance purposes as per the relevant Housing 
Acts rather than Bona Fide Registered ETCI Periodic Inspection Reports? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As part of an inspection of a private rented property Dublin City Council may, in line 
with the “Guidelines for Housing Authorities in Implementation of Standards in Rented 
Accommodation” (DOHLGH, August 2024), request copies of certificates relating to a 
property to be submitted, to assist in assessing compliance.   This may include a 
current Periodic Inspection Report issued by a Safe Electric registered electrical 
contractor.   
Q.81  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive the following; 
The massive rise in Domestic Violence in Ballymun & Finglas is a huge concern, is the 
Chief Executive in a position to advise what measures are being put in place to reverse 
this through any campaigns &/or awareness programs? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Department of Justice has set up a new statutory agency Cuan dedicated to 
tackling and reducing domestic, sexual and gender based violence.  Their role includes 
leading on awareness-raising campaigns designed to reduce the incidence of DSGBV 
in Irish society as well as ensuring that all victims know how to access the supports 
they require. 
 
Q.82 
COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive can we please get a task force set up or working group 
within the council that ensures that Licenses that are administered by Dublin City 
Council to have outdoor furniture/street furniture for Publicans are enforced? 
Particularly around Camden Street. Publicans have not been adhering to their licenses 
agreements, where all furniture must be brought in by 10 P.M and also show their 
license on the front of their property stating what time it can be out until and what 
amount of space can be used for the street furniture.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Street Furniture Unit carry out regular inspections of all premises with Street 
Furniture Licences to ensure compliance.  With regard to the area referenced the 
Public Domain Officer has been liaising with the Camden Residents and the 
businesses in order to resolve any issues that may arise. 
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive, to investigate a strip of land which is council owned and it 
is currently causing a nuisance to the residents of London Road, Dublin 4. There has 
been Badgers using the land as a home, they have now caused significant damage to 
the homes in the proximities gardens. Can the council please assist in the safe removal 
of these Badgers?  
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The area in question is the responsibility of Uisce Eireann and it is known to contain a 
Badger Sett . The Badger is a protected species so the person being affected by their 
presence should contact the National Parks and Wildlife Service for advice 01- 
8882000. It is to the rear of a property on Londonbridge Road.  
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive can we please get Dublin City Council Dublin Bikes placed 
down in Ringsend? There are a considerable amount of Dublin City Bike points all 
throughout Dublin 2 & 8 but virtually none in Ringsend. Residents have requested that 
the Bikes could be placed here (photo attached) the area along Irish Town Road. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council supports the dublinbike bicycle sharing scheme administratively 
and financially. The dublinbike bicycle sharing scheme is operated by JCDecaux. The 
expansion of this scheme, or the capacity of a station within the scheme, would require 
a contractual change and there are no plans to amend the contract or expand the 
scheme. The current scheme is in contract until 2027. 
 
Q.85 
COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Residents in Markievicz House & along Lombard Street have been under siege by the 
worsening of the rat infestation that is a direct cause of the non-maintained site 19/20 
Lombard Street, 112/114 Townsend Street. How is the council managing this 
situation? (photo of sites attached). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance is constantly monitoring Markievicz House and bait is laid 
regularly.  Camera survey has taken place and repairs have been carried out where 
necessary.  Contact has been made with the Management Company of the boarded 
up Countess Markievicz Public House (in private ownership) who have committed to 
laying further bait and these works should improve the situation. 
 
Q.86 
COUNCILLOR EOIN HAYES 
To ask the Chief Executive for the numbers of derelict sites added to and removed 
from the Derelict Sites Register for each year from 2014 to-date (or latest data 
available), the funds yielded from the Derelict Site Levy each year under the Derelict 
Sites Act 1990 broken down by principal and accrued interest, the outstanding unpaid 
Derelict Site Levy balances by each year, and the number of sites CPO'd by the 
Derelict Sites Unit for each year, as per the table below: 
 
 
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
Number of Sites Added to Derelict 
Sites Register 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of Sites Removed from 
Derelict Sites Register 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of Sites Acquired through 
CPO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total Derelict Sites Levy Charged 
(EUR) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Total Derelict Sites Levy Interest 
Charged (EUR) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance of Unpaid Derelict Sites 
Levy (EUR) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total Arrears Derelict Sites Levy 
(EUR) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
 
  
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024  
to 30/9 
Total number 
of sites on 
DS Register 
48 
54 
63 
70 
83 
85 
73 
76 
78 
109 
128 
Number of 
Sites Added 
to Derelict 
Sites 
Register 
29 
5 
7 
17 
25 
17 
2 
10 
11 
39 
12 
Number of 
Sites 
Removed 
from Derelict 
Sites 
Register 
12 
3 
6 
20 
12 
15 
14 
7 
9 
8 
5 
** Number of 
Sites 
Acquired 
through CPO 
Information not 
available 
Information not 
available 
Information not 
available 
11 
6 
6 
1 
1 
11 
2 
5 
Total Derelict 
Sites Levy 
Charged 
(EUR) 
€194,475.00 
€425,850.00 
€441,450.00 
€425,175.00 
€355,875.00 
€444,029.79 
€1,648,150.00 
€1,540,970.90 
€1,545,110.00 
€1,597,610.00 
€1,858,430.00 
Total Derelict 
Sites Levy 
Interest 
Charged 
(EUR) 
€107,519.19 
€100,065.34 
€107,710.91 
€124,097.97 
€103,074.47 
€256,996.42 
€255,860.50 
€292,890.06 
€325,672.56 
€438,423.41 
€439,869.81 
Total Derelict 
Sites Levies 
paid PLUS 
interest 
€24,043.98 
 
€205,089.40 
 
€291,471.92 
 
€193,228.76 
 
€462,970.39 
 
€298,556.67 
 
€402,344.37 
 
€417,447.02 
 
€490,029.35 
 
€1,027,910.63 
 
€343,488.26 
 
Balance of 
Unpaid 
Derelict Sites 
Levy (EUR) at 
year end 
including 
arrears 
€1,432,860.25 
€1,618,432.22 
€1,842,041.12 
€2,027,309.30 
€1,780,191.73 
€2,149,309.87 
€3,445,768.74 
€4,756,429.17 
€5,800,254.86 
€6,659,059.20 
€8,380,401.69 

 
 

 
Since 2017, an ongoing acquisition strategy has been implemented as a key part of 
the Council’s Active Land Management Initiative. For context we have included the 
total number of sites on the Derelict Sites Register for each year. 
 
Under the Planning and Development (Amendment) Act 2018, the amount of the 
derelict sites levy increased from 3% of market value to 7% of market value from 1st 
January 2020. 
 
It should also be noted that Line 3** above refers to sites acquired under Section 14 of 
the Derelict Sites Legislation whereby “a local authority may acquire by agreement or 
compulsorily any derelict site”. The Council will only acquire compulsorily as a last 
resort in circumstances where all efforts to secure the carrying out of improvement 
works by property owners have been exhausted.  This process can take up to 2 years 
to complete. 
 
For clarification it differs from the Compulsory Purchase Order (CPO) legislation 
whereby the Council can exercise powers conferred upon it by the Housing Act (as 
extended by the Local Government Act) and the Roads Act (as amended by the 
Planning and Development Act, 2000 – 2021).  This CPO process is affected by a 
number of factors and can take approximately 18 months. 
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR EOIN HAYES 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail what would be needed in terms of funding, 
partnerships, planning, land, and other important factors to expand the Dublin Bikes 
Scheme, in particular to Rathmines, Rathgar, Terenure, Harold's Cross, Kimmage, and 
Crumlin. I note that the Portobello Plaza redevelopment includes removal of the Dublin 
Bikes stand, which I oppose, but also means that while the citizens of Dublin are 
seeking increased active travel measures we will see a net reduction in Dublin Bikes 
stations. How might we chart a course to reverse this trend? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council supports the dublinbike bicycle sharing scheme administratively 
and financially. The dublinbike bicycle sharing scheme is operated by JCDecaux. The 
expansion of this scheme, or the capacity of a station within the scheme, would require 
a contractual change and there are no plans to amend the contract or expand the 
scheme. The current scheme is in contract until 2027. 
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR EOIN HAYES 
To ask the Chief Executive for names and titles of the individuals who have decision-
making power in the Transport Advisory Group, the terms of reference and 
underpinning legislation for the group, and details on the process by which they make 
decisions. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Transport Advisory Group (TAG) is made up of representatives from An Garda 
Síochána, DCC Traffic section, Dublin Bus and Go Ahead Ireland Bus. Service 
requests are received from a number of sources including Elected Representatives, 
members of the public, transport bodies and other internal departments. These 
requests are assessed by DCC traffic engineers and where a Statutory Order or stat 
is required, this is discussed at a monthly meeting of the TAG. The stat then goes 
through and administrative process to give it legal standing. The TAG works in 
adherence to the current Road Traffic Acts and any other relevant legislation, along 
with current traffic related design guidelines. 
 

Q.89  COUNCILLOR EOIN HAYES 
To ask the Chief Executive what testing is in place by Dublin City Council for the 
effluent leaving the Ringsend Wastewater Treatment facility before discharge into 
Liffey, details of the findings of any such tests within the last 12 months (especially 
relating to the chemical compounds present in such samples), and details of any 
equivalent testing done on Dublin City Council facilities or lands in the nearby area as 
may relate to the Wastewater Treatment Facility or the nearby incinerator. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As the issues raised are a matter for Irish Water they should be referred directly to Irish 
Water.   
Please call the telephone number on 0818 178 178 / 0818 578 578 and identify yourself 
as an Elected Representative. You will be put through to the Local Representative 
Support Desk in Irish Water’s Customer Contact Centre who will deal with you directly. 
Alternatively, there is a specific e-mail address at Irish Water for Councillors: 
LocalRepSupport@water.ie.  
The Local Representative Support Desk at Irish Water operates from 9.00am – 
5.30pm, Monday to Friday.  
   
Q.90 
COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive about creating official sites for Camper vans in Dublin.  It 
would be great for Tourism.  In France they have them and they work fantastic. I think 
it would be a great idea for our city. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is committed to developing sustainable tourism in Dublin city as 
set out in the Dublin City Council Tourism Strategy 2023 to 2028.  In addition to the 
work carried out by Dublin City Council, we are engaged with a wide range of public 
and private sector stakeholders working on strategy, funding, infrastructure and 
programming designed to ensure that Dublin remains an attractive location for visitors, 
while balancing the needs of those living in Dublin with the needs of visitors.  There 
are many entities who provide tourism accommodation and facilities, with a high level 
of provision designed and delivered by commercial providers.  Dublin City Council will 
raise this issue with Fáilte Ireland and seek to establish if they have identified a 
demand for Camper van facilities in Dublin city or in the Dublin region, and if they have 
what steps are being taken to encourage commercial providers to establish facilities of 
this type. 
   
Q.91  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive for a new plan on cleaning up our paths in Dublin. Many 
paths are full of weeds etc., and many residents are not happy with this. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services clean litter and dirt from the footpaths citywide as part of 
our cleaning schedules. This is done by hand vac sweeping machines, manual 
sweeping or litter picking, whichever method is most appropriate for the various 
locations involved. This cleaning is monitored constantly to ensure the most effective 
cleaning possible is achieved.  
 
In 2024 a budget of €698,623 excluding VAT was allocated to carry out weed control 
by a contractor on public roads and footpaths. This equates to 478km of the road 
networks in the Dublin City Council Administrative Area. The Area Offices manages 
the weed control contract. 
 
 

Q.92 
COUNCILLOR ALSION FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive about providing a clothing collection from households, the 
clothing banks are constantly overflowing with clothes and the bags just left beside 
them.  Dumping is a major issue with this. There must be a better solution. I am 
suggesting a household collection system.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council does not provide a household waste collection service. 
Furthermore, there is currently no national legislation in place governing the collection 
of textiles for recycling, nor is there currently a requirement for textile collection 
operators to hold a waste collection permit. As a result, there are a number of 
unauthorised companies offering household clothing collections without governance. 
This could potentially result in the interception of authorised clothing collections and 
improper disposal of waste materials by unauthorised collectors should the council 
attempt to provide a third party household clothing collection service under contract. 
 
However, in line with the revised EU Waste Framework Directive, member states must 
ensure, by 1 January 2025, the separate collection of textiles for re-use, preparing for 
re-use and recycling. Furthermore, within 18 months of the legislation coming into 
effect, each member state must establish extended producer responsibility (EPR) 
schemes, through which economic operators that make textiles available on the EU 
market would cover the costs for their separate collection, sorting and recycling. The 
Department of Environment, Climate and Communication’s Waste Management Plan 
for a Circular Economy established a Textile Advisory Group. This group has not as 
yet issued any recommendation as to how the legislation will be adapted in Ireland. It 
is likely however that the recommendation will be for the service to be provided via 
Local Authority civic amenity and recycling facilities, including on-street clothes banks. 
 
Waste Management Services acknowledges that in recent years, illegal dumping, 
scavenging of clothes and discarding of unwanted items in the surrounding areas has 
risen to unmanageable levels at many locations across the city.  
 
Textile and glass bottle banks at Dublin City Council’s network of bring bank facilities 
are serviced multiple times per week, with clothing collections at many sites taking 
place six to seven days per week, and in some cases twice per day. Additional cleaning 
and removal of illegal dumping by DCC Cleansing operatives is also undertaken every 
day, either by the pilot north city Bring Bank Maintenance Team (BBMT), or by area 
based Cleansing staff who attend to sites on the days they are not scheduled for 
cleaning by the BBMT. However, these activities typically only occur once per day, 
usually in the morning, and it may be up to 24 hours, or longer, before Cleansing 
personnel return, leaving ample opportunity for illegal dumping, and scavenging and 
scattering of clothes to take place. However, within this time period, should WMS 
receive reports of illegal dumping or overflowing banks, Cleansing staff are deployed 
or the contracted service provider is notified to take the relevant action. 
 
As part of Waste Management Services recently published Three Pillar Strategy, we 
intend to introduce a permanent BBMT programme citywide, which will consist of two 
dedicated teams each in the north and south city. This is, however, likely to be the last 
phase of the current  recruitment drive, once sufficient resources have been deployed 
to Cleansing teams in each of the operational areas. 
 
Q.93 
COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive about installing wheelchair access facilities on Dollymount 
beach to enable wheelchair users to have access to the Beach and Sea. 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The trial of wheelchair matting on the beach was unsuccessful as the matting was 
destroyed by an unusually strong tide.  The tidal influences extends the full width of 
the beach to the toe of the dune system and the area is a statutory nature reserves 
covered by many environmental designations.  The installation of a permanent 
boardwalk or similar on the beach would therefore be complex from an engineering 
point of view, hugely expensive would require appropriate environmental assessments 
and ministerial consent for any such construction within the protected habitats.  The 
matter is currently being explored through the Bull Island Forum of stakeholders. 
In the meantime Beach Wheel chairs are available for hire free of charge during the 
bathing season which can provide access to all areas of the beach and indeed into the 
water.  The Parks Service would welcome any feedback form users of the Beach 
Wheelchairs as to how the service can be expanded or improved. 
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to address the following regarding traffic in (Details 
supplied). 
Residents did a survey of houses in relation to placing planters/ trees to act as a 
deterrent for cars driving over the footpaths. A total response rate of 42 out of 53 
households - 79% applied. 
39 want to restrict the access further in some manner 
2 responses wants to leave the path as is for access for emergency vehicles. 
1 response would like alternate barriers allowing access for emergency vehicles 
I understand that a decision was made by DCC to not install trees or planters and 
residents are keen to learn the reason for this decision and to request that the decision 
be looked at again. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Executive Parks and Landscape officer responsible for this area will respond to 
this query for the next area committee meeting 
 
Q.95 
COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise regarding ownership of a laneway (details 
supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Council by resolution at its meeting on the 12th June 1995 extinguished the 
public right of way over the Laneway between (details supplied). Footpaths and roads 
can be taken in charge by the Council subject to following the relevant take-in-charge 
procedures. 
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to deal with the following (Details supplied) regarding a 
green area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Executive Parks and Landscape officer responsible for this area will respond to 
this query for the next area committee meeting. 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to deal with the following (Details supplied) regarding 
parking. There is a bus stop on this pathway that is causing pedestrians to go out on 
the road. There are accessibility issues for people in wheelchairs trying to get by on 
this footpath, Can this be examined by Traffic wardens on a regular basis? Can you 
advise as well as to how many traffic wardens there are for the northside of Dublin? 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The issue at this location will be investigated further. Parking Enforcement engage the 
services of our contractors Dublin Street Parking Services to enforce illegal parking. 
They would not have general traffic wardens for the city. 
 
Q.98 
COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive please refer to seriously broken and dangerous footpath at 
(Details supplied) and say if he can arrange to repair same as local person fell and 
seriously injured herself at this point. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11165845) has been created and passed on to the Area Inspector who 
will carry out an inspection and add this to a works list.  
 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please refer to enormous tree at (details supplied) and 
say if he can (a) remove same of (b) prune same as resident fears the height of same. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow and any 
works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care 
programme for the area 2024-25. 
 
Q.100 COUNCILLOR DEIDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please refer to tree at (details supplied) which is 
causing serious damage to footpath, arrange for same to be examined and say what 
action he can take in relation to 
(a)   Pruning tree  
(b)   Repairing the seriously damaged footpath 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow and any 
works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care 
programme for the area 2024-25. 
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to road at (details supplied) and say if he 
consideration can be given to  
(a)   Making same a one way or 
(b)   Introducing a no left turn (during peak hours) from point A to B as per details 
attached.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Transport Advisory Group will only recommend one-way systems and turn ban 
restrictions in exceptional circumstances as they have considerable drawbacks 
associated with them including: 
• 
Operational difficulties for emergency services, waste disposal and delivery. 
• 
Considerable inconvenience to local residents and other road users due to 
diverted traffic. 
• 
Increased volumes of traffic on other local streets as traffic is displaced. 
• 
Increased traffic speeds, especially on one-way roads. 

Dublin City Council will only proceed with the investigation of any of the above, if 
there is a demonstrable and clear desire from a high majority of Residents of the 
roads in question, in favour of implementing such measures. 
Q.102  COUNCILLOR JEN CUMMINS 
To ask the Chief Executive if there is there the possibility of community chargers or 
public chargers for EVs that could be linked to residents MPRN to give a more 
favourable rate for charging. What is the plan for the roll out of more public EV chargers 
in the city? Or if another solution can be recommended. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has explored the feasibility of linking EV public EV charging to 
individual domestic supplies via smart metering. A number of Charge Point Operators 
and Electricity suppliers were asked if this solution could be viable.  
The response received typically referred back to concerns over General Data 
Protection Regulations (GDPR), as different providers would not be permitted to share 
customer information. 
Furthermore, it is important to understand there are significant additional costs to 
Charge Point Operators to provide a public charging network that do not apply to 
individual domestic customers, including; 
• 
Providing a fast charging service (robust equipment, high capacity grid 
connection) 
• 
Licencing arrangement 
• 
Maintenance 
• 
Insurance 
Charge Point Operators are commercial entities, whose primary purpose is to generate 
a return on investment for shareholders. The roll out of a high quality EV charging 
network across Dublin and indeed Ireland, will rely on private sector investment.  
Dublin City Council does not have any legal entitlement to influence the market rate of 
providing a commercial service. 
 
With reference to the roll out of EV charging,  the Dublin Local Authority Electric Vehicle 
Charging Strategy commissioned by DCC, DLRCC, FCC, SDCC, Smart Dublin and 
CARO published in June 2022, established the anticipated demand for public EV 
charging equipment up to 2030, modelled on Government ambition and national and 
international take-up trends. 
 
Within the context of the strategy, it has always been understood that the role of Dublin 
City Council relating to the provision of EV charging infrastructure is one of facilitating 
third party operators rather than managing the service.  
Dublin City Council agreed that ‘Rapid Hub’ (rather than ‘Mixed’) technology 
arrangement of EV chargers as described in the strategy would be the better model to 
align with the City’s development, transport and climate action objectives. 
This model (Destination Charging) utilises existing off street car park facilities such as 
those at leisure facilities, libraries or parks, where there are existing grid connections 
and adequate space to provide an array of fast EV chargers. 
 
Dublin City Council does not support the installation of on-street EV charging.  
In support of the strategy, DCC and the other Dublin Local Authorities are working with 
Zero Emissions Vehicles Ireland (ZEVI), ESB Networks and other key industry 
stakeholders to develop a limited number of public charging hubs across Dublin City 
and County. 
 

The following locations have been identified by Dublin City Council as suitable for the 
pilot scheme. 
 
1. St. Anne’s Park                                   North Central Area 
2. Clontarf Bus Garage                           North Central Area 
3. Strand Road, Sydney Parade             South East Area 
4. Mary’s Lane,                                       Central Area 
5. Donnybrook (The Crescent)               South East Area 
6. Milltown (Strand Terrace)                   South East Area 
7. Ballyfermot Leisure Centre                 South Central Area 
8. Raheny Library                                   North Central Area 
9. Cabra Parkside Leisure                      Centre Central Area 
10. Finglas, Wellmount St.                     North West Area 
11. Clonskeagh (Farmer Browns)         
South East Area 
12. Bushy Park (Rathdown Avenue)    
South East Area 
13. Cabra Library                                    Central Area 
14. Walkinstown Library                         South Central Area 
 
A contractor has been appointed and installation works are expected to begin in the 
coming months. The DLA’s will review the outcome of the Pilot Project and 
consideration may be given to identifying additional locations. 
 
Q.103 COUNCILLOR JEN CUMMINS 
To ask the Chief Executive for the cleaning plan for the South Circular Road from St 
James Hospital to Suir Road and how the cleaning is achieved, what methods of 
cleaning are used? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services clean the above section of road with the large road 
sweeping machine and also with the smaller compact sweeping machine. As there is 
nearly constant heavy parking here, we use the leaf blowers to blow the leaves and 
litter from the paths and from under the parked cars out on the road for the sweeping 
machines to clear. 
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR JEN CUMMINS 
To ask the Chief Executive for the rota of gully cleaning in the South West Inner City 
area as the autumn progresses and the leaves and debris tend to block the gullies. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services operate a leaves clearing programme throughout the 
city over the autumn and winter months. Priority is given to tree-lined streets, footpaths 
with heavy pedestrian use and areas particularly prone to flooding. In addition we 
assist resident groups in clearing leaves from their areas and remove the collected 
leaves for them. This assists the Drainage Division in carrying out their gully cleaning 
programme in the South West Inner city area and throughout the city. 
 
Q.105 COUNCILLOR JEN CUMMINS 
To ask the Chief Executive for the schedule of works for the painting and maintenance 
of lamp posts in Goldenbridge Walk, Inchicore, numbers 9 to 26. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The lampposts on Goldenbridge Walk will be placed on the list for painting in 2025 
 
 
 

Q.106  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise what solution the council is following in order to 
resolve the ongoing Parking issues at Crestfield x Collins Avenue Junction please. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement have requested that DSPS patrol this area regularly to enforce 
any and all illegal parking. DSPS will continue to patrol and enforce where necessary 
using both clamps and Fixed Penalty Notices. 
 
If the residents wish to look at changes to the area such as installation of bollards etc. 
to discourage further illegal parking, they should be advised to contact the Traffic 
Advisory Group (TAG) to request that a Road Engineer assess the area. They can be 
contacted by emailing traffic@dublincity.ie. 
 
Q.107  COUNCILLOR CAROLYN MOORE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide me with a list of Derelict Sites within the Dublin 
City Area in tabular format with their address, Eircode (if available), date of entry on 
the Register, levies accrued, levies paid, interest accrued, interest paid, and could he 
make a statement on the matter? 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Derelict Sites Register (DSR) includes the following –  
• 
Address/Location 
• 
Map Ref 
• 
File Ref 
• 
Date of entry 
• 
Date of removal 
• 
Name & Addrss of Owners/Occupiers 
• 
Change of Ownership Date 
• 
Actions taken by Dcc 
• 
Market Valuation 
• 
Date of Appeal to Valuation Tribunal 
• 
Market Value as determined  by Valuation Tribunal 
• 
Particulars of any development objective etc 
• 
Bond details under S25 
 
The full detail is principally held in hard copy format however an extract of the DSR is 
available on our website Derelict Site Register | Dublin City Council. 
 
Should the Councillor, or any member of the public, wish to view the full Register 
please contact us at derelictsites@dublincity.ie or 01-222 2143 to make an 
appointment between the hours of 9am – 5pm (Monday to Friday).  
 
Investigations are ongoing as to moving the DSR to electronic format and in a more 
user friendly way for the website. Information regarding the levies applied, interest 
accrued and related payments for each individual property is not available publically.  
An overview of total levies raised and interest accrued will be forwarded to Cllr. 
Moore. 
 
Q.108  COUNCILLOR CAROLYN MOORE 
To ask the Chief Executive provide me with a statement on the impact of the changes 
in the rates reduction levy in recent years on vacancy and rates income for the city. 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A response will issue to the Councillors following further clarification.  
 
Q.109  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive why the new playground in McAuley Park has been so 
delayed? Can the Council confirm that work will begin in November as promised? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Unfortunately the estimated November date proved overly optimistic.  The delays in 
processing the suite of documentation prepared by the Parks Service after the 
tendering, consultation and contracting processes under the newly introduced financial 
system lead to delays in the issuing of the order to the contractor.  The order has been 
issued and the contractor has scheduled the installation early in the new year. 
 
Q.110  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to urgently look at a traffic plan for the Kilmore West area. 
There will be a lot of construction in the area over the coming years and an already 
bursting community will no doubt feel isolated to their homes. The area is at present 
very dangerous and this will only be made worse with future developments and 
redevelopments in Beaumont Hospital. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The main issue with the parking at Kilmore West is the lack of available parking for 
staff and patients at Beaumont Hospital.  Until a solution is arrived at with the Board of 
Management of the hospital, there will be a continued high demand for parking on the 
roads in the Kilmore West area, especially since these roads have free parking. 
If the residents want to manage and formalise the parking on their roads, they can 
apply to Dublin City Council Parking Enforcement section for a Pay & Display and 
Permit Parking scheme.  More than 35% of residents need to be in favour of a scheme 
in order for a scheme to be installed and they are required to show their support for a 
scheme in the form of a written plebiscite. 
Also to note that any illegal parking, such as parking on the footpath or blocking of 
entrances, should be reported to Dublin Street Parking Services (www.dsps.ie) or An 
Garda Síochána to enforce penalties.  
 
Q.111  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive why the new playground in Kilmore West has been so 
delayed? Can the Council confirm that work will begin in November as promised 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Unfortunately the estimated November date proved overly optimistic.  The delays in 
processing the suite of documentation prepared by the Parks Service after the 
tendering, consultation and contracting processes under the newly introduced financial 
system lead to delays in the issuing of the order to the contractor.  The order has been 
issued and the contractor has scheduled the installation early in the new year. 
 
 
Q.112  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to communicate with Glenveigh regarding the Oscar 
Traynor Woods development. There are ongoing frustrations between the community 
and Glenveigh with the community liaison officer not answering calls or emails from 
residents or Councillors 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC have raised this concern with the developer Glenveagh Living Limited. The 
Community Liaison officer at Glenveagh Living Limited is Gary Keegan. 
 
Gary is available to take calls or emails at any time. He has responded to both residents 
and Councillor Queries throughout the project to date.  
 
Q.113  COUNCILLOR MICHAEL MACDONNCHA 
To ask the Chief Executive confirm that, given that the Section 183 disposal in relation 
to 24/25 Moore Street was voted on by councillors in the context of a previous and 
different planning application to the current Hammerson planning application, that the 
matter will return to the Elected Members for re-consideration. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Any future agreements in relation to the disposal of this site will be brought to the 
Elected Members in accordance with our normal procedures. 
 
Q.114  COUNCILLOR MICHAEL MACDONNCHA 
To ask the Chief Executive to instruct the Traffic Department to cease enforcement of 
parking tickets for parking on a stretch of road which is marked as a bus lane but which 
in fact is not a bus lane on the section of the Hole in the Wall Road adjacent to Fr 
Collins Park; is he aware that the National Transport Authority has confirmed that 
buses will not be using this route until the end of 2025; and will he instruct the Traffic 
Department to rescind its current status until such time as it is actually a bus lane 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parking Enforcement Section must request that DSPS enforce under the Road 
Traffic (Traffic and Parking) Regulations 1997. There are currently road marking and 
signage that indicate that the area described is a bus and cycle lane. This lane would 
also be used by taxi’s and emergency service vehicles. Therefore DSPS must continue 
to enforce at this area. 
 
Q.115  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to clarify whether there is a Buildings at Risk Officer for 
Protected Structures in place within the City Council. If so can he provide me with their 
name and number, and if not would he consider filling this post, and can he make a 
statement on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is a “Buildings At Risk Officer” in Dublin City Council.  His name is: 
Conor Doyle, conor.doyle@dublincity.ie; Tel: 222 6269  
He is based in the Conservation Section of the Planning & Property Development 
Department. 
 
Q.116  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to review the street sign clutter identified at the following 
link https://motorwayservices.ie/dublin/  that includes examples from Mayor Street, 
Seville Place, Bolton Street, North King Street, Parnell Street etc.  And revert to me 
with his plans for removing excess street clutter caused by out of date or unnecessary 
signage. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The street signage mentioned above has been logged for investigation. 
 
 

Q.117 COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive provide a timeline for new toilet provision on Bull Island 
behind Happy Out café, so that it is in place for 2024 bathing season and the end of 
the contract with current provider 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As the contract for the existing toilet at this location ends in late 2025 it was envisaged 
that design and procurement would be carried out next year to be in a position to 
replace this toilet as soon as the contract ended.  Discussions will be held with 
colleagues in Waste Management who manage this contract to ascertain detail of the 
contract and as to whether this timeline can be accelerated. 
 
 
Q.118  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on Moore Street market revival plans. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Co-ordination Office are currently carrying out a review of the new food market 
on Moore Street.  This market is being operated and managed by the successful 
tenderer Temple Bar Company.  The review of this market will identify what is working 
well, what needs to be improved and the key challenges that exist. 
 
Q.119  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive what correspondence DCC have had with the NTA on the 
return of the bus stops to the North Strand Road and what is the timeline of the 
reinstatement, as recent figures show, high numbers of people registered with 
disabilities in that area(181) and 106 people aged 65 and over. These bus stops are 
crucial to their independence and travel around Dublin City. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The new bus stops on North Strand Rd. at Strandville Avenue junction (inbound) and 
Nottingham Street (outbound) have now been constructed/ DCC is liaising with our 
colleagues in the NTA in relation to the installation of signage and commissioning of 
the bus stops.  
The network / route planning and the decisions pertaining to what bus numbers shall 
use these new stops is a matter for Dublin Bus and the NTA. 
DCC shall continue to liaise with the NTA on the matter and shall provide an update to 
Elected Members when a more specific date the bus stops shall come into service is 
known. 
 
Q.120  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive what steps can be taken to better improve the lighting 
throughout Fairview Park, better illuminating the pathways for dog walkers, people of 
all ages and abilities - people who use this space for all activities - as we approach the 
winter months and the darker nights. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are 2 lit routes within Fairview Park including a lit esplanade inside the boundary 
of the park and new greenway along the Tolka River.  There are no proposals to install 
additional lighting.   
 
Q.121  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive if he could provide the full details of the agreement with 
Live Nation around the Ambassador Theatre regeneration, the plans to engage local 
artists, businesses and community groups and exact allocations for each facet of the 
project, which will see an investment of €7 million.  

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is no formal agreement in place between DCC and Live Nation in relation to the 
Ambassador Theatre. DCC has met Live Nation to discuss options to refurbish the 
venue. 
DCC will consider proposals from Live Nation to refurbish the theatre and continue to 
engage with Live Nation to progress options to refurbish the Ambassador Theatre. 
 
Q.122  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive would he commit to engaging with the residents around 
Croke Park and commit to funding an independent report to measure the noise levels 
of future concerts? Residents all around the stadium have mentioned the most recent 
event was the loudest they have ever experienced. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As with all large scale outdoor Concert Events that take place in Dublin City maximum 
allowable music noise levels associated with the event are prescribed by Dublin City 
Council by way of event licence condition as well as pre-emptive EPA notice, both 
issued to the relevant concert promoter. 
 
The permitted levels outlined in both the event licence and the EPA notice are pursuant 
to the Noise Councils Code of Practice associated with outdoor concerts. The relevant 
requirements are as follows and were mandated by Dublin City Council for all Croke 
Park Concerts in 2024.  
 
“The promoter must comply with the Noise Council Code of Practice on the Control of 
Noise from Concerts. The maximum Music Noise Level measured at any noise 
sensitive locations agreed in advance between Dublin City Council and the acoustic 
consultant, must not exceed 75dB (A) over a 15 minute period.  A suitably qualified 
and experienced noise control consultant shall be appointed to the approval of Dublin 
City Council.  The noise control consultant shall liaise between the promoter and the 
sound engineer on all matters relating to noise control prior to, including sound checks 
and rehearsals and during the concerts.  The appointed noise control consultant shall 
continually monitor noise levels at the agreed noise sensitive locations and advise the 
sound engineer accordingly to ensure that the noise limits are not exceeded”.   
 
Officers from both the Environmental Health Section, Noise and Air Quality Unit as well 
as Officers from the Planning Enforcement Section actively engage on the ground with 
all parties during the course of outdoor concerts in order to ensure compliance with the 
prescribed noise levels associated with the concerts. This engagement took place 
during the Croke Park Concerts in 2024. The prescribed requirements associated with 
noise were found to be complied with for all 2024 Croke Park Concerts. 
 
This conclusion was as a result of monitoring results from both Dublin City Council 
Environmental Health Officers, as well as the noise control consultants appointed by 
the Promoters for the Croke Park 2024 Concerts.  
 
All issues relating to outdoor event licence compliance requirements are overseen by 
senior officers from the Planning Enforcement Section of Dublin City Council on site at 
all outdoor concerts. 
 
The issue of independent monitoring therefore does not arise. Dublin City Council will 
continue to ensure compliance with prescribed noise requirements for any future Croke 
Park Concerts. 
 
 

Q.123  COUNCILLOR DARY BARRON 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to footpath at (details supplied) and say if he can 
arrange repair of same. Irish water repaired leak 24 months ago but never reinstated 
footpath properly – blue lines outline the area to be reinstated but never done. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11165886) has been created and passed on to the Area Inspector who 
will carry out an inspection add this to a works list.  
 
Q.124  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON  
To ask the Chief Executive please refer to dead tree at (A. details supplied) and say 
if he can remove same and refer to (B. detail supplied)  and say if he can arrange to 
fill hole left following removal of tree. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A. An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow and any 
works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care 
programme for the area 2024-25. 
B. Following the inspection arrangements will be made to make to fill the hole. 
 
Q.125  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON  
To ask the Chief Executive refer to shore at (detail supplied) and say if he can arrange 
to have same cleared. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The gullies have been cleaned at (detaila supplied) on 26/09/2024.  
 
Q.126  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to footpath at (details supplied) and say if he can 
arrange to have same resurfaced as it is a danger for pedestrians, particularly 
vulnerable ones. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11165887) has been created and passed on to the Area Inspector who 
will carry out an inspection and add this to a works list.  
 
Q.127  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a detailed map/information identifying all current 
landowners, including the ownership of main roads, paths, roundabouts, and other key 
infrastructure in the Belmayne/Parkside area. This should also include information on 
the land where Sisk is currently building and any remaining Dublin City Council land. 
Additionally, could the Chief Executive confirm if the Land Registry and commissioned 
Masterplans contain these ownership details, including the dates of land parcel 
purchases and sales? This information is important for the residents of the area who 
would like clarity on land ownership 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The map below shows the undeveloped land, circa 9.6 hectares, in the ownership of 
Dublin City Council in the vicinity of Belmayne/Parkside. Information regarding the 
ownership of privately owned land can be obtained from Land Registry (for registered 
property) or Registry of Deeds (the existence of deeds and conveyances of 
unregistered property) in Tailte Éireann.  
 

 
 
Q.128  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a detailed account of staffing in the following 
sections and offices, with comment on optimal staffing levels for each section, clearly 
indicating whether staffing levels are at, above or below optimal levels and to comment 
on any suboptimal scenarios: 
(i) Social Work Section (Especially in processing of Exceptional Social Grounds 
applications). 
(ii) Housing maintenance across 8 depot areas (especially want figures for North 
Dublin and NW Area) 
(iii) Finglas Area Office 
(IV) Ballymun Area Office. 
(v) DRHE Family Support 
(vi) Parks (Esp on Northside of Dublin and in North West Area 
(vii)Traffic (Esp in North City) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Social Work Section: There are 5 Senior Social Workers & 12 social workers employed 
in Housing  
Housing Maintenance: There are 500 staff employed in Housing Maintenance, 421 of 
whom are operational staff.   
There are 51 staff assigned to the North West Area – 27 in the Ballymun Area Office 
and 24 in the Finglas Area Office. 
DRHE Family Support Team: 9 staff.  
Parks: 234 staff are assigned to Parks.   

Traffic: There are 323 staff in Traffic Management & Construction, 14 In traffic 
planning. 
There is an ongoing programme of recruitment. The Human Resources Department 
engages with local management in relation to the filling of vacancies through the 
Council’s Workforce Planning process, in the context of annual service delivery plans 
and budgetary requirements. 
 
Q.129  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a detailed update on collection of vacant site 
levies. Earlier this year it was reported that DCC are owed a total of €35million by 
property owners and that 38 sites are registered as vacant. The response should 
address how sites are added to the register for the vacant site levy and what measures 
are being taken to collect the unpaid levies. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The Active Land Management Unit established the City Council’s Vacant Sites 
Register on 1st January 2017 under the Urban Regeneration and Housing Act, 2015. 
Under the Act each planning authority is required to maintain a Vacant Sites Register. 
The Vacant Site levy is payable in arrears each year, where appropriate.  It is payable 
from January 2019 onwards and is based on a valuation of the vacant site.  
 
An identified vacant site can be entered on the register when the Council is of the 
opinion that it has an area in excess of 0.05 hectares, is zoned for either residential or 
regeneration purposes and has been vacant for a minimum of 12 months preceding its 
entry on the register.  
 
There are 38 sites on Dublin City Council’s Vacant Sites Register. Currently there are 
levies in the amount of €25,804,850 owing to Dublin City Council. Levies in the amount 
of €12,396,050 have been paid to date.  The Vacant Sites Unit raises demands for 
payment annually and reminders for payment are also issued. 
 
While proceedings are not issued for the collection of vacant sites levies, where a levy 
becomes due and payable, it becomes a charge on the land concerned until it is paid.   
Vacant site levy charges now appear on pre-contract planning searches and 
purchasers are now on notice of these charges.  
 
The Residential Zoned Land Tax (RZLT) is due to replace the Vacant Site Levy in 
2025. The Revenue Commissioners will collect the RZLT directly. While the legislative 
provisions for the Vacant Sites Levy will be repealed, the vacant sites levy will continue 
to apply and accrue as a charge on land. Any outstanding charges in respect of the 
vacant site levy will remain against the land in question to be collected by the local 
authority. 
 
Q.130  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive what protocols are in place in homeless services to meet 
the needs of people with Autism, intellectual and other disabilities, particularly 
children? Are there specific provisions made for suitable emergency accommodation? 
Are outcomes measured for this specific vulnerable group? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
All new presentations to homeless services in the Dublin region will have a 
comprehensive assessment completed with the relevant local authority to determine 
their need for emergency accommodation. Factors considered in the assessment 
process include: exploring prevention interventions, accommodation history, reason 
for homelessness, placement and support needs, presenting need, exit options and 

any other relevant information that will inform the assessment and placement. If 
required the assessment can be completed face to face or over the phone. 
 
If highlighted in the assessment that there are additional needs the most appropriate 
available placement will be identified. 
• 
Families can be consider for placement into a family Hub with a sensory room and 
child support workers or can be referred to Focus Family Hat team who also can refer 
to child support workers.  
• 
Single/Couples presentations can be placed into a NGO supported accommodation or 
can be referred to private emergency Accommodation Assertive Case Management 
Team (PACT). 
 
Supports 
• 
The HSE funds two Health-Link teams, Northside and Southside Dublin, to assist 
people in homeless services that have difficulty accessing healthcare services. These 
teams work closely with DRHE Placement Staff, NGO Services and the PACT team to 
support households access appropriate healthcare supports 
• 
The PACT team is an integrated team that consists of Case Managers, Clinical Team 
and Specialised Case Managers that operate across all PEAs in the Dublin Region 
• 
The Housing Support officers and NGO staff engage with all households in services to 
assist with their Social Housing Applications, applying of Choice based lettings and in 
cases where a Medical Priority Application is the most appropriate course they will be 
supported in submitting same 
• 
Each support service should hold records of referrals to designated disability and/or 
health services. 
 
Q.131  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive what protocols exist for memorials in Dublin City (memorial 
parks, benches etc.) and for erecting memorial plaques or murals? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Council operates a formal commemorative plaques and commemorative naming 
scheme under which proposals for the commemoration of people, places, and events 
may be considered. Valid proposals are considered by the Commemorations & 
Naming Committee. The current commemorations & naming policy may be found at 
https://www.dublincity.ie/sites/default/files/2020-10/policy_for_commemorative_naming.pdf 
 
Q.132  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive say if he can provide a public light in (Details supplied) as 
residents feel uncomfortable accessing this location. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The laneway to the rear of H55 on Stiles Road is a rear access entry laneway and, in 
general, street lighting isn’t provided on such laneways except, perhaps, in cases 
where they are well used lanes that might provide links for residents from one estate 
to another one. 
 
Q.133 COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the following housing applicant (details 
supplied). Confirm their current position on the housing list and Confirm that they are 
currently being assessed for Medical Priority. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing List, with an application date of 08/02/2024, the 
applicant holds the following position on this list; 

 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
2 
811 
E 
2 
908 
 
Based on these positions, it may be some time before the applicant is reached for an 
offer of housing.  
 
Correspondence has recently been issued to the tenant regarding their medical priority 
and for data protection reasons this information has not been included in this response. 
Correspondence to this effect has been forwarded to the applicant. 
 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household.  
 
Q.134  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive to please organise for the tree outside (details supplied) 
to be assessed as it is pushing up the footpath and becoming a hazard for pedestrians. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow and any 
works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care 
programme for the area 2024-25. 
 
Q.135  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive to please organise for the tree outside (details supplied 
1) to be assessed as it is causing numerous issues as set out in the correspondence 
attached (details supplied 2). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow and any 
works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care 
programme for the area 2024-25. 
 
Q.136  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive to please address the following questions in relation to the 
Donaghmede Roundabout: 
• 
Has signalisation of the Roundabout been considered to alleviate congestion?  
• 
Was there a formal assessment carried out and what were the conclusions? 
• 
If signalisation is coming, what is the implementation timeframe? 
• 
The lands abutting the Roundabout on the north western side are currently being 
developed – once completed where will the ongoing access point be for this 
development and approximately how far away from Donaghmede Roundabout will it 
lie? 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Donaghmende Roundabout (Hole in the Wall Roundabout) is part of the DCC 
Active Travel Schemes;  
• 
DCC 22 0012 Clarehall to Belmayne  
• 
DCC 21 0023 Baldoyle to Fairview 
 
However, neither of these schemes are the current NTA / DCC Active Travel 
Programme Office priority programme, which runs from 2024 – 2028.  
Design of these schemes in not scheduled to happen until after this period. (However, 
should additional funding become available, work could start before 2028). 
 
Q.137  COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline the process of the Transport Advisory Group; the 
number of requests it typically receives from members of the public, councillors and 
others; the number of requests in a backlog if any; the average time it takes for the 
TAG to carry out an assessment and deliver a recommendation; and the frequency at 
which it meets to consider requests. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Transport Advisory Group (TAG) is made up of representatives from An Garda 
Síochána, DCC Traffic section, Dublin Bus and Go Ahead Ireland Bus. Service 
requests are received from a number of sources including Elected Representatives, 
members of the public, transport bodies and other internal departments. These 
requests are assessed by DCC traffic engineers and where a Statutory Order or stat 
is required, this is discussed at a monthly meeting of the TAG. The stat then goes 
through an administrative process to give it legal standing. The TAG works in 
adherence to the current Road Traffic Acts and any other relevant legislation, along 
with current traffic related design guidelines. 
The Transport Advisory Group (TAG) for this quarter received a total of 494 service 
requests in all Council Areas by the 1st October 2024.  
The Transport Advisory Group Area Engineers for this quarter carried out a total of 291 
TAG decisions by the 1st October 2024. 
Requests are replied to in as timely a manner as is possible and this depends on the 
complexity of the request and the resources available. 
The TAG meets on a monthly basis however, traffic engineers endeavour to resolve 
service requests on an ongoing basis. 
 
Q.138  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for a list of all fines issued for littering, illegal dumping and 
dog fouling and the location of each offence for the years 2023 and 2024. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please see the tables below for fines issued for littering/illegal dumping and dog fouling 
for 2023 and 2024 (to end of August). 
 
 
2023 
Central 
North Central 
North West 
South Central 
South East 
Illegal 
Dumping/Litter 
307 
94 
6 
340 
333 
Dog Fouling  
0 
4 
2 
0 
0 
 
2024 (to End 
August) 
Central 
North Central 
North West 
South Central 
South East 

Illegal 
Dumping/Litter 
56 
1 
6 
97 
72 
Dog Fouling 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
Q.139  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for a timeline for the rollout of bike bunkers in Dublin City? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Road Safety and Micromobility Section is currently progressing the Bike Bunker 
tender process. The tender process should be completed by end of Q4 2024.  
It is hoped that the tender be awarded by end of Q4 2024. 
 
Q.140  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive what steps are being taken to progress the upgrade of 
Martin Savage Park? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is engaging with the National Parks & Wildlife Service (NPWS)/ 
Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage (DoHLGH) along with other 
local authorities in the Dublin area in order to consider the possible combined effects 
of other presently considered developments of artificial pitches on playing field sites 
utilised by the Brent geese in the Dublin area as well as that proposed in Martin 
Savage. These discussions are ongoing.  
 
Q.141  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for more bins to be installed in Terenure 
generally but as a priority you reinstate the bin outside the Chinese takeaway on 
Terenure Road West. The removal of this bin has resulted in an increase in litter in the 
area. The re-instatment of the bin is important at this location given it is at a bus stop 
and outside a takeaway where students from the local secondary school frequent.’ 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services reinstated the bin outside the Chinese takeaway on 
Terenure Road West. It was replaced by a double capacity bin which should be more 
than sufficient for the litter there. 
 
Requests for litter bins are examined on a case by case basis. If it is considered that 
more bins are needed in Terenure, requests for specific locations can be submitted to 
Waste Management Services. It should be noted that new litter bins are provided in 
areas of high footfall such as shop fronts, outside of pubs, churches, bus stops etc. 
We don’t install new bins in residential areas. 
 
Q.142  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Can the following housing matter be looked into (Details Supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing List, with an application date of 01/08/2023, the 
applicant holds the following position on this list; 
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
J 
2 
424 
K 
2 
540 
 

Based on these positions, it may be some time before the applicant is reached for an 
offer of housing, however I have noted her interest in the new apartments at De La 
Salle/Stoneboat, Ballyfermot Road.  
 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household.  
 
Q.143  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive please have the following looked into (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The vacant property unit has noted the details of this property and will investigate its 
vacancy status. If the property is deemed to be long term vacant the unit will identify 
the owner(s) and contact them to advise them to return the property to use in a timely 
manner. Any failure by the owner(s) to comply with this request may result in the City 
Council invoking its legislative powers to ensure the property is returned to use.  
 
The City Council will undertake a review of the current condition of the property and 
where necessary will undertake any necessary works to ensure that the property and 
or its environments are cleaned.  
 
Q.144  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to please have the following housing issue looked into 
(details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Under the HAP scheme as the rental agreement is between the landlord and the tenant 
any maintenance issues should be reported to the landlord to be resolved. Inspections 
are carried out by Environmental Health officers within 8 months following move in 
dates to properties. The HAP section issues a weekly list of new tenancies to EHO’s. 
Any issues identified at inspection date are to be addressed and resolved by the 
landlord within 12 weeks. An inspection was carried out at (details supplied) by an 
Environmental Health Officer in 2017 and was closed off in 2018. I have contacted the 
Environmental Health Section and they have advised me that they have an open case 
on this address and an improvement notice has been served to the landlord. A follow 
up inspection will be carried out after the notice period expires to determine if issues 
have been resolved.  
 
Under the legislation the applicant is deemed to have her housing need met through 
the provision of social housing support (HAP). The above applicant is on the Transfer 
List, with an application date of 17/02/2016, the applicant holds the following positions 
on this list: 
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
E 
3 
206 

J 
3 
95 
           K 
3 
129 
 
Based on these positions, it may be some time before the applicant is reached for an 
offer of housing.  
 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household.  
 
Q.145  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive to please have the following housing issue looked into 
(details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing List, with an application date of 29/06/2021, the 
applicant holds the following position on this list; 
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
J 
1 
290 
 
Based on these positions, it may be some time before the applicant is reached for an 
offer of housing. The applicant may wish to make an application for consideration for 
a medical priority, should he be successful in obtaining same, it may increase his 
chances of being reached for housing in a shorter timeframe. The applicant may also 
wish to make an application for HAP which would provide financial assistance towards 
the cost of renting a property.   
 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household.  
 
Q.146  COUNCILLOR BARRY HENEGHAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to urgently aid Child Vision Grace Park Rd, Drumcondra, 
Dublin 9, D09 WKOH as they try to acquire an organizational disability badge but are 
experiencing difficulty.   
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Tag only provide Disabled Parking bays, we don’t have any knowledge of dealing with 
an organisational disability badge on the public road in the charge of Dublin City 
Council. 
The Irish wheelchair association deal with individual blue badges, the councillor will 
have to contact them to see what, if any criteria is needed for organisational disability 
badges Disabled parking permits - Irish Wheelchair Association (iwa.ie). 
 
The following link is what we deal with in relation disability bays. Disabled Parking | 
Dublin City Council. 
 
Q.147  COUNCILLOR BARRY HENEGHAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a full and detailed financial review, including all  
associated costs, of the installation and ongoing maintenance of the sandbags on the 
Clontarf seafront since their initial installation up to the most recent repairs in 
September 2025. Please give an in depth review to (Material Costs (sandbags, sand, 
other materials), Labour (workers, equipment operators), Transportation (delivery of 
materials and equipment), Site Preparation (clearing debris, leveling ground), 
Engineering/Consultation Fees (site assessments, designs), Repair and Replacement 
(damaged or degraded sandbags), Monitoring (regular inspections), Staffing 
(maintenance personnel), Equipment Hire or Purchase (machinery, tools), 
Environmental Assessment (impact evaluations), Permitting and Compliance 
(environmental regulations), Erosion Control (additional protective measures), 
Insurance (liability, property damage). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply will be issued to the Councillor within two weeks of the Council meeting. 
 
Q.148  COUNCILLOR BARRY HENEGHAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to conduct an immediate investigation into whether 
Shelmartin Road qualifies for permit parking, given ongoing resident complaints about 
the road being used by non-residents, particularly during events at nearby stadiums, 
making parking for locals unmanageable. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
According to our system, we have no Shelmartin Road within Dublin City Councils 
boundary. However, if the Councillor is referring to Shelmartin Avenue in Marino, the 
residents of this road can apply to the Traffic Advisory Group (TAG) to apply for permit 
parking on their road by emailing traffic@dublincity.ie. The Roads engineer for that 
area would then assess the road to assess if a permit scheme would be viable. If found 
viable, the Parking Enforcement Section would ballot each house on the road to assess 
demand for the scheme. If a majority vote is received, the scheme would return to TAG 
to carry out statutory requirements. 
 
Q.149  COUNCILLOR BARRY HENEGHAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to re-evaluate the traffic flow and design of East Wall Road 
and its junctions with Church Road and East Road, which have created significant 
bottlenecks. Despite the completion of engineering works and the lifting of traffic 
diversions, there is still major congestion stretching along Alfie Byrne Road and 
Clontarf Road. This design flaw is hindering access to critical infrastructure, including 
the port tunnel and East Link bridge, which goes against the Council’s policy of 
reducing traffic within residential areas. What specific actions will be taken to address 
these bottlenecks and improve access? 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Lane reductions and alterations at the Junctions along East Wall Road have been 
permanently installed as part of the East Coast Trail Phase One Project. This project 
is part of the City Council’s series of planned Active Travel Schemes enabling 
sustainable travel in the city and assisting the council in meeting its obligations and 
targets with regards to climate action.  It is acknowledged that these important safety 
improvements to the cycle foot and wheeler infrastructure have effected vehicular 
traffic flows in the area particularly at the Junctions of East Wall Road and Church 
Road and East Road. These changes enhance the operation of the junctions from a 
pedestrian and cyclist perspective and are in line with national guidance and standards 
for these type of schemes. 
 
It is worth noting that this junction is controlled by Dublin City Council’s SCATS 
Adaptive Traffic Management System, and is monitored by the Intelligent 
Transportation Systems (ITS) team and Traffic Control Room in DCC via our SCATS 
and CCTV systems.  During the course of the works the Project Team consulted with 
the ITS team to review potential for optimising sequencing durations to mitigate 
impacts.  Now that the Temporary Traffic Management systems are removed, we will 
request that they again review the junctions in question and make amendments to 
traffic signal timings if and when there is scope to so do. 
 
It is also worth noting that one objective of the scheme was the need to provide a safe 
and continuous link from the existing high quality cycle infrastructure along the coast 
to employment centres in the docklands (which is council policy). It is hoped that traffic 
congestion will improve as more people use this new infrastructure to shift to 
sustainable modes of travel.  
 
The lifting of traffic restrictions on North Strand should also ease some of the 
congestion here as some traffic diverts onto alternative routes.  
 
Q.150 COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if he is aware of any role relating to Dublin City Council 
played by any of the former members of Sinn Fein, sacked or who have recently 
resigned pertaining to the McMonagle outrage? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The Chief Executive is not aware of any role played by the former members of Sinn 
Fein in relation to Dublin City Council. 
 
Q.151 COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to quantify the full extent of damage which has been done 
to all essential services in the Dublin City Council area following the financial crisis of 
2008. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 It is not possible to isolate the precise impact of the economic crisis on the services 
provided by Dublin City Council.  The level and extent of services provided by Dublin 
City Council is influenced by a range of factors as its level of expenditure and income 
is derived from numerous sources including the state purse.   Revenue and Capital 
Budgets from 2008 to date can be provided to the Councillor if he wishes. 
Q.152 COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update of occupancy rates of Dublin City Council 
units by bedroom size and giving number of occupants and number of tenancies 
involved. 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply will be issued to the Councillor within two weeks of the Council meeting. 
 
Q.153 COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive In reply to my question number 37 at the February 2023 
City Council meeting the Chief Executive reply included an undertaking that officials 
would undertake the scope of the suggested study and how it could be commissioned. 
Can the Chief Executive give me an update on this? 
Original question for information: (Q37 February 2023 City Council Meeting) 
To ask the Chief Executive, given that so many of our Dublin Street names are named 
after Kings and Queens of England, Lords Lieutenants, various “Noblemen”, absentee 
landlords, state officials etc. reflecting the period of our unlawful occupation by Britain, 
and noting that the National Gallery in London has an on-going research project 
examining the legacies of British Slave-ownership, can the Chief Executive 
commission a study to find out if any of those after whom our streets are named had 
any links to the enslavement of people (i.e. the slave trade).  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A study as proposed would be a significant undertaking for the City given several key 
factors including: the number of streets (4,000+); the length of time over which streets 
were named (almost 1,000 years); the range of sources to be identified, consulted and 
verified, and the complex nature of the issues involved.  
Officials will carry out a scoping exercise and report to the Commemorations & Naming 
Committee once re-constituted. 
 
Q.154 COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive if he would consider an amendment to the “To be 
completed by the Landlord” section of the Dublin City Council Transfer Application 
Form. The suggested amendments that a tenant in a Voluntary Housing unit should be 
able to have the transfer form completed by Dublin City Council as his/her original/de 
facto landlord. I am requesting this as some tenants of AHBs are reluctant to ask the 
Housing body to sign off as they are fearful that by giving the AHB notice that they are 
looking for a transfer, the service level and attitude to them may change. 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A tenant of an Approved Housing Body when submitting a transfer application is 
required to submit proof of a clear rent account, owing to the fact that Housing 
Allocations do not have access to view a rent account of a tenant of an Approved 
Housing Body. There should be no difference in the service level and attitude to an 
applicant seeking a transfer, should there be, the applicant should follow the 
complaints procedure applicable to the relevant Approved Housing Body. 
 
Q.155 COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council would be open to suggestions for the 
temporary use of George’s Dock while the longer term development there is being 
processed. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Council is currently reviewing Georges Dock on its viability for meanwhile use 
opportunities.  Expressions of interest for use may be sought following consideration 
of the options for the Dock. The Dock itself is a conservation area and has constraints 
on how it can be utilised as a public use space. Under the current development plan 
zoning for Georges Dock is to deliver water based activities. 
In the short term the Dock is planned to be one of the locations for winter lights 2024. 
 

Q.156  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Parking permits are issued to short term rental car companies so people can rent cars 
by the hour which is a great service for the community. What is the overview of the 
amount of permits that will be granted to these private companies? Are there any 
restrictions on these permits to prevent parking in high demand areas or residential 
areas/roads where there are insufficient spaces for residential on street parking? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply will be issued to the Councillor within two weeks of the Council meeting. 
 
Q.157  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Cabbage patch – could parks please detail what work has been completed following 
the public consultation on the park in 2019. 
How much has been spent on the upgrades over the last five year period.   
What are the plans for upgrading and enhancing this park over the next five years? 
Could a timeline of proposed works please be provided as local residents are frustrated 
with the lack of progress with works that have previously been agreed upon following 
the public consultation in 2019. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We will revert to the Councillor directly once the information has been collated. 
 
Q.158  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive Could the corner of the footpath at the junction of Ashfield 
Park and Ashdale Road, Dublin 6w be investigated for damage and necessary repair 
works completed? The corner is regularly driven on as the curb has dropped perhaps 
due to the Eir covers - see attached photo. This makes using the footpath hazardous 
for pedestrians who are particularly vulnerable at this junction due to the lack of 
visibility and no curb to prevent vehicles from mounting the path. Is there a 
recommended curb height to achieve maximum safety for pedestrians? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply will be issued to the Councillor within two weeks of the Council meeting. 
 
Q.159  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the chief executive what is the necessary criteria for trees to be pruned? Many 
residents on many different roads are concerned about trees blocking the street lights 
especially as the evenings are darker now. How dark does it need to be before the 
Council take action to prune the trees back so that the light isn't impacted? There are 
many roads with dark areas and this impacts greatly on people’s safety.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
All criteria in relation to tree works are in our Dublin City Tree Strategy. The trees will 
only be pruned if the branches are directly affecting the public lights. 
https://www.dublincity.ie/sites/default/files/media/file-uploads/2018-
08/Dublin_City_Tree_Strategy_2016-2020.pdf 
 

APPENDIX B 
 
Vote 1 – Report No. 187/2024  - Motion to amendmend the Local Property Tax 2025 
RECORD OF DIVISION AT 7TH OCTOBER COUNCIL MEETING  
 
FOR: 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTAIN: 
 20 
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
 
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
Councillor Ammar Ali 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Janet Horner 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daryl Barron 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Vincent Jackson 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Racheal Batten 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Feljin Jose 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor  Emma Blain 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Leslie Kane 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor  Janice Boylan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Kourtney Kenny 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Tom Brabazon 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Patrick Kinsella 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor  Christy Burke 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Dermot Lacey 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Claire Byrne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor John Lyons 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Danny Byrne 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Micheál MacDonncha 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Mary Callaghan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ray McAdam 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Hazel Chu 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Séamas McGrattan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor  Anthony Connaghan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Paddy Monahan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor  Fiona Connelly  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Carolyn Moore 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor  Keith Connolly 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Edel Moran 
√ 
 
 
 
 Deputy Lord Mayor Donna Cooney  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Darragh Moriarty 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Jen Cummins 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Naoise Ó Muirí 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Ray Cunningham 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Cat O’Driscoll 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Hazel de Nortúin 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Colm O’Rourke 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Maire Devine 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Gavin Pepper 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Daithí Doolan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Cieran Perry 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Pat Dunne 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Michael Pigeon 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daniel Ennis 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Gayle Ralph 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Cian Farrell  
 
 
 
 
Councillor Punam Rane 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Alison Field  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Conor Reddy 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Declan Flanagan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Nial Ring 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Mannix Flynn 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Patricia Roe 
 
√ 
 
 
Lord Mayor James Geoghegan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Aisling Silke  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Eoin Hayes  
 
 
 
 
Councillor Supriya Singh 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Barry Heneghan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Malachy Steenson 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Deirdre Heney 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor John Stephens 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Jesslyn Henry 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Philip Sutcliffe 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Rory Hogan 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

APPENDIX B 
 
AGAINST: 
   
 
 
 
 
ABSENT: 
 3 

Appendix C 
Motion No 1 – Sinn Fein 
 
Motion/Report Amendment Form 
  
City Council Meeting held on the 7th October 2024 
  
N.B This form must be completed, signed and handed to the Lord Mayor for each and 
every amendment put forward. Copies of Amendments must be circulated to all Members 
& Officials before Amendment is tabled. 
  
(a) Details of Motion/Report to be amended : 
  
1. I wish to put forward an amendment to Report No 187/2024 on the Agenda 
  
  
(b) Amendment Text 
  
“That Dublin City Council determines, in accordance of the provisions of Section 20 of the 
FINANCE (LOCAL PROPERTY TAX) ACT 2012 (as amended), that the basic rate of local 
property tax should stand varied downwards by 15 per cent for 2025 in respect of relevant 
residential properties situated in the administrative area of Dublin City Council.” 
 
(d) Signature of Councillor(s) Proposing Amendment 
  
Cllr Daithí Doolan 
Cllr Máire Devine 
Cllr Leslie Kane 
Cllr Mícheál McDonncha 
Cllr Anthony Connaghan 
Cllr Janice Boylan  
Cllr Kourtney Kenny 
Cllr Edel Moran 
Cllr Séamas McGrattan 
 
 
  
For Official Use only 
Amendment No ___ to Motion No ______ 
Amendment complies with Standing Orders______ 
Amendment Approved by Council ______ 
Vote Taken________ 
Amended Motion approved by Council_______ 
Signed : ____________________________________ 
 
 
Motion No. 2 – Labour and Green Party  
 
Motion/Report Amendment Form 
  
City Council Meeting held on the 7th October 2024 
  

Appendix C 
With regard to Report No 187/2024 
  
We propose:  
  
 “That Dublin City Council determines, in accordance of the provisions of Section 20 of the 
FINANCE (LOCAL PROPERTY TAX) ACT 2012 (as amended), that the basic rate of local 
property tax should stand for 2025 in respect of relevant residential properties situated in 
the administrative area of Dublin City Council 
  
 
  
 
Cllr Darragh Moriarty, Cllr Fiona Connelly, Cllr Alison Field Cllr Dermot Lacey & Cllr. Janet 
Horner on behalf of the Green Party  
 
 
Motion No. 3 – Fine Gael  
 
Motion/Report Amendment Form 
City Council Meeting held on the 7th October 2024 
Copies of Amendments must be circulated to all Members & Officials before Amendment 
is tabled. 
(a) Details of Motion/Report to be amended : 
1. I wish to put forward an amendment to Report No 187/2024 on the Agenda 
(b) Amendment Text 
“That Dublin City Council determines, in accordance of the provisions of Section 20 of the 
FINANCE (LOCAL PROPERTY TAX) ACT 2012 (as amended), that the basic rate of local 
property tax should be varied downwards by _15___% for 2025 in respect of relevant 
residential properties situated in the administrative area of Dublin City Council.” 
(c) Motion wording as revised, including proposed amendment/deletions 
_______________________________________________________________ 
_______________________________________________________________ 
_______________________________________________________________ 
_______________________________________________________________ 
(d) Signature of Councillor(s) Proposing Amendment 
Cllr___Danny Byrne ____________ Cllr____Punam Rane__________ 
Cllr___Gayle Ralph_____________ Cllr___Emma Blain____________ 
Cllr___Ray McAdam_____________ Cllr___James Geoghegan______ 
Cllr___Naoise O’Muiri____________ Cllr__Supriya Singh ___________ 
Cllr___Patrick Kinsella___________ Cllr__Colm O’Rourke__________ 
Cllr___Declan Flanagan__________ 
For Official Use only 
Amendment No ___ to Motion No ______ Amendment complies with Standing 
Orders______ Amendment Approved by Council ______ 
Vote Taken________ 
Amended Motion approved by Council_______ Signed : 
____________________________ 

Appendix C 
Motion No. 4 – Independent Group  
 
Motion/Report Amendment Form 
 
City Council Meeting held on the 7th October 2024 
  
Copies of Amendments must be circulated to all Members & Officials before Amendment is 
tabled. 
 
(a) 
Details of Motion/Report to be amended : 
 
1. I wish to put forward an amendment to Report No 187/2024 on the Agenda 
 
(b) 
Amendment Text 
 
_______________________________________________________________ 
That Dublin City Council determines, in accordance of the provisions of Section 20 of the 
FINANCE (LOCAL PROPERTY TAX) ACT 2012 (as amended), that the basic rate of local 
property tax should be varied downwards by 15 per cent for 2024 in respect of relevant 
residential properties situated in the administrative area of Dublin City Council.” 
 
Signature of Councillor(s) Proposing Amendment 
  
  Cllr Cieran Perry on behalf of the Independent Group  
 
For Official Use only 
Amendment No ___ to Motion No ______ 
Amendment complies with Standing Orders______ 
Amendment Approved by Council ______ 
Vote Taken________ 
Amended Motion approved by Council_______ 
Signed : ____________________________________ 
 
Motion No. 5 – Fianna Fáil  
 
Motion 
 
 
City Council Meeting held on the 7th October 2024 
  
 
Details of Motion/Report to be amended : 
 
1. I wish to put forward an amendment to Report No 187/2024 on the Agenda 
 
 
 “That Dublin City Council determines, in accordance of the provisions of Section 20 of the 
FINANCE (LOCAL PROPERTY TAX) ACT 2012 (as amended), that the basic rate of local 
property tax should be varied downwards by 15% for 2025 in respect of relevant residential 
properties situated in the administrative area of Dublin City Council.” 

Appendix C 
 
Signature of Councillor(s) Proposing Amendment 
  
Cllr. Deirdre Heney   
Cllr. Tom Brabazon 
 
Motion No. 6 – Social Democrats  
 
Motion/Report Amendment Form 
 
City Council Meeting held on the 7th October 2024 
  
Copies of Amendments must be circulated to all Members & Officials before Amendment is 
tabled. 
 
(c) 
Details of Motion/Report to be amended : 
 
2. I wish to put forward an amendment to Report No 187/2024 on the Agenda 
 
(d) 
Amendment Text 
 
bi) “That Dublin City Council determines, in accordance of the provisions of Section 20 of 
the FINANCE (LOCAL PROPERTY TAX) ACT 2012 (as amended), that the basic rate 
of local property tax should stand for 2025 in respect of relevant residential properties 
situated in the administrative area of Dublin City Council” 
OR 
 
bii) “That Dublin City Council determines, in accordance of the provisions of Section 20 of the 
FINANCE (LOCAL PROPERTY TAX) ACT 2012 (as amended), that the basic rate of local 
property tax should be varied upwards / downwards (delete as appropriate) by ____%  
(insert percentage no greater than 15%) for 2025 in respect of relevant residential 
properties situated in the administrative area of Dublin City Council.” 
 
(e) 
Motion wording as revised, including proposed amendment/deletions 
_______________________________________________________________ 
 
That Dublin City Council determines, in accordance of the provisions of Section 20 
of the FINANCE (LOCAL PROPERTY TAX) ACT 2012 (as amended), that the basic 
rate of local property tax should stand for 2025 in respect of relevant residential 
properties situated in the administrative area of Dublin City Council. 
 
The Dublin City Council further notes: 
• The misnamed “Local Property Tax” is not a local tax in Dublin City Council’s 
context. In 2023, for example, about 90% of the LPT charged to Dublin City 
Council home owners was returned to the central government fund and not 
used to fund Dublin City Council services. This is not what city taxpayers 
expect and a dishonest appropriation of Dublin City Council funds. 

Appendix C 
• In addition, central government has not invested sufficiently in Dublin city in 
funds or in policies - the city’s Council operations like renovating social 
housing stock or funding ambulances for Dublin Fire Brigade, but also the 
capital investments required to tackle dereliction and vacancy and improve 
the public domain of the city itself. 
• Furthermore, we do not have confidence that Dublin City Council is pursuing value 
for money with taxpayer funds. In particular, to our knowledge, the Chief Executive 
and staff have not formulated any strategies or implemented any measures to deal 
with extreme cost inflation, cost controls, reform of procurement practices, or 
establishing better return on investment from existing financial resources. We have 
heard very clearly from our constituents that progress on these measures must be 
made and we are deeply disappointed to see no mention of this to councillors from 
the Chief Executive to-date, while he asks for an increase in funds from LPT. 
• However, given the economic backdrop for small businesses in the city, in particular 
for restaurants and cafes, we are greatly concerned that any continued maximum 
tax cut in LPT would require higher commercial rates for businesses, plunging many 
into more difficult financial circumstances. In fact, Dublin City Council's finance 
department has recommended an increase to commercial rates to fund local 
services. We believe we have a responsibility to rate-payers, who directly fund 
about 30% of the Dublin City Council budget, as well as to residential property 
owners and the citizenry of Dublin. There must be a balanced approach. In 
particular, we find it galling that the so-called 'parties of business' are presiding over 
a crisis for small businesses in the city. 
 
The Dublin City Council furthermore requests that the Chief Executive ensures: 
• Any net new funds yielded from LPT are kept within the City Council's budget 
and not clawed back by the central government. 
• The proper ring fencing of the net proceeds from the year-on-year increase 
are put to use at the full discretion of Councillors through the budgetary 
consultative group, including for initiatives such as homeless services. 
• A full cost control and value for money strategy is formulated and 
implemented by the Chief Executive and Council staff for approval by 
Councillors by the November 2024 monthly meeting of the Council. 
_______________________________________________________________ 
_______________________________________________________________ 
 
(f) 
Signature of Councillor(s) Proposing Amendment 
  
  Cllr Cat O’Driscoll____
__ 
Cllr Eoin Hayes ____
____ 
 
on behalf of the Social Democrats group on Dublin City Council  
 
For Official Use only 
Amendment No ___ to Motion No ______ 
Amendment complies with Standing Orders______ 
Amendment Approved by Council ______ 
Vote Taken________ 
Amended Motion approved by Council_______ 
 
