Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 8 January 2024 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
 
  
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 4ú Eanáir 2024 i Seomra na Comhairle, Halla 
na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an 
tArdmheara Daithí de Róiste sa chathaoir 
 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Daryl Barron 
Racheal Batten 
Janice Boylan 
Tom Brabazon 
Christy Burke 
Dearbháil Butler 
Claire Byrne 
Danny Byrne 
Deborah Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
Anthony Connaghan 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Caroline Conroy 
Deirdre Conroy 
Donna Cooney 
Daniel Céitinn 
Kelsey May Daly 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Daithí de Róiste 
Tara Deacy 
Máire Devine 
Kevin Donoghue 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Anne Feeney 
Declan Flanagan 
Terence Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
James Geoghegan 
Alison Gilliland 
Deirdre Heney 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Jane Horgan Jones 
Dermot Lacey 
Darcy Lonergan 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Briege MacOscar 
Ray McAdam 
Paddy McCartan 
Eimer McCormack 
Séamas McGrattan 
Declan Meenagh 
Carolyn Moore 
Darragh Moriarty 
Sophie Nicoullaud 
Naoise Ó Muirí 
Claire O'Connor 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Damian O'Farrell 
Colm O'Rourke 
Larry O'Toole 
Cieran Perry 
Michael Pidgeon 
Noeleen Reilly 
Nial Ring 
Patricia Roe 
Catherine Stocker 
Michael Watters 
 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Richard Shakespeare 
Aisling Browne 
Frank d'Arcy 
Ruth Dowling 
John Flanagan 
Anthony Flynn 
Samantha Gill 
Kirsten Hart 
Mary Hayes 
Yvonne Kelly 
Karl Mitchell 
Brendan O'Brien 
Bruce Phillips 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Kathy Quinn 
Michelle Robinson 
Deirdre Scully 
Prajwal K. Annibabu 
Andy Walsh 
 
 
 
  

 
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
The Lord Mayor welcomed everyone to the meeting and wished them a happy 
new year.  
 
He congratulated Richard Shakespeare on his recent appointment as Chief 
Executive and advised members that the Chief Executive will be meeting with 
all political groups on the Council before the February City Council meeting.  
 
Donation Statements 
Members were reminded of the deadline of 31st January for return of their 
Annual Donations statements to Ruth Dowling or Natalie Leonard.  
 
Approval of Seminar   
The Lord Mayor sought the approval of Members for attendance at the 
Association of Irish Regions Seminar taking place on 7th & 8th February 2024.  
Agreed.  
 
 
 
 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the 
questions lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the 
questions lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and 
Answers are set out in Appendix A to these minutes. 
 
12 - 46 
 
3 
  Correspondence was received from Clare County Council and Limerick City and 
County Council. 
 
• 
Clare County Council  
• 
Limerick City and County Council  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas McGrattan and seconded by Councillor 
Terence Flanagan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence 
listed. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
4 
  To confirm the minutes of the City Council Meeting held on 4th December 2023 and 
the Special Council Meeting on the 19th December 2023. 
 
The minutes of the City Council meeting held on the 4th December 2023 and the 
Special 
Council 
Meeting 
on 
the 
19th 
December 
2023 
having 
been 
printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken 
as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor. 
 
 
 
5 
  Authorisation under Section 153(2) Local Government Act 2001 to defend a Judicial 
Review of the Development Plan concerning the zoning of lands located in 
Chapelizod, Dublin 20. 
 
It was proposed by the Lord Mayor Daithí de Róiste and seconded by Cat O’Driscoll 
that pursuant to Standing Order 39.1. the members meet in the absence of the media 
and the general public for part of the Council meeting for the purposes of receiving 
legal advice in private from Stephen Dodd SC on the judicial review of the Council’s 
decision to defend a Judicial Review of the Development Plan concerning the zoning 
of lands located in Chapelizod, Dublin 20 in the matter of Pat O’Donnell & Company 
 

 
v Dublin City Council 2022/1096JR (Lands at Chapelizod). The motion was put and 
carried. 
 
The meeting administrator then requested that the webcast and Zoom recording be 
paused and that all members of the public and media leave the Chamber for the 
duration of the discussion. 
 
Stephen Dodd, Senior Counsel briefed the members on the proceedings and provided 
clarification on the issues they raised during the discussion. He also provided an 
update on other Judicial Review proceedings of the Dublin City Council Development 
Plan. 
 
On the conclusion of the briefing the meetings administrator requested that the 
Webcast and Zoom recording be restarted and invited members of the public and 
media to re-join the meeting. 
 
The following motion was then proposed by Councillor Mícheál Mac Donncha and 
seconded by Councillor Declan Meenagh that: 
 
“Pursuant to Section 153 (2) of the Local Government Act 2001 the elected members 
give express authorisation to the Chief Executive to defend a Judicial Review of the 
Development Plan concerning the zoning of lands located in Chapelizod, Dublin 20 in 
the matter of Pat O’Donnell & Company v Dublin City Council 2022/1096JR 
(Lands at Chapelizod). The motion was put and carried. 
 
Cllr. Flynn requested that his abstention be noted. 
 
 
6 
  Report No. 02/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - With reference to the 
Proposed Variation No. 2 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022 - 2028; Lands 
adjacent to Dublin City University Glasnevin Campus and Albert College Park, 
Glasnevin, Dublin 9. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas McGrattan and seconded by Councillor Naoise 
Ó Muirí that the members of the authority having considered the proposed variation 
and the Chief Executive’s Report, and the issues raised, the proper planning and 
sustainable development of the City, the statutory obligations of the local authority and 
the relevant policies or objectives of the Government or of any Minister of the 
Government; the City Council resolves that Variation No. 2 of the Dublin City 
Development Plan 2022-2028 is hereby made and that the necessary notices of the 
making of Variation No. 2 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028 be 
published. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
7 
  Report No. 03/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - With reference to the 
Proposed Variation No. 3 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022 - 2028 ; Lands at 
Botany Weaving Mill Ltd, Emerald Square, Cork Street, Dublin 8. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Mannix 
Flynn that members of the authority having considered the proposed variation and the 
Chief Executive’s Report, and the issues raised, the proper planning and sustainable 
development of the City, the statutory obligations of the local authority and the 
relevant policies or objectives of the Government or of any Minister of the 
Government; the City Council resolves that Variation No. 3 of the Dublin City 
Development Plan 2022-2028 is hereby made and that the necessary notices of the 
making of Variation No. 3 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028 be 
published. The motion was put and carried.  
 

 
 
 
8 
  Report No. 12/2024 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (A. Flynn) - With reference to 
the Arts Grant Funding 2024 (Arts Act 2003). 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 12/2024 and hereby 
approves the Arts Funding for 2024 as set out therein.  The motion was put and 
carried.  
 
 
 
9 
  Report No. 16/2024 of the Area Manager (K Mitchell) - With reference to the 
extinguishment of the public right of way over the laneway to the rear of multiple 
properties at Harbour Court, Dublin 1. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Anthony 
Connaghan that we the Lord Mayor and Members of Dublin City Council, being the 
Roads Authority for the City of Dublin and being of the opinion that the public right of 
way over the laneway to the rear of multiple properties at Harbour Court, Dublin 1 as 
shown on the attached Map SM 2023-0311 is no longer required for public use, 
extinguish the public right of way in accordance with Section 73 of the Roads Act 
1993.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
Councillor Janet Horner, Councillor Donna Cooney and Councillor Deborah Byrne 
wished for their objections to the report be noted.  
 
 
 
10   Report No. 17/2024 of the Area Manager (K Mitchell) - With reference to the 
extinguishment of the public right of way over the laneway to the rear of houses No. 2 
& No.4 Nottingham Street, Dublin 1. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Pat Dunne and Seconded by Councillor Anthony 
Connaghan that we, the Lord Mayor and Members of Dublin City Council, being the 
Roads Authority for the City of Dublin and being of the opinion that the public right of 
way over the laneway to the rear of houses No. 2 and No.4 Nottingham Street, Dublin 
1 as shown on the attached Map SM 2023-0533 is no longer required for public use, 
extinguish the public right of way in accordance with Section 73 of the Roads Act 1993  
The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
11   Disposal of Fee Simples   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 06/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Robinson) - With 
reference to the disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and 
Tenant (Ground Rents) (No. 2) Act, 1978.  
 
Cllr. Michael Pidgeon declared a conflict of interest and recused himself from 
the meeting.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
Séamas McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
06/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
On conclusion of the decision Cllr. Pidgeon rejoined the meeting. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 23/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the disposal of the Fee Simple of 123A Ventry Park, Cabra, Dublin 7.  
 
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Terence Flanagan and seconded by Councillor 
Anthony Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
23/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 24/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the disposal of the Fee Simple of 449 Collins Avenue, Collins Avenue West, 
Dublin 8.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Naoise Ó Muirí and seconded by Councillor 
Vincent Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
24/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
(d)   Report No. 31/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the disposal of the Fee Simple in a site for an ESB substation at Rutland Row, 
Dublin 1.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by 
Councillor Terence Flanagan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of 
Report No. 31/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
12   Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 22/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the proposed grant of a 5 Year Lease of the Reco Building, Silogue Road, 
Ballymun 11 to Ballymun Regional Youth Resource CLG.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by 
Councillor Terence Flanagan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of 
Report No. 22/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 25/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the proposed grant of a further licence of the premises known as Bride Street 
(St Patrick’s Park Tearooms) to The Tram Café Limited.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by 
Councillor Terence Flanagan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of 
Report No. 25/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 26/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the proposed grant of a Licence of a Room in Ballyfermot Civic Centre, Dublin 
10 to Stewarts Care Limited.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
Sophie Nicoullaud that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
26/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
(d)   Report No. 32/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the grant of a 3 year licence for a Café Unit, Bull Wall North, Clontarf, Dublin 3 
to Container Café Limited.  
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Naoise Ó Muirí and seconded by Councillor 
Terence Flanagan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
32/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
13   Disposal of Property:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 27/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the disposal of plot to the rear of 32 Sandford Road, Ranelagh, Dublin 6.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor 
Mannix Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
27/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 28/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the disposal of Valve Lodge, Knockfadda, Co Wicklow.  
 
Councillor Donna Cooney declared a conflict of interest in respect of Report 28 
and 29 and recused herself from the meeting for the discussion and decision 
on both items. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor 
Mannix Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
28/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 29/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the disposal of Vartry Lodge, Knockfadda, Co Wicklow.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor 
Mannix Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
29/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
Cllr Donna Cooney rejoined the meeting. 
 
 
 
(d)   Report No. 33/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the disposal of porch areas at the front of 1-44 Pigeon House Road, Ringsend, 
Dublin 4.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor Claire 
O’Connor that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 33/2024 
and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
 
 
 
14   Report No. 13/2024 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (F. d'Arcy) - Social Housing 
Supply and Delivery Monthly Update Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by Councillor Daithí 
Doolan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 13/2024. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
15   Report No. 18/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (J. Flanagan) - 
Quarterly Report of the Active Travel Programme Office. 
 

 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Michael Pidgeon and seconded by Councillor Alison 
Gilliland that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 18/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
16   Report No. 30/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (J. Flanagan) - 
Quarterly Report of the Traffic Department 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Michael Pigeon and seconded by Councillor Alison 
Gilliland that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 30/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
It was agreed that the Lord Mayor would write to the National Transport Authority in 
relation to the reduction in funding for Zebra Crossings. The issue will also be listed on 
the next meeting of the SPC on 7th February 2024. 
 
 
 
17   Report No. 07/2024 of the Head of Finance (K. Quinn) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Terence Flanagan and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 07/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
18   Report No. 08/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Terence Flanagan and seconded by Councillor Naoise 
Ó Muirí that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 08/2024. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
19   Report No. 19/2024 of the Corporate Policy Group - Breviate of the meeting held on 
the 29th September 2023, Lord Mayor Daithí de Róiste, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Daithí de Róiste and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 19/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
20   Report No. 20/2024 of the Corporate Policy Group - Breviate of the meeting held on 
the 24th November 2023, Lord Mayor Daithí de Róiste, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Daithí de Róiste and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 20/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
21   Report No. 11/2024 of the Area Committees - Breviates of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of December 2023. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Mícheál 
MacDonncha that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 11/2023. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
22   Report No. 15/2024 of the North West Area Joint Policing Sub-Committee - Breviate of 
the meeting held on 11th December 2023, Councillor Keith Connolly, Chairperson. 
 
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 15/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
23   Report No. 04/2024 of the Planning and Urban Form Strategic Policy Committee - 
Breviate of the meeting held on the 27th June 2023, Councillor Ray McAdam, 
Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Terence Flanagan and seconded by Councillor Declan 
Meenagh that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 04/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
24   Report No. 05/2024 of the Planning and Urban Form Strategic Policy Committee - 
Breviate of the meeting held on the 5th October 2023, Councillor Ray McAdam, 
Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Terence Flanagan and seconded by Councillor Declan 
Meenagh that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 05/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
25   Report No. 09/2024 of the Economic Development and Enterprise Strategic Policy 
Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 28th November 2023, Councillor Tom 
Brabazon, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Máire Devine and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 09/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
26   Report No. 34/2024 of the Arts, Culture & Leisure & Recreation Strategic Policy 
Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 25th September  2023, Councillor Cat 
O'Driscoll, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Dermot 
Lacey that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 34/2024. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
27   Report No. 35/2024 of the Arts, Culture & Leisure & Recreation Strategic Policy 
Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 27th November 2023, Councillor Cat 
O'Driscoll, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Dermot 
Lacey that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 35/2024. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
Councillor James Geoghegan raised a query in relation to item no. 10 of Report No. 
35/2024 Chatham Row seeking clarity on the decision made in relation to a lease of 
the property by the subcommittee and whether or not that decision will come before 
the full council.  It was confirmed by the Chair of the Arts SPC, Cat O’Driscoll that the 
committee are awaiting legal advice in relation to an appeal.  Update expected for the 
next SPC meeting.   It was further affirmed by the Chief Executive that any decision 
regarding a lease or disposal of a property must come before the council by way of a 
Section 183 statutory process.   
 
 
 
 
 

 
28   Report No. 10/2024 of the Dublin City Joint Policing Committee - Breviate of the 
meeting held on the 27th November 2023, Councillor Tara Deacy, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by Councillor 
Declan Meenagh that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 10/2024. 
The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
29   Report No. 21/2024 of the Protocol Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 
23rd November 2023, Councillor Deirdre Heney, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Deirdre Heney and seconded by Councillor Declan 
Meenagh that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No.21/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
30   Topical Issues 
 
No topical issues were submitted for consideration. 
 
 
 
31   Motions on Notice 
 
Motion No. 1.  It was proposed by Councillor Daithí Doolan and seconded by 
Councillor Janice Boylan that the following motion in their names be taken without 
debate:  
 
“Dublin City begins the year 2024 in the wake of the events of 23 November 2023. 
The cruel attack and injury of three children and an adult at Gaelscoil Choláiste Mhuire 
and the deplorable rioting and looting which followed, shocked our City.  
 
However, six weeks on, we resolve to continue to build with determination on what is 
best in our City. The  solidarity with those who were injured; the courage and diligence 
of front-line emergency and other workers, including Dublin City Council workers; the 
unity in opposition to the far right elements who sought to use the tragedy to stir up 
hatred; all these positives point to the way forward.  
 
Therefore Dublin City Council resolves to:  
 
• Work with all relevant public bodies and stakeholders, including the Garda Síochána 
and Government departments, to improve community safety and confidence in all 
parts of our City 
• Continue to enhance our City centre as the hub of Dublin’s commerce and culture 
and to make it a welcoming place for all, both day and night 
• Give civic leadership to improve our City for all who live here, in all our diversity, and 
all who visit.  
 
We note that Dublin City will be made safer if agencies, including Gardaí, youth 
services, drug services and mental health services work with communities to deliver 
the change that is so urgently required. To this end Dublin City Council seeks an 
urgent meeting with the Minster for Justice, the Minister for Transport and the Minister 
for Health to discuss:  
• Establishment of public transport policing on the DART, Luas, Irish Rail and Dublin 
Bus, 
• Improving resourcing to support the work of community Gardaí and an increase in 
new Youth Diversion Projects 
 

 
• Addressing and seeking to resolve issues which lead to loss of Gardaí from the 
service in Dublin, such as the cost of living, especially housing 
• Increasing funding and resources to drug rehabilitation programmes and mental 
health services in areas of high demand.” 
 
Agreed. 
 
 
32   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
There was one emergency motion in the name of Councillor Ray McAdam accepted 
for debate:  
 
“That the Elected Members of Dublin City Council utterly condemn the senseless 
vandalism and the anti-social behaviour that has once again wreaked havoc in 
Fairview Park over the weekend. Communities from within the North Inner City are 
again questioning whether they can use the park, whether families are safe while 
there and Inner City sports clubs have been left without playing pitches leaving the our 
young soccer players unable to play the game they love. The communities I represent 
in the North Inner City, who are regular users of Fairview Park, want to know what 
Dublin City Council and An Garda Siochana are doing to better protect Dubliners who 
use this northside amenity.  
Therefore, I am calling on the Chief Executive to: 
1. Clarify what plans the Parks Department has to improve or enhance Fairview 
Park between now and 2030.  
2. Confirm if the Teas Rooms proposals are proceeding.  
3. Review the effectiveness of the path installed in the park and thereby reduced 
the availability of playing pitches for North Inner City clubs.  
4. Work and liaise with clubs like Sheriff YC to identify alternative playing pitches 
that their young soccer stars can play and utilise while the damaged pitches 
are repaired and ensure those repairs are carried out within the next month.  
5. Provide bi-monthly updates to the Central Area Committee on the progress 
made in respect of each of these matters given that the park is located in the 
North Central Area.  
Separately, the Elected Members of Dublin City Council calls upon the Assistant 
Garda Commissioner for the DMR to prioritise the initiation and implementation of a 
cross-Divisional policing plan to counteract the ability of cars to access and enter 
Fairview Park, tackle the drug dealing occurring within the Park and to utilise new 
legislation to seize scrambler bikes and those using them to terrorise Dubliners who 
wish to use Fairview Park individually, with their families or with sporting clubs.  
The Elected Members of Dublin City Council are determined to ensure that Fairview 
Park can be enjoyed by all safely and without the fear currently felt by many of my 
constituents who use this park.  
The motion was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Naoise Ó Muirí.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
Councillor Tara Deacy, Chair of the Joint Policing Committee confirmed that she 
would bring the issues raised to their next meeting.  
 
 

 
The Manager noted that repairs to the pitch are underway.  He also committed to  
work with E&T in relation to illegal access of vehicles to the Park.  Parks will contact 
Clontarf Gardaí requesting assistance and support in relation to the issues raised and 
meet with Sheriff YC.  He also confirmed that the Part 8 planning is in place for the tea 
rooms and that the Part 8 for the Library will be issued later this year.  
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
 

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT 
THE MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY, 8th 
OF JANUARY 2024 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide details of vacant property grant applications. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council, in partnership with the Department of Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage, administers the Croi Conaithe Scheme (Vacant Property Refurbishment 
Grant) for the City. 
 
The purpose of this scheme is to make a financial grant available to applicants who 
wish to return a long-term vacant property back to residential use in a timely manner. 
 
The key requirements is that the property must be vacant for two years at the date of 
applying to join the scheme. The grant sum available is up to a maximum of €70,000 
(max €50,000 if non derelict). 
 
The full terms and conditions of the Scheme and Application details are available on 
the Housing Agency’s web site at www.housingagency.ie and the Department of 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage site at www.gov.ie 
 
The City Council’s administrative process is as follows: 
 
 
Once the City Council receives an application it is vetted to ensure that the 
applicant has fully completed the application form together with the necessary 
supporting documentation and that it meets the requirements of the Scheme. 
 
 
If the application is deemed suitable for entry to the scheme an appointment is 
made for a site visit to view the property. 
 
 
Once a site inspection report is completed a decision will be made on the 
application and this will be corresponded to the applicant (Approval or Refusal). 
 
 
When the refurbishment works are completed the applicant must inform the 
City Council and another site inspection is undertaken and a site report 
generated. 
 
 
The City Council will then review its file and then initiate the legal process for 
the registering of the charge document in Tailte Eireann. 
 
 
Once the charge document is registered then the City Council will complete the 
necessary administration for the issuing of a grant payment to the applicant(s). 
   
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a time line to applicants which are availing of 
this grant. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Council cannot provide an exact time schedule for the processing of the Croi 
Conaithe Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant as this time period is dependent on 
the quality and quantity of information provided by the applicant on their application 
form.   

Where all required information is received by the City Council the time period for 
processing the initial application form, undertaking the initial site inspection and issuing 
an approval or refusal letter to the applicant takes approximately four weeks.   
 
In practice however we have found that applicants often do not provide all the 
information necessary to assess the application. This requires ongoing communication 
between parties until such time as all information is received and a decision can be 
arrived at and communicated to the applicant. 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive provide an explanation why applications are taking 7 
months to process. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Council is dependent on applicants for the Croi Conaithe Vacant Property 
Refurbishment Grant providing them with a fully completed application form in order to 
administer the Grant.  
 
Where the City Council receives a fully completed application form the time period for 
processing the initial application, undertaking an initial site inspection and issuing an 
approval or refusal letter to the applicant takes approximately 4 weeks. 
 
Where information is not provided to the level of detail and quality required to properly 
assess the application, the application process is lengthened by the duration of time 
taken to receive relevant information.  
 
A number of applicants have also submitted numerous application forms for the 
scheme together with revisions in the refurbishment works and or revised costing 
reports for same. Naturally these changes lead to delays in the processing of these 
applications for the scheme.   
 
All other aspects of the processing of the grant is dependent on the completion of the 
refurbishment works and the active engagement of the applicant and or their 
representatives with this office as regards the completion of the administration process 
thereafter. 
 
Q.4 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive how many privately operated homeless hostels have only 
the dining room as inside social space. In his answer can he explain what is being 
done to make sure people have enough space in these facilities. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Out of 81 private emergency accommodation (PEA) services for singles, couples and 
families: 
34 have only dining room communal spaces, however many are large and open plan 
spaces. 
The DRHE always examines the options for additional communal space within each 
accommodation setting if required, mindful of the footprint of each building and the fact 
that any additional changes could trigger a material planning issue. 
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR JANE HORGAN-JONES 
To ask the Chief Executive the following question: 
 
Regarding the Ayrfield United premises on Blunden Drive. This club have no 
connection to water, waste or electricity at their site leased to us by Dublin City Council. 

 
The club have Academy U7s, U8s and U9s boys and girls teams playing there each 
weekend as well as youth teams and senior teams not having access to toilets for 
home and away teams as well as spectators is completely unacceptable in this day 
and age. 
 
The Club have spoken to Ayrfield Community Centre but they are refusing to give them 
use of any of the toilets inside the main building however they have informed the club 
that we are welcome to add a toilet at our own cost into one of the storage rooms on 
the outside of the building. This is certainly not ideal however it would solve their 
problem in the short term.  
 
There is access to water in the room and the room is close to existing foul drainage 
outside which requires very minimal civic works. The club believe that this is the 
cheapest alternative for a short term solution as it requires the least amount of work to 
be carried out. To fit a new toilet, urinal, wash hand basin, cubicle walls and doors etc. 
as well as works on connections to foul waste, we are looking at between €5k and €6k. 
Can the Manager please confirm if funding can be made available for this project? 
  
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The local Area Manager has met with representatives of the club and has agreed to 
support the provision of temporary toilet facilities to accommodate both juvenile and 
adult members of both Ayrfield United and visiting clubs. 
 
Q.6 
COUNCILLOR JANE HORGAN-JONES 
To ask the Chief Executive for a full statement on the circumstances in which the 
Clontarf Half Marathon came to be held on the Sheriff FC pitches which were badly 
damaged by the event, and what measures have been taken to find alternative pitches 
for the club during repairs, and a timeframe for restoring the pitches to a good 
condition. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Clontarf Half Marathon has been a popular event on runner’s calendar for many 
years.  Recently however as the event grew is was seen as less sustainable to allow 
these numbers run through the protected habitats of Dollymount Strand which 
necessitated a new starting and finishing point for the participants to achieve the 
requisite distances.  The public open space at Alfie Byrne Road is ideally located for 
this purpose.   
 
The weather in the run up to the event did pose a challenge and the Parks Service met 
with the organisers on 3 occasions before the event the most recent being the 
Thursday before the start.  A route was agreed with the organisers that avoided the 
playing surface of the pitch with the runners exiting the public open space using the 
space behind the goals.  However the rain was so heavy the night before the event 
that this space was waterlogged with several inches of standing water in this undrained 
space.  It was necessary to allow the runners to use the space in front of the goals on 
the Saturday for safety reasons.  This was a calculated risk with the potential of 
damage to a section of 1 pitch currently allocated to 1 local adult team.  It was however 
understood that even in the worst case scenario the goal posts could simply been 
moved forward a few meters to the other side of the runners route until full repairs 
could be affected to the damaged area.    
However once the rain washed down the mud kicked up by the runners it was clear 
that the pitch remained playable and available to the club but was subject to the usual 
weather calls as is the case with every other council owned pitch in the area.  While 
no invasive repairs are necessary a small bit of decompaction and topdressing has 

been commissioned along the runner’s route and will be carried out as soon as 
conditions allow.  These works will not take the pitch out of commission. 
 
Q.7  
COUNCILLOR JANE HORGAN-JONES 
To ask the Chief Executive to address the following issues arising in Maypark, 
Donnycarney 
  
-       The trees in Maypark hanging over the Malahide road side of the pavement need 
to be cut back, some of the branches are really long. They cause a mess because 
there are leaves everywhere on the footpath and bus / cycle lane.  For cyclists this is 
not safe particularly during wet weather.   
-       The park has 3 bins, all in the playground.  I noticed 2 were replaced last year to 
those ones with tiny openings to place your rubbish, this has increased litter in the 
area.  Can there be a bin at the entrances and beside the Astro pitch?  The park needs 
more bins and they need to be picked up more frequently.  The one on the Killester 
Avenue side of the park is always overflowing and between that bin and the dog poo 
bin it is unsightly. There are also no recycling facilities available for plastic bottles etc., 
could this be considered?   
-       The playground has gotten so shabby over the years.  The council used to be great 
at repairing broken equipment but now equipment is removed and not replaced.  The 
ground materials are coming apart and children are picking at it (it doesn't look hygienic 
or safe).  The council did a lovely job of Fairview playground. Are there plans to do 
up Maypark playground?  It is due a makeover.   
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply to this question is currently being compiled. The response will be sent directly 
to the councillor within the next three weeks. 
 
Q.8  
COUNCILLOR JANE HORGAN-JONES 
To ask the Chief how often are bins emptied in the Killester area and on what 
days? Residents have noticed full bins (especially beside, in the park or near schools) 
on a Friday and not collected until Monday / Tuesday.  Same goes for bank holidays, 
overflowing bins in the area.   
  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services have the bins on main routes and shopfronts in the     
Killester area emptied on a daily basis. The bins in residential areas here are emptied 
five days a week, Monday to Friday.  
 
Q.9 
COUNCILLOR MICHAEL PIDGEON 
To ask the Chief Executive if any further indoor cycle parking facilities are being 
considered, beyond the three currently in place, and if council management are open 
to funding any further ones should sites become available? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The development of indoor cycle parking facilities have certain key requirements. The 
facility needs to be located on the ground floor of a building or on floors that are 
accessible by shallow ramps suitable for safe access by cyclists. It needs to be 
centrally located to generate sufficient demand to justify the establishment of a cycle 
parking facility. It needs to be safe and secure while also allowing for easy access and 
egress by cyclists. Ideally the facility is owned by the City Council but where necessary 
lease agreements can be entered into with car park owners.  
 
In recent years Dublin City Council has inspected car parks, both publically and 
privately owned, in the city centre area. The above requirements have ruled out the 

development of cycle parking facilities in these car parks with the exception the Spire 
Car Park and Jervis Street Car Park where facilities have been installed. 
 
DCC would welcome opportunities in other suitable locations and if funding is available 
DCC is open to developing facilities further indoor cycle parking facilities in the future. 
 
Q.10  COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive To ask the Chief Executive to provide, in tabular form, the 
number of housing standards inspections and housing standards prosecutions brought 
by DCC in the following years 2018,2019,2020,2021, 2022 and 2023 and if he will 
make a statement on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
 
*Improvement letters and Improvement Notices were not distinguished between in 
2018 statistics. 
**Includes both Improvement Notices and Improvement Letters. 
*** 2023 annual statistics will not be available until January 2024.  The figures provided 
may be subject to minor change. 
 
In 2019 the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) Regulations 2017 were revoked 
which meant that legal actions initiated under the 2017 Regulations did not proceed to 
court.  In 2020 - 2021 Covid restrictions meant that legal proceedings from 2019 did 
not proceed to court.   
 
Due to the resulting backlog with both inspections and also within the courts service 
itself no new legal proceedings were initiated in 2022.  This was reviewed in 2023 and 
it is now possible to return to initiating legal proceedings in cases of continuing non-
compliance. 
 
There was a significant increase in enforcement activity in 2022 and 2023 in terms of 
Improvement Letters issued and Improvement Notices and Prohibition Notices served 
on non-compliant properties, increased significantly, with high numbers of Prohibition 
Notices served, and a return to legal proceedings being recommended in the case of 
continuing non-compliance. 
 
 
 
 
Year 
Number of 
inspections of 
private rented 
properties carried 
out 
Improvement 
Letters 
issued 
Improvement 
Notices 
issued 
Prohibition 
Notices 
issued 
Number of 
legal 
proceedings 
initiated 
2018 
5830 
-* 
3367** 
46 
28 
2019 
9099 
4562 
1118 
60 
55 
2020 
3020 
1761 
465 
10 
0 
2021 
3663 
2098 
254 
0 
0 
2022 
6532 
3828 
945 
138 
0 
2023 (to 
end 
Q3)*** 
5449 
2365 
746 
106 
2 

Q.11 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the number of people who have expressed 
an interest in selling their home to Dublin City Council under the financial contribution 
scheme. How many of these applied for the scheme, and how many were allocated? 
How many are currently on the waiting list and can he explain this in tabular form and 
make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Allocations of tenancies to applicants on the Financial Contribution list are dependent 
on new Older Persons Housing Developments becoming available, as supply 
increases we expect to be in a position to increase offers to these lists.  
The below table sets out the current number of applications in respect of the Financial 
Contribution Scheme –  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Five applicants were housed through the Financial Contribution Scheme in 2023. 
 
Q.12  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can clarify if within an estate that has not been taken 
in charge by the Council the land outside individual houses which contains the 
infrastructure of water supply and drainage of foul water is owned by a Company 
limited by Guarantee (the shareholders being the owners of the properties in the 
estate). 
Which entity is responsible legally and financially to rectify a) a failure and breakage in 
the fabric of the said infrastructure outside the individual houses and b) an internal 
blockage not affecting the fabric of the said infrastructure outside the individual houses. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
For any estate not taken in charge, the responsibility for repairs to water and 
wastewater infrastructure is the responsibility of the management company. Should 
there be an issue such as a blocked private wastewater connection, then that is 
between the householder and the management company. When a Local Authority now 
takes in charge an estate, they do not take in charge the Water and Wastewater 
Infrastructure. These are taken in charge by Uisce Eireann. 
 
Area 
Number 
Area B 
41 
Area D 
13 
Area E 
122 
Area H 
17 
Area J 
35 
Area K 
32 
Area L 
13 
Area M 
15 
Area N 
13 
Area P 
5 

Q.13  COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive when the cycle and bus lane works be complete on (Details 
supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The (details supplied) will deliver 8km of walking facilities, 6km of cycling facilities, 
and 5.4km of bus lanes on the following routes (details supplied).  
 
Construction commenced in Q1 2022 and the Project Team are working towards a 
substantial completion in Q2 2024. The Scheme Contractor has a substantial 
workforce of typically 100no. Operatives at any given time in an effort to progress the 
works as quickly as is possible in a difficult and restricted urban environment. 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive when in 2024 will the winter beds close down at homeless 
services? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
330 additional single adult beds have been added to the system since the 1st of 
October. These are permanent beds, with no end date in 2024. In addition to these, 
there are 40 extreme weather beds in NGO services, which are made available as 
needed, depending on the demand for homeless services on any given night. There is 
no specific end date for these in 2024. 
 
Q.15  COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive when (Details supplied) will come under the Demolition 
of the empty complex. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has received Stage 3 funding and budget approval from the 
Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage for the redevelopment of the 
(Details supplied). 
 
Currently the tender for the main contract is progressing and we hope to finalise the 
tender process in early 2024. The main contract includes for the full demolition of the 
current estate and the construction of 163 new homes alongside a multi-use 
community space (crèche/karate/community facility), a boxing club, a commercial unit 
and a café space. It is anticipated that a contractor will be appointed and onsite by May 
2024. 
 
Q.16 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive if DCC have held any discussions with (detail supplied) 
regards a Garda sun station at the Docklands. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The Dublin City Council Docklands Office had corresponded with An Garda Siochana 
during 2023 at the request of the Docklands Oversight and Consultative Forum in 
respect of a number of matters one of which was to request consideration of a Garda 
Station for the Docklands area. No further discussions have taken place following a 
response received from the Assistant Garda Commissioner.  
 
 

Q.17  COUNCILLOR MANIX FLYNN To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report as the 
cost and expense of the “We Believe in Dublin” campaign. This report to include 
evening events nitefest in the city 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Believe in Dublin campaign and associated events and initiatives, including night 
time events, were all put in place over a short period of time and in collaboration with 
many city stakeholders. The campaign and the many events were part of a concerted 
campaign to bring citizens and tourists back into the City after the terrible events of 
November 23rd 2023. The rapid response to delivering family friendly events, 
supporting the night time economy and boosting retail added hugely to the city during 
the festive season and was extremely successful based on the footfall figures that were 
recorded at this time. 
  
  
Due to the nature of the events and the many stakeholders involved and with the 
holiday period it will take time to gather the relevant information that has been 
requested. The information will be prepared and a report will issue to the Councillor as 
soon as possible. 
 
Q.18 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a report regarding the progress of the creation of 
the municipal theatre at Smock Ally this report to include intended board structures 
and all financial contributions made by Dublin city council to this project as well as 
governance structures and who owns the buildings  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Temple Bar Cultural Trust (TBCT), as the owner of this property, has been actively 
engaging with the Board and Executive of Smock Alley Theatre Ltd (SAT) with a view 
to an orderly wind up of the company on the basis that TBCT, in partnership with DCC, 
would turn the building into a Municipal Theatre. In September 2022, Dublin Municipal 
Theatre CLG was incorporated as a company to be the vehicle to carry out this project. 
SAT will begin the final stages of their orderly wind up in the near future, DMT will then 
take over control of the building and its operations in early 2024. There are still some 
legal pieces between TBCT and SAT to be finalised and executed. 
 
The current board of DMT is comprised of TBCT executive directors. Once all legal 
agreements have been executed, a new Board for DMT will be established to oversee 
operations of the new Theatre and ensure the corporate governance responsibilities 
of the new entity are adhered to. It is envisaged that the board will have the following 
structure:  
 
Independent Chair (Selected by DCC Chief Executive in consultation with the Lord 
Mayor)  
2 x DCC Officials 
2 x Elected Members  
2 x External members  
1 x Existing SAT board member (to ensure continuity for the first 12 months) 
 
Dublin City Council, via the Arts Office, will provide financial support to DMT going 
forward and a Service Level Agreement will be put in place to ensure that the theatre 
is operating in line with the needs of the City. It is proposed that €250,000 will be 
provided for in the Annual Revenue Budget going forward. The initial SLA will be for a 
period of five years with a review thereafter. Payment of this annual grant to DMT will 
be made once the following steps have been adhered to: 

 
DMT to formally write to DCC requesting each drawdown of the annual grant. 
A twice yearly payment schedule is to be agreed in advance and subject to review 
during the period of the agreement. 
Each request is to include specific details of programming for the preceding period, an 
updated cash-flow statement, set of management accounts made up to the most 
recent quarter and up to date confirmation of tax clearance status. 
 
Q.19 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to initiate the full investigation regarding the financial costs 
of Avalon House and the governance around the leasing contracts and costs into the 
future use of the building.  
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Peter McVerry Trust entered a 20 year lease for Avalon House in 2019 for use as 
emergency accommodation. This was funded through Section 10 funding. Local 
stakeholders began legal proceedings in December 2019 and an application for an 
injunction was lodged with the High Court to prevent the use of the facility as 
emergency accommodation for single adults.  
 
Following intensive negotiations, senior management agreed to a re-assignment of the 
lease from PMVT to Dublin City Council (DCC) on the basis the hostel would be used 
to accommodate families. In December 2020 it was agreed that the lease would be re-
assigned to DCC for the residue of the term and this completed in May 2021.  
 
The DRHE considered alternatives and a family hub was considered to be the only 
viable use. The DRHE commenced the capital works application process, conditional 
approval was granted in February 2023 and full Stage 1 approval given by the 
Department in June 2023, following compliance with the conditions set out.  In August 
 
2023 a contractor was appointed to prepare the tender to procure an integrated design 
team. This tender did not go live in late November 2023/early December 2023 as 
anticipated but is scheduled to go live in January 2024. 
 
The building currently costs €2m per annum plus utilities and security costs. The 
outcome of the judicial review was a settlement agreed by all parties and the costs 
incurred during this process were legal costs and ongoing rent on the building. The 
estimated cost of planned works to the building is €6m. 
 
Q.20 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to carry out a full investigation as to how the iconic listed 
building, protected structure, Taylors Hall that is owned by DCC was allowed to be 
turned in a full pub without the full informed consent of the elected representatives and 
the local community  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is an ongoing investigation being carried out by the Planning Enforcement 
Section in respect of the alleged change of use of part of the premises concerned to a 
public house. There has been a recent updated inspection carried out by Officers from 
the Planning and Property Development Department, following receipt of a submission 
on behalf of the operator of the premises. A decision will be made in due course as to 
whether further enforcement action is warranted in this case. 
 
Q.21 
COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 

To ask the Chief Executive to comment on reports that contracted clampers use a 
‘discretionary policy’ when applying clamps to vehicles, to provide a copy of said 
discretionary policy and to ask how this complies with DCC’s obligations to operate in 
a transparent, fair, objective and impartial manner. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is no discretionary policy in place. Parking Enforcement action is governed by 
the Road Traffic Act 1961 and amendments. In order to carrying out legal 
enforcements there are a number of factors to consider. There can be many reasons 
why non enforcement would take place such as: insufficient road markings and road 
signage, road marking could be awaiting re instatement due to recently roadworks in 
an area, signage can be vandalised or knocked down, enforcement at these locations 
may have to be suspended until the appropriate markings and signage is re-instated.  
Enforcement action can only take place where Dublin City Council as the roads 
authority is in charge of the area. There are private lands and footpaths and areas in 
front of shops called private landings in various locations that may look like they are 
public areas but are in fact owned privately and therefore cannot be enforced.   
 
Applications for parking suspensions may granted by the Parking Enforcement 
Section, on foot on an application, purposes vary from organised events, filming in the 
city or emergency roadworks, if granted, this could lead to an instruction not to enforce 
on a particular street or allowances area made for residents of such streets to park on 
adjoining streets to facilitate the suspension and it ensures they won’t be enforced in 
the interim.  
  
Q.22  COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive how infrastructure which allows parking / stopping for 
hearses, wedding cars and disabled parking spaces close to entrances of religious 
spaces will be included within the Draft Dublin City Centre Transport Plan. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Any religious spaces that are close to any planned interventions included as part of 
the Draft Dublin City Centre Transport Plan will be consulted with prior to any new 
measures being introduced. It is planned to carry out local consultations for all specific 
measures which will allow for consultation with all local stakeholders.  
 
Q.23 
COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update regarding the UN IOM migration forum and 
DCCs response to the Department of Integration’s community engagement model. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As noted in the Guide for Inclusive Community Engagement in Local Planning and 
Decision Making, engagement fosters long-term trusting relationships between 
communities. The principles for community engagement, outlined in the guide, are 
evident in the preparation of the Dublin City Local Economic and Community Plan 
(LECP) 2024 – 2029.   
 
The LECP public consultation period began on 13 November 2023, continuing until 15 
January 2024.  Throughout the consultation process a variety of mechanisms are being 
used to ensure meaningful engagement with Dublin City citizens and stakeholders.  
These include: 
Accessible online and in-person workshops.  
World Café Event. 
Online survey promoted via corporate website, social media platforms and in public 
buildings.  

Series of one to one conversations with key contributors and stakeholders.  
Facilitated consultation through Dublin City PPN. 
 
On completion of the public consultation, the objective is that the diverse needs of 
people in Dublin City are represented and reflected in the LECP. The Plan, will then 
be implemented in partnership with Dublin City Council, state bodies, community and 
voluntary organisations and local businesses. 
  
The Local Economic and Community Plan 2024 – 2029 framework and initial 2-year 
Implementation plan will be published towards the end of Q2 2024.  As part of this an 
action to establish the pilot Dublin City Migrant Forum will be progressed at an early 
stage.   
 
 
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update regarding plans to refurbish the CTC building 
since the North Inner City meeting held on September 25th 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The North Inner City Area Office will present options to the NIC Councillors early in 
2024. 
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Firstly I want to acknowledge the great work done by DCC staff in delivering the 
Friendship Agreement with Ramallah. Can the Chief Executive please outline the 
programme of work that will now take place to ensure the aims and objectives of the 
agreement are met and to also outline the resources being committed to this 
programme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following the signing of the Friendship Agreement between Dublin City Council and 
the Ramallah Municipal Authority in December 2023, further work will be progressed 
in the first quarter of 2024 to agree a programme of work to support the terms of this 
agreement.  In the coming weeks a meeting will be set up to discuss the work plan 
within the areas of cooperation we agreed upon;  
 
Areas of Cooperation 
The Parties will carry out, in accordance with the principles of equality and mutual 
benefit, and subject to the availability of personnel and resources, exchanges and 
cooperation between the two cities in various forms in the following fields. 
Climate Action 
Sustainable Transport/Active Travel 
Municipal Services  
Smart Cities to promote common prosperity and development. 
 
Regular contacts shall be maintained between the leaders and relevant departments 
of both sides to facilitate consultations on the exchanges and cooperation as well as 
matters of common concern.  This work aligns with Dublin City Council’s Mission 
Statement “To drive the sustainable development of the City through strong civic 
leadership and delivery of effective services that promote the well-being and quality of 
life of citizens and communities.” 
 

Both cities will work with relevant organisations to develop a practical programme of 
cooperation and to develop and implement joint initiatives. 
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive will the DRHE be receiving any extra funding to meet the 
demand on resources as a result of extra rough sleepers or people presenting as 
homeless because of the change in Government policy in the provision of 
accommodation to asylum seekers. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DRHE will receive extra funding in 2024 to continue the work that we do with rough 
sleepers and with people presenting as homeless in the Dublin Region. DRHE does 
not have a role in the provision of accommodation to International Protection 
applicants. That falls under the remit of the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, 
Integration and Youth (DCEDIY). 
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the repair of the footpath at 21 Grove Road, 
Dublin 11 as the temporary repair is in poor condition. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11150232) has been created & forwarded to the Area Inspector, who 
will carry out an inspection of the locus & add any defects to a works list for repair. 
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR BRIGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive to review the public lighting on (details supplied) which is 
quite a dark stretch. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The existing street lights on (Details supplied) are planned to be upgraded to LED 
street lights under the Public Lighting Upgrade Project. These works are expected to 
be completed by the end of summer 2024.  
Until the upgrade works are completed, routine maintenance work on the existing 
street lighting will continue to be carried out in accordance with normal maintenance 
regimes. 
 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive can he advise if (Details supplied) is due to receive a 
public lighting upgrade as the existing lights do not provide great coverage. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The street lights in (details supplied) were upgraded to LED Street lights in 2017 so 
there are no plans for a further upgrade of these lights. In the meantime a lighting 
assessment will be carried out on the street lighting in (details supplied) to ascertain 
whether or not any additional lighting may be required. 
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive arrange for the repair of the footpaths at (details supplied) 
as the footpaths in the cul-de-sac are in very poor condition. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref.11150234) has been created & forwarded to the Area Inspector, who 
will carry out an inspection of the locus & add any defects to a works list. 
 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR CAROLINE CONROY 

To ask the Chief Executive to provide me with an update on the current status of 
Adelphi House 153 North Circular Road Dublin 7,  D07 W1K6 (a building in the 
ownership of the Health Services Executive)  and indicate whether a fire certificate was 
issued or Commencement Notice lodged, when it was last inspected by Dublin City 
Council officials, when rates were last paid on the building and whether the premises 
is on the Vacant Sites or Derelict Sites Register, and can he make a statement on the 
matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
153 North Circular Road is owned by the Health Service Executive (HSE).  Section 16 
of the Health Service Executive (Financial Matters) Act 2014 which amends Schedule 
4 of the Valuation Act 2001 includes “any land, building or part of building occupied by 
the Health Service Executive” is deemed not rateable.  Hence this building is exempt 
from Commercial Rates and no rates demand have been issued. The Dublin City 
Council rating system confirms that no charge has been raised in respect of the 
premises since 1997. I have no records prior to 1997. 
An application for a fire safety certificate was submitted on the BCMS on the 21st April 
2021 and a decision issued on 18th June 2021 (Fire Cert Granted). It is application 
submission number SN3002304 / decision number FSC2103059DC. 
It Was For A Proposed Single Storey Activity Hub At The Rear Of Adelphi House 
Community Dwelling At 153 North Circular Road, Cabra East, Dublin 7, D07 W1k6. 
 
Q.32 
COUNCILLOR CAROLINE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive provide me with an update on the current status of Baggot 
Street Hospital, 15-18 Baggot Street Upper, Dublin 4, D04 T6N3, and indicate when it 
was last inspected by Dublin City Council officials, indicate when the local authority 
last met with the Health Services Executive to discuss the building’s future, and can 
he make a statement on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Responsibility for the maintenance and security of a Protected Structure lies with the 
owner (and occupiers if any) of the building under Section 58 of the Planning and 
Development Act, 2000 (as amended), in this case the HSE. 
Dublin City Council Conservation Department and the Buildings at Risk Inspector shall 
request and arrange a detailed inspection and on-site meeting with the HSE in the 
coming weeks to ensure that the integrity and fabric of the Protected Structure is 
safeguarded. 
 
Dublin City Council Housing Department held a number of meetings in 2023 with the 
HSE to investigate the potential of adapting and refurbishing the Baggot Street Hospital 
Buildings to create apartments, either for use as social housing or to provide housing 
for public sector employees working in healthcare or other sectors.  As part of this 
engagement, an inspection of the property took place in January 2023. This inspection 
was facilitated by the HSE with DCC employees in attendance. 
 
With respect to the potential Adaptive Reuse project, the last meeting between the 
HSE and the Adaptive Reuse Unit in the DCC Housing Department took place in March 
2023. Subsequent to this meeting, a decision was made by DCC Housing Department 
not to pursue the HSE any further in relation to the potential redevelopment of this 
building. 
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR CAROLINE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive  provide me with an update on the current status of 
Aldborough House, Portland Row Dublin 1, D01 YF59,  and indicate the current status 
of Planning Permission 3457/17, and indicate whether a fire certificate was issued or 

Commencement Notice lodged, and when it was last inspected by Dublin City Council 
officials, when rates were last paid on the building and whether the premises is on the 
Vacant Sites or Derelict Sites Register, and can he make a statement on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council recognises the historical importance of the building, Aldborough 
House and are keen to see it used in a meaningful way. The Council are willing to 
engage in further discussions regarding its future use and ownership. 
Any such discussions would have to take account of the complexity of such a project, 
planning regulations and how Aldborough House could be used in the future. 
There were some discussions with the OPW on this pre-Covid19. The OPW were 
considering an intervention to use the building ultimately for offices and whether 
Aldborough House could be brought into public ownership.  
The scale of expenditure to purchase and fully refurbish was daunting and the owners 
were keen to retain the building at that time.  Aldborough House is on the Vacant Sites 
Register. 
The most recent planning permission for this location Planning Reference 3457/17 
expired on 25th August 2023.  No further planning applications have been lodged.  
  
Derelict Sites has no active file on this property and it is not entered on the Derelict 
Sites Register.   
 
The site identified as Aldborough House, Portland Row, Dublin 1, was entered on the 
Vacant Sites Register on 28th July 2017 as it met the criteria, as set out in the Urban 
Regeneration and Housing Act, 2015. The market value of the site was determined by 
the City Valuers Office on 18th August 2017 at €3 million euro (the market value was 
revised in 2022 to €3.5 million euro but will not apply until 2024 in respect of 2023 
should the site remain entered on the Vacant Sites Register). 
Demands for payment of Vacant Site Levies were levied in respect of the site for 2018, 
2019, 2020, 2021 and 2022. The Vacant Site Levy for 2018 was calculated at 3% of 
the market value of the site and all subsequent Demands were based on 7% of the 
market value of the site. 
The Vacant Sites Unit raises demands for payment annually and reminders for 
payment are issued quarterly.   Under the vacant site levy provisions, there is a 
cumulative effect associated with not activating a site for development purposes for 
each year that a site remains vacant or idle and in respect of which levy liability is not 
paid.  
Where a vacant site levy becomes due and payable, it becomes a charge on the land 
concerned until it is paid. 
The Residential Zoned Land Tax (“RZLT”) was introduced in the Finance Act 2021. 
This is a new tax to activate land for residential purposes which will in time replace the 
Vacant Site Levy.  The RZLT is an annual tax, calculated at a rate of 3% of the market 
value of land and will be collected by the Revenue Commissioners.  Lands that fall into 
scope will be liable for this tax measure in February 2025. Aldborough House was 
identified as a site that met the criteria under the RZLT and was included on the final 
map on the basis that the site constitutes land satisfying the relevant criteria as set out 
in the Act. The owner will have an opportunity to make a submission on the annual 
draft map that will be published in February 2024. 
   
Q.34 
COUNCILLOR CAROLINE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Given the important legacy of James Joyce to Dublin can the Chief Executive provide 
me with a list of locations, where he lived, and where a commemorative plaque has 
been placed, and in the case of those that don’t have a plaque can he ensure that one 
is provided, and can he make a statement on the matter? 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
James Joyce lived at a total of eighteen addresses in Dublin city and county, of which 
sixteen are within the City Council area. (Information taken from where They Lived in 
Dublin by John Cowell.) 
 
Period 
Address 
1882-
84 
41 Brighton Square, Rathgar 
1884-
87 
23 Castlewood Avenue, Rathmines 
1893-
94 
14 Fitzgibbon Street and 29 Hardwicke Street 
1894 
2 Millbourne Avenue, Drumcondra 
1895 
17 North Richmond Street 
1896-
99 
29 Windsor Avenue, Fairview 
1899 
7 Convent Avenue, Fairview 
1899-
1900  
15 Richmond Avenue, Fairview 
1900-
01 
 8 Royal Terrace (now Inverness Terrace), 
Fairview 
1902 
32 Glengariff Parade, North Circular Road 
1902-
03 
St Peter’s Terrace (now St. Peter’s Road), 
Phibsboro 
1904 
60 Shelbourne Road, Ballsbridge 
1904 
35 Strand Road, Sandymount 
1904 
103 Strand Road, Sandymount 
1909 
44 Fontenoy Street, Dublin 1 
1912 
17-21 Richmond Place, North Circular Road 
 
There is only one plaque marking a house where Joyce lived, at his birth place of 41 
Brighton Square. The (now somewhat faded) plaque was erected by Montclair State 
University (USA) in 1966. 
Joyce is otherwise memorialised in the City at several locations, including: 
James Joyce Street. 
James Joyce Bridge. 
A statue of James Joyce in North Earl Street. 
A bust of James Joyce in St Stephen's Green. 
14 brass plaques in the footpath marking Leopold Bloom's journey across Dublin. 
A plaque in St Patrick's Park. 
The James Joyce Centre. 
The Dedalus Library in the Museum of Literature Ireland (MOLI). 
The Council’s policy on commemorations states that ‘In considering proposals for 
naming of infrastructure or erection of civic monuments or plaques, consideration will 
be given to what other infrastructure; monuments or plaques exist in honour of the 
person/s or event.in general a person should be commemorated by one memorial.’ 
Notwithstanding that, it would be impractical to erect a plaque at every address. 
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a detailed update on the legal challenge taken by 
Hammerson against the City Council's decision to add several historic buildings on 
Moore Street to the Record of Protected Structures. 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The matter is next in court for mention on the 20 February 2024. At that stage it is 
expected that the pleadings will be closed and that a date for hearing can be allocated. 
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR DARCY LONERGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on what progress, if any has been made to 
render the following site non-derelict: Dublin City Council owned site at junction of 
Marshal Lane and Bridgefoot Street to the rear of the premises 134-137 Thomas Street 
West. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The site is managed by Property Management and currently in use by the Council’s 
Parks Department as a temporary depot facility while options for use are considered. 
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR DARCY LONERGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive the following in regard to the continued dereliction of 
13a/13b Conyngham Road, Dublin 8 for many decades, can the Chief Executive state 
whether a Reference of Ownership has been received from the Law Department, and 
if so to state who the owner is, and whether a Derelict Site or Vacant Site Notice has 
been or will be issued to them. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The property at 13a/13b Conyngham Road, Dublin 8 are not currently on the Derelict 
Sites Register (DSR) and as it is not registered with DCC, a reference of ownership 
was carried out.  The owner has been contacted regarding the appearance of the 
property and a reply is awaited which will inform the next steps to be taken by the 
Derelict Sites Section. In general, ownership details are only provided when a site is 
included on the Derelict Site Register and when the information is available in the 
public domain. 
 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR DARCY LONERGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
“In regard to the European Union Green City Capital awards might the Chief Executive 
consider entering Dublin for this award, and can he ensure sufficient capacity is made 
available to the Parks Department to do so, and can he make a statement on the 
matter.” 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council through the Environment and Transportation Department has 
previously applied for the European Green Capital Award in 2020 for 2023.  The 
application at that time was unsuccessful. The Environment and Transportation 
Department will consult with our colleague in CRES and following a review of the 
indicators that are assessed for the award, we will consider if a submission in the next 
round would be appropriate. 
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR DARCY LONERGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive advise on the current status of the long term plans for 
comprehensive traffic calming of the Western and Northern sides of Parnell Square. 
While acknowledging that the temporary build-outs for bus stops  on the West side of 
the Square have been beneficial, as well as the temporary cycle lane on the East 
side, can the Chief Executive update me on the status of the long-term plans for 
comprehensive plan to improve the public realm and increase the attractiveness of 
the Parnell Square Cultural Quarter for residents and visitors alike  by widening 

footpaths and narrowing vehicular traffic lanes to actively ensure that speed limits are 
adhered to on the Square, as was first proposed in the O’Connell Street Area 
Integrated Area Plan back in the 1990s.’ 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY:  
At present, DCC is progressing the design of Parnell Square Project Phase 1 which 
comprises the construction of the City Library,  
Essential works to six number Georgian houses including complete renovation of one 
of the Georgian houses and works to the Hugh Lane Gallery. 
 
Phase 2 comprises the upgrading of the public realm works at Parnell Square and the 
complete renovation of two further number Georgian houses.  
 
Design of the Phase 2 works is due to commence in the latter half of 2024. 
 
Q.40 
COUNCILLOR PATRICIA ROE 
To ask the Chief Executive to have a traffic survey carried out at (details supplied). 
This area is particularly dangerous in the morning rush hour with many students 
walking and cycling to school and others being dropped off by car.  Extending the 
yellow box to both sides of the road would help as would the provision of a school 
warden (which was recently refused by TAG) as this would encourage cyclists who all 
use to footpath on Collins Ave south, from the pedestrian crossing at Shanowen 
Avenue, to use the cycle lane provided.  
 
Could the Chief Executive ask the Active Travel office when the cycle land is likely to 
be extended from the school as far as the Swords Road junction 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Response from Traffic Advisory Group:  
The area engineer will assess Cllr. Roe’s request for the extension of the existing 
Yellow Box at (details supplied). The Councillor will be informed once the Area 
Engineer has assessed this request. 
 
School Warden Request: 
Following investigation on (details supplied) there it is not a suitable or safe crossing 
point to recommend a school warden crossing. The road is wide and a 50km/h arterial 
route and there is no suitable place in the vicinity of the school gates with no 
appropriate footpath that is safe for students to use in order to access the school gates 
via a school crossing point. Therefore a school warden it is not recommended. 
 
Students can be redirected by school management to a safe crossing point at the 
pedestrian crossing on at the junction with Larkhill Road. Students can use this 
pedestrian crossing to access alternative school gates on Falcarragh Road.  
 
Response from DCC Active Travel Programme Office 
Dublin City Council’s Active Travel Network will be delivered through a series of 
infrastructural projects. The School is located on the proposed Finglas to Killester 
Active Travel Route, which is programmed for delivery in the period 2025 – 2027, 
pending approval of funding. Design consultants are expected to be appointed to this 
scheme in Q1 2024. 
 
 
 

Q.41 
COUNCILLOR PATRICIA ROE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an indicative time line of when footpath repairs 
will be carried out in (details supplied). I have previously requested this information 
from Roads Maintenance department to no avail, and have submitted photo evidence 
of injuries to residents who have tripped and fallen on broken footpaths in this estate. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11150235) has been created & forwarded to the Area Inspector, who 
will carry out an inspection of (details supplied) and add a list of defects for repair. 
The timeframe for commencement of these repairs is 6-8 weeks. 
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive please look at what measures DCC Parks Dept. can do to 
ensure equine / scramblers are kept off the GAA Pitch at Californian Hills Park 
Rossmore Road Ballyfermot Dublin 10. On a number of occasions, it has become 
impossible to use the facility due to some ongoing issues Dublin City Council must 
take responsibility to ensure this beautiful Park is protected and remains a valuable 
asset to the People of Ballyfermot / Chapelizod, Palmerstown etc. I would be very 
grateful for an on-site meeting with D La Salle GAA to discuss issues. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks are available to meet with the club at a mutually convenient time in the New 
Year. The issue relating to horses requires input from animal welfare section.  The 
kissing gates at all locations serves as a deterrent to scramblers in the park, however, 
it is impossible for parks to completely prevent the entry of these bikes into the park. 
Gardai require involvement in addressing this issue. 
 
Q.43 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive can the housing Department please look at the following 
(Details Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance have engaged a damp specialist to investigate the issue at this 
property.  We are currently awaiting inspection and recommendations.  We anticipate 
having this information in early January 2024. 
 
Q.44 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to please ensure that retails units like the former Iceland 
store on Le Fanu Road Ballyfermot and the former Bank of Ireland premises are not 
allowed to be used for any additional fast food outlets. Ballyfermot has enough of this 
type of commercial premises. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Ballyfermot urban village is governed by the landuse zoning objective Z4:To provide 
for and improve mixed-services facilities. Key Urban Villages and Urban Villages 
(formerly District Centres) function to serve the needs of the surrounding catchment 
providing a range of retail, commercial, cultural, social and community functions that 
are easily accessible by foot, bicycle or public transport; in line with the concept of the 
15-minute city. Key Urban Villages form the top tier of centre outside the city centre. 
Urban Villages zoned Z4 are typically smaller in scale and provide a more localised 
role for the daily shopping needs and local services of a residential community. 
 
All planning applications including change of use applications for fast food outlets in 
Z4 areas such as Ballyfermot are assessed against the policies and objectives of the 

Development Plan, including the Retail Strategy and Development Management 
Standards for retail, food and beverage and leisure uses. 
 
Any such proposal for fast food outlets on the sites identified, would require a planning 
application. In assessing any planning applications including fast food outlets on these 
sites, the Planning authority will have regard to the detailed list of issues in Section 
15.14.7, which includes the effect on amenities, the need to safeguard the vitality and 
viability of the shopping area and to maintain a suitable mix of uses. In particular for 
take away proposals, the number/frequency of such outlets within 1km of school sites 
is examined, as is the context and character of the existing street, where the aim is to 
maintain and improve its vitality by encouraging a range of convenience and/or 
comparison retail shops.  
 
Q.45 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive please ensure that the leaking water cylinder at (details 
supplied) is replaced and that the central heating be looked at this is a very Cold 
house awaiting external wall insulation for the past few years without any clear 
indication when works will be done. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance have carried out the repair to the leaking cylinder.   The Heating 
Section have contacted the tenant in relation to the above problem and all necessary 
works will be carried out to ensure it is working correctly.   
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide the 2023 Council Gender Equality report and 
outline the percentage of the Senior Executive of each gender. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Council published its 2023 Gender Pay Gap Report in December. The 2023 
report shows a Mean Gender Pay Gap of 4.44% and a Median Gender Pay Gap of 
3.14%. 
 
This represents a slight reduction in our figures from 2022. (In 2022, our Mean Gender 
Pay Gap was 4.83% and our Median Gender Pay Gap was 5.65%.) 
 
Although our results will vary from year to year, the City Council will monitor the long-
term trends and continue to emphasise the importance of opportunity for all. 
 
At the end of 2023, the gender breakdown of senior managers within DCC (Analogous 
Senior Executive Officer and above) is set out below:  
 
Gender  
Percentage 
Female 
38% 
Male 
62% 
 
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive what steps have been undertaken to expedite the 
examination of 54 Arbour Hill with a view to including it on the Record of Protected 
Structure in light of its social and architectural significance, and amidst concern over 
its recent sale? 
 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
No. 54 Arbour Hill is a detached single-bay three-storey over basement former widows 
almshouse, built c.1720, having a four-bay side elevation, with angled corner to the 
north-west and a two-storey extension to the  west elevation.  
 
In November 2019, the Planning & Property Development SPC agreed a methodology 
to expedite the proposed additions/deletions to the RPS in a systematic manner, based 
on the Architectural Heritage Protection Guidelines 2011 and NIAH/Ministerial 
Recommendations under Section 53(1) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 
(as amended).  The methodology agreed to prioritise industrial, twentieth century, early 
buildings and underrepresented typologies.   
 
No. 54 Arbour Hill was surveyed by the NIAH (as part of the DHLGH Stage 2 
programme of work) and given a Ministerial Recommendation as being of Regional 
significance. Additionally, the structure is an early building.  
 
In 2023 the Conservation Section opened an RPS Addition file for 54 Arbour Hill for 
the structure to be assessed for inclusion on the Record of Protected Structures. 
In early 2024 the Conservation Section will be carrying out a review of the Stage 2 
NIAH Ministerial Recommendations received by the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage. No. 54 Arbour Hill will be prioritised for assessment as part 
of this review. 
 
Q.48  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive how many personal injury claims were filed in 2023 relating 
to incidents on footpaths and cycle lanes in Dublin City Council and how does this 
compare with recent years? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The number of personal injury claims filed to end of quarter 3, 2023 relating to incidents 
on footpaths is 169.  A total of 298 claims were filed in 2022 and 316 claims were filed 
in 2021 in relation to incidents on footpaths.  Personal injury claims in relation to cycle 
lanes in Dublin City Centre are not distinguished separately to incidents on footpaths. 
 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update regarding plans for the redevelopment of 
Mountjoy Square? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The design team has been conducting comprehensive desktop studies and site 
surveys, engaging in consultations with crucial stakeholder groups within the vicinity. 
This collaborative effort also involved inter-departmental discussions to meticulously 
outline a scope of works, with the ultimate goal of presenting a well-structured Part 8 
planning proposal in 2024. 
 
Q.50  COUNCILLOR SOPHIE NICOULLAUD 
To ask the Chief Executive how many housing units (and the type of units) were bought 
in 2023 for the Traveller Community. Were the houses bought specifically for this 
community? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Dublin City Council Traveller Accommodation Unit purchased 10 houses in 
2023.These homes were specifically bought for the Traveller Community to alleviate 
overcrowding and de-canting. 
These consisted of 7x3 Bedrooms 2x2 Bedrooms 1 x 4 Bedroom. 
 
Q.51 
COUNCILLOR SOPHIE NICOULLAUD 
To ask the Chief Executive of the full process to sign off on a housing maintenance job 
done directly by DCC and to sign off on a job done by a contractor? Who sings off? Is 
the work inspected by the housing manager for him to sign off? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In general the process of allocation and management of Housing maintenance jobs is 
the role of the local Area Maintenance Officers (AMOs), who report to the Senior 
Executive Officer, Housing Maintenance.  This is a separate role to the Area Housing 
Officers who carry out a more general estate management role under the Area 
Management structure. 
 
All maintenance requests are logged via the OHMS IT System (Open House 
Management System) and referred to the local AMO who assigns the job via the 
relevant Foreman.  The range of maintenance jobs is broad and each job is allocated 
either to direct labour or Contractor depending on the nature of the request. 
 
All jobs, whether direct labour or Contractor are inspected and signed off by the 
relevant Foreman in consultation with the Area Maintenance Officer where necessary. 
 
If the Councillor has a query in relation to a specific case please contact the S.E.O. 
Housing Maintenance directly (Contact details below). 
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR SOPHIE NICOULLAUD 
To ask the Chief Executive the list of DCC properties which would fall into phase two 
of the energy efficiency retrofitting programme and that have not been completed yet? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
According to our records we have 2245 properties which would fall into Phase Two of 
the Energy Efficiency Retrofitting Programme and that have not been completed yet.  
As it is not feasible to furnish a list of the individual properties/addresses, a breakdown 
of same are listed in the table below as per the areas/lots of the current tender for the 
programme: 
 
Lot 
Area 
No. of Properties 
Remaining 
Lot 1 
Finglas West 
468 
Lot 2 
Finglas East 
141 
Lot 3 
Artane/Whitehall 
60 
Lot 4 
Donaghmede 
7 
Lot 5 
Clontarf 
38 
Lot 6 
Cabra/Glasnevin 
222 
Lot 7 
North Inner City 
96 
Lot 8 
South Inner City 
314 
Lot 9 
Ballyfermot West 
274 
Lot 10 
Ballyfermot East/Drimnagh 
257 
Lot 11 
Kimmage 
Rathmines/Pembroke 
368 
Total 
 
2,245 

 
Q.53 
COUNCILLOR JAMES GEOGHEGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive, further to question 38 on the 4th of December 2023 if he 
could clarify that the amounts listed in the table provided between 2019 and 2023 are 
inclusive of any funding that the Office of Public Works or Central Government may 
have provided funding for during those years for the specified projects.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Yes these figures to end of October 2023 are inclusive of all funding from sources 
outside of Dublin City Council. They do not include the cost of Office of Public Works 
direct labour however which would add a further €2m to these mainly on the Dodder 
Flood Alleviation Scheme. They also do not include private flood alleviation schemes 
through the planning process and as part of private initiatives all of which are monitored 
by the Flood Defence Office of Dublin City Council. 
 
There are many other initiatives involving the monitoring of existing flood defences and 
flood warnings also not included in these figures. These roughly cost the Council €1m 
per annum. 
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR JAMES GEOGHEGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can request that the Senior Executive Technician in 
the Bus Stop And Services section of Dublin City Council to nominate himself or an 
appropriate colleague and/or an appropriate representative from the NTA with whom 
he is engaging with on this issue, to meet with the (details supplied) who has ongoing 
concerns about safety arising from the installation of a bus-stop across her driveway 
without any prior-warning or consultation.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As per previous correspondence on the matter, it is not accurate to say that the bus 
stop was installed without prior warning or consultation. 
 
With respect to the perceived safety issues: The design was carried out by competent 
designers in line with the ‘Design Manual for Urban Roads and Streets.’ It is in keeping 
with the guidance which states that it is acceptable for bus stops to traverse driveways 
(See screenshot below).  Road Safety Audits have been carried out to ensure safety 
and the NTA’s design team found there to be no safety issues at this stop.  Further to 
this, a Stage 4 Road Safety Audit is scheduled to take place as a matter of routine, 
approximately 3-4 months after the bus route went live (in this case approx. March 
2024).In order to address any concerns the resident may have, a member of the bus 
stops and services team will arrange to meet with the resident in the New Year 
arranged via Cllr James Geoghegan. To ensure that the meeting is successful and that 
the relevant members of the team from DCC and NTA can be invited we would again 
request that the Councillor or the resident inform us of the exact nature of these safety 
concerns. 
Q.55 
COUNCILLOR JAMES GEOGHEGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive whether he believes the Dublin riots necessitate a rethink 
of the proposed pedestrianisation of College Green or whether he is committed to the 
project proceeding as planned. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We are completely committed to the project proceeding as planned. The recent riots 
reinforce the need for a more vibrant city centre which this project will help to deliver. 
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR JAMES GEOGHEGAN 

To ask the Chief Executive if he will carry out a review of the Dublin City Council capital 
programme and identify projects which have been listed, and relisted, for capital 
funding over several years with no actual implementation or delivery with a view to 
rationalising and prioritising the capital programme list.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Capital Programme for 2024 – 2026 was considered at the December Council 
meeting and identifies projects with an estimated spend of €4.245 bn over the 3 years. 
The programme is critically reviewed each year to take account of (1) those projects 
that can be delivered in the timeframe (2) a review of both external and internal funding 
sources and (3) the need to address deficits in infrastructure provision. The 2024 -
2026 programme prioritises those projects that the City Council expects will be 
delivered over the 3 years. 
 
Q.57 
COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive and the Parks Department about an issue from an enquirer 
on Bushy Park Road, Terenure.  
 
Along the road, numbers 70/72, 84/86 and 94/96, and others, notified that the trees 
are massive whether in leaf or without leaves.  
 
The tree's habit is out of control with all the pruning done to its front, to allow buses to 
pass and no pruning done to the other sides or the back. The enquirer states that this 
makes it dangerous particularly when there are storms. The enquirer also mentions to 
have emailed parks@dublincity.ie but has not got the trees revised. The request 
includes a good pruning at the lower level. 
 
 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply to this question is currently being compiled. The response will be sent directly 
to the councillor within the next three weeks. 
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive and Parks Department, in regard to the enquiry about the 
mature amenity trees, flora and fauna in the large Bushy Park, Terenure. The enquirer 
forwards on information about DCC Parks.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Some trees in the woodland have had to be removed as they were in a dangerous 
condition. This work was overseen by the DCC Tree Officer in accordance with good 
arboricultural practice. All of the trees have been independently surveyed by a qualified 
arborist. To ensure there is no impact on biodiversity, in particular bats and herons the 
work was planned in cooperation with the DCC Biodiversity Officer and approved by 
National Parks and Wildlife Services (NPWS). It should be noted that there are some 
additional trees that need to be removed in due course. 
 
As part of an on-going management plan it is proposed to plant Oak, Beech, Scots 
pine, hawthorn and hazel in Q1 2024 in the enclosed area. Laurel prevents the 
development of a sustainable ground cover flora and so it is being removed on a 
phased basis to facilitate re-planting. Dublin City Council is a member of the Tree 
Council of Ireland. 
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to cut back the shrubbery in (1. details supplied) which is 
adjacent to the back gardens of (2.details supplied) as residents have reported rats 
coming across the walls there. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will arrange for an inspection of the shrubbery in the area 
adjacent to the back gardens. 
 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the replacement of the wooden gates, which 
are rotten at (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The repairing or replacing of gates is the responsibility of the tenant as per page 19 
the Tenant Handbook. 
 
 
Q.61 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a housing maintenance inspection at (details 
supplied) where it is reported that the extension walls need to be dry lined/insulated. 
The tenant reports that the sitting room, kitchen and hall have damp issues. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance have called out to this tenant and carried out an inspection.  An 
appropriate programme of works has been agreed and the tenant has been informed 
that all of these works will commence in January 2024.   
 
 
 
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the installation of speed ramps on (details 
supplied) where local residents have reported that cars are regularly speeding along 
this stretch of road that is used as a rat run.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
(Details supplied) has 3 No. Raised tables at various junctions.These raised tables 
are installed to encourage drivers to reduce their speeds. 
 
In addition (details supplied) has 30km/h Slow Zone signage indicating the lower 
speed limit and the area is a Home Zone/Slow Zone. This warns drivers they are driving 

in a residential area and to expect children. These 30km/h Slow Zone signs are clearly 
marked on (details supplied) at the entrances from Jamestown Road and Ballygall 
Road West respectively.  
 
Parked vehicles along (details supplied) provide additional traffic calming as 
oncoming motorists yield to allow each other to proceed. On-street parking reduces 
the available carriageway width and increases driver caution. The trees lining (details 
supplied) creates an enclosed environment which further enhances traffic calming. 
For these reasons the provision of extra traffic calming measures are not 
recommended at this time. 
 
Q.63 
COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for a breakdown in tabular form of the numbers on DCCs 
housing list, including numbers on both the housing list and transfer list, for each area, 
length of time on list, bedroom size required on comparison to 12 months ago. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please find attached the most recent housing report and the corresponding report for 
the previous year for comparison purposes.  
 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAM 
To ask the Chief Executive how many families are in 'family hubs' and how many 
families are in there longer than 12 months & how many families are in longer than 2 
years? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
On Nov 30th 2023, there were 557 unique families living in family hubs across the four 
Local Authority areas in the Dublin region (DCC, SDCC, FCC, DLRCC).  
These 557 families were made up of 882 adults (this includes adult dependents aged 
18+) and 1,038 children aged 17 and under. 
Of these 557 unique families, 301 families had been living in family hubs for 12 months 
or longer. These 301 families were made up of 516 adults (including adult dependents 
aged 18+) and 624 children aged 17 and under (see Table 1 below). 
A total of 135 families had been living in family hubs for 2 years or longer. These 135 
families were made up of 253 adults (this includes adult dependents aged 18+) and 
314 children aged 17 and under (see Table 1 below). 
 
Table 1: Duration of Families living in Family Hubs in the Entire Dublin Region as of 
30th Nov 2023 
Duration in EA – (as at 
30/11/2023) One Night 
Only 
Total 
Families 
Total 
Adults 
Number 
Dependents 
24+ months 
135 
253 
314 
18-24months 
81 
138 
151 
12-18 months 
85 
125 
159 
6-12 months 
101 
142 
152 
6 months or less 
155 
224 
262 
Total 
557 
882 
1038 
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 

To ask the Chief Executive to carry out a review of traffic calming measures at (details 
supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer will carry out a review of the issues raised by Cllr. Connolly in 
relation to (details supplied) in Q1 of 2024. The Cllr. Will be notified if any traffic 
calming measures are required on the aforementioned road. 
 
Road Maintenance Services will add the ramps on the Avenue at (details supplied) 
to the 2024 North West Area works programme. 
 
Q.66 
COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider upgrading the lighting on (details supplied) 
the lights and poles are old and in need of repair/replacement 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A special night check was carried out on (details supplied) and two lights were 
recorded out of order and these will be scheduled in for repair as soon as possible. All 
other lights were found to be operating normally. 
 
Under our Public Lighting Upgrade Project the street lights on (details supplied) will 
eventually be upgraded to LED street lights although an exact timeframe cannot be 
provided for these works at present. 
 
With regard to the poles on (details supplied) virtually all of them are ESB Networks 
poles so attending to those is a matter for ESB. Only the lights and brackets 
(supporting the lights) belong to DCC. Until the lighting upgrade works take place we 
will continue to maintain the existing lighting in accordance with our normal 
maintenance regimes. 
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will consider putting a basketball court in (details 
supplied). One of the tennis courts could easily be converted in a basketball court. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks services have completed a feasibility study of the tennis courts at (details 
supplied) with the intention of providing upgraded tennis and padel facilities for the 
NW area. Park services will investigate the feasibility of installing a small basketball 
court next to this new proposed tennis facility, subject to available budget. 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the clean-up of the leaves, street sweep and 
weeding to be carried at (Details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management will have the above mentioned estate cleaned by the end of 
January 2024. 
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM  
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the status of plans being prepared 
by the Parks Department regarding revising the existing layout of (details supplied); 
the nature of the proposed changes; the timeframe for the undertaking of these works; 
the indicative cost of the proposals; whether a Part 8 planning application is required; 
and if he will make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Parks Service will be reviewing the layout of (details supplied) this year. When details 
are available they can be made available to the councillor.  
 
Q.70 
COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a comprehensive update on plans to redevelop 
(Details supplied); the consequences of changes introduced in the Dublin City 
Development Plan 2022 - 2028 on the redevelopment site; how many homes are now 
likely to be built; whether the site will be connected to the existing senior citizens 
housing complex; when does he expect an application for planning permission to be 
granted; the indicative cost of the project and the likely time frame for the completion 
of same; and if he will make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Fold Housing design team are currently evaluating the impact of changes 
introduced in the Dublin City Development Plan, specifically in relation to the required 
riparian zone. Fold and DCC Housing Development team have been engaging directly 
over the last number of months with the relevant technical departments and a design 
response is being worked on at the moment.  
It is expected that the scheme will follow a Part 8 / Section 179 (a) planning process. 
A cost analysis of the project is currently not available due to the ongoing adjustments 
to the design for the site.   
It is expected that a design will be available for presentation to the local Area 
Councillors and the local community before the end of Q1 2024. 
 
Q.71 
COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline how he intends to implement the approach 
adopted by the Transportation SPC with regards (Details Attached); to list the actions 
that have been taken to date by officials since the SPC meeting in September; the next 
steps in terms of advancing tendering procedures, etc; and if he will make a statement 
on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following the approval of the proposal in relation to the (details supplied) at the Traffic 
and Transportation SPC in June 2023, the following actions have commenced; 
The procurement department has been contacted to inform of intention to proceed with 
the procurement of this service 
Tender documents are being drafted and approved for procurement 
It is intended to go to procurement on this scheme in Q1 2024. 
 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to indicate the current status of plans to enhance and 
upgrade (Details supplied) the time frame for the undertaking of any planning 
procedures to advance this initiative; the indicative cost of these works; to provide an 
outline of what is being considered and if he will make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The design team has been conducting comprehensive desktop studies and site 
surveys, engaging in consultations with crucial stakeholder groups within the vicinity. 
This collaborative effort also involved inter-departmental discussions to meticulously 
outline a scope of works, with the ultimate goal of presenting a well-structured Part 8 
planning proposal in 2024. 
 
 
Q.73 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  

To ask the Chief Executive to detail the amount paid by DCC in respect of Overtime 
directly related to the Bloom Festival and to further ask if the Bloom Festival organisers, 
which is a hugely profitable venture, make any contribution towards this increased 
workload. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Service had no overtime in respect of Bloom Festival 2023. 
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the scope and remit relating to the recent 
appointment of Infrastructure Asset Management Services Limited for a special 
inspection of Luke Kelly Bridge. In addition, could the Chief Executive request that any 
works deemed necessary also include new lighting and signage for the bridge. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Infrastructure Asset Management Services Limited were appointed to carry out testing 
so that more information could be provided to determine the cause of concrete spalling. 
The lighting and signage will be examined. 
 
Q.75 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive to detail what is involved in and envisaged for the 
Ormond Square concept design (20798 CRES/0260/2023) and to further detail 
the budget amount allocated for the concept design stage and the resultant works 
programme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services are currently reviewing the overall design of Ormond Square with a 
view to delivering an enhanced park and play space for the community. The proposal 
is still at early stages and as part of developing the scheme, there will be local 
consultation with residents.  
 
Q.76 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive what percentage of DCC public lighting is LED lights and 
to further ask how this compares to other local authorities and the overall average of 
53% in 2022. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are approximately 47,400 street lights in the Dublin City Council’s (DCC) 
administrative area and around 32.5% of these lights are now LED street lights. Under 
the current Public Lighting Upgrade Project this percentage will increase quickly over 
the next few years. 
 
DCC doesn’t have access to information from other Local Authorities and thus 
comparisons cannot be made. It needs to be noted that DCC has a significant 
proportion of old lighting infrastructure much of which cannot be upgraded to LED 
street lights without addressing other aspects of the lighting infrastructure at the same 
time which we are compelled to undertake. This makes the delivery of the Public 
Lighting Upgrade Project more complicated in Dublin City than in many other Local 
Authorities around the country.     
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond to the following regarding laneway (Details 
supplied) 
Can the council look again about allowing the above resident take in charge the space 
beside her home? 

1. The Council were agreeable in the past but it was not finalised 
2. The area suffers regular spates of anti-social behaviour 
3. The area is of little public utility as open space. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Manager is currently liaising with the Parks Department and the Gardai to 
verify the level or existence of serious Anti-Social Behaviour in this green area. Once 
this has been clarified then we will make contact with the lady at (details supplied) 
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond to the following regarding cycleway (Details 
supplied) 
 
Can I ask that the work along this route be completed immediately?   
What is the delay with its completion?  
What is the cost and is it on track to be opened in Q2 – 2025 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The works along the (details supplied) contain significant civil and structural 
engineering elements of construction, in a tight and narrow urban environment, while 
complying with numerous environmental and conservation restrictions.  The Contractor 
must also carry out the works in compliance with the requirements of numerous 
stakeholders, such as DCC Traffic, the landowners whom are Waterways Ireland and 
CIE/Irish Rail, statutory utilities such as ESB, Úisce Eireann, Bord Gais etc, while 
liaising with the numerous businesses and home owners along the entire route.  The 
Contractor started on site in January of this year (2023), and in order the complete 
these works in a safe, compliant and satisfactory manner, a programme of greater than 
two years is required, which has resulted in a completion date of Q2 of 2025.   
 
Below is a high-level list of the works  
 
2.1 km of footpaths and cycle tracks 
 
Replacement of existing public lighting heads 
 
Replacement of CCTV infrastructure 
 
A new pedestrian bridge at lock 3, which was recently installed 
 
Numerous earth retaining structures, such as long lengths of piling and 
retaining walls 
 
Ramps including their foundations and support structures 
 
Repairs to sections of historic canal banks and walls 
 
Diversions of existing services, such as gas mains and electricity mains to 
facilitate the structures 
 
Installation of new services where required, such as electricity ducting 
 
4 new signalised toucan crossings or junction upgrades, at Phibsborough 
Road, Drumcondra Roads, Russel Street and Summerhill Parade / Ballybough. 
 
Upgrades to the public domain, such as Charlemount Mall 
 
Landscaping along sections of the entire route 
 
Tree protection areas, and tree planting where required 
 
Subject to the works progression and their satisfactory completion, some sections of 
the route may be opened before Q2 of 2025, such as the section between 
Phibsborough (Cross guns bridge) and Drumcondra (Binns bridge), which the Project 
Team anticipate could be opened in Q2 of next year (2024).  We will give our elected 
representatives advance notifications of these major milestones.   
 

The City Council at a recent meeting in November, approved an amending Part VIII for 
the east side of Drumcondra Roads or Binns bridge.  The Project Team are working 
through the various design items listed in the approved report, and are currently 
completing the resulting detailed design for construction in the new year. 
 
The Project Team, which includes DCC staff, the Project Designer, the Contractor and 
numerous other specialists, such as an arborist, landscape designer, ecologist and 
conservation architect are all working together to ensure the completion date of Q2 
2024 is achieved, while anticipating that some sections may be completed before that 
date. 
 
This project is funding by the National Transport Authority (NTA), whom approved an 
allocation of close to €30.8 million. 
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond to the following regarding Tree (Details 
supplied)  
He is concerned about trees located on land whose owner has long since been 
dissolved.  
Would the Council take the land in charge or take responsibility for the tree? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Arrangements will be made to carry out an inspection of the tree at this location to 
determine any action.  
 
 
Q.80 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond to the following regarding club (Details 
supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Property management are organising a Condition Survey of the building and once it is 
made clear that the building is in a safe condition to lease, the Area Office will liaise 
with local groups, clubs etc with regard to the granting of a new lease/licence 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WATTERS 
To ask the Chief Executive to please outline how often bins are emptied at (details 
supplied) and address the comments from resident below. 
 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services have the bins on main routes and shopfronts in the 
above mentioned area emptied on a daily basis. The bins in residential areas here are 
emptied five days a week, Monday to Friday.  
 
Q.82 
COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WATTERS 
To ask the Chief Executive to give me an update on both cycle ways as per (details 
supplied) and say when same will be completed and made safe, ready for use by 
cyclists.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Cycle lane on details supplied (a) 
The proposed cycle lanes on (details supplied (a) ) are part of Phase 1 of the (details 
supplied) Walking & cycling route, that is  2.5km of protected cycle paths and 
improved pedestrian facilities from (details supplied). The non-statutory Public 

Consultation for this phase of the route was carried out from  6th June  to 31st July, 
2023. A public information event was held in Artane Coolock Family Resource Centre 
on Tuesday 25th July, 2023 with over eighty persons attending. Over 800 submissions 
have been received.  These are being reviewed and the Public Consultation Report is 
currently being prepared. Consultants Jacobs have commenced detailed design on 
the project. Traffic counts, Site surveys, tree surveys and road safety audit are 
underway at present. Consultants will also oversee the preparation of the Tender 
documents for the Construction phase. The procurement of a Contractor is expected 
to be in Q4 2024.  
 
Cycle lane on (details supplied (b) 
A contractor was appointed to construct the (details supplied) in May of 2023 with 
site works commencing in June of 2023. Works on site are currently running in line 
with the contractors agreed construction program. Final Footpath and traffic island 
works are expected to be complete in January of 2024 with resurfacing works and the 
installation of the concrete cycle way segregation kerb to follow. Following this the 
installation of traffic lights and final line marking will be completed. All site works are 
expected to be completed in Q2 of 2024 with the cycle lane being open and ready for 
public use.  
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WATTERS 
To ask the Chief Executive report on the condition of road (potholes, cracks etc) as per 
(details supplied) which local residents/cyclists say is badly broken up/in poor 
condition as a result of building/development works taking place over recent years with 
heavy construction related vehicles etc using the road and say if he can arrange to 
have same reinstated/resurfaced. 
 
Partially as a result of the apartments built over the last few years and the heavy 
vehicles using the roads.  If I take photos who do I report these too and will they be 
repaired?  As a cyclist I am fed up trying to avoid cracks and potholes.   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11150353) has been created & forwarded to the Area Inspector, who 
will carry out an inspection of the locus & add any defects to a works list for repair 
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WATTERS 
To ask the Chief Executive refer to the removal of weeds at location as per (details 
supplied) and say what his plans are for removal of same. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Public Domain Enforcement Officer has advised that waste management services 
will have this area added to the list of the 2024 weeding programme and works will be 
completed once resources allow. If Councillor can give exact details we can request 
that this be added to the listing.  
 
Q.85 
COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive report on when Pelletstown residents can expect their 
estates to be taken in Charge by Dublin City Council. What can the community groups 
in the area do to expedite the situation? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Taking in charge (TIC) requests have been received from Ballymore Homes for Royal 
Canal Park and from Castlethorn for Rathbourne Vale. Engagement is ongoing 
between the service departments and Ballymore and Castlethorn. Once all matters 

have been dealt with satisfactorily the TIC process will be completed as soon as 
possible thereafter.  
 
Q.86 
COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive to report on progress made locating a suitable, long term 
recycling centre in Phibsborough. The current location at the shopping centre is less 
than fit for purpose and DCC need to be assisting the community with providing a safe, 
accessible location for such a centre. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 Waste Management Services is committed to recycling and providing the best 
infrastructure possible in a busy, urban environment. We are always open to the 
possibility of adding new recycling facilities should suitable locations become available, 
and always happy to investigate any reasonable suggestions for new bring bank sites.  
However, the reality is that finding sites for new bring banks in the city is very 
problematic. Many are located on privately owned land e.g. supermarket car parks and 
sports grounds. Publicly owned land is at a premium. Statutory planning regulations 
restrict the locations where new bottle banks can be installed, and our service provider 
requires safe access to all sites. The area must be free of overhead cables and 
overhanging trees, must not conflict with bus or cycle lanes and must be directly 
accessible by HGV.  
Due to the high density urban nature of Phibsborough, and both sides of the city centre 
in general, there is a lack of suitable spaces for the establishment of new bring bank 
sites. While we absolutely agree that the bring bank facility in Phibsborough is less 
than ideal, and is in fact very problematic in terms of incredibly high levels of illegal 
dumping, Waste Management Services have tried on numerous occasions to find a 
suitable alternative site for this facility but have been unsuccessful to date. Most 
recently, working with the Cabra Area Office, we have reached out to local community 
groups to ask for suggestions for a potential alternative site but no such suggestions 
have been forthcoming.  
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive to report on when a segregated cycle route will be provided 
from Doyle’s Corner to Cabra Cross on the Cabra Road, Dublin 7. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The proposed cycle lanes on Ratoath Road are part of the Cabra to Blanchardstown 
Active Travel Scheme. The scheme will provide 2.5km of protected cycle paths and 
improved pedestrian facilities along Ratoath Road from the junction with the Navan 
Road northbound to Cappagh Road.  
 
The non-statutory Public Consultation for this route has been undertaken and over 224 
submissions have been received. These are being reviewed and the Public 
Consultation Report is currently being prepared. Consultants will be appointed in 
January 2024 to undertake the detailed design on the project.  
 
The appointed consultants will also oversee the preparation of the Tender documents 
for the Construction phase. The procurement of a Contractor is expected to be in Q1 
2025 and construction to commence thereafter pending NTA approval. 
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive report on when the long required works to clean and make 
safe and accessible the laneway to the rear of homes on Glendhu Road, Navan Road, 
Dublin 7 will be undertaken. Residents have been seeking these works for some time 
and have been very patient 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management will have the above mentioned laneway cleaned by the end of 
January 2024. 
 
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive, in relation to trees that were removed from location as per 
(details supplied), to say if/when same are planned to be reinstated, if he is aware 
that telecommunications infrastructure is currently being installed at details attached 
and if this work can suspended, pending the replacement of the removed trees, as 
residents fear that if the telecommunication infrastructure is installed fully, that this will 
be used as an excuse not to reinstate the missing trees. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply to this question is currently being compiled. The response will be sent directly 
to the councillor within the next three weeks. 
 
Q.90 
COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to trees on road as per (details supplied) and say 
if he can give me a follow up report in relation to the inspection referred to in the reply 
to my question at the November 2023 North Central Area Committee meeting. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply to this question is currently being compiled. The response will be sent directly 
to the councillor within the next three weeks. 
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to road as per (details supplied (a)) and say if he 
can examine same with a view taking action to improve egress from (details supplied 
(b)) as residents of (details supplied (a)) find it increasingly difficult to navigate their 
way out of this one way system and say if consideration can be given to erecting a 
mirror on a lamppost at details supplied (b). 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Traffic Department does not provide convex traffic mirrors as requested as they 
give a distorted view of approaching traffic which is potentially hazardous and also 
because such mirrors would attract a high degree of vandalism with associated 
maintenance costs. 
 
Q.92 
COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive with reference to my question 44 of the December Council 
meeting, if he can confirm that the matter was brought to the attention of the TAG Area 
Traffic Engineer, and if not can this be done to try and assist residents address the 
problem of the ongoing traffic mayhem at (details supplied)  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Transport Advisory Group is not in a position to make any traffic management 
recommendations in relation to (details supplied 1) as the location concerned is 
private and not in the charge of Dublin City Council. 
 
However, the junctions of (details supplied 2) have proper road markings and traffic 
lights that require drivers to follow traffic regulations. Issues relating to poor driver 
behaviour should be referred to the local Gardaí as and when they occur. 
 

Q.93 
COUNCILLOR TERENCE FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond to the following regarding a green (Details 
supplied). Can part of this green area be cut back to make way for more parking 
spaces which are badly required at the shops. The traffic is very heavy at this location. 
There were original plans to make spaces at this green but it never happened. With 
the extra traffic in the area it is needed now. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Details Supplied (a): 
There is already indented parking on the north side of this road   opposite the Spar 
Shop. There is on street parking available on the south side of this road opposite the 
indented parking area is located. 
 
Details Supplied (b): 
The majority of residents opposite the “green area” have off street parking in the form 
of driveways. 
 
Details Supplied (c): 
The majority of residents opposite the “green area” have off street parking in the form 
of driveways. Some of these driveways can accommodate 2 No. vehicles. 
 
The Area Engineer does not recommend any reduction of the “green area” for the 
purpose of parking for residents at the aforementioned roads. 
 
Any reduction to this “green area” would be contrary to DCC’s Climate Action Plan 
2019 – 2024.  
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR TERENCE FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond to the following regarding a Traffic survey 
(Details supplied) 
 
Can the council please carry out a comprehensive traffic survey on the above roads & 
monitor the traffic flow at Clare Hall shops  
Recommendations need to be made particularly around the poor signage, markings, 
roundabouts, which are dangerous  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer has responded to Cllr. Flanagan with the following responses: 
             
 
Details Supplied 1 is short in length 65m approx. As such this road does not meet the 
criteria for provision for speed ramps.  
 
 
 
The criteria for provision of speed ramps on a public road are: 
1. The road should have a straight run of at least 200m. 
2. The 85th percentile speed should be greater than speed limit of the road. 
3. Traffic volumes should exceed 60 vehicles per hour.  
4. There should be genuine road safety concerns based either on actual accident 
statistics or on observed road safety patterns or written report from an Inspector of 
the Garda Traffic Division. 
 
Details Supplied 1 has parking available on both sides of this road which passively 
calms traffic on this road. 
Details supplied 2 has 7 No. speed ramps from Temple View Ave to Elmfield Lawn 
via Elmfield Ave. 

There is a 30km/h SLOW ZONE sign to alert drivers they are entering a residential 
30km/h SLOW ZONE. This sign is located as south of the roundabout as vehicles 
exit Belmayne Avenue/R139. 
The onus is on drivers to adhere to the posted speed limit within the aforementioned 
roads. If residents observe speeding/dangerous driving these issues should be 
reported to the Gardai as/when they occur.  
Details Supplied 3 does not meet the criteria for the provision of speed ramps (see 
speed ramp criteria above bullet point 1).  In addition on street parking is available on 
both sides of this road which passively calms vehicular speeds. The aforementioned 
road is a cul-de-sac as a non-through road therefore has low traffic volumes. 
Details supplied 4 has 4 No. Speed ramps in place along with on street parking acts 
as traffic calming by narrowing the road.  
Details supplied 5 - has 4 No. Speed ramps in place along with on street parking 
acts as traffic calming by narrowing the road. 
The aforementioned roads above have been traffic - calmed where applicable. As 
such no further traffic calming measures are recommended at this time.   
 
Q.95 
COUNCILLOR TERENCE FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond to the following regarding footpath (Details 
supplied). The footpath is damaged. Can it be added to the repairs list? 
Re: Lead pipe scheme. Any further information regarding a list of contractors available 
to do underground water pipe replacement 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref.11150352) has been created and forwarded to the Area Inspector who 
will carry out an inspection and add this defect to a works list for repair. 
 
RE: Lead Pip Scheme: Please refer to Waterworks Division/Irish Water 
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR TERENCE FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond to the following regarding illegal parking (Details 
supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The parking enforcement inspector has visited this location and engaged with 
customers and business owners about illegal parking. Dublin Street Parking Services 
have been instructed to patrol this location and carry out enforcement action on illegally 
parked cars on the footpath. Incidents of dangerous driving or driving on footpaths do 
not fall under the remit of Dublin City Council. 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR TOM BRABAZON 
To ask the Chief Executive confirm when (details supplied) will reopen fully to full 
public use. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We are awaiting a construction programme from the contractor. As soon as the 
commencement and completion dates are available the Area Committee and the 
public will be informed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
