Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 3 November 2025 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 3 Samhain 2025 i Seomra na Comhairle, Halla 
na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an 
tArdmheara Ray McAdam sa chathaoir 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Ammar Ali 
Daryl Barron 
Racheal Batten 
Emma Blain 
Janice Boylan 
Kevin Breen 
Noelle Brown 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Danny Byrne 
Lesley Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
David Coffey 
Anthony Connaghan 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Ray Cunningham 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Daniel Ennis 
Cian Farrell 
Alison Field 
Declan Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
Deirdre Heney 
Jesslyn Henry 
Rory Hogan 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Feljin Jose 
Leslie Kane 
Kourtney Kenny 
Patrick Kinsella 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Aoibheann Mahon 
Ray McAdam 
Séamas McGrattan 
Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
Paddy Monahan 
Carolyn Moore 
Edel Moran 
Darragh Moriarty 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Colm O'Rourke 
Gavin Pepper 
Cieran Perry 
Michael Pidgeon 
Gayle Ralph 
Punam Rane 
Conor Reddy 
Nial Ring 
Aishling Silke 
Supriya Singh 
Karl Stanley 
Malachy Steenson 
John Stephens 
Philip Sutcliffe 
Ciarán Ó Meachair 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Aidan Blighe 
Mary Cleary 
Dermot Collins 
Don Daly 
Rory Flannery 
Anthony Flynn 
Michael Gallagher 
Dennis Keeley 
Yvonne Kelly 
Katie Learmouth 
Natalie Leonard 
Mick Mulhern 
Ronan O'Byrne 
Mairead Owens 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Richard Shakespeare 
Brendan Teeling 
Barry Woods 
 
 
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
In Memorium 
The Lord Mayor expressed his sincere condolences on the passing of Sr Stan. He 
said that her life reminds us of the best of what community and civic service can 
mean. From the outset, Sr Stan committed herself together with those on the margins;  
the homeless, the newly arrived, the disadvantaged; believing that every person 
deserves a home, a voice, and respect.  
13 

 
In founding organisations such as Focus Ireland and the Immigrant Council of Ireland, 
she showed that compassion must be matched with action and that lasting change 
flows from collective endeavour together, not in isolation.  
 
In Dublin, our capital city, we know that our civic responsibility is not simply to build 
structures but to build a city where everyone belongs. Sr Stan’s legacy is a reminder 
that the true measure of a city is how it cares for its most vulnerable. Her lifetime of 
service encourages us all to work together: public officials, agencies, citizens, 
neighbours. 
 
To Sr Stan’s family, her religious community, her many colleagues and friends across 
Ireland: our thoughts are with you. And for all of us here, let us commit that her life will 
not simply be remembered, but lived through our ongoing work together in public 
service and in the life of our city. 
 
The Lord Mayor will be formally opening a book of condolence to Sr. Stan which will 
be available in the Mansion House from tomorrow and Wednesday, between 10am 
and 4pm. Members can also sign the book in City Hall this evening.  
 
Ar dheis Dé go raibh a h-anam dílis, may her faithful soul rest in peace. 
 
Tribute to President Michael D. Higgins 
As this is the final meeting of Dublin City Council before the conclusion of President 
Michael D. Higgins’ term of office, the Lord Mayor wanted to take this opportunity to 
place on record the cities deep appreciation for his fourteen years of distinguished 
service as Uachtarán na hÉireann. 
 
President Higgins has embodied the very best of our Republic: dignity, empathy, 
intellectual curiosity, and a profound belief in the power of culture, citizenship, and 
shared humanity. Across two terms, he has spoken not just to the nation but for the 
nation, reminding us of who we are, and of the kind of people we aspire to be. 
 
We also acknowledge the remarkable contribution of his Bean Chéile, Sabina Higgins,  
a constant source of strength, compassion, and principle. Sabina has been more than 
a supportive presence; she has been an advocate in her own right for social justice, 
creativity, and community, standing with the President every step of the way. Not just 
throughout these fourteen years, but across his entire public life. 
 
As a city that values democracy, equality, and cultural expression, Dublin has been 
well served by a President who has championed all three with such integrity. 
 
On behalf of the elected members of Dublin City Council, the Lord Mayor extended his 
thanks, respect, and very best wishes to President Higgins and Sabina as they enter 
the next chapter of their lives together. 
 
Go raibh míle maith agaibh, a Uachtaráin agus a Shabina. 
 
President-elect Connolly 
The Lord Mayor extended congratulations to Catherine Connolly on her election as the 
tenth President of Ireland. 
 
President-Elect Connolly has made a significant contribution to Irish public life over 
many years, both locally and nationally. The Lord Mayor wished her every success as 
she prepares to take up the responsibilities of the Presidency and to represent the 
country in the years ahead. 

 
The Lord Mayor also gave credit to both candidates - President-elect Connolly and 
Heather Humphreys – for ensuring the election campaign was run with dignity and 
respect.   
 
Together, we look forward to working to build an Ireland that reflects that spirit of 
civility, inclusivity and shared purpose. 
 
Dublin City Neighbourhood Awards 2025 
On Friday, 24 October, more than 350 Dubliners joined Lord Mayor and City Council 
Staff for the 21st City Neighbourhood Awards, which aims to recognise those who 
make their streets, estates, neighbourhoods and businesses cleaner, greener, more 
inviting and more beautiful. 
 
The Lord Mayor extended his thanks to the residents’ associations, community groups 
and local businesses who work tirelessly to create a Dublin that everyone can 
celebrate. He extended a special congratulations to the overall winner, Stoneybatter 
Pride of Place. A shining example of community pride and partnership. 
 
Dublin by Night Fest 
The Lord Mayor noted the huge success of Dublin by Night Fest 2025, which brought 
a record 80,000 people into the city centre across Capel Street, Dame Street and 
College Green on Saturday night which was double last year’s attendance. It 
showcased the very best of the cities night-time economy, its creativity, and its 
capacity to host safe, vibrant, family-friendly events after dark. 
 
The Lord Mayor expressed his belief that two Dublin by Night Fest events should be 
held in 2026. The first between St. Patrick’s Day and the June Bank Holiday, and the 
second in its now-traditional slot marking the start of Winter in Dublin. The success of 
Dublin Night Fest 2025  proves that Dublin after dark is alive, confident, and worth 
celebrating and he will work with the Events Section, the City Centre Co-ordination 
team, the Night-Time Economic Adviser, DublinTown, Failte Ireland and other 
stakeholders to make this a reality. 
 
Macnas Procession 
The Lord Mayor made the following statement: 
What we witnessed last night was more than a procession. It was a moment of civic 
pride on a scale we have not seen in this part of the city for many years. The sight of 
thousands of families, children on shoulders, neighbours greeting neighbours, and 
whole streets stepping out to reclaim their public space. That is the Dublin I and we all 
believe in, the Dublin we are proud to serve. 
 
To see the North-East Inner City not as a footnote, not as an afterthought, but as the 
stage on which one of Ireland’s great cultural institutions chose to perform. That 
matters. It sends a message about who we are, and about who belongs at the centre 
of our story, particularly when you consider 16 young students from schools across 
the North Inner City took part in the procession but also in Galway last week too. And 
let me say this clearly, when 50,000 people come together in safety, joy, colour and 
community, that is not just a cultural success. That is a statement of confidence in 
Dublin, in its people, and in the future, we are shaping together. Last night was proof 
of what happens when community, creativity, and city leadership pull in the same 
direction, We don’t just host events, we create magic. 
 
Halloween 
The Lord Mayor thanked all the Community Development teams and Dublin Fire 
Brigade for their hard work in the run-up to and during the Halloween festivities.   

 
Emergency Motions: 
Four emergency motions were ruled out of order.  
 
The first is the name of Cllr. Pepper was ruled out under Standing Order 34 (1), as it 
does not require the immediate action of Council. 
 
The second in the name of Cllr. Flynn was ruled out because there is still a legal 
process underway. Following advice from the Law Agent the Lord Mayor read the 
following statement into the record of the meeting:  
 
Dublin City Council / Dublin Fire Brigade is aware of the outcome of the recent court 
proceedings involving a member of staff. As an appeal is understood to be pending, it 
would be inappropriate for the organisation to make any further comment on the 
matter at this time. The organisation remains committed to respecting the legal 
process and ensuring that any internal considerations are managed in line with fair 
procedures and established policies. 
 
The third motion in the name of Cllr. Barron and the Fianna Fail group was ruled out 
under Standing Order 34 (1), as it does not require the immediate action of Council. 
However, the Lord Mayor agreed to follow up in writing with both the Minister for 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage and the Minister for Health, highlighting the 
unanimous support of the elected members for the full implementation of the 
recommendations of the HSE / DCC Joint Ambulance Service Delivery Task and 
Finish Group Report. Furthermore, the Lord Mayor noted that the issue of the new 
Computer-Aided Dispatch (CAD), NEC Software Solutions (NEC) which forms the 
basis of the new National Fire Mobilising and Communication System (NMACS) is 
currently subject to discussions at the Workplace Relations Commission (WRC). A 
copy of this correspondence will be circulated to all Members.  
 
The fourth motion in the name of Cllr. Steenson was ruled out under Standing Order 
34 (1), as it does not require the immediate action of Council. 
 
Apology from Councillor Philip Sutcliffe 
The Lord Mayor on behalf of Councillor Sutcliffe read a statement into the record 
where the Councillor apologised for his post on Social Media depicting a Presidential 
Ballot paper which contained offensive and unacceptable language. Full details of the 
statement can be found in Appendix A to these minutes.     
 
 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Declan 
Flanagan that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the 
questions lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the  
questions lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and 
Answers are set out in Appendix B to these minutes. 
 
14 - 59 
 
3 
  Correspondence was received from the following Local Authorities; 
• 
Monaghan County Council 
• 
Limerick City and County Council 
• 
Galway City Council 
• 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Declan Flanagan and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O'Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence listed. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 

 
4 
  To confirm the minutes of the Special City Council Meetings held on 29th September 
and 16th October and the monthly City Council meeting held on 6th October 2025 
 
The minutes of the City Council meeting held on 2022 having been 
printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken 
as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor 
 
 
 
5 
  Vacancies:   
 
 
 
(a) To fill one vacancy on the City of Dublin Education and Training Board following 
the resignation of Councillor Carolyn Moore  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Donna Cooney and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Councillor Feljin Jose be appointed to the City of 
Dublin Education and Training Board. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
(b) To appoint one Member as the Dublin City Council nominee to Irish Public 
Bodies following the resignation of Councillor Keith Connolly  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Keith 
Connolly that Councillor Deirdre Heney be appointed as the Dublin City Council 
Councillor Representative to Irish Public Bodies. The motion was put and 
carried. 
  
 
 
6 
  Report No. 259/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. Kelly) - With reference to the 
Three Pillar Strategy to deliver a cleaner Dublin City - Year 1 Progress Update 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Cat O'Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 259/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. A copy of the presentation is attached as Appendix C to 
these minutes. 
 
The Lord Mayor vacated the Chair to Deputy Lord Mayor John Stephens at 7.40pm 
and returned to the Chamber at 7.50pm.   
 
 
 
7 
  Reports of the Chief Executive in compliance with the provisions of Section 179 of the 
Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning and 
Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) and in compliance with the provisions 
of the Local Government Act 2001:   
 
 
 
(a) Report No. 247/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - With reference to 
the redevelopment of Glover Court Estate, York Street, Dublin 2.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
247/2025 and hereby approves the contents therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
 
 
 
(b)  Report No. 248/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - With reference 
to the construction of a new apartment block at Crumlin Road-Rafters Lane, 
Dublin 12.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daithí Doolan and seconded by Lord Mayor Councillor 
Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 248/2025 and 
hereby approves the contents therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 

 
8 
  Report No. 236/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (A. Flynn) - With reference to 
the Core Strategy Monitoring Report on City Performance Indicators 2024 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor  
Cat O'Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 236/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
9 
  Report No. 241/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (E. Quinlivan) - With reference 
to the Proposed Borrowing for the Redevelopment of Dalymount Park, Phibsborough, 
Dublin 7 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and Councillor Cat O'Driscoll 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.241/2025 and hereby 
approves the borrowing requirement as set out therein, subject to the sanction of the 
Minister of Housing, Local Government and Heritage. The motion was put and carried. 
  
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Cat O'Driscoll that standing orders be suspended at 8.30pm to continue with the 
business on the agenda. The meeting would revert to motions on notice if time 
allowed otherwise they would be deferred to the December meeting. The motion was 
put and carried.     
 
 
 
10   Report No. 246/2025 of the City Librarian (M. Owens)- With Reference to the Dublin 
City Libraries Development Plan 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Fiona Connelly and seconded by Councillor Jesslyn 
Henry that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 246/2025 and hereby 
approves the contents therein. The motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
11   Report No. 249/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (E. Quinlivan) - With reference 
to the Draft Commemorations and Commemorative Naming Policy 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Declan Flanagan and seconded Councillor Keith 
Connolly that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 249/2025 and 
hereby approves the revised Commemorations and Commemorative Naming Policy. 
The motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
12   Disposal of Fee Simple and Freehold Interest:   
 
 
 
a) Report No. 242/2025 of the Executive Manager (F. D'Arcy) - With reference to the 
disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and Tenant (Ground Rents) 
(No. 2) Act, 1978.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Declan Flanagan and seconded by Councillor Keith 
Connolly that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 242/2025 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
b) Report No. 263/2025 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) - With reference to the 
Disposal of the Council’s Fee simple interest in the property known as 19-20 
Hogan Place, Macken Street, Dublin 2  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Declan 
Flanagan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 263/2025 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 

 
c) Report No. 256/2025 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) With reference to the 
disposal of the Fee Simple interest in lands at St. Bricin’s Military Hospital, Arbour 
Hill, Dublin 7 to the Department of Defence  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Declan 
Flanagan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 256/2025 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
13   Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
 
a) Report No. 214/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - With reference to 
the granting of a 99-year lease of lands at Alfie Byrne Road, Dublin 3 to Eastwall 
Bessborough FC & Belvedere FC CLG.  
 
Councillor Daniel Ennis through his Group Leader, Councillor Cat O'Drsicoll, 
informed the meeting that he had a conflict of interest in relation to this item and 
was therefore removing himself from the meeting until the item was dealt with.  
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by 
Councillor Cat O'Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 
214/2025 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and 
carried.   
 
 
 
b) Report No. 255/2025 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) - With reference to the 
granting of a 3 year Short-Term Letting to Whitefriar Aungier Area Community 
Council for the use of rooms at the Community Centre, 3 Mercer Street upper, 
Dublin 2  
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by 
Councillor Declan Flanagan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No 255/2025 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put 
and carried.   
 
 
 
c) Report No. 257/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - With reference to 
the proposed 10-year Lease of Café Unit at the junction of Fenian Street/Holles 
Street, Dublin 2 to J Bar Hospitality Limited t/a Griolladh  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Declan Flanagan and seconded by Councillor Daryl 
Barron that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 257/2025 and 
assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried.   
 
 
 
d) Report No. 262/2025 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) - With reference to the 
proposed grant of a further licence to the premises at The Tram Café, Wolfe Tone 
Park, Jervis Street, Dublin 1 to The Tram Café Limited  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Declan Flanagan and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O'Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 262/2025 and 
assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried.    
 
 
 
e) Report No. 264/2025 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) - With reference to the 
proposed grant of a further 5-year Lease of the Ground Floor Retail Unit and 
Basement Stores of No. 4 Capel Street, Dublin 1, Dublin Vintage Shop  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Jesslyn Henry and seconded by Councillor Séamus 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 264/2025 and 
assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried.   
 
 

 
f) Report No. 265/2025 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) - With reference to the 
proposed grant of a 5-year lease of the premises at Unit 4, Killarney Court, 
Buckingham Street Upper, Dublin 1 to Tusla Education Support Services.  
 
Councillor Dermot Lacey requested that in future reports on Section 183 Disposals 
to state bodies include a reference to the amount of rates that will be forgone as a 
consequence, considering the fact that such bodies do not pay rates. The Manager 
agreed to this request. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor Jesslyn 
Henry that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 265/2025 and 
assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried.   
 
 
 
g) Report No. 266/2025 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) - With reference to the 
proposed grant of a 5-year lease of the premises at Unit 2, Killarney Court, 
Buckingham Street, Dublin 1 to Akina Dada Wa Africa CLG.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daithí Doolan and seconded by Councillor Declan 
Flanagan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 266/2025 and 
assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried.   
 
 
 
h) Report No. 267/2025 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) - With reference to the 
proposed grant of a 5-year short-term letting of the premises at 1-4 Portland 
Square, Dublin 1 to The Community After School Project Limited.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daithí Doolan and seconded by Councillor Declan 
Flanagan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 267/2025 and 
assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried.    
 
 
 
14   Disposal of Property:   
 
 
 
a) Report No. 253/2025 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) - With reference to the 
Disposal of lands adjacent to Casino of Marino, Dublin 3 to the Office of Public 
Works  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Deirdre Heney and seconded by Councillor Gavin 
Pepper that the report be amended with the inclusion of the text "the Local 
Community", in point 5 of report 253/2025 so the amended text reads:  
 
"That the title transferred shall include a covenant to the effect that the lands can 
only be used for social, community and amenity purposes associated with the 
Local Community and heritage, tourism, culture and/or arts, to include 
appropriate ancillary services." The amendment was put and carried. 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by 
Councillor Deirdre Heney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 
253/2025 as amended and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion 
was put and carried.    
 
 
 
b) Report No. 254/2025 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) - With reference to the 
disposal of a former laneway to the side of 9 Graigue Court, Poppintree, Dublin 11  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Daithí 
Doolan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 254/2025 and 
assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried. 
 
 

 
c) Report No. 258/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - With reference to 
the disposal of a plot of land to the rear of 11 New Ireland Road, Rialto, Dublin 8  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Jesslyn Henry and seconded by Councillor Declan 
Flanagan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 258/2025 and 
assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
15   Report No. 250/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Social Housing 
Supply and Delivery Monthly Update Report 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Declan Flanagan and seconded by Councillor Patrick 
Kinsella that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 250/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
16   Report No. 251/2025 of the Head of Finance (R. Flannery) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamus McGrattan and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
251/2025. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
17   Report No. 252/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Declan Flanagan and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O'Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 252/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
18   Report No. 243/2025 of the Area Committees - Minutes of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of September 2025. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor Daryl Barron 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 243/2025. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
19   Report No. 244/2025 of the Planning and Urban Regeneration Strategic Policy 
Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on the 24th June 2025, Councillor Catherine 
Stocker, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Edel Moran and seconded by Councillor Noelle Brown 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 244/2025. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
20   Report No. 245/2025 of the Protocol Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on the 
25th September 2025, Councillor Deirdre Heney, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Deirdre Heney and seconded by Councillor Mannix 
Flynn that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 245/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
21   Topical Issues 
 
No topical issues were submitted for consideration. 
 
 
 
 

 
22   Motions on Notice 
 
Motions on notice were deferred to the December City Council meeting. 
 
 
 
23   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
No emergency motions were taken for debate. 
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
 
 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
 

Councillor Philip Sutcliffe 
Statement to Council Meeting 
Monday, 3 November 2025 
 
 
Lord Mayor, colleagues, 
 
I want to apologise for the post that appeared on my social media on polling day. The 
post had been forwarded to me, and I was also tagged in it, and it was accidentally 
shared on my accounts. I wasn’t aware it had gone up on my social media account.  
 
I want to make it absolutely clear that the image was not my ballot paper, and the 
content of that post was absolutely disgusting and completely unacceptable. I would 
never share anything like that. 
 
I take full responsibility for what happened and I’m very sorry for any offence or 
confusion caused. It was an honest mistake, and I’ll make sure it doesn’t happen 
again. 
 
Thank you. 
Cllr Philip Sutcliffe 
Appendix A

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY 3rd 
NOVEMBER 2025 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if the green lampposts in the Tenters area of Dublin 8 could 
be repainted, as the paint is quite faded on many of them. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Inspections of the green lampposts in the Tenters area will be carried out in the coming 
weeks. Those lampposts identified as requiring painting will be added to a list for 
consideration in 2026 and beyond. 
 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive the total value of Domestic Rates collected in the final year 
in which they were applicable in Dublin Corporation and how much such an income 
would be valued at today given the rates of inflation since then. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Finance Department will reply directly to the Councillor.  
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive when are the above atrocious third world surfaces 
scheduled to be resurfaced, with their holes, bad ramps and everything else, on 
Details Supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Utility companies are responsible for the temporary reinstatement of their works until 
such time as permanent reinstatement is completed. Road Maintenance Services 
will notify the relevant utilities to complete the permanent reinstatement in the above 
areas as soon as possible. 
If permanent reinstatement is not imminent then all openings are to be checked by the 
utility to ensure they are safe for the public particularly vulnerable users such as 
pedestrians and cyclists. 
 
Q.4  
COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update to two lighting requests in Inchicore (details 
supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Regarding both locations the existing uplighters have become unmaintainable. One 
uplighter at each location has been removed that will allow suitable replacements to 
be identified from a lighting manufacturer that will fit into the existing bases. 
Unfortunately, as these uplighters are nonstandard items it can take 10 weeks or so to 
take delivery of them (upon placement of an order) so it is unlikely this replacement 
work will be carried out this side of Christmas. 
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR  
To ask the Chief Executive if he will ensure DCC act on foot of a request from The 
Liberties Litter Pickers to install public bins in several major litter hotspots in their area. 
Currently, there are no public bins on key streets including. 
• 
South Brown Street 
• 
The Cork Street end of Donore Avenue (a significant litter hotspot we frequently 
clear) 
• 
The Pimlico/Coombe area 

• 
Weavers' Square 
• 
Chamber Street 
• 
Ormond Street 
• 
Marrowbone Lane (including Maryland) 
to 
Additionally, the entire Tenters area has one single bin at Oscar Square. Can DCC 
liaise directly with The Liberties Litter Pickers to ensure a proactive and strategic plan 
is put in place for additional public bin installations in The Liberties area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We will place another bin at the park entrance in Weavers Square. Chamber Street 
and Ormond Street can avail of the nearby bins on Cork Street. There are currently 
four litter bins on Marrowbone Lane and two on James Walk. The Cork Street end of 
Donore Avenue is too narrow a street to safely service a litter bin. South Brown Street 
and Pimlico/ Coombe area are not considered suitable locations for bins. 
 
The current locations of litter bins in the Tenters area are as follows: 
 
2 bins at Oscar Square at entrance to the dog park. 
1 bin at Donore Credit Union 
2 bins on Mill Street 
1 big belly bin at Newmarket outside Tesco. 
 
Q.6  
COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can ensure ongoing lighting issues with the pitch at 
Marrowbone Lane flats are resolved. There are two floodlights that are not in use at all 
and need bulbs to be replaced. These are on the outside of the fencing but are pointing 
in on the pitch. The floodlights themselves that are in action also need to be adjusted, 
they are pointing down directly on the goals so at night the goals are bright, but the 
rest of the pitch is somewhat in darkness. If the direction they are pointed could be 
moved it would ensure the whole pitch is bright. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance can confirm that the lights were fixed 21/10/2025, this was a 
combined effort by the Electrical Services Division, Public Lighting and Housing 
Maintenance. 
 
Q.7 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive, how many private homes do DCC plan to acquire for 2026. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has not been given a target for 2026 acquisitions. To date DHLGH 
has allocated DCC a Capital amount of €28.5 million to acquire second-hand 
properties.  DHLGH have advised that additional funding has been earmarked in 
advance of the full 2026 allocation being confirmed.  
This amount is to cover the acquisitions and refurbishment costs for properties for 
specific categories of housing need.  
It is not possible to accurately determine at this stage how many properties DCC will 
purchase next year, however we currently have fifty-six individual properties under 
consideration these purchases will not complete until 2026.     
 
Q.8 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive, that a date be supplied to this councillor, as to when the 
56 units in Marshall’s Yard East Road, East Wall be ready for letting 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The 56 homes in Marshalls Yard East Road East Wall, are due for delivery in the final 
quarter of 2025. The Part V team are currently finalising legal agreements, DCC 
expects to be in a position to allocate these units before the end of the year.  
 
Q.9  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
            To ask the Chief Executive, how many flat complexes in the North East Inner-City area 
will have retrofit works carried out. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC is working with central Government on an action plan for the North East Inner 
City, this would include plans to retrofit or renew existing flat complexes. At this stage 
there is no agreed position on how this will proceed but discussions are on-going.  
Currently DCC is not progressing retrofit works to flat complexes in the North East 
Inner City area.  
 
Q.10 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive, to have the pathway reinstated outside (details supplied). 
As the tree roots are now raising the pathways. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Rectification works are scheduled to commence within the next few weeks.   
 
Q.11  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive, can lighting be placed around Details Supplied. The area 
can go very dark from 4pm onwards. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services do not install lighting in our parks or open spaces.  
 
Q.12 
COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask The Chief Executive, how many HAP payments have been overpaid to 
landlords as they have not reported the tenants lease ceasing.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
It is not possible to extract this information from the HAP system however if any 
overpayments to landlords are identified following the closure of a HAP tenancy, DCC’s 
HAP team works to recoup the amount overpaid from landlords.   
Q.13  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask The Chief Executive, how many people are on the housing list 15 years or more 
and still have not been housed. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are 580 applicants on the Housing List 15 years or more that have not been 
housed. 
Of the 580 applications, 90 have refused offers of Social Housing. 
The Dublin City Council website is updated with new properties available through 
Choice Based Letting every Friday at 5pm.  
 
I would advise applicants to check the website weekly for new listings and express 
interest in properties that would meet their needs. 
 
 

Q.14  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask The Chief Executive, can a full list of vacant housing units that are empty 12 
months in DNW be made available. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance Voids section has a total of 18 units over 12 months at various 
stages, 3 of these units are fire jobs. 11 units will be completed in the coming weeks. 
7 units will be completed in Q1 2026.  
 
Address 
Beds 
Status 
Estimated 
completion 
date 
PARK CRESCENT HOUSE 
2 
Awaiting Vacant Possession 
1st Q 2026 
DEANSTOWN PARK 
4 
Awaiting Vacant Possession 
1st Q 2026 
ARD NA MELA 
1 
Awaiting Vacant Possession 
1st Q 2026 
COMPASS COURT SOUTH 
1 
Awaiting Vacant Possession 
1st Q 2026 
DUNARD COURT 
1 
Awaiting Vacant Possession 
1st Q 2026 
DUNARD COURT 
0 
Awaiting Vacant Possession 
1st Q 2026 
GATEWAY VIEW 
1 
Awaiting Vacant Possession 
1st Q 2026 
CLAREVILLE COURT 
0 
Work 
in 
progress 
by 
contractors 
Q4 2025 
CLAREVILLE COURT 
1 
Work 
in 
progress 
by 
contractors 
Q4 2025 
CONVENT VIEW CRESCENT 
0 
Work 
in 
progress 
by 
contractors 
Q4 2025 
CONVENT VIEW CRESCENT 
0 
Work 
in 
progress 
by 
contractors 
Q4 2025 
DEANSTOWN COURT 
1 
Work 
in 
progress 
by 
contractors 
Q4 2025 
DUNARD COURT 
0 
Work 
in 
progress 
by 
contractors 
Q4 2025 
HAMPSTEAD COURT 
0 
Work 
in 
progress 
by 
contractors 
Q4 2025 
MERVILLE COURT 
1 
Work 
in 
progress 
by 
contractors 
Q4 2025 
CAPPAGH ROAD 
3 
Work 
in 
progress 
by 
contractors 
Q4 2025 
DRUID COURT 
4 
Work 
in 
progress 
by 
contractors 
Q4 2025 
HEATH SQUARE 
3 
Work 
in 
progress 
by 
contractors 
Q4 2025 
 
Q.15  COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding the heavy rains on October 19th and 20th saw 
flooding in many parts of Dublin. Part of the reason for the flooding appears to be that 
drains were blocked by fallen leaves. Does the council have a policy of proactively 
clearing gutters and drains when storms are forecast, especially at this time of year 
when there is heavy leaf-fall? 
 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY:  
Thank you for your question regarding the flooding experienced in parts of Dublin 
during the heavy rainfall on October 19th and 20th, and the role of blocked drains due 
to leaf-fall. 
Dublin City Council’s Environmental Protection Division operates a proactive 
maintenance programme, particularly during the autumn months when leaf-fall is at its 
peak. This includes regular inspection and cleaning of gullies and surface water inlets 
across the city. The Council prioritises known flood-prone areas and locations with high 
tree density for more frequent clearing. 
Our department is in frequent communication with the Waste Management Section, 
and we endeavour to coordinate the clearing of leaves and roadside channels with 
gully cleaning operations. In many cases, road sweeping is scheduled to precede gully 
cleaning to maximise the effectiveness of both services. While this approach works 
well on an area-wide basis, it is more challenging to implement at a street-by-street 
level due to the differing time requirements and operational constraints of each service. 
 
In advance of forecasted storms or heavy rainfall events, the Council activates its 
Flood Emergency Plan, which includes targeted gully cleaning and monitoring of 
high-risk locations. Nonetheless, due to the sheer volume of leaves falling at this time 
of year—and the minimal amount required to cover a gully grate (causing localised 
ponding) — it is likely that localised incidents of ponding will continue to occur in leafy 
areas. 
Our proactive monitoring of flood-prone locations is continually reviewed and adjusted 
to minimise the recurrence of leaf-related blockages. We remain committed to 
improving coordination and response times to reduce the impact of seasonal flooding 
across the city. 
If you have a request for a specific street, please email cqsurfacewater@dublincity.ie 
and we will respond accordingly. 
 
Q.16  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive to give a summary of Dublin City Council’s Cyber Security 
strategy designed to protect critical infrastructure and data assets. Also, to detail the 
council’s Cyber Security enhancements and progress to date in compliance with the 
EU NIS2 (Network and Information) Directive. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s Cyber Security Strategy is based on the internationally 
recognised NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology) framework. This 
strategic foundation ensures robust protection of DCC’s critical infrastructure and data 
assets, with a strong emphasis on maintaining confidentiality, integrity, and availability 
across all digital services. To deliver on this strategy, DCC has implemented a 
comprehensive suite of cybersecurity technologies, including advanced tools powered 
by artificial intelligence and machine learning. These capabilities enable real-time 
threat detection and response, supporting staff and safeguarding public services. A 
dedicated cybersecurity team continuously monitors the ICT environment, ensuring 
swift action against potential risks and emerging threats. 
  
In anticipation of the EU NIS2 Directive, which has not yet been transposed into Irish 
law, DCC has proactively initiated its compliance programme. A Senior Management 
NIS2 Board has been established to provide strategic oversight, and a detailed gap 
analysis is being completed to identify priority areas for alignment with the directive. 
This work will be supported by the development of DCC’s new Cyber Security Strategy 
2026–2029, which will include NIS2 requirements and strengthen DCC’s ability to 
manage cyber risks and deliver secure, resilient public services. 
 

Q.17  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive to briefly summarise Dublin City Council’s Risk Appetite 
Statement and to detail the Risk Categories identified and Risk Appetite level 
associated with each category. 
 
In noting that Dublin City Council achieved less than 50% involvement in the Comhairle 
na nÓg local council scheme in 2024, and further noting that in the Dublin City Council 
area only 27% of schools are involved in the local youth/Comhairle  na nÓg scheme 
(which is the lowest in the country), can the Chief Executive outline what 
plans/processes/engagements are in place to increase the participation level, as well 
as increasing the number of schools involved in the scheme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin City Council Risk Appetite Statement forms part of the overall Risk 
Management Framework for the organisation.  
 
The purpose of this Risk Appetite Statement (RAS) is to consider the most significant 
categories of potential risks to the Council and to provide an outline as to the amount 
of risk that the Council is prepared to accept, retain, tolerate or be exposed to at any 
point in time in the pursuit of our core priority objectives. 
Dublin City Council accepts a range of risk appetite across 5 levels (Averse: Minimal; 
Cautious: Open: Eager) dependent on the risk category, in order to pursue and achieve 
its Corporate Plan objectives.  
Closely aligned to the Council’s risk appetite is risk tolerance. Risk tolerance is an 
important consideration in the operational translation of the risk appetite 
The Risk Categories and associated Risk Appetite Levels are: 
RISK CATEGORY 
APPETITE LEVEL (Averse – Eager) 
Cyber Security 
Minimal 
Environmental 
Open/Eager 
Financial 
Cautious 
Health and Safety 
Averse 
Legal and Regulatory 
Minimal 
Operational 
Open 
Reputational 
Minimal/Cautious 
Strategic 
Open/Eager 
Technological 
Open/Eager 
 
Dublin City Comhairle na nÓg has capacity for 63 members mirroring Dublin City 
Council. 
As Dublin City is the largest local authority area with 305 (primary, secondary and 
special education) in addition to a large volume of youth focussed organisations, not 
all schools / organisations can be represented. 
 
With regard to recruitment and participation levels, annually the schools and youth 
organisations on the Comhairle na nÓg database are contacted directly in advance of 
the Annual Youth Conference (AYC) to nominate up to four delegates. Furthermore, a 
promotional campaign via social media and traditional media run simultaneously.  

The AYC’s typical attendance is in the region of 220 young people, held each 
November in the Round Room, Mansion House.  At the conference the Comhairle na 
nÓg members for the following year are elected, with a maximum membership term of 
two years.  
 
Active participation of members throughout the term fluctuates due to age of the 
members, 12 to 17 years, and competing activities / responsibilities / personal 
circumstances.  In recent years there has been an increase in young people from 
marginalised groups / communities including young traveller women, young people 
with disabilities and those living in IPAS centres.  Also, when members leave 
permanently, a reserve list is activated.  
 
Dublin City Comhairle na nÓg is recognised in the Department of Children, Disability, 
Equality, Integration and Youth as highly functioning and productive. Evidenced by 
being the only Irish, and one of two youth focussed organisations from Europe invited 
to Japan, in August 2025 by the Tokyo Metropolitan Government.  As part of this 
unique opportunity, five members of the Dublin City Comhairle na nÓg participated 
alongside other young people from Indonesia, Taiwan and Tokyo, in the Teen Square 
Youth Conference.  
 
Q.18  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the number of pollution cases in respect of which 
a complaint was made during 2024 and to further indicate the number of pollution 
cases closed during that year. Also, to indicate a number of pollution cases on hand 
as of 31st December 2024. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Protection of Water Bodies Office proactively manages responses to surface 
water-related incidents and complaints submitted by members of the public, elected 
representatives, and relevant stakeholders. Complaints are primarily received via the 
dedicated email address waterpollution@dublincity.ie, which is actively monitored 
to ensure timely and appropriate action. 
 
Please find below details in response to particulars requested.  
 
Surface Water Returns  
Number  
Opening related cases in 2024 
0 
Number of cases received in 2024 
163 
Number of inspections relating to cases 
received in 2024 
326 
No of cases closed in 2024 
161 
No of cases carried over into 2025 
2 
 
Please note, these returns explicitly relate to surface water related cases only. They 
are annually reported to the Environment Protection Agency under Recommended 
Minimum Criteria for Environmental Inspections (RMCEI).  
 
Q.19  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive what powers has Dublin City Council gained and what 
powers has it lost since 1st January 2017. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A response to this request will require a significant amount of research and will take 
some time as there is a high degree of complexity involved. The Chief Executives 

Office will liaise with the Local Government Management Association which has 
undertaken a significant amount of work in this area. A response will issue to the 
Councillor in due course.  
 
Q.20  COUNCILLOR DANNY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm how much the Council currently spends annually 
on agency staffing and consultants, and whether this represents value for money 
compared with permanent staffing models? 
What internal performance metrics are being used to evaluate the effectiveness of 
council departments, and when were they last independently reviewed? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council do not employ agency staff. All our internal/external recruiting is 
done through our recruiting processes. 
 
Q.21  COUNCILLOR DANNY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive given the introduction of new active-travel and 
pedestrianisation schemes across the city, how is the Council ensuring that local small 
businesses are supported (for example through revised loading-access times, 
signage, marketing) and what mechanisms are in place to monitor any adverse impact 
on trade and respond quickly? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Delivery of the Active Travel Programme across the planned network will bring 
significant long-term citywide benefits, including environmental, economic, health, and 
quality-of-life improvements. In 2026, the Dublin Active Travel Analysis Project will be 
undertaken to develop a set of indicators under the themes of Transport, Climate, 
Health, Economy, and Community. A formal project workshop will be held in January 
2026 to initiate this work. 
Great care is taken to ensure that all works are delivered to the highest professional 
standards expected within our capital city. A process of public consultation is carried 
out as part each project well before the construction stage. The very largest projects 
have established consultative committees for the duration from design to completion, 
and these committees include local business members. The Council procures 
experienced and competent contractors and designers and specifies the use of high-
quality materials to ensure projects enhance the public realm and the wider built 
environment, including adjacent business premises. 
High-quality project information leaflets are produced and distributed locally, 
containing key project details, links to our webpage, and multiple contact channels. 
During construction, these materials include contact information for both the Active 
Travel Office and contractors, including a 24-hour contact number. Residents and 
businesses can use these channels to obtain updates or request assistance directly 
from our staff. 
Each project has a dedicated full-time construction team experienced in managing 
works in busy urban environments. These on-site staff act as the primary liaison 
between local businesses, residents, contractors, elected representatives, and Council 
departments, addressing queries and resolving issues promptly. Team members 
actively engage with local businesses, providing first-hand updates and support 
throughout construction. Our contractors are obliged to consider the operating hours 
of local businesses, as well as the timing of events such as concerts, church services, 
community activities, state exams, and peak traffic periods. They communicate directly 

with stakeholders, often through hand-delivered notices, to coordinate works efficiently 
and safely, while minimising disruption. On larger projects, where appropriate, fixed 
signage and digital displays (variable message signs) are used to emphasise 
“business as usual” and support local traders. 
Reprioritising public spaces for active travel modes presents challenges, particularly in 
busy commercial areas. Loading bays, parking, and bus stops are essential for the 
long-term viability of many streets, and any changes are made following extensive 
engagement with stakeholders to mitigate impacts. During construction, contractors 
endeavour, where safe and feasible, to maintain loading and parking facilities, keeping 
local businesses informed through direct communication and leaflet updates. 
We acknowledge that some short-term disruption is unavoidable and are extremely 
grateful to local businesses, residents, and road users for their patience and 
cooperation. Every effort is made to minimise inconvenience, and we remain available 
to address any concerns or queries. Businesses or residents wishing to contact a 
Project Team can do so by emailing activetraveloffice@dublincity.ie, where a team 
member will be happy to arrange a meeting. 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive if he would support the proposal from Sheriff YC to use a 
portion of the land adjacent to their pitch and the Irish Rail site in Fairview Park for the 
secure storage of goals and equipment. The club has managed and maintained these 
pitches, and surrounding areas for decades, while providing essential support for the 
local community. Given their long-standing commitment and the challenges, they have 
faced - including recent and recurring incidents of vandalism - it is important that we 
facilitate this request.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The club has an existing storage container at this location next to the council pitches 
where they have an annual allocation.  Recently the Parks service facilitated the 
enclosing a space with fencing around this storage container for the storage of goal 
posts.  The Club has not advised the Parks Service of additional storage needs.  A 
meeting can be arranged to discuss same if contact is made at parks@dublincity.ie  
 
Q.23  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive could I get a detailed plan for Fairview Park regarding the 
proposed tea rooms and library, including proposed locations, timelines, and any 
community consultation to date. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The project to deliver the tearooms and the public library at Fairview Park is at Stage 
2 where it is anticipated that an integrated design team will be appointed in Q1 2026. 
Initial designs, timelines for delivery and proposed consultations will follow on from the 
appointment. 
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive, in relation to major events held in Fairview Park - such as 
the summer concerts and the recent American football event - how much revenue does 
the Council receive for granting permission to host these events? Once received, how 
is this revenue allocated or used by the Council? Is it earmarked for specific projects, 
such as improvements to Fairview Park, or does it go into a general fund? With these 
events becoming more regular with an intensification of use in the park, residents are 

simply looking for more information and understanding around the financial aspects 
and how the proceeds benefit the local area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The fees for standard events held in parks are outlined on DCC’s website under ‘Apply 
to host and event or activity in our parks.  For the larger events cited fees, bonds etc. 
would be subject to a level of negotiation depending on the scale of the proposed 
event, duration, time of year and risk of damage etc.  This income is factored into the 
multi-annual capital programme for the area.  A number of major improvements have 
taken place in Fairview in recent years including a full upgrade to the playground, a 
new lit esplanade, new lit greenway, additional seating, new adult exercise equipment 
as well as pitch improvement works and extensive tree works throughout the park.  The 
major project to deliver a tearooms in Fairview Park has now been combined with the 
public library project and a tender process to appoint Integrated Design Team is to 
commence in 2026. 
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive to work on plans to develop a multisport, full-size, all-
weather pitch with a running track in Fairview Park. As someone who grew up and 
lives beside Fairview Park, I have seen firsthand the challenges and recognise the 
urgent need for enhanced amenities to support positive activity and community use. 
Recent issues, including antisocial behaviour and attacks, highlight the necessity for 
investment in facilities that will benefit people of all ages, encourage active recreation, 
and contribute to a safer, more vibrant community space, use day and night. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Fairview Park is a relatively small park with a range of existing recreational amenities.  
It is not considered large enough to receive such a development with an extensive 
footprint such as full-sized all-weather pitch with running track without significantly 
impacting on the existing facilities and the removal of several grass pitches.  
Furthermore, the existing significant level changes within the park would make the 
design and construction of such a facility at this location prohibitively expensive.  As 
there are a range of existing Council owned all-weather pitches a few hundred metres 
to the east on the far side of the railway line Fairview Park would not be considered a 
high priority for the provision of all-weather facilities.  
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
           To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for Aulden Grange to be cleaned including tree 
maintenance and leaf gathering. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow with a 
view to identifying any low hanging branches that might be considered hazardous to 
pedestrians.  Any such work is identified as necessary will be expedited. 
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
           To ask the Chief Executive what harassment is happening in the bring Centre on Oscar 
Traynor Road and why. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Members of staff who attempted to prevent scavenging of WEEE materials by a small 
number of members of the public have allegedly been harassed and intimidated for 
approximately one year as a result. Waste Management Services made several 
interventions during this time to prevent any unauthorised access to the WEEE cages, 
but the harassment has allegedly continued despite our best efforts. The Health and 

Safety team have ultimately implemented this trial removal of the WEEE recycling 
service as a last resort to ensure the health, safety and welfare of staff and patrons of 
the facility. 
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to deal with the rubbish and dumping in 
Belcamp/Priorswood Park. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Our Litter Enforcement Manager will ensure that this location is regularly patrolled by 
litter wardens and that any dumped rubbish there is removed in a timely manner 
 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many DCC tenants on the current housing lists are 
envisaged to be housed on the Oscar Traynor lands. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are 342 units of social housing planned for delivery in the Oscar Traynor Road 
development, all 342 homes will be allocated to applicants on the DCC Social Housing 
waiting lists.  
The distribution of allocations across the housing and transfer lists has not yet been 
determined.  
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
            To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the question below (details supplied), 
the Resident concerned says the inspection has not yet taken place. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The inspection was carried out in June as committed to.  The inspector spoke to one 
affected resident at the time of inspection and outlined the work that was 
recommended; to crown-lift above the public footpath, somewhat separated the 
crowns of the two trees and reduce the length of specific limbs overhanging private 
gardens.  This resident was further advised that the work would be programmed in the 
autumn/winter.  It is anticipated that the work will take place in the coming weeks after 
the annual Halloween clean up. 
 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for the installation of the “Eco” toilet facilities, like the ones 
recently installed in St. Anne`s Park, for the many teams and Kilmore Celtic F.C. who 
use the Oscar Traynor Road Football Pitches Week in Week out for Matches and 
Training. Details Supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Service do not provide such facilities in locations where staff are not based 
to monitor and service same, nor are such facilities provided for the exclusive use of 1 
club. 
 
Q.32  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the Question below (details supplied). 
The resident has not had any contact since. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance confirms that it is planned to replace the wall at the above 
address.  Once details are finalised, works will be scheduled to commence early in Q1 
2026. The tenant will be contacted directly to arrange. 

Q.33  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to make arrangements to have the gutters cleaned in 
(details supplied) as reported by the householders; and if he will make a statement 
on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A maintenance crew from the Environmental Protection Division were onsite at Details 
Supplied on 29/10/25. All gullies are clean, functional, and in operation.  
 
Q.34  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the works that have taken place this year within 
the context of Details Supplied. The update should detail preparatory works, design 
works, projects that have been subject of an external third party; and if he will make a 
statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Response to issue directly to Councillor. 
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to list all projects under the Capital Plan 2025 - 2027 that 
are located within details supplied; the funding provided towards each project; its 
current status; the works that have been undertaken or completed to date and to 
provide an anticipated completion date; and if he will make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Response to issue directly to Councillor. 
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
          To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the funding for the (details supplied) 
redevelopment project. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Response to issue directly to Councillor. 
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
          To ask the Chief Executive for an update on future plans for Tolka Valley pitch & putt 
course on Ballyboggan Road. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This matter is currently being examined by Parks and a report will issue directly to the 
Councillor 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
           To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the collection of outstanding derelict site 
levies due to Dublin City Council. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is currently an amount of €9,546,344 of outstanding Derelict Sites Levies. 
 
€1,135,316 has been received in 2025. 
 
With respect to properties/sites on the Derelict Sites Register, these are subject to a 
derelict sites levy of 7% of the market value of the property and incur interest on unpaid 
levies at a rate of 1.25% per month.  
 

The Derelict Sites Section takes prompt action in demanding levies.  All Derelict Sites 
levies are demanded in January with a final demand sent 2 months later.  The Act 
provides that unpaid levies, including interest, automatically become a charge on the 
land and will remain a charge until the full amount is discharged. If no payment is 
received, the case is referred to Dublin City Council’s Law Department to register a 
charge on the land.  If and when a derelict site with a charge is subject to a sale, 
purchasers require vendors to have the charge removed as part of the conveyance 
process. 
 
Given the recent concerns expressed by the elected members regarding the 
recoupment of levies, the Law Department have been asked to carry out a test pilot on 
a number of Derelict Sites with outstanding levies to determine the viability, value for 
money, resourcing involved in:  
i. 
Pursuing the debt collection by litigation for the debt 
and/or 
ii. 
Serving a Notice under the Act (and then prosecute) 
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
           To ask the Chief Executive can a fence be erected at the rear of details supplied with 
immediate effect to prevent anti-social behaviour and to prevent a drowning occurring. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services will investigate the feasibility of erecting some fencing at this location. 
It is our intention to allow a natural shrub buffer zone re-establish along the canal edge. 
Additional shrub planting will be planted this winter to close up any visual gaps. 
 
Q.40  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
           To ask the Chief Executive can the bench at details supplied be removed immediately 
as it is attracting anti-social behaviour.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services have reviewed this request and it has been added to our local works 
schedule for removal. 
 
Q.41  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive can a management system be introduced to collect and 
sweep up leaves in the Cabra / Glasnevin / Navan Road and Drumcondra areas. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Service operates a leaf clearing programme throughout the city 
over the autumn and winter months. Priority is given to tree-lined streets, footpaths 
with heavy pedestrian use and areas particularly prone to flooding. In addition, we 
assist resident groups in clearing leaves from their areas and remove the collected 
bags for them. We will ensure that the above mentioned locations are included as often 
as possible during the course of this programme. 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive when the Pelletstown area will be taken in charge by DCC. 
There are many parking problems reported at this location. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC are in advanced discussions with the Developer in order to progress remediation 
works necessary to bring these areas to taking in charge standard. 
 
 

Q.43  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for a full update on the plans for the redevelopment of 
Lansdowne Vally and the pitch and putt course in Drimnagh, please include the 
timeframe for commencement and completion of the work. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The developments for the pitch and putt end of the park will be brought to the council 
when plans are ready.  The Camac Greenway project is within the current 2025-2028 
programme of project delivery and will be delivered in collaboration with the Active 
Travel Programme Office. Public Consultation will be included as part of this process. 
 
Q.44  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for a full update on the plans for the redevelopment of 
Brickfield Park dressing rooms in Drimnagh, please include the timeframe for 
commencement and completion of the work. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Additional surveys have been requested by the planning department for this 
development in advance of part 8. These are being completed and should be 
completed by mid December. The part 8 process will begin early 2026 (8 weeks).  
 
Q.45  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm how much bonfire material, in tonnes, was 
collected in each of the administrative areas in the run up to Halloween and how much 
did this cost Dublin City Council? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Service expect to be in a position to provide this information by 
the middle of November 2025 after collating all the collected weights involved from all 
the various sections involved in the collection of bonfire material.  
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for a full update on the plans for the redevelopment of the 
multi-purpose playing pitch in Cherry Orchard beside St. Ultan’s NS, please include 
the timeframe for commencement and completion of the work. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks, Landscape & Biodiversity team have developed a draft masterplan for 
(new) Cherry Orchard Park, which includes an upgrade to the multi-purpose playing 
pitch. Once budget is approved, the plan will be brought to the Area Committee and 
local residents for consultation. 
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
Can the Chief Executive issue a full report regarding the installation of two pedestrian 
crossings outside of the Royal College of surgeons on York Street. This report to 
include all meetings that were had between the college and the traffic department, who 
was at these meetings, who made the decision to install these pedestrian crossings. 
What consultation took place with local area, staff, local area counsellors, our local 
area residence, what was the criteria used to install these pedestrian crossings at a 
private university? Was there a guarantee of any monies for the cost of these crossings 
how much did these crossings cost? What was the tendering process who issued the 
order of works, and can all this documentation be provided to me? Also, who initiated 
this process, in conclusion who was aware in Dublin City Council of the Royal College 
of Surgeon’s plan to turn the area into their compass which officials are staff in Dublin 
City Council? What part of this process are aware of this process who initiated the 

decision to present this plan to the southeast area committee without any consultation 
with the local area residence of the local area counsellors.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An initial meeting was held with the RCSI on the 9th of Jun 2025. Officials from the 
Traffic Department attended this meeting. Having heard the request for traffic calming 
measures on York Street due to the approx. 3,000 pedestrian movements per day 
crossing the street, the Traffic department proposed the installation of zebra crossings. 
The speeds and volumes on the street met the criteria for such a crossing and the road 
was already flush with the pavement. This was a similar situation to the zebra crossing 
installed on South William Street earlier this year.  
The cost is covered by DCC and as the works were very minor were carried out by the 
appointed contractor under the Single Party Framework for Small Scale Road Works. 
The works cost €14,000 with an additional delay cost of €7,000 due to the halting of 
the works at various times. 
The proposals by the RCSI for the street are a separate plan to the traffic calming 
measures.  
 
Q.48 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
Can the Chief Executive issue a full report regarding the building of a restaurant and 
Café facility in Marion Square Park? This report should include the overall cost to date, 
why the works are stopped, when this work would be completed and this café opened 
what is the reason for the delay on these works? Who has financial oversight on this 
project?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Merrion Square Park was originally developed as a private garden square during the 
Georgian era for the exclusive use of local residents and has been in place for over 
two centuries. In 2014, Dublin City Council commissioned and approved a 
Conservation Plan for the park, which outlined measures to enhance the visitor 
experience, including the provision of tearooms and public toilets. 
 
At the October 2024 meeting of the South East Area Committee, the estimated cost of 
the construction works was reported as approximately €3.7 million (excluding VAT). 
This figure includes the upgrade of external areas and installation of public lighting. 
The project is being managed under Dublin City Council’s Capital Project Governance 
Framework, in accordance with the Public Spending Code. This framework provides 
for robust oversight and accountability through a tiered governance structure; including 
an assigned Project Manager and Steering Group 
 
The Project Manager oversees the day-to-day delivery of the project, including 
managing the contract in line with approvals granted, providing regular progress and 
financial reports to the Steering Group and Corporate Project Support Office reporting 
any cost variations or contractual issues, submitting project appraisals and progress 
reports for approval and implementing change control procedures for cost, programme 
or scope adjustments.Although on-site construction activity may have appeared to 
have paused, significant progress has continued off-site. The roof structure, glazing, 
and façade elements have been under fabrication, and the first roof trusses were 
installed on-site this week. The structural columns and concrete framework are now 
complete, and installation of the pre-fabricated roof and façade components will 
progress on-site over the coming months. 
 
It is anticipated that construction of the Merrion Square tearooms and public toilets will 
be completed in the second quarter of 2026 after which the café will open to the public. 
 

Q.49  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
            Can the Chief Executive initiate a public campaign and support of the wearing of 
cycling helmets? It is important that we make cyclists aware of the dangers on our 
roads particularly regarding head injuries. While it is not compulsive to wear a helmet, 
Dublin City Council have an obligation to encourage people to wear helmets 
particularly in relation to recent statistics of head injuries of those who have come off 
our bikes. I’ve been involved in single accidents that have resulted in catastrophic head 
injuries, campaign would run alongside the Dublin cycling campaigns who hand out 
lights to cyclist in winter months but seem to ignore that head injuries that are causing 
the most concern for those cycling on our roads. 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has no plans currently to initiate a campaign to encourage cyclists 
to wear helmets.  
 
Dublin City Council supports, but is not involved in, Dublin Cycling Campaign’s annual 
light up your bike initiative which gives free lights to cyclists each year as the clocks 
go back. The use of lights for lighting up time is a legal requirement, and lights are 
provided by the Road Safety Campaign for this initiative.   
 
Q.50  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
Can the Chief Executive issue a full report regarding the ongoing Garda investigation 
in relation to fraud in the Peter Mc Very trust. This report to include all involvement in 
this investigation by Dublin City Council and Dublin regional Homeless executive.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC/Dublin Region Homeless Executive is aware that An Garda Síochána has begun 
a criminal an investigation into the Peter McVerry Trust. We have not been contacted 
in relation to the investigation but will give full co-operation if required.  
 
Q.51  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
            To ask the Chief Executive how many planning permissions have been granted by the 
DCC planning office for hotels, aparthotels, and hostels in the North and South Inner-
City areas since the City Development Plan 2022 to 2028 came into effect 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Due to the volume of information requested, additional time is required to respond.  A 
response will issue directly to the Councillor within two weeks. 
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
            To ask the Chief Executive how many planning permissions have been granted by the 
DCC planning office for new offices in the North and South Inner-City areas since the 
City Development Plan 2022 to 2028 came into effect. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
Due to the volume of information requested, additional time is required to respond.  A 
response will issue directly to the Councillor within two weeks. 
 
Q.53  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
            To ask the Chief Executive how many planning permissions have been granted by the 
DCC planning office for housing developments in the North and South Inner-City areas 
since the City Development Plan 2022 to 2028 came into effect. 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Due to the volume of information requested, additional time is required to respond.  A      
response will issue directly to the Councillor within two weeks. 
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please clarify why the DCC Planning Department 
are working with Failte Ireland to carry out an analysis of the supply and demand for 
tourism related accommodation, including hotels, aparthotels, hostels, Bed and 
Breakfast Accommodation and other short-term letting in the Dublin City area, as per 
the objective in the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028. Does the CEO support 
this decision given that Failte Ireland's remit is to provide tourist accommodation and 
therefore cannot be objective in their analysis of demand, and if so, can the CEO 
please outline the justification of this process given the current housing crisis? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028 contains an objective to carry out an 
analysis of the supply and demand for tourism related accommodation including 
hotels, aparthotels, hostels, Bed and Breakfast Accommodation and other short-term 
letting in the Dublin City area.  The Planning Department is committed to this objective 
and began initial work in scoping out this study including engaging with Fáilte Ireland, 
who are the relevant stakeholder for this information.   
 
Failte Ireland recently completed analysis of Dublin Hotel Development from Planning 
to Completion. The study looked at hotel refurbishments and new builds across the 
Dublin region over a 10 year period. While not completed on behalf of DCC it will help 
inform DCC’s analysis of supply and demand for tourism related accommodation as 
will all available research.  
 
The Planning Department is actively working to progress this matter and intends to 
conduct the study once the necessary resources are in place.  
 
Q.55  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on short-term letting activity across 
Dublin City for 2025 to date, including: 
1. The number of planning applications received and decided for change of use from 
residential properties to short-term letting accommodation. 
2. The number of Form 15 notifications submitted since 1 January 2025, broken down 
by month and type (home share, short-term letting, or both); and 
3. Details of any enforcement actions taken by the Council this year in relation to 
unauthorised short-term letting, including the number of inspections carried out, 
warning letters issued, enforcement notices served, and prosecutions initiated. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
1. Planning applications decided for change of use from residential properties to short-
term letting accommodation this year for first 2 Qtrs 2025: 
 
Year 
Granted Refused 
Grand 
Total 
2025 
0 
2 
2 
2. Form 15 notifications submitted this year to 13th October 2025 

2025 
 
Jan 1st to – 
(13th October 
2025 
Homeshare 
29 
STL 
74 
Both 
20 
Total 
124 
3. Enforcement actions taken by the Council this year in relation to 
unauthorised short-term letting. 
 
2025 
 
Cases 
Open    
 
S152 
Warning 
Letters 
 
S154 
Enforcement 
Notices 
 
Cases 
resolved 
 
S157 Legal 
Proceedings 
 
Number of 
Inspections 
1st Jan - 
13th 
October 
2025 
 
293 
 
371 
 
14 
 
208 
 
4 
 
356 
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a full breakdown of the current housing and 
transfer lists by DCC housing area (A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, etc.), showing the number 
of applicants on each band (Band 1, Band 2, and Band 3) for both lists and each area.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please find attached figures as requested for the following Housing Areas – B, D, E, 
H, J, K, L, M, N and P.  
 
Housing Waiting List - 
 

TABLE 1 (a)
BAND 1 HOUSING
Area B   Area D   Area E  Area H   Area J  Area K   Area L   Area M  Area N  
Area P   
Grand Total
Care Leaver Priority
25
7
14
12
5
1
4
1
1
70
Traveller Priority
46
11
15
23
8
103
Housing Medical Priority
73
17
42
27
18
26
11
11
18
2
245
Housing Medical Priority older person
5
3
5
7
1
1
2
2
5
3
34
Welfare Priority
14
4
10
7
5
3
1
4
4
52
Welfare Priority older person
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
8
Homeless Priority
7
4
17
9
3
4
7
4
2
2
59
Homeless Priority older person
7
1
6
3
2
3
6
1
1
30
Band 1 Grand Total
179
48
109
66
58
46
32
23
31
9
601
BAND 2 HOUSING
Area B   Area D   Area E  Area H   Area J  Area K   Area L   Area M  Area N  
Area P   
Grand Total
Band 2 Housing List
2491
708
1183
774
849
742
436
328
327
111
7949
Band 2 Housing List older person
56
11
45
23
30
28
16
29
35
4
277
Band 2 Grand Total
2547
719
1228
797
879
770
452
357
362
115
8226
BAND 3 HOUSING
Area B   Area D   Area E  Area H   Area J  Area K   Area L   Area M  Area N  
Area P   
Grand Total
Band 3 Housing List
1639
315
745
467
507
435
315
282
323
75
5103
Band 3 Housing List older person
150
13
121
45
50
47
45
54
75
14
614
Band 3 Grand Total
1789
328
866
512
557
482
360
336
398
89
5717
HOUSING LIST TOTAL
4515
1095
2203
1375
1494
1298
844
716
791
213
14544
July 2025 Housing Waiting List figures by Band Category
 
 
 
Transfer Waiting List – 
 
BAND 1 TRANSER LIST
Area B   Area D   Area E  Area H   Area J  Area K   Area L   Area M  Area N  Area P   Grand Total
Surrendering Larger priority
45
9
28
28
24
23
30
17
6
7
217
Transfer HAP Band 1
1622
368
856
397
479
435
278
215
230
62
4942
Transfer HAP Band 1 Older Person
19
11
5
7
4
4
5
8
3
66
Transfer Medical priority 
107
25
62
41
33
33
34
31
9
10
385
Transfer Medical priority older person
14
9
31
28
10
13
22
12
11
4
154
Transfer Welfare priority
59
14
47
16
27
34
6
8
12
5
228
Transfer Welfare priority older person
1
3
1
4
4
1
1
1
16
Band 1 Transfer List Grand Total
1867
425
1038
516
584
542
378
289
277
92
6008
BAND 2 TRANSFER LIST
Area B   Area D   Area E  Area H   Area J  Area K   Area L   Area M  Area N  Area P   Grand Total
Band 2 Transfer List
594
151
419
277
236
282
216
186
164
42
2567
Band 2 Transfer List older person
78
7
63
40
23
30
11
45
30
8
335
Band 2 Transfer List Grand Total
672
158
482
317
259
312
227
231
194
50
2902
BAND 3 TRANSFER LIST
Area B   Area D   Area E  Area H   Area J  Area K   Area L   Area M  Area N  Area P   Grand Total
Band 3 Transfer List
2090
336
1181
635
672
653
612
465
389
147
7180
Band 3 Transfer List older person
137
48
157
80
85
52
108
78
70
21
836
Band 3 Transfer List Grand Total
2227
384
1338
715
757
705
720
543
459
168
8016
TRANSFER LIST TOTAL
4766
967
2858
1548
1600
1559
1325
1063
930
310
16926
July 2025 Transfer Waiting List figures by Band Category
TABLE 1 (b)
 
 
 

Q.57  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide: 
A. The current average wait times for the assessment of applications on 
exceptional social grounds and on medical priority grounds; and 
B. A report on the resourcing levels currently allocated to the assessment of both 
categories of application, including staff numbers, grade, and whether any 
backlogs are being experienced. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Social Work Section is currently meeting its target of assessing Exceptional Social 
Grounds (ESG) applications within a twelve - week period in most cases. However, it 
is not possible to accurately state how long a particular application might take as cases 
vary in complexity and may take longer than twelve weeks when the Senior Social 
Worker assigned the case requires additional information to assist them in making their 
decision. Response times may fluctuate due to the volume of applications received at 
any one time and the resources available to process them. The volume of ESG 
applications received in the Social Work Section has steadily increased over the past 
five years. 
The Allocations Section has seen an increase in applications for Medical Priority in 
2025, however the staff have ensured that the current decision time is 20 weeks. As 
above the response times may fluctuate due to complexity of medical cases or if further 
supporting documentation is required.  
The current distribution of staff across both teams aligns with our work force plan 
requirements and workload expectations. 
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on traffic request Ref No: 11165965 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The TAG Area Engineer is liaising with colleagues in the DCC Schools Zone Team to 
address the issues raised on Zion Road. An update will issue in the next few weeks. 
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive is it possible to install speed ramps in Sandymount village 
as many are not obeying the 30 km hour limit. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer will carry out an assessment of the location to determine the 
suitability of installing additional speed ramps and the traffic condition for enforcement 
of the existing 30 km/h speed limit within the village area. 
The Councillor will be notified of any findings or recommendations arising from this 
assessment in due course. 
 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he could have the Sandymount sea wall examined in 
relation to its structural integrity (details supplied). I appreciate that the Flood 
Alleviation Project will address it in time but there could be a near-term risk.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We have looked at this section of the Sandymount seawall and there does not appear 
to be any immediate threat of increased flood risk to buildings behind it. We are looking 
at carrying out some repairs on this section as soon as possible. In the interim we will 
monitor it when any high tides or large waves are forecast at Sandymount and 
temporarily protect this section if required. 
 

Q.61  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline the co-ordinated plan Dublin City Council intends 
to implement to prevent anti-social behaviour and manage the stockpiling of pallets 
and other combustible materials in the lead-up to and during Halloween (31st 
October)? 
Please include details on: 
1. The agencies involved (e.g., Gardaí, Dublin Fire Brigade, Waste Management, 
Parks Services). 
            2.  Proactive removal strategies for stockpiled materials. 
             3. Patrols and community engagement initiatives in areas of concern. 
4.Any planned public awareness campaigns to encourage safe and responsible 
community celebrations. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
South Central Area Response  
Waste Management co-ordinate the Bonfire Materials removal campaign city wide with   
Dublin Fire Brigade, Waste Enforcement, Parks, Housing Maintenance, Customer 
Services and Public Domain.   
 
Members of the public are requested to report all stockpiling of bonfire materials to 
Customer Services on tel. no. 01 222 2222 24/7 or use the Citizen Hub  
https://citizenhub.dublincity.ie/en/service/Bonfire_Materials  All reports are actioned by 
relevant department depending on where the materials are stored e.g. Green Space, 
private or public area. 
 
Public Domain work with An Garda Síochána to safely remove bonfire materials in 
transit or stockpiles in a variety of locations. All of above mentioned operational 
departments share information and plan strategies to ensure as much material is 
diverted from public areas intended for bonfires. Additional resources to augment 
Dublin City Council services are deployed and managed by Public Domain.  
 
Halloween stay safe messages, information on reporting stockpiling and community 
events are posted on social media and Dublin City Council website through corporate 
communications.  Dublin Fire Brigade, ISPCA and An Garda Síochána run a campaign 
on the dangers of using illegal fireworks. A post-Halloween Report is included in the 
Agenda Pack for November South Central Area Committee to keep elected member 
fully informed as to how events proceeded.  
 
North Central Area Response 
The Area Housing Office for the Clontarf/Donagamede area records and logs 
complaints of stockpiling of material on public property, and forwards to the appropriate 
section for action. Any material in our housing stock or vacant properties is removed 
and any breaches of tenancy agreements on foot of these will be investigated by our 
estate management section.  
 
Regular engagement has taken place between housing, waste management, Parks 
Services, An Gardai Síochána and the Fire Brigade to ensure a co-ordinated response. 
In addition, NCA team have organised 6 official events within the area and have given 
support to 23 local groups to hold smaller events to promote safe and responsible 
Halloween celebrations. These include showcase events such as the Bram Stoker 
Festival.  
 
 
 

North West Area Reponse 
The North West Area Offices (Finglas and Ballymun) have been part of a citywide 
Halloween response Group since September 2025. This group consists of 
representatives from Waste Management, Parks, Housing, Public Domain and the 
Dublin Fire Brigade. At local level, the North West Area Offices also have a Halloween 
working group in place which includes Public Domain, Community, Housing and An 
Garda Síochána.  To prevent stockpiling, the Public Domain team will be on the ground 
from Sunday 19th – Thursday 31st October to remove bonfire stockpiles. An Garda 
Síochána will assist where necessary to safely confiscate materials or support staff in 
potentially hazardous situations. At the same time, DCC is proactively monitoring 
known stockpiling hotspots and potential bonfire locations. The Area Offices are 
spreading public awareness of Halloween events and channels to report stockpiling 
through leaflet drops to both homes and businesses, as well as regular social media 
updates.  
North West Area private plant hire and on-call staff will supplement DCC teams as 
needed, which will operation at the following times: Sunday 19th  October 6am–4pm, 
Sun 26th & Mon 27th October: 6am–4pm, Thurs 30th October: 6am–4pm, Friday 31st 
October: 6am–2pm. 
In addition to actions above the NWA Public Domain team, in the run up to Halloween, 
are offering residents free recycling vouchers which can be used at the Ballymun 
Recycling Centre (NCOD). This has been advertised on our social media channels, 
offered to all registered Community and Environmental groups and a direct door-knock 
program to a number of households in illegal dumping blackspot areas. The overall 
objective is to reduce the dumping of household items which could potentially be used 
as bonfire material.  
1. Agencies Involved  
Dublin City Council holds regular multi-agency planning meetings in advance of 
Halloween. These meetings include representatives from: 
• 
Dublin City Council departments: Waste Management, Public Domain, Waste 
Enforcement, Community, Parks, Housing and Dublin Fire Brigade (DFB). 
• 
External agencies: An Garda Síochána  
An operational plan is developed collaboratively, with resource schedules shared among 
all stakeholders to ensure coordinated action. 
2. Proactive Removal Strategies for Stockpiled Materials 
In the days leading up to and including Halloween, Dublin City Council deploys both direct 
labour and contracted crews with vehicles to remove bonfire materials. Removal efforts 
are prioritised based on risk, including: 
• 
Materials posing a threat to public safety or wellbeing 
• 
Materials endangering critical public infrastructure 
• 
Materials likely to become focal points for public disorder 
All reports of bonfire materials submitted via the Citizen Hub are routed to the relevant 
departments (e.g., Parks, Waste Management).  
Note: If there is an imminent danger to life or property, please dial 999 or 112. 

Area Public Domain Officers collaborate to monitor and track stockpiling activity in their 
local areas and work with Waste Management and contractors to proactively remove 
material that is being stockpiled, or made available, for bonfires. 
Last year, 654 tonnes of bonfire material were safely removed from the public realm, 
significantly reducing the impact of bonfires. 
3. Patrols and Community Engagement Initiatives 
The city is being actively monitored by: 
• 
Litter Wardens 
• 
Waste Enforcement Officers 
• 
Public Domain Officers 
These officers work with local Community Gardaí to visit industrial estates and businesses, 
advising them not to leave potential bonfire materials unsecured. 
Area Housing Managers will coordinate with Housing Maintenance to remove 
materials from housing complexes and estates. Public Domain Officers will also work 
with: 
• 
Parks staff to remove materials from green spaces and parks 
• 
Waste Management teams to clear materials from roads and footpaths 
Contracted crews have been operating city-wide from Saturday 25th October to Friday 
31st October. 
4. Public Awareness Campaigns 
Dublin City Council Community staff have organised local events to engage residents 
and offer positive alternatives for children and young people during the Halloween 
period. 
Additionally, meetings have taken place between Gardaí and DCC Housing and Public 
Domain staff in each local area to support community engagement and ensure a safe 
and coordinated response. 
There is a wide-range of events being run by the Area Offices across the City for 
Halloween. These events contribute significantly to the development of local 
communities as well as providing accessible options for everyone looking to celebrate 
Halloween.  
Waste 
In the lead up to Halloween, all reported stockpiling of bonfire material is collected by 
the local depots from 6am to 2pm. From the 18th October 2025 up to the 31st October 
2025, Waste Management Services have an on call team, grab truck and crew, one 
northside and one southside from 2pm to 10pm daily. These respond to call outs from 
the various agencies involved and from reports from the general public through 
Customer Services. Any public awareness campaigns in this regard are arranged by 
the Area Offices. 
 
 

Q.62  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive, given the commitments in Dublin City Council’s Climate 
Action Plan 2025–2030 to enhance carbon sequestration through urban greening, 
woodland creation, and biodiversity restoration, if consideration could be given to 
examining how these measures could be aligned with EU Regulation (EU) 2024/3012 
on the certification of carbon removals, and to explore the feasibility of Dublin City 
Council participating in carbon credit schemes to potentially generate revenue from 
public lands and green assets once national frameworks are established? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s focus is on implementing the measures contained in the climate 
action plan, Climate Neutral Dublin 2030 and the Climate City Contract to reduce the 
city’s emissions and ultimately become a climate neutral city.  
 
Regarding the Carbon Removals & Carbon Farming Regulation (2024/3012) the EU 
Commission website sets out the following next steps to implement the regulation: 
 
1. Adoption of EU certification methodologies: The Commission, with support from 
the Expert Group on Carbon Removals, will establish tailored EU certification 
methodologies for different carbon removal activities through delegated acts. 
These acts involve standard procedures, engaging the European Parliament, the 
Council, and broader stakeholders. 
 
2. Adoption of third-party verification rules: The Commission will issue implementing 
acts to set technical rules for third-party verification requirements, specifying 
procedures for certification schemes, certification bodies, and audit processes. 
 
3. Recognition of certification schemes: The Commission will approve certification 
schemes able to apply CRCF rules through Decisions, following a comprehensive 
assessment of governance, rules, and procedures, typically granting recognition 
for five years. 
 
Dublin City Council can consider whether it should participate in the scheme when 
these steps have been completed. 
 
Q.63  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide details on the procedures and measures Dublin 
City Council employs to collect unpaid parking fines from Council carparks and Pay-
and-Display 
areas? 
Furthermore, can the Chief Executive advise on the current total value of unpaid 
parking fines and any strategies being considered to improve collection and 
enforcement? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Fixed Penalty Notices (FPNs) are used as an additional enforcement option and are 
mainly used where clamping or relocation enforcement isn’t the most efficient or 
suitable option, as it will not address the obstruction to pedestrian and transportation 
flows.  
The penalties for such notices break down as follows.  
• €80 fine applies to footpaths, cycle tracks (mandatory and non-mandatory) and bus 
lanes.  
•  €150 fine applies to Parking in a Disabled Bay without a valid disabled permit/badge. 
• €200 fine applies to Misuse of a disabled parking permit/badge. 

• €40 fine applies to all other offences.   
Following the issuance of a Fixed Penalty Notice, a reminder letter is sent to the vehicle 
owner on Day 10. 
At midnight on day 28, if unpaid the fine will increase by 50% and a Notice of Fixed 
Charge Penalty Increase is sent to the vehicle owner.  
If payment is not made within the 56-day period, court proceedings will be initiated and 
a Notice of Intention to Prosecute is sent to the vehicle owner and the fee will increase 
by a further €37 for administration fees. 
The Court Date is on the third Tuesday of every month, except August, unless 
otherwise specified. 
  
Please see the below current breakdown of figures for Fixed Penalty Notices for 2025 
to date.  
 
  
Period  
01/01/2025 
05/10/2025 
Total number of FPN issued for this period and 
potential monetary amount 
16371 
€843,050 
Total number paid and monetary amount 
received into bank account  
13686 
€745,298 
Total of unpaid FPN  
2685 
€97,752 
Total FPN P&D enforcement for period 
1925 
  
Total FPN P&D Unpaid 
308 
  
Number of Court Cases brought against Motorist  350 
  
Number of Court issued fines, range €25 to €500 
plus costs  
104 
  
Parking Enforcement are currently going to tender for the Enforcement contract and 
will be reviewing all strategies and policies that will improve enforcement overall which 
will include the collection of fees owed to Dublin City Council for illegal parking. 
 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the implementation of Part III of 
the Gaming and Lotteries Act 1956 within Dublin City Council. Specifically, can the 
Chief Executive: 
1. Identify which areas or localities within the city this part of the Act has been enacted. 
2. Outline the reasons for its enactment in those areas; and 
3. Explain any reasons against enactment in other localities and the considerations 
that influenced these decisions? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
No areas or localities have been adopted by Dublin City Council under Part 111 
Section 13 of the Gaming and Lotteries Act 1956 as amended. 
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR MARY CALLAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report detailing funding from the Department 
of Housing to DCC for both voids and extensions, in tabular form by funding per unit, 
total units funded and total funding for units provided in 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, and 
2024. Please also let me know if there are projected figures for 2025.   

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Voids 
The Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage provide a certain level of 
funding for voids and this information is shared with DCC at the beginning of each 
calendar year. Please see table below for allocated targets and funding. 
 
Year 
Target units 
Funding per unit 
Total Funding  
Received  
2025 
348 
€11,000 
€3,828,000 
2024 
447 
€11,000 
€4,917,000 
2023 
500 
€11,000 
€11,334,352 
2022 
505 
€11,000 
€5,338,172 
2021 
363 
€11,000 
€4,405,780 
 
This is the extent of funding provided by DHLGH for voids works. However, DCC 
processes in the region of 1,000 voids a year. These voids arise as part of a natural 
churn of people moving out of social homes for a variety of reasons. For some 
properties that become vacant the scale of works needed before the home can be 
tenanted is low and the cost is low.  
 
However, 50% of DCC’s housing stock is over 55 years old and when these older 
properties become vacant, they can require extensive works to bring them in line with 
the Governments ‘Standard for Rental Homes (2019)’. For these properties it is not 
possible to deliver the scale of works needed in these homes at €11,000. As such DCC 
is required to fund a significant proportion of our works of voids from our own budget.  
 
Extensions 
Dublin City Council has not received funding for the extensions completed in 2023 / 
2024. These have been sent to the Dept, and we are waiting for the decision of the 
amount awarded.  
 
Q.66  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to modify the path at the gate to Mayfield Park on Killester 
Avenue (beside Killester Health Centre).  Dishing the path at this location would make 
life so much easier for people with disabilities, wheelchair users, parents of children in 
disability buggies and also anyone using a buggy. I would be grateful if this work could 
be carried out as soon as possible, to improve access for residents with disabilities, 
parents and young children. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7048626) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to install a barrier at the Tennis Courts Car Park in St Annes 
Park on All Saints Road.  These were to be installed in 2019 with the Autumn/Winter 
worlds in 2019. Since the campervan ban the carpark has been attracting a lot of 
boozing and drug taking by people in cars. There’s a lot of rubbish, noise, multi car 
parties, and reckless driving going on throughout the nights. If these barriers could be 
closed at night-time, when the car park is not in use.  The local residents have informed 
me of this antisocial behaviour; the Gardai have been notified. 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Anti-social behaviour is primarily a matter for the Gardaí.  There are no current 
proposals to install barriers or gates at this location. 
 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to review the situation for drivers turning off the Howth Rd 
Raheny (opposite the Circle K garage) into Foxfield. Details Supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A continuous white line is in place for a distance of approximately 20 metres on Foxfield 
Road from the junction with Howth Road and for a distance of approximately 22 metres 
from the junction with Foxfield Park. This is considered to be a suitable length and 
facilitates access and egress to the estate. 
 
These parking restrictions combined with staggered vehicular parking act as traffic 
calming measure by physically narrowing the width of the carriageway. Further 
restrictions on this section of the road would lead to increased traffic speeds, especially 
when entering a 30kph road from a 60kph road, whereas parked vehicles help to slow 
down the traffic.  This is in accordance with the Design Manual for Urban Roads and 
Streets guidelines. 
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chiel Executive to look at different play options for children on the Clontarf 
Promenade.  St Annes Park playground and Farview park playground are some 
distance away. It would be a fantastic idea to have a swing for example, or a small 
climber or slide spread out along the Promenade.  Like the gym points.   Parents while 
out walking or cycling could stop off to let the children play.  It would encourage more 
outside activities for children. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are medium term plans to deliver a playground at this location for precisely the 
rationale outlined in the question above.  However, the proposed 2 major infrastructure 
projects the Arterial Water Main and the Flood Defences will significantly impact on the 
promenade over an extended period.  Once these projects have been delivered the 
Parks Service will procced with the delivery of a playground here at the earliest 
opportunity. 
 
Q.70  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive whether Dublin City Council provides rates reductions or 
exemptions to any organisation operating charity shops within its functional area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Tailte Éireann is the statutory body with responsibility for the valuation of properties. 
Dublin City Council must levy Rates based on the valuation set by Tailte Éireann.  
 
The status of a number of charity shops is currently under review with Tailte Éireann.  
Charities and other relevant Public Bodies may apply for an exemption from paying 
Commercial Rates on their properties as set out in Schedule 4 of the Valuation Act 
2001.  
 
Q.71  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive what supports Dublin City Council provides to roads and 
estates with predominantly older residents who are not in a position to carry out work 
such as leaf collection, footpath sweeping, and grass cutting themselves as volunteers, 

particularly in cases where these jobs not being carried out would result in slip and trip 
hazards for older residents.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services have residential estates swept and cleaned on a 
quarterly basis. We operate a leaf clearing programme throughout the city over the 
autumn and winter months. Priority is given to tree-lined streets, footpaths with heavy 
pedestrian use and areas particularly prone to flooding. 
 
 In addition to the above, we assist resident groups in clearing leaves and litter from 
their areas and remove the collected bags for them.  
 
Estates with older residents unable to carry out some voluntary cleaning, they can and 
do contact us through the citizen hub and email waste.management@dublincity.ie 
requesting extra cleaning or leaves removal between scheduled cleanings. We 
respond to these requests in a timely manner. 
 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive to urgently arrange for the removal of rubbish and refuse 
bins in the corner of a school car park (details supplied) as it has resulted in the 
school experiencing pest control issues. The information page on the HSE website 
relating to pest control states that local authorities are responsible where pest control 
problems relate to issues with waste or litter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services will make contact with the school when it reopens to 
establish the exact nature of this problem. 
 
Q.73  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive what actions Dublin City Council is taking to prevent the 
use of Richmond Road by HGVs exceeding the 3.5-tonne limit in place along the road, 
given the ongoing safety issues their use of the road is causing for residents and other 
road users, and how enforcement is carried out. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Roadworks Control Unit Reply 
 
HGV permit scheme enforced  
 
Authorisation must be sought by electronic registration on the HGV permit scheme, 
www.hgv.ie and any printouts are for the applicant’s information only. An Garda 
Síochána are the enforcing body and have direct access to the HGV permit scheme 
database. If an applicant is found in breach of the terms and conditions of the permit 
scheme, they are liable to receive a fixed charge notice of €200. 
 
HGV Checker App 
The public can check in real time if a 5+ axle vehicle has a valid permit to be in the 
city. The APP is used to complement Dublin City Council’s HGV Management Strategy 
which provides for a ban on 5+ axle vehicles during restricted hours seven days a week 
within a designated cordon area in the city. 
 
The public can assist the City Council by downloading the free HGV Permit Checker 
App and if they spot a 5+ axle vehicle they can check in real time if it has a valid permit 
to be in the city. 

The App is available to download for Android devices on the Google Play Store and 
Apple devices on the App Store. Please search for HGV Permit Checker or Dublin City 
Council or Permit Checker. Dublin City Council submits a report to An Garda Síochána 
every 4 months regarding HGV’s that are in breach of the HGV Management Strategy. 
 
Traffic Advisory Group Reply 
Enforcing the current 3.5-tonne restriction falls under the responsibility of An Garda 
Síochána. Any concerns regarding this should be directed to them for appropriate 
action. 
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
           To ask the Chief Executive when the new parking enforcement contract will be awarded 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
           The current Parking Enforcement contract expires on the 31st July 2026. A new contract 
should be in place by this time. 
 
Q.75  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the taking in charge of the Royal 
Canal Park and Rathborne area in Ashtown including: 
 
1. A list the roads and footpaths for which taking in charge requests have been made 
2. A list of roads and footpaths in the area that is already under the charge of Dublin 
City Council 
3. The steps that have to be taken by the Council, the management company and the 
residents between now and the end of the process. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC are in advanced discussions with the Developer in order to progress remediation 
works necessary to bring these areas to taking in charge standard. 
 
Q.76  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive what the purpose of these stone blocks Details Supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The stone blocks were originally put in place in place, along with a series of four retail 
kiosks, to prevent vehicles entering the eastern side of the bridge, which is not capable 
of taking the weight of a vehicle. The kiosks were later removed. 
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for: 
1. A list of sites entered into the Derelict Sites Register since 1 August 2025 including 
the date of entry and the value of each site  
2. A list of sites removed from the Derelict Sites Register since 1 August 2025 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The following sites have been entered on the Derelict Sites Register since the 1st 
August 2025, and are awaiting valuations.  
Address 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date of Entry 
Kincora Road, 17, Clontarf, Dublin 3.   
 
 
 
11/08/2025 
Coolgariff Road, 32, Beaumont, Dublin 9. 
 
 
 
16/09/2025 
Blackhorse Avenue, 487, Ashtown, Dublin 7. 
 
 
02/09/2025 

Cloonlara Drive, 14, Finglas, Dublin 11 
 
 
 
05/08/2025 
Dorset Street Upper, 119, Dublin 1  
 
 
 
02/09/2025 
Dorset Street Upper, 118, Dublin 1  
 
 
 
02/09/2025 
Ranelagh, 89, Dublin 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
07/08/2025 
Bath Street, 7-9, Irishtown, Dublin 4.  
 
 
 
17/09/2025 
Drumcondra Road Lower, 48B-50A, Dublin 9. 
 
 
30/09/2025 
Raheny Road, 91, Raheny, Dublin 5, D05 F9W2 
 
 
13/10/2025 
Dorset Street Upper, 120, Dublin 1  
 
 
 
02/09/2025 
Templemore Avenue, site to rear of 63 Highfield Road, D6.  
20/10/2025 
The following sites have been removed from the register since the 1st August 2025. 
Address 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date removed 
Dunville Terrace, 5, Canal Road, Ranelagh, Dublin 6. 
 
08/09/2025 
Dunville Terrace, 3, Canal Road, Ranelagh, Dublin 6. 
 
08/09/2025 
 
Dunville Terrace, 4, Canal Road, Ranelagh, Dublin 6. 
 
08/09/2025 
 
Dunville Terrace, 6, Canal Road, Ranelagh, Dublin 6. 
 
08/09/2025 
 
Dunville Terrace, 2, Canal Road, Ranelagh, Dublin 6. 
 
08/09/2025 
Le Vere Terrace, site adj. No.1, Rathmines, Dublin 6W 
 
10/09/2025 
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the phased ban of plastic bin bags 
on kerbside in the central area and the roll-out of alternatives by Dublin City Council? 
Specifically: 
 1. What is the current compliance rate (businesses/residences) with the ban in the 
trial zone? 
 2. What solutions are being provided for premises that lack space for wheelie bins (or 
the new containers)?  
3. What are the estimated cost implications for roll-out city-wide, and the timeframe for 
full implementation? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The trial period has not yet officially commenced in the South Inner-City Area and is 
not expected to do so until mid-November at which point the derogation permitting the 
presentation of waste in bags on the public street will be removed for this area so the 
issue of compliance does not arise yet. The trial and use of privately owned 
compactors is not managed by Dublin City Council but rather forms part of several 
alternative waste collection and disposal options being offered by private waste 
collectors to their customers ahead of the upcoming ban on bags being presented on 
street. Effectively customers can opt for a number of collection options which include 
door to door collections or they can bring their own waste to the designated compactor. 
Although the ban is not yet implemented the private waste collectors are already 
implementing these options with their customers. Initial feedback indicates that most 
commercial premises are opting for a door to door collection service from the collector. 
The City Council is fully supportive of this initiative and if it proves successful it is hoped 
to expand the ban to areas in the North Inner city in the new year.  
The City Council exited the waste collection business in January 2012 and since this 
time has not and will not be offering waste collection solutions for those premises who 
cannot accommodate wheelie bins but rather they are being directed to fully engage 
with their collector of choice and choose the collection arrangement that suits them 
and their business or residential property best. 
There are currently no specific estimated cost implications for the City Council as this 
is only a trial and as stated the compactors and waste disposal options and services 

are all privately borne by the relevant collector. The trial will be evaluated on an 
ongoing basis and if issues or problems arise these will have to be addressed before 
any expansion of the trail area can occur. While it is difficult to say with absolute 
certainty when the trial will be expanded it is not expected to move to the North Inner 
City until the 3rd quarter of 2026 when sufficient time has passed to adequately judge 
the relevant successes or failures of the trial. 
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to have the following park repairs completed (details 
supplied)  
1) can the rusting railing in parts around the park be repaired and the full railings 
painted it is badly needed 
 2) can No Cycling be painted on the ground at all entrances as was previously the 
case, speeding scooters are constantly going through the park which makes it very 
dangerous. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services have included in our programme of works ’25 to replace some of the 
bad sections of railings at Details Supplied. Other sections of railing that require 
attention will be added to our programme in the coming years. Taking into account the 
Council’s policy shift to promote more active means of transport in recent years, Parks 
Services are happy to allow responsible cycling in the park. Park services intend to 
review existing signage at the park. 
 
Q.80  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update regarding housing (details supplied) The 
above housing units are derelict, when will they be repaired and ready for occupation? 
Can the overgrown shrubbery be cleaned and the dumped rubbish be removed which 
makes them an eyesore. Can this be added to a quarterly list as nothing is done until 
I raise this. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council will arrange for the removal of rubbish and clear back the 
overgrown shrubbery. 
These properties went out to Part 8 Planning in June. This process takes around 20 
weeks. We have received some recommendations from our colleagues in Drainage 
with regards to SUDS (Sustainable Drainage, or SuDS, is a way of managing rainfall 
so that it mimics the drainage processes found in nature). 
There is subsidence in the properties and therefore both properties will have to be 
demolished and a geotechnical survey carried out prior to a rebuild being carried out. 
Due to these works a feasibility survey will also need to be done to see if there is value 
for money in continuing with this project. 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
          To ask the Chief Executive to establish what options are available to the residents of 
details supplied to address the parking issues. Residents are often blocked in due to 
non-residents parking there, though there is not much space it's promoted online as 
free parking and is close to the Broadstone Luas. While the space is too narrow for a 
paid parking scheme there is a need to restrict parking to residents. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer recommends installing a “No Parking” sign (RUS 019) with 
supplementary plate P 051, indicating “Mon–Sun, 24 hours,” on details supplied to 
prevent illegal parking 
 

Q.82  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to engage with the NTA and An Gardaí Síochána to 
address the road safety issues on the details supplied. Residents report that the 
pedestrian lights at the junctions of details supplied are broken putting pedestrians at 
risk. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The cause of the issue was an ESB outage in the area on the 20th of October which 
cut off power to the three junctions mentioned. If the councillor would like any other 
issues with the signals here investigated, I would be happy to do so if more details can 
be provided.   
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to install more wire leaf collect bins around the city in tree 
dense areas where residents are active in leaf sweeping and provide information to all 
councillors on the scheme. Please also provide information on the leaf disposal/reuse 
process for leaves collected in bags. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Waste Management Department have never installed wire cages for leaf 
collections in any area. This was an initiative implemented and managed by local area 
offices. It would be a matter for the individual local area office to determine if they wish 
to continue with or expand this facility to other suitable areas under their jurisdiction. 
All leaves collected in bags as part of the City Councils Community Clean up services 
are brought to Thorntons Recycling Facility for processing into compost/mulch. 
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the inspection with a view to the removal or 
severe prune of the trees at (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The sorbus tree outside (details supplied) was inspected on the 13.10.2025 and was 
found in good condition with no other recommended works at this time. 
 
Q.85  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive if a review of the trees at (details supplied) could be 
carried out.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks services will arrange for an inspection of these trees, and any necessary work 
will be added to our Tree Care programme for the area.  
 
Q.86  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the repair of the pathway at (details 
supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXCHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The footpath at Details Supplied has been inspected. Repairs at this location are on 
our Works List and will be carried out when a crew is available in this area. 
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will look at the trees outside of (details supplied), 
they are overgrown and they are breaking the footpath beneath them likely to fall and 
cause injury/damage. Only recently one fell in the estate almost crushing someone.  
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services are aware of two trees which came down in the above mentioned 
estate during recent storms. The tree officer had attended site shortly before one of 
the trees came down and had not noted any defects in the tree. The trees in the central 
median are due to be crown reduced later this year. Parks will engage with our 
colleagues in Road Maintenance in relation to broken footpaths. 
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding an ongoing safety and access issue at the 
junction with Terenure Road West and Lavarna Grove. The double yellow lines at this 
entrance are extremely worn, and as a result cars park illegally there on a daily basis. 
At peak times, this results in cars being unable to enter Lavarna Grove when traffic is 
queued to exit. On many occasions, cars have had to reverse back onto Terenure 
Road West, which presents a clear safety hazard. The situation is made worse by the 
fact that the yellow lines are so worn they are barely visible, even in summer when the 
road is clear of leaves. At this time of year, with fallen leaves covering the road surface, 
they are even less visible, meaning cars regularly park across them without realising. 
There are concerns locally for access by emergency vehicles and waste collection 
trucks. If these vehicles are blocked at the junction, the consequences could be severe, 
and residents are understandably very worried about this. Can we get the lines 
repainted and extended by three metres so as to keep the junction clear.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This location will be inspected in the coming days. Any requirement for renewal of road   
markings will take place within 30 working days of the SCAC meeting. 
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
To ask the Chief Executive about an abandoned motor bike in details supplied. It is 
clearly abandoned and gives rise to anti-social behaviour.  
If details supplied is under council control could this situation be looked at or is it a 
Garda issue?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Our Abandoned Vehicles Officer will investigate this case and will have the motor bike 
removed if it is deemed to be abandoned. 
 
 
Q.90  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
To ask the Chief Executive to address the following issues around Terenure road west 
 
1. Every morning both adults and more importantly children struggle to cross the road 
on route to school and even when they are on the footpaths, they are narrow and 
frequently people are having to step onto the road to pass each, are there any 
plans to increase the footpath width?  
2. There is very limited signage to show that you are approaching a school area i.e. 
Presentation school Terenure, can a couple of signs be put up to alert drivers? 
3. The speed limited is 50k/ hr which seems crazy given the proximity to school, is it 
possible to make it 30K at that stretch? Could speed ramps be introduced or do 
buses prohibit their use?  
4. It is a long stretch of road between the lights at Greenlea Rd and the KCR so there 
is no designated or safe place to cross for kids so particularly in the morning they 
end up weaving between the traffic to try and get to school, could a zebra crossing 
or lollipop person be used to assist?  
5. Finally, under the NTA plans are there any changes being introduced for buses or 
bus corridor? 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is currently a school warden outside Presentation school to assist with the safe 
crossing of pupils travelling to school. Children coming from the direction of the KCR 
on the opposite side to the school, can walk up to the school warden and cross safety 
there.  
This area has been looked at previously, however, the warrant was not met for a school 
warden due to the low numbers of unaccompanied children. 
 
The implementation of the bus connects network redesign on Terenure Rd West is 
continuing. Route S2 and 74 have been introduced. The 15a route will be removed 
from service in Q3 2026 and route 81 will be introduced in March 2026.  More 
information 
on 
the 
bus 
connects 
network 
redesign 
can 
be 
found 
at 
www.transportforireland.ie  
Terenure Rd West does not form part of the bus connects continuous bus corridor 
network so no infrastructure works will take place on this road as part of the scheme.  
 
An Active Travel scheme is planned for Terenure Road West along with a School 
Zones project. Whilst it is unlikely that either will involve significant widening of the 
footpaths due to the narrow road, they are likely to include footpath buildouts at certain 
points. The School Zone team will assess the need for a zebra crossing and school 
wardens. 
There are two Bus Network route improvement schemes in planning at present 
(Limekiln - Ringsend Bus Garage code 81 & Liffey Valley – UCD code S4). 
Speed limits are being reviewed across the city in advance of the national changes 
happening next year. 
The TAG Area Engineer will assess Terenure Road West for additional measures 
including extra signage. 
 
Q.91   COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider the installation of a Bike Bunker at the Ranch 
Housing Scheme at Sarsfield Road Ballyfermot Dublin 10. The Old style of housing 
prevents the proper safe storage of bicycles at this location with its close proximity to 
the City Centre is an ideal location to promote sustainable modes of transport. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
BikeBunkers are only installed where expressions of interest have been received from 
residents. Each space within a bunker is individually assigned and subject to a fee. 
Residents who wish to avail of this facility may register their interest directly on the 
website www.bikebunkers.ie 
 
Q.92  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a letter of Comfort to Cherry Orchard Childcare 
Service Ltd Croftwood Crescent Cherry Orchard Dublin 10 to allow the drawdown of 
€750.000 provided for the construction of a new extension which will provide an 
additional 42 Childcare places. The Planning Permission for the extension was 
approved however the Dept funding wants a letter of comfort from DCC to allow the 
drawdown of funding in order to protect state funding. The builder is waiting to 
commence this project and there is an urgency in needing this letter of comfort whilst 
other legal issues proceed with DCC. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A response will be issued to the Councillor directly  
 
 
 

Q.93  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
Can I ask that DCC Litter Warden and Dog Warden call to BCFE Ballyfermot Road to 
discuss at first hand the difficulties the principal of this 1,000-student college is having 
with litter dumping, dog waste etc and hopefully it would help improve the situation for 
all concerned. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Our Litter Enforcement Manager will contact the principal of this college to arrange a 
meeting. 
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive In light of the shocking lack of real public consultation with 
residents of Chapelizod and indeed Bluebell / Inchicore in relation to the recent 
changes brought in by the NTA can DCC please impress upon the NTA / Bus Connects 
team the necessity to listen to the Bus User to ensure all the concerns are heard and 
when changes are not working that appropriate action to address these issues. The 
People of Chapelizod have lost their connectivity to the City Centre and have lost all 
their bus connections with the heart of the City Centre. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Your concern regarding the bus connects network redesign has been forwarded to the 
National Transport Authority network redesign team.   
 
Q.95  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm whether the City Council holds recent figures for 
the average annual maintenance or repair cost per housing unit in newer or mixed-
tenure estates in Dublin, and whether those costs are higher in estates experiencing 
higher levels of antisocial behaviour? If such figures exist, will the Chief Executive 
provide the most recent annual average? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The annual Housing Maintenance revenue budget is €91 million. The cost is spread 
across 8 Area Depots and ancillary service: caretaking, paint squad, fleet management 
and civic maintenance. This revenue money is spent on the day to day maintenance 
of our housing stock. 
 
However, the information as currently gathered for maintenance works does not track 
these works and associated spend against unit type or tenure. As such, Housing 
Maintenance cannot provide average annual maintenance or repair costs per housing 
unit or any correlation with levels of antisocial behaviour between newer estates and 
estates experiencing higher levels of such activity.  If the councillor wishes to provide 
specific units or complex, Housing Maintenance may be able to extract the types of 
maintenance repairs being requested from the OHMS Housing System associated with 
that unit/complex. 
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide the Council’s most recent data on average 
annual maintenance and repair costs per housing unit for: 
A. newly constructed Council or Approved Housing Body (AHB) estates (completed 
within the last 10 years), and 
B. mixed-tenure estates (Council/AHB/private/partnership schemes). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Approved Housing Body Maintenance Costs  

The following examples are costs submitted by Approved Housing Bodies and relate 
to housing developments that have already completed in 2025 or are due for 
completion in 2026 & 2027. 
 
Apartment Scheme 188 units 1107 per unit per annum  
Apartment Scheme 730 units 1205 per unit per annum    
Apartment Scheme 138 units 1391 per unit per annum  
Apartment Scheme  38 units  1279 per unit per annum 
 
The above figures do not include cost covering the following additional expenses.  
• 
Management and administrative costs  
• 
Sinking fund  
• 
Management Company fees where applicable.  
 
The annual Housing Maintenance revenue budget is €91 million. The cost is spread 
across 8 Area Depots and ancillary service: caretaking, paint squad, fleet management 
and civic maintenance. This revenue money is spent on the day-to-day maintenance 
of our housing stock. 
 
However, the information as currently gathered for maintenance works does not track 
these works and associated spend against unit type or tenure. As such, Housing 
Maintenance cannot provide average annual maintenance or repair costs per housing 
unit or any correlation with levels of antisocial behaviour between newer estates and 
estates experiencing higher levels of such activity.  If the councillor wishes to provide 
specific units or complex, Housing Maintenance may be able to extract the types of 
maintenance repairs being requested from the OHMS Housing System associated with 
that unit/complex. 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
           To ask the Chief Executive to please provide data for the past five years on the number 
of council tenancies that were ended, transferred, or otherwise subject to enforcement 
action due to antisocial behaviour or neighbour disputes. 
In addition, please provide any available information on: 
• the average or typical cost per case to the local authority (including legal, staffing, 
and rehousing costs); and 
• the total number of such cases dealt with per year 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The list below is the number of evictions for anti-social behaviour for the past five years. 
They were carried out on foot of court orders and executed by the city sheriff. The 
average cost of the city sheriff and his team per eviction is €5,675. There are additional 
DCC staff and legal costs in obtaining the relevant court orders. 
 
2025 = 3 
2024 = 3 
2023 = 2 
2022 = 1 
2021 = 0 
 
There are cases of threat to life and estate management moves due to anti-social 
behaviour, these do not incur legal costs but DCC staff costs. The following is a five-
year list.  
 
2025 = 15 

2024 = 18 
2023 = 12 
2022 = 13 
2021 = 9 
 
Q.98  COUNCILLOR KARL STANLEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide the following information relating to sites on the 
Derelict Sites Register: Group the sites into quartiles, where each quartile represents 
the proportion of the derelict sites levy outstanding divided by the valuation of the 
property (outstanding_levy / site_valuation). That is, all properties where outstanding 
derelict site levies are <25% of the site valuation are to be grouped together, all 
properties with 25-50% of their valuation owing are grouped together etc. 
For each group, show the following columns 
• 
Group name (<25%, 25-50% etc) 
• 
Count of sites in group 
• 
Total outstanding levy 
• 
Total interest on levies accrued 
• 
Total levy collected to date 
• 
Total valuation 
Place sites awaiting valuation in their own group, so there should be 5 groups in total: 
[0-25, 25-50, 50-75, 75-100, awaiting valuation] 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The information is available on different platforms and will take some time to collate 
into the Councillor’s desired format and unfortunately will need some more time.  A 
report will issue to the Councillor directly. 
 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR KARL STANLEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on DCC’s efforts to create a traffic 
management plan for Marino. In the last council session, each of the six councillors in 
the Clontarf LEA allocated €5,000 of their discretionary fund to provide seed funding 
for this plan. In the 2 years since that happened it doesn’t appear any follow up actions 
have taken place. Is this correct? I am aware there were delays relating to the rollout 
of the C2CC but that has been in place for a year now and I’m wondering whether the 
traffic management plan for the areas affected by this work is still going ahead. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC Traffic Department plan to carry out traffic studies to assess the traffic in the 
Marino area now that the C2CC project is complete. Once these surveys have being 
carried out the results will be assessed, and action will be taken to address any traffic 
issues if necessary. 
 
Q.100  COUNCILLOR KARL STANLEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if there are plans to replace the “temporary” yellow modal 
filters at Haverty Road in Marino (beside St Joseph’s School) with something more in 
keeping with the local environment. If such plans exist, please provide a timeline for 
implementation. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The design for Haverty Road is incorporated into the NTA Clongriffin to City Centre 
Core Bus Corridor Scheme which has being granted planning permission. 
The design includes a filtered permeability scheme at the eastern end of Haverty Road 
at the junction with St. Aidan’s Park Road, rather than at the western end of Haverty 

Road at the junction with Marino Park Ave where we currently have our temporary 
filtered permeability scheme. 
Taking this into consideration DCC will not be constructing a permanent structure at 
the junction of Haverty Road and Marino Park Avenue. 
DCC will continue to maintain these bollards as a temporary measure. 
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can please ask the City Centre Transport Projects 
section, if they can give a timeline for the (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7048683) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group 
 
Q.102  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can please ask the Parks Department if they would 
deweed and cutback the shrubbery.  (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This routine maintenance of the boundary hedging is tackled annually as part of the 
autumn/winter hedge and shrubbery maintenance programme in the area.  The work 
has been underway around the park for the last couple of weeks. 
 
Q.103  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON 
            To ask the Chief Executive to ask the Parks Dept. if they would repaint the cycleways 
at (details supplied)  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The white line down the middle of the perimeter path separating pedestrians from 
cyclists was deliberately removed as it is felt that such an arrangement is not safe 
within a recreational setting and leads to complaints of conflict.  Certain cyclists appear 
to regard these few centimetres of white paint as granting permission to cycle at 
speeds wholly inappropriate for the setting.  Parents with buggies, small children 
and/or dogs should not have to worry about such speeding cyclist within a public park. 
Share with care signage is being installed to advise all to modify their behaviour and 
to take full cognisance of other park users.  
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON 
To ask the Chief Executive to ask the Parks Dept. what the plans for the reinstatement 
or removal of the (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Response to be issued directly to Councillor. 
 
Q.105  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to embankment at location as per (details 
supplied) and say if/when he can arrange to have same cut back (as was partially 
done in 2024) as the embankment is very overgrown and causing a problem for 
local/nearby residents 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The public domain officer has arranged a site visit for next week at this location and 
will advise the councillor of the outcome. 
 
Q.106  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to laneway as per (details supplied) and say 
if/when he can arrange to clear dumped materials from same (as was done some years 
ago by City Council). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Arrangements have been made to have the above mentioned laneway cleaned by the 
middle of November 2025. 
 
Q.107  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to replacement of any removed trees from 
(details supplied) in particular, (as a result of tree removal to facilitate planning 
permissions for driveways etc) if he will commit to their replacement with new native 
trees in the nearby vicinity in order to ensure the maintenance of residential amenity, 
air pollution management  and biodiversity; and in general if he can commit to the use 
of “tree pits” in details attached A and B in order to provide greening to an otherwise 
concrete residential area 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A. This location is dominated by parking spaces to serve the commercial 
establishments and there is no suitable existing planting location. 
B. The roads in these estates are too narrow and full of services to allow for a 
constructed tree pit. 
 
The construction of engineered tree pits on the public road is a long-involved process 
and a very expensive solution to achieve the greening of areas.  The process involves, 
surveys, design, the loss of parking spaces, the rerouting of underground services, 
extensive local consultations, and is currently only considered in areas of low canopy 
cover identified in the Dublin Canopy Cover Survey and where no other options exist 
for planting such as the inner city. 
 
Q.108  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will consider the provision of two replacement trees at 
location as per (details supplied). 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A. Stumps are allowed to remain in situ until the root plate and major scaffolding roots 
have degraded sufficiently to allow for their safe removal without risking damage to 
nearby underground services.  Telecoms and data cables are considered particularly 
vulnerable.  An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules 
allow and if the stump is considered suitable for removal it will be included in the next 
tranche of such works in the area. 
 
B. The digital inventory of street trees was interrogated and while it appears that an 
inspection was carried out on foot of the works request received through Citizen Hub 
the recommendations of the inspector were not recorded.  This may have been due to 
a connectivity issue at the time.  The inspector has been requested to carry out a follow 
up inspection and record the recommendations so that they can be included in the 
prioritised tree care programme for the area and to allow the cases to be closed. 
 
 

Q.109  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive what governance does Dublin City Council have over 
mobile food, coffee and ice-cream vans? Are there limits to where they can park and 
set up for selling? Or is there a limit to the bells and sounds they play to attract 
customers? I have reports from some school communities that vans are parking close 
to schools at pick up time to take advantage of the students leaving. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The unauthorised use of private land is a matter for Planning Enforcement, temporary 
parking on a public road/private space and the playing of bells/sounds is not a matter 
for Planning.   
More specific details would be needed of location by Councillor for Planning 
Enforcement to carry out investigations 
 
Q.110  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive for a list of Pedestrian crossings / zebra crossing planned 
or improvements for the North Central Area for 2026. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We are currently finalising the 2026 Works Programme of Pedestrian and Zebra 
Crossings for the entire Dublin City Council area. Once finalised the list will be issued 
to all Councillors. 
 
Q.111  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive, if DCC is not the owner of the laneway at (details 
supplied), can you please provide who is? At the entrance to the laneway there are 
DCC signs for no illegal dumping, so causing confusing with the businesses and locals 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC do not own the title to this laneway, it is registered under Freehold to Details 
Supplied. 
 
Q.112  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive when we are to expect the opening of applications for 
Phase 2 of the affordable homes at Oscar Traynor woods’ 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We expect to invite applications for the next phase of affordable purchase homes at 
Oscar Traynor Woods in Q1 2026. In principle, we aim to advertise homes for sale 
approximately six months before they complete. This allows the application and 
conveyancing process to align with the completion of the homes.  
 
Interested applicants should review our FAQs at https://affordablehomes.dublincity.ie/ 
and consider their mortgage options. We will advertise and inform Councillors at least 
two weeks ahead of any launch.   
 
Q.113  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline Dublin City Council’s policy and responsibilities 
regarding the maintenance, repair, and management of drains within its administrative 
area as it relates to domestic foul drains (serving toilets, sinks, and other household 
wastewater). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is responsible for the surface water infrastructure in the public 
realm, specifically the main surface water sewers located beneath the road surface. 

Uisce Éireann, meanwhile, is responsible for foul and combined sewers within the 
public realm. 
Dublin City Council does not hold records of private property drainage systems, as 
their maintenance falls outside our remit. Responsibility for private drains lies with the 
property owner, up to the point where the private drain connects to the public sewer - 
typically beneath the public roadway. 
To assist householders in understanding their responsibilities, we have a document 
titled Notice to Householders, which outlines the extent of private drainage 
responsibility. This includes a diagram illustrating the relationship between private 
shared drains and the public sewer network. A copy of this document is enclosed for 
your information. 
 
Housing Maintenance 
Dublin City Council Housing Maintenance is responsible for the repair and 
maintenance of approximately 29,400 dwellings (DCC tenants) across the Council’s 
administrative area. 
Internal drainage repairs (i.e., drains serving only a single property) are generally the 
responsibility of the tenant. 
The Council provides a ‘choke car’ service to clear blockages in drainage lines that are 
common to two or more properties. 
For residential flat complexes, DCC Housing Maintenance coordinates the repair and 
maintenance of shared or common drainage systems within each complex. 
 
Q.114  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report, including a map, detailing all domestic 
foul drains (serving toilets, sinks, and other household wastewater) within the Marino 
and Fairview areas, and to indicate which of these drains are under the responsibility 
of Dublin City Council. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is responsible for the surface water infrastructure in the public 
realm, specifically the main surface water sewers located beneath the road surface. 
Uisce Éireann, meanwhile, is responsible for foul and combined sewers within the 
public realm. 
Dublin City Council does not hold records of private property drainage systems, as 
their maintenance falls outside our remit. Responsibility for private drains lies with the 
property owner, up to the point where the private drain connects to the public sewer—
typically beneath the public roadway. 
To assist householders in understanding their responsibilities, we have a document 
titled Notice to Householders, which outlines the extent of private drainage 
responsibility. This includes a diagram illustrating the relationship between private 
shared drains and the public sewer network. A copy of this document is enclosed for 
your information. 
 
Housing Maintenance Input (DCC Properties) 
Maps for internal Drains are generally issued at the time of construction by the builder, 
for example when you purchase a new house it will come with a construction pack, 
showing plans, homebound guarantee, and drainage layout amongst other things. 
Dublin City Council would not have any drawings pertaining to the private side of our 
properties. In general our Housing Stock around Marino and Fairview were built in the 
1920’s. 
Dublin City Council Housing Maintenance is responsible for the repair and 
maintenance of approximately 29,400 dwellings (DCC tenants) across the Council’s 
administrative area. 

Internal drainage repairs (i.e., drains serving only a single property) are generally the 
responsibility of the tenant. 
The Council provides a ‘choke car’ service to clear blockages in drainage lines that are 
common to two or more properties. 
For residential flat complexes, DCC Housing Maintenance coordinates the repair and 
maintenance of shared or common drainage systems within each complex. 
Uisce Éireann maintain a record of public foul sewer infrastructure and Dublin City 
Council (Surface Water Division) maintain a record of the public surface water sewer 
network. 
Uisce Éireann have some very useful infographics that outline who has responsibility 
for which components of a drainage system, i.e., the delineation between public and 
private drainage  https://www.water.ie/help/pipe-maintenance-responsibility  
 
Q.115  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive in light of the severe flash flooding experienced in October, 
and the increasing frequency of flooding events resulting from clogged drains, arrange 
for all drains in the Clontarf and Killester areas to be thoroughly dredged and cleared 
to ensure proper drainage capacity and to mitigate future flooding risks. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s Environmental Protection Division operates a proactive gully and 
sewer maintenance programme, with increased activity during the autumn and winter 
months. Gullies and surface water gullies in flood-prone areas such as Clontarf and 
Killester are regularly inspected and cleaned to ensure proper drainage capacity and 
reduce the risk of future flooding. We accept that leaves clogging gullies is a frequent 
challenge in the Autumn and we are focused on ensuring that localised ponding is 
minimalised with continually operational focus in that regard.  
In response to severe weather forecasts, the Council activates its Flood Emergency 
Plan, which includes targeted gully cleaning and on-site monitoring of high-risk 
locations. These operations are prioritised based on historical flooding data and 
infrastructure vulnerability. 
We have a regular surface water sewer cleaning programme of work within our 
operational section, which included surface water sewers in the Clontarf area. (Note; 
Uisce Eireann is responsible for this similar work on the foul and combined sewers, 
the prominent sewer infrastructure in the area). Our proactive maintenance schedules 
are continually reviewed and adjusted to ensure that surface water drainage 
infrastructure in these areas is functioning effectively. 
If you have a request for a specific street, please email cqsurfacewater@dublincity.ie 
and we will respond accordingly. 
 
Q.116  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive for a detailed report outlining the council work planned for 
(the Harmonstown area) over the next 9 months. The report should be broken down 
by each department in DCC and each extensive report should include all works 
planned for the area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The public domain will be continuing duties as usual for the Harmonstown area. These 
include liaising with environmental groups, resident associations, community cleanup, 
and city neighbourhoods. We will continue to remove graffiti, remove bonfire material, 
illegal dumping, power washing, and engage with composting initiatives with local 
residents, schools and environmental groups. We will be involved with providing 
equipment and bags for community cleanup and for the leaf fall.  
 
 

Q.117  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive, to assist with an ongoing issue in relation to disabled toilets 
across the city. People with disabilities are constantly finding that these designated 
toilets are used as storage for mops, buckets and other cleaning equipment. As well 
as making the space difficult for people to use, it also conveys a level of disrespect for 
the needs of people with disabilities. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s Waste Management section has no responsibility or authority to 
ensure that disabled toilets in public or private buildings are properly maintained or 
kept free of stored items unless the relevant toilet is in one of our own City Council 
buildings. If there is an issue with access to a disabled toilet in a City Council building 
then this would normally to directed to the facilities management section or indeed the 
manager of that department or section to address. 
It is the responsibility of the individual building owners or managers to ensure that their 
building users, be they customers, residents or workers have access to these facilities 
and any complaints regarding their lack of accessibility must in the first instance be 
addressed to the relevant individual building management company or owner. 
 
Q.118  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive, if the double yellow lines in Lavarna Grove in Terenure at 
the junction with Terenure Road West could be repainted. The double yellow lines at 
this entrance are extremely worn and barely visible. (See photo below). At this time 
of year, with fallen leaves covering the road surface, they are even less visible, 
meaning cars regularly park across them without being aware of the restrictions. At 
peak times, this results in cars being unable to enter Lavarna Grove when traffic is 
queued to exit. On many occasions, cars have had to reverse back onto Terenure 
Road West, which presents a safety hazard. This issue also raises concerns for access 
to Lavarna Grove by emergency vehicles and waste collection trucks. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This location will be inspected in the coming days. Any requirement for renewal of road 
markings will take place within 30 working days of the SCAC meeting. 
 
Q.119  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive, if a comparable local service has been or will be 
established following the closure of the walk-in support service at Crosscare’s 
Cathedral Street Office. For many years this office provided direct assistance to people 
experiencing hardship and homelessness. If no comparable service has been 
established, I would ask that Dublin City Council review the availability of local walk-
in-supports and engage with Crosscare and the Archdiocese to ensure that assistance 
for people is restored or replaced upon closure of a service. Homlessness and poverty 
remain pressing issues in Dublin and these community-based supports offer vital 
services for people across the city. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Crosscare service that was available on Cathedral Street moved location. It is now 
based at 2, St Marys Place, Dublin 7, D07 Y768.  
 
They also provide a café on Portland Row, serving food and operating a food bank.  
 
Focus Ireland provides a drop-in food service with case management support Mon-
Sun 10.30am – 6.30pm in Temple Bar.  
 

Merchants Quay Ireland provides a drop-in service with food, showers, GP, harm 
reduction and case management support. Mon-Fri, Sunday (closed Sat) 8am-7pm  
 
Focus Ireland in Mountjoy Square provides appointment-based support for families. 
Mon- Fri 9am-5pm. 
 
Q.120  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive, to address the ongoing issue of pedestrian safety and 
accessibility in Terenure Village. Specifically, the lack of a pedestrian crossing 
between Bank of Ireland and the opposite side of the road where Hidden Hearing and 
Lotts Co are situated. 
 
When crossing the road at this point, pedestrians face a long stretch without a safe 
crossing point. At present, if you wish to cross safely from the Bank of Ireland to the 
opposite side, you must either: 
• 
Wait for three separate pedestrian crossings to change at the main junction. 
• 
Walk as far as the War Memorial Hall, cross there, and then walk back to the 
village. 
 
This is both inconvenient and potentially unsafe, particularly for schoolchildren, older 
residents, and those with limited mobility.I believe consideration should be given to 
installing an additional pedestrian crossing either: 
• 
At the junction between the Bank of Ireland and Hidden Hearing/ Lotts & Co 
where there are already dropped kerbs and lines drawn for a crossing, but no 
lights installed. 
• 
Near the existing school warden crossing zone between Lidl and Two Fifty 
Square. 
 
These measures would greatly improve pedestrian safety within Terenure Village. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The traffic junction at Rathfarnham Road and Terenure Road East forms part of the 
BusConnects Dublin, Rathfarnham to City Centre Core Bus Corridor “Preferred Route 
No. 12”. The proposed scheme includes extensive civil works to improve pedestrian 
safety and overall junction operation. The project has been granted planning 
permission but is currently subject to judicial review. 
 
Further information, is available at:https://templeoguerathfarnhamscheme.ie 
 
 

 
Volume 1 - General Arrangement Drawings of the Rathfarnham to City 
Centre Core Bus Corridor Scheme – April 2023 - Volume 1 - Page 10 - Sheet No.6 of 
42. 
Source: 
https://busconnects.ie/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/12-rathfarnham-to-city-
centre-brochure.pdf  
 
 
Q.121  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive to ask the Minister for Transport to engage with the National 
Transport Authority (NTA) with a view to resolving the ongoing issues of delays and 
service reliability affecting the new F Spine bus route in Dublin North, particularly in 
Ballymun and Finglas, noting that residents of these areas have contacted me 
regarding these unresolved problems of major concerns which are to the detriment of 
children adults and the elderly and their important day to day activities which depend 
upon commuting. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In order to identify issues and have them resolved, the NTA have asked that issues 
with the latest phase of the bus connects network redesign are logged via the online 
form at the following website https://www.transportforireland.ie/support  
Q.122  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive if he is aware of any queries around the allegedly incorrectly 
erected road signs in the Santry Lane area. This question arises as a result of a query 
received and specific details of this unusual matter can be provided by email to the 
Chief Executive.    
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This matter of incorrectly erected road signs in the Santry Lane area” was a missing 
Pole and “No Right Turn” sign on Santry Avenue at Shanliss Way. This was reported 
to Traffic last Friday by the Gardai. We have since replaced the missing pole along 
with the signage, we also changed the “No Right Turn” sign on the Shanliss side.  
Photo attached . 
 
Q.123  COUNCILLOR MALACHY STEENSON 
To ask the Chief Executive can he confirm how many properties have applied for 
Planning Permission or Exemption from Planning for the conversion of units to care 
homes for children either by TUSLA, any other State Agency or private contractors.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Due to the complexity of this request, additional time is required to respond.  A 
response will issue directly to the Councillor within two weeks. 
 
Q.124  COUNCILLOR MALACHY STEENSON 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can confirm (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC allocates according to the Scheme of Lettings, as adopted by Council. Additional 
funding has been made available to purchase properties targeted at the rehousing of 
families who are long-term in emergency accommodation. The size of a household will 
be keeping with the bedroom size recommendations of the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act and regulations. The nationality of a family is not relevant to the making 

of an allocation, as all households in receipt of social housing must be qualified under 
the core eligibility criteria in the act.  
 
Q.125  COUNCILLOR MALACHY STEENSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update in relation to the development of social 
housing at the Readymix site on East Wall Road. 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Ready-mix site was part of the National Social Housing PPP Bundle 3 programme. 
The Bundle 3 project is subject to judicial review proceedings. Accordingly, no further 
information can be disclosed until such time as those proceedings have been 
concluded. Once this process has concluded the housing team will provide Cllrs with 
an update and next steps. 
 
Q.126  COUNCILLOR MALACHY STEENSON 
Can the Chief Executive provide an update in relation to the development of a Tea 
Room in Merrion Square to include the current estimated cost, the initial estimated 
cost, the amount spent on advisors etc. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Merrion Square Park is one of Dublin’s original Georgian garden squares. The 
tearooms and public toilets currently under construction have been carefully planned 
and designed in accordance with the 2014 Conservation Plan for the park. The 
construction contract, valued at approximately €3.7 million (excluding VAT), also 
includes upgrades to the park’s pavements and the installation of new public lighting. 
The pre-tender cost estimate was €2.3M in 2016. Construction works are scheduled 
for completion in late Q2 2026. 
 
Q.127  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the replacement trees at (Details 
supplied) 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services tree orders have been completed for upcoming tree planting 
programme (Nov-Mar). These verges will be inspected to determine suitability for 
replacement trees in advance of the 2026 tree orders. 
 

3 Piller Strategy to deliver a cleaner 
Dublin City – Year 1 Progress Update
November 2025 Council Meeting 
Derek Kelly, Executive Manager, Environment and Transportation
Barry Woods, Head of Waste Management (SE)

Recap on 3 Pillar Strategy

Challenges facing the service

Pillar 1:  Operational Enhancements
Phased recruitment of 100 staff across all 
operational depots. 
Procurement of new fleet, with an investment of c. 
€8.5M over 4 years
Expansion of the city center commercial area that 
receives a 24hour cleaning service
Increasing street washing capability with dedicated 
wash vehicle per area and city-wide rapid 
response team to manage wash programme and 
responding to urgent cleaning operations.
Implementation of IS systems offering 
transparency & accountability

WM Functional Areas and Cleaning Regime
.
• c. 500 Op Staff
• 275 Vehicles
• 6 Operational Depots
• 8 Bring Centres
• 3 Civic Amenity Sites
• Circa 33,000 service request per year (online 24/7)
• Circa 18.000 tonnes of litter collected per year
• 3500 public litter bins

New Fleet in Service
 
New Grab Lorry
New Multihog Compact Sweeper
New Multihog Wash Vehicle
New Hand Vac
New Side Loader
New Hook Lorry
New Washing Van

Photos showing dedicated street washing 
service 

Expansion of City Centre 24-hour cleaning area

Pillar 2: Enforcement and Regulation Change
Removal of derogation allowing waste to be 
presented in plastic bags on kerbside for 
collection
Doubled litter enforcement staff in city centre 
and new litter enforcement staff recruited for 
night time economy
Robust enforcement of:- “Litter Pollution Act”; 
“Bye-Law for Control and Prevention of Litter”, Bye- 
Law for Storage, Presentation and Segregation of 
Waste”
Implementing Ministerial Guidance note and 
procedures associated with the “reverse 
register” data
Roll-out of CCTV scheme

Challenges with plastic bags presented for waste 
collection

Map of Phase 1 Pilot Area for removal of derogation

Solution – Removal of Derogation
Compactors placed on Fownes Street and St Stephens Green
2 compactors each location, Residual Waste & Dry Mixed Recyclable Waste
This scheme will remove 1000+ bags from the city streets each night
Result – significant improvement in cleanliness and appearance of city streetscape

Litter Enforcement
• No. of Litter wardens in 
service is 15 (increase of 5)
• New night time litter 
enforcement service
• Fines averaging > 70/week
• New Bye-Law obligations 
Booklet advising business of 
obligations (sanctions for 
non-compliance)
• New Anti-Litter Charter and 
Shield

Litter/Illegal Dumping Prevention Measures
CCTV
• Phase 1 in place, 3 streets NEIC 
• Phase 2 Bring Banks
• Phase 3 Litter black spots identified in 
conjunction with area office
Reverse Register Scheme
• Central Local Electoral Area 

Pillar 3 Advertising Campaign
Roll out of a city wide Litter Prevention and 
Awareness Campaign 
Goals 
•
Increase awareness of littering and 
encourage litter prevention.
•
Encourage behavioural change
•
Encourage civic pride to support our  clean 
city ambitions

Litter Prevention and Awareness Campaign
First Phase
Theme: To inform the public 
“DCC are making an effort, and 
we want the public to make an 
effort too!!”. Social media ads 
and radio ads developed to 
promote the message
Second Phase
“No More Rubbish Excuses – 3,500 bins 
in the city”.
Social media and radio ads rolled out to 
complement this message.

• Enhanced cleaning regime across city 
• Workforce resilience, and ability to cope with seasonal 
effects on service
• Reduction in litter and illegal dumping on city streets
• Positive reporting of Dublin offering enhanced reputation 
and supporting economic growth
• Measurement of success - metrics??
     (Clean European Network)
Strategy Outputs/Outcomes

•
Continue with removal of bag derogation areas. Aim is to fully 
remove the derogations by end of 2026/Q1/Q2-2027.
•
Further procurement of new fleet – Large Road Sweepers, Cycle 
Lane Sweepers
•
Re-open Slaney Road Depot to focus on Phibsborough, 
Stoneybatter, Smithfield, Cabra as NW2, allowing NW1 service area 
to focus on Ballymun and Finglas, operating from NCOD.
•
Roll out of Solar Compactor Bins project to enhance service 
effectiveness and efficiency
Next Steps

Vision/Goals
Ambition – To emulate the cleanest cities in Europe
