Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 13 May 2024 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
 
  
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 13 Bealtaine 2024 i Seomra na Comhairle, 
Halla na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an 
tArdmheara Daithí de Róiste sa chathaoir 
 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Daryl Barron 
Eimer McCormack 
Carolyn Moore 
Máire Devine 
Patricia Roe 
Declan Meenagh 
Daniel Céitinn 
Danny Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Caroline Conroy 
Deirdre Conroy 
Donna Cooney 
Dearbháil Butler 
Kelsey May Daly 
Tara Deacy 
Michael Watters 
Catherine Stocker 
Kevin Donoghue 
Michael Pidgeon 
Colm O'Rourke 
Cat O'Driscoll 
James Geoghegan 
Sophie Nicoullaud 
Janet Horner 
Darragh Moriarty 
Racheal Batten 
Darcy Lonergan 
Briege MacOscar 
Tom Brabazon 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Anne Feeney 
Claire O'Connor 
Daithí de Róiste 
Séamas McGrattan 
Janice Boylan 
Mannix Flynn 
Paddy McCartan 
Declan Flanagan 
Alison Gilliland 
Deirdre Heney 
Jane Horgan Jones 
Vincent Jackson 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Anthony Connaghan 
Ray McAdam 
Naoise Ó Muirí 
Damian O'Farrell 
Larry O'Toole 
Cieran Perry 
Nial Ring 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Pat Dunne 
Daithí Doolan 
Noeleen Reilly 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Ruth Dowling 
Anthony Flynn 
Richard Shakespeare 
Prajwal K. Annibabu 
Natalie Leonard 
Kathy Quinn 
John Flanagan 
Brendan O'Brien 
Michelle Robinson 
Tatiana Kearney 
Frank d'Arcy 
Samantha Gill 
Victor Leonov 
Aisling Browne 
 
 
 
 
  

 
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
A minute silence was held to remember Councillor Larry O’Toole’s son Darren, who 
recently passed away.  Councillor O’Toole thanked the Lord Mayor and members for 
their support during this very difficult time.    
 
The Lord Mayor spoke about the victims and families of the Stardust and mentioned 
the 50th anniversary of the Dublin Monaghan bombing.   
 
He informed the Members that it was agreed at Group Leaders that the following 
motion in the name of Councillor Máire Devine would be taken without debate.  It 
was proposed by Cllr Máire Devine and seconded by the Lord Mayor “That This 
Council acknowledges that the provision of sport and pitch facilities is essential for 
healthy thriving cohesive communities. The lack of adequate facilities is most keenly 
felt in the Liberties, Dublin 8 area where disadvantage and inequality has 
disproportionately impacted upon the lives of children. It therefore notes and 
welcomes the Chief Executive’s recent commitment to accommodate a full size, 
multi-purpose playing pitch on the Marrowbone Lane site. 
  
This Council expresses its unanimous support for the provision of the playing pitch 
and now directs the Council Executive to expedite its delivery - and calls upon the 
incoming Council to ensure this matter is prioritised and progressed as a matter of 
urgency.” 
   
The motion was put and carried.  
 
Councillor Mary Freehill was invited to say a few words following her retirement from 
the City Council after over 40 years of service to the City. The Lord Mayor thanked 
Mary for all her service, hard work and commitment and wished her well in her 
retirement.  Members were reminded of the evening to be held in the Mansion House 
on Friday 17th May in recognition of the service of the Councillors not seeking  
re-election.  The Lord Mayor wished all those well in the upcoming elections. 
 
The following presentations were given under Lord Mayor’s business.  A copy of these 
presentations can be found in Appendix A attached to these minutes. 
 
The Charter of Inclusion and A Dublin Samaritans presentation. 
 
 
 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the 
questions lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the 
questions lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and 
Answers are set out in Appendix B to these minutes. 
 
 
 
3 
  Correspondence was received from the following: 
 
• 
AILG Letter to Minister Kieran O’Donnell 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Máire Devine and seconded by Councillor Séamas 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence listed. 
The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
 

 
4 
  To confirm the minutes of the City Council Meeting held on 8th April 2024 and the 
Special Council Meeting held on the 29th April 2024. 
 
The minutes of the City Council meeting held on 8th April 2024 and the Special Council 
Meeting held on the 29th April 2024 having been printed, certified by the Meetings 
Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken as read, were signed by the Lord 
Mayor. 
 
It was noted that there was an error in relation to the minutes of the 8th April 2024 
regarding Item 13, Report No. 92/2024.  The minutes as amended were agreed.  A 
copy of the amended minutes can be found attached to these minutes in Appendix C. 
 
 
 
5 
  Report No. 127/2024 of the Head of Finance (K. Quinn) - Crowdfund Dublin City 
Pledges (Grants). 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas McGrattan and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No.127/2024 and hereby approves the Crowdfund Dublin City Pledges as set out 
therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
6 
  Report No. 105/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Proposed 
redevelopment of St. Anne’s Court Raheny, Dublin 5, in compliance with the 
provisions of Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) 
and Part 8 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended). 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Alison Gilliland and seconded by Councillor Donna 
Cooney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 105/2024 and 
hereby approves the contents therein. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
7 
  Report No. 110/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Proposed works at the  
Mansion House, Dawson Street, Dublin 2, in compliance with the provisions of Section 
179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the 
Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended). 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Tara Deacy 
that the Part 8 Application be withdrawn.  The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
8 
  Report No. 106/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Robinson) - With reference to 
the disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and Tenant (Ground Rents) 
(No. 2) Act, 1978. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Damian O’Farrell and seconded by Councillor Dermot 
Lacey that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 106/2024 and hereby 
assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
9 
  Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 117/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the proposed grant of a Licence of a Room in Ballyfermot Civic Centre, Dublin 
10.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Lord Mayor Daithí De Róiste and seconded by 
Councillor Vincent Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of 
Report No. 117/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 

 
(b)   Report No. 119/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - Grant of a lease 
of Tolka Park Stadium, Richmond Road, Dublin 9.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Damian O’Farrell and seconded by Councillor 
Nial Ring that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 119/2024 
and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 120/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - Grant of a 5 year 
licence at Silloge Park Golf Course, Ballymun Road, Dublin 11 to the Trustees 
of Silloge Park Golf Club.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Keith Connolly and seconded by Councillor 
Declan Meenagh that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
120/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
(d)   Report No. 121/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - The grant of a 
999 year lease of 3 commercial units at Dominick Hall, Dublin 1 to the Health 
Service Executive.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Janice Boylan and seconded by Councillor 
Vincent Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
121/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
10   Report No. 118/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - Disposal of a plot of land 
to the rear of 26 Carleton Road, Marino, Dublin 3. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Naoise Ó Muirí and seconded by Councillor Anthony 
Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 118/2024 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
11   Report No. 115/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive (F. d'Arcy) - Social Housing 
Supply and Delivery Monthly Update Report 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mícheál MacDonncha and seconded by Councillor 
Alison Gilliland that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 115/2024. 
The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
12   Report No. 131/2024 of the Dublin City Joint Policing Committee - Annual Report of 
the Joint Policing Committees 2023. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Tara Deacy and seconded by Councillor Dermot Lacey 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 131/2024. The motion was 
put and carried.  
 
Cllr Deacy informed the Members of the Strong Cities initiative presentation which will 
be made at the committee’s final meeting on 27th May.  
 
 
 
13   Report No. 114/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Annual Financial 
Statement 2023 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Janice Boylan and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes Report No 114/2024 and adopts the Annual 
Financial Statement 2023 as outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 

 
14   Report No. 116/2024 of the Head of Finance (K. Quinn) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas MacGrattan and seconded by the Lord Mayor 
Daithí de Róiste that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 116/2024. 
The motion was put and carried. 
 
The Lord Mayor suspended standing orders at 9.27p.m. to allow the members 
congratulate Kathy Quinn, Assistant Chief Executive on her retirement. The Lord 
Mayor, Chief Executive Richard Shakespeare and members applauded her 
commitment, dedication and service to the City Council and wished her well in her 
retirement.   
 
 
 
15   Report No. 122/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Dermot 
Lacey that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 122/2024. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
16   Report No. 130/2024 of the Corporate Policy Group - Breviate of the meeting held on 
22nd March 2024, Lord Mayor Daithí de Róiste, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 130/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
17   Report No. 107/2024 of the Area Committees - Breviates of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of April 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 107/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
18   Report No. 108/2024 of the Dublin City Joint Policing Committee - Breviate of the 
meeting held on 25th March 2024, Councillor Tara Deacy, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 108/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
19   Report No. 111/2024 of the Joint Policing Area Sub-Committees - Breviates of the 
Area Joint Policing Sub Committee meetings held in April 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 111/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
20   Report No. 128/2024 of the Housing Strategic Policy Committee - Breviate of the 
meeting held on the 17th April 2024, Councillor Alison Gilliland, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 128/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 

 
21   Report No. 109/2024 of the Economic and Development Strategic Policy Committee - 
Breviate of the meeting held on the 23rd April 2024, Councillor Tom Brabazon, 
Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 109/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
22   Report No. 112/2024 of the Planning and Urban Form Strategic Policy Committee - 
Breviate of the meeting held 16th April 2024, Councillor Ray McAdam, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 112/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
23   Report No. 123/2024 of the Climate Action, Environment and Energy Strategic Policy 
Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 29th November 2023, Councillor 
Claire Byrne, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 123/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
24   Report No. 124/2024 of the Climate Action, Environment and Energy Strategic Policy 
Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 10th January 2024, Councillor Claire 
Byrne, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 124/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
25   Report No. 125/2024 of the Climate Action, Environment and Energy Strategic Policy 
Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 31st January 2024, Councillor Claire 
Byrne, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 125/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
26   Report No. 126/2024 of the Protocol Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 
22nd February 2024, Councillor Deirdre Heney, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Deirdre Heney and seconded by Councillor Declan 
Meenagh that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 126/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
27   Report No. 129/2024 of the Protocol Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 
4th April 2024, Councillor Deirdre Heney, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Deirdre Heney and seconded by Councillor Declan 
Meenagh that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 129/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
28   Topical Issues 
 
134 

 
The following topical issues was submitted or debate:  
 
"Taoiseach’s Dublin City Taskforce"  
 
A vote was taken but the topic failed to achieve the required two thirds majority of 
those present to proceed for debate.  A copy of this vote can be found in Appendix D.   
 
 
 
29   Motions on Notice 
 
The following motion was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded 
by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll 
 
“That the City Council agree to establish a pilot initiative in the #NorthInnerCity 
to encourage and engage communities in order to create more playful, healthy 
and inclusive public places. Such an initiative should be piloted within the North 
Inner City given the lack of outdoor space within family homes. It can enable 
inner city communities to get the most out of the resources that they have and 
allow them to enjoy the places where they live, and for children, adults, older 
people, to have somewhere that’s close to home for them where they can rest, 
they can play, communities can come together.” 
 
The motion was put and carried.  
 
The following motion was proposed by Councillor Keith Connolly and 
seconded by Councillor Mary Callaghan 
 
“That Dublin City Council agrees to lease site 31 in Ballymun to Ballymun 
Kickhams. 
a) The fee is abated to a nominal fee until such a time that site 31 is fully 
developed. 
b) The club retain Pairc Ciceam for a period of 30 years to allow for club 
development and expansion. 
 
The motion was not agreed.  The Executive agreed to set out possible 
alternatives for development for the site and bring a report to the next Council. 
 
 
 
30   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
No emergency motions were taken for debate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
 

Dublin Charter of Inclusion

2
Design and Curation

Day 1

Day 2

Values and Behaviours
Actively listen to all voices to 
ensure fair representation
Promote a culture of 
acceptance of different, 
traditions, and perspectives
Proactively advocate for
equal access to opportunities 
and resources
Encourage Individuals to 
advocate for themselves and 
offer to help where required 
or requested

Values and Behaviours Continued
Take personal responsibility 
because we each have a part 
to play in making our city a
better place
Be aware of barriers and limitations 
for others and seeks to reduce them 
to create a supportive and 
compassionate city 
Live and move around the 
city without restriction and 
fear of judgement, 
discrimination, or restrictions 
based your identity
Take personal responsibility to leave 
the world a better place by being 
aware of how your actions impact the 
safety and wellbeing of others 

Dublin Samaritans


Our valuesListeningExploring feelings alleviates distressand helps people

How we listen

Samaritans at a glance

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT 
THE MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY, 
13th OF MAY 2024 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH  
To ask the Chief Executive why Dublin City Council does not have a full-time road 
safety officer. To ask if the manager agrees that this is an important position to be 
filled. To ask if the manager will make a commitment to appoint this person, and if he 
will make a statement on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Currently, the Council does not have a Road Safety Officer.  
The Council employs a full time Road Safety Engineer, Zewar Zyada, who works within 
the Road Safety and Micromobility Team, and the wider National Road Safety Team 
as coordinated by the RSA and LGMA.  
The Road Safety Engineer manages the Road Safety Working Together Group 
including its external stakeholders, AGS, FS, Councillors, TII, NTA, and Dublin Bus. 
The Road Safety Engineer works collaboratively with internal stakeholders; TAG, the 
School Traffic Wardens and the Walking and Cycling Officers.  
The Council at this time does not intend to employ a full time Road Safety Officer.  
 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR JANE HORGAN JONES 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for an urgent inspection/removal of the silver 
birch tree outside (Details supplied). 
Please arrange for inspection and urgent resolution of this issue for the resident who 
has been raising it with DCC directly since 2022. 
Pictures attached. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The tree is listed for inspection which will be carried out as soon as local schedules 
allow and any works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree 
care programme for the area 2024-25.  It is unclear why it is claimed that the footpath 
must be levelled before the wall can be repaired ‘as the wall could not be re-
constructed on a broken surface’.  The wall should not be re-constructed on the public 
footpath but rather on its own independent foundation. Once the foundation has been 
properly constructed roots will not be able to undermine the repaired structure.   
 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR MICHAL PIDGEON 
To ask the Chief Executive how many street cleaning staff are employed by the city 
council, how many more staff are planned to be hired, and if many vacancies exist. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services currently have 450 street cleaning staff including 
supervisors and inspectors. Interviews are currently being held with the view to hiring 
up to 100 more staff in this regard.  
 
Q.4 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive provide an update on (detail supplied) traffic lights not 
working correctly. There is huge frustration in the area. Can the traffic engineer drive 
the actual area so that he can see what the issue is, one or two cars getting through 
before the lights go red again. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
At the junction of (details supplied) approaches receive a majority of available green 
time each cycle of the traffic signals as the (details supplied) is a main public transport 

artery to/from the city and the main city transportation route to Dublin airport, Northern 
Ireland and northern commuter areas. Allocation of extra green time to (details 
supplied) approaches reduces the green time available to the (details supplied) and 
thus increases public transport journey times, delaying hundreds of passengers, 
contrary to Dublin City Council policy to prioritise sustainable modes of transportation. 
 
However, the mater of the operation of the traffic signals at this location was referred 
to the Head of Technical Services ( Traffic ) in DCC and, following assessment, an in 
depth traffic survey is being arranged at this location to determine the current situation 
regards journey times on all approaches, vehicle queue lengths, pedestrian wait times, 
public transport journey times etc. Once this survey has been undertaken the resulting 
data will be assessed to determine if there are any changes that could be made to 
assist overall junction traffic signal operation, reducing journey times whilst ensuring 
the safety of all road users. 
 
As regards the junction of (details supplied), at the end of 2021, upgraded pedestrian 
and cycle infrastructure was provided at the junctions of (details supplied). This active 
travel infrastructure necessitated the removal of some vehicle lanes, installation of 
protected cycle lanes, additional pedestrian crossings and amending traffic signalling 
operation, resulting in a reduction, at times, of available traffic signal green time for 
vehicles at these junctions. 
 
However, the level of service and safety for pedestrians and cyclists has been 
significantly improved which is in line with National and City Council policy to provide 
for active and sustainable modes of transportation. The ITS section will continue to 
monitor public transport, traffic and cyclist/pedestrian movements through these 
junctions and make amendments to traffic signals timings as required where there is 
scope to do so.  
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive can a better solution be provided for the (detail supplied) 
residents driving out of their estate. 
The current situation is very dangerous and is unworkable. There have been crashes 
exiting the estate. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7038888) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.6 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the update on the bring centre for (details 
supplied) 
 
EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The PPP Project Manager submitted a report to the April North Central Area 
Committee to notify Councillors that the Housing Department intended to initiate under 
Part 8 Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) for the site details 
above.  
The PPP Project Manager via the Area Office circulated an update to the members 
following the NCAC meeting 
The Project Team are finalising all the statutory documentation for submission to the 
Planning Department. All Councillors will be notified when the Part 8 application is 
lodged, as part of the statutory consultation period.  

 
Q.7  
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive can the tree at (detail supplied), be tackled please, the 
roots have knocked the wall down at the house, can DCC call into the actual house to 
discuss 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection was previously requested and will be carried out as soon as local 
schedules allow.  Contact will be made at that point. 
 
 
Q.8  
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for information on all the fire safety assessments carried 
out by Dublin Fire Brigade over the past 24 months on buildings in the Dublin area 
used for accommodating international protection applicants. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin Fire Brigade have received circa 50 notifications for buildings to be used for 
residential purposes for persons for International Protection Procurement Service 
(IPPS). 
DFB has been working collaboratively with both the DCEDIY and each operator 
respectively in regard to the fire safety in these buildings and all such applications have 
been processed expeditiously. 
Each applicant and the DCEDIY was informed that it is imperative that an adequate 
fire safety strategy is in place for this proposed use in the operation of this building in 
advance of occupation. 
The operator has responsibilities outlined under the Fire Services Act 1981 & 2003 
and Building Control Legislation and Regulations. 
Each applicant was advised that the operator, pursuant to Section 18(6) (a) of the Fire 
Services Act 1981-2003, was required to carry out a full Fire Safety Assessment of the 
premises for the use for residential purposes for persons for International Protection 
Procurement Service (IPPS). 
The Fire Safety Assessment is required to be carried out by a technical advisor; this 
will typically be an architect, engineer or fire safety consultant, who is suitably qualified 
with sufficient training, knowledge and experience to allow them to undertake the 
Assessment. 
Advice on preparation of  Fire safety assessment can be found at this guidance as  
issued by the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage and NDFEM in 
March 2022;- https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/354c8-code-of-practice-for-fire-safety-
assessment-of-premises-and-buildings/  
A report of the findings is required to include confirmation that all fire related active and 
passive measures are in place and they are operating correctly to be submitted to the 
Fire Authority. 
It should also include and should ensure that there is a fire safety plan in place. 
 
Operators have a duty of care regarding fire safety under Section 18(2) of the Fire 
Services Act, 1981 and 2003. 
 
Section 18(2) 
                “It shall be the duty of every person having control over premises to which 
this section applies to- 
 
Take all reasonable measures to guard against the outbreak of fire on such premises, 
provide reasonable fire safety measures for such premises and prepare and provide 
appropriate fire safety procedures for ensuring the safety of persons on such premises, 

ensure that the fire safety measures and procedures referred to in paragraph (b) are 
applied at all times, and 
ensure, as far as is reasonably practicable, the safety of persons on the premises in 
the event of an outbreak of fire whether such outbreak has occurred or not” 
 
They were further advised that a fire safety certificate application is required in respect 
to works to buildings: including the construction of buildings, or when a material 
alteration, material change of use or extension occurs in a building, in accordance with 
the Building Control Act 1990 & 2006 and associated Building Control Regulations, in 
particular in accordance with the Building Control Regulations 1997 – 2021. 
They were advised to be seek technical advice on compliance with the Building Control 
Regulations 1997 – 2021 and preparation of a fire safety certificate application. 
DFB has been actively engaging with all applications when notified, of the notifications 
received; DFB received a Fire safety assessment and a fire safety certificate 
application as required.  
 
Q.9 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the weeds that are an eyesore at the 4 parking bays 
at (details supplied) be cleaned and also the overgrowth under the name sign 
Cherrymount Grove be cleaned out as it’s also an eyesore. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Public Domain Officer will arrange for the weeds to be sprayed in the coming 
weeks at the 4 parking bays and will liaise with the local environmental group in 
relation to the overgrowth under the name sign.   
 
Q.10  COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that Dublin city council provide the local residents group in 
(details supplied) with flowers and box’s in order to continue brighten up the estate 
as the group has been doing this work for years. To date Dublin city council have not 
assisted in the flower arrangements. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Public Domain team will arrange an inspection of this area and liaise with (details 
supplied) in relation to this request.  
 
Q.11 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive for the wheelchair space outside the hotel on (details 
supplied) to be put back in place as a local resident was in the past parking there. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
After a data assessment, it was noted that there is no Statutory Order for a Disabled 
Parking Bay on (details supplied) has been recorded in the Confirm database and 
there is no evidence that there was a Disabled Parking Bay located here in the past. 
If the Councillor believes a Disabled Parking Bay is required at this location, a new 
service request can be raised on https://citizenhub.dublincity.ie/ with the necessary 
documentation attached. 
 
Q.12  COUNCILLOR CHIRSTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive when road works on (details supplied) be completed. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The remaining sections of East Wall Road will not feature in 2024 Works Programme. 
RMS will carry out any necessary localised repairs. 
 

Q.13  COUNCILLOR RAYMCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a disabled parking bay to be installed outside 
the home of (Details Attached) who is in receipt of the blue badge; and if he will make 
a statement on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
It’s not recommended to install another Disabled Parking Bay on (Details Attached), 
opposite Property No. 5, because there is currently a Disabled parking bay in front of 
Property No. 6.  
The road is 6.1m wide, enough to accommodate one sided parking. Any motorist 
assigned a ‘Blue Badge’ can park in any bay marked as a Disabled Parking Bay and 
can also park in Pay & Display parking bays free-of-charge. As the car is not kept full 
time at the address, the Disabled Parking Bay already in-situ can be used for pick-up 
and drop-off. 
Dublin City Council tries not to recommend a Disabled Parking Bay in front of other 
people’s house, unless there is no other option available. 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR LARRY O’TOOLE 
To ask the Chief Executive to make provision repairs to the surface of the playground 
in Belcamp Park, Clonshaugh, Dublin 17.  The playground surface is damaged which 
creates a trip hazard. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The playground in Belcamp Park is listed for an upgrade this year for which a tender 
will be published in the coming weeks.  In the meantime the site will continue to be 
regularly inspected to ensure the facility remains safe in advance of the improvement 
works. 
 
Q.15  COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WATTERS 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for enhanced traffic calming, including full length 
speed bumps and extra pedestrian crossings, to be installed on Tyrconnell Road, 
Inchicore, Dublin 8 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref:  7039045) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.16 
COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WATTERS 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the roads and footpaths to be resurfaced on 
Railway Avenue, Ring Terrace, Nash Street, O'Donoghue Street, Tyrconnell Park and 
Jamestown Avenue, Inchicore, Dublin 8 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Road Maintenance visited this location and noted the overall condition to be 
reasonable but starting to show its age. This list of roads will be considered for our 
2025 Resurfacing and footpath works program, which is dependent on available 
funding. In the meantime, we will carry out a detailed survey and add any defects to 
our works list for repair. 
 
 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WATTERS 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the installation of more street lighting on 
Railway Avenue, Ring Terrace, Nash Street, O'Donoghue Street, Tyrconnell Park and 
Jamestown Avenue, Inchicore, Dublin 8 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The street lights on Railway Avenue, Ring Terrace and Tyrconnell Park are scheduled 
to be upgraded under the Public Lighting Upgrade project in the next couple of months 
and upgrade works have already commenced on some of these streets. Once 
upgraded to LED these streets will be lighted to a satisfactory level. 
With regard to Nash Street, O’Donoghue Street and Jamestown Avenue the street 
lights on these streets will also be upgraded to LED street lights under the Public 
Lighting Upgrade project. However we cannot provide a timeframe for this upgrade 
work at present except to say that they will be upgraded to LED street lights within the 
next five years. In the meantime the existing lights will continue to be maintained in 
accordance with current maintenance regimes. 
Light level assessments have been carried on Nash Street, O’Donoghue Street and 
Jamestown Avenue. Nash Street currently meets the required standard for such a 
residential street. However O’Donoghue Street and Jamestown Avenue fall slightly 
below what would be desired and we are currently looking at options to address this. 
 
Q.18 
COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WATTERS 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for weed killing along the footpaths and roads 
on Railway Avenue, Ring Terrace, Nash Street, O'Donoghue Street, Tyrconnell Park 
and Jamestown Avenue, Inchicore, Dublin 8 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Ballyfermot Drimnagh LEA was provided with funding to treat approximately 59km 
of road network in its administrative area, which has an estimated road network of 
129km.  
 
The total allocated budget for the Ballyfermot/Drimnagh LEA for weed treatment, plus 
additional monies allocated from the local area office budget, allows for a 2 year 
treatment cycle, to ensure every road/street in the Ballyfermot Drimnagh LEA will get 
at least one treatment every second year. Some prominent streets, in our village 
centres etc. will be treated annually, such as Ballyfermot Road.  
 
Below is a map of the area showing the streets referenced by Cllr. Watters. Highlighted 
in orange are the streets that have been selected to be treated in this area in 2024. 
Selection was based on a review of current road conditions and streets that were 
treated in 2023. Generally roads selected in 2023 were excluded on the basis of 
rotating treatment as stated above. (The blue line indicates the LEA boundary) 
 

 
 
Below is a 2023 treatment map of the same area of Inchicore, highlighting the streets 
that were treated in that year. Please note Oblate Drive is shown as being treated in 
2023 but that will be treated as part of this years programme. 
 
 

 
Treatment in based on 4 spray treatments over the course of the growing season, April 
to October, at intervals of approximately 8 weeks each. The first treatment for selected 
areas in the Ballyfermot Drimnagh LEA started on the 24th April and is currently 
ongoing. Please note treatment is weather dependant. The 2nd treatment is due in 
mid-June, 3rd mid-August and the 4th in early October. Railway Avenue, Ring Terrace, 
Nash Street, O’Donoghue Street & Jamestown Avenue were all treated last year and 
will be treated again in 2025 as per the programme while Tyrconnell Park will be 
treated this year. 
 
Q.19 
COUNCILLOR MICHAEL MCDONNCHA 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the executive‘s position regarding electric vehicle 
(EV) overhead charging arm 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Permanent structures in a front garden, or attached to the façade of a building need 
planning permission.  In addition, a structure such as a ‘charge arm’ generally requires 
the extension of infrastructure over the public footpath or roadway. The provision of 
any infrastructure on a public roadway would normally require a licence from the 
Environment and Transportation Department. DCC is unlikely to issue such a licence 
to permit the use of EV charging solutions that cross the public pavement to anybody 
other than an undertaker authorised to provide an electricity service due to the potential 
creation of safety and liability issues.   
In response to the demand for public EV charging identified in the Dublin Local 
Authority EV Charging Strategy, the Council is facilitating the delivery of high speed 
EV charging hubs in the city. With one fast charging hub already in place in Finglas, 
tender procedures are underway to expand the network to provide viable fast charging 
services for households that don’t have off street space for charging. 
 
Q.20 
COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive what are the implications for Local Authorities re Derelict 
Sites Levy in light of the recent Supreme Court ruling that found the responsibility for 
payment resides with the previous owner and not a purchaser?” 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Council has informed the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
of the outcome of the Supreme Court ruling and has requested it be considered in the 
context of their review of potential changes to the Derelict Sites Act 1990.  
 
Q.21 
COUNCILLOR ALISON GILLILAND 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline how the TII Applying a Gender Lens to TII Public 
Transport Projects policy/checklist is applied to our active travel and transport projects. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Active Travel Programme are reviewing how to best integrate the Transport 
Infrastructure Ireland Guidance in consultation with the National Transport Authority.  
Presently, the designing of Active Travel Routes gives consideration to opportunities 
for alternative routes and/or intermediate access points for greenways or any such 
areas that may not feel safe, particularly during winter months. However, in some 
cases, it can be challenging to gain community support for measures such as 
permeability measures through local neighbourhoods. 
 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive what discussions he has had with the Taoiseach regarding 
the establishment of a Dublin City Taskforce and to report in details on the contents of 

and participants in such discussions and to further ask if there is any intention of 
engaging with the members of the City Council on this matter. To further ask if the 
Chief Executive raised the disbanding of the Dublin City Joint Policing Committee in 
this context. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council were informed of the potential establishment by Government of a 
Dublin City Centre Taskforce and are awaiting proposals regarding same. The nature 
of the taskforce, terms of reference and membership have not been forwarded to 
Dublin City Council as yet. The City Co-ordination Office will brief all of the members 
once the information is available.  
The City Council is in ongoing discussions with the Department of Justice on the 
development of a new national community safety policy as part of the Policing, Security 
and Community Safety Act 2024 and how this applies to the current structures 
operating within the City Council administrative area. 
We are seeking further clarifications on issues including geography, staffing, 
chairpersons, particular considerations which may be applicable to Dublin City. 
We will revert to members once we have additional clarity on the national roll out of 
Community Safety Partnerships versus the particular needs of Dublin City.  
 
Q.23 
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to report on the details, contents and outcomes of the 
meeting with the Minister for Housing and Local Government on the 18th April 2024 
and to further ask what engagement took place with the Chairperson of the Housing 
SPC, Group Leaders or the Corporate Policy Group prior to that meeting taking place. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There was a very positive meeting with the Minister and the 4 Dublin Local Authorities 
on the 18th April 2024. The issues discussed included: 
 
allocation of social housing to homeless households in each local authority; 
 
continued Ministerial support for prevention of homelessness through Tenant 
in Situ and Homeless HAP; 
 
support for households to move quickly when taking up a tenancy through 
social housing or HAP;  
 
refusals of social housing by homeless households; 
 
changes in the demographics of homelessness; 
 
Blocks and solutions to exits for larger families and families who have a very 
short time on the social housing list but of longer duration in emergency 
accommodation.   
The ACE and Director of the DRHE represented Dublin City Council and their input to 
any meeting on homelessness, Ministerial or otherwise, is informed by the feedback 
of Councillors through the Housing SPC and in particular the Special Committee on 
Homelessness.  
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to include (Details Attached) in the former assessment of 
Stoneybatter as an Architectural Conservation Area, per  Volume 1, Chapter 11, 
Section 11.5.2 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022 - 2028; and if he will make a 
statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended), provides the legislative basis 
for the protection of Architectural Conservation Areas (ACAs). Under the Act, an ACA 
is defined as a place, area, group of structures or townscape that is of special 

architectural, historical, archaeological, artistic, cultural, scientific, technical, social 
interest or value, or contributes to the appreciation of protected structures.  
ACAs are designated in recognition of their special interest or unique historic and 
architectural character, and important contribution to the heritage of the city. The 
Council continually strives to protect, enhance and preserve our heritage assets.  
The city has 24 designated ACAs which range from historic villages such as 
Chapelizod, to Georgian streets and squares such as North Great George’s Street, 
Fitzwilliam Square and Mountjoy Square, and attractive Victorian streetscapes such 
as Haddon Road and Victoria Road in the suburbs of Clontarf.  Sixteen ACAs have 
been identified for prioritisation following careful consideration of the aspects required 
to identify areas for protection under an ACA, as set out in Chapter II, Part IV of the 
Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended) and expanded upon in Chapter 3 
of the Architectural Heritage Protection Guidelines for Planning Authorities (2011). 
These 16 ACAs and any others considered necessary at any time, will be progressed 
subject to a prioritisation programme to be agreed as part of the implementation of the 
development plan and the availability of resources. 
Priority ACA projects (in alphabetical order)  
 
 
Aungier Street  
 
Brú Chaoimhín & Environs  
 
Ceannt Fort  
 
Collins Barracks, Arbour Hill & Environs  
 
CIE Estate Inchicore  
 
Grove Park  
 
Harold’s Cross  
 
Henrietta Street  
 
Iveagh Gardens, Crumlin  
 
James’s Street/Thomas Street (west end)  
 
Marino  
 
Moore Street  
 
Parnell Square  
 
Rialto Court & Environs  
 
Stoneybatter  
 
The Tenter’s  
 
The exact boundaries of each of these ACAs will be considered when it is decided to 
progress one for designation.  Consideration of the inclusion (details supplied) within 
the Stoneybatter priority ACA will be undertaken when work commences on that ACA. 
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Since the closure of Magic Moments, two childcare providers have tried and failed to 
open a childcare unit in Chapelizod.  They both came to the conclusion there is no 
viable building available in Chapelizod.  Chapelizod village centre now has a single, 
oversubscribed, full time childcare provider that has no potential to expand. Local 
residents have identified 39a Main Street as a potential building for a new creche. This 
building is owned by Dublin City Council, will the CE give serious consideration to 
allowing this building house a crèche for Chapelizod, as a first step, would you facilitate 
access to 39a Main Street for a local architect to undertake a feasibility survey of the 
building for repurposing it for childcare? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council acquired 39a Main Street, Chapelizod under the Derelict Sites Act 
on 9th February 2024.  In the first instance the property will be structurally assessed as 

it is derelict and currently unsafe to enter.  Future uses for the building will be 
considered including the possibility of use for childcare/crèche facilities. 
 
It should be noted that the property is also included on the Department approved 
programme for the third round of URDF funding support, which is specifically designed 
to address long term vacancy and dereliction and the acceleration of the provision of 
residential accommodation. 
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOLLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to please clarify who is responsible for the upkeep and 
mapping out the sites of fire hydrants in Dublin City Council area, is it DCC or Uisce 
Eireann, are the sites of these fire hydrants known to Dublin City Council and Dublin 
Fire Brigade? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Uisce Éireann have responsibility for the upkeep of fire hydrants in Dublin City Council 
area. Dublin City Council have a comprehensive Fire Hydrant system available in the 
city, which is very accurately mapped, complete with water main size and expected 
flow in litres per minute.  This map is available online to Fire Officers on mobile 
devices.  There are fire hydrants at very regular intervals on almost all Dublin streets, 
mostly adjacent to junctions.  
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOLLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive Would Dublin City Council consider drafting a co-operative 
business strategy for Dublin City as part of Community Wealth Building. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Local Enterprise Office will undertake to meet the LCDC office and EDO office and see 
where a co-operative business strategy for Dublin City as part of Wealth Building would 
best fit. We will explore if it could be included in the upcoming LECP if that is still 
possible as an action.  
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to please clarify (details Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Income details were submitted in May 2023 for the tenant’s son which showed that 
employment income had ceased.  Evidence of his income details from November 2022 
to May 2023 were requested and also Employment Details Summary (EDS) for 2021 
and 2022.  These documents were subsequently submitted and updated in late 
December 2023 at which stage income details summary for 2023 were required in 
order to calculate the correct balance on the account.  
The son’s EDS 2023 showed that income for 2023 had increased and therefore he had 
been under-assessed.  It was this increase in employment income that reduced the 
credit on the account. 
A detailed summary and breakdown and details of the rent charge applied to (details 
supplied) in 2023 has been provided to the tenant. 
 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the Bull Island Discovery Centre project, 
its current status, the projected cost, detailed information on the funding sources for 
the project and the projected timelines for the project. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Once the required information has been collated a detailed response will be issued to 
the Councillor in due course. 
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive to take a more proactive approach to the laneways of 
Dublin by establishing a project similar to “Love the Lanes” as supported by DCC in 
2014” 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Under the auspice of the City Co-ordination Office a Working Group has been 
established to recommence works on concept proposals as set out in the Reimaging 
Dublin One Strategy and the Love the Lanes Initiative.  
The Group is working alongside local stakeholders and affected businesses with a 
view to formulating a Plan for 2024.  
Talbot Lane and Coles Lane are the projects that are being focussed on in the first 
instance.  
As an initial improvement measure, a mural developed by local artists was completed 
on Talbot Lane in April 24.  
The Working Group are now in the process of preparing proposals for Coles Lane.  
A further update on the progress of the Reimaging Dublin One Strategy and Love the 
Lanes Initiative will be submitted to the City Council in due course.  
The South Central Area Office are also proactively working with local stakeholders to 
improve the laneway environment on a number of lanes off Thomas Street. If there are 
any laneways of concern the South Central Area Office can discuss the issues and 
examine how best to overcome them. 
 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive what involvement the City Council had in the recent 
Transport Conference held in the RDS in April, if staff members were involved, if 
Councillors and members of the SPC were invited in any way to participate and what 
supports if any did the Council give to the organisers of the event. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Transport Research Arena (TRA) 2024 Conference was recently held in the RDS 
from Monday April 15th to Thursday April 18th. This biennial event typically takes place 
in a different European capital city and offers an opportunity for researchers, 
policymakers and industry representatives to come together to discuss the state of the 
art in transport research across all modes.  
 
TRA 2024 was composed of a management committee comprised of members from 
the Department of Transport, Transport infrastructure Ireland, various universities, 
European Commission staff and various other European and national agencies. Dublin 
City Council was not a member of the management committee and had no formal role 
in hosting the conference. Nonetheless, as the local authority for the host city, DCC 
staff were invited to be part of the TRA 2024 local organising committee. Brendan 
O’Brien, Head of Technical Services (DCC Traffic) and Liam O’Brien (Senior Executive 
ITS Officer, DCC Traffic) served on this committee for the duration of the conference 
being organised. The City Council supported the conference as follows: 
 
The Lord Mayor  Daithí de Róiste addressed the opening ceremony. 
 
DCC ITS provided 2 x 1 hour technical tours and presentations of our Traffic 
Control Centre to TRA Delegates. 
 
DCC Traffic organised an exhibition stand at the conference displaying work 
and projects carried out by DCC Traffic, Smart Dublin and Active Travel. 
 
ITS Staff wrote and presented a paper at the conference. 

 
A number of DCC E&T staff took part in sessions and various panel 
discussions. 
 
An event involving POLIS (the leading network for European cities and regions 
working to develop innovative technologies and policies for transport) was held 
in City Hall on Wednesday 17th. The Transport SPC members, Road Safety 
Working Together Group, Polis Group and various E&T staff members were 
invited to this event. 
 
Q.32 
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for  a report on the timeframes for the completion of new 
homes in Phase 1 of the Oscar Traynor Road development, and details of when the 
allocation and application processes will  commence for the three strands of new 
homes - social units, Cost Rental and Affordable Purchase. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The first phase of homes in Oscar Traynor Woods will be delivered early in 2025.  
 
Social Housing 
The social housing in Oscar Traynor Road will be allocated by our Housing Allocations 
Section to those applicants on our social housing waiting lists for ‘Area B’.   
 
Cost Rental Housing 
The cost rental homes in Oscar Traynor Road will be managed by Clúid Housing. 
When they become available they will be advertised online by Clúid. If there are more 
applicants than there are homes, successful applicants will be selected through a 
lottery. 
 
Affordable Purchase 
The first phase of affordable purchase homes will be completed early in 2025. They 
will be advertised for sale later this summer. There will be a 3-week period during which 
people can apply. We will publish information regarding the homes, their sizes, prices 
etc in advance.  
 
Any constituent who might be interested in buying an affordable purchase home at 
Oscar Traynor Woods can register for an account on our affordable homes portal at  
https://affordablehomes.dublincity.ie. At this stage they should also: 
 
Review the FAQs on our website 
(https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/housing/affordable-housing-
initiatives/local-authority-affordable-purchase-scheme-laap); 
 
Consider their options in terms of mortgage approval; and  
 
Review their eligibility for the Help to Buy Scheme (first time buyer).  
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for the installation of a yellow box at the junction of 
Dundaniel Road and Castletimon Road in Kilmore West, Dublin 5. Any traffic surveys 
to be conducted must include afternoon periods from 3pm-5pm. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref:  7038889) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
 

Q.34 
COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the status of (details supplied) which has been 
empty for 15 years, is the property on the derelict sites list and what can be done to 
ensure it doesn’t become a nuisance to surrounding properties. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The property, which is the subject of the Question, is not on the Derelict Sites Register. 
The Derelict Sites team will inspect the property to determine if the site is deemed 
derelict under the Derelict Sites Act 1990 and will report the findings directly to the 
Councillor. 
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to review the bollards outside the school on (details 
supplied) as they have increased the problem of parking on the road. Could the 
bollards be moved into the path and allow the parking bay be used for school drop off 
only. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The School Zone at Broombridge Educate Together was installed as part of the Safe 
Routes to School Programme, a national programme funded by the National Transport 
Authority. The programme aims to improve safety at the school gate by providing ‘front 
of school’ treatments to alleviate congestion and improve access for students to walk, 
scoot and cycle to school. 
 
The installation of the bollards was to facilitate the removal of the set down area, which 
is an essential element of the design of this School Zone. The Safe Routes to School 
design guide recommend against the use of set down areas at schools (page 27) as 
set down areas encourage vehicles into the area with the highest intensity of children 
congregating, reduce air quality in areas with the highest intensity of children 
congregating and reduce the attractiveness of a park ‘n’ stride options. The School 
Zone project aims to encourage sustainable travel and discourage driving to school. 
For these reasons the decision was made to remove the set down area at (details 
supplied) and we recommend keeping it in place.  
 
Initial feedback from the school has been positive in terms of the impact of the School 
Zone for improving the safety of the students. The principal has reported an increase 
in the number of students walking to school since the installation of the School Zone. 
However it is also worth noting that it takes time for such schemes to settle in and for 
people to adjust their behaviour accordingly. Our team plans to monitor the School 
Zone over the coming months to assess its impact.  
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider greening initiatives for (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
(Details supplied) is a narrow street and unfortunately its current layout does not 
provide enough space for successful tree planting.  Currently, our resources are 
focused on a wider greening strategy for nearby Fassaugh Avenue, which is a main 
thoroughfare road. Parks services will list this street for consideration during future 
greening plans for the area. 
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to clean the gullies on (details supplied)  
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The gullies have been cleaned as follows: 
 
(Details supplied) especially in the area prone to flooding at the junction of (details 
supplied) 12 of 12 gullies cleaned on 26/04/2024.  
 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR MICHAEL PIDGEON 
To ask the Chief Executive for an updated schedule for the delivery of the Dolphins 
Barn and Newmarket public realm schemes. The projects have been funded and 
planning has been approved, with no progress for 6-7 years in either. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dolphins Barn and Newmarket public realm schemes are on the Road Design priority 
list and they will be progressed when resources are available. 
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR ALISON GILLILAND 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline progress to date with regard to finalising and 
signing our City Contract for the Climate Neutral and Smart Mission City. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Climate City Contract has been submitted for assessment by the EU Climate 
Neutral and Smart Cities Mission. We are awaiting a decision.  
 
Q.40 
COUNCILLOR ALISON GILLILAND 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the re-aligning/sinking of the manhole 
connection at (Details supplied) so that the sewage does not flow up through the 
manhole and into the garden of the DCC house in question, something that happens 
on several occasions annually.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will investigate the reported issue regarding the outfall manhole 
located in the front garden of details supplied above. 
 
Q.41 
COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive that material of clear nature be used in appropriate place 
of hoardings to allow ease of visibility to the site which will help mitigate and manage 
illegal dumping 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Hoarding is generally erected within the boundary of a site to protect members of the 
public from construction activities. The hoarding gives some protection to pedestrians 
and prohibits anyone from wandering onto the site.  It also serves to prevent windblown 
litter or illegal dumping on the site.  
Solid hoardings provide the most effective method of deterring illegal dumping and 
keeping sites clean and presentable for surrounding communities. Windows in solid 
hoarding can allow visibility into the site and this is now being adopted by many new 
developments.   
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the footpath along South Terrace, Inchicore, Dublin 8 
be resurfaced for safety purposes?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Road Maintenance visited this location and noted some locations that need attention 
along the full length of the road. Due to the nature of the layout of the road system 

leading into this estate I am going to see if I can include this footpath in our 2025 minor 
works program to be carried out by a contractor. Please note this is dependent on 
funding been available for this project. 
 
Q.43 
COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive and Planning Department, in regard to enquirers about the 
Blocking off of the slip road and yellow pencil bollards on Zion Road and Orwell Road, 
Rathgar.  
 
    
 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The removal of the left slip road and installation of bollards on Zion Road formed part 
of the measures included in the School Zone for Stratford National School and 
Stratford College, as part of the Safe Routes to School Programme which is funded by 
the National Transport Authority. Stratford Schools applied for the School Zone in order 
to improve safety for their students on their journey to school. The School Zone was 
designed in consultation with the schools and a non-statutory public consultation took 
place on the design from 12-26th October.  
 

The yellow pencil bollards were installed to prevent cars parking on the footpath in 
order to improve the safety for students walking to school and to increase the visibility 
of the school.   
 
The slip road was removed to facilitate safe passage of children from the island to the 
school gate. Bus Connects plans also include the removal of this slip road. The School 
Zone was installed in April and the team is monitoring its impact. The traffic light 
sequence has been updated to give more time to vehicles turning left since the removal 
of the slip road. The team will continue to monitor this and make any adjustments 
needed.  
 
A test with Dublin Bus was carried out in September 2023 to ensure buses could make 
the left turn not using the slip lane. This showed there was no issues and Dublin Bus 
were satisfied with the proposed arrangement.  
As with any traffic change it can take a few weeks to settle. The traffic change will 
continued to be monitored over the coming months.  
 
Q.44 
COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive, roads and Traffic Department, in regard to residential 
enquirers about parking issues on Brighton Gardens in a heritage area.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The roads mentioned in the attached question are public roads and therefore provided 
motorists are parking legally no action can be taken.  The Car Park in Terenure is not 
owned by Dublin City Council.  If the residents of Brighton Gardens wish to submit a 
request to introduce a Residential Permit Parking scheme on their road the following 
link to our website has all the information needed to start the process: Criteria for the 
introduction of a Pay and Display and Permit Parking Scheme | Dublin City Council 
 
Dublin City Council do not provide on-street EV charging. DCC are working with the 
other Dublin Local Authorities to implement a pilot project to install Fast Charging Hubs 
at 14 facilities in the ownership and control of DCC. 
 
The area engineer has assessed the site at BRIGHTON GARDENS (SE) with an eye 
on the vehicular parking issues. It was observed that the road width ranges between 
4.5-7.0 meters throughout. Illegal parking may lead to bottlenecks and blockages in 
certain scenarios.  
Some of the neighbouring roads such as TOWER AVENUE (SE) and HEALTHFIELD 
ROAD (SE) maybe not experience the same parking issues that exist on WHITTON 
ROAD (SE), ALEXANDRA TERRACE (SE), and BRIGHTON GARDENS (SE) due to 
the presence of Pay & Display schemes on these roads. Dublin City Council (DCC) 
DSPS can inforce area that suffer from illegal parking if vehicles park illegally at a 
designated parking bays. 
 
Reports of illegal parking should be directed to DSPS at 01 6022500 or via email at 
info@dsps.ie.  
 
It is advisable for residents of BRIGHTON GARDENS (SE) to consider applying for a 
Pay & Display and Permit parking scheme. With the road width measuring between 
4.5m – 5.5m, this would accommodate both one sided parking arrangements in the 
area. 
 
Dublin City Council (DCC) can proceed with the preparation of a Pay and Display and 
Permit Parking Scheme on the road, followed by a ballot of residents, provided there 
is clear and demonstrable support for the scheme, i.e., 35% of households in favour of 

the request. This support may be indicated through written requests or, ideally, a 
signed petition from residents of the road (details supplied). Requests for a Parking 
Scheme will be referred to the Traffic Advisory Group for examination and report. A 
petition per road or street would be necessary. 
 
If residents wish to formalise parking on this road they can apply for a Pay & 
Display/Permit parking scheme by following the link below. 
https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/parking-dublin-city-centre/start-parking-
scheme/criteria  
 
 
Q.45 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to give a full update regarding Tailors Hall.  This report to 
include- is the premises still operating as a 7 day public house illegally? What is the 
progress regarding enforcement on unlawful planning on this premises? And what 
moves, if any, Dublin City Council have initiated to take this premises back in charge 
which was agreed at a motion of the South Central Area committee recently.   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council initiated enforcement action pursuant to the Planning and 
Development Act 2000 in respect of the unauthorised use of the lower ground floor for 
use as a public bar/public bar food/restaurant use where persons can come in off the 
street and be served food and drink, including alcoholic drinks. 
The operators of the premises were written to requiring the cessation of the 
unauthorised use as outlined above. Recent inspections by the Planning Enforcement 
Section have revealed that the unauthorised use has ceased. The premises will 
continue to be monitored to ensure continued compliance. 
 
In relation to the lease held by An Taisce, there are 43 years remaining on the 99 year 
lease.  While the motion agreed at the South Central Area Committee meeting is noted, 
An Taisce have accrued tenancy rights during this period and the legal impact of 
rescinding the lease is being considered.  
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR MANNYX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report with regards the planning status for 
electric vehicle chargers that overhang the footpath? There is grave concern by many 
residents regarding this charging points that go across the public footpath.  There are 
issues in relation to insurance and indeed security.   There is also concerns in relation 
to air rights and overhang.  Many of these wires are attached to the vehicle for hours 
on end.  Pedestrians who notice these on footpaths are less inclined to walk near them 
or under them particularly those who are visually impaired and/or have disability.  

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Permanent structures in a front garden, or attached to the façade of a building need 
planning permission.  In addition, a structure such as a ‘charge arm’ generally requires 
the extension of infrastructure over the public footpath or roadway. The provision of 
any infrastructure on a public roadway would normally require a licence from the 
Environment and Transportation Department. DCC is unlikely to issue such a licence 
to permit the use of EV charging solutions that cross the public pavement to anybody 
other than an undertaker authorised to provide an electricity service due to the potential 
creation of safety and liability issues.   
In response to the demand for public EV charging identified in the Dublin Local 
Authority EV Charging Strategy, the Council is facilitating the delivery of high speed 
EV charging hubs in the city. With one fast charging hub already in place in Finglas, 
tender procedures are underway to expand the network to provide viable fast charging 
services for households that don’t have off street space for charging. 
.   
Q.47  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that Ringsend Library is placed on the record of 
protected structures immediately after its upgrade and refurbishment. 
This is a unique art deco building that is very much part of the heritage and history of 
Ringsend.  It is vitally important that it is listed as protected structure.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
On foot of a previous request from An Taisce, the Conservation Section have included 
Ringsend Library, Fitzwilliam Street, Dublin 4 on their nominations list of structures to 
assess with a view to adding them to the Record of Protected Structures (RPS).  
In November 2019, the Planning & Property Development SPC agreed a methodology 
to expedite the proposed additions / deletions to the RPS in a systematic manner, 
based on the Architectural Heritage Protection Guidelines 2011 and NIAH/Ministerial 
Recommendations under Section 53(1) of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 
(as amended).  The methodology agreed is to prioritise industrial structures, 20th 
Century buildings, early buildings and under-represented typologies that were given a 
Ministerial Recommendation of Regional or above.  
The NIAH have not yet completed their inventory for Dublin 4, but it is expected that 
Ringsend Library will be surveyed and be identified as being of Regional interest. The 
NIAH recently assigned Architectural, Historical & Social Significance to a similar 
library site at Drumcondra (NIAH Ref: 50080156). Moreover, as Ringsend Library is a 
20th Century structure, it would fall within the above priority categories and the 
Conservation Section would aim to expedite its addition to the RPS once Ministerial 
Recommendations are received.  
 
Q.48  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive request that relevant staff at Dublin City Council work 
closely with the developer of 22/24 Aungier Street a series of vitally important 18th 
century listed buildings in one of Dublins most historically important streets to ensure 
that the redevelopment and vital works of this project proceed.  It is unacceptable that 
delays on these structures, in this city centre location, would continue any further. The 
city is without accommodation for many and is suffering from serious dilapidation.  
Many who wish to develop properties complain and are concerned about the many 
obstacles that are being placed in their way by the local authority.  This may be due to 
staff shortages, and if so, this must be addressed immediately.  
Local councillors are willing to work with local tenants and communities and staff at 
DCC to ensure the success of this vital heritage and restoration project which is as 
important to the city as the Iveagh Markets. 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Numbers 22-24 Aungier Street are Protected Structures (RPS no.s 301,302, & 303) 
included within Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028, Volume 4 Record of 
Protected Structures. In accordance with Section 58 of the Planning and Development 
Act 2000 (as amended) Owners and Occupiers of Protected Structures have a 
statutory obligation to protect them from endangerment as follows: ‘Each owner and 
each occupier shall, to the extent consistent with the rights and obligations arising out 
of their respective interests in a protected structure or a proposed protected structure, 
ensure that the structure, or any element of it which contributes to its special 
architectural, historical, archaeological, artistic, cultural, scientific, social or technical 
interest, is not endangered.’  There are currently open Endangerment (Building-At-
Risk) files on these three buildings and the Conservation Section is engaged with the 
owners in addressing the endangerment issues identified. 
It is noted that Planning permission was Approved as part of App Ref: 4170/18, (ABP-
303453-19) and amended as part of App Ref: 5485/22, for hotel accommodation which 
includes refurbishment works and the conversion of 22/24 Aungier Street to hotel 
suites/bedrooms and associated services from ground to third floor levels. There is 
also a live App: 5019/23, requested further amendments to the overall scheme and 
Further Information has been requested by the Planning Department. 
As a local authority, our commitment is to foster the responsible development of 
protected structures within broader development initiatives. We prioritize preserving 
the historical and architectural significance of these structures while integrating them 
harmoniously into larger development schemes. Our approach involves thorough 
assessment, consultation with heritage experts, and collaboration with developers to 
ensure that the unique character of protected structures is maintained and celebrated. 
By striking a balance between preservation and progress, we aim to enhance the 
cultural richness and vitality of our community while advancing sustainable 
development goals. 
Dublin City Council understands the importance of being available for consultation 
throughout all phases of construction. Our involvement during construction ensures 
that the integrity of protected structures is upheld, and any unforeseen challenges are 
addressed promptly and effectively. By maintaining open lines of communication with 
developers and stakeholders, we can provide guidance, address concerns, and ensure 
that the development process respects the heritage value of these structures. 
 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will respond to the various suggestions contained in 
the email submitted with this Question and in particular if he will arrange for the 
unauthorised Airbnb key containers locked to various DCC structures to be removed 
across the City. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Our Litter Enforcement Manager has litter wardens investigating this type of illegal 
dumping daily, trying to get evidence in order to issue fines. Landlords of holiday-lets 
are treated the same as landlords of standard-lets regarding their responsibilities under 
the Litter Bye-Laws. More regulation by the government of the holiday-lets would 
undoubtedly reduce these incidences of fly tipping. 
 
The issuing of Residential Parking Permits is governed by the Parking Control Bye 
Laws 2024.  There is criteria that must be met in order to be eligible to obtain a 
Residential permit or visitor permits.  Visitor permits are 24 hour parking scratch cards 
and entitle the residents’ guest to park for a period of 24 hours. 
 
 
 

Q.50  COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive if a house at (details supplied) could be investigated as it 
visibly derelict from the front. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Derelict Sites Unit has an active file on this site. An inspection has been carried 
out and the owners have been contacted regarding the condition of the property and 
their plans.  
 
Q.51 
COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive to investigate regarding a wheelchair parking spot at 
(details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The rescindment of the Disabled Parking bay on Clare Road, outside property No. 13 
was recommended by the Area Engineer and it is included on the March TAG agenda. 
Once all the statutory measures are complete, the Traffic Officer will be contacted to 
proceed with the rescindment. 
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive if the laneway at (details supplied) could be cleared. 
Resident thinks it’s a private lane but if so was wondering if it could be cleared once 
off as there is a large build-up of rubbish causing hygiene issues and elderly residents 
can’t clear. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services can confirm that the above mentioned lane is private 
and unfortunately we are not in a position to include private property in our cleaning 
schedules. 
 
Q.53 
COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive to investigate a yellow covering to cover a hole at grass 
verge beside the path to be rectified and removed (details supplied) 
The covering was placed by the Council well over 2 years ago but the hole at the grass 
was never rectified and the covering is still there.) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We are currently investigating the reason this temporary plate was installed so the 
underlying issue can be resolved and the removal of the plate can be arranged. 
   
(Enq. Ref. 11158590) 
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will ensure that the double yellow lines on Shaw’s 
Lane & its extension, off Bath Avenue, Dublin 4, are renewed as people are parking 
there & preventing access. 
 
Q.55 
COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline the mechanism for requesting electric vehicle 
chargers for residents without front gardens 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council do not provide on street EV charging services and do not have an 
application mechanism for residents to request EV chargers. Dublin City Council 
adopted the Dublin Local Authority Electric Vehicle Charging Strategy in 2022. It was 

agreed that DCC’s role was to facilitate the roll out of fast charging hubs over other 
models. Dublin City Council’s agreed policy does not support neighbourhood charging. 
To support the strategy DCC and the other Dublin Local Authorities are in the process 
of procuring an operator to implement a pilot project to develop a limited number of 
public charging hubs across Dublin City and County. The following locations have been 
identified by Dublin City Council as suitable for the pilot scheme. 
1. St. Anne’s Park   North Central Area 
2. Clontarf Bus Garage   North Central Area 
3. Strand Road, Sydney Parade  South East Area 
4. Mary’s lane    Central Area 
5. Donnybrook (The Crescent)  South East Area 
6. Milltown (Strand Terrace)  South East Area 
7. Ballyfermot Leisure Centre  South Central Area 
8. Raheny Library   North Central Area 
9. Cabra Parkside Leisure Centre Central Area 
10. Finglas, Wellmount St.  North West Area 
11. Clonskeagh (Farmer Browns)  South East Area 
12. Bushy Park (Rathdown Avenue) South East Area 
13. Cabra Library    Central Area 
14. Walkinstown Library   South Central Area 
 
These locations will be subject to a final assessment by the successful Charge Point 
Operator, to ensure that site conditions and layouts are suitable. 
In relation to residential / domestic charging, where a property has off street parking, 
the property owner can install an EV charger for use within the curtilage of the property. 
Private (Domestic/Business) EV charging infrastructure is not permitted within the 
Public Domain. 
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive if any consideration has been given to lamppost charging 
for electric vehicles, similar to the trial by Fingal County Council. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The vast majority of Dublin City Council’s public lighting electrical connections are 
unmetered. Consumption is accurately calculated based on pre-established load 
profiles and the known hours of operation.  
EV charge points consume significant amounts of energy. The demand at each charge 
point cannot be accurately anticipated, therefore the consumption profile cannot be 
considered as’ fixed’. For this reason EV charge points are not permitted as unmetered 
electrical connections by ESB Networks (ESNB) and the Commission on Utilities 
Regulation (CRU). 
A number of neighbouring Dublin local authorities have utilised their PL assets to trial 
EVCP installations. It should be noted that all of the above ground and below ground 
infrastructure was replaced in these trials, including the installation of an ESBN meter 
and associated mini pillar/ducting. From discussions with these authorities, we 
understand the average cost per Charging Unit installed was circa €10,000.  
A previous report by DCC into the capacity of the existing public lighting asset network 
to support EV charging concluded that over 80% of the infrastructure is not suitable. 
 
Q.57 
COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to set out, in tabular form, the schedule for substantial 
refurbishment or retrofitting works to take place in each of the social housing 
complexes in the Central area and to specify what works are planned. 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Housing 
Scheme 
Homes  
Status 
Expected 
finish 
date 
Works Planned 
St Finbar’s 
Court, Dublin 7 
46 
Onsite 
Q4 2024 
Construction of new Older 
Person housing scheme 
 
Dorset Street 
Flats, Dublin 1 
 
163 
 
Contractor due to 
start on site May 
2024 
 
Q4 2026 
 
Full demolition of existing 
flats & construction of 163 
homes plus a multi-use 
community space 
(crèche/karate/community), 
a boxing club, a 
commercial unit and a café 
space. 
 
Matt Talbot 
Court, Dublin 1 
 
92 
 
Planning Approval 
achieved. Stage 3 
application with 
DHLGH for 
approval to go to 
tender for Main 
Contractor 
 
Q3 2027 
 
Full demolition of existing 
flats & construction of 92 
homes 
 
Constitution 
Hill, Dublin 7. 
Phase 1 
 
46 
 
Planning Approval 
achieved. Stage 3 
submission with 
DHLGH for 
approval to go to 
tender for Main 
Contractor 
 
Q3 2026 
 
Full deep-retrofit and 
extension of existing 
housing block and 
construction of new 
housing block. Will also 
provide a multi-use crèche 
space 
 
Dominick Street 
West, Dublin 1 
 
75 
approx 
 
Stage 1 DHLGH 
funding and 
project approval 
 
Q3 2028 
 
Full deep-retrofit of existing 
housing blocks 
 
Constitution 
Hill, Dublin 7. 
Phase 2 
 
78 
 
Planning Approval 
achieved 
 
Q4 2028 
 
Full deep-retrofit and 
extension of two housing 
blocks and construction of 
new housing block and 
mews. 
 
In support of DCC’s regeneration programme and planned maintenance works, the 
next social housing complex scheduled for retrofitting works in the Central Area is 
Cannon Burke, with the proposed scope of works as follows: 
 External Insulation 
 300mm Attic Insulation 
 Roof and Wall Ventilation 
 Draught Proofing 
 Insulated Cylinders  
 Windows and Doors 
 Heat Pumps 
 Full Internal Fit Out of all units 

 Ancillary works to external communal areas 
 Upgrade of incoming ESB mains  
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update from the City Council on its engagement, 
through the South Central Area Office, with the National Stadium regarding ongoing 
traffic impact on surrounding residential streets. Can the Chief Executive provide a 
specific update on City Council meetings with the Stadium thus far, how many 
meetings there have been, and what power the City Council has to compel Stadium 
management to meet with DCC to work through and address traffic management and 
parking enforcement issues arising at events? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DSPS, our parking enforcement contractor, have a schedule of events being held at 
the National Stadium and monitor the area and carry out enforcement where 
necessary.  They will continue to ensure that this continues. 
 
I met with the management of the National Stadium. The National Stadium 
management are committed to working with the City Council and our Parking 
Enforcement team to reduce impacts of events on surrounding communities.  
The National Stadium pointed out that they encourage people attending events to 
travel by public transport. They agreed to share information on planned events with 
the City Council and have said that most events are posted on their website.  
The Parking Enforcement Office have now been provided with a list of scheduled 
events and have confirmed that Dublin Street Parking Services will be directed to focus 
on the monitoring and enforcement action during the scheduled events. 
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to update on plans for rollout of Electric Vehicle Charging 
Points across the DCC area. 
The 2022-2030 Dublin Local Authority Electric Vehicle Charging Strategy stated DCC 
would require 65 ‘rapid hub charging points’ in residential settings by 2025, and a total 
of 247 of these charging points by 2030. We are now into Q2 of 2024, can the Chief 
Executive confirm how many of these have been delivered? 
Further, can the Chief Executive comment on the use of DCC Street Lights as EV 
charging points, which I understand was to be rolled out on a trial basis dating back to 
2018.  What happened with this project and will it be rolled out further? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin Local Authority Electric Vehicle Charging Strategy (DLAEVCS) was 
published in June 2022 to anticipate the demand for services across Dublin City and 
County. Dublin City Council agreed that the ‘Rapid Hub’ (rather than ‘Mixed’) 
technology scenario would be the better model to align with the City’s development, 
transport and climate action objectives. 
Based on the ‘Rapid Hub’(*) Medium (Curtailed) Scenario the DLAEVCS anticipates 
the following demand for Public EV charging points in the City by end of 2025; 
 
Residential          65 
 
En-Route             19 
 
Destination         280 
It is expected that the majority of these charge points will be installed and operated by 
private sector investors. 
Dublin City Council have one public EV charging Hub located in Finglas, operated by 
EasyGo. ESB Ecars operate EV charging stations across the city, other private sector 

operators currently provide public EV charging services on private property including 
carparks and commercial centres. 
DCC’s role in public EV charging is as a facilitator rather than an operator in the 
establishment and maintenance of a public EV charging network. However, to 
encourage the private sector participation and investment the 4 Dublin Local 
Authorities agreed to run a pilot project to install up to 200 Electric Vehicle charging 
points at ‘easy win’ publicly owned facilities. 
DCC identified the following locations as suitable for the pilot project; 
 
1. St. Anne’s Park                                              North Central Area 
2. Clontarf Bus Garage                                      North Central Area 
3. Strand Road, Sydney Parade                        South East Area 
4. Mary’s lane                                                     Central Area 
5. Donnybrook (The Crescent)                         South East Area 
6. Milltown (Strand Terrace)                             South East Area 
7. Ballyfermot Leisure Centre                           South Central Area 
8. Raheny Library                                               North Central Area 
9. Cabra Parkside Leisure Centre                     Central Area 
10. Finglas, Wellmount St.                                   North West Area 
11. Clonskeagh (Farmer Browns)                       South East Area 
12. Bushy Park (Rathdown Avenue)                 South East Area 
13. Cabra Library                                                 Central Area 
14. Walkinstown Library                                       South Central Area 
 
Procurement for the pilot project was managed by Fingal County Council. The 
procurement process is currently underway. A number of submissions have been 
received and are being reviewed. 
*Rapid Hub – All public residential charging demands are met by rapid EVCPs. It is 
envisaged that in the short-medium term this would likely be 1 or 2 chargers installed 
together, and in the medium-long term “proper” hubs would be developed (e.g. 6 + 
EVCPs 
 
In relation to the use of street lighting as EV charging points, the vast majority of Dublin 
City Council’s public lighting electrical connections are unmetered. Consumption is 
accurately calculated based on pre-established load profiles and the known hours of 
operation.  
EV charge points consume significant amounts of energy. The demand at each charge 
point cannot be accurately anticipated, therefore the consumption profile cannot be 
considered as’ fixed’. For this reason EV charge points are not permitted as unmetered 
electrical connections by ESB Networks (ESNB) and the Commission on Utilities 
Regulation (CRU). 
A number of neighbouring Dublin local authorities have utilised their PL assets to trial 
EVCP installations. It should be noted that all of the above ground and below ground 
infrastructure was replaced in these trials, including the installation of an ESBN meter 
and associated mini pillar/ducting. From discussions with these authorities, we 
understand the average cost per Charging Unit installed was circa €10,000.  
A previous reported by DCC into the capacity of the existing public lighting asset 
network to support EV charging concluded that over 80% of the infrastructure is not 
suitable. 
 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on DCC’s mobility and traffic 
management plan for the Rialto, SCR and Kilmainham areas surrounding the National 
Children’s Hospital. As construction nears completion, how people – staff, patients and 
visitors – get to and from the hospital is coming into sharp focus with many locals 

concerned that already grid-locked traffic will become even worse. Further, the main 
exit from the National Children Hospital, according to its plans, was to exit left onto Old 
Kilmainham, which is now complicated by the bus gate which has been granted 
permission. Can DCC please provide an overview of its mobility and traffic 
management plans for this area? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Traffic Division Reply: 
 
South City Loop (Kilmainham to Ballsbridge):  
DCC Active Travel Programme Office (AcTPrO) has been granted funding from the 
National Transport Authority for the design of the Kilmainham to Ballsbridge South City 
Loop Active Travel scheme. This project involves the design of a 7.3km high quality 
cycle and pedestrian route which passes through this area, connecting Kilmainham to 
Ballsbridge. This project is scheduled in the 5-year delivery plan. However, the junction 
of South Circular Road/Brookfield Road is to be advanced to improve pedestrian and 
cycle access to the National Children’s Hospital, and a Consultant has now been 
appointed to progress the design stage. 
 
Transportation Planning Division Response: 
 
With regard to the development of the National Paediatric Hospital: An Bord Pleanála 
granted permission (ABP Ref: 29N.PA0043) subject to 17 no. conditions, for the 
development a new National Paediatric Hospital at the St. James’s Hospital campus 
and a temporary construction compound at Davitt Road, Drimnagh. Condition no.s 5-
7 of the planning permission require proactive car parking management, mobility 
management and monitoring of traffic.  
Permission was also granted for ancillary works to include: 
 
Public realm improvements to the existing St James’s campus spine road; the 
linear park at the Rialto Luas stop and the public steps between Mount Brown 
and Cameron Square;  
 
Improvements to the road junction at the existing campus entrance on St 
James’s Street and a new campus entrance piazza from Brookfield Road / 
South Circular Road, with minor improvements to these roads;  
 
A new vehicular entrance from Mount Brown;  
 
A realigned internal campus road;  
The above works were intended to improve access to the site for pedestrians and 
cyclists as well as to improve connectivity to Luas and bus stops to promote public 
transport use.  
The mobility strategy for the site will remove general through traffic from the campus 
except for buses.  
 
Bus Connects 
The Liffey Valley to City Centre scheme was approved by An Board Pleanála in 
December 2023. 
Subject to completion of various processes, the National Transport Authority will now 
be developing a construction sequence taking account of any planning consents 
received, along with documentation to allow procurement to commence for the 
construction stage of the Scheme. 
It is expected that all twelve corridors will be completed by 2030 with the first 
construction contracts to be awarded at the end of 2024 and on-site construction 
commencing early next year. The construction of the corridors will be delivered on a 
phased basis in order to reduce the traffic impacts that could arise should all twelve be 
constructed concurrently. In relation to the Liffey Valley to City Centre Scheme, it is 

likely that it will be implemented in the first half of the overall Core Bus Corridor 
construction programme. During 2024, detailed communication arrangements for the 
construction phase will be developed to ensure that residents, community groups, 
businesses and public representatives are kept fully informed and have access to 
relevant liaison personnel during the delivery of the Scheme. 
There are two bus gates associated with the scheme.  
 
Inbound traffic 
The scheme allows for an inbound bus gate at the Hospital entrance on James’s 
Street. This bus gate only allows for buses, cyclists and taxis to travel inbound towards 
Thomas Street between 6am and 10am Monday to Sunday. 
There are also turn restrictions associated with traffic exiting the Hospital campus as 
shown below:  
 

  
 
 
Outbound traffic  
The scheme allows for an outbound bus gate on the eastern side of the National 
Children’s Hospital entrance on Mont Brown. This bus gate only allows for buses, 
cyclists and taxis to travel outbound on Mount Brown between 4pm and 8pm Monday 
to Sunday.   
 

 
 
Bus Connects Network Redesign 
The completed Bus Connects network redesign will see three bus route operating 
through the Hospital Campus  
 
S2 route already operates every 15 mins and links Heuston Station, Kimmage, and 
Ballsbridge to Poolbeg. 
The G spine is already in operation and has a combined frequency of 8mins. 
Orbital Route – will operate every 8mins and will operate along North and South 
Circular Roads. (Planned launch Q4 2024) 
Route 73 will operate every 15min and will link Marino, to City Centre to Walkinstown. 
 
Q.61 
COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER 
To ask the Chief Executive to have the footpaths repaired as a matter of urgency at 
(details supplied) This is particularly urgent and necessary as there is a local resident 
whose husband is in a nearby nursing home and the family wheel him home as often 
as possible in his wheelchair to spend time at home and the journey is painful for him 
due to the quality of the footpaths. As the man is in his 80s and this is really impacting 
his quality of life can we please address this as a matter of urgency rather than pushing 
to next year’s programme of works 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
I would like to inform you that (details supplied) is already included in this year's 
programme of works, and it is scheduled to commence in early June. We will discuss 
the urgency of this matter with the contractor and see what they can do to plan the 
repair of these footpaths as early as possible.  
 
 

Q.62  COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER 
To ask the Chief Executive to identify the playground nearest Charlemont estate in 
Dublin 9 and if –  under the terms of our own play strategy – which references a 500m 
distance to a local community playground or a 1KM distance to a high quality 
destination facility (Play Strategy 2022-2027, P58) and states the following as a 
goal  “Fully equipped play facilities within 10 minutes walking distance from home and 
in areas with high population of children under 14 years” (Play Strategy 2022 – 2027, 
P112) – he considers this to be sufficient and to make a statement on the measures 
which can be taken to address this deficit and provide a nearby play facility? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This estate appears to be just outside the 1km distance from 3 existing playgrounds in 
the area by relatively small margins; Fairview, Maypark and Ellenfield.  The priority for 
the available Playgrounds Budgets in the short to medium term is to bring existing 
playgrounds up to modern standards of play value, accessibility and inclusivity.  
Fariview was extensively upgraded in 2022, Maypark is listed for a similar upgrade in 
2025 and Ellenfield in 2026. 
 
Q.63 
COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER 
To ask the Chief Executive to have a variable speed sign – which indicates the speed 
of passing cars with a red/green indicator – installed on Collins Ave West between the 
junction of the Swords Rd and the Malahide Rd. The traffic on this stretch is 
considerably heavier than it was even five years ago and often moves very fast. The 
local community would like to see a variable speed sign installed to act as a reminder 
to drivers to slow their pace.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7039128) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond to the issue outlined in the (details supplied) 
 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services will ensure that the smaller sweeping machine is used 
to carry out the cleaning in the locations outlined above when we are cleaning the 
(details supplied) 
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive if he is happy with the lack of engagement between Dublin 
City Council, Waterways Ireland and Irish Rail in relation to who is responsible for 
clearing ditches around Ashtown Station. Does he believe have Irish Rail complied 
with their duties. Can he explain how these ditches impact on local flooding concerns 
and what actions has he taken since I previously asked the question on this matter. 
Will he commit to clarifying the position and will he make a statement on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The sections of drainage ditch which run parallel with the railway line between Ashtown 
and Pellestown train stations is within the curtilage of Irish Rail’s property. The 
drainage ditch in question is independent of the drainage infrastructure within the 
public areas to the south of the railway lines, in particular the area of Glendhu Park. 
The protection of Water Bodies Office has informed Irish Rail of the matter both when 
the Councillor first raised his concern (November 2023) and again this month. We have 

no evidence on record that suggests Irish Rail’s management of their internal property 
drainage poses a direct flood risk to the public realm. 
The drainage infrastructure within the public realm in the vicinity of Glendhu Park 
includes a bioswale (for floodwater retention in extreme rainfall events) and a 
segregated surface water drainage system which all discharge into DCC storm water 
drainage infrastructure before making its way to the River Tolka. This segregated 
surface water drainage system is separate and not dependant on the drainage ditch 
alongside the railway line. 
Any future surface water management issues may be referred directly to myself or 
cqsurfacewater@dublincity.ie for expedience should you or the public wish. 
 
 Q.66 COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on Dublin City Council’s plans to engage with 
the European Urban Initiative and to ask for details of any future plans to engage in 
these calls 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has a history of having submitted applications under the European 
Urban Initiative (EUI). Most recently, one application was unsuccessful and a second 
application Thematic Partnership on Food project under The Urban Agenda for the EU 
(UAEU) - European Urban Initiative was successful. 
 
We are aware of the current EUI funding call that opened this week & will close 14th 
Oct 2024.  The European Programme Support Office is currently in the process of 
reaching out to departments & project managers to inform them of the call & support 
applications where applicable & where they align with Dublin City Council’s strategic 
objectives. 
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report, in tabular form, for which consultations the 
following bodies took part in with Dublin City Council, Department of Education, 
Department of Further and Higher Education, Solas. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
It is not possible to report / filter on all consultation submissions within the consultation 
platform, Citizen Space.  
If the Councillor is interested in a specific search to be carried out on a particular 
consultation please let us know.  
 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR DANIEL CÉITINN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for an inspection and permanent repair of the 
heavily dilapidated Chapel Avenue, Irishtown, Dublin 4, which has significantly 
deteriorated in recent years 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer will carry out a site assessment at the aforementioned location any 
pothole(s) will be repaired. Any repairs to the road will be carried out as soon as a road 
maintenance crew is available. 
 
Based on the site assessment Chapel Avenue will be added to a list of other roads in 
Dublin South East requiring resurfacing. This list will be reassessed for road 
resurfacing should future funding be made available to the Area Engineer.  
 
 
 

Q.69  COUNCILLOR DANIEL CÉITINN 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will ensure that the gate to Ringsend Park from Pine 
Road, Ringsend is open early in the mornings to facilitate school children walking to 
school as the recent change of policy to close this gate until 10 am is an unnecessary 
inconvenience which is contrary to the Council's policy of encouraging cycling and 
walking in this age cohort in their everyday lives 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is no change in policy relating to gate opening times in Ringsend Park and parks 
staff attend daily to ensure the park is open from early morning. If this issue occurs 
again please contact the below signed so the matter can be resolved. 
 
Q.70 
COUNCILLOR DANIEL CÉITINN 
To ask the Chief Executive if the Council is willing to buy a property (details supplied) 
and transition the tenant to social housing. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Financial Contribution Scheme Housing List with an 
application date of 10/05/2022 and holds the following position –  
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
M 
1 
8 
 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list. Allocations is 
reviewing the Financial Contributions list in this area and we will try to progress where 
we can.  
 
Q.71 
COUNCILLOR DANIEL CÉITINN 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will arrange for a boiler repair and other outstanding 
works required at a Council property (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance attended to two leaks at this property at the beginning of 
February.  The first leak was coming from the attic tank so the ball cock was replaced.  
However, the attic tank overflowed again a few days later but it was actually the kitchen 
taps which caused the leak from the attic.  The tenant installed her own taps which 
were faulty and this resulted in the water back filling into the attic tank which caused it 
to overflow.   Housing Maintenance have since installed standard pillar taps and no 
leaks have been reported since. 
Electrical Services have carried out works to the smoke alarm and light fittings.  We 
will follow up with the Paint Workshop in relation to the painting of the ceilings and the 
Heating Section will carry out an inspection of the boiler for replacement. 
We are not aware of any issue in relation to the bannisters, but we have logged this 
now for inspection and repair. 
If the tenant wishes to submit a claim for damages, they should contact Housing 
Maintenance directly and the relevant claim form can be sent out to her for processing 
through the normal channels. 
 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the roll out of the Bike Bunker scheme 
following from the report to the Transportation SPC last September, in which it was 

concluded that DCC would continue to roll out the "Bike Bunker" scheme by 
contracting a third party to work with DCC to provide the scheme on a city wide basis 
subject to funding. Can the Chief Executive confirm whether, or not, a third party has 
been contracted yet and, if not, at what stage is the tender process. Also, to ask 
the Chief Executive what is the agreed timeline involved in rolling out the scheme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Road Safety and Micromobility Section is currently working on the Bike Bunker 
scheme tender process. Dublin City Council is planning to launch a competitive 
tendering process to select a contractor who will manage the comprehensive bike 
bunker operations, users and assets. After selecting a contractor, the council aims to 
collaborate with the winning tenderer to provide this service throughout the city and 
establish a goal of having 300 bike bunkers (by 2026), dependent on funding. 
The procurement process for this scheme was scheduled to commence in the first 
quarter of 2024, unfortunately this deadline was missed. However, the process has 
now commenced, and the qualification questionnaire is being prepared. 
 
Q.73 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive to review the application submitted for a Disabled Space 
at 8 St. Brigid's Avenue, North Strand with a view to confirming that the space is never 
used by the resident and that this particular resident does not allow any other person 
(with a disabled permit) use the space. In particular, can the Chief Executive 
immediately write to the resident and enquire if he still has a disabled parking permit 
and if he ever uses it.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Disabled Parking Bay in front of Property No. 8 Saint Brigid’s Avenue was installed 
in November 2021, and was requested by a resident with a disability, who was 
awarded the relevant certification (including a BLUE badge). The resident does not 
have a vehicle parked permanently at the aforementioned address. However the 
resident is entitled to a Disabled Parking Bay as the resident is required to be driven 
to hospital appointments etc. and is allowed to use the Disabled Parking Bay, even if 
the vehicle is not parked full-time at the address.   
The road is not over subscribed with regards on-street parking.  
Note that any Disabled Parking Bay can be used by anyone in possession of a blue 
badge.  
The resident will be contacted in order to verify if the bay is still needed. 
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an up to date list of all Dublin City Council owned 
or controlled properties which are subject to a lease or licence to community groups 
(e.g. crèche, community rooms, enterprise units, dance studio, sports club etc.). The 
list should provide the following: 
Property details (address, size, and type of Tenure etc.) 
Current (or most recent) valuation of property. 
Commercial rent or licence fee which could be charged. 
Rent or licence fee being charged. (I.e. abated/reduced abated) 
An overall figure of the amount of rent foregone by DCC in providing these facilities 
should be included to indicate and acknowledge the cost to DCC (in subsidised rents 
etc) of this unseen essential  “service” being provided by DCC throughout the city. 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The information requested will take some time to compile and a response will issue 
directly to the Councillor. 
 

Q.75 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive to indicate what steps/procedures need to be taken by DCC 
and/or City Councillors to change the Planning rules to allow residents to erect 
overhead charging “arms” outside their homes to charge their Electric cars on the 
street where they have no off street parking. Allowing car owners to charge their EV 
outside their home would have many benefits including cheaper charging, less reliance 
on the few public charging points, encouragement of non EV car users to consider 
changing to EVs etc. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Permanent structures in a front garden, or attached to the façade of a building need 
planning permission.  In addition, a structure such as a ‘charge arm’ generally requires 
the extension of infrastructure over the public footpath or roadway. The provision of 
any infrastructure on a public roadway would normally require a licence from the 
Environment and Transportation Department. DCC is unlikely to issue such a licence 
to permit the use of EV charging solutions that cross the public pavement to anybody 
other than an undertaker authorised to provide an electricity service due to the potential 
creation of safety and liability issues.   
In response to the demand for public EV charging identified in the Dublin Local 
Authority EV Charging Strategy, the Council is facilitating the delivery of high speed 
EV charging hubs in the city. With one fast charging hub already in place in Finglas, 
tender procedures are underway to expand the network to provide viable fast charging 
services for households that don’t have off street space for charging. 
.   
Q.76 
COUNCILLOR TARA DEACY 
To ask the Chief Executive to repair the carriageway / ensure an acceptable quality of 
reinstatement in the vicinity of the junction of Celtic Park Road and Collins Avenue 
West where it has been left in poor repair following recent works.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection of the above junction, was carried out by The Infrastructure Management 
Unit(IMU), RMS on 3rd May 2024, and the utility works were noted to be completed 
satisfactorily. 
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR TARA DEACY 
To ask the Chief Executive to conduct a speed survey of traffic entering Grace Park 
Heights from Grace Park Road with a view to installing traffic calming in the form of 
speed ramps and/or additional 30KPH/ children at play signage (for instance painted 
on the carriageway) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer observed this location and found that there was no evidence of 
excessive speeding by motorists.  
The road is naturally traffic calmed with the provision of on-street parking on both sides. 
It is also lined with mature trees offering a more enclosed residential space as well as 
a cul-de-sac. The combination of these measures offers a reduced carriageway width 
for motorists and increases driver caution. 
Grace Park Heights is currently traffic calmed with a number of speed ramps placed at 
the appropriate distances apart for optimum traffic calming. 
In addition, Grace Park Heights is covered by the 30 km/h Slow Zone signage, 
indicating the lower speed limit of 30kph and that the area is a Home Zone/Slow Zone.  
This warns motorists the road is a residential area and to expect the presence of 
children. The sign is clearly marked at the entrance to Grace Park Road. 
 
No further engineering measures are recommended at this time. 

Q.78  COUNCILLOR TARA DEACY 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for Grace Park Heights/Meadows and Mucky 
Lane community park, D9 to be included in the pilot for the provision of bags for dog 
poo as due to the large greens in these areas people from the surrounding area walk 
their dogs there and there is significant dog fouling on the greens making it difficult to 
allow children out to play. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services have no pilot planned for the provision of dog poo bags 
in large green areas in Grace Park Heights/Meadows and Mucky Lane community 
park, Dublin 9.  
Dublin City Council is committed to combating dog fouling through various initiatives, 
including providing free doggie bags, arranging signage and audio visual messages to 
promote responsible ownership.  
Dog Poo Bags are available through area offices, public libraries and on request from 
Waste Management Services to Community groups.  
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR TARA DEACY 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the provision of bins in 
the Collinswood estate, Dublin 9, which is a large estate with little to no provision of 
public bins and there is a significant problem with dog fouling. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services are not in favour of providing litter bins in residential 
estates such as Collinswood as they tend to attract illegal dumping of household waste 
in and around them.  
 
Q.80 
COUNCILLOR KELSEY MAY DALY 
To ask the Chief Executive for an explanation on the segregation of social housing 
tenants at Newmarket Yards.  
Why did the advertisement for CBL properties at Newmarket Yards mention access to 
common areas and other facilities if the council and Tuath housing were not paying 
management fees and knew the tenants would not have such access? 
Were the relevant bodies aware of this false advertisement?  
What are the plans to resolve the issues facing social housing tenants who are now 
frustrated and disappointed that they have been lied to and given false expectations of 
the properties they were excepting under the CBL scheme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Housing Department will issue a detailed reply to this motion upon receipt of a 
report from Tuath Housing 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR KELSEY MAY DALY 
To ask the Chief Executive Manager what is the cause of the delays in processing 
HAP applications? Are there plans to deal with the large volume of applications and 
the length of time taking to process such?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The HAP section is currently processing approximately 210 applications per month 
and it is a priority for the section to process each application in a timely manner.  Some 
applications are taking some time to process due to insufficient documentation being 
submitted and this can cause delays.   
Staff have been doing overtime to clear the backlog and have made inroads in to the 
workload, should any applicant be at risk of losing the offer of a tenancy, staff in the 
section can prioritise such an application.  

Q.82 
COUNCILLOR KELSEY MAY DALY 
To ask the Chief Executive if there are plans to deal with the extensive maintenance 
calls by tenants of Thomas Court Bawn and Meath Square Flats. Many are 
experiencing shoddy and cowboy type works taking place at their residence, often 
making the issue worse rather than rectifying it. This is causing more work for 
maintenance workers and tenants are seeking an explanation as to why this is 
happening.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance is not aware of any sub-standard works in these flat complexes.  
There are 40 units in Thomas Court Bawn and 30 units in Meath Place.  We respond 
to individual requests on a case by case basis.  If there are specific units that have 
issues with poor workmanship, please provide details of these units and an inspection 
can be arranged. 
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR KELSEY MAY DALY 
To ask the Chief Executive the reasoning for the further delays in the regeneration of 
Dolphin House and Oliver Bond despite a pledge by the Minister of Housing to keep it 
as a priority project? What are the plans to address these delays and how are the 
council engaging with residents in regards to their concerns on the regeneration? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The regeneration of Oliver Bond House is to be carried out in phases. The first phase 
identified for regeneration are housing blocks L, M and N. Stage 1 project and funding 
approval was received from the Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage in November 2023. This approval also included funding for a community 
space to be provided as part of the regeneration of the estate.  The key milestones 
remain unchanged and current activity includes procurement of the consultant design 
team members, which is nearing conclusion. 
 
A non-statutory masterplan has been developed by Dublin City Council (DCC) and 
agreed with the local community and the Regeneration Board for the regeneration of 
Dolphin House. This Masterplan has been reviewed and revised a number of times 
over the years. The most recent masterplan was agreed with the Regeneration Board 
in 2021. 
 
The master plan for the regeneration of Dolphin House includes for: 
 Complete regeneration of the existing estate  
 Both social and affordable housing to be provided  
 Provision of community amenities  
 
To date, 100 new social homes have been provided in the Phase 1 regeneration 
project, as well as 43 Older Person homes delivered by Fold Approved Housing Body.  
In order to proceed with the next phases, which will deliver 600- plus homes of mixed 
tenure, we are required to meet statutory planning requirements which include the 
provision of an Environmental Impact Assessment Report (EIAR) and a Part 10 
planning lodgement. Work is currently underway to prepare the necessary tender 
documentation to appoint a consultant design team to lead out on these requirements, 
while separately the Stage 1 application is being prepared for submission to the 
DHLGH. 
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive for a comprehensive update regarding the flood 
remediation measures for the Castlecourt/Auburn estates – these were granted 

planning permission last autumn – what is the current stage and timeframe for 
delivery? In addition can the manager outline all steps taken by the city council to 
engage and communicate with the residents who, understandably, are anxious that 
the flooding will recur?   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Representatives from Dublin City Council will be meeting local residents next 
Wednesday 8th May to update them on progress on the Wad river flood alleviation 
project in the North Central Area Office at 7pm. 
 
Q.85 
COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to conduct a traffic survey of traffic turning from Collins 
Avenue West onto Hazel and then Elm Road, Donnycarney, Dublin 9 with a view to 
installing some ramps and/or other appropriate traffic calming measures. At present, 
the traffic is backing up Collins Avenue from the junction with Malahide Road and cars 
are taking this turn to avoid the congestion despite a no right turn 7-10am sign. The 
issue is worst at rush hour- particularly mornings. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7039130) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.86 
COUNCILLOR CAR O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report on the 'Shop Front Improvement' 
schemes run in this council term answering how many schemes were opened, their 
locations, the uptake and any learnings for future schemes.  
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In the North Inner City there were 5 schemes.   
 
Dorset Street 11 applications and 9 completed 
Capel Street 12 applications and 3 completed 
Talbot Street 10 applications and 8 completed 
Amiens Street  3 applications and 0 completed 
Ballybough 
7 applications and 1 completed 
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive on what improvements can be made to Martin Savage Park 
while the nature studies are completed? The park is beside a busy train station and 
needs lighting for winter commuting. An older population lives close to the park and 
additional public seating will make the space more accessible to them. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A bat friendly-lit commuter route has been included in redevelopment plans for the 
park. Installation of such lighting requires planning approval. Our Parks improvement 
program for the district has been agreed for this year, the above request for park 
seating will be listed for consideration and inclusion in our parks improvement 
programme’25. 
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive to report any plans to appoint a full time and permanent 
Road Safety Officer for the city and county as there currently are in other jurisdictions? 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Currently, the Council does not have a Road Safety Officer. The Council employs a full 
time Road Safety Engineer, Zewar Zyada, who works within the Road Safety and 
Micromobility Team, and the wider National Road Safety Team as coordinated by the 
RSA and LGMA.  
The Road Safety Team manages the Road Safety Working Together Group including 
its external stakeholders, AGS, FS, Councillors, TII, NTA, and Dublin Bus. The Road 
Safety Team works collaboratively with internal stakeholders; TAG, the School Traffic 
Wardens and the Walking and Cycling Officers.  
The Council at this time does not intend to employ a full time Road Safety Officer.  
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive to investigate with traffic section the possibility of adding a 
filter light for people turning right off Drumcondra Road onto Millmount Avenue. Whilst 
there is a yellow box, there is no designated light to safely allow right turns here. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Thank you for your enquiry. After an assessment it was not judged to be necessary to 
install a right turn filter at this location. The volumes of vehicles turning into Millmount 
Avenue are relatively low but the introduction of a right turn filter has the potential to 
cause delays to public transport on one of the busiest bus corridors in the city. In 
response to safety concerns, the position of the traffic lights inbound on Drumcondra 
Road, at this junction were changed recently to improve legibility for drivers turning into 
Milmount Avenue.  
 
Q.90 
COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive to report on any plans to resolve the ongoing problems on 
the Old Cabra Road footpaths. (Photo’s sent separately) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
RMS has inspected the area in question and couple of defects has been already 
forwarded to the area inspector under enquiry (Ref.11158621) to schedule for repairs 
as soon as possible, otherwise the general conditions of the footpath is in a fair 
conditions. There are some defects related to some of the utilities covers and the 
300mm surroundings area which will be forward to the Infrastructure Management Unit 
to address with the relevant utilities. The missing trees issues will be forward to Parks 
to address them.   
 
Parks services will arrange for a review of any empty tree pits along the Old Cabra 
road ahead of our winter tree planting programme (Nov-Mar). It can take several 
seasons for rooting system of previous tree to degraded sufficiently to allow for their 
safe removal and provide space for planting of a new tree.  
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK  
To ask the Chief Executive please outline, with dates included, the plans for any and 
all tree pruning planned for the Central Area of North Dublin for the coming year? The 
continued use of Guidelines from the 2016 – 2020 timeline need updating post Covid 
and many residents feel the trees in there area’s need urgent attention for both the 
safety of constituents and the health and wellbeing of the trees themselves. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Tree Care Programme 2024 is in the final stage of preparation and will be 
circulated to City Councillors within the next two weeks. It will address the issues raised 
in the question. 

Q.92 
COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise if a long term solution to the problem of recurring 
degeneration of the road surface at (details supplied) the road was resurfaced in 2021 
and the same patch has disintegrated again already. Local residents believe a stream 
running underneath may be the issue. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We are arranging for works to take place to investigate the cause of this issue and 
carry out a suitable repair. 
(Enq. Ref. 11158632) 
 
Q.93 
COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise if a dog park is being considered for the Dublin 
11 area and if any of the local parks have been identified as being particularly suitable, 
particularly Johnstown Park, Poppintree Park and Tolka Valley Park? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks byelaws allow dog owners to exercise their dogs off leash in all our parks 
up until 11am and for 1 hour before closing, provided owners keep their dog under 
effective control. International recommendations suggest that dog parks be at least 1 
acre in size.  With the exception of Tolka Valley Park, the parks in the Finglas area 
just don’t have an acre to give to such a facility.  Dog parks are not for every dog and 
many dog owners avoid them.  It would be very difficult to justify giving over this 
prime area to a dog park that would only be used by some dog owners and would 
severely limit the potential of the park to serve the wider community. Approximate 
figures suggest to create such a facility is in the region of €70-100k depending on 
what surfacing/drainage/water is required. This is a considerable amount in terms of 
a limited Parks improvement budget. Parks have not received many requests from 
the public to justify this level of investment.  Park services will look at this proposal it 
in the context of other improvements to Tolka Valley Park beyond the development of 
the Finglas Luas, subject to available funding.   
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a review of speed on (Details supplied) and 
outline if the current ramps can be upgraded to provide more of an obstacle to 
speeding traffic. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The area engineer will add (Details supplied) to a list of future speed surveys to be 
considered.  This is to identify if the existing ramps are effective in reducing the speeds 
on the road.  
 
Q.95 
COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive investigate the installation of double yellow lines or a 
single yellow line at the junction of Ferndale Avenue and School Road as there is 
frequent double parking making the area difficult to pass and dangerous for 
pedestrians.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parking Enforcement Inspector will review the location and request appropriate 
enforcement. 
 
Double Yellow Lines are not recommended on School Road at the junction with 
Ferndale Avenue, as it is not current Dublin City Council policy to provide parking 
restrictions where restrictions or prohibitions are provided under the law. 

Under The Road Traffic (Traffic & Parking) Regulations, Section 36 paragraph “(2) a 
vehicle shall not be parked— (c) within 5 metres of a road junction; 
(d) On a section of roadway with less than 3 traffic lanes and where traffic sign number 
RRM 001 [continuous white line] has been provided; 
(k) In a manner in which it will interfere with the normal flow of traffic or which obstructs 
or endangers other traffic; 
There is currently a Continuous White Line and a Yield sign at this junction. 
Instances of illegal parking should be reported to Dublin Street Parking Services, the 
City Council’s parking enforcement contractor (Ph: 01-602 2500 or Email 
parkingenforcement@dublincity.ie), or to the local An Garda Síochána, as it is a matter 
for enforcement under the Road Traffic Regulations. 
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR PATRICIA ROE 
To ask the Chief Executive if the lane between (details supplied) could be closed 
off?  This lane is a magnet for anti-social behaviour and local residents state they have 
looked for it to be closed since the 90s. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The original request to close this laneway due to antisocial behaviour dates back to 
1987, the most recent to 2015/2016.  Residents asked for the laneway to be closed by 
means of walls, as they did not want to have to bear the financial burden of paying for 
gates.  
 
There is a 224mm foul sewer and 10kv ESB cable running under the laneway.  Uisce 
Eireann, DCC’s drainage division and ESB Networks require vehicular access to the 
laneway to maintain these services. They have no objection to the laneway being 
closed by means of lockable gates. Uisce Eireann refused consent to closure of the 
laneway by walls, or the disposal of the laneway to residents, as it is not possible to 
divert the sewer which serves approx 350 houses. ESB advised that to close the 
laneway by means of walls would require an alternative route for their cable. In 2016 
they estimated this would cost approx. €80,000, chargeable to residents/DCC. 
If the residents would like to close the laneway by means of lockable gates, the public 
right of way over the laneway needs to be extinguished under section 73 of the Roads 
Act 1993.    
 
The extinguishment of a public right of way is a reserved function of the elected 
members of the City Council.  The local area office manage the application and 
statutory consultation process. 
 
An application for the Extinguishment of a Public Right of Way (EPROW) is made in 
writing to the local area office and must include: 
• The reason for the requested closure 
• A statement as to how the laneway will be closed 
• A statement confirming that the proposers are aware that following the closure they 
take responsibility for the future maintenance and upkeep of the laneway 
• A statement confirming that residents agree to undertake the costs of closure of the 
laneway, including the cost of installing a gate and diverting services, if necessary 
• A petition signed by the majority or residents/owners of houses abutting the laneway, 
which should contain a statement on each page illustrating that signatories are aware 
of the above. 
 
On receipt of the above, the Area Office will prepare a report for the next Area 
Committee meeting requesting that procedures be initiated under Section 73 of the 
Roads Act 1993.  If this is agreed the local area office will initiate the statutory 
consultation process:  

 
•A notice will be published in one or more national newspapers circulating in the area 
indicating where the public right of way proposed to be extinguished is located.  This 
notice must also indicate where the map showing this public right of way may be 
inspected.  A minimum period of one month must be allowed for inspection of the 
proposal with a further two weeks allowed for the making of objections or 
representations.  The notice shall also state that persons making such objections or 
representations may make a request in writing to state their case at an oral hearing. 
•An online consultation will be set up on DCC’s consultation hub so that members of 
the public can view the map and information associated with the EPROW, and can 
submit objections/representations on the proposal  
•A sign will be placed at each end of the public right of way to be extinguished for a 
period of at least 14 days, with the drawing illustrating the closure and details of the 
consultation process 
•A service check will be carried out, notifying service providers of the proposed 
EPROW and requesting any objections or requirements 
•If an oral hearing is requested in writing, the Local Area office will schedule and 
conduct same. 
 
On conclusion of the consultation process the Local Area Office will prepare a second 
area committee report for councillors, with a recommendation to extinguish/retain the 
right of way.   This decision is a reserved function of the elected councillors.    
 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR PATRICIA ROE 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the following vacant properties (details 
Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A. This property is not a Council property.  
B. This property has an active rent account and tenancy in place. 
C. This property is currently under refurbishment under the Buy and Renew Scheme 
there has been issues with the water connection which are being resolved with Irish 
Water. It is envisaged that this refurbishment will be completed by Q3 2024. 
 
Q.98 
COUNCILLOR PATRICIA ROE 
To ask the Chief Executive to engage with the lady (details supplied) regarding the 
moving of her polling station which has made it more difficult for her to vote. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The creating and updating of polling stations for all electoral events falls under the 
remit of the Dublin City Returning Officer, Mr. Joseph Burke. 
 
Dublin City Council’s Franchise section updates the register with the polling stations 
provided to them from the Dublin City Returning Officer. 
 
The polling station which is attached to the elector’s address currently is the Marino 
Institute of Education, Griffith Avenue, Dublin 9. Previously it was Maryfield College, 
Glandore Road, Dublin 9. This change took place for the March 8th referendum and 
will remain at Marino Institute of Education for the Local & European Elections June 
7th 2024. Due to mock and state examinations on both of those electoral dates the 
secondary school was unavailable. 
 
 
 

Q.99  COUNCILLOR PATRICIA ROE 
To ask the Chief Executive to fill in the hole which has been left at the lamppost at 
(Details supplied) where a new light was installed.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection was carried out at (Details supplied). This was a reinstatement in grass 
around a lighting column that had sunk. It will be attended to early in week commencing 
13th May.  
 
Q.100 COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a review of the roundabout at Glasnevin 
Downs as some people locally are reporting that the signage is not adequate and cars 
not familiar with the area are driving on wrong side of the road and there has been 
some near miss traffic accidents. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Signage and markings have been provided around the roundabout at Glasnevin 
Downs. On all points of entry to the roundabout, Yield lines and Yield signs have been 
provided. Furthermore, keep left bollards have been provided on all points of entry, to 
indicate to motorists to “Keep Left” of the traffic islands. “Roundabout Ahead” warning 
signs have also been provided leading up to the roundabout, to warn drivers that they 
are approaching a roundabout.  
However, the Area Engineer will assess the request to provide additional signage to 
indicate to drivers the correct direction to travel around the roundabout. 
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for an assessment of the Junction of 
Cardiffsbridge road shops and Cappagh Road (near Macaris chipper). Wheelchair 
users have difficulty crossing here as cars continuously block the ramp to access the 
shops here. Can a raised zebra/pelican crossing be installed here to provide safety for 
pedestrians and wheelchairs users who use the shops there. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The aforementioned location will be added to a list for consideration for future minor 
works. Meanwhile, the Area Engineer will assess the junction for Double Yellow Lines 
to be installed as a temporary measure to keep the access clear for people with 
disabilities and also make it safer for pedestrians. 
 
Q.102  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive Executive to arrange for the an inspection of the footpaths 
on Shanliss Walk and Shanliss Way where the footpaths are In a very bad state of 
disrepair and for the Chief Executive to arrange for their re-instatement as soon as is 
practically possible. There are several bad trip hazards along here. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Shanliss Way is on our 2024 Footpath Reconstruction Programme which is due to 
commence in the coming months. Shanliss Walk will be inspected and put forward for 
consideration for next year’s programme. 
(Enq. Ref. 11158643) 
 
Q.103 COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a survey of traffic along Ballygall Crescent. 
Residents regularly report cars speeding along the road and around the bend. 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Ballygall Crescent is currently traffic calmed with 5 No. speed ramps and 2 no. mini-
roundabouts. All the area around the aforementioned road are also traffic calmed with 
ramps, signs and mini-roundabouts. The existing traffic calming measures are 
considered to be effective in reducing traffic speeds. 
Generally when considering speed surveys and the provision of additional traffic 
calming, those roads without any vertical deflection are considered a priority over roads 
which are currently traffic calmed.  
Dangerous driving/instances of anti-social behaviour should be reported to the Gardaí 
as they occur. 
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to please give me some advice on the following housing 
matter (details supplied) 
 
Details supplied: I recently spoke to a man from Ballyfermot a Mr James Sower of 40 
Decies Road Ballyfermot Dublin 10 in relation to his sister a Mrs Maire Murphy who 
currently resides in Bognor Regis’s in the UK. Mrs Murphy`s husband died 2 years 
ago leaving her on her own at 76 years of age. Over the past 2 years Mrs Murphy 
has become withdrawn and is finding the living in Britain very difficult this coupled 
with her advancing age she is now nearly 79 years of age she wants to come back to 
Ireland to live out the remainder of hr life. Unfortunately, Mrs Murphy only rents her 
home in the UK hence she does not have income needed to buy a new home if and 
when she returns to Ireland. I am asking on compassionate grounds would DCC 
allow her be considered for accommodation in an older person complex. Mrs Murphy 
moved from Clondalkin over 30 years ago and surrendered her home at the time to 
the Council she was told that if she ever returned, she would be considered for 
housing. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
I would advise the applicant in this case to make contact with Safe Home, Ireland, 
contact details as set out below – Safe Home Ireland, St. Brendan's Village, Mulranny, 
Westport, Co. Mayo 
For text/calls/whatsapp - Mobile Tel: +353 86 059 45 38 
Tel: +353 98 36036; Email: info@safehomeireland.com 
 
Q.105 COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive to please look into the following  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant’s housing application is currently deferred owing to the following 
outstanding documentation –  
Proof of a clear rent account from his previous HAP tenancy  
Upon receipt of the above document, the application will be reviewed, with a review of 
removing the deferral.  
 
Q.106  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive to please look into the following (Details Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing Older Persons Transfer List, with an application 
date of 15/06/2023, the applicant holds the following position on this list; 
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
J 
1 
17 

 
I have noted the applicant’s interest in Fr. Lemass Court on his housing file. 
 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
 
Q.107  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive to look into the following (Details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing List, with an application date of 28/01/2021, the 
applicant holds the following position on this list; 
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
J 
2 
233 
 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
 
Dublin City Council is increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household.  
 
The applicant may also be eligible to avail of HAP, should she wish to do so she can 
make contact with Housing Allocations to make an appointment, to be advised 
regarding same. 
 
Q.108  COUNCILLOR MARY CALLAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the processes Dublin City Council needs to 
go through to deliver social and affordable housing, what parts of the processes are 
as a result of conditions or rules imposed at European level?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are a wide range of processes that Dublin City Council employ which are 
governed by European legislation or other mandated policies related to the delivery of 
social and affordable housing.  
In relation to the acquisition of works [construction contractors] and services 
[consultants e.g. engineers] that contribute to the construction of social and affordable 
housing; these are in compliance to public procurement procedures, available to 
Government Departments and State bodies, which align with EU and national public 
procurement rules, including the 2014 Directives and 2016 Regulations.     
 
Q.109  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the proposed new bus stop 
locations at (Details supplied) 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC has forward on this request to the NTA via their email address at  
oireachtasliaison@nationaltransport.ie 
 
We are awaiting a response. 
 
Q.110  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report on the actions to date in relation to the 
emissions and smells from (Details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Air Quality Monitoring and Noise Control Unit received complaints about air 
pollution associated with the (Details supplied). The Unit can deal with air pollution 
complaints under the provisions of the Air Pollution Act 1987. 
 
The officer of the area has engaged with the residents and carried out inspections.  
The management of the company advised that have engaged Environmental 
Engineers to provide solutions to mitigate the emissions. In the interim they also 
advised they would only smoke when the wind is in a direction that will not impact 
residents.  
 
Monitoring was carried out by officers of the Unit and no air pollution as defined in the 
Act was witnessed to date. Further monitoring will be arranged and if air pollution is 
witnessed legal proceedings can be initiated under the Act.  
 
Q.111  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the overgrown brambles and shrubbery on 
the pathway at (Details supplied) to be cut back. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This footpath will be inspected and Hedge Cutting Notices will be issued to properties 
 
that are found to have trees/hedges causing an obstruction. 
(Enq. Ref. 11158640) 
 
Q.112  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the repair of the badly damaged/sunken 
pathway at (Details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The footpath at (Details supplied) will be inspected any defects found will be 
scheduled for repair works when a crew is next available in this area. 
(Enq. Ref. 11158642). 
 
Q.113  COUNCILLOR ALISON GILLILAND 
To ask the Chief Executive to investigate the possibility of Dublin City Council acquiring 
(details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council Acquisitions Sections has made efforts to engage with the owner 
to acquire this property. However we were not successful in coming to an agreement 
to purchase. 
 
Q.114  COUNCILLOR ALISON GILLILAND 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline steps taken to date to address (Details supplied) 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The office has dealt with this property in the past in relation to the up keep of the back 
garden. The garden was cleaned by Dublin City Council a couple of years ago. We will 
liaise with the Councillor and call on the tenant to see if the issue can be resolved. 
 
Q.115  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive please organise for the repair of the footpath trip outside 
(details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11158634) has been created and passed on to the Area Inspector who 
will carry out an inspection and add any defects to a works list for repair.  
 
Q.116  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive please organise for the inspection and repair of the 
carriageway on Blackheath Park from No. 54 to No. 58 as it appears to be subsiding 
as per the attached photo. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11158635) has been created and passed on to the Area Inspector who 
will carry out an inspection and add any defects to a works list for repair.  
 
Q.117 COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive to please organise for the repair of the footpath trip outside 
(details supplied 1) as per (details supplied 2)? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11158636) has been created and passed on to the Area Inspector who 
will carry out an inspection and add any defects to a works list for repair.  
 
Q.118  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive please organise for an inspection of the road surface on 
Grace Park Road (both around the Grace Park Heights junction and between it and 
the Collins Avenue junction) with remedial works to be undertaken as appropriate as it 
is in poor condition? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11158637) has been created and passed on to the Area Inspector who 
will carry out an inspection and add any defects to a works list for repair.  
 
Q.119  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY  
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Toilets at Stannaway Park - are the toilets in the park rangers space for public use or 
at the discretion of the park ranger? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
No clubs have paid to use the changing rooms as part of their pitch allocation for 2024 
so the pavilion is not unlocked at weekends. 
 
Q.120  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive Could signage be improved at the entrance to Harold’s 
Cross park to limit the amount of vehicles that turn right from McGowan’s pub onto the 
Harolds’ Cross Road and break the pedestrian lights crossing? 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Transport Advisory Group (TAG) area engineer has conducted a preliminary 
assessment of the traffic safety issues at the T-junction near McGowan’s pub on 
Harold's Cross Road (SE). The road features a Stop sign and associated road 
markings. Based on this assessment, the primary issue appears to be non-adherence 
to road rules. Consequently, the matter will be brought to the attention of An Garda 
Síochána for enforcement. 
In addition, following recent discussions between TAG and our Traffic Signal 
engineers, an additional traffic signal head has been added to enhance visibility for 
vehicles. 
 
Snap shot of answer to Q.21 from the March meeting.  
Junction of HAROLD'S CROSS ROAD (SE) / PARKVIEW AVENUE (SE) 
 
 
Q.121  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive could the rainbow crossings be updated ahead of Pride 
this June? Many of them are in bad repair and they need attention. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Traffic approve this request. All locations will be re-painted in time for this event. 
 
Q.122  COUNCILLOR TERENCE FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond to the following regarding Park (Details 
Supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Part 8 public consultation on proposals to improve (details Supplied) drew in the 
order of 2,000 submissions from the public, stakeholders, NGOs and other public and 
state bodies. 
 
The submission from the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
dated 12th February recommended that the City Council carry out a Natura Impact 
Statement “to consider the possible in combination effects of other presently mooted 

developments of artificial pitches on playing field sites utilized by the Brent geese in 
the Dublin area as well as that proposed in the current Part 8 proposal”.  
 
The DoHLGH also recommended that DCC “propose suitable measures to reduce the 
potential effects of the development proposed on the geese using (details Supplied) 
such as the removal of the proposed playground to a different part of the site, the 
deletion of new footpaths and access points……….so as to minimize possible 
disturbance of the geese by pedestrians and dogs”. 
 
Dublin City Council therefore decided to withdraw the current Part 8 proposal pending 
consideration of recommendations as contained in this submission and discussions, 
as necessary, with the DoHLGH. As advised at the March Central Area Committee, a 
report on the outcome of these considerations will be brought to the councillors later 
this year as well as a timeline for progressing plans for (details Supplied). 
A meeting is being arranged with St Oliver Plunketts GAA club in the meantime. 
 
Q.123  COUNCILLOR TERENCE FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond to the following regarding a junction (Details 
Supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A full upgrade and redesign of this junction is proposed under Bus Connects. Dublin 
City Council are currently in discussion with Fingal County Council and the OPW in 
regard to agreeing a design for temporary works at this location in order to improve the 
safety of all road users. These works are expected to be completed by the end of this 
year. 
 
Q.124  COUNCILLOR TERENCE FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond to the following regarding taking in charge 
(Details Supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Details supplied 
 
Q.125  COUNCILLOR TERENCE FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond to the following regarding roundabout (Details 
Supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The (Details Supplied) forms part of the Active Travel Network and is located on the 
Clarehall to Belmayne Project.  
Following confirmation from Department of Transport of the funding envelope that was 
available for Active Travel in 2024, the National Transport Authority (NTA) engaged 
with Dublin City Council (DCC) to agree a revised prioritisation of projects that would 
reflect the funding realities. On that basis, a limited number of projects that are in the 
North Central Area continue to be funded in 2024. These are; 
 
1. 
DCC 21 0031 Bayside to Donaghmeade 
2. 
DCC 21 0009 Coolock to Clontarf 
3. 
DCC 210019 Raheny to Kilbarrack 
4. 
DCC 12 0033 Clontarf to City Centre 
5. 
DCC 23 0029 Clontarf Baths 
6. 
DCC 21 0001 Finglas to Killester 
7. 
DCC 21 0010 Glasnevin to Clontarf 
8. 
DCC 21 0011 Santry Greenway 

9. 
DCC 21 0023 Baldoyle to Fairview 
 
DCC will continue to work closely with the NTA to ensure that the Active Travel Network 
for Dublin City is realised, in line with our shared policies and objectives. However, the 
limited funding requires that projects be prioritised to match available funding. 
The full signalisation of the roundabout will be considered as part of the overall 
Clarehall to Belmayne Project. Both DCC and the NTA are not in a position to resource 
this project at the moment. 
 
The roundabout is maintained by contract and the report of weeds will be forwarded to 
the contracts’ manager.  This roundabout is planted with a display of spring flowering 
bulbs the foliage of which is currently feeding up the bulbs for next year’s display and 
will die down next month at which point they will be mown away.  There are no current 
proposals to carry out further planting here.  
 
 
Q.126  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive For an update on the pilot project to provide public 
education around street names in the North Inner City, as passed by the central area 
committee in June 2023? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Heritage Office has begun compiling historical information to inform a Historic 
Place names promotional campaign for rollout in due course on for Dublin City Council 
social media channels.  
 
Q.127  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive what traffic monitoring arrangements will be put in place to 
monitor and evaluate the impact of the city centre transport plan? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Traffic monitoring will be undertaken as part of the Plan and will include a 
comprehensive set of traffic counts pre and post implementation at key locations. The 
schedule of the post implementation counts will be dependent on the location and the 
measure. In addition there will be real time monitoring undertaken by the Traffic 
section.    
 
Q.128  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive For an update on the report on bring centres in the context 
of the 15 minute city which was agreed on through a motion in my name at the May 
2023 Climate and Environment SPC? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services intend to undertake a study beginning in Q3 2024 to 
assess our current recycling infrastructure and to develop a strategy for the future 
development of such facilities in line with the city development plan, national waste 
plan, projected population increase and relevant land use zoning.  
 
Q.129  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive What protocols are in place for providing food for Mansion 
House events and how a provision could be included to make the menu reflective of 
climate change targets? e.g. favour a lower emissions and locally produced menu in 
procurement contracts for events etc? 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
A four year multi-party Framework Agreement for the provision of Hot & Cold Food 
Catering services is in place in the Mansion House since October 2022.  The 
Framework will be retendered when the Framework expires or when the contract value 
is reached. 
 
As part of the next procurement process, environmental and social considerations will 
be included. 
 
Q.130  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to  please refer to depression in footpath outside dwelling 
at (Details supplied) (which footpath was marked for repairs over 12 months ago) and 
say when the necessary works can be carried out to level the footpath so as to 
eliminate the constant pooling of rainwater outside this dwelling. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11158654) has been created and passed on to the Area Inspector who 
will carry out an inspection and add any defects to a work list for repair. 
 
Q.131  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive please arrange for hedge/bush at location as per (details 
supplied) to be removed as same is blocking the view of oncoming busses, with the 
result that buses are driving past commuters without commuters seeing same . 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local and any necessary safety 
works programmed as local schedules allow. 
 
Q.132  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to CE arrange to have foliage cut back from location as per 
(details Supplied) as same is having a negative effect on cyclists. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is no open space at this point on the cycle lane that Parks Service has 
responsibility for. 
 
Q.133  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange to provide an update on request to repair/replace 
seating at location at (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The picnic benches will be recovered from the encroaching sands in the coming weeks 
in advance of the bathing season. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 8 April 2024 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 8th Aibreán 2024 i Seomra na Comhairle, Halla 
na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an 
tArdmheara Daithí de Róiste sa chathaoir 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Daryl Barron 
Eimer McCormack 
Carolyn Moore 
Máire Devine 
Patricia Roe 
Declan Meenagh 
Daniel Céitinn 
Danny Byrne 
Deborah Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Caroline Conroy 
Deirdre Conroy 
Donna Cooney 
Dearbháil Butler 
Kelsey May Daly 
Tara Deacy 
Michael Watters 
Catherine Stocker 
Kevin Donoghue 
Michael Pidgeon 
Colm O'Rourke 
Terence Flanagan 
Cat O'Driscoll 
James Geoghegan 
Sophie Nicoullaud 
Janet Horner 
Darragh Moriarty 
Racheal Batten 
Darcy Lonergan 
Briege MacOscar 
Tom Brabazon 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Anne Feeney 
Claire O'Connor 
Daithí de Róiste 
Séamas McGrattan 
Janice Boylan 
Mannix Flynn 
Paddy McCartan 
Declan Flanagan 
Alison Gilliland 
Deirdre Heney 
Jane Horgan Jones 
Vincent Jackson 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Anthony Connaghan 
Ray McAdam 
Naoise Ó Muirí 
Damian O'Farrell 
Larry O'Toole 
Cieran Perry 
Nial Ring 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Pat Dunne 
Daithí Doolan 
Noeleen Reilly 
 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Ruth Dowling 
Anthony Flynn 
Richard Shakespeare 
Yvonne Kelly 
Natalie Leonard 
Kathy Quinn 
John Flanagan 
Brendan O'Brien 
Deirdre Scully 
Michelle Robinson 
Andy Walsh 
Kirsten Hart 
Frank d'Arcy 
Aisling Browne 
Donncha Ó’Dúlaing 
 
 
 
 
1   Lord Mayor's Business 
 
Charter of Inclusion 
The Lord Mayor advised councillors that the Charter of Inclusion Presentation is 
deferred to the  May Council meeting.  
 
8 - 21 

 
 
 
Department of An Taoiseach – Presentation on the Shared Island Unit 
Eoghan Duffy, Principal Officer, and Aoife Budd, Assistant Principal of the Department 
of An Taoiseach presented to the Members on the Shared Island Unit. A copy of this 
presentation can be found in Appendix A. 
 
2   Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Séamas 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the 
questions lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the  
questions lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and 
Answers are set out in Appendix B to these minutes. 
 
22 - 64 
3   Correspondence was received from the following Local Authorities; 
 
 
Louth County Council  
 
Clare County Council  
 
Westmeath County Council  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Anthony 
Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence listed. 
The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
4   To confirm the minutes of the City Council Meeting held on 4th March 2024 
 
The minutes of the City Council meeting held on 4th March 2024 having been 
printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken 
as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor. 
 
 
5   To fill one vacancy on the City of Dublin Education and Training Board (CDETB) 
following the resignation of Cllr. Catherine Stocker with effect from the 29th February 
2024. 
 
It was agreed that this vacancy would be deferred to the next council meeting.  
 
 
6   Report No. 84/2024 of the Senior Executive Officer (R. Dowling) - Local Elections 
2024 - Issue of Polling Information Cards. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Larry O’Too
Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.84/2024 and assents to the pr
outlined therein. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
7   Report No. 91/2024 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (T. Flynn)  - The Dublin City 
Sports Plan 2023-2028. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Declan Meenagh and seconded by Councillor Fiona 
Connelly that Dublin City Council notes Report No 91/2024 and approves the Dublin 
City Sports Plan 2024-2029 as outlined therein. The motion was put and carried.  
 
Councillor Cieran Perry wished for it to be noted that he was opposed to any 
suggestion of outsourcing the management of Sport and Leisure Facilities. 
 
 

 
8   Reports of the Chief Executive, in compliance with Section 138 of the Local 
Government Act 2001 informing the Council of works which are about to commence 
and in compliance with the Planning and Development Regulations 2001, Part 8:   
 
 
(a)   Report No. 83/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - The proposal to 
extend and refurbish Ringsend Library and to carry out improvements to the 
surrounding public realm.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Claire Byrne and seconded by Councillor 
Anthony Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
83/2024 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 99/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - proposed 
development at the site located at Dublin City Moorings, Custom House Quay, 
Dublin 1 on an existing pontoon structure adjacent to the current Dublin 
Docklands office building.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor 
Vincent Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
99/2024 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
9   Report No. 78/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - with reference to 
Proposed Variation No.5 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028: : A 
technical update in relation to 'Build-To-Rent' (BTR) accommodation on foot of the 
publication of Sustainable Urban Housing: Design Standards for New Apartments - 
Guidelines for Planning Authorities, DHLGH, 2023. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Donna Cooney and Seconded by Councillor Mannix 
Flynn that the Members of the authority having considered the proposed Variation and 
the Chief Executive’s Report No. 78/2024, and the issues raised, the proper planning 
and sustainable development of the City, the statutory obligations of the local authority 
and the relevant policies or objectives of the Government or of any Minister of the 
Government; the City Council resolves that Variation No. 5 of the Dublin City 
Development Plan 2022-2028 is hereby made and that the necessary notices of the 
making of Variation No. 5 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028 be 
published.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
10   Disposal of Fee Simple:   
 
 
(a)   Report No. 81/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Robinson) - with reference 
to the disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and Tenant 
(Ground Rents) (No. 2) Act, 1978.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
Mannix Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
81/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 95/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - with reference to 
the Disposal of the Fee Simple in the property known as site at Seamus Ennis 
Road, Finglas, Dublin 11 to Finglas Credit Union Limited.  
 
 
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor 
Donna Cooney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
95/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
11   Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
(a)   Report No. 94/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - with reference to 
the proposed Licence for a Plot of Ground to Rear of 647A Howth Road, Dublin 
5.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mícheál MacDonncha and seconded by 
Councillor Mannix Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No. 94/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 96/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - with reference to 
Grant of a 3 year Short Term Letting at 81, The Coombe, Dublin 8 (Ground 
Floor) to Shannon’s Hopeline CLG.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor Máire 
Devine that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 96/2024 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 97/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - with reference to 
the assignment of lease in respect of Unit 5/E1 Ballymun Industrial Estate, 
Dublin 11 to Sika Ireland Limited.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
Mannix Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
97/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
12   Disposal of Property:   
 
 
(a)   Report No. 93/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) with reference to the 
proposed grant of a Short Term Business Letting Agreement in Unit 1A 
Shangan Neighbourhood Centre, Ballymun, Dublin 11 to Ballymun Community 
Law Centre CLG.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
Dermot Lacey that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
93/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 98/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - with reference to 
the proposed Exchange of lands and air rights at Kevin Street Library Dublin 8 
between Dublin City Council and GA Development ICAV.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor 
Dermot Lacey that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
98/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 

 
 
 
13   Report No. 92/2024 of the A/Executive Manager  (B. O'Brien) - The Draft Dublin City 
Centre Transport Plan. 
 
The following motion was proposed by Councillor Damian O’Farrell and seconded by 
Councillor Christy Burke:  
 
“That this Council agrees the implementation of the Draft Dublin City Centre Transport 
plan be deferred until such time as there has been disability proofing in compliance 
with DCC’s legally binding obligations under the CRPD.  Furthermore, the body and 
conclusion of the report being noted here tonight show no evidence of DCC‘s 
awareness of their obligations under the CRPD. There is no mention of or reference to 
the legal standing of DPRO’s. To prevent any possible discrimination or future 
unintended consequences of this non-compliance this Council takes this opportunity 
tonight to defer the matter.” 
 
In order to continue the debate on this report, the Lord Mayor at 8.52 p.m. proposed 
an extension of the meeting to 10.15 p.m. to facilitate completion of business.  He also 
sought, with the agreement of the relevant managers that for items 14, 15 & 17, that 
Councillors would email their questions to the Manager. This would provide allow time 
for the discussion on the topical issue to take place.    
 
The Lord Mayor vacated the Chair to Councillor Deirdre Heney at 9 p.m. and returned 
to the chamber at 9.03 p.m. 
 
Following the debate on this report and motion, Councillor Declan Meenagh 
suggested that a meeting be held with the DPRO’s regarding this report within the 
next month.  All members and management were in agreement with this suggestion. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Janet 
Horner that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 92/2024. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
14   Report No. 88/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (J. Flanagan) - 
Quarterly Report of the Traffic Department. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 88/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
15   Report No. 85/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (J. Flanagan) - 
Quarterly Report of the Active Travel Programme Office. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 85/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
16   Report No. 102/2024 of the Executive Manager (D. Kelly) - with reference to Public 
Consultation for the  Dublin Agglomeration Noise Action Plan (2024 - 2028) 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Claire Byrne and seconded by Councillor Donna 
Cooney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 102/2024 and 
hereby approves the contents therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 

 
 
 
17   Report No. 89/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive (F. d'Arcy) - Social Housing 
Supply and Delivery Monthly Update Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 89/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
18   Report No. 100/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - With Reference to 
Revised Expenditure for 2023 Submitted In Accordance with Section 104 of The Local 
Government Act 2001. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the content of Report No. 100/2024 and 
assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
19   Report No. 87/2024 of the Head of Finance (K. Quinn) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement and EU IMF Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 87/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
20   Report No. 86/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 86/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
21   Report No. 79/2024 of the Corporate Policy Group - Breviate of the meeting held on 
26th January 2024, Lord Mayor Daithí de Róiste, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 79/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
22   Report No. 82/2024 of the Area Committees - Breviates of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of March 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 82/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
23   Report No. 80/2024 of the Joint Policing Area Sub-Committees - Breviates of the Area 
Joint Policing Sub Committee meetings held in February and March 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 80/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
24   Report No. 101/2024 of the Finance Strategic Policy Committee - Breviate of the 
meeting held on 21st March 2024, Cllr. Séamas McGrattan, Chairperson. 
 
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 101/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
25   Report No. 90/2024 of the Housing Strategic Policy Committee - Breviate of the 
meeting held on the 14th February 2024, Councillor Alison Gilliland, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 90/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
26   Report No. 103/2024 of the Housing Strategic Policy Committee - Breviate of the 
meeting held on the 13th March 2024, Councillor Alison Gilliland, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 103/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
27   Topical Issues 
 
The following topical issue was submitted for discussion. 
 
“Dublin response to Gaza Genocide” 
 
It was unanimously agreed by the members to discuss this issue. 
 
 
28   Motions on Notice 
 
As a topical issue was taken for debate, all motions on notice were deferred to the 
next meeting.  
 
 
29   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
The following emergency motion was proposed by Councillors Mícheál Mac Donncha, 
Tom Brabazon, Dearbháil Butler, Daryl Barron, John Lyons, Catherine Stocker, 
Terence Flanagan and Larry O’Toole:  
 
“This City Council calls on all concerned, including Dublin City Council executive, to 
act with urgency to ensure the immediate opening of Belmayne Main Street. The 
opening has been repeatedly promised, delayed, promised and delayed again. Huge 
inconvenience and disruption is being caused to the local community, including local 
businesses, in a large densely populated and still growing area. Further delays cannot 
be tolerated” 
 
It was agreed that this motion be taken without debate.  The motion was put and 
carried.  
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 

 
 

Shared Island Initiative
Presentation to Dublin City Council
8 April 2024

Shared Island initiative -overview
•
Programme for Government - Shared Island chapter: 
•
“Work with all communities and traditions on the island to build consensus 
around a shared future, underpinned by the Good Friday Agreement.”
•
Significantly-enhanced level of ambition for collaborative all-island 
investment cooperation (PfG and National Development Plan 2021-2030).
•
Deepening cooperation and connections across the island.
•
Good Friday Agreement - relationships (N/S and E/W), institutions, principles, 
commitments.
•
Whole of Government approach: 
•
Shared Island unit in D/Taoiseach driving and coordinating; projects and 
programmes delivered by Government Departments and Agencies. 
•
Working through all-island partnerships with NI, UK, Local Authority,  
Education and Civil Society partners.

• Deliver long-standing and new cross-border 
investments
Building a Shared Island 
• 16 events, 3500+ citizens from all communities, 
traditions and regions
• Youth Forum of  80 young people meeting over a 
year to agree vision and values for a Shared Island
Dialogue on a shared future
• Evidence and analysis on economic, social, cultural, 
and political considerations for the island. 
Research programme 
Shared Island initiative 
-elements

Shared Island research programme
•Cross-Border Trade in Services
•Enhancing attractiveness of the Island of Ireland to FDI
•Analysis of Primary Health Care Systems of Ireland and Northern Ireland
•Comparison of Education and Training Systems and outcomes
•Modelling Productivity Levels in Ireland and Northern Ireland
•Coordination of Energy infrastructure and renewable energy supports
•Early Childhood Education and Care, North and South
•Migrant Integration and Experience in Ireland and Northern Ireland
•Student Mobility in Ireland and Northern Ireland
•Social and political attitudes in Ireland and Northern Ireland 
•Contrasting Housing Supply in Ireland and Northern Ireland
ESRI publications to date:
•Gender and Labour market inclusion – Launch 10 April 
Upcoming research:
All reports available at  gov.ie/sharedisland/research

Shared Island Youth Forum
• 80 young people (18-25) from diverse 
backgrounds across the island. 
• Deliberative forum over a year to set out 
their vision and values for a shared future.
• Themes of Sustainability; Opportunity; 
Wellbeing; Equality; and Culture and 
Identity.

• Deliver strategic investment objectives on Shared Island in the 
Programme for Government and revised National Development Plan.
• Allocations by Government to Ministers to take forward projects.
• Working with Executive, UK, Local Authority, Education, Civil Society 
partners.
• Portfolio approach - Government, Executive, UK Government, Local 
Authority, EU funding sources to projects – eg Ulster Canal. 
• Departments operating competitive funding calls for all-island 
programmes
Shared Island Fund

Shared Island Fund –Allocations
A more sustainable island 
• €11m for all-island 
bioeconomy 
demonstrators
• €11m for cross-border 
peatland restoration 
and biosecurity 
initiative
• €15m for sports club 
EV charging point 
installation
A more prosperous island 
• €44.5m for teaching 
building at Ulster 
University Derry
• €20m for Co-Centres
for Research and 
Innovation through 
Science Foundation 
Ireland
• €7.6m collaboration by 
Wild Atlantic Way and 
Causeway Coastal 
Route 
A more connected island
• €3m Shared Island 
Civic Society Fund
• €7.4m for Arts 
investment projects
• €6m Shared Island 
dimension to Creative 
Ireland Programme 
2023-2027

Shared Island -latest announcements
• 20 February announcement by Government
• €800m in total for SI investment priorities
• €600m to A5 upgrade and progressing related N2 and 
Donegal TEN-T schemes
• Hourly frequency rail service Dublin - Belfast
• Contribution to Casement Park redevelopment
• Construction of Narrow Water Bridge
• Shared Island Enterprise scheme
• Cooperation on reducing educational disadvantage
• Renewal of Battle of the Boyne visitor experience

Shared Island Local Authority 
Development funding scheme (€5m)
Shared Island Community Climate 
Action Programme (€3m)
Creative Ireland programme (€6m)
Local Authorities

Shared Island Local Authority Development Funding Scheme
Overview
•
Seed capital grants of up to €250,000 for cross-border Local Authority Partnerships.
•
25 awards to 15 Local Authorities in the South working with 9 councils in NI.
•
Projects are currently being assessed by Departments, consulting with NI counterparts. 
•
Dublin City Council project with Belfast City Council on feasibility of a circular economy 
partnership to jointly develop infrastructure, facilities, institutional frameworks to 
support transition to a green economy and meet climate ambitions. 
Objective
•
Generate well-developed pipeline of cross-border local authority projects. 
Impact
•
Local Authorities cooperating to deliver shared regional development goals. 
•
More strategic cooperation by central and local government on the island.

Shared Island Community Climate Action Programme
Overview
•
€3m for Shared Island strand to Community Climate Action Programme.
•
Projects to include a partner in Northern Ireland (can be a Council).
•
50% of awarded funding for project delivery in Northern Ireland.
•
Minister for Environment launched Strand 1a in January 2024.
•
Administered by Community Climate Action Officers in Councils .
•
Grants of €5,000 to €100,000.
•
Applications currently being assessed by Local Authorities.
Objective
•
Support Local Authorities to step up climate action in partnership with 
communities across the island.
•
Cross-border projects sought on: Valuing Networks for Nature: Just Transition; 
Renewable energy: Flood forecasting; Coastal erosion.
Impact
•
Help to reach climate and energy targets on the island of Ireland.
•
Support collaborative community involvement on climate action.

Shared Island dimension to the Creative Ireland programme
Overview
•
€6 million for a Shared Island dimension to the Government’s Creative Ireland 
Programme 2023-2027. Elements include:
•
Cruinniú na nÓg 2024: Events programmed on an all-island basis.
•
Creative Communities on a Shared Island: €850k to 9 cross-border creative and 
cultural projects led by Local Authorities:
•
Dublin City Council: aRchive an immersive LED light installation at Five 
Lamps Festival. Programme of dialogue between young people and older 
generations in Shankill/East Belfast and Dublin’s North East Inner City.
•
Creative Youth on a Shared Island: Funding of up to €180,000 to at least 3 
projects that nurture collaboration, hope and understanding.
•
Creative Health and Wellbeing in the Community: €350,000 of Shared Island 
funding in 2024 for Local Authority led cross-border arts and health 
partnerships to deliver 5 projects.

Shared Island initiative –2024
Continue to implement Government Shared Island investment 
priorities.
Shared Island Youth Forum statement and continue the Shared 
Island Dialogue series
Progressing the Shared Island research programme to provide 
evidence and analysis on the opportunities, and challenges, 
around deepening cooperation and connections on the island. 

Further Information
gov.ie/sharedisland
sharedisland@taoiseach.gov.ie 

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY, 8th OF 
APRIL 2024 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR JANE HORGAN JONES 
To ask the Chief Executive to clean or paint over the graffiti problem in the lane behind 
Clontarf park.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Public Domain Team will have this graffiti removed as soon as resources allow.  
 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR KELSEY MAY DALY 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the Marrowbone Lane depot 
reduction/consolidation project. Specifically addressing the numbers of staff currently 
working onsite, projected reductions of staff and services over the next year, the 
progress of plans for the open space which will be vacated by the depot operations 
and  
details 
of 
the 
DCC 
official 
with  
responsibility  
for 
developing 
a 
sporting/recreational use for the lands, specifically a full sized pitch for the community 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Marrowbone Lane Depot provides key operational services essential for the 
functioning of the city, and there are no immediate plans to reduce the number of staff 
or services operating from the Depot. 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR KELSEY MAY DALY 
To ask the Chief Executive if there are plans to address the maintenance issues in 
Tyrone Place. Specifically the issues of mould, leaks and structural damage. Is there 
a meantime solution to improve the health and well-being of residents.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
Dublin City Council will engage an independent damp report on any unit within the 
complex and carry out the recommended measures outlined in the report. 
Tenants can request this inspection through the normal channels (telephone, email, 
local representative, area office) and we will arrange for the survey. 
Similarly, any reports of leaks or other structural issues, are dealt with on a case by 
case basis. 
 
Q.4 
COUNCILLOR MICHEAL PIDGEON 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the bike bunker scheme, when a tender 
will likely issue, and how many bunkers are expected in the initial order. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Road Safety and Micromobility Section is currently working on the Bike Bunker 
scheme tender process. Dublin City Council is planning to launch a competitive 
tendering process to select a contractor who will manage the comprehensive bike 
bunker operations, users and assets. After selecting a contractor, the council aims to 
collaborate with the winning tenderer to provide this service throughout the city and 
establish a goal of having 300 bike bunkers (by 2026), dependent on funding. 
The procurement process for this scheme was scheduled to commence in the first 
quarter of 2024, unfortunately this date was missed and this process is planned to kick 
off in April/ May 2024.  
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR MICHAEL PIDGEON 
To ask the Chief Executive how many people are employed in the DCC housing 
section, how many part/full-time vacancies there are, and at what grades the vacancies 
are at. 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently 1026 employees in the Housing and Community Services 
Department and 120 full-time vacancies. 
A number of these vacant posts are in the process of being filled, with further vacancies 
scheduled for advertising over the coming months.   
 
The breakdown of vacancies across the various levels is as follows: 
 
 
Managerial 
 
1 
 
Grade 8 
 
4 
 
Grade 7 
 
15 
 
Grade 6 
 
26 
 
Grade 5 
 
20 
 
Grade 4 
 
3 
 
Grade 3 
 
6 
 
Operational 
 
45 
 
Q.6 
COUNCILLOR MICHEAL PIDGEON 
To ask the Chief Executive the number of beds/places available within homeless family 
hubs across Dublin. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is an approximate capacity of 4,358 beds in Emergency Accommodation for 
families (NGO, hubs & Private Emergency Accommodation) across the 4 Local 
Authorities covered by the Dublin Regional Homeless Executive (DRHE). 
 
Q.7  
COUNCILLOR MICHEAL PIDGEON 
To ask the Chief Executive how many enforcement cases have been opened, 
completed, or are pending against short-term lets since 1st July 2019, and if he will 
give an overview of their current status in tabular form. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Short Term Letting: July 2019 to March 2024 
 
Year 
 
Cases Open    
 
S152 
Warning 
Letters 
 
S154 
Enforcement 
Notices 
 
Cases resolved 
2024 
77 
85 
4 
65 
2023  
302 
370 
35 
259 
2022 
336 
404 
16 
452 
2021 
310 
492 
9 
469 
2020 
572 
650 
10 
398 
2019 
295 
113 
16 
51 
Total 
1892 
2114 
90 
1694 
 
 
Q.8  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive how many rough sleepers beds are available for Dublin 
City . 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Outreach team contact the Freephone / Central Placement Service (CPS) 
throughout the day, should they require accommodation for any rough sleepers that 
they encounter during the course of their work. Beds are then allocated based on 
availability.  
 
When the Freephone closes at 10pm, the Outreach team have a guaranteed allocation 
of 16 beds. Additionally, any beds that have not been used by the Freephone by 10pm, 
will also be made available to the Outreach team.  
 
Should a rough sleeper contact the Freephone / CPS directly themselves requesting 
accommodation throughout the day, they will be allocated a bed, again based on 
assessment and availability. 
 
Q.9 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the section of the path way that has fallen out due to 
the tree roots be reinstated at (Details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry has been created (ref. 11155577) and passed to the Area Inspector who 
will 
carry 
out 
an 
inspection 
and 
arrange 
the 
repair, 
if 
needed.  
 
Q.10  COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive about the traffic congestion on (Details supplied) .That 
the traffic department see if the congestion can be addressed as local residents cannot 
open their windows due to the omissions from trucks cars every day of the week. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The predominant pollutant associated with traffic is Nitrogen Dioxide.  
 
Dublin City Council does not have a permanent Air Quality Monitoring Station in that 
immediate location. 
Indicative Nitrogen Dioxide monitoring can be carried out using diffusion tubes. The 
tubes can be placed in the location for consecutive months and the results obtained 
by laboratory analysis. More information about this can be found by accessing the 
below link.  
https://www.epa.ie/environment-and-you/air/diffusion-tube-results/ 
The Air Quality Monitoring and Noise Control Unit and the EPA commenced a diffusion 
tube survey of streets in the North Inner City area to determine the contribution of traffic 
to air pollution levels in the area. The survey was initiated because of complaints from 
residents of the area about traffic volumes and associated air pollution levels. The 
survey started on 14/01/2024 and must be carried over a one year period to reference 
the results against annual mean limit values cited in the Air Quality Standards 2011. 
The results will be available from 14/01/2025.  
When the survey is completed the results will be discussed with the Traffic Division. 
 
Q.11 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the damaged dish outside (Details supplied) be 
repaired. This Cllr did have a question in on same some months ago .Work was to take 
place but so far no works have taken place. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11156963) has been created and forwarded to the Area Inspector who 
will assign a crew to the repair of the vehicular dishing outside (Details supplied) 
 
 

Q.12  COUNCILLOR DARCY LONERGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many planning applications there have been for Short 
Term Lets in Dublin City in each year since July 2019, and how many have been 
approved, rejected, or are currently in progress 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Set out below are the details regarding planning applications for Short Term Lets    
received from 2019 to date: 
 
 
Short Term Lettings 2019 - 13.03.2024 
 
DCC  
  
  
  
  
ABP 
  
Year 
Received Granted Refused Current  On Appeal to 
ABP 
Appealed 
and 
Granted 
permission by ABP 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
2019 
15 
2 
13 
  
  
2 
2020 
6 
2 
4 
  
  
2 
2021 
3 
1 
2 
  
  
  
2022 
5 
2 
3 
  
1 
  
2023 
11 
1 
10 
  
3 
  
2024 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Total 
40 
8 
32 
0 
4 
4 
ABP Decisions 
2019 
  
1 
  
  
SHD Application - Permission granted by ABP. 
Q.13  COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive if the parks department could investigate the Japanese 
Miyawaki forestry method for rapidly growing forests to replace trees that are cut down 
or die. 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We have been aware of the Miyawaki Method, developed by the Japanese botanist 
Akira Miyawaki in the 1970s, and which has been promoted by some sources for a 
number of years. However, the planting and husbandry of trees has been practiced 
and proven in Ireland over many decades both in forests and in urban parks.  
 
There is no evidence that planting forestry transplants and whips in extremely dense 
copses has any benefit for the trees, for biodiversity and in fact according to the advice 
of arborists and foresters it is unsustainable in the long term. 
 
While there is an initial impressive growth in height due to the increased competition 
for light, this growth in height is achieved at the expense of the girth of the trees, which 
increases their susceptibility to fail and certainly will not enable them to grow to 
maturity. It is mature trees, which have the most value for carbon sequestration and 
biodiversity. 
 
There are multiple reasons why we are not planting trees in dense copses in excess 
of best arboricultural practice in public parks and we are not aware of any independent 
peer-reviewed evaluations or trials which scientifically confirm the supposed 
advantages of the Miyawaki method. 

As a Parks Services, we plant and support the planting of thousands of trees each year 
by community groups who wish to enhance their locality and contribute to Climate 
Action initiatives. We also provide advice to community groups on biodiversity and 
nature conservation measure suitable for communities. 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive further to the reply issued to Question Number 20 at the 
March City Council meeting if he will respond to the clarifying questions and statements 
now submitted in relation to that Reply and set out below. 
 
Once again, we have GDPR being misapplied by the Council with the result that it is 
facilitating non-compliance with motor tax/vehicle registration requirements. 
 
The Officer confirms that residency i.e., 183 or more days in the State at the relevant 
address is a legal requirement for the issuance of the permit. They also check that the 
vehicle is insured at the address where the person resides.   
 
Effectively, the Council is ignoring the best evidence of residence at the address which 
would be a copy of the Vehicle Registration Certificate which will be issued to any 
purchaser of a car, resident in Ireland or anyone becoming resident in Ireland who is 
legally required to register the vehicle within at least 30 days, sometimes sooner.  
 
The situation could be easily remedied by the conditions for a successful application 
for a parking permit to include a copy of the VRT certificate showing the address. A 
foreign registered vehicle which has not been re-registered will not be able to comply 
with this requirement. 
 
Having the vehicle registered correctly here should be a duty of all State bodies who 
have the ability to assist with compliance. As well as dealing with issues around 
compliance with motor duty and VAT requirements for imported vehicles, it also helps 
to being all vehicles driving on the roads here by residents of Ireland within the  NCT 
process.  If an English or NI vehicle is imported into Ireland and is not registered here, 
it falls outside the vehicle safety checks in Ireland. 
 
I accept that the existing position does not require the production of the correct 
document but it would be interesting to hear why the Council thinks that it could not 
amend the application process to assist with compliance with tax laws and road safety. 
GDPR is not an excuse for inaction when already the Council asks for the insurance 
cert and two other ID documents. The Council is not a private car park operator who 
might have legal constraints. It is the gatekeeper of legal compliance for vehicles 
parking on our public streets." 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin City Council Parking Control Bye Laws 2024, which are approved by 
Council, govern the issuing of Residential Parking Permits.  As previously outlined, 
Dublin City Council must work within the remit of these Bye Laws when determining if 
a person is eligible to obtain a permit based on the criteria, set out in the Bye Laws.  
Dublin City Council is only authorised to collect this data for the specific purpose of 
issuing a permit, we are not authorised to collect data for any other reason.  Any 
change to the requirements set out in the Bye Laws would need to be done as per the 
process set out in Section 36 of the Road Traffic Act 1994 and would ultimately need 
to go back to Council for approval. 
 
The issue of requesting VRT as part of a Residential Parking Permit may be examined 
when the Bye Laws are being reviewed at a later date. 
 

Q.15  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the housing options available to (details 
supplied), mother of two young children, and living in the parents’ home in what is a 
difficult and stressful environment. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing List with an application date of 06/06/2023, the 
applicant holds the following position on this list; 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
2 
709 
D 
2 
414 
E 
2 
831 
 
The applicant has recently been approved for Homeless HAP. 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household.  
 
Q.16 
COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WATTERS 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a stone facade to be installed on the walls 
that surround Drimnagh Castle, on Landsdowne Gate, Dublin 12, as well as the wall 
at the bottom of Slievebloom Park, facing Long Mile Road, Dublin 12.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The walls in question are privately owned structures that the City Council has no role 
in the maintenance or development of. 
 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WATTERS 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the removal of tree stumps on Slievebloom 
Park, adjacent to Drimnagh Castle Primary School. 
The trees were cut roughly three years ago. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks will include these stumps into our next stump removal tender. This work is likely 
to be carried out in the coming months. 
 
Q.18 
COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WATTERS 
To ask the Chief Executive to explore the possibility of opening a tourist information 
office on Long Mile Road, Dublin 12, in close proximity to Drimnagh Castle. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Tourism Information Offices in Dublin and nationally are provided by Fáilte Ireland.  
The majority of tourist information offices for Dublin are city centre locations where 
there is high footfall of visitors seeking information.  The most recent office opened 
beside City Hall and is getting a high level of engagement with visitors to the city.  Each 
office supplies information on a wide range of tourism offering and events and 
information on Drimnagh Castle can be provided through the existing network of offices 

and on line resources on www.visitdublin.ie which is also managed by Fáilte Ireland.  
Information is provided for a wide range of culture and heritage sites in and around the 
city.  Drimnagh Castle is a meticulously restored medieval castle and has its own 
excellent tourist information website www.drimnaghcastle.org while also plays a key 
role in prominently publicised and promoting this city asset.  Other websites Discover 
Ireland contains information for visitors.   
 
Q.19 
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the proposed Padel Centre at Bushy Park 
could he outline the number of tender applications received; the names of those who 
submitted an application and the date on which a decision will be made. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The tender for a Multi-Party Framework Agreement to Manage the Pavilion, Tennis 
Courts and Padel Courts in Bushy Park, Dublin 6 closed for submissions on the 12th 
March 2024.  I am unable to provide the number of tenders submitted or the names of 
those who tendered whilst the tender process is still active.  Tenders received will be 
assessed in the coming weeks and once completed, a Contract Award Notice will be 
published on the E-tenders website when the contract is in place, in line with 
procurement legislation. 
 
Q.20 
COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive does the council have a policy in relation to Tree pruning 
and action plan in relation to nuisance claims from residences where repeated request 
have been made for the council property to encroach on their property.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The policy in relation to public trees overhanging neighbouring properties can be 
consulted 
in 
our 
Dublin 
City 
Tree 
Strategy 
(https://www.dublincity.ie/sites/default/files/media/file-uploads/2018-
08/Dublin_City_Tree_Strategy_2016-2020.pdf). 
Please see below the paragraph in relation to public trees overhanging neighbouring 
properties. 
Council will not prune trees that overhang neighbouring properties unless the trees are 
dangerous or are causing actionable nuisance. The Council has no legal obligation to 
prune overhanging trees unless they are causing direct damage to an adjacent 
property or are imminently dangerous. This reflects the Council’s position as an owner 
of thousands of trees and the resources available. Given that many thousands of 
Council trees overhang boundaries, it is not an effective use of resources to prune 
every overhanging limb. Tree roots in gardens are a natural occurrence and root 
presence is unlikely to be affected by tree pruning. However, situations where a tree 
is genuinely generating root encroachment to an exceptional, severe and 
unreasonable degree are dealt with on a case-by-case basis. 
 
Q.21 
COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the Kilmore Road/ Ardmore 
Junction new light junction upgrades as there is a request that it is priorities 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The TAG Group has previously recommended that additional pedestrian crossings at 
this junction be provided and it has already been included for consideration on a works 
programme for 2024. 
 
The NTA confirmed the funding allocations for 2024 on the 7th of February 2024. 
Funding of €3,750,000 has been made available for installing pedestrian crossings 
across the Dublin Administrative Area.   

The Traffic Section will be meeting with North Central Area Councillors on the 3rd of 
April to gather their views on which other locations they wish to prioritise prior to 
finalising the works programme for 2024. 
 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on a community event to be hosted 
in the Ellen field Park in Whitehall. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Community and Social Development Team, Artane-Whitehall LEA are starting the 
process of planning a family fun day for Ellenfield Park, Whitehall, Dublin 9. It is hoped 
the event will be in Q3 2024. The event will be advertised locally and with all the 
community contacts within the Whitehall, Santry area.  
 
Q.23 
COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive for the number of complaints made in the last 3 years, in 
relation to trip and fall where tree roots had caused a lift in the path to cause uneven 
surfaces, and of these how many request where in for maintenance on the surface in 
the 12 months prior. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Road Maintenance Services records customer services requests on a Transport Asset 
Management System (TAMS). During the three year period from 1st March 2021 to 31st 
March 2024, over 40,000 individual customer service request have been recorded on 
this system, that relate specifically to road maintenance issues. 
 
These service requests include the reporting of potholes on the City’s roads and 
streets, damaged footpaths (either due to tree roots lifting the path or other non-tree 
related issues), damaged street furniture, oil spills, overgrown hedges, utility 
reinstatement related issues, requests for vehicular dishings, collapsed manholes, 
fallen trees, street nameplates etc. 
 
Whilst over 7,000 of these service requests have been recorded for issues concerning 
footpaths for the period in question, the system does not specifically record the number 
of trips and falls that arose as a result of footpath issues and footpath issues that relate 
to tree roots. 
 
Please further note that during the same three year period Road Maintenance Services 
crews repaired and made safe approximately 18,000 defects and hazards on the road 
and footpath network. These included repairs to footpaths that were damaged as a 
result of tree roots. 
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for information on the number and nature of maintenance 
requests from people living in Cromcastle Court over the previous twelve months, how 
long it took to resolve each maintenance request and a statement on the maintenance 
of the common areas of the flat complex, including the bin shoots, grass and play areas 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We are currently de-tenanting people from Cromcastle Court. Emergency requests are 
dealt with within 48 hours and standard requests are dealt with within eight weeks. We 
have a caretaking service which maintains the common areas of the complex. 
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER 
To ask the Chief Executive to engage with housing maintenance to replace the front 
door at (details supplied). This is a tenant of ours whose door is in extremely poor 

condition. She has tried stopgap measures to remedy this but it really needs replacing 
as there is significant draft. Furthermore, to ask housing maintenance to look at the 
work done in her driveway where some potholes were tarmacadam over and work was 
to a very poor standard.  Her contact details are provided. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance have agreed with tenant to replace this hall door.  The door has 
been ordered and it will take approximately 6 weeks for delivery. The driveway falls 
under the tenant’s responsibility.  
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER 
To ask the Chief Executive what measures the council has taken to comply with the 
motion regarding support for the Palestinian BDS Movement voted through this council 
in 2018 and if an ‘Apartheid Audit’ has been completed by the council to assess where 
and how we can support BDS as per the elected members’ wishes. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The legal responsibility for all procurement by the City Council rests with the Chief 
Executive, as against the Elected Members.  In exercising this responsibility, the Chief 
Executive is obliged to comply with statutory national and EU procurement frameworks 
that already provide specified grounds for exclusion.  Dublin City Council is required to 
meet its procurement obligations including the equal treatment of all parties and not 
deliberately restrict the market.  The motion agreed by Elected Members in 2018 would 
have resulted, if implemented, in Dublin City Council being in breach of its procurement 
obligations. 
 
In this context, the Chief Executive will not conduct an audit aimed at establishing 
compliance with the BDS campaign as the campaign is in breach of both national and 
EU procurement frameworks. 
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER  
To ask the Chief Executive to have the planning enforcement section examine the 
development on Killester Avenue East (65-67) and compare the artists impressions 
from the application with the actual height of the building to determine whether these 
are consistent. Local residents believe there is a significant disparity between images 
provided prior to development and the actual result.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Planning Enforcement Section will set up an enforcement file and investigate the 
issue brought up in this question as to whether the building height is planning 
compliant. The Councillor will be informed of the results of the investigation once the 
building height has been measured. 
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER 
To ask the Chief Executive to erect signage in the vicinity of the bathing shelters on 
Bull Island to remind people to dispose of food carefully as last year there was an issue 
with rats. Furthermore, to ask the manager to engage with the food outlet on site – 
which is under license with the council I believe - regarding same and engaging with 
their customers to ensure appropriate disposal of food waste.  
 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Service will liaise with the in-house signage department to come up with 
appropriate signage that might inform the issue which will be erected at appropriate 
locations at the shelters and café.  
 
 
 

Q.29  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a full maintenance inspection of (details supplied) the 
family have no heating, no hot water, water ingress on their balcony, their windows and 
backdoor need replacing. These conditions are intolerable and are having a significant 
detrimental impact upon the family. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will log this for the tenants and all necessary works will be 
carried out.  An inspection will also be carried out on the water ingress on the balcony, 
the windows and backdoor.   
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to examine the level of existing street lighting and public 
lighting in (Details supplied); consider where additional lighting columns can be 
installed; and to indicate a timeframe for the installation of any new lighting columns; 
and if he will make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The following report provides an update on the street lighting and public lighting 
(details supplied.) 
 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that a Community Consultative Forum be 
established as part of the redevelopment of (Details supplied); as Co-Chair of a 
similar forum for the O'Devaney Gardens housing project, such an initiative is 
necessary and would be of benefit to both the City Council and the local community 
and I urge the Chief Executive to agree to this request; and if he will make a statement 
on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The PPP Project Team are due to commence on site in Q4 2024. As part of the 
community engagement for this site, it was agreed that a Community Liaison Officer 
would be appointed for the duration of construction.  
Once the preferred tenderer has been appointed, the PPP Project Team will engage 
with officials in the Central Area to establish a Community Liaison Officer.  
The Area Housing Manager will work with the PPP Project Team to establish the most 
appropriate forum in advance of construction commencing on site. 
 
Q.32 
COUNCILLOR PADDY MCCARTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many metered on-street parking spaces are  there  in 
the city of Dublin in the various categories, Red, Yellow, Green, , Orange, and Blue, 
and those metered only on certain weekend days? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
There are currently a total of 1,082 meters.  They are broken down between the 
following colour zones: 
 
Yellow Zone – 370 Meters 
 
Red Zone – 281 Meters 
 
Orange Zone – 177 Meters 
 
Green Zone – 230 Meters 
 
Blue Zone – 24 Meters 
 
The “white zone” which is paid parking on Sundays from 2pm to 6pm would usually be 
considered the yellow zone on all other days of the week.  The information on 37 of 
these meters updates every Sunday from 2pm – 6pm from yellow zone to white zone.  

The area concerned would be parts of the inner city (included in the map attached) - 
https://www.dublincity.ie/sites/default/files/2023-12/parking-fees-map-2024.pdf  
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR PADDY MCCARTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive what was the annual revenue from metered parking in each 
of the last five financial years 2019, 2020,2021,2022,2023? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A response will issue to the Councillor directly on this. 
 
Q.34 
COUNCILLOR PADDY MCCARTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many residents are in receipt of parking badges (under 
the €50 per annum scheme) entitling them to park without payment at metered spaces 
on specified streets? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently 20,830 permit holders within the Dublin City Council area.  These 
Residential permits once displayed on the residents’ vehicles authorise them to park 
on the road displayed on their permit.  The permit holder can purchase either a 1 year 
or 2 year permit. 
 
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR PADDY MCCARTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many blue permits for disability claimants are in issue 
in Dublin. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement don’t issue these permits, you would need to contact the Irish 
Wheelchair Association to find out the numbers issued. 
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive and Planning Department, in regard to enquirers about the 
historic building, Rathmines Post Office, being removed as a post office for so many 
residents in the areas. See (Details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Rathmines Post Office, formerly the Telephone Exchange is an imposing 1934 Art 
Deco building on Rathmines Road Upper and is a protected structure- RPS no.7247. 
Chapter 11 of the City Development Plan – Built Heritage & Archaeology, includes a 
series of policies and objectives to conserve and enhance our protected structures. 
Dublin City Council does not own this building and as such, has no role in the decision 
of An Post to close the Post Office.    Planning permission is required for any works or 
change of use which would materially affect the character of the protected structure or 
its special interest.  The Conservation Section is available to advise owners of 
protected structures in relation to development and conservation proposals. 
The Planning Authority will assess any future planning application in accordance with 
the provisions of the 2022-2028 City Development Plan and ensure any proposed use 
aligns with the zoning objective and the preservation of the integrity of the protected 
structure. 
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive and Roads Department in regard to the enquirers about 
parking in certain parts of Rathgar Avenue which can be dangerous for children in the 
area. See (details supplied) 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The query regarding the traffic situation at the junction of Rathgar Avenue, Garville 
Avenue, and Garville Avenue Upper is currently being assessed by the TAG area 
engineer. Consideration to include the junction in the future road works program is 
underway. 
 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR JANICE BOYLAN  
To ask the Chief Executive when the traffic lights at the junction of Mayor Street Upper 
and Wapping Street (beside Spencer Dock LUAS stop) will be programmed so that 
concrete bollards can be removed allowing for through traffic from North Wall Quay, 
and from Sheriff Street Upper. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The upgrade works at the junction immediately beside The Spencer Dock Luas stop 
are being undertaken by the developer building the adjacent buildings. Once the 
upgrade works have been completed by the developer DCC will be in a position to 
open the junction. We are currently waiting for the developer to complete the works 
which were originally scheduled for last year. We have written again to the developer’s 
agent asking for an update. 
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that this council advances the refurbishment and 
upgrade of (Details suppled) so that we can consider utilising the community property 
for community purposes such as early years childcare and education, training 
programmes to assist parents of children with neurodiverse needs; dedicated space 
for senior citizens in the area; and that any alternative plans for the site to be shelved; 
and if he would make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council acknowledges the needs reported within the Central Area of 
services for Childcare. This matter is also a focus of the North East Inner City (NEIC) 
Programme Implementation Board which has a broad representation of Central 
Govenment Departments including Department of An Taoiseach and the Department 
of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth. DCC has committed to the 
North East Inner City (NEIC) Programme Implementation Board to review vacant 
properties within the area for consideration as suitable properties for Childcare 
provision. The (details supplied) is one of the buildings currently under consideration.  
Recommendations as to what the future use of this and other Council owned properties 
will be brought to the Active Land Management team chaired by the Chief Executive. 
 
Q.40 
COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Requests for help with serious ASB from residents throughout the inner city appears 
to have increased exponentially over the last number of months? To ask if this is 
reflected in the demands of those responsible for implementing DCCs “Anti-Social 
Behaviour Strategy?” 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Councils Central Estate Management Unit structure will oversee the 
implementation of the ASB Strategy Fostering Safer Communities across the Council, 
provide or arrange the provision of necessary training, collect necessary data on 
activity levels, ensure a consistency of approach to dealing with ASB complaints and 
finally ensure required levels of inter-agency cooperation. The Unit works closely with 
all our Estate Management Teams in the Area Offices on these matters. 
 

Our overall objective is to provide safe and peaceful neighbourhoods for Dublin City 
Council tenants, and their neighbours, to reside and work in. We will aim to prevent 
and reduce incidences of anti-social behaviour (ASB) in affected communities where 
citizens are negatively affected. We will deliver this through strategies that are based 
on Prevention, Partnership, Enforcement, and Continuous Improvement. Below is a 
summary of the commitments that we will adhere to in the delivery of this strategy.   
Dublin City Council’s commitments to prevent and reduce anti-social behaviour are: 
 
 Proactive Estate Management: Prevention & Early Intervention 
 Working In Partnership: Building Key Relationships 
 Consequences for Anti-Social Behaviour which affects the Community   
 Effective Complaints Response: Efficient Investigation and Proportionate Sanctions   
 Continuous Improvement: Investing in the Delivery of our Strategy.   
 
Q.41 
COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Following the Department of Transports recommendations for cost effective yet safe 
alternative zebra crossings (without Belisha beacons) can the Active Travel Unit/Traffic 
Department provide a draft plan of potential suitable locations within D8 that includes 
a schedule of works for their installation please?” 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The DCC Traffic section is currently engaged in a consideration of the recently issued 
guidelines on Zebra Crossings from the DoT. Issues including road safety, suitability 
of location, technical engineering aspects and resource availability need to be 
addressed in advance of a City wide adoption of Zebra Crossings. 
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the Dublin City Council Sports Action Plan 2024-2029 
prioritise the refurbishment of the numerous “pocket pitches” dotted throughout the city 
which will support the vision of “More Active,More Often”?” 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An Outdoor Recreation Officer will be assigned to oversee the assessment of all green 
/ open spaces and parks. The role will involve an assessment of green / open spaces 
and parks within Dublin City the purpose of which will be to investigate the 
opportunities available for physical and recreation activities.  
The goal is that this role and the work undertaken will create opportunities for 
highlighting and empowering activity in these spaces on an ongoing basis. 
 
Q.43 
COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the surprisingly successful dog fouling initiative taken 
by Galway LA in stencilling messages to owners on foot paths and fluorescent spray 
painting poo be piloted in the D8 area. 
Please refer to the attachment. 
Galway’s dog poop problem halved after council’s bizarre spray paint campaign | Irish 
Independent 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Dublin City Council are considering introducing a pilot stencilling initiative in the Dublin  
12 area and if successful will roll out to other areas in the city. There are no plans in 
place to spray fluorescent paint on dog poo in any area of Dublin  
 
 
 

Q.44 
COUNCILLOR ALISON GILLILAND 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline progress to date on the upgrading of our public 
lighting system to a more carbon efficient system across the city and in particular to 
indicate any public/private collaborations involved in this upgrade 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A report will issue to the Councillor in advance of the May meeting of the City Council 
 
Q.45 
COUNCILLOR ALISON GILLILAND 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline the approach used by our Planning section to 
assess and adjudicate on planning applications so as to meet the following 
Development Plan Objective QHSN3 (ii) 'To encourage the establishment of 
sustainable residential communities by ensuring a wide variety of housing typologies 
and tenures is provided throughout the city in accordance with the provisions of the 
Housing Need Demand Assessment and any future Regional HNDA'. i.e. how do we 
ensure a balanced tenure mix in the immediate and wider area where the proposed 
residential development is being proposed. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The HNDA prepared to inform the Housing Strategy of the City Development Plan 
clearly demonstrated that there is ample justification for the full implementation of the 
Part V housing provision of the current Planning legislation; and also any expansion of 
the 10% social housing to include 10% additional affordable.  As a result all planning 
applications for the City above the relevant thresholds of 10 units must comply with the 
full extent of Part V as currently allowed for. 
 
Alongside this, the objective is also implemented through the work of Local Area Plans 
and SDRAs; whereby the Council encourages the provision of a greater level of tenure 
mix than currently provided for.  For example in the implementation of the Ballymun 
LAP; the identification of sites for affordable rental and/or purchase or varied types of 
AHBs are actively encouraged to provide a greater mix for the area.  Also part of 
providing this mix is the building of working relationships with the LDA, who can provide 
affordable rental and/or purchase on a mix of public and privately purchased land to 
expand the variety of housing typologies in many of the large regeneration areas.  The 
Council will continue to use the current legislation; its functions as a landowner and 
also by engaging with other key stakeholders working on housing delivery; to ensure 
that the objective continues to be successfully implemented.  
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR LARRY O’TOOLE 
To ask the Chief Executive to make provision for a Moatfield Estate name stone to be 
installed on the grass area at entrance from Tonlegee Road. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Public Domain team will make provision in 2024 for a name stone to be installed 
in this area. 
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR LARRY O’TOOLE 
To ask the Chief Executive to make provision for litter bins installed at grass area along 
Moatfield Park, and at laneway from Moatfield on to Tonlegee Road shops.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services will have the above mentioned locations assessed and 
litter levels monitored there over the coming weeks to see if there is a requirement for 
litter bins there. 
 
 

Q.48  COUNCILLOR LARRY O’TOOLE 
To ask the Chief Executive to make provision for a ‘No litter’ sign to be erected at 
laneway from Moatfield on to Tonlegee Road shops. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Public Domain Team will make provision for a “No Dumping” sign to be erected in 
this laneway in the coming weeks.  
 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR LARRY  O’TOOLE 
To ask the Chief Executive to make provision for speed calming measures/ramps to 
be installed throughout Moatfield estate.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Administration team have been in touch with the Councillor for further information 
and when we receive this (Enquiry Ref: 7038532) will be referred to the Area Engineer 
for assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
 
Q.50  COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the EV  fast charging point pilot, to ask 
how many locations are being piloted, their location, the intended timeline for the pilot, 
the process for assessing the experience after the pilot and DCC's intended timeline 
for all of this and if he will comment on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin Local Authority Electric Vehicle Charging Strategy (DLAEVCS) was 
published in June 2022 to anticipate the demand for services across Dublin City and 
County. Dublin City Council agreed that the ‘Rapid Hub’ (rather than ‘Mixed’) 
technology scenario would be the better model to align with the City’s development, 
transport and climate action objectives. 
 
Based on the ‘Rapid Hub’(*) Medium (Curtailed) Scenario the DLAEVCS anticipates the 
following demand for Public EV charging points in the City by end of 2025;  
 
 
Residential 
65 
 
En-Route 
19 
 
Destination 
280 
 
 
It is expected that the majority of these charge points will be installed and operated by 
private sector investors. 
 
DCC’s role in public EV charging is as a facilitator rather than an operator in the 
establishment and maintenance of a public EV charging network. However, to 
encourage the private sector participation and investment the 4 Dublin Local 
Authorities agreed to run a pilot project to install up to 200 Electric Vehicle charging 
points at ‘easy win’ publicly owned facilities. 
 
DCC identified the following locations as suitable for the pilot project; 
 
1. 
St. Anne’s Park 
 
 
 
North Central Area 
2. 
Clontarf Bus Garage  
 
 
North Central Area 
3. 
Strand Road, Sydney Parade 
 
South East Area 
4. 
Mary’s lane 
 
 
 
 
Central Area 
5. 
Donnybrook (The Crescent)  
 
South East Area 
6. 
Milltown (Strand Terrace) 
 
 
South East Area 
7. 
Ballyfermot Leisure Centre 
 
 
South Central Area 

8. 
Raheny Library 
 
 
 
North Central Area 
9. 
Cabra Parkside Leisure Centre 
 
Central Area 
10. 
Finglas, Wellmount St. 
 
 
North West Area 
11. 
Clonskeagh (Farmer Browns) 
 
South East Area 
12. 
Bushy Park (Rathdown Avenue) 
 
South East Area 
13. 
Cabra Library  
 
 
 
Central Area 
14. 
Walkinstown Library  
 
 
South Central Area 
 
Procurement for the pilot project was managed by Fingal County Council. The 
procurement process is currently underway. A number of submissions have been 
received and are being reviewed. 
 
The DLAs expect that the successful tenderer will be appointed by the end of May, 
2024 and that works will be substantially complete by the end of December 2024. 
 
*Rapid Hub – All public residential charging demands are met by rapid EVCPs. It is 
envisaged that in the short-medium term this would likely be 1 or 2 chargers installed 
together, and in the medium-long term “proper” hubs would be developed (e.g. 6 + 
EVCPs) 
 
Q.51 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline exactly the options to local authority tenants with 
regard to waste disposal and collection, to set out the grounds upon which tenants are 
only allowed use bags for waste collection as opposed to bins and if he will comment 
on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Local Authority Tenants who reside in Dublin City Council flat complexes generally 
have communal bins supplied for their use within the complex and an appropriate 
charge for this service is applied to their monthly rent. 
 
Local authority tenants who are living in single housing have exactly the same options 
and responsibilities as all private rented dwellings in that they are required to make an 
arrangement with a private waste collector of their choice who will provide them with 
the service they require. There are no properties in the city where tenants are only 
allowed use bags and it is the preferred option of the City Council that bins must always 
be used whenever possible because of the problems associated with the presentation 
of waste in bags. Notwithstanding this it must be accepted that in many properties 
throughout the city the option to use a bin is not practical because the properties simply 
do not have off street storage for bins.  
 
In such cases, the street will generally be given a derogation, which permits the 
presentation of waste in bags. Again, the resident, private or City Council tenant must 
make a private arrangement with a waste collector for the supply and collection of their 
waste bags. Currently almost 900 streets around the city have such derogations. 
We also actively encourage the use of the many bottle banks and bring centres located 
across the city to ensure the maximum amount of waste is recycled. Residents also 
have an option to bring their bagged waste to a local Civic Amenity site and dispose of 
it there for an appropriate fee if this suits their specific needs. 
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to publish the full terms of the settlement 
between  Greyhound Household Unlimited Co and Dublin City Council on foot of the 
case taken to the Commercial Division of the High Court in 2023 and if he will comment 
on the matter. 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Legal case in question was struck out on agreement between the parties with no 
Order as to costs when Dublin City Council took the decision not to proceed with the  
Competition. 
 
Q.53 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council Housing Department has had an 
opportunity to review the recently published report “Opportunities and challenges of 
vacant above the shop units for residential use in Ireland” (collaboration between 
Dublin Simon Community and Kathleen Stokes of Dublin City University) and if the 
recommendations therein would be of interest/use to DCC in facilitating over the shop 
planning permissions in accordance with and in compliance with our Development 
Plan. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The report “Opportunities and challenges of vacant above the shop units for residential 
use in Ireland” by Dr. Kathleen Stokes and Michelle Connolly, has been reviewed by 
officials in the Housing & Community Services and Planning & Property Development 
Departments. The report is welcomed and the findings and recommendations will of 
be value in the development of policy in relation to urban commercial vacancy. 
 
The writers of the report have been invited to give a presentation at the next meeting 
of the Planning Strategic Policy Committee in Dublin City Council, This will enable a 
discussion of the recommendations and their implication for planning policy.  
 
Dublin City Council continues to grant permission for proposals for the conversion of 
over the shop units for residential purposes, with over 60 new residential apartments 
granted permission in the past four months.  In the same period 3 notifications of 
intention to avail of the planning exemption for change of use from commercial to 
residential with a potential to provide 9 residential units have been entered on the 
record. 
 
The Planning Department continues to deliver the Living City Initiative. It is 
acknowledged as identified in the report, that there are limitations to this initiative which 
has led to a low uptake of the incentives available.    
 
The Adaptive Reuse Unit in the Housing and Community Services Department, 
established in October 2022, is managing a programme of projects involving the 
acquisition of commercial property and the conversion of these properties to 
apartments for residential use. This programme addresses the complex challenges 
associated with addressing vacancy over the shop as outlined in the DCU/DSC VATSU 
report and is taking advantage of opportunities that are presented by increasing 
commercial vacancy for the creation of new housing solutions. The findings of the 
Adaptive Reuse Unit over the past 18 months, having completed a number of feasibility 
studies on the conversion of commercial property to residential, have been broadly in 
line with the findings of the VATSU report and this unit would agree with most of the 
recommendations that are made in the report. The availability of appropriate funding 
mechanisms for these types of projects is a limiting factor for expansion of the 
programme. 
 
Some of the recommendations made in the report are already being progressed. For 
example:  
Adaptive Reuse projects are being delivered with the support of a multi-disciplinary 
Programme Advisory Group that has been established to include colleagues from a 
range of departments in Dublin City Council including planning, valuers, architects, 

conservation, heritage, quantity surveyors, building control and fire safety. This allows 
projects to be de-risked from a planning and cost perspective.  
 
Representatives from the Adaptive Reuse Unit in the Housing and Community 
Services Department and from the Planning and Property Development Department 
form part of a working group established by the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage that has been tasked with making recommendations for 
promoting the development of vacant commercial property. This group is looking at all 
vacant commercial property including vacancy over active and inactive commercial 
units at ground floor level. A draft report from this working group is due to be presented 
to the Minister for Housing in June of this year.   
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Given that the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage (DOHLGH) 
sets targets for DCC for inspection of dwellings in the private sector, can the Chief 
Executive confirm whether, or not, the subvention/recoupment received form the 
DOHLGH for 2021, 2022 and 2023 covered the cost of the inspections carried out or 
if not, how much does DCC have to pay for this scheme from its own resources. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Inspections are undertaken by Environmental Health Officers to enforce standards in 
private rented properties under the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) 
Regulation 2019.  These Regulations require landlords of rented properties to ensure 
that the properties meets certain minimum standards.  Funding for inspections paid by 
the DOHLGH is paid at a rate per inspection of a dwelling and per dwelling that is 
compliant or brought into compliance with the standards.  The funding received does 
not cover the full cost of inspections.  The table below sets out the summary outcome 
for each of the three years concerned. 
 
  
Inspections 
Total 
Expenditure 
Total 
Income 
Net Cost to DCC 
Inspections 
2021: 
              
3,663  
 €       1,422,789  
 €   513,200  
 €         909,589  
Inspections 
2022: 
              
6,532  
 €       1,423,709  
 €   815,900  
 €         607,809  
Inspections 
2023: 
              
6,611  
 €       1,460,064  
 €   943,900  
 €         516,164  
 
 
The funding Rate is €100 per inspection and up to the end of March 2023, €50 per 
property that is compliant or brought into compliance with the standards. The €50 rate 
was increased to €100 from 1st April 2023 in recognition of the importance of the 
objective of bringing properties into compliance with the standards, something that 
Dublin City Council had made representations to the Department regarding. 
 
An additional point of note is that targets are set for Dublin City Council based on the 
number of registered tenancies to be inspected, however, subvention is not paid per 
inspection of a registered tenancy, instead, it is paid for each inspection of a dwelling. 
 
Q.55 
COUNCILLOR NAIL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
In relation to the COVID-19 essential works carried out at Belcamp (Traveller 
accommodation) can the Chief Executive confirm the final cost of the works completed 

and to also confirm how much of this has been recouped from the DOHLGH and if 
there are any outstanding amounts to be recouped. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Covid Essential works in the Belcamp area commenced in 2020. Total spent to date 
amounts to €4,777,907.07. To date, the Traveller Accommodation Unit has recouped 
€1,790,343.50 of the overall spend from DOHLGH. Total spend of €331,993.08 was 
deemed to be un-recoupable by DOHLGH. Total spend of €2,647,774.29 relating to 
permanent ESB works remains under review with DOHLGH. 
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the amount of the Financial Contribution towards 
the St. Patrick’s Festival 2024 (paid by CRES under Manager’s Order 31490 
CRES/0048/2024) and the payment made to the St. Patrick’s Festival (paid by the 
Central Area under Manager’s Order 29664 CA/0021/2024) and could the Chief 
Executive explain the rationale behind the latter payment give that the Festival is a 
citywide event and not confined to the Central Area.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
CRES Response: 
I can confirm the financial contribution towards St. Patrick’s Festival 2024 
(CRES/0048/2024) from CRES is €423,000 to be paid as follows: 
 
50% on signing of Memorandum of Agreement 
 
20% on the launch of the core festival programme 
 
30% post event, on the satisfactory completion of a post event report 
 
In relation to the payment authorised to St. Patricks Festival under Central Area under 
Manager’s Order 29664 CA/0021/2024 this relates to the North East Inner City (NEIC) 
Pageant which took part in St. Patricks Day Parade 2024.  
 
The proposal for the NEIC to take part in the 2024 parade was proposed by the NEIC 
Programme Office, in consultation with the Central Area Community Development 
team.  A funding application was considered and approved by the NEIC Programme 
Implementation Board and Budget Sub Group in January 2024 to contribute €25,000 
to St. Patricks Festival from the NEIC Initiative with match funding of €25,000 from the 
Central Area NEIC budget programme. 
 
St. Patrick’s Festival, Dublin City Council and the North East Inner City Initiative 
partnered to celebrate the North East Inner City and its historic relationship with the 
St. Patrick’s Festival.  
 
A co-production between the three organisations, a first for 2024, included over 200 
participants on March 17th as the pageant celebrated the energy, resilience and talent 
that make up the community of the NEIC, shining a light of positivity over the story and 
power of the NEIC and the Talent, Strength, Hope, Diversity and Joy in this community. 
 
Q.57 
COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he would list the Dublin City Council sponsored 
applications to the Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht Sport and Media 
for consideration under the current round of the Sport Capital Grants scheme which 
closed some months back, also if the projects under consideration or being 
implemented under the Large Scale Sport Infrastructure Fund can be similarly listed 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Sport Capital Grant Applications under the last round which have yet to get approval 
from the Department are: 
 
1. St Catherine’s Cardiac Rehabilitation –gym equipment. 
2. Irishtown Refurbishment of the Athletic Track. 
 
In respect of large scale infrastructural fund, an announcement is due in the first half 
of 2024 with dates, T & C's etc. to be published on department's website as per Dail 
response to item 1226/24. Two applications were made in the last call for applications 
namely: 
1. Dublin City Council is the applicant for the Dalymount Park Redevelopment 
Project. 
 
2. Technological University Dublin as part of the redevelopment of Grangegorman 
intend to design and construct a new Indoor Sports Complex, Dublin City 
Council is the sponsor for this project. 
 
Parks Biodiversity & Landscape Services submitted eight (8) applications under the 
2023 Sports Capital & Equipment Programme operated by the Department of Tourism, 
Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport & Media.  The eight applications are as follows:- 
 
1. Brickfield Park - 7 a side All Weather 
2. Herbert Park - Bowling Green 
3. Kildonan Park – All Weather 
4. Rockfield Park - Tennis Court upgrades 
5. Silloge Golf Course – Drainage Works 
6. Bunting Park -  St. James Gaels - toilets 
7. Willie Pearse Park - Outdoor Gym 
8. Albert College Park - Tennis Ireland – new dome, upgrade to court lighting, 
improved shower/toilet facilities 
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please refer to playground equipment at (details 
supplied) and arrange for repair of same as a matter of urgency and give a timeline 
for same and if not repairable, please say when replacement equipment will be 
provided. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This piece of play equipment does seem to be particularly attractive to groups 
congregating in the playground after dark who overload the trampoline resulting in the 
damage observed and forcing the piece to be taken out of commission.  This item has 
been repaired twice in the last 12 months and a contractor has been lined up to affect 
repairs once again.  It seems that the previous repairs have used up the necessary 
parts that were in stock with the contractor and unfortunately replacements had to be 
ordered to affect this repair causing some considerable delay. If the damage 
experienced continues consideration will have to be given to the removal of this piece 
and its replacement with another item which might not be so vulnerable to damage. 
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Can the Chief Executive, in relation to trees at (details supplied), say: 
(a) When the work that was begun over a year ago will be completed 
(b) What efforts he plans to make to put right the damage caused by tree to properties 
at details attached 
(c) Why the work, begun over a year ago, has been left to drag on  

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
a) The Parks Service has no record of any communication with this resident nor any 
commitment to remove this tree. 
b) The Parks Service does not carry out repairs to privately owned walls.  If residents 
wish to initiate a claim against the council for repairs contact should be made on 
parks@dublincity.ie requesting a claim form. 
c) The Parks Service has no record of works having being commenced at this 
location. 
 
A visual tree inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow 
and any works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care 
programme for the area 2024-25. 
 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to clarify the situation in relation to industrial/business 
units at (details supplied) and say: 
 
A) What is the current zoning of these properties 
B) When were they rezoned and who requested same, was it a management 
recommendation or a request from Councillors/Developers 
C) If he will agree to establish a Local Area Plan to guide future development 
D) If he will set up a Sub-committee of Area Committee to meet occasionally with 
DCC officials, and reps from local residents to discuss/future and provide input to 
them 
E) If the rezoning was done as support for this view that old industrial sites should be 
moved out to the M50 and these areas changed to residential 
F ) If this is a City Council planning idea or a Government strategy 
G) If it is "old thinking" at this stage and if the strategy has been proofed against City 
Council & Government 2030/2050 climate strategy plans which seem to promote the 
creation of work places close to residential locations 
H) If he can point to locations where this policy of rezoning old industrial sites to 
residential can be viewed as achieved or successful 
J) If he will examine and make a statement on the matter 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In response to the question’s nine elements, each are addressed below. 
 
a) The lands are zoned Z10- “to consolidate and facilitate the development of inner city 
and inner suburban sites for mixed uses”.   
b) They were identified as part of the Z6 and Z7 study, on foot of an objective of the 2016 
Development Plan; which took place in 2017-2019.  As part of this study all Z6 and Z7 
lands were reviewed.  Some lands were brought forward for variation in 2020 and 
others were brought forward through the development plan process. 
c) The lands are not identified as one of the 18 locations for a local area plan/village 
improvement plan within the City Development Plan.  Considering the limited size and 
extent of the area in question, the LAP process would not be appropriate. 
d) Any future development of these lands must be progressed though the statutory 
development management process which requires public consultation on any 
development proposal.  None of the lands in question are in Council ownership.  It 
would not be appropriate to set up a sub-committee of the NCAC to address future 
development management proposals or applications. 
e) The zoning of Z10, which has a requirement for a mixed use approach; supports the 
retention of employment uses on the lands by seeking consolidation and densification 
of uses; alongside the development of new residential as appropriate.  All existing uses 
can continue to operate and expand as recognised existing operators, whether they 
are a conforming or non-conforming use.   

f) Supporting sustainable compact growth directly adjacent to existing high quality rail 
based transport station is a national, regional and local planning policy and also a key 
part of our climate response.   
g) The Z10 zoning seeks to create a mixed use environment that provides the opportunity 
for densification of both employment and residential locations.  
h) The Council recently adopted a masterplan for the Jamestown area of Finglas which 
saw a substantial area of land move from industrial zoning in the 2016 Plan to a 
regeneration mixed use zoning by way of variation. New planning applications for these 
lands are anticipated to be lodged over the coming months that will deliver a mix of 
housing, commercial and community uses.  As an as built location, the North Lotts and 
Grand Canal Dock is over 90% complete as a post industrial area that has been 
significantly intensified for commercial and residential purposes from a low density and 
low use industrial area of the city at a highly accessible location. 
i) DCC will continue to actively promote and implement the policies and objectives of the 
City Development Plan, including Z10 sites such as the one identified in the question, 
through the statutory development management processes; to achieve positive 
sustainable regeneration and the delivery of much needed housing in high quality 
accessible locations, in tandem with employment. 
 
Q.61 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive issue a full update regarding the cherry orchard 
investigation into cash payment for protection 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Chief Executive is not in a position to provide an update at this time as the matter 
is with the Department of Housing and the Gardaí. 
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive present a full and frank report regarding the ongoing 
financial and governance issues that are ongoing regarding at Smock alley theatre   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Temple Bar Cultural Trust is currently involved in a legal process with the tenant of the 
building, Smock Alley Theatre CLG regarding the proposed municipal theatre at the 
venue. The TBCT board is being kept informed on developments in this regard and 
this is the appropriate forum given the fiduciary responsibilities of the board relating to 
the activities of the company. However, when this process has concluded a report will 
be brought before the Council and or the SPC. 
 
Q.63 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to give a report on the ongoing governance and financial 
crisis that is continuing at the Peter Mc Verry trust this report to include what 
measures  and safeguards the DRHE have put in place and has a forensic audit been 
initiated by DCC into PMcVT.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
PMVT has ongoing engagement with the DRHE and the Department of Housing in 
relation to financial and governance matters. The DRHE is concerned with ensuring a 
continuity of services to people experiencing homelessness and that none of PMVT’s 
service users are negatively affected during this time.  
 
The AHB Regulatory Authority (AHBRA) and the Charities Regulatory Authority have 
appointed inspectors to carry out investigations into the affairs of PMVT.  
 
 
 

Q.64  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to present a full report into the use of the building design 
yard in temple bar that is now being use by the Dublin theatre festival, this building was 
to have multiple use and multiple occupancy and was also to facilitate Arts companies 
and artists in its envelope, the building would have full occupancy and be arts active 
under the heading festival house. However, it would appear that this building which is 
closed for most of the year is actually excluding Artist and Arts practice and at 
companies. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Temple Bar Cultural Trust (TBCT) intends to carry out a series of fire and life safety 
improvements in 12 East Essex Street (formerly Design Yard). An architect has been 
engaged by TBCT with a view to commencing works in the coming months. There are 
a number of complexities with the building which has limited its ability to achieve full 
potential. Part of the planned refurbishment will involve an upgrade and reconfiguration 
of the front glazed screen, which will allow for enhanced heat retention in the building 
creating a much more usable space in the process. Temple Bar Cultural Trust are 
committed to working with the current tenant of the building to deliver a more visible 
and vibrant cultural building moving forward. 
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline in tabular form the amount of funding Dublin City 
Council allocates youth services in Dublin City and what are the services that receive 
this funding? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply will be issued to the Councillor within two weeks of the Council Meeting. 
 
Q.66 
COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on any contact made with Ramallah and any 
progress made with the Treaty of Friendship. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In December 2023 the Lord Mayor, Daithí de Róiste and Mayor Issa Kassis of 
Ramallah, Palestine formally signed a City to City Friendship Agreement.  International 
Relations are working to establish a programme of engagement that will support the 
City to City Friendship Agreement.   
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive In noting concerns raised by youth services at the recent 
D12 Community Safety Forum, will Dublin City Council consider installing lighting in 
Eamon Ceant Park Crumlin, this would greatly assist night time outreach work with 
'hard to reach' young people?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As of now, there are currently no immediate plans for the installation of lights in Eamon 
Ceant Park. Although discussions have been held regarding the potential installation 
of lighting fixtures in the park, no concrete steps have been taken towards actualizing 
this proposal. Despite the interest and consideration, the decision so far has tended 
towards not proceeding with the installation of lights 
 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive manager to outline in tabular form how many people were 
charged for illegal dumping in Dublin City for the years 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023 & so 
far in 2024, how many fines were issued during this time, how fines were paid during 

this time and how much did DCC spend on removing and discarding illegal dumping 
during the same period?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Year 
Fines 
issued 
Fines 
paid 
Fines 
cancelled 
on appeal 
Prosecutions  
Initiated 
Convictions  
obtained 
 in court 
Out 
of 
Court 
Settlements 
Cost of illegal 
dumping 
removal, fleet, 
disposal, staff 
2020 
763 
330 
127 
169 
7 
15 
€991,403 
2021 
914 
514 
150 
237 
23 
0 
€904,670 
2022 
806 
413 
100 
159 
48 
4 
€997,784 
2023 
1197 
645 
139 
263 
31 
17 
€945,017 
To 
date 
2024 
66 
19 
23 
0 
16 
1 
Q1 2024 not 
available as yet 
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR DANIEL CEITINN 
To ask the Chief Executive if Road resurfacing could be arranged for (Details 
supplied), could DCC also examine installing more water drainage, there are only two 
drains in the entire cul-de-sac and this combined with the uneven road surface is 
leading to a large build-up of surface water and spot flooding during periods of rain. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer will carry out a site visit on (Details supplied). Any extensive 
rutting/pothles will be repaired. The Area Engineer will review the surface water 
drainage in conjunction with our drainage colleagues. 
 
Q.70 
COUNCILLOR DANIEL CEITINN 
To ask the Chief Executive if a speed bump could be installed on Hazelbrook Drive as 
the street is seeing an increase in use as a rat run. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following an assessment it was found that Hazelbrook Drive does not meet the criteria 
for speed ramps. The criteria for the installation of speed ramps are as follows: 
•The 
road 
should 
have 
a 
straight 
run 
of 
approximately 
200 
metres.  
• The 85th percentile speed (speed exceeded by 15% of vehicles) should exceed the 
posted 
speed 
limit.  
• 
Traffic 
volumes 
should 
exceed 
60 
vehicles 
per 
hour.  
• There should be genuine road safety concerns based on accident statistics or 
observed road safety patterns or a written report from an Inspector of the local Garda 
Síochána. As Hazelbrook Drive does not have a straight run of 200m, speed ramps 
are not recommended.  
 
Q.71 
COUNCILLOR DANIEL CEITINN 
To ask the Chief Executive if an update could be provided on the proposed inclusion 
of Melvin Road and Neagh Road on the 2024 Footpath Resurfacing Programme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Melvin Road and Neagh Road are not included on the Roads and Pavements 
Maintenance Programme 2024. The Area Engineer will add Cllr. Ceitinn’s request to a 
list with other pavements seeking resurfacing for consideration in 2025. This list will be 
reassessed should future funding become available in 2024.  
 
 
 

Q.72  COUNCILLOR DANIEL CEITINN 
To ask the Chief Executive if further action could be taken in relation to the compulsory 
purchase of an abandoned property (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A number of sites on the Derelict Sites Register, including the one which is the subject 
of the question, have been identified for potential acquisition and preparations are 
underway to commence the process. 
These acquisitions form part of the Council’s ongoing acquisition strategy, in place 
since 2017, which is a key part of our Active Land Management Initiative to tackle 
dereliction and which has yielded very positive results. All sites entered on the Derelict 
Sites Register can be considered for acquisition and sites do not have to be entered 
on the Register for a particular time before they can be considered for acquisition.  
 
Q.73 
COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide details of the programme of works planned in 
2024 for each administrative area as part of (Details Attached); and if he will make a 
statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
These are the works that the Division has planned to do this year with the budget that 
has been made available (attached). 
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to account for why there is no left turn allowed from North 
Wall Quay onto Samuel Beckett Bridge to facilitate access by North Wall residents to 
the south quays.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the Samuel Beckett Bridge states that 
the purpose of the bridge “is to provide greater levels of accessibility for all transport 
modes within the Inner City, while continuing to restrict thru-traffic from the City 
Centre.” Dublin City Council implemented the ‘No Left Turn’ in accordance with the 
conditions imposed by the planning permission granted by An Bord Pleanála, in order 
to make provision for pedestrians, cyclists and public transport. The bridge was 
intended to facilitate the orbital route traversing the City from North to South and visa-
versa. During the public consultation phase held at the time, traffic noise and traffic 
volume levels would have been a factor considered as part of the EIS for residents 
living in the vicinity of the Bridge. 
 
The Area Engineer therefore does not recommend rescinding the ‘No Left Turn’ from 
Sheriff Street Upper onto Guild Street, because the turning angle at the location is far 
greater than 100⁰ and many motorists would be unable to safely manoeuvre around 
the corner. 
 
Q.75 
COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the plans to open St. Werburg’s Church 
for arts and culture use and if he will comment on the matter 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A Design Team was appointed a year ago and in 2023 and has set about the 
preliminary Design, Issues of alternative access through Castle Street are being 
resolved with assistance from the OPW. A Conservation plan for the cemetery one of 
the most important historical cemeteries nationally has been completed. Part 8 
Panning already in preparation should proceed by summer 2024, Construction 
Procurement in the last Quarter of 2024 with construction to begin in early 2025. 

It is intended that the Church will function as heritage visitor site and as a performing 
Arts venue. The Dublin city Council Culture Company will bring forward plans to 
operate the building when completed. 
 
Q.76 
COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that when NO2 indicative level testing devices 
are installed across the city later this year that one in installed at the junction of North 
King Street and Bolton Street in Dublin 1.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Indicative Nitrogen Dioxide monitoring can be carried out using diffusion tubes. The 
tubes can be placed at site selected locations for consecutive months and the results 
obtained by laboratory analysis. More information about this can be found by accessing 
the below link.  
 
https://www.epa.ie/environment-and-you/air/diffusion-tube-results/ 
 
The tubes must be placed at locations having regard to the site selection criteria in the 
Air Quality Standards 2011. They cannot be placed directly at junctions.  
 
The Air Quality Monitoring and Noise Control Unit and the EPA commenced a diffusion 
tube survey of streets (including North King Street) in the North Inner City area to 
determine the contribution of traffic to air pollution levels in the area. The survey was 
initiated because of complaints from residents of the area about traffic volumes and 
associated air pollution levels. The survey started on 14/01/2024 and must be carried 
over a one year period to reference the results against annual mean limit values cited 
in the Air Quality Standards 2011. The results will be available from 14/01/2025.  
The diffusion tubes in place at North King Street will give an accurate indication of NO2 
levels in this area.   
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding my question submitted in December 2023 which 
remains unanswered, whether the Chief Executive would, as outlined in the 2022-27 
Dublin City Council Play Strategy and provided for under Temporary Minor Street Play 
Orders as per the 2013 DCC Traffic and Transport SPC, prioritise outdoor street play 
for children in Dublin Central by 1. Re-instating the Play Officer role and 2. Forming a 
Street Play Committee made up of local political and community representatives, 
community Gardaí, local area officials and other interested parties such as school 
boards. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks and Landscape Services are committed to working cross departmentally to 
identify and develop Street Play opportunities as outlined in the 2022-27 Dublin City 
Council Play Strategy and provided for under Temporary Minor Street Play Orders as 
per the 2013 DCC Traffic and Transport SPC, prioritising outdoor street play for 
children in Dublin Central.  
 
In addition a dedicated Parks person as Play Officer will work collaboratively with the 
area office and relevant stakeholder interests including other Dublin City Council 
Departments in forming a Street Play Committee for improving ‘street play’ 
opportunities such as  pilot street play initiative/temp road closures. 
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the home adaptation of (details 
supplied) based on medical grounds. 

The person is waiting for an update on the downstairs bedroom and bathroom, he can 
no longer get up the stairs due to bad health. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance received an application for adaptations from the tenant of 
(details supplied). The clerk of works inspected the unit and the tenant was approved 
for works including ramped access, level access shower and a stair lift. 
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive for a follow up on question 96 of the December 2023 
meeting in relation to the cutting of grass verges. 
 
a) Has it been decided how the €650,000 will be spent? 
b) Will there be a change in policy from last year? 
c) Will verges be mapped or done through request? 
d) Did the meeting take place as planned in January? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In 2023 the Park Service collated a list of locations where grass verges were identified 
by residents and Councillors as being in need of maintenance and these were attended 
to in Q3 of 2023. 
In 2024, funding has been allocated to maintain these locations once a fortnight 
throughout the growing season. In addition, we have identified a number of roads with 
wider margins which we have added to our landscape maintenance contract. 
We can add any other locations that are identified in 2024 but there is no reason to 
expect that there will be many more locations. The evidence is that the majority of 
residents in the City are maintaining their grass margin as residents do in every other 
local authority.  
As previously stated, any locations where residents or communities are in need of 
support by the City Council to cut grass margins can be emailed to parks@dublincity.ie.  
 
Q.80 
COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to prioritise the tag decision 7037289 in relation to double 
yellow lines for Ballygall Road West. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The aforementioned service request is currently going through the statutory process. 
The area engineer has requested it to be prioritised, and once the statutory process is 
completed, the traffic officer will be contacted to prioritise the installation of double 
yellow lines on Ballygall Road West. 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update in relation to Dublin City Council’s role 
in deciding the locations of new bus stops for proposed changes with the City Wide 
Bus Connects role out. 
a) Are residents notified if a bus stop is being placed outside their home? 
b) As it goes through the TAG process how do residents raise concerns/objections  
c) Is a map available of new proposed bus stops per LEA? 
d) Is it the area committee roles to note the new locations or can a review be 
requested? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
a) Dublin City Council Bus and Coach Section have asked the NTA to provide an 
answer regarding notification of residents if a bus stop is being placed outside their 
home.  

b) The TAG section has been requested to complete the statutory consultation process 
with An Garda Síochana for the NTA BusConnects measures and to include the 
measures on the Area Agendas for Councillors information purposes. 
c) Dublin City Council Bus and Coach section have asked the NTA to provide a map 
per LEA of proposed new bus stops.  
d)  Queries in relation to the measures should be forwarded to the NTA. 
 
Q.82 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive provide an update on the following (detail supplied - when 
will his back garden be remedied and cleaned up? This is going on far too long I have 
sent in numerous representations, if funding is needed please use discretionary 
funding. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Arrangements were made with our contractor to cutback all the overgrown trees in 16 
but they were unable to gain access to the property/rear garden on two occasions.  
Estate Management is liaising with the tenant and contractor to agree on a date for the 
works to be carried out.  This will be done as a matter of urgency. 
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the update on (details supplied) housing 
application on exceptional social grounds, can you write out to her please so that we 
can progress housing for herself and her family 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
I can find no record of an application to the Exceptional Social Grounds (ESG) Scheme 
from (details supplied). A copy of the ESG application form including information 
about 
the 
Scheme 
can 
be 
obtained 
by 
downloading 
it 
from 
https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/housing/social-work-section or by phoning the 
Social Work Section on 01 2222233. 
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive has the site (details supplied) been check for fire hazards, 
if it is commercial zoning, how can any residents be housed there? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DFB have received two separate applications for a Fire Safety Certificate, which were 
made through the BCMS for the proposed new use of this building to be used for 
residential purposes. DFB are assessing these applications to determine if compliance 
with Building Regulations has been demonstrated and achieved, and through 
engagement with the technical advisor we hope to be in a position to grant this 
application, once it has been finalised with our administrative processes it will be sent 
to the applicant. 
Additionally the Fire Services Act 1981 & 2003 places responsibility on those in control 
of a premises for the fire safety in the premises. 
In this regard, DFB has written to outline these responsibilities, to those in control of 
this building, and to request that a fire safety management plan is prepared and 
submitted to DFB outlining how they will meet their responsibilities. 
DFB will continue to engage with the persons in control of this building going forward. 
 
Exemptions from Planning exist for properties seeking to house IPA’s and those fleeing 
war in Ukraine, there is no requirement to seek an Exemption Certificate, this matter 
is progressed by the Dept. of Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration 
and Youth. The Zoning of land is not a restriction on the use of property for temporary 
accommodation under these Exemptions. 
 

Q.85 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief can the below be dealt with please detail supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The cycle path arrangements referred to above have been in place for over a decade. 
They are due to be upgraded as part of the National Transport Authorities Bus 
Connects proposals for the Swords to City Centre Route. Further information can be 
found at https://swordsscheme.ie/ . 
 
Q.86 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
 
People are living longer than ever and many people still have so much skills they want 
to share within their community and City, Can Dublin City Council please look at 
developing a volunteer strategy to harness this potential where people could volunteer 
to do a few hours a week in their local Sports Centre, Library, Park etc. The knowledge 
many people have in the autumn years of life could be invaluable in bridging the 
intergenerational divide. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin City Council Community & Social Development Section works closely with 
the Dublin City Volunteer Centre that hosts the Public Participation Network (PPN).  
One of the main aims of the Dublin City PPN is to provide a mechanism for the sourcing 
of community representatives for Dublin City Council committees and networks such 
as SPCs.  These roles are voluntary and the PPN actively seeks nominations from 
older people in the community who have a diverse range of skills.   
 
In addition, the Dublin Volunteer Centre also connects individuals looking for 
appropriate volunteer roles to organisations looking to work with volunteers.  
As part of this, older volunteers are encouraged to get involved through events such 
as ‘Experience Counts – Volunteering for People 50 +’.  The next session is taking 
place on Thursday 18 April 2024, from 1:30pm to 2:30pm in Kevin’s Street Library.  
This is a free event, booking in advance is not necessary and participants will find out 
about the latest opportunities in this space.  
 
Dublin City Libraries very much appreciates and encourages the engagement by older 
people with our public libraries. However, we do not see the delivery of library services 
as a suitable role for volunteers. 
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive please ensure good estate management procedures are 
agreed before the allocation of the new apartments at Chapelizod Hill Ballyfermot 
Dublin 10 later in the year. I would have some concerns that due to the very high 
density here that it is essential we start the project off well to ensure all new tenants 
can aspire to and have a good life here. Is it our intention to appoint an approved 
housing body to manage this extensive development? If so can we ensure one is 
chosen who has a good track record in running, maintaining and managing such 
schemes. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This development will be managed by Tuath Housing on behalf of DCC, Tuath are 
required under the Service Level Agreement to provide a Tenant Induction training to 
all new tenants covering the following areas, the tenancy agreement – rights and 
responsibilities of tenant and landlord, how to make a complaint, repairs and 
maintenance, tenant participation, harassment, neighbour disputes, rents, paying 
utility bills. Anti-social behaviour will be managed by both Tuath Housing and the local 

Area Housing staff in line with the DCC anti-social behaviour policy. Tuath Housing 
has many years’ experience in managing schemes for Dublin City Council, along with 
the development and management of their own housing stock. DCC Housing 
management work closely with Tuath Housing in terms of management and 
maintenance of both new and existing housing schemes under their remit. All efforts 
will be made to ensure this new scheme is managed to the highest of standards for 
both tenants and the wider community.  
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive to please give an update of the schedule that will have to 
happen in order to deliver the new long awaited library for the people of Drimnagh / 
Crumlin at the Ard Scoile Enna Site at Crumlin Road, indicative time span, financing 
of the project and when the proposal will go to construction / expected completion. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Indicative Timespan: 
 
Stage 
Timeframe 
Note 
Part 
8 
Planning 
Permission  
5 months, ending 
September 2024 
City Architects intend to lodge the Part 8 
planning application by the end of April. 
Without objections, planning would be 
granted by the end of September 2024. 
Detailed 
Design 
& 
Tender Documentation    
12-16 
months: 
January 2026 
We anticipate that the detailed design and 
preparation of tender documentation could 
take a further 12-16 months, to include a 
consultant procurement process for a 
Design Team (3 months). Subject to grant 
of fire safety certificate and disabled 
access certificates.  
Tender 
Action/Evaluation/Award 
3 
months: 
May 
2026 
Subject 
to 
availability 
of 
suitable 
framework to tender works to.  
Construction       
 
10-14 months: July 
2027 
Indicative construction programme of 9 
months, subject to preferred tenderers 
availability to start on site and lead in times 
for materials. 
 
Funding for this project is included in the current DCC CRES Capital Programme. 
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive Can the Planning Department please look at the following 
(details supplied)  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The relevant planning application number is (details supplied). The compliance 
submission was received in relation to Condition no. 2 on the 19th February 2024 and 
the submission was considered to be in compliance with said condition. This 
submission was dealt with expeditiously by the Transportation Planning Division within 
the statutory time period, with a decision issuing on the 2nd April 2024. 
 
Q.90 
COUNCILLOR PATRICIA ROE  
To ask the Chief Executive to direct Planning Enforcement and the Chief Fire Officer 
to carry out an inspection of the site at Beaumont Road, Beaumont, Dublin 9, formally 
known as Beaumont Drive-In,  

a) To ascertain if the recent fire has caused the building to become a hazard for people 
who can currently access the site, and if the owner should be directed to demolish 
what remains of the building. 
 b) If the site could be properly secured with hoarding to prevent the persistent and 
serious dumping with is taking place at the site. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DFB is aware that there is deliberate setting of fires at this site. The site consists of 
two derelict buildings on the site with heras fencing surrounding it. The Fire Services 
act 1981 & 2003 places responsibility on the owner of a Building for the fire safety in 
their building. 
DFB wrote to the owner of the site (Urban Life) on 07/03/24 requesting that they act to 
prevent the deliberate setting of fires with the potential for fire spread to adjoining 
properties. 
They responded via email on 13/03/2024 and confirmed that they would demolish the 
buildings and remove combustible material from the site. They also made the point 
that hard hoarding would afford privacy to individuals seeking to set fires. They 
committed to re-inforce the existing heras fencing. 
DFB were informed that work to remove asbestos on the site was to start immediately, 
in March 2024, and it was considered it could take 2 weeks. The rest of the work to 
demolish the buildings and secure the site should take a further 2 weeks. 
DFB will continue to monitor this site 
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR PATRICIA ROE 
To ask the Chief Executive if traffic lights can be installed at the junction of Ardmore 
Drive and Kilmore Road, Artane, Dublin 5. Residents of Admore/Montrose estate 
report severe difficulty in exiting from Ardmore Drive onto Kilmore Road.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The TAG Group has previously recommended that additional pedestrian crossings at 
this junction be provided and it has already been included for consideration on a works 
programme for 2024. 
 
The NTA confirmed the funding allocations for 2024 on the 7th of February 2024. 
Funding of €3,750,000 has been made available for installing pedestrian crossings 
across the Dublin Administrative Area.   
 
The Traffic Section will be meeting with North Central Area Councillors on 3rd of April 
2024 to gather their views on which other locations they wish to prioritise prior to 
finalising the works programme for 2024. 
 
Q.92 
COUNCILLOR PATRICIA ROE 
To ask the Chief Executive to direct the North Central Area management team to 
provide councillors with a Periodic Statement of Account in relation to the Discretionary 
Fund to provide a detailed overview of the financial activities throughout the year 
including allocations, disbursements and transfers.  This will provide the transparency 
to ensure that the funds are being directed towards the intended purpose and highlight 
areas where most allocations are being made.  Currently a statement of account is 
provided at the outset of the financial year when decisions on annual funding of 
projects are being made, with ‘indicative’ costs only provided for under the various sub-
heads but no Statement of Account is ever provided at the end of the financial year 
showing the expenditure and /or carry-over of unspent monies into the following year’s 
fund. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area office is liasing with the Councillor in regards to this request.  

 
 
 
Q.93 
COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive does Dublin city council owns the laneway that starts 
between (details supplied) and if so could dcc arrange to have the lane cleared of 
dumped rubbish. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will arrange for the lane to be cleared of rubbish. 
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update to when the overcrowding extension will be 
built for (Details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Tenant (details supplied) is currently number 68 for an overcrowding extension. 
At present we are currently working through 41 medical priority extensions.  
 
Q.95 
COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive when will the residential parking scheme begin on (Details 
Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
(Details Supplied) is on a Bus Connects Route funded by the National Transport 
Authority (NTA). It was agreed between the NTA and the residents of the road that 
regulated parking would be provided outside their homes. However, the NTA is still 
awaiting a decision from An Bord Pleanála regarding the next steps on this matter.  
Dublin City Council has contacted the NTA for an update, and the Area Engineer is 
awaiting a reply.  Once a reply has been received, the Area Engineer will inform the 
Councillor.   
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to contact (Details supplied) to discuss the installation of 
a drive-in for his garden). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The proprietor of (Details supplied) will need to apply to Dublin City Council for 
planning permission to remove the property’s front wall and construct a driveway within 
their front garden. They will also need to consult with Road Maintenance Services 
(roadmaintenance@dublincity.ie) in relation to the provision of a vehicular dishing in the 
existing footpath, outside of their property. Full details in relation to the provision of 
vehicular dishings, including associated costs, are available on Dublin City Council’s 
website.” 
As such planning permission is required for the driveway rather than the vehicular 
dishing in the footpath 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR ALISON GILLILAND 
To ask the Chief Executive to indicate the timeline for the completion of the signalised 
pedestrian system on the Coolock flyover? I’m conscious this is being led by TII and 
involves Fingal CC but many are frustrated at the drip feed progress of the 
infrastructure the at is being put in.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Works are still ongoing but the pedestrian crossing at the Coolock Flyover is expected 
to be operational at the end of quarter two this year.  

 
 
 
Q.98 
COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WATTERS 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can arrange to repair and re-erect/ reinstall removed 
gate at (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Repairs have been completed. 
 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive for Dublin City council to address the following (details 
supplied). 
 
The audit should consider: 
1.      The placement of Double Yellow Lines throughout the Estate, especially on 
corners. Due to illegal parking near corners, there are a number of blind spots for 
residents and through traffic which create dangerous situations. A total audit of where 
Double Yellows are necessary should be carried out and implemented; 
 
2.      The ad-hoc approach to dished footpaths for access to driveways. Footpaths 
throughout the Estate are grossly uneven and difficult to walk on for old people, people 
with mobility issues and people pushing buggies. DCC needs to standardize the 
dishing of footpaths throughout the Estate for access to driveways and ensure there is 
sufficient room on the footpaths for people walking by foot; and 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
(1) It is not current Dublin City Council policy to provide parking restrictions, such as 
double yellow lines, where restrictions are already covered under legislation. Under 
Road Traffic (Traffic and Parking) Regulations 1997 section 36:2:c “A vehicle shall not 
be parked - within 5 metres of a road junction;” 
 
Instances of illegal or obstructive parking should be referred to Dublin Street Parking 
Services, DSPS (email info@dsps.ie or tel. no. 01 602 2500) or an Garda Síochána 
for enforcement. 
 
If residents still feel parking is an issue, they may wish to apply for a pay and 
display/permit parking scheme (https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/parking-dublin-
city-centre/start-parking-scheme). 
 
(2) Dublin City Council manage vehicular dishing’s through an application process. 
Residents must make an application for a vehicular dishing and further details on the 
process are available on the Dublin City Council website: 
https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/transportation/road-maintenance-services/modify-
footpath-allow-vehicular-access 
On successfully applying for a vehicular access the dishing is constructed to Road 
Maintenance Services Construction Standards. 
 
If there are footpaths within Bulfin estate that you would like to focus on, then these 
could be looked at for possible inclusion in our 2025 minor works program     depending 
on condition and available funding.  
 
Q.100 COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm how much in derelict sites levies are owed and 
how much have been paid to DCC by owners of the following sites: Rialto Cinema, 
Dolphins Barn and 47-50 Dolphins Barn Street. Can the Chief Executive comment on 

DCC’s efforts to engage with the owners of these sites and current state of play with 
regard to bringing them back into use? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
355-361 South Circular Road, D8 – Rialto Cinema and 47-50 Dolphins Barn Street, D8 
 
The Derelict Site Levy is 7% of market value. Outstanding levies attract interest at the 
rate of 1.25% per month. Outstanding levies including interest automatically become 
a charge on the land and will remain a charge on the land until all outstanding levies 
have been paid. In all cases the levies have been outstanding since entry on the 
Derelict Sites Register. Attempts to get the owner to render the properties non-derelict 
have been unsuccessful.  
Levies demands, first and final, have issued, in these cases in 2022, 2023 and 2024 
and remain outstanding. The Outstanding Derelict Sites Levies at 2nd April, 2024 are 
as follows; 
D.S.No 
Location 
Entered on the 
Derelict 
Sites 
Register 
Amounts 
outstanding 
928 
355-361 South Circular Road, D8 – 
Rialto Cinema 
06.01.2021 
€836,062.50 
1518 
Dolphins Barn Street, 43, D8 
25.05.2021 
€47,775.00 
1122 
Dolphins Barn Street, 44, D8 
25.05.2021 
€71,662.50 
1123 
Dolphins Barn Street, 45, D8 
25.05.2021 
€62,107.50 
1124 
Dolphins Barn Street, 46, D8 
25.05.2021 
€74,051.25 
1125 
Dolphins Barn Street, 47, D8 
25.05.2021 
€93,161.25 
1126 
Dolphins Barn Street, 48/48a 
25.05.2021 
€83,606.25 
1127 
Dolphins Barn Street, 49, D8 
25.05.2021 
€62,107.50 
1128 
Dolphins Barn Street, 50, D8 
25.05.2021 
€76,440.00 
 
 
 
 
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on Dublin City Council plans for 
improvements to the disused informal carpark space at Goldenbridge Terrace, near 
the canal in Bulfin Estate.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A landscape architect firm have finished working on first draft of concept design for the 
Goldenbridge Terrace gravelled space.  These concept plans have now been reviewed 
by internal Dublin City Council Departments, including South Central Area Office, 
Parks and Landscape Services, Drainage and Roads, with feedback given to the 
landscape architects and the draft plan is currently being revised.   
 
Once design plans are agreed, the next stage includes finalising plans for presentation 
and public display (expected May/June 2024). Once feedback is received and 
considered then detailed design, bill of qualities for landscaping elements and planting 
schedules will be prepared.   
 

It is expected that contractors should be on site for 6 to 8 weeks, in the second half of 
2024. 
 
Q.102  COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive to report on any plans to install a pedestrian crossing at 
the Hole in the Wall on Blackhorse Avenue and to install two speed bumps one either 
side of same at this dangerous location? A very popular spot, at all times, there needs 
to be speed reduction and pedestrian safety features added as a matter of urgency. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Currently there are no plans for a pedestrian crossing at the Hole in the Wall Pub as 
there is no suitable location to provide a controlled crossing. Blackhorse Avenue has 
currently 21 No. speed ramps along its entire length, including at the approach to the 
Hole in the Wall area. Roads where there is no traffic calming are considered priority 
over roads currently traffic calmed.    
 
Q.103 COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive to report on when the residents of Connaught Street, 
Phibsborough, can hope to see the road surface replaced? Temporary pothole repairs 
were recently carried out, but the entire length needs attention. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Road Maintenance Services will inspect the road and will add it to a list to be 
considered for future works programmes based on the road conditions. Please note 
that we prioritise the worse conditions due to the long list and budget limitation.  
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive to report on why the speed bumps were removed at Quarry 
Road, Cabra, Dublin 7, and at what cost please? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The speed ramps were removed as they were not located within 8m of a road traffic 
junction and within 5m of a public light stand. 
 
The Area Engineer is assessing the inclusion of further traffic calming measures for 
Quarry Road in 2024. 
 
Q.105 COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive outline if any traffic calming measures are currently being 
considered for (details supplied) particularly around the green due to the speed of 
vehicles. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently 5 No. speed cushions and one raised table on (details supplied). 
According to Traffic Management Guidelines, it is recommended on bus and 
emergency service routes that speed cushions rather than ramps are provided to 
facilitate emergency vehicles and the safety of bus passengers. This allows the buses 
and emergency vehicles to straddle the cushions and proceed unhindered without 
damage to the vehicle. Therefore additional traffic calming is not recommended on 
Tolka Estate. 
 
Q.106  COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive outline if the cause of persistent flooding/pooling of water 
at the junction of Shanliss Way and Santry Avenue as it is a recurring problem 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

We will liaise with our colleagues in the Drainage Dept. to arrange for gullies at this 
location to be jetted which should resolve this issue. 
 
Q.107  COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline if the traffic lights at the junction of (Details 
supplied) have been reviewed as there has been complaints that the sequencing is 
unsafe for pedestrians. Are any further changes being considered? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A review of the operation of the current traffic signals at the junction of (details 
supplied) will be carried out and a response issued once the review has been 
completed  
 
Q.108  COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider the installation of extra lighting at the entrance 
to (details supplied) as the walk from the N2 to the estate is quite dark for bus users 
and pedestrians. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A lighting assessment will be carried out at the entrance to (details supplied) to 
determine whether or not additional lighting may be needed at this location. 
 
Q.109  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive is there an update on the bike bunker scheme? Residents 
have been emailing to request a bike bunker for their street as they would like to have 
secure bicycle parking. I understand that the tender process for bike bunkers was due 
to conclude at the end of Q1 2024. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Road Safety and Micromobility Section is currently working on the Bike Bunker 
scheme tender process. Dublin City Council is planning to launch a competitive 
tendering process to select a contractor who will manage the comprehensive bike 
bunker operations, users and assets. After selecting a contractor, the council aims to 
collaborate with the winning tenderer to provide this service throughout the city and 
establish a goal of having 300 bike bunkers (by 2026), dependent on funding. 
The procurement process for this scheme was scheduled to commence in the first 
quarter of 2024, unfortunately this date was missed and this process is planned to kick 
off in April/ May 2024.  
 
Q.110  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive Could Dublin City Council please clarify the legislation 
around footpath parking and how it is enforced. Recent changes to enforcement have 
caused significant distress to local residents who without notice have had the terms of 
how they use the public realm changed.  
Clarity is needed on footpath parking. I get frequent emails from residents who 
previously parked with two wheels on the path to allow for road users to pass as well 
as leaving enough space for footpath users to pass and are now being clamped. 
Forcing them to park on the road is impacting on traffic and congestion, limiting parking 
spaces and increasing damage to parked cars. What is the current strategy for 
managing this issue? This is a divisive issue and leadership on this would be very 
welcome.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Section 36 (i) of The Road Traffic (Traffic and Parking) Regulations, 1997, outlines that 
parking on a footpath is illegal.  Dublin City Council have to consider the needs of 
pedestrians and wheelchair users to be able to safely navigate the footpath.  DSPS, 

our enforcement contractor, carry out enforcement for footpath parking where vehicles 
have encroached onto the footpath making it unsafe for pedestrians and forcing them 
out onto the road to get past the vehicle.  DSPS also must respond to complaints 
received from the public in relation to footpath parking.  The onus is always on the 
motorist to ensure they park legally to guarantee that they are not enforced. 
 
Q.111  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive could a children at play sign be installed at Grosvenor Park, 
Leinster Road please? Residents have raised this as an issue that was agreed 
previously and hasn’t been fulfilled by DCC. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The South East area engineer has conducted an assessment of Grosvenor Park, 
Leinster Road for Children Crossing (W 142) road sign. Following the assessment, the 
Traffic Advisory Group recommends installing a Children Crossing (W 142) road sign 
at the entrance to Grosvenor Park. A request will be forwarded to the Councils Signage 
Team for installation in the coming weeks. 
 
Proposed location of a Children Crossing (W 142) road sign at the entrance to 
Grosvenor Park. 
 
Q.112  COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the light poles at (details supplied) be painted due to 
bad condition they are in with rust.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The poles on (details supplied) are ESB Network poles and the painting of those 
poles is a matter for ESB. Only the lights, brackets and fuse units on those poles belong 
to DCC. This request will be forwarded onto ESB for their consideration. 
 
Q.113  COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the footpath at (details supplied) be repaired. 
Developers who were accessing an adjacent site damaged the path and put tarmac in 
to fix a number of years ago but the site is now developed and the footpath needs to 
be reinstated. The lip of the shore ud also coming up 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The footpaths on (details supplied), have been examined and there is no indication 
of a damaged footpath. If possible can Councillor O’Rourke provide further details on 
the location of the issue referred to and Road Maintenance Services will arrange for a 
further investigation. 

 
Q.114  COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the light poles at (details supplied) be painted. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
There is a combination of ESB Wooden poles and ESB Steel poles on (details 
supplied). These poles are ESB Network poles and the painting of them is a matter 
for ESB Networks. Only the street lights, brackets and fuse units on those poles belong 
to DCC.  
This painting request will be forwarded onto ESB for their consideration. If they agree 
to painting it will only be the ESB steel poles that they would paint. 
 
Q.115  COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding my previous requests for the junction at (details 
supplied) to be improved that, A) the junction be redesigned with safety measures to 
be examined due to how unsafe the junction is. B) To report on Fingal’s liaison and 
plan with Dublin City Council to improve the junction, what the plan is and what the 
timeline is for the improvements?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The junction of (details supplied) is part of the National Transport Authority funded 
Blanchardstown to City Centre Core Bus Corridor Scheme, with designed 
improvements planned for the junction as part of this scheme. The boundaries of 
Dublin City Council, Fingal County Council and Office of Public Works are located at 
this junction. In advance of the Bus Connects Scheme being constructed, Dublin City 
Council and Fingal County Council have been liaising on a regular basis to discuss the 
provision of temporary traffic measures to improve the safe operation of the junction.  
Dublin City Council will be liaising with Fingal County Council again in the near future.  
 
Q.116  COUNCILLOR CAROLINE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive can the pot holes on Shanliss Road please be repaired 
urgently.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Could house address details please be provided to pinpoint locations of potholes. We 
will then arrange for these locations to be inspected and arrange repairs as necessary. 
 
Q.117 COUNCILLOR CAROLINE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive can the damage Road on St. Pappins Green be replaced 
as soon as possible  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
St. Pappins Green carriageway will be put forward for consideration for inclusion in our 
future Carriageway Resurfacing Programmes. In the interim, if house address details 
could be provided to pinpoint specific area of concern, these will be inspected and local 
repairs arranged as necessary. 
 
Q.118  COUNCILLOR CAROLINE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive can the paths on Shanliss Avenue please be 
replaced/repaired urgently. I’ve requested this over the last number of years. There 
has been many falls by older persons on this path.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The footpaths on Shanliss Avenue will be put forward for consideration for inclusion in 
our future Footway Reconstruction Programmes. In the interim, if house address 
details could be provided to pinpoint specific area of concern, these will be inspected 
and local repairs arranged as necessary. 

 
 
 
Q.119  COUNCILLOR CAROLINE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive can safety measures be put in place outside lady of 
Victories school urgently as this is a very dangerous junction. As cars park along the 
stretch to the school, cyclists are pushed out into the traffic, children can’t being seen 
if crossing and residents can’t get out of their own homes on that stretch of road.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Our Lady of Victories has applied for a School Zone and is on the School Zone waiting 
list. At the moment the team only has funding to progress School Zone applications as 
part of the Safe Routes to School Round 2 list, funded by the National Transport 
Authority, and is not in a position to progress applications outside of this list. The team 
hopes to be in a position to progress works on the waiting list subject to securing 
alternative funding.  
 
Q.120  COUNCILLOR TERENCE FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond the following regarding traffic lights (details 
supplied) and if he will make a statement on the matter 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The TAG Group has previously recommended that additional pedestrian crossings at 
this junction be provided and it has already been included for consideration on a works 
programme for 2024. 
 
The NTA confirmed the funding allocations for 2024 on the 7th of February 2024. 
Funding of €3,750,000 has been made available for installing pedestrian crossings 
across the Dublin Administrative Area.   
 
The Traffic Section will be meeting with North Central Area Councillors on the 3rd of 
April 2024 to gather their views on which other locations they wish to prioritise prior to 
finalising the works programme for 2024. 
 
Q.121  COUNCILLOR TERENCE FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond to the following correspondence regarding traffic 
calming (Details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Based on previous investigations, it was noted that (Details Supplied)has several 
features that contribute to traffic calming, as outlined below: 
- 
(Details Supplied) is short in length and is currently traffic calmed with two 
speed ramps placed at appropriate distances for optimum traffic calming. At 
the junction with (Details Supplied), traffic is calmed by a raised table (large 
ramp). 
- 
The 30 km/h Slow Zone signage covers Hazelwood Drive, signalling the 
reduced speed limit and designating the area as a Home Zone/Slow Zone. This 
alerts drivers that the road is residential and to be cautious of children. The 
signs are prominently displayed at the entrances from Kilmore Road and Ardlea 
Road. 
- 
There is a 30km/h road marking at the entrance of Chanel Rd from Brookville 
Park, accompanied by additional 30 km/h Slow Zone signage when entering 
from Malahide Road. 
- 
 

Instances of erratic driving/speeding should be referred to the Gardaí as a matter for 
enforcement. Transport Advisory Group will raise the Councillor’s concern with the 
Gardaí at the next TAG Meeting. 
Also the residents can apply for a Neighbourhood Traffic Scheme which can be found 
on the DCC website: https://citizenhub.dublincity.ie/en/service/Traffic_Request 
Q.122  COUNCILLOR TERENCE FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update regarding meetings with ((Details 
Supplied)) and if he will make a statement regarding the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The lands at (Details Supplied) are not on the DCC/LDA led Delivery Programme, 
these lands were not acquired from Dublin City Council. The LDA have a Stakeholder 
Engagement Strategy which will apply for this development, as part of that 
engagement process the Area Committee Members, local residents and all other 
stakeholders will be informed as this development progresses.  
 
Q.123  COUNCILLOR TERENCE FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update regarding (Details supplied) and if he will 
make a statement on the matter. 
A) What work has happened on this LAP since January of this year? 
B) What is happening with DCC empty units in the estate. What are the plans for them 
over the short term, medium and long term etc? 
C) Has a meeting took place with the traders to ensure that the plan retains a 
community space where the market can continue to trade in? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A workshop was held with the Central Area and North West Area Committees on the 
12th of March to input into the LAP, the drafting of which has now commenced. Ongoing 
engagement will continue with elected members with further workshops planned post 
local elections. Consultation continues with public and private stakeholders including 
landowners. 
 
Background and supporting research and analysis is being carried out with respect to 
economic viability, population and demographics, and community infrastructure needs.  
Following a procurement process, consultants have now been appointed and are 
completing technical surveys and statutory assessments on behalf of DCC related to 
flood risk and surface water management, Appropriate Assessment and Strategic 
Environmental Assessment.  
 
DCC interests at Slaney Road and Bannow Road Depots will be assessed in the 
context of their future potential to contribute to the overall regeneration of the LAP 
lands in the medium to long term. Shorter term uses are governed by the existing Z6 
employment and Z1 residential zonings until such time as a local area plan is in place. 
 
A meeting was undertaken with representatives of the Honest 2 Goodness Market on 
the 25th of January to discuss the process for preparing the LAP and potential 
opportunities to incorporate market uses in the area. 
 
Q.124  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive to organise a further review and assessment of the signal 
timings at the upgraded Grace Park Road/Collins Avenue junction as local residents 
tell me that there is much great traffic build-up on Collins Avenue since this junction 
was upgraded. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Dublin City Council policy priorities Active and Sustainable Travel modes across the 
city. In line with this policy, in 2023 two extra pedestrian crossings has been added to 
the site and the site now runs an all pedestrian phase.  
The above measures have slightly reduced the green time available to vehicles each 
cycle of the traffic signals (Traffic signal cycle is the time whereby all approaches and 
the pedestrian crossings are serviced before cycle restarts)  
The traffic signals at the junction are controlled by City Council's Urban Traffic 
Management System, SCATS. SCATS is an adaptive traffic control system that 
automatically alters signal timings, in real time, based on traffic demand taken from on 
street vehicle detectors.  
 
In addition, traffic in the city is monitored 24 hours a day, 365 days a year by the City 
Council's Traffic Control Centre, and amendments are made in SCATS in response to 
incidents and problems / congestion as they arise. 
The ITS section will continue to monitor the junction operation and amend traffic signal 
timings and sequences as required, where there is scope to do so. 
 
Q.125  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive confirm if the Dublin City Council Traffic Department have 
considered the installation of a pedestrian phase for crossing Collins Avenue within 
the traffic light installation at the Collinswood entrance and provide a detailed report 
on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The TAG Group has previously recommended that additional pedestrian crossings at 
this junction be provided and it has already been included for consideration on a works 
programme for 2024. 
 
The NTA confirmed the funding allocations for 2024 on the 7th of February 2024. 
Funding of €3,750,000 has been made available for installing pedestrian crossings 
across the Dublin Administrative Area.   
 
The Traffic Section will be meeting with North Central Area Councillors on the 3rd of 
April 2024 to gather their views on which other locations they wish to prioritise prior to 
finalising the works programme for 2024. 
 
Q.126  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm the status/position of the following applicant 
(details supplied) on the Dublin City Council housing list and confirm their application 
reference number. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Older Persons Transfer Housing List, with an application 
date of 23/01/2019, the applicant holds the following position on this list; 
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
1 
31 
 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
 
Q.127  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 

To ask the Chief Executive provide a detailed update on the installation of the new 
playground at McAuley Park. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Service has consulted with local residents and has fed recommendations 
back to the designers.  Revised layout drawings have been circulated to the residents.  
Once agreement is reached contracts will be signed with the suppliers and a timeframe 
for delivery will be fixed. 
 
Q.128  COUNCILLOR JANICE BOYLAND 
To ask the Chief Executive for a full update on the plans to increase the caretaking 
staff in Dublin’s north inner city. The staff are doing the best job they can and I want 
that noted however I can see clearly that they are severely understaffed.  
A. What is the plan to replace staff?  
B. When will the power washing van that’s off the road be finally fixed?  
C. How many staff have we currently in these roles?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council agree with the Councillors comments that the caretaking service is 
a vital part of maintenance. Our Senior Executive Officer, recently employed in this 
role, is currently carrying out a full review of the service, its structure and resources. 
When complete this will be made available to the members. 
 
Q.129  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide a list of all road resurfacing plans 
for the South East Inner City for 2024.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Roads Engineer is finalising a list of roads to be resurfaced in 2024. It is anticipated 
that this list will be made available to Cllr. Byrne for the May Area Council Meeting. 
 
Q.130  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive can please provide a list of all footpath resurfacing plans 
for the South East Inner City for 2024.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Roads Engineer is finalising a list of pavements to be resurfaced in 2024. It is 
anticipated that this list will be made available to Cllr. Byrne for the May Area Council 
Meeting. 
 
Q.131  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to please outline if planning permission is required for 
mobile digital advertising screens at sporting and other events, do the promoters pay 
an advertising fee for these mobile units, if so how much is that fee and who is it paid 
to, and if planning permission is not required how are these units allowed to operate 
during large events in the city. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Class 16 and 16A of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) 
provide a broad suite of exemptions for advertising associated with both sporting and 
non-sporting events. Such advertising signs are considered to be fleeting and 
temporary in nature and do not require a fee to be paid.  
 
Q.132  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide an update on the expansion of the 
Bike Bunkers Scheme, has the tender for an operator been issued; if not when will the 

tender be published; when is it anticipated the new scheme likely to be up and running; 
what funding is in place for city wider roll out and has Dublin City Council applied for 
further funding from the NTA for the scheme. 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Road Safety and Micromobility Section is currently working on the Bike Bunker 
scheme tender process. Dublin City Council is planning to launch a competitive 
tendering process to select a contractor who will manage the comprehensive bike 
bunker operations, users and assets. After selecting a contractor, the council aims to 
collaborate with the winning tenderer to provide this service throughout the city and 
establish a goal of having 300 bike bunkers (by 2026), dependent on funding. 
The procurement process for this scheme was scheduled to commence in the first 
quarter of 2024, unfortunately this date was missed and this process is planned to kick 
off in April/ May 2024.  
Funding from the NTA was not secured and therefore DCC will fund this scheme. 
 
Q.133  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the number of complaints made by people 
living in emergency accommodation in each year 2017-2023, the nature of the 
complaint, the outcome, the name and address of each accommodation unit where the 
complaint arose from and a statement from the DRHE on the inspection regime in 
place and what measures can be taken to ensure the standard of the temporary 
emergency accommodation in Dublin improves. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As of 2023, a complaints report detailing the complaints received by the DRHE is 
published on a quarterly basis on the DRHE website and can be viewed at 
https://www.homelessdublin.ie/info/publications  
The complaints for 2022 have been attached to this response. Prior to 2022, 
complaints were dealt with on a departmental basis, so responses were not recorded 
centrally. 
There are Quality Standards Frameworks in both NGO and PEA accommodation 
which monitor the standards of all emergency accommodation and make targeted 
improvements where necessary.  There is also an independent Inspectorate that 
complete cyclical inspections on all NGO & PEA services.  In addition to this, the DRHE 
standards and facilities teams complete unannounced site visits on a monthly basis 
across all Emergency Accommodation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix D            Topical issue "Taoiseachs Dublin City Taskforce" 
 
RECORD OF DIVISION AT THE CITY COUNCIL MEETING 13th MAY 2024 
 
FOR: 
31 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTAIN: 
  
AGAINST: 
 25  
 
 
 
 
ABSENT: 
  
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
 
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
Councillor Daryl Barron 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Alison Gilliland 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Racheal Batten 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Deirdre Heney 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Janice Boylan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Jane Horgan Jones 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor  Tom Brabazon 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Janet Horner 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor  Christy Burke 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Vincent Jackson 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Dearbháil Butler 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Dermot Lacey 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor  Claire Byrne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Darcy Lonergan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Danny Byrne 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor John Lyons 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Deborah Byrne 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Micheál MacDonncha 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Mary Callaghan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Briege MacOscar 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Daniel Céitinn 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ray McAdam 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Hazel Chu 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Paddy McCartan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Anthony Connaghan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Eimer McCormack 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Fiona Connelly 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Séamas McGrattan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Keith Connolly 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Declan Meenagh 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Caroline Conroy 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Carolyn Moore 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Deirdre Conroy 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Darragh Moriarty 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Donna Cooney 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Sophie Nicoullaud 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Hazel de Nortúin 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Naoise Ó Muirí 
√ 
 
 
 
Lord Mayor Daithí de Róiste 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Claire O’Connor 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Kelsey May Daly 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Cat O’Driscoll  
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Tara Deacy 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Damian O’Farrell 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Máire Devine 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Colm O’Rourke 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Kevin Donoghue 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Larry O’Toole 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daithí Doolan 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Cieran Perry 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Pat Dunne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Michael Pidgeon 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Anne Feeney 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Noeleen Reilly 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Declan Flanagan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Nial Ring 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Terence Flanagan 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Patricia Roe 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Mannix Flynn 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Catherine Stocker 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor James Geoghegan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Michael Watters 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
