Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 7 April 2025 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 7 Aibreán 2025 i Seomra na Comhairle, Halla 
na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an 
tArdmheara Emma Blain sa chathaoir 
 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Ammar Ali 
Daryl Barron 
Racheal Batten 
Emma Blain 
Kevin Breen 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Danny Byrne 
Lesley Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
David Coffey 
Anthony Connaghan 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Ray Cunningham 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Daniel Ennis 
Cian Farrell 
Alison Field 
Declan Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
Deirdre Heney 
Jesslyn Henry 
Rory Hogan 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Feljin Jose 
Kourtney Kenny 
Patrick Kinsella 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Aoibheann Mahon 
Ray McAdam 
Séamas McGrattan 
Ciaran Meachair 
Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
Paddy Monahan 
Edel Moran 
Darragh Moriarty 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Colm O'Rourke 
Gavin Pepper 
Cieran Perry 
Michael Pidgeon 
Gayle Ralph 
Punam Rane 
Conor Reddy 
Nial Ring 
Aishling Silke 
Supriya Singh 
Malachy Steenson 
John Stephens 
Catherine Stocker 
Philip Sutcliffe 
 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Prajwal K. Annibabu 
Lorraine Brogan 
John Flanagan 
Anthony Flynn 
Yvonne Kelly 
Natalie Leonard 
Victor Leonov 
Chris Manzira 
Mick Mulhern 
Brendan O'Brien 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Deirdre Scully 
Richard Shakespeare 
Mary Hayes 
 
 
 
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
Best Wishes 
The Lord Mayor extended her best wishes to Councillor Pat Dunne on his upcoming 
nuptials that will take place on Good Friday 17th April in City Hall. 
 
 
 

 
She also extended her best wishes to Deirdre Scully, City Planner on her retirement 
later this month after 15 years service to Dublin City Council.  
 
Emergency Motion No. 4 in the name of Cllr. Janet Horner, Claire Byrne, Donna 
Cooney, Ray Cunningham, Feljin Jose, Carolyn Moore, Darragh Moriarty 
 
The Lord Mayor agreed that the following motion would be taken under Lord Mayor’s 
Business. 
 
The Lord Mayor and Dublin City Councillors offer their solidarity to the Mayor of 
Istanbul Ekrem İmamoğlu, following his arrest and detention as part of a wider 
campaign to prevent him contesting the Presidential election. We note with deep 
concern the growing authoritarianism of Turkish rule under President Erdoğan and call 
on the Irish Government, the EU and the Council of Europe to act within their powers 
to support free, fair and democratic elections in Türkiye, protect the freedom of the 
press and the right to protest. In particular, we call for a review of Türkiye's role in the 
Council of Europe and accession status to the EU in light of recent events. 
 
The motion was put and carried.  
 
Apology 
The Lord Mayor informed members that Cllr Punam Rane wrote to her and asked that 
her apology be read and placed on record: 
 
Dear Lord Mayor 
I am writing to you in relation to a contribution I made during the meeting of the City 
Council on Monday 7th October, 2024, in the context of a Motion on Notice concerning 
the Occupied Territories Bill under the agenda item 28, and a related emergency 
motion under agenda item 29, both of which were debated together. 
 
I wish to formally withdraw the comments I made during the course of that debate. 
 
I understand that my remarks were offensive to members of the Jewish community, 
both in Dublin and further afield, as well as to others.  I sincerely apologise once again 
for the offence caused, and I wish to place this apology formally on the record. 
 
Sincerely, Cllr Punam Rane 
 
Hungary – cancellation of Pride 
The Lord Mayor thanked Cllr Fiona Connelly for raising this issue with her.  With 
Dublin Pride having been granted permission to take place this year, the Lord Mayor 
raised her concern that Pride has been cancelled in Hungary and would like to support 
calls for Pride to be reinstated.   
I will write to the Ambassador of Hungary to Ireland and to Prime Minister Viktor Orbán 
to raise the issue and asking them reconsider the decision to cancel Pride.   
 
2 
  Legal Briefing on HSE Funding for Emergency Ambulance Services provided by 
Dublin Fire Brigade. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Colm O’Rourke and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam pursuant to Standing Order 39.1 that the members meet in the absence of 
the media and the general public for part of the Council meeting for the purpose of 
receiving a legal briefing in private from Stephen Dodd SC relating to the HSE funding 
for the provision of the Emergency Ambulance Service by DFB. 
The motion was put and carried.  
 
 

 
The meeting administrator then requested that the webcast be paused and that all 
members of the public and media leave the Chamber for the duration of the 
discussion.  
 
3 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Christy Burke 
that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the questions 
lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the questions 
lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and Answers are set 
out in Appendix A to these minutes. 
 
9 - 63 
4 
  Correspondence was received from the following Local Authorities; 
 
• 
Donegal County Council  
• 
Sligo county Council  
• 
Clare County Council  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by Councillor John 
Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence listed. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
5 
  To confirm the minutes of the City Council Meeting held on 3rd March 2025 and the 
minutes of the Special City Council meetings held on 13th March and 24th March 
2025. 
 
The minutes of the City Council meeting held on 2022 having been 
printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken 
as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor. 
 
Councillor Séamas McGrattan asked to make a comment on the minutes for the 
March Council Meeting and for it to be put on record that the council is owed €78.3 in 
outstanding Development levies, €13.8 is to be paid from the Government Waiver 
Scheme. While noting that legal proceedings have been initiated to recover this some 
of this, he has requested that a report be provided later in the year outlining progress 
due to the huge sum of money owed to Dublin City Council.   
 
 
6 
  Vacancies   
 
 
(a)   To fill one Social Democrat vacancy on the Planning and Urban Regeneration 
Strategic Policy Committee following the resignation of Councillor Cat 
O'Driscoll.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor 
Deirdre Heney that Councillor Aishling Silke be appointed to the Planning and 
Urban Regeneration Strategic Policy Committee. The motion was put and 
carried.  
 
 
(b)   To fill one Social Democrat vacancy on the Finance Strategic Policy 
Committee following the resignation of Councillor Tara Deacy.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor 
Jesslyn Henry the Councillor Noelle Brown be appointed to the Finance 
Strategic Policy Committee.  The motion was put and carried.   
 
 
 

 
7 
  Report No. 71/2025 of the Executive Manager (B. O'Brien) - with reference to the 
proposed draft Skip Bye-Laws 2025. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Ammar Ali 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 71/2025 and hereby resolves 
to make Dublin City Council Control of Skip Bye-Laws 2025 as outlined in the report. 
The commencement date that these Bye Laws shall come into operation is 1st May 
2025.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
It was raised by Councillor Michael Pidgeon that under 6(g) of the updated Bye Laws 
there is a weird formatting that carries over and has carried over for this addition 
where the list mentioned in (g) is listed in (h) and he has asked that it be addressed.  
 
 
8 
  Report No. 105/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Amendment to 
the Housing Allocations Scheme (Scheme of Letting Priorities). 
 
 It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that the following amendments to the report, circulated in advance of the 
meeting, be considered:  
 
1. Inclusion of Other Care Leavers 
 
Original Draft Text: 
 
“Care Leavers will be living in a residential care placement at the time of application;” 
 
Proposed amendment: 
 
“Care Leavers will be living in residential or another recognised care arrangement, or 
they will be in homelessness with a care history."  
 
2. Engagement with Aftercare Service 
 
Original Draft Text: 
“Care Leavers will be availing of the Tusla Aftercare service;” 
Proposed amendment: 
“Care Leavers will be availing of, or will have previously availed of, the Tusla Aftercare 
service” 
 
3. Definition of Housing Need 
Original Draft Text: 
“Care Leavers will have no other options for housing support on leaving care, other 
than homeless accommodation;” 
Proposed amendment: 
“Care Leavers will have no suitable or secure long-term housing options available on 
leaving care; this includes those in precarious, informal, or time-limited arrangements.” 
 
Councillor Dermot Lacey proposed that the amendments be forwarded to the Housing 
Strategic Policy Committee for further consideration.  
 
Following a robust discussion on the proposed amendments, the motion to amend the 
report was put to a vote and fell.  A copy of this vote can be found attached to these 
minutes in Appendix B.   
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and Seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that these amendments now be sent to the Housing SPC for further 
consideration.  This was unanimously agreed.  
64 

 
It was then proposed by Councillor Deirdre Heney and seconded by Councillor 
Vincent Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of report No. 105/2025 
and hereby approves the contents therein.  
 
9 
  Disposal of Fee Simple and Freehold Interest:   
 
 
(a)   Report No. 83/2025 of the Executive Manager (F. D'Arcy) - With reference to 
the disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and Tenant (Ground 
Rents) (No. 2) Act, 1978.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor 
Christy Burke that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
83/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
10   Disposal of Property:   
 
 
(a)   Report No. 93/2024 of the Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - Disposal of a plot of 
land to the rear of 25 Broadstone Avenue, Broadstone, Dublin 7. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor 
Christy Burke that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
93/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
(b)   Report No. 94/2024 of the Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - Disposal of plot of 
land to the rear of 647a Howth Road, Raheny, Dublin 5. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor 
Christy Burke that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
94/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 95/2024 of the Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - Disposal of plot of 
land to the rear of 30 Croydon Green, Marino, Dublin 3. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor 
Christy Burke that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
95/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
(d)   Report No. 96/2024 of the Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - Disposal of a plot of 
land to the rear of 41 Saint Aidan’s Park Road, Marino, Dublin 5. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor 
Christy Burke that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
96/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
(e)   Report No. 91/2024 of the Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With further 
reference to the disposal of 28 Abbey Street and 109 Marlborough Street, 
Dublin 1. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor 
Christy Burke that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
91/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 

 
11   Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
(a)   Report No. 92/2024 of the Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to the 
proposed grant of a Short-Term Business Letting Agreement of 1st and 2nd 
Floor units at 54-56 Gateway Crescent, Ballymun, Dublin 11. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Feljin Jose and seconded by Councillor Racheal 
Batten that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 92/2025 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
  
 
(b)   Report No. 100/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - With reference 
to the proposed grant of a 5 year lease at a site known as Cherry Orchard 
Green (Allotments) to Ballyfermot Chapelizod Partnership CLG.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Feljin Jose and seconded by Councillor Racheal 
Batten that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 100/2025 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
 
 
12   Report No. 97/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (J. Flanagan) - 
Quarterly Report of the Active Travel Programme Office. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Dermot 
Lacey that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 97/2025.  The motion 
was put and carried.   
 
 
13   Report No. 103/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (J. Flanagan) 
- Quarterly Report of the Traffic Department 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 103/2025.  The 
motion was put and carried.   
 
The Lord Mayor proposed an extension of the meeting at 9.15 p.m. until 10 p.m. in 
order to conclude the business on the Agenda.  This was unanimously agreed by 
council.   
 
 
14   Report No. 98/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Social Housing 
Supply and Delivery Monthly Update Report 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Donna Cooney and seconded by Councillor Feljin Jose 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 98/2025. The motion was put 
and carried. 
 
 
15   Report No. 99/2025 of the A/Head of Finance (V. Leonov) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement & EU IMF Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Séamus 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 99/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
16   Report No. 102/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Conor 
Reddy that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 102/2025. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
17   Report No. 86/2025 of the Area Committees - Breviates of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of March 2025. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 86/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
18   Report No. 87/2025 of the North West Area Joint Policing Sub Committee - Breviate of 
the meeting held on 10th March 2025, Cllr. Keith Connolly, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 87/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
19   Report No. 84/2025 of the Economic Development and Enterprise Strategic Policy 
Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 18th February 2025, Councillor 
Racheal Batten, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 84/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
20   Report No. 85/2025 of the Arts, Culture, Leisure and Recreation Strategic Policy 
Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 25th February 2025, Councillor 
Darragh Moriarty, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 85/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
  
 
21   Report No. 104/2025 of the Climate Action and Urban Resilience Strategic Policy 
Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on 5th February 2025, Councillor Declan 
Flanagan, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 104/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
  
 
22   Report No. 101/2025 of the Protocol Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 
20th February 2025, Councillor Ray McAdam , Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Christy 
Burke that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 101/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
23   Topical Issues 
 
No topical issues were submitted for consideration. 
 
 

 
24   Motions on Notice   
 
 
25   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
Emergency Motion No. 3 in the name of Cllrs Daithi Doolan, Janice Boylan, 
Anthony Connaghan, Leslie Kane, Kourtney Kenny, Micheal MacDonncha, Edel 
Moran, Ciaran O Meachair, Alison Field, Kevin Breen, Christy Burke, Vincent 
Jackson, Cieran Perry, Niall Ring, John Lyons, Pat Dunne, Michael Pidgeon 
Hazel Chu and Hazel de Nortúin was proposed and seconded by Councillor 
Mannix Flynn that  
 
   
Dublin City Council notes that the Tenant In Situ scheme was an essential tool in 
preventing homelessness. It allowed local authorities to buy properties from landlords 
who otherwise would have carried out no fault evictions.  Last year, hundreds of 
families in Dublin were prevented from becoming homeless because of this effective 
scheme. Dublin City Council is deeply concerned that the Minister for Housing James 
Browne has cut funding to this scheme and introduced criteria that will result in more 
people becoming homeless. Dublin City Council urges the Minister for Housing to 
immediately reverse his decision and to reinstate the scheme in. 
 
The Lord Mayor agreed to write a further letter to the Minister for Housing Local 
Government and Heritage, James Brown setting out this councils position on the 
matter.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
 

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY 7th APRIL 
2025 
 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline the origination of the National Concert Hall 
Quarter (SDRA 18) designation and whether copies of any submissions still exist and 
can be made available. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A submission in relation to the National Concert Hall Quarter was received in response 
to the public display of the Draft Dublin City Development Plan 2016-2022 which 
occurred from 1st October to 11th December 2015.   
The submission requested the designation of an SDRA designation for the National 
Concert Hall Quarter to provide the framework for a planned and co-ordinated 
approach to ensure the NCHQ reaches its full potential in terms of cultural and 
commercial development, and that such development is delivered in conjunction with 
appropriate planning benefits, such as high quality streetscape and public realm 
upgrades. This was incorporated into the Dublin City Development Plan 2016-2022 by 
way of a SDRA designation for the area.  The relevant Chief Executive Report of March 
2016 and the relevant submission requesting this designation will be forwarded to the 
Councillor.  
 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive further to my question Number 21 at the February City 
Council meeting, would he give a response to the response provided to me by an 
interested Citizen set out below 
 
I see that DCC's principal objections are thus: 
 Unregulated market / service / commercial use of public parking space. 
 Management of local electricity grid capacity. 
 Managing parking enforcement 
 Proliferation of equipment of streets. 
 Additional hazards to public safety 
 Private wire legislation (Only ESB can own distribution networks) 
My response is as follows: 
Unregulated market / service / commercial use of public parking space. I suspect 
most of the areas that would be most suitable for lamppost charging already require a 
parking permit to park on the street. Certainly in our area this is well policed and many 
a ticket has been observed! I cannot see how lamppost charging would change this in 
any way. 
Management of local electricity grid capacity. Not my area of expertise but if other 
advanced European cities can do it I don't see what would stop us. 
Managing parking enforcement. See above - they would have no impact on parking 
enforcement whatsoever. 
Proliferation of equipment on streets.  From what I have read there will be no / 
minimal additional street hardware required (see extract below). 
Additional hazards to public safety - there is no evidence of this in other markets 
and I cannot really see the difference between lamppost charging hazards and 
communal charging hazards. 
Private wire legislation (Only ESB can own distribution networks) - not my area, 
but again, if others can do it why can't we? 
 

I attach below a section from the following website - https://ubitricity.com/en/charging-
solutions/ac-lamppost/ - worth a read! 
 
The one question that remains outstanding is whether or not we have an approved 
meter small enough to fit into our lampposts.......? 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Council’s plan in relation to electric vehicle charging points is set out in the 
Electric Vehicle Charging Strategy; 
 https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/transportation/electric-vehicle-charging-
information 
Under this strategy charging for households that do not have off-street parking will be 
provided through neighbourhood schemes close to the residents’ home.  As stated 
previously, there are no plans to provide charging points in lampposts. 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR MICHEAL PIDGEON 
To ask the Chief Executive if the Greenfield site to the immediate west of (Details 
Supplied) has been assessed for new housing, which could deal with the problem of 
repeated overgrowth and provide a new home. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This site is not currently on a programme the programme for Housing, Housing 
Development will make an assessment as to whether developing new housing on this 
site is feasible and we will update the Councillor once a feasibility is complete. 
 
Q.4 
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the current status of the Council's 
Community Wealth Building initiative and a progress report on the work to date of 
the CWB Working Group. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Background  
Community Wealth Building (CWB) was adopted by Dublin City Council at its meeting 
in October 2021.  CWB is an initiative of the Finance SPC.   Dublin City Council has 
engaged the Centre for Local Economic Strategies (CLES) to assist in the 
implementation and mainstreaming of CWB.  It is a strategic approach to local 
economic development which is about increasing the flow, circulation and ownership 
of wealth in a place.  It focuses on delivering outcomes that create more opportunities 
for those individuals and communities who are marginalised with fewer choices and 
freedoms than others.  Moving towards equity in opportunities for employment, access 
to facilities, lifestyle opportunities are all central tenets of CWB.  
  
 CWB Priorities for 2025  
 In January 2024, as outlined in a report to the Finance SPC, the CWB Steering Group, 
supported by CLES, identified five key priorities for 2025 as:  
 
1. Deepening awareness and understanding of CWB  
2. Engaging anchor institutions  
3. Growing a values-based recruitment  
4. Supporting the implementation of social value  

5. Piloting in Cherry Orchard  
   
Deepening awareness and understanding of CWB  
The CWB Steering Group has worked with CLES to continue to deepen the awareness 
and understanding of CWB across Dublin City Council.  This has included the 
development of training workshops which has been offered and delivered to 
departments across the Council.  The Council also worked with CLES to develop a 
briefing paper on CWB for our Elected Members.   A set of resources has been 
developed to work with Dublin City Council’s online training platform to be deployed as 
part of the new staff on-boarding process. This online learning module will be an 
interactive, video and quiz-based learning module, building CWB understanding and 
awareness in all future recruits. A simplified version is being developed for all frontline 
staff by the Dublin City Council Learning and Development Team.  Currently the 
module is being finalised, ready to be added to the learning and development platform 
in the coming months. 
 
In addition, knowledge and awareness of CWB continues to grow through regular 
meetings held by the cross departmental CWB steering group, with representatives of 
the steering group potentially able to bring information and knowledge back to their 
departmental teams. 
   
Engaging anchor institutions  
In October 20224, Dublin City Council convened an event for a large group of public 
anchor organisations to discuss CWB at Dublin City Council to date and to explore the 
feasibility of establishing an anchor network for Dublin City. This anchor network would 
provide opportunities for public sector organisations to co-ordinate their work on 
employment, assets and procurement spends, so as to deliver social and economic 
outcomes for citizens.  A briefing paper was prepared in advance to summarise the 
potential opportunities of this collaboration.  Senior representatives were in attendance 
from a range of public sector organisations including:  
 
City of Dublin ETB 
Dublin Port 
St James Hospital  
Rotunda Hospital  
Grangegorman 
National Maternity Hospital  
Eye and Ear Royal Victoria  
Dublin City University 
Children’s Health Ireland 
TU Dublin  
 
During the meeting, representatives discussed the key challenges and opportunities 
of closer collaboration on key elements of CWB including employment, procurement, 
spend, assets, ownership and finance.  Case studies of similar work elsewhere, 
including the CWB Bill in Scotland, were discussed.    
Dublin City Council is planning another meeting of the anchor network with a CWB 
Workshop in early May 2025.  
 
Growing values-based recruitment  
Dublin City Council has successfully piloted a values-based and geographically 
targeted approach to the recruitment of general operatives with a second pilot 
programme planned for Cherry Orchard. A number of Dublin City Council departments 

have expressed an interest in the approach, which may enable a scaling up of the 
second phase pilot.  Discussions are ongoing with the Human Resources Department.  
 
Support implementation of social value  
Dublin City Council worked with CLES to develop a Social Value Framework and work 
is continuing to help implement this framework across the Council’s work including the 
Corporate Plan and the Dublin City Local Economic and Community Plan.  Progress 
made on implementation of social value to date has included: 
 
 
Preparation of a Social Value Implementation Guide which outlines the key 
priorities and legal requirements of delivering social value. 
 
 
A market intelligence paper to outline the opportunities to develop a 
comprehensive overview of social economy sector and a system to help 
support contract and market readiness, including options to reserve contracts. 
 
 
Dublin City Council has also worked with CLES to explore the opportunities to 
embed social value within a number of specific contracts, for example, types of 
questions and wording for tenders, for example on textile recycling and 
catering. 
           
            Piloting in Cherry Orchard  
Cherry Orchard has been identified as a pilot area in Dublin to bring together the pillars 
of CWB. To date the focus was on working with stakeholder groups already operating 
with a focus on Cherry Orchard to look for opportunities to embed CWB.   This has 
included working with the Cherry Orchard Implementation Board. A programme of 
targeted recruitment is already planned for Cherry Orchard with local employers in 
construction, healthcare and retail sectors targeted. An awareness of this will be 
developed with locally based anchors who may be able to support and/or join the 
programme.  The social value paper has been sent to the team in Cherry Orchard and 
they are now exploring the ways that social value can be embedded in their work. 
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive a report on the council's Caravan Loan Scheme and for the 
following questions to be addressed in the report:  
What criteria does DCC use in relation to the purchase of trailers from its suppliers for 
use by the Travelling Community? 
What specific building standards are used by DCC to evaluate the trailer (national 
and/or British standard)?  
What quality criteria and type of trailer are used by DCC to evaluate if a trailer 
represents value for money: age of trailer, bedroom size, and overall condition of 
caravan?  
What percentage of the price given by the supplier represents delivery and what 
percentage of the price represents installations?  
What does DCC's "acceptance test" entail when DCC agrees on a trailer? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council tendered for the establishment of a Multi-Party Framework for the 
Supply, Delivery, Installation, Commissioning and Handover of Mobile Homes for the 
Traveller Accommodation Unit on the 18th November 2023 with a closing date of 18th 
December 2023 for submissions via e-tenders.   

Following the tender process two successful applicants were placed on the Framework 
and contractors were signed on 28th February 2024 with a commencement date of 27th 
March 2024: 
 
Harry Farrell & Sons Ltd  
 
Wallace Mobile Homes Ltd  
 
The maximum value of the framework over the life of the framework (4 years) is 
€4,000,000, and it should be noted that this value is not a guarantee of any spend over 
the life of the Framework Agreement as provision of mobile/trailer/caravans is subject 
to funding from the Department of Housing Local Government and Heritage. 
 
The specific building standards used by DCC, as per the tender documentation are 
detailed below: 
 
All mobile homes must meet the latest Health & Safety and/or Construction 
Standards including the following standards and/or the updated equivalents: 
 
National Standards Authority of Ireland: 
 
I.S. 168: 1973 Ventilation of caravans & mobiles homes (Note: Statutory 
Instrument S.I. No. 111 of 1974 in relation to this Standard.) 
 
I.S. 806: 1988 Butane and gas burning installations in caravans, non-
permanent dwellings, transportable site offices & cabins. 
 
British Standards Institution: 
 
BS 3632: 1995 Specification for residential park homes. 
 
BS 5482: Domestic butane & propane gas burning installations. Part 2: 1977 
Installations in caravans and non-permanent dwellings. 
 
BS 5601: Code of Practice for ventilation and heating of caravans. Part 1: 1978 
(1990) Ventilation Part 4: 1980 (1990) Installation of electrical heating 
appliances. 
 
BS 6764: 1991 Specification for habitation and stability requirements for leisure 
accommodation vehicles: leisure homes. 
 
BS 
6767: 
Transportable 
accommodations 
units. 
Part 
1: 
1992 
Recommendations for design & construction. 
 
Guide to Fire Safety in Existing Traveller Accommodation: National Directorate for Fire 
and Safety Management 
 
All the above must be compliant with Residential Specification BS 3632 is the British 
Standard or EN1647 is the European Standard industry norms for permanent 
residence mobile homes and gives guidance on thermal insulation, materials, 
equipment, etc. used to build and insulate mobile homes for permanent residence. All 
mobile homes must comply with the above standards as a minimum requirement. 
After a DCC tenant/licence holder, from a registered DCC TAU Scheme/Site, has been 
offered a trailer/caravan under either the Trailer/Caravan Loan Scheme or the 
Trailer/Caravan Emergency Scheme an appointment is made with one of the DCC 
suppliers (the recipient picks their preferred supplier from the framework).  A DCC 
member of staff attends the appointment also and it is the tenant/licence holder who 
chooses the trailer/caravan within the allocated amount.  The DCC staff member 
completes the attached checklist in relation to same.  
 
The majority of trailers/caravans are new or approximately 2 years old.  If 2nd hand they 
must be refurbishment to a high standard must met the criteria outlined above.  The 

recipient has the final say on the trailer provided it is within the allocation provided by 
DCC. 
 
The average cost of a trailer/caravan is €55,000 (inclusive of VAT at 13.5%) and 
additional costs for delivery and where required crane hire to install the trailer/caravan 
€2,900 (inclusive of VAT at 23%). 
 
Q.6 
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on tenant rent arrears in each of the five 
administrative areas of the city council. The report should include information on the 
number of tenants in rent arrears and the level of rent arrears per tenant in each area; 
the categorisation of the rent arrears; the process involved in engaging tenants in 
significant rent arrears; the level and nature of engagement with and support for 
tenants in rent arrears; the number of eviction notices served by the city council in each 
year 2021 to the present day; and finally, the costs incurred by the council in pursuing 
each eviction notice (legal fees, court time, etc...). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Categorisation of Rent Arrears 
 
Tenants are categorised as follows in relation to rent and rent arrears: 
 
Compliant – i.e. a tenant is paying their weekly rent charge each week and/or is 
adhering to a repayment arrangement in relation to rent arrears. Accounts are 
continually monitored on a daily basis and intervention occurs as and when 
payments are missed. 
 
Repayment Arrangements – this category covers tenants in rent arrears who have 
recently entered repayment arrangements with their Executive Housing Officer in 
relation to rent arrears owed. Accounts are continually monitored on a daily basis and 
intervention occurs as and when there is a breach of the repayment arrangement. 
 
Irregular Payments – this category relates to tenants who are not compliant in 
relation to their weekly rent payment and arrears owing. Majority of tenants in this 
category are well advanced in the Stages of our Rent Arrears Recovery Process and 
are either in the process of receiving a Tenancy Warning or have already received 
one and are subject to legal proceedings in line with the Housing (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act 2014.  
At the end of 2024, Dublin City Council had a 70% compliance rate in relation to the 
payment of weekly rent charges and repayment arrangements in relation to rent 
arrears. 
Rent Arrears per Administrative Area 
Please see below the breakdown of rent arrears per administrative area and the 
number of rent accounts in arrears per administrative area: 
 
Central Area – 2,594 rent accounts in arrears 
 
Arrears 
Range 
Number of Accounts  Arrears Amount 
Categorisation 
€0-€500 
1314 
€189,700.41 
Compliant 
€501-€5000 
847 
€1,649,951.47 
Compliant/Repayment 
Arrangement 

€5001-
€10,000 
253 
€1,819,205.87 
Repayment 
Arrangement/ 
Irregular Payments 
€10,001-
€19,000 
149 
€1,959,185.14 
Repayment 
Arrangement/ 
Irregular Payments 
Over €19,000 
31 
€783,379.27 
Irregular Payments 
 
 
North Central Area – 2,799 rent accounts in arrears 
Arrears Range 
Number 
of 
Accounts 
Arrears Amount 
Categorisation  
€0-€500 
1244 
€194,058.59 
Compliant 
€501-€5,000 
988 
€1,953,899.31 
Compliant/Repayment 
Arrangement 
€5,001-€10,000 309 
€2,202,994.81 
Repayment 
Arrangement/ 
Irregular Payments 
€10,001-
€19,000 
206 
€2,797,707.55 
Repayment 
Arrangement/ 
Irregular Payments 
Over €19,000 
52 
€1,220,651.20 
Irregular Payments 
 
North West Area – 4,260 rent accounts in arrears 
Arrears Range 
Number 
of 
Accounts 
Arrears Amount 
Categorisation 
€0-€500 
1954 
€314,252.89 
Compliant 
€501-€5,000 
1661 
€3,246,462.37 
Compliant/Repayment 
Arrangement 
€5,001-€10,000 419 
€2,962,349.28 
Repayment 
Arrangement/ 
Irregular Payments 
€10,001-
€19,000 
188 
€2,449,634.49 
Repayment 
Arrangement/ 
Irregular Payments 
Over €19,000 
38 
€913,965.09 
Irregular Payments 
 
 
 
South Central Area – 5,268 rent accounts in arrears 
Arrears Range Number 
of 
Accounts 
Arrears Amount 
Categorisation  
€0-€500 
2564 
€402,870.79 
Compliant 
€501-€5,000 
1885 
€3,672,115.73 
Compliant/Repayment 
Arrangement 
€5,001-
€10,000 
496 
3,474,098.90 
Repayment 
Arrangement/ 
Irregular Payments 
€10,001-
€19,000 
248 
3,380,412.34 
Repayment 
Arrangement/ 
Irregular Payments 
Over €19,000 
75 
€1,788,006.95 
Irregular Payments 

 
South East Area – 2,039 rent accounts in arrears 
Arrears Range 
Number 
of 
Accounts 
Arrears Amount 
Categorisation 
€0-€500 
1250 
€162,439.10 
Compliant 
€501-€5,000 
611 
€1,115,966.12 
Compliant/Repayment 
Arrangement 
€5,001-€10,000 116 
€827,596.42 
Repayment 
Arrangement/ 
Irregular Payments 
€10,001-
€19,000 
50 
€667,139.26 
Repayment 
Arrangement/ 
Irregular Payments 
Over €19,000 
12 
€286,255.39 
Irregular Payments 
 
Total credit on rent accounts amounts to €5.1m. 
Rent Arrears Recover Process: 
There is a multi-layered approach to the Rent Arrears Recovery Process – as outlined 
below; 
Stage 1 – Early Intervention – 1st Warning 
Stage 2 – Escalation to 2nd Warning  
Stage 3 – Escalation to 3rd Warning (pre-legal final warning) 
Stage 4 – Statutory Tenancy Warning/Review  
Stage 5 – District Court proceedings for Possession Order 
Stage 6 – Repossession of property 
Preventative: Monitoring of rent accounts and early intervention where necessary to 
promote good payment habits. 
Remedial: Supporting the tenant to find a workable solution to address rent arrears. 
Legal: Initiation of legal proceedings in accordance with the Act where all reasonable efforts 
fail and/or there is a lack of engagement by the tenant.  
Executive Housing Officers engage on daily basis with tenants to encourage them to enter 
into manageable and sustainable repayment arrangements. Contact is made via phone, 
letter and house calls. Executive Housing Officers liaise with our Welfare Section and Estate 
Management so as to provide additional supports to tenants as and when required.  
Possession Orders 
With regards to Possession Orders, please see table below: 
Year 
Number of Possession Orders Served 
2021 
0 
2022 
3 

2023 
5 
2024 
21 
2025* to date 
6 
 
Costs involved in relation to arrears recovery for 2024 are outlined below: 
Legal Costs (includes DCC Law Dept, Counsel Costs, Court Costs): €180,369 
City Sheriff Costs: €66,452 
Overall Total for 2024: €246,821 
Q.7  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive when the pay and display will be in place on (Details 
Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The installation of Pay and Display and resident parking at Details Supplied will 
commence once our new permit parking system has gone live. The process to change 
over from the old system has commenced and Parking Enforcement, Customer 
Services and the system developers are currently working together to transfer all data 
and test all aspects before we can activate the system. 
The current Parking Permit system has been in place for a number of years and 
contains a huge of amount data. This system is no longer supported and if it crashed 
this would result in the loss of all data as well as leaving us with no means of processing 
parking permits in the interim.  
The introduction of the permit parking scheme on Details Supplied will necessitate 
the input of a huge amount of data on to the system (there are over 250 eligible 
properties entitled to between 2 and 4 permits in addition to visitor permits depending 
on the layout of the building) which would put it under further strain.   
We will be in a position to give a realistic timeframe after go live which is set for mid to 
late April. 
 
Q.8  
COUNCILLOR CHIRSTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive When will the disabled bay be in place at (Details 
Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A Disabled Parking bay at this location was recommended by the Transport Advisory 
Group at its meeting of 25/02/2025 and will be installed upon completion of the TAG 
process. (TAMS Enquiry Ref: 11171617). 
 
Q.9 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive if he has an update on the future of North Strand fire station 
regards a new station in the dock area 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin Fire Brigade do not know the future development of the site/building once DFB 
move to the new station at Alfie Byrne Rd.  
 
Q.10  COUNCILLOR CHIRSTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive how many voids are in (Details Supplied) 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Area  
(Details 
Supplied) 
Awaiting vacant possession  
12 
Works under contractor 
30 
Works under the Depot 
18 
Total 
60 
 
 
Q.11 
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can clarify why Dublin City Council received no funding 
under this scheme. (Details Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Transport Infrastructure Ireland provides funding for greenways to local authorities 
under the Greenway Programme.  
Funding for Dublin City Council’s Active Travel Programme, which includes greenways 
is provided by the National Transport Authority. 
Dublin City Council therefore does not avail of this funding because our funding 
requirements, including for greenways, is administered through the National Transport 
Authority. 
 
 
Q.12  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will arrange for the relevant Housing Staff to respond 
to the issues contained in the email submitted with this Question and relating to 
(Details Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council currently operates under the Differential Rent Scheme.  
Under this scheme, rents are charged at 15% of the income, after deductions, of the 
Principal Economic Earner in the household. Secondary Earners within the household 
are charged a max of €21.00 per week.  
Dublin City Council in conjunction with the Finance SPC and the Housing SPC are in 
the process of setting up a Sub-Committee to review the current Differential Rents 
Scheme.  
Any changes implemented as a result of this review will be communicated to tenants 
as and when they are agreed by the committee. 
 
 
Q.13  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive if he is aware of the ongoing protests taking place monthly 
at (Details Supplied); what engagement has this local authority had with An Garda 
Siochana; the Department of Agriculture and the Revenue commissioners in order to 
prevent these protests occurring; and if he will make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The City Council remains committed to Details Supplied 
DCC will continue to liaise and work with the Gardaí and the local community in an 
effort to manage the public domain and mitigate health and safety risks as well as 
providing waste management services.  

 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update of following public realm plans, including 
works taken place to date and the schedule for works going forward: the paving of 
O'Connell Street, upgrades to the surfacing and streetscape of South William Street, 
the permanent streetscape changes for Suffolk Street and the implementation of the 
Grafton Street Quarter including the junction of Grafton Street and Stephen's Green 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Roads Maintenance Response:  
An inspection of O’Connell Street was undertaken on 25/03/2025 and it was found that 
the carriageway was in good condition.  Therefore, it is decided that no roadworks are 
needed on this road.  
 
Active Travel Response: 
The Active Travel Programme office is currently working on the delivery of the Harcourt 
to South William Street Active Travel project.  The project is currently at the concept 
development and option selection phase.  This work included a high level examination 
of the feasibility of original concept.  The review identified issues with the traffic 
volumes on Mercer Street that prevent the implementation of a safe cycle route on 
South William Street at this time.  
 
The scope of work of the Feasibility and Option Selection Report has been updated to 
include consideration for an alternative corridor to connect the Sandyford/Clonskeagh 
to Charlemont Scheme to the city centre.   
 
Suffolk Street and O'Connell Street are both on the Active Travel Network. However, 
the projects involved are not currently part of the 2024-2028 delivery programme. 
Should additional funding and resources become available, the Active Travel 
Programme Office will look to accelerate projects that are currently assigned as post 
2028. 
 
The Grafton Street Quarter which is not part of the Active Travel Network, is part of the 
Public Realm Steering Group. 
 
Should you require any further information please find the relevant contacts below: 
 
Q.15  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report regarding the ongoing issues of the 
misuse of Tailors Hall. This issue goes back a number of months when this listed 
building under the care of An Taisce was turned into a public house without proper 
planning procedures.  This report to include: whether this public house use has been 
ceased. 
What are the outcomes of planning enforcement? And bearing in mind that a motion 
was agreed to take this property back in charge on behalf of the community for 
community and cultural use what efforts have been made with this regard?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The use of the premises as a Public House has long since ceased following the 
initiation of appropriate enforcement action. There are no outstanding Planning 
Enforcement issues relating to this premises at this time. 
 
Q.16 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 

To ask the Chief Executive to give an update regarding the publication into alleged 
corrupt payments on (Details Supplied) that was initiated a number of years back.  
This was a very serious allegation which led to a number of investigations.  Can the 
CEO indicate when this report will be released.  
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Chief Executive is not in a position to indicate when this report will be released.  
He will however write to the Department of Housing to enquire as to the status of the 
report. 
 
 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive give a progress report regarding the policy and guidelines 
that were agreed to be set up regarding bereavements and deaths that take place in 
emergency housing accommodation.  This initiative was agreed well over a year ago 
and there has been absolutely nothing to date achieved regarding a bereavement 
policy from DCC/ Dublin Regional homeless executive.  This is unacceptable and 
atrocious practice bearing in mind that this matter was given serious attention some 
time back and seems to have fallen entirely off the radar. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The DRHE has had a Death notification policy in place since 2020. This has been 
updated regularly over the last number of years in conjunction with service providers 
and the HSE. 
The HSE has appointed a full-time mortality coordinator to work with services and the 
DRHE. 
In addition, a mortality oversight committee is established with members from the HSE 
& DRHE. 
 
Q.18 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full and transparent report as to how DCC arrive 
at decisions around section 5 exemptions for IPAS centres?  
There is public concern as to whether DCC adhere to best practice/due diligence in 
making the decision regarding the KBC building off Boyne Street which was granted 
an exemption section 5. On examining the planning files there does not seem to be 
any confirmation from the Department regarding their use of this building by way of a 
letter or a note of contract.  If this is the case, this decision would be null and void.  This 
issue of section 5 needs to be a transparent process, particularly when it is being used 
in emergency accommodation for refugees and asylum seekers. 
Misuse of section 5 or gaming of section 5 by would be developers, sitting on vast 
vacant properties, needs to be cautioned against.  The planning system cannot be 
twisted to suit certain individuals.  The integrity of DCC’s decisions are at stake here 
and public confidence in this process is at an all-time low.  Bearing in mind the diverse 
views from Left to Right and in-between, local communities and indeed local 
businesses and local representatives need to be informed prior to any granting of such 
Section 5. Exemptions, particularly in relation to contentious use of section 5 
The local community in and around Boyne Street are gravely concerned, like those in 
Mount Street, of the impact of such Adhoc centres on their very scarce and almost 
non-existent amenities 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Section 5 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) sets out the 
mechanism for a Planning Authority to consider an application for a Declaration of 
Exemption. All Section 5 Exempted Development Declaration requests submitted are 

considered in accordance with all applicable statutory planning legislation, including 
the Planning & Development Act 2000 (as amended) and the Planning & Development 
Regulations 2001 (as amended). 
Specifically in regard to Section 5 Declaration Register Reference: 0392/24, at the 
former KBC Headquarters Building, it was declared that the question of a proposed 
change of use from an office block into emergency accommodation would be 
exempted development as per Class 20F, Part 1, Schedule 2 of the Planning and 
Development Regulations 2001 (as amended). As stated in the Planner Report,  
The Applicant has submitted documentation which states that the proposed change of 
use (if availed of) would be carried out on behalf of the Minister for Children, Equality, 
Disability, Integration and Youth. The Applicant states that they are currently engaged 
in the expression of interest process for the proposed use and the subject application 
forms part of our advance due diligence. Furthermore, given it is understood the 
change of use is contingent on the use being for or on behalf of the minister, it is not 
intended at this stage to submit written agreement. As required, these would be 
submitted before the use is taken up. 
It should be noted that the provisions of Section 5 of the Planning and Development 
Act 2000 (as amended) are for an applicant to request a declaration from the planning 
authority with regard to the provisions of exempted development.  There is no function 
for a planning assessment of the development, therefore the number and location of 
IPAS Centres in operation is a matter for Department of Children, Equality, Disability, 
Integration and Youth and not a matter for Dublin City Council. 
 
Q.19 
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a new kitchen and living room windows for a tenant 
residing at (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will carry out an assessment of the above property in the coming 
weeks.  Any repairs or replacements deemed necessary will be carried out as per 
Dublin City Council Tenant Handbook. 
Q.20 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
 
Having regard to the NOAC Local Authority Performance Indicator Report can the 
Chief Executive confirm the DCC figure in comparison to the average countrywide in 
relation to re-letting time and cost of social housing units which shows an average cost 
of €28,347 per unit and an average time from vacancy to re-letting of 33.72 weeks. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The average time from vacancy of voids to re-letting Dublin City Councils’ turnaround 
time is averaging at 26.96 weeks at an average cost of €41,970.48. We recognise that 
the average cost per void refurbishment is higher in DCC. The primary reason for this 
is that DCC has a housing of stock of c.29,000 homes and over 50% of these homes 
are over 50 years old. Much of DCC was built prior to the introduction of current 
Standards for Rental Homes. When older homes become void and DCC carries out 
works to these homes we must bring them in line with these standards. This can 
include a wide range of work including works to the address standards for gas, 
electrics, fire and internal layouts. Given the age of our stock and the extent of works 
required DCC has to carry out more extensive works on average to our voids, which 
increases our overall spend.  
The preferred approach is to move to a planned maintenance approach whereby we 
can upgrade homes in a planned manner resulting in a reduction in the amount of 

money that has to be spend on any individual void refurbishment. Works on planned 
maintenance has started, however it will take a number of years for this work to ramp 
up and then many more years to see a meaningful impact on the standard of our 
homes. 
Q.21 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive if he will ensure that any and all recorded 
announcements/instructions/greetings on any DCC telephone lines use Irish and not 
British accents and to also to ask if he would consider including an initial bi-lingual 
(Irish and English) greeting on such lines 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will ensure that any and all recorded 
announcements/instructions/greetings on any DCC telephone lines use Irish 
and not British accents 
 
In order to provide a response to this query we require clarification on which DCC 
telephone number or service it relates to.  
 
To ask if he would consider including an initial bi-lingual (Irish and English) 
greeting on such lines 
 
From a technical perspective, the telephone system can facilitate messages in both 
Irish and English.  
The DCC main telephone number 222 222 has the option for the caller to select their 
preference to listen to the messages in Irish or English.  
Other DCC services also provide messaging in both languages.  
 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the occupancy details of DCC properties 
in the same format as provided to me  February 2023 - Q30 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
These are the figures for the Central Area as clarified  
5 Bedroom Tenancies  
No of Occupants  
No of Tenancies  
 
1 
0 
 
2 
0 
 
3 
0 
 
4 
0 
 
5 
0 
 
6> 
1 
 
 
 
4 Bedroom Tenancies  
No of Occupants  
No of Tenancies  
 
1 
26 
 
2 
68 
 
3 
57 

 
4 
33 
 
5 
29 
 
6> 
41 
 
 
 
3 Bedroom Tenancies  
No of Occupants  
No of Tenancies  
 
1 
130 
 
2 
310 
 
3 
320 
 
4 
230 
 
5 
97 
 
6> 
70 
 
 
 
2 Bedroom Tenancies 
No of Occupants  
No of Tenancies  
 
1 
474 
 
2 
880 
 
3 
548 
 
4 
233 
 
5 
74 
 
6> 
20 
 
 
 
1 Bedroom Tenancies  
No of Occupants  
No of Tenancies 
 
1 
895 
 
2 
120 
 
3 
14 
 
4 
2 
 
5 
2 
 
6> 
0 
Total 
 
4,674 
 
 
 
Q.23 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the number of insurance claims by category taken 
against DCC per annum for the past five years and also to detail the amounts paid out 
and number of claims currently outstanding and estimated liability thereon 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

The gathering and collating of the information is on-going and a detailed response will 
issue before the May Council meeting. 
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive to explain why a public waste bin was removed (details 
supplied) and if it could be reinstalled either here or at a nearby location. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This bin was removed as it was creating a serious public health hazard by attracting 
birds which were completely covering the area in droppings. This issue was the result 
of people illegally dumping their domestic waste in and around the bin (including food) 
which was attracting birds to roost in the trees above. Our litter wardens also confirmed 
that illegal dumping was a constant issue with this bin every week. In the end removal 
of this bin was our only option. 
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline what steps are being taken to address situations 
where households have no waste disposal contract at source, as these cases often 
lead to dumping and domestic waste in public bins. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A pilot scheme has been introduced where we are contacting waste collection 
companies to see what households have a registered bin collection contract and 
subsequently targeting those households who don’t have one. 
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline when badly needed public realm work in Dolphins 
Barn Village will commence, could it also be ensured that electricity boxes in Dolphins 
Barn Village are included in the next round of electricity box artwork applications 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dolphins Barn is on the Road Design priority list and will be progressed when 
resources are available. 
The call out for the 2025 scheme will issue shortly. Locations for painting have already 
been identified. Some locations in the Dolphin’s Barn area have been identified 
however the scheme is confined to Traffic Control boxes in the ownership of Dublin 
City Council. 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if the height of the railings in Oliver Bond House, Dublin 8 
between blocks A&B and blocks B&C could be increase as a way of combating 
ongoing drug dealing. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
You can’t increase the height of the existing railings as to add to the current railings 
would entail work that isn’t feasible or guaranteed to work. You would need to take out 
the existing railings and replace them with higher railings. The implications of this work 
would be onerous and expensive. DCC currently wouldn’t have a budget to do this. 
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive clarify the policy in relation to the use of glyphosate across 
the Council? According to this 2020 document the use by the housing department still 
wasn't clarified: Glyphosate report.pdf. And could the updated policy please be 

published on the DCC website so that the public can be assured that it is not in use if 
they have health concerns? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks, Biodiversity and Landscape Services does not use glyphosate in its 
maintenance operations. The only exception is for the treatment of specific invasive 
species.   
 
Dublin City Council Administrative Area includes 1,131km of  public roads, 94km of 
laneways and an estimated 21,500 trees and street furniture (which includes sign 
poles, traffic lights, seats/benches, telephone boxes, sculptures, street lighting 
columns and bollards etc.). The areas prone to weeds include back of footway and 
channel line.  
 Road Maintenance provide funding to the Area Offices for the treatment of weeds on 
public roads including footpaths. 
As part of Dublin City Council’s Road Maintenance commitment to eliminate its reliance 
on the use of ‘glyphosate’ based herbicide for the control of weeds on its road network, 
Dublin City Council Road Maintenance ceased using these products on public roads 
in 2018. 
 
Housing Maintenance can confirm that the use of glyphosate based herbicide is 
prohibited in the tender specification for the landscape maintenance contract. 
 
 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive for footpaths to be widened at (details supplied) to slow 
cars down as they turn the corner and improve safety for pedestrians, particularly 
children using this road to go to and from school.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7045070) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the what is planned for a plot of land 
(details supplied) which was acquired by Dublin City Council, when any planned 
works will begin to progress, and whether this plot will be included in the street’s pay 
and display scheme in future.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council are in the process of completing the acquisition of this plot of land. 
The paperwork is currently with the Law Department. The request to acquire this land 
came from the Housing Department who were proposing to regularise parking in the 
area and introduce a residential parking scheme. 
 
 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive what is Dublin City Council’s policy in relation to providing 
public recycling bins, including in parks, and for a report on any efforts to engage a 
recycling contractor.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Waste Management Services trialled segregated recycling bins on Henry Street and 
Grafton Street from 2020 to 2024. Waste Characterisations Studies continually 
showed high levels of contamination of recycling bins with residual waste and the trial 
ended unsuccessfully. Waste Management Services have no plans to revisit 
segregated street bins at this time. 
 
 
Q.32 
COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on presumably unauthorized tree felling 
during nesting season at a site (details supplied), what actions have been taken by 
the City Council in relation to this and to prevent similar incidents in future, and whether 
replanting will be considered to mitigate the loss of the destroyed foliage. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council, as Landlord, has been in contact with the lessee of the area in 
question, namely details supplied.  No permission was granted for the felling of trees 
at this location nor was consent sought by the leaseholder, which is considered to be 
a breach of the lease, and Property Management are engaging with the lessee on the 
matter. The Council’s Parks Department also reported the removal of the trees to 
National Parks and Wildlife Service (NPWS) who have indicated that they will also be 
investigating the matter. 
Property Management is currently not aware of any proposed works to the carpark 
which would require consents under the terms of the lease. 
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR AMAR ALI 
To ask the Chief Executive if there is any way Dublin City Council can help and support 
to get the railings on the (details supplied) replaced. The railings are rusty and 
unrepairable. It would be great if Dublin City Council can assist in this regard. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Details supplied does not form part of the public realm. The responsibility for 
maintaining these railings rests with the local community group that manages this 
space and is not a matter for the City Council. The community group are advised to 
consider the various community grants that may be available to undertake the 
required repairs. 
  
Q.34 
COUNCILLOR AMAR ALI 
To ask the Chief Executive reason for the removal of litter bin on (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This bin was removed as it was creating a serious public health hazard by attracting 
birds which were completely covering the area in droppings. This issue was the result 
of people illegally dumping their domestic waste in and around the bin (including food) 
which was attracting birds to roost in the trees above. Our litter wardens also confirmed 
that illegal dumping was a constant issue with this bin every week. In the end removal 
of this bin was our only option. 
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR AMAR ALI 
To ask the Chief Executive Can the following tree be trimmed (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks will arrange for the tree at the above location to be trimmed as soon as possible. 
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR AMAR ALI 

To ask the Chief Executive the Tender process of Donore Community Centre has 
started, which is a positive step forward. Can DCC escalate the progress for the 
reopening of the Community Centre and make sure there is no further delays.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
On 21st March tender documents for the refurbishment of Donore Youth and 
Community Centre were issued via etenders to the relevant framework. The closing 
date for return of tenders is 18th April. Once a contractor is appointed an up to date 
programme of completion can be provided to the Area Committee. 
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR MICHEAL PIDGEON 
To ask the Chief Executive if there are plans to remove redundant signage and old 
lighting from along the quays, especially given the excellent quay wall cleaning 
recently. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Public Lighting Services acknowledges that there are old lighting columns/lights along 
the quay walls and is currently exploring what is involved to either replace and improve 
the lighting columns/lights or remove them.  
 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to placing lights from St Anne’s Ave to All Saints 
Road.  As this area is very dark with so many trees and can be dangerous to anyone 
walking there when it is dark, with so many pinecones on the paths and for security 
and safety. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This area contains many historic and heritage trees associated with the 19th century 
planting of St. Anne’s Park.  The roots of these trees act to prevent the installation of 
cables to power any lighting here and would also prevent the effective lighting of the 
area.  There is an existing well lit route connecting these roads less than 200m to the 
east via Watermill Park. 
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive about placing an astro pitch/basketball court in McAuley 
Park (similar to the one in May Park and Rockfield Park).  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply will be issued to the Councillor within 2 weeks of the council meeting. 
 
Q.40 
COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to please re do the yellow lines and place no parking 
signage asap outside (details supplied), as this corner and stretch is constantly 
having vans parking there on the very faded yellow lines while they are delivering to 
the local shops, the resident cannot get out of his driveway on several occasions with 
them parking on his dishing.  It is causing him major stress as he has young children 
and is fenced in with constant Vans.  He has called the Gardaí on many occasions, 
but as you know they are very stretched. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
It is not recommended to install “no parking signage” where restrictions are already 
covered under the law. 
Any instances of illegal parking, should be reported to the Gardaí or Dublin Street 
Parking Services (tel no. 01 6022500), for enforcement under the law. 

Under The Road Traffic (Traffic & Parking) Regulations, Section 36 paragraph (2); a 
vehicle shall not be parked:  
( a ) on that side of a section of roadway along the edge of which traffic sign number 
RRM 008 [double yellow lines] has been provided; 
 
(c) Within 5 metres of a road junction; 
 
(g) In any place, position or manner that will result in the vehicle obstructing an 
entrance or an exit for vehicles to or from a premises, save with the consent of the 
occupier of such premises; 
 
(i) On a footway, a grass margin or a median strip; 
This location will be inspected in the coming days. Any requirement for renewal will 
take place within 30 working days of the City Council Meeting 07/04/25 
 
Q.41 
COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD  
To ask the Chief Executive to review the clothes banks (clothes pods) ASAP in Dublin 
City, there is constant dumbing of clothing in Edenmore, Raheny Library and 
Clontarf, can we please review these clothing banks and may I suggest that these be 
removed and be relocated at our DCC recycle centres.  It would make sense.  I am 
sure all areas in Dublin are having the same issues. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services provides clothes recycling facilities within our Bring 
Centres and Recycling Centres. However, the Department of Environment, Climate 
and Communications has indicated that Local Authorities should also continue to 
provide on street clothes recycling facilities in order to comply with EU Waste 
Framework Directive requirements.  
At present, this service is provided to Dublin City Council by Textile Recycling Limited, 
T/A Clothes Pod. Publication of a Request for Tender to establish a new Framework 
for the provision of textile recycling services is imminent. It is likely that any new 
contracts arising from this Framework will be awarded in late Q2.  
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can detail the extent of collaboration between Dublin 
City Council and An Garda Síochána and the National Transport Agency on the 
deployment of traffic management cameras within Dublin.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC the NTA and An Garda Siochana always work closely in the area of road safety 
and traffic management cameras. CCTV for traffic management is a key component 
of road safety and allows DCC to monitor and observe traffic across the city and 
depending on the location the NTA provides funding for the purchase of cameras.  
 
Q.43 
COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can set out in tabular form between 2020 and to date 
in 2025 for each year the number of CCTV cameras which are operated by or can be 
accessed by Dublin City Council.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The requested information is not broken down by year but is the current up to date 
locations for all DCC Cameras and is attached.  
 
Q.44 
COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 

To ask the Chief Executive if he can set out in tabular form between 2020 and to date 
in 2025 for each year the total number of traffic management cameras which are 
operated by or can be accessed by Dublin City Council. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The requested information is not broken down by year but is the current up to date 
locations for all DCC Cameras and is attached.  
 
Q.45 
COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive further to question 75 on the 3rd of March 2025 if he can 
confirm what the final number of expressions of interest received in respect of the lease 
for the Tearooms in Palmerston Park were after the deadline passed on the 25th of 
February and when he expects a lease to be in place and an operator in situ.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Agents received 24 proposals which are currently under assessment. Once a 
preferred operator is identified, lease terms will be agreed. We hope for these to be 
presented to Local Area Committee in May. 
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
QUESTION WITHDRWAN. 
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to increase traffic enforcement in Kilmore West, Dublin 5. 
Illegal parking is a huge issue in the area, due to the lack of staff parking from 
Beaumont Hospital. Following from a previous question raised to council, traffic 
enforcement came and ticketed a number of illegally parked vehicles but unfortunately, 
a child has since been hit by a car outside his home as he was not seen by the driver. 
This is becoming not just an inconvenience in the area, but a health and safety issue 
for residents. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement will instruct Dublin Street Parking Services to increase patrols in 
this area and enforce all illegal parking that is encountered. 
 
Q.48  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on Coolock Swimming Pool. An email 
received on March 21st stated: 
(Details Supplied) 
Can this be clarified please? 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We sent out an e mail to three local swimming pools in February 2025, Sportslink, 
Trinity Sports and Leisure complex in Donaghmede and ALSAA swimming Pool to see 
if they could cater for the groups that were affected in Coolock Swimming Pool. Two 
swimming clubs were facilitated in Trinity Sports and Leisure complex in Donaghmede.  
Sportslink replied in March and asked what the club numbers were affected and what 
the current training times of the Coolock groups were. We gave the clubs Sportslinks 
contact details to link in with them directly. We also made contact with DCC Markievicz 
swimming Pool in March 2025 as they had hours available. We emailed all the clubs 
advising of this availability and asked them to make contact directly with the centre 
manager.  
 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 

To ask the Chief Executive to outline the role Dublin City Council has in the regulation 
of commercial drone food delivery services and what guidelines are in place with 
regard to the impact on community safety and wellbeing. What other authorities play a 
role in regulation? How can the public be heard in the regulatory processes 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Irish Aviation Authority (IAA) are the national body responsible for the 
implementation of the EU (European Union Aviation Safety Agency – EASA) 
regulations of all drone (UAV) flights in the airspace above Dublin and the rest of the 
country be it delivery, commercial or recreational operations. Any drone delivery 
company seeking to fly within the airspace above the DCC administration area can 
only do so when they have been certified and granted permission by the IAA allowing 
them to fly under specific conditions e.g. flying beyond visual line of sight from the pilot. 
Any drone certified for BVLOS (Beyond Visual Line of Sight) operations must include 
at Flight Termination System and parachute system as part of the drone safety system. 
Dublin City Council play no role in the regulation of drone/UAV flights.  
The Department of Transport are to issue new policy guidelines on drone flights in 
Ireland later this year. The Corporate Drone Unit will review this document at the 
earliest opportunity to see if there are any proposed regulatory changes to flight or 
ground operations (e.g. Planning/noise etc.) that could impact on drone operations in 
the City. 
 
 
Q.50  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the audit agreed to in response to 
Q87 in November 2024 Council Meeting to look at vacant buildings in Drumcondra and 
Glasnevin to determine suitability for child care.   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A review was conducted of known vacant properties owned by Dublin City 
Council throughout the city. 
However, no such properties were identified in the specified areas of 
Drumcondra and Glasnevin. 
 
 
Q.51 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to allocate areas for Casual Trading spaces in all Dublin 
city council parks to allow interested parties apply for casual trading licences in parks 
where Tea Rooms, Coffee tender or other facilities aren’t planned for currently. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Casual Trading comes under the remit of the Casual Trading Unit and spaces for 
casual trading are specified under the Casual Trading Bye-Laws 2013.  Trading within 
parks is not governed by these bye-laws.  
  
Opportunities to trade in Dublin City Council parks are advertised by way of tender and 
if further locations are identified, they will be included in any future tender. 
 
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the area outside (details supplied) to be re-
instated properly. A temporary tarmac surface was left and local residents who aren’t 
so steady on their feet have had difficulty walking here. 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing will investigate this. A reply will issue directly to the Cllr within two weeks of 
the meeting. 
 
 
Q.53 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the small broke shore outside (details 
supplied) to be repaired/replaced 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This will be investigated by Surface Water Management staff and an update will be 
given at the next meeting. 
 
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for an extension to the double yellow lines on 
both sides of the entrance to (details supplied). There has been many instances of 
cars parking on either side of the continuous white line at this location causing traffic 
issues for residents.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Was noted that there is a continuous white line in place for a distance of approx. 20 
metres on (details supplied) from the junction with Collins Avenue, this facilitates 
access / egress and is considered to be a suitable length. 
 
Under The Road Traffic (Traffic & Parking) Regulations 1997, Article 36, Paragraph 
(2), (d); 
 
- 
a vehicle shall not be parked on a section of roadway with less than 3 traffic lanes 
and where traffic sign number RRM 001 [continuous white line] has been provided; 
 
Instances of illegal parking should be reported directly to Dublin Street Parking 
Services, Dublin City Council’s Parking Enforcement Contractors (www.dsps.ie; 01 
602 2500, info@dsps.ie) or to An Garda Síochána, as they occur. 
 
Double yellow lines are not recommended to be repainted and/or extended. 
 
 
Q.55 
COUNCILLOR LESLIE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to look into the student accommodation (Details Supplied) 
where currently the public have no access and so cannot access the Poddle.  Can we 
ensure the public can have access to the Poddle and to confirm that this was the 
arrangement made in the planning process?   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This matter was investigated by the Planning Enforcement Officer for the Area over 
several months in 2024. 
 
SHD0023/20 Condition number 2 is outlined below that relates to this 
development. 
C2. Public access to the exposed area of the River Poddle from Mill Street and 
Sweeney’s Terrace will be available between 9.00 am and 5.00 pm, Monday to 
Sunday. 
 

Inspections were carried out by the Area Planning Enforcement Officer over a period 
of several months up to the end of 2024. These inspections have concluded that this 
condition and the associated required access times were being complied with. On that 
basis no further action was taken and the file on the matter was closed. 
 
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to review how a situation arose that due to printing 
company error a letter notifying tenants in (Details Supplied) of a rent increase was 
only issued to residents in March and that there is an expectation that residents will 
pay the backdated amount.  Given that the letter was written on the 31st January and 
payment was due on the 27th January and it did not arrive to March can some 
consideration be given to this in regards to the backdated payments?   
(Details Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s 2025 Rent Scheme went live on 27th January 2025 which resulted 
in rent charge increases and the correspondence related to these changes was due to 
issue to tenants on the 31st January 2025. Unfortunately, there was a delay in the 
issuing of this correspondence.  
The majority of Social Welfare recipients saw their increased Welfare payments 
applied from the start of January 2025. The changes to Dublin City Council’s Rent 
Scheme were applied from the last week in January. These increases and changes 
are applied every year in line with any budgetary alterations to Social Welfare 
payments.  
While Dublin City Council acknowledges the delay with the issuing of the 
correspondence, the changes that occurred in January are not unexpected changes 
and therefore it does not warrant backdating. 
 
Q.57 
COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for the number of residential parking permits currently 
issued in Dublin City broken down by either street names, electoral division or parking 
tariff zones 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Attached is a breakdown of Parking Permit streets and the number of permits issued 
for those streets. 
 
Q58  
COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive when the current charge for residential parking permits was 
set. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The current charges for residential permit parking tariffs came into effect once the 2011 
Parking Control Bye-Laws were adopted by the City Council on the 4th July 2011. 
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for a timeline on the rollout of bike bunkers in the city 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Road Safety and Micromobility Section is currently progressing the Bike Bunker 
tender process.  
Stage one of the procurement process is complete, stage 2 began on 02.12.24 and 
closed on 04.02.2025.  

It was hoped that this procurement process would run smoothly and the contract would 
be awarded in Q1 2025, but allowing for due consideration this timeline has been 
extended to Q2 2025. 
 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for a timeline for awarding the next contract for parking 
enforcement in the city 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement are currently drawing up the tender request documents to be 
published on E-Tenders. This process may take some months to complete to ensure 
that all aspects of enforcement are included.  
Once published on E-Tenders, applicants will be given at least six weeks to draw up 
their tender submissions and submit to the E-Tenders portal. 
All tenders that are submitted will then be assessed by an appointed assessment board 
and depending on how many submissions are received and the size of each 
application, this process may take some months to complete.  
A complete timeframe cannot be provided until all applications have been received.    
  
Q.61 
COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive can the public lighting at Clancy Court Finglas please be 
resolved as soon as possible a small amount of houses are in complete darkness 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are four street lights on Clancy Court and these were attended to and repaired 
at the end of last month, i.e. February 2025 and all are working normally now. 
 
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive can the areas that were damaged from bon fires please be 
repainted in White acre playground 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services will carry out an assessment of the playground surfaces in White Acre 
and will arrange for any repair or repainting as required.  
 
 
Q.63 
COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive can the grass margins be maintained across the DNW area 
it is causing a lot of the area to look unkept 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is responsible for maintaining grass margins along main roads and 
those bordering large green spaces within housing estates.  In residential areas, it is 
common practice for homeowners to maintain the grass margin outside their property. 
For elderly or infirm residents, assistance is typically provided by family members or 
neighbours. This approach is consistent with policies in other local authorities, 
including Fingal, South Dublin, and Dún Laoghaire-Rathdown County Councils. 
The majority of residents across the city continue to maintain their grass margins, 
contributing to the overall upkeep of their communities. However, if there are cases 
where elderly or vulnerable individuals do not have access to support, Dublin City 
Council can provide a one-time grass cut upon request. To facilitate this, we would 
require 
a 
specific 
address 
and 
supporting 
information 
to 
be 
sent 
to 
parks@dublincity.ie  
 

 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive How many Choke cars do DCC currently have, how many 
times is this been requested and what are the wait times to use the equipment and 
could we do with another. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance currently have three choke cars operating in the City.  As of 
31/3/25 the year to date total jobs allocated to the choke car service is 925.  It normally 
takes 24 to 48 hours to attend to a choke request depending on the urgency of the 
particular job. 
There are occasions when one or more of the vehicles is off the road due to essential 
repairs and this can have an impact on response times.  In general, it is considered 
that three vehicles is adequate.  This will be kept under review. 
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on progress on the development of the 
(Details Supplied). Have Respond appointed a full Design Team which was expected 
around the end of February 2025? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Respond Housing have engaged with DCC Planning Department, and are currently 
revising the proposals following feedback from the Planning Department. Respond 
are also in the process of appointing a full Design Team. 
 
Q.66 
COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the request made last November to have 
the Traffic Lights at the entrance to the new Belcamp Manor Estate, Dublin 17, 
introduced to service, there are circa 142 Homes in this Estate and Residents are 
experiencing major problems when trying to exit the estate without the Traffic lights. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The proposed traffic signals at this location are in the Fingal County Council area but 
will be added to the DCC traffic management system once operational. There has been 
a number of delays throughout the project and we expect to have the traffic signals 
switched on at this location by the end of April.  
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for a list of voids in the Coolock Area and the status of the 
houses in the attached photos 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We have not received the addresses in Moatview, Belcamp or Glin Road as voids from 
the Area Office and appear to have active rent accounts. This will be followed up with 
the Area Office. 
The table below shows the number of Voids in the Coolock Area and their status. 
Void Status  
No. of voids  
Awaiting 
vacant 
possession  
11 
Works 
under 
Contractor  
20 
Works under Depot  
5 
Total Voids 
36 
 

Q.68  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive what measures are being done to stop illegal parking at 
the Marino mart in Fairview as the illegal parking of cars is causing a strain on 
businesses and on local residents in the area. If the Chief Executive will lease with the 
relevant authorities to ensure proper parking enforcement is in place around the Marino 
mart and if clampers can be more regularly deployed 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement have instructed Dublin Street Parking Services to continue to 
patrol this location regularly. 
The following actions have taken place since Dec 1st 2024 until Mar 27th 2025 
36 clamps 
6 relocations 
44 Fixed penalty notices. 
 
Dublin Street Parking Services will continue to patrol this area and enforce all illegal 
parking in the area. 
 
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to circulate the co-design of implementation of article 4 (3) 
of the CRPD to all Councillors in DCC. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
General Comment 7 by the UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
makes a distinction between Disabled Persons’ Organisations (DPOs) and 
organisations for persons with disabilities. Disabled Persons’ Organisations (DPO’s) 
are organisations that are led, directed, and governed by disabled people. Article 4.3 
of the UNCRPD requires that ‘States Parties shall closely consult with and actively 
involve persons with disabilities, including children with disabilities, through their 
representative organizations. 
In 2022, Dublin City Council procured the assistance of a service design provider to 
facilitate co-design of a process for consultation with Disabled Persons’ Organisations. 
This co-design process took place over 2022 and 2023, the consultation and 
participation process was co-designed with three key stakeholder groups – Disabled 
Persons Organisations, Elected Councillors, and DCC staff, to take into account their 
respective needs and goals. This process included deep qualitative interviews, 
workshops, pilot projects and culminated in a Draft Consultation Process for Disabled 
Persons’ Organisations, which was completed in June 2023.  
Following the completion of phase 1, and the delivery of the report, pilot projects 
continued while procurement was arranged for phase 2 of the process – to deliver a 
corporate implementation plan for the consultation process enabling the adoption and 
implementation of the process across Dublin City Council. Following a procurement 
process, Context Studios were selected as service designer.  
Phase 2 of the project commenced in June 2024 and Context Studio recently 
concluded preparation of a draft Corporate Implementation Plan for the consultation 
process for Disabled Persons’ Organisations. 
A wide suite of training materials and tools have been prepared to assist with 
implementation The objective of the plan is to embed a culture of awareness of the 
rights of people with disabilities, the benefits of real engagement, which will help 
ensure positive outcomes for people with disabilities, informing the development of a 
more accessible city for all, and helping DCC to achieve social justice goals.  
At present, the Implementation Plan is being considered by senior management.  Prior 
to roll out, the Plan and the relevant training assets will be circulated to all Councillors.    
 

Q.70 
COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive if DDC was involved in removing the plaque on a bench 
under the statue of our lady at the end of the wooden bridge in Clontarf, in 
remembrance of (Details Supplied) which has been removed twice and if the family 
still have permission to use this bench as a memorial for their late mother and if another 
plaque can be implemented 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Service had no involvement in the removal of this plaque.  If the family wish 
to make contact with the Parks Service on the email below the installation of a 
replacement memorial can be discussed. 
 
Q.71 
COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin city council are paying for the railings which are 
blockading the public seating facility connected to the carpark opposite from the Dublin 
bus garage and if under the lease agreement if Dublin bus is required to pay for any 
required works to this seating facility and under the lease agreement what restrictions 
are on Dublin bus vehicles using the car park. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The railings were installed by the Council’s Parks Department in the interests of health 
and safety following damage to the boundary wall of the car park on the seaward side. 
Property Development have commenced engagement with Dublin Bus to regularise 
their occupancy at this location which would include the repair to the wall. Additional 
engagement is required with Uisce Éireann in relation to the proposed installation of 
the North City Arterial Main (NCAM) trunk main project which will likely impact the 
carpark and may affect the proposed terms of any agreement with Dublin Bus. 
 
 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that regarding the public space at (details supplied) if a 
number of tasks could be conducted to enhance this public space that is used by so 
many residents: 
A)   Could all of this public space from all entrances at this this location please be swept, 
cleared of leaves and debris, particularly in the corners.  
B)   The gully at (Details Supplied) entrance be cleared (adjacent to (Details 
Supplied)) and any other gullies in this location be checked and cleared. 
C)   Could all this public space from all entrances at this this location please be power 
washed, including the footpaths and the walls.  
D)   Could the graffiti be please removed from all this public space from all entrances 
to this location.  
E)    Could the street signage at the entrance to this location please be repainted?  
F)   Could the walls at this location be painted to brighten up the area?  
G)   Could the overgrown shrubbery please be cut in this location, as it completely 
engulfed some of the public lighting here.  
H)     Could CCTV please be placed to the entrances at this location to catch illegal 
dumping and could new signs be erected to warn the public about illegal dumping.  
I)    could a schedule of cleaning please be given as to what cleaning and when it takes 
place at this location? 
J)   Could all the public lighting in this location please be repainted as the light poles 
are rusting and in a bad way?  
K)    Could all the public lighting please be checked in this public space from all 
entrances at this location not all public lighting is working.  
L)   Could the entire footpath/road network at this location be investigated with a view 
to the location being put on the list to be fully resurfaced please?  

M)   Could a community notice board be installed at this location? 
N)   Could planters please be placed throughout this location?  
O)   There is an old Eircom cable duct on the section adjacent with Annamoe Drive, 
halfway up this section. It is damaged and dented and is a trip hazard that needs 
replacing. I have contacted Eir but it remains there, could Dublin City Council please 
contact the relevant people to ensure the duct in the path is replaced:  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Item O: 
 
Dublin City Council has notified Eir on the 28th of March 2025 regarding the defective 
duct causing a trip hazard and requested its repair at the address specified. 
 
A) Waste Management Services had the above mentioned location cleaned as 
requested on the 26th March 2025. 
C) Waste Management Services had the above mentioned location power washed on 
the 27th March 2025. 
I) This location would be on a twelve week cleaning schedule. However it is monitored 
regularly and extra cleanings are carried out between the scheduled cleanings if 
deemed necessary or on foot of a request to do so. 
 
J)  There are fourteen light poles along Annamoe Parade and these will be added to the 
painting list for painting in 2025. 
K)  The street lighting on Annamoe Parade (and the laneways linking to Annamoe Drive 
and Charelville Road) have been night checked and no lights are out of order. However 
an additional light will be provided on an ESB networks pole in the middle section of 
Annamoe Parade. 
 
We will follow up on any outstanding points not answered and we will send to 
the councillor within 2 weeks of the council meeting 
 
 
Q.73 
 COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive to address the dangerous and illegal parking at (details 
supplied) and that a suite of measures be put in place to solve the ongoing issue: 
A)      To monitor this area and to take the appropriate action thereafter regarding 
vehicles that are illegally parked 
B)      That double yellow lines be introduced on one side to restrict parking, this is done 
on nearby streets to this location.  
C)     That a traffic survey be carried out in the street on one of the days, Monday to 
Friday, between the hours of 6.00am and 6.00pm 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement will instruct Dublin Street Parking Services to patrol this area and 
enforce all illegal parking at this location (detail supplied) / Permit Parking, along with 
parking restrictions (Double Yellow Lines) in certain sections where parking on both 
sides is not feasible. 
Under the Road Traffic (Traffic and Parking) Regulations, Section 36, paragraph (2), 
“a vehicle shall not be parked…..(c) within 5 meters of a road junction; 
 (i) on a footway, a grass margin or a median strip; 

( k ) in a manner in which it will interfere with the normal flow of traffic or which obstructs 
or endangers other traffic; 
Instances of illegal parking should be reported to Dublin Street Parking Services, the 
City Council’s parking enforcement contractor (Ph: 01-602 2500 or Email 
parkingenforcement@dublincity.ie), or to the local Gardaí, as it is a matter for 
enforcement under the Road Traffic Regulations. 
 
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive waste, and litter be please removed from (details 
supplied) as machinery may be needed to remove some of the waste left here. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services will attend to the corner of (details supplied) to clear the green waste 
and household waste dumped in this space.  
 
Q.75 
 COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that CCTV be installed at (details supplied) to tackle the 
extremely high volume of illegal dumping at this location 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Due to legislative changes introduced in the Climate Action and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act 2022, we are unable to reinstate CCTV cameras at this time. However, 
in line with the new legislative requirements, Dublin City Council intends to reintroduce 
CCTV cameras to problematic bring banks facilities, subject to compliance with the 
aforementioned legislation, over the course of 2025. (Details supplied) has been 
identified as one such location, and will be included in the initial reintroduction of CCTV 
systems at bring bank sites. 
 
Q.76 
 COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to install a big belly bins on (details supplied) to 
discourage illegal dumping at the two sets of shops. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services will assess the above mentioned location regarding the 
requirement of a big belly bin there. 
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive consider what interim works can be carried out in (details 
supplied), outside of the part 8 planning process, to allow the clubs use the pitches 
for longer periods in the winter months).  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services will be carrying out pitch maintenance, including de-compaction and 
top-dressing, to enhance drainage and improve overall pitch quality. These works will 
help extend accessibility to the pitches throughout the winter months, ensuring better 
playing conditions for the clubs.  
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider a recycling facility similar to the ones on 
Shamrock Terrace and in Coolmine by Fingall CC in the (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Waste Management Services currently provide a bring centre in Grangegorman. We 
would be happy to develop a larger Recycling Centre similar to Shamrock Terrace, 
Ringsend and Ballymun Recycling Centres in the (details supplied) should a suitable 
site become available. 
 
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the timeline for works to begin on the old 
maintenance depot site on (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Tuath Housing are currently responding to additional information request from the 
Planning Department on their application for Planning permission. If planning is 
achieved on this site, it may take a minimum of six months before Tuath will be able to 
commence on site.  
 
Q.80 
COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on DCC plans to redevelopment Lansdowne 
Valley and the former pitch & putt grounds in D12, please include an outline details of 
when will work commence and what public consultation will take place? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The developments for the pitch and putt end of the park will be brought to the council 
when plans are ready.  The Camac Greenway project is within the current 2025-2028 
programme of project delivery and will be delivered in collaboration with the Active 
Travel Programme Office. Public Consultation will be included as part of this process. 
 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive how come, (details supplied), was not reached for 
(Details Supplied)? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Applicant is currently under nomination for the Hollybrook apartments in Dublin 
12. 
 
 
Q.82 
 COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the average time to process an application to go 
on the DCC housing, what is the average length of time for an application for house 
priority to be processed? It appears to have gone from 10 weeks to several months, 
and can the CE please clarify why there has been such an added delay in the last 12 
months 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The average length of time to process a housing application is twelve weeks, delays 
can occur when an incomplete application is received and additional documentation is 
required to be submitted.  Housing Allocations receive on average of 500 housing 
applications a month, 2024 saw a 16% increase in the number of applications received.  
Below table sets out the number of applications received on a yearly basis for the 
period 2021 – 2024.  
Year 
No. of applications 
2021 
4267 

2022 
4778 
2023 
5206 
2024 
6030 
 
An application for priority on Exceptional Medical Grounds takes 14 - 16 weeks to be 
assessed, the majority of applications are sent for recommendation from the 
independent Medical Examiner.  To note, there has been a 22% increase in the 
number of medical priority applications received, 1824 medical priority applications in 
2024 compared to 1,500 in 2023.   
 
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
In noting, when preparing voids for reletting, the fact that DCC spend on average 
€45,000 per unit yet the department grant only partially covers the cost can the CE 
please clarify how much funding has DCC borrowed over the last 5 years to cover the 
cost of voids, what is the interest paid on these loans, does DCC intend to continue 
borrowing or will the department increase funding to cover the cost of completing the 
voids 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please see below table of borrowing for Voids and interest rates.  
Interest Rates Charged on Voids 2019- 
2024 
Year  Rate 
€m Value of Loan  
2019 
1% 
30.5 
2020 
1% 
20.2 
2021 
1% 
8.95 
2022 2.6% 
9.03 
2023 3.1% 
27.8 
2024 3.1% 
14.4 
 
DCC are in constant communication with the Department of Housing about increasing 
funding towards voids. As it stands the Department has notified DCC that it will fund 
up to €11,000 per void for a total of 348 void refurbishments completed.  
 
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider how the city of Dublin can strengthen our 
already existing partnerships with the City of Liverpool and Greater Manchester in 
areas like Off-shore wind technology, Maritime policy and smart ports, Sporting and 
cultural connections and Urban regeneration and vacancy; his thoughts on the 
potential benefits to Dublin and this Council in respect of the above; how he believes 
such an initiative could be advanced; and if he will make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council/Dublin City Sport & Wellbeing Partnership Active City 
connections with Liverpool. 
 

The Active Cities project is a global initiative developed by the World Health 
Organisation (WHO) to create healthy cities where physical activity, movement and 
sport are prioritized. The framework is comprised of four pillars: 
 
Active Systems 
 
Active Environment 
 
Active Societies  
 
Active People. 
 
 
Active Cities Liverpool began in 2004 when the city had one of the highest rates of 
inactivity in Europe. Through building links in the municipality and pushing the activity 
agenda, levels of activity increased significantly.  The city was awarded Global Active 
City status (GAC) in 2018, making it the first city in the UK, and one of the first six cities 
worldwide, to receive the certification 
In 2022 Dublin City Council appointed an Active Cities (Dublin City) Officer, Carmel O’ 
Callaghan. As part of the Active Cities remit, Carmel has developed links with the 
Active City team in Liverpool, led by John Marsden. Over the last 12 years John has 
been involved in the development of the Active Cities model, working in partnership 
with numerous cities, national and international governing bodies in sport and global 
health organisations. 
John has been the International Active City Commissioner for TAFISA - The 
Association for International Sport for All, the Global Active City Director for a number 
of international sport and physical activity organisations and the International Active 
City Development and Advocacy Manager for Liverpool John Moore’s University.  
The over-arching vision for the Dublin City Sport Plan 2024 - 2029 is centred on making 
Dublin one of the most active cities in the world.  During the plan’s consultation 
process, Carmel arranged for members of the consulting team to meet with John and 
get a better understanding of the benefits of Global Active City status.  
John has attended the Active City Dublin City Steering Committee meeting and has 
provided advice on applying for Global Active City status for Dublin. Carmel has also 
had meetings with a board member from the Liverpool Clinical Commissioning Group 
to discuss the exercise/activity programmes they have put in place for marginalised 
groups and new communities.  
 
 
The cities of Dublin and Liverpool have a formal twinning agreement in place since 
1997. Following a courtesy visit to the Mansion House on 18th February by Mr Steve 
Rotheram, Metropolitan Mayor of the Liverpool City Region and Mr Andy Burnham, 
Metropolitan Mayor of Greater Manchester, the Lord Mayor of Dublin Emma Blain has 
officially visited the city of Liverpool on Monday 31st March to meet with Cllr Richard 
Kemp CBE, Lord Mayor of Liverpool and Mr Liam Robinson, Leader of Liverpool City 
Council. The core purpose was to re-engage and revitalise the existing Dublin-
Liverpool twinning agreement and to reset and reframe the programme and subject 
areas where opportunities for greater collaboration and cooperation exit between both 
cities. 
Further to this meeting, a working meeting between city officials, the Liverpool 
Chamber of Commerce and including the Consul General of Ireland for the North of 
England was undertaken on 1st April. Discussions focussed on economic and cultural 
opportunities and initiatives for collaboration and knowledge exchange between Dublin 
and Liverpool that strengthen already existing partnerships, including the subject areas 
as outlined in the Councillor’s question. While at an initial and early stage of exchange, 
both cities are committed to developing out agreements for collaboration under the 
newly framed Ireland and UK engagements arising from the Ireland–UK summit 
between An Taoiseach Micheál Martin and Prime Minister Keir Starmer and hosted by 
the city of Liverpool on March 5th. 

With regard to Manchester, although no formal twinning agreement is in place, Dublin 
City Council collaborates under an agreed Concordia from 2022 with the cities of 
Manchester, Liverpool and Belfast focussed on circular economy, renewable energy 
and green maritime shipping initiatives and will continue to explore similar areas of 
possible cooperation between our cities under the UK’s Join the Dots initiative and 
other agreed bilateral programmes. 
 
 
Q.85 
COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive what actions have been undertaken by this Council with 
regards the Motion passed by the elected members at our meeting on May 13th 2024 
relating to the creation of more playful, healthy and inclusive public places; the purpose 
of the motion was to enable inner city communities to get the most of the resources 
that they have and allow them to enjoy the places where they live, and for children, 
adults, older people, to have somewhere that’s close to home for them where they can 
rest, they can play, communities can come together; and if he will make a statement 
on the matter 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin’s dedication to fostering family-friendly spaces is evident in both its famous 
parks, its natural attractions but also in its smaller, community-focused playgrounds. 
There are currently sixty-three playgrounds in the city parks and open spaces and 
thirteen in the inner city, with refurbished playgrounds including Royal Canal Bank 
Playground. This project is going on site on the 7th of April and we expect it to be open 
by the June Bank holiday weekend just in time for summer. Close by, a new market is 
open in Broadstone on a pilot basis on Wednesdays and is very well attended.  
Bridgefoot Street Park is currently heading into Phase II of its development with more 
accessible play equipment and general improvements throughout. In March 2024 we 
consulted with Dublin Comhairle na nÓg and plan to to more consulting with Teens in 
the future to make sure their perspective is contributing to places all the community 
can enjoy.  
Smaller playgrounds provide accessible recreational spaces for children and families, 
reinforcing the city's walkability and connection to nature and history. If you’re in 
Dublin’s inner city, your probably less than ten minutes’ walk from your nearest 
playground. In the central area we have thirteen play grounds with 39 inclusive pieces 
of equipment 16 playable directly from the chair. Many of our parks in the inner city 
such as Merrion Square, St. Patricks Park, Mountjoy Square, Sherriff Street, are 
projects we are committed to commencing this year. We are continuing to roll out our 
Greening projects, transforming our communities from hard surfaces to places that the 
communities can enjoy natures changing seasons.  
 
 
Q.86 
COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm whether the Council has received tenders from 
potential contractors for works on (Details Attached); the next steps in the 
procurement process and the indicative timeline involved; when he expects work to 
formally begin on site and from the tender documentation submitted to date, how long 
does he envisage the works to take on site; and if he will make a statement on the 
matter 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Deirdre Prince, Acting Senior Executive Landscape Architect & Parks Officer will 
provide an update directly to the Councillor in relation to this project. 
 
 

Q.87 
COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER 
To ask the Chief Executive consideration can be given to improving the skatepark in 
Fairview Park, for example changing it to a concrete surface which is less slippy in the 
wet weather, and to include a full drop, similar to skate parks in Clongriffin and 
Ballyfermot? This is an important amenity for movement and recreation for children 
and adults who are less interested in traditional team sports but is well overdue some 
upgrading. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Cast in-situ concrete skate park facilities are hugely expensive requiring a significant 
capital budget.  The existing facility at Fairview Park is considered to be an excellent 
beginner’s skate park for new skaters to learn their sport.  While these may be merit in 
the provision of a more advanced and challenging skate facility in the area Fairview 
Park may not be the most ideal location for same.  Such facilities should be located 
separate from children’s playgrounds and ideally co-located with an existing sports 
centre where some level of oversight and training can be provided for what is a sport 
not without its risks.  
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER  
To ask the Chief Executive to engage with the parks section in the North Central area 
with regard to the planting of trees in the empty tree pits on Belton Park Garden, 
Donnycarney, Dublin 9 – including one which was replanted in recent years but did not 
thrive. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Service has just recently completed the street tree planting programme for 
2024-25.  The locus can be inspected over the summer months and any locations 
deemed suitable for planting can be listed for inclusion in next winter’s planting 
programme. 
 
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER 
To ask the Chief Executive the following questions in relation to the recent 
unsanctioned destruction of trees and wildlife on DCC property which is leased to 
(details supplied) for car parking use. I have been made aware that the management 
of the establishment have contacted members outlining ‘significant enhancements’ to 
their operation including ‘major improvements to parking facilities’.  Have these ‘major 
improvements’ been made possible through the unsanctioned removal of trees in 
nesting season:  
 
Did DCC have any knowledge of their intention to remove these trees before 
the event?  
 
What communication has DCC had with the management/premises since this 
matter occurred?  
 
Does DCC consider the lessee to have breached the terms of their lease?  
 
What sanctions are available to DCC when a lessee breaches the terms of a 
lease and are any sanctions being considered or implemented in this instance?  
 
What knowledge does DCC have of the detail of the ‘major improvements’ to 
car parking at the DCC owned land? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council, as Landlord, has been in contact with the lessee of the area in 
question, namely Details Supplied.  No permission was granted for the felling of trees 
at this location nor was consent sought by the leaseholder, which is considered to be 
a breach of the lease, and Property Management are engaging with the lessee on the 

matter. The Council’s Parks Department also reported the removal of the trees to 
National Parks and Wildlife Service (NPWS) who have indicated that they will also be 
investigating the matter. 
Property Management is currently not aware of any proposed works to the carpark 
which would require consents under the terms of the lease. 
 
Q.90 
COUNCILLOR DEIDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to (details supplied) and say what assistance he 
can provide to resolve the matter 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement have instructed Dublin Street Parking Services to patrol the area 
and enforce all illegal parking at this location. 
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive refer to my previous requests for the installation of a 
pedestrian crossing at location as per (Details Supplied) and say if can now agree to 
installation of same. 
 
 CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A request for Pedestrian Crossing on (details supplied) (Enquiry Ref: 7035483) is 
listed for examination and report by the Transport Advisory Group.   
The Councillor will be informed of the recommendation in due course.   
Q.92 
COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to requests from my constituents to extend the 
Dublin Bikes scheme to location as per (Details Supplied) and say if he can agree to 
same and make a statement on the matter 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council supports the dublinbike bicycle sharing scheme administratively 
and financially. The dublinbike bicycle sharing scheme is operated by JCDecaux. The 
expansion of this scheme, or the capacity of a station within the scheme, would require 
a contractual change and there are no plans to amend the contract or expand the 
scheme. The current scheme is in contract until 2027. 
 
Q.93 
COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive refer to public lamp standards at location as per (Details 
Supplied) and say if he will arrange to have same painted as requested by local 
residents. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The poles on (details supplied) are ESB Network poles. Only the lights and brackets 
on those poles belong to DCC. The ESB were contacted about the poles and they said 
they would add these poles onto their 2025 painting programme and get them painted 
this year. 
 
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive To avoid the frustration of constituents all the time 
contacting me that someone on less points etc have being allocated a housing unit 
before them that the previous system that was in operation that elected Councillors 
were made aware what allocations took place on a monthly, the points allocated, and 
family size etc, if there are GDPR reasons why this information is not available can the 

manager identify if the previous scheme created problems for DCC. I regret waiting on 
the list appears to means nothing you can wait years without getting an allocation. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
All properties are let in accordance with Dublin City Council’s Housing Allocations 
Scheme (Scheme of Lettings Priorities).  Dublin City Council allocates properties 
based on time on the list.   
 
The Lettings List has not been circulated to Councillors since 2018 as the list contains 
personal data of each tenant.  Councillors can come in to Housing Allocations to view 
the Lettings List at any time, by contacting the Allocations Officer directly, 
sandra.barry@dublincity.ie.   
 
Q.95 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive please look upon the full insulation package for the 
following resident. (Details supplied,) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance had previously called to this address to arrange a survey of the 
property to ascertain if it is eligible to be included on the Energy Efficiency Retrofit 
Programme (EERP).  The tenant declined the offer.  A further call out was done on 
01/04/2025 and the offer was declined again.  The tenant and a family member were 
present.  It was also confirmed that the tenant has chosen not to have gas heating and 
the gas meter has been removed by Gas Networks Ireland. 
The Housing Maintenance representative left contact details for the tenant or her 
representative to get back in touch should she change her mind in the future. 
 
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange that the soil build up around the traffic islands 
near the Church of the Assumption Kylemore Road Ballyfermot are cleaned of sand, 
dirt etc, it is years since they were last done and many along Ballyfermot Road / 
Sarsfield Road are needing a clean out 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services will have this cleaning carried out by early April 2025. 
 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKCON  
To ask the Chief Executive please ensure that the (Details Supplied) has a full clean-
up of the verges to remove weeds etc, I was contacted by a few residents who have 
stated it is a long time since we i.e. DCC have done a serious clean up along this Road 
one of the longest in Ballyfermot the weeds when not removed the weeds attract the 
retention of litter etc. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Public Domain officer has confirmed that Details Supplied is scheduled for spray 
weed control treatment in 2025 as part of the annual Road Maintenance contract for 
weed control. This schedule comprises of 4 weed spraying treatments during the weed 
growing season for selected roads.    
As previously advised to South Central Area members the budget from the Roads 
Department for spray weed treatment does not allow for every road in the area to be 
treated annually.  

The Public Domain Officer for the Ballyfermot Drimnagh area established a policy back 
in 2024 that ensures that every road in the Ballyfermot Drimnagh area is, as a 
minimum, scheduled to be treated at least bi annually.  
With the addition of discretionary funds, the Public Domain officer also ensures that 
the main roads of the area, including DCC owned public carparks, major tree lined 
streets and their tree pits, and large cobbled areas, which are prone to weed growth, 
are treated annually.  
The weed control schedule maps for Ballyfermot Drimnagh LEA will be circulated to 
members, once confirmed by the contactor.  
This will insure all local Councillors are fully aware of which roads/areas are or are not 
due for spray weed control treatment in 2025 in the area. 
 
 
 
Q.98 
COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to explain why there is a 7 week wait to have an 
appointment with a housing advisor? Does this wait period apply to meetings with a 
councillor and a constituent regarding their housing situation 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is a large volume of appointments being requested which has resulted in a 7 
week wait.  Applicants are advised that appointments are not required for handing in 
of documents, they can be posted in to Housing Allocations or alternatively uploaded 
to the Citizen Hub portal on the following link; https://citizenhub.dublincity.ie.  All 
request for appointments are triaged by Housing Allocation or Customer Service staff, 
to ensure that only individuals that require a face to face meeting are facilitated. 
This does not apply to Councillors who wish to make an appointment with a housing 
advisor in the Allocations Section, contact for a direct appointment can be facilitated 
through eimear.lennon@dublincity.ie. 
Applicants can also check their position online at the following address 
https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/housing/i-am-looking-home/housing-online 
or 
applicants can discuss their housing application with a member of staff via phone on 
tel. 01 222 2201/2207 and the Local Area Offices can also provide assistance.  Our 
Customer Services Department can also provide advice and assistance to housing or 
transfer applicants.  
 
 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide the number of 3 and 4 beds that will be available 
from now to until 2028 in area M, N and L. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are 375 new three-bed room homes currently in the pipeline to be delivered 
2025 – 2028, 32 of which are in areas M, N & L and 14 four-bedroom homes over the 
same period. This figure does not include the acquisition of second hand properties.  
 
We expect this figure to increase in the coming year as new proposals for acquisitions 
and new build developments are offered to DCC and the AHB sector for purchase.  
 
 
Q.100 COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please liaise with Waterways Ireland in order to have 
this particular part of land between the Docks where Hanover Quay is cleaned and any 

repairs to be carried out as necessary. The site is left in constant disrepair and there 
needs to be a solution on how to maintain it and upgrade it.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Council is liaising with Waterways Ireland in relation to the removal of the 
hoarding located at Grand Canal Dock.  The hoarding line was erected for works that 
were been carried out at the locks.  During Storm Eowyn a section of the hoarding was 
blown off the quay wall and into the dock. 
 
 
I have requested a timeline from Waterways Ireland to remove the hoarding.  A further 
update will issue as soon as possible. 
 
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please provide an update on the rodent infestation in 
(Details Supplied)? The residents are under constant threat of disease. The rats are 
now infiltrating into the sheds of the residents. There is more activity, more rats and 
residents are doing what they can themselves to stop this but are being neglected by 
the council. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance specialised mobile crew have an active rodent treatment 
programme for the communal areas of Details Supplied, the area is baited weekly 
and monitored. Housing Maintenance are aware that the Dublin City Council’s, Public 
Domain section have contacted the owners of 3 local derelict buildings regarding this 
issue. Housing Maintenance will continue to work together with relevant teams to 
resolve this issue for tenants.  
 
 
Q.102  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive to have the Road Engineer to conduct review the conditions 
of (details supplied). The road is not fit for purpose and the residents have been trying 
to get action on this for years. Once this review is completed to act on what is needed 
to make this a safe road. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
A reply will be issued to the councillor within 2 weeks of the council meeting. 
 
 
Q.103 COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive many people are currently on the Area E & Area P housing 
list?” 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please find attached figures in respect of Area E and P below as requested –  
 
January 2025 HOUSING Waiting List figures by Bedsize Req 
Bedsize Required 
Area E 
Area P 
1 Bed 
1347 
156 

2 Bed 
518 
28 
3 Bed 
202 
19 
4 Bed 
29 
4 
5 Bed 
3 
  
Grand Total 
2099 
207 
January 2025 TRANSFER Waiting List figures by Bedsize Req 
Bedsize Required 
Area E 
Area P 
1 Bed 
929 
141 
2 Bed 
1135 
102 
3 Bed 
642 
39 
4 Bed 
63 
4 
5 Bed 
10 
1 
Grand Total 
2779 
287 
 
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive liaise with Dublin Bus to address the issue with (details 
supplied), Is it possible to have a cut through in the grass where passengers exit the 
bus now, from the middle door. The stop was perfectly serviceable when the bus would 
have entrance and exit from the front door but now exiting onto the grass from the 
middle door. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A member of Dublin City Council Bus and Coach Section will investigate this issue 
further and following this will issue a report on the matter.  
  
 
Q.105 COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive what the average turnaround time on houses that are 
CPO’d and to when they have tenants move in?’ 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
These properties typically fall into two categories. 
Following inspection, properties with no structural issues are classified as 
refurbishment projects – these projects are completed by Housing Maintenance’s 
Voids Team, typical turnaround time for refurbishment is 26 weeks.   
The second category are properties with structural issues requiring the establishment 
of a Design Team (typically architect led) – these properties often require temporary 
support works, partial demolishment, sensitivity to conservation, consultation with 
neighbouring properties etc. it is difficult to put a turnaround time on such projects; the 
Design Team must be publicly procured, Part 9 planning takes 20 weeks, Design 
Stage, Construction Stage (Works Contractors also to be publicly procured); the 
timeline for the construction stage differs for these projects, but would be seen as 15-
24 months on average. 

When acquired the unit is given to the voids team to bring up to private rental 
standards, the average turnaround time to be ready to let is 26.96 weeks.  
 
 
 
Q.106  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding a football pitch (Details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
If the club can make contact on parks@dublincity.ie a meeting can be arranged. 
 
 
Q.107  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding a traffic survey (Details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Recently a speed survey was conducted on Details supplied. The average speed was 
found to be 32.3 km/h and have not indicated the presence of speeding vehicles which 
suggests that the road is compliant with the speed limit.  
The road is currently traffic calmed with 7 No speed ramps and on-street parking. 
 
 
Q.108  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding parking (Details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A solution would be for Dublin City Council Parking Enforcement to implement a Pay 
& Display/Permit Parking scheme.  
If Residents wish to formalise parking on this road, 35% or greater of households need 
to show in writing that they would be in favour of a scheme.  The Residents can apply 
for a scheme at the link below. https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/parking-dublin-city-
centre/start-parking-scheme/criteria. 
 
 
Q.109  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding a park (Details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
(Details Supplied) can apply to Parks Services to deliver this service in Griffith Park, 
Drumcondra. 
The 
application 
form 
can 
be 
obtained 
by 
contacting 
parkevents@dublincity.ie which will have to be submitted with a copy of their 
insurance, which must specifically indemnify and name Dublin City Council on the 
policy. (Details Supplied)  can contact the sports@dublincity.ie for information about 
potential funding.  
 
 
 
Q.110 COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON 
To ask the Chief Executive ask the Water Section if would supply a Water Station 
(Details Supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is not involved in the provision of Water Services anymore and this 
is now the function of Uisce Eireann.  
 

Dublin City Council has installed Water Stations as part of large Public Realm Capital 
Schemes. I believe DCC Parks have also installed some units. This involves procuring 
and installing the unit and applying and paying for a connection from Uisce Eireann. 
My suggestion is that this should be raised with the Area Office with a view to 
establishing the suitability/possibility of installing such a unit at the location suggested 
by the Councillor. 
 
Q.111  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON 
To ask the Chief Executive to ask the Water Section if would supply A Water              
 Station (Details Supplied).  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is not involved in the provision of Water Services anymore and this 
is now the function of Uisce Eireann.  
 
Dublin City Council has installed Water Stations as part of large Public Realm Capital 
Schemes. I believe DCC Parks have also installed some units. This involves procuring 
and installing the unit and applying and paying for a connection from Uisce Eireann. 
My suggestion is that this should be raised with the Area Office with a view to 
establishing the suitability/possibility of installing such a unit at the location suggested 
by the Councillor. 
 
Q.112  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can please ask the Park’s Department to resurface 
the pathway at the right of the north playground. At the (Details Supplied)  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection will be arranged and any works identified as necessary will be listed for 
consideration in the Parks path upgrade programme summer 2025. 
 
 
Q.113  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can please request the upgrade of the surface on the 
public space at the end of the Cul de Sac (Details Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The Public Domain Officer for the North Central Area has arranged to meet with 
Councillor Barron in the coming days and this location will be included in the matters 
for discussion.  
 
 
Q.114  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to say whether, given the ongoing issues around Coolock 
swimming pool, Dublin City Council will consider the provision of portable swimming 
pools in Dublin this summer of the kind provided by Swim Ireland? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We have contacted Swim Ireland and the consideration of a portable pool would not 
be feasible as there are a number of significant constraints, around security, erection 
of fencing, security cameras, the construction of a marquee to house the pool, a level 
site, access to water to fill the pool, access to toilet facilities, gas heating and electric 
services, hiring of a crane. The portable pool is 12 metres X 3.4 metres and a depth of 
1.2 metres. This would be a constraint and would not cater for the current user groups 
in situ.  

 
 
 
Q.115  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive set out in detail all interactions that have taken place 
between the Department of Education and Dublin City Council around the plans to 
place a new school on the grounds of Belmayne Educate Together Secondary School 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Forward Planning team liaise with Dept. of Education regarding long term 
strategic planning for schools sites in the city.  There have been initial discussions 
around the provision of additional schools in the wider Belmayne / Clongriffin area to 
meet the demand of the existing and future population of the area. There has been 
no specific interaction in relation to this site and currently no planning permission in 
place for an additional school on the grounds of the Belmayne Educate Together 
Secondary School. 
Q.116  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive outline whether the plans to place a new school on the 
grounds of Belmayne ETSS are compliant with fire safety regulations, both for the new 
school and Belmayne ETSS. Has a fire safety certificate been sought in this regard? 
When was the relevant fire safety inspection carried out, what were the results of this 
and was a report produced? Can the Chief Executive publish any related report in 
response to this question? Can the Chief Executive say whether there are exceptions 
to fire safety regulations and/or a derogation that would allow the Department of 
Education to proceed with the plans to place a new school on the grounds of Belmayne 
ETSS without seeking a fire safety certificate 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Between 2019 and 2022, Dublin Fire Brigade received, processed and granted 13 no. 
fire safety certificates applications for a modular style school buildings for this site. It 
can be assumed that these modular buildings were to house Belmayne ETSS pending 
the construction of a permanent school building. 
A Fire Safety Certificate application was sought and granted for the permanent school 
building in 2022, the works would have commenced after this date. 
The Building Control Amendment Regulations BCAR, SI 9 of 2014 places 
responsibility on the Designers, the Owner and the Builder to complete works in 
accordance with the Building Regulations and Building Control Regulations. When a 
Fire safety certificate application is granted, it means that if the building works are 
completed in accordance with the Fire safety certificate design then building is 
considered to be prima facie with in accordance with the Building Regulations. It is the 
responsibility to these persons mentioned above to ensure that the building in built in 
accordance with the Building Regulations. The BCAR regulations place responsibilities 
on the Assigned Certifier to provide adequate oversight and sign off on the works and 
also to submit a certificate of compliance at completion before occupation. 
Dublin Fire Brigade is not in possession of any reports related to your question. 
Dublin Fire Brigade is not aware of plans to place a new school on the grounds of 
Belmayne ETSS. No new fire safety certificate has been submitted in this regard. 
There are no exemptions in the Building Control Regulations from the obligation to 
obtain a fire safety certificate for school buildings. 
In relation to school buildings, a fire safety certificate is required when: 
 
A new school is being built 
An existing school is being extended 
An existing school is subject to a material alteration 

An existing building is subject to a change of use to a school 
 
 
Q.117 COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive whether the plans to place a new school on the grounds of 
Belmayne ETSS are subject to planning regulations and whether planning permission 
has been sought in this regard by the Department of Education or any other entity? 
Can the Chief Executive say whether there are exceptions to planning regulations 
and/or a derogation that would allow the Department of Education to proceed with its 
plans to place a new school on the grounds of Belmayne ETSS without seeking 
planning permission? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is no planning permission for an additional school on this site and there is no 
current planning application for a school on the site. The post primary school was 
consented under planning permissions 2600/20 (parent permission) and 3351/21 
(amendments permission) Details of each application can be found by inputting the 
planning 
reference 
into 
the 
search 
bar 
of 
the 
following 
link: 
https://planning.agileapplications.ie/dublincity 
Whilst our Forward Planning team liaise with Dept. of Education regarding long term 
strategic planning, no specific discussions have been held relating to this site. 
Class 20D of the Planning and Development Regulation 2001(as amended) allows for 
the development consisting of: 
The erection on land on which a school is situated of a structure to facilitate the 
continued delivery of education. 
Conditions: 
1. No such structure shall be erected for a period exceeding 5 years.  
2. The gross floor area of such structure shall not exceed 30% of the gross floor area 
of the existing school.  
3. No such structure shall exceed two storeys. 
4. Distance to party boundary - (a) any single storey structure shall be a distance of 
not less than 2 metres from any party boundary, (b) any two-storey extension facing 
an existing dwelling shall be a distance no less than 22 metres from the main part of 
the dwelling, or (c) any two-storey extension closer than 12.5m to a party boundary, or 
facing and closer than 22 metres to the dwelling shall - (i) have no windows 
overlooking, or (ii) have obscure glass.  
5. Such structure shall comply with the Department of Education Primary and Post 
Primary Technical Guidance Documents for the time being in force. 
 
 
Q.118  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive about a housing issue (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Transfer List effective from 30/05/2018, the applicant 
holds the following position on this list; 
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
3 
297 
D 
3 
117 
H 
3 
152 
 

All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 
number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list.  
 
5 x 3 bedroom properties in Shanliss Way, Area D were advertised through Choice 
Based Lettings on 28th of March for a period of 3 weeks, the closing date is 18th of April 
2025. 
 
The 
applicant 
can 
apply 
via 
the 
following 
link;   
https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/housing/i-rent-my-home/i-rent-city-council/choice-
based-lettings  
 
Q.119  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding a bin (details supplied)  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services will assess the above mentioned location regarding the 
requirement of a litter bin there. 
 
Q.120  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding a pedestrian crossing (details supplied)  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Traffic and ITS conducted an assessment of this junction during the design process in 
2024. 
It was noted that the presence of large mature trees near the junction would likely 
impact on visibility of any new traffic signals. The trees would either have to be felled 
or else tall cantilever poles would be required to ensure visibility of the signals. 
Cantilever poles are an expensive option and can give rise to objections to their use 
on aesthetic grounds.    
If this junction was signalised, the heavy traffic flows along (details supplied) would 
mean that only a limited amount of green time would be available to the Rise and 
Rathlin Road. This would likely give rise to driver frustration on the minor roads.  
There is an existing Double D facility on (details supplied) that facilitates pedestrians 
crossing in this location. 
Taking all these points into consideration and given the limited budget that was 
available in 2024 for Pedestrian Crossing, it was decided to drop this location from 
consideration from the current works programme, and concentrate on locations more 
appropriate to signalisation. 
 
 
Q.121  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update re; the rollout of Zebra crossings; to advise 
as to how many have been rolled out to date & to outline the locations for further 
rollouts this year 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This year zebra crossings have been installed at: 
 
Blackditch road, Dublin 10 
 
South William Street, Dublin 2 
 
Herbert Park Road, Dublin 4 
 
Marlborough Road, Dublin 4 
 
 

Future locations planned for 2025 include: 
 
Mount Prospect Avenue, Dublin 3 
 
Greendale Road, Dublin 5 
 
 
Q.122  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive as residents & businesses throughout Dublin Northwest 
area are becoming concerned about the possibility of an IPAS Centre on Slaney Road 
as per the Public Danger & costs associated with IPAS Centres, can the Chief 
Executive give some clarification regarding the potential construction of said viz a 
decision which is imminent about this debacle? The increase in population within that 
centre will over spill into my constituency putting additional pressure on already over 
stretched necessary services 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The operation and construction of IPAS Centres is a matter for Department of Children, 
Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth and not a matter for Dublin City Council. 
 
Section 5 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) sets out the 
mechanism for a Planning Authority to consider application for a Declaration of 
Exemption. All Section 5 Exempted Development Declaration requests submitted are 
considered in accordance with all applicable statutory planning legislation, including 
the Planning & Development Act 2000 (as amended) and the Planning & Development 
Regulations 2001 (as amended). 
The purpose of the Section 5 application is not to determine the acceptability or 
otherwise of the temporary accommodation use and associated building alterations in 
respect of the proper planning and sustainable development of the area, but rather 
whether or not the matter in question constitutes development, and if so falls within the 
scope of exempted development.  
Specifically in regard to Section 5 Declaration 0080/25, at 131C, Slaney Road, Dublin 
Industrial Estate, the exact question asked in the Section 5 application is; 
Whether the use of the Existing unit with offices on the first floor and offices and kitchen 
on the ground floor at 131 Slaney Road to be used as accommodation for International 
Protection Applicants (IPAS) only, is exempted development using exemption 20(F) of 
the Planning & Development (Exempt Development) (No. 4) 2022. 
The Planning Authority is limited to determining whether or not the development is in 
accordance with Class 20F, Schedule 2 of the Planning and Development Regulations 
(as amended 2022) and not to determine the acceptability or otherwise of the 
temporary accommodation use and associated building alterations in respect of the 
proper planning and sustainable development of the area. 
 
The Section 5 Application at No. 131C Slaney Road is under review and an 
assessment of the proposal against the relevant exempted development provisions 
has yet to be issued. 
 
 
Q.123  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive if it’s possible for DCC to help start a programme that 
involves making sure all secondary school children are registered to vote before they 
finish school 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following the implementation of the Electoral Reform Act 2022, a person may register 
to vote from the age of 16 years of age, but they will not become eligible to vote until 
they are 18 years of age. 

Voting is a democratic right in Ireland. It is optional not mandatory to be registered on 
the Register of Electors. There is an onus on electors to register. 
The Franchise Section in Dublin City Council has created and worked on many 
promotional drives in the run up to elections. These include:   
 
A Dublin wide online, billboard and radio campaign for www.voter.ie as well 
as our own in house social media drives. 
 
College registration drives in TUD’s and DCU. 
 
Liaising with the housing department to provide hardcopy application forms 
and information leaflets with every new tenant pack. 
 
Posters and application forms are available in public libraries & post offices. 
 
Locating new housing developments within the Dublin City boundary and 
posting a hardcopy application form with accompanying free post envelope. 
All application forms & letters sent have a QR code on them so voters can still 
opt to register online. 
 
Registration drives in communities. 
 
While working with schools could have a positive impact on increasing youth voter 
turnout and fostering a sense of civic responsibility among young people, a wider 
initiative would involve collaboration between DCC, the Department of Education, 
secondary schools, and An Coimisiún Toghcháin (The Electoral Commission) who are 
tasked with promoting public awareness of, and working to increase public 
participation in electoral events through education and information sessions.  
 
The Franchise Section will engage with any schools Councillor Pepper may wish to 
bring to our attention. 
 
 
 
Q.124  COUNCILLOR MARY CALLAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide, in tabular form, the total housing allocations per 
housing area, as a percentage of the total number of people on the housing list for that 
area for 2024. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Please see figures requested as set out below -  
 
Combined Housing & Transfer Area B   Area D   Area E  Area H   Area J   Area K   Area L   Area M  Area N    Area P  Grand Total
HOUSING LIST TOTAL
4258
990
2099
1320
1342
1249
806
676
781
207
13728
TRANSFER LIST TOTAL
4496
897
2779
1488
1534
1478
1283
994
889
287
16125
Combined Total
8754
1887
4878
2808
2876
2727
2089
1670
1670
494
29853
Category Of Award 
Area B   Area D   Area E  Area H   Area J   Area K   Area L   Area M  Area N    Area P  Grand Total
Total Lettings
611
117
298
359
441
257
491
141
60
61
2836
Percentage
6.98%
6.20%
6.11%
12.78% 15.33%
9.42%
23.50%
8.44%
3.59%
12.35%
9.50%
 
 

 
Q.125  COUNCILLOR MARY CALLAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide, in tabular form, the total number of projected 
housing allocations based on housing delivery forecast per housing area, as a 
percentage of the total number of people on the housing list for that area for 2025, 
2026, 2027. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This is a sizeable request for information that will take time for the team to prepare. It 
will not be ready in time for the April Council meeting. The team will produce this 
information and should be in a position to issue this information within two weeks.  
 
 
Q.126  COUNCILLOR MARY CALLAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the planned affordable housing delivery by year for 
the next five years broken down by affordable rental and purchase, and broken down 
by area 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The following is a breakdown of the planned affordable housing delivery over the 
next 5 years. Some of these schemes are well advanced, while others are earlier in 
the process and may not have secured planning permission or have funding in place.  
Area 
Type 
Scheme 
No of Homes 
Provider 
Central 
Affordable Purchase 
Montpelier(O'Devaney) 
165 
DCC 
Central 
Cost Rental 
Rathborne Wharf 
399 
AHB 
Central 
Affordable  Purchase 
Montpelier (O'Devaney) 
68 
DCC 
Central 
Cost Rental 
Montpelier  
(O'Devaney) 
264 
AHB 
North Central 
Affordable Purchase 
Oscar Traynor Woods 
84 
DCC 
North Central 
Cost Rental 
Parkside Block 3A 
85 
AHB 
North Central 
Cost Rental 
Griffin Court 
64 
AHB 
North Central 
Affordable Purchase 
Oscar Traynor Woods 
42 
DCC 
North Central 
Cost Rental 
Cromcastle Underpass 
133 
DCC/LDA 
North Central 
Cost Rental 
Griffin Hall 
104 
AHB 
North Central 
Cost Rental 
Hartfield Place 
251 
AHB 
North Central 
Affordable Purchase 
Belmayne 
500 
DCC 
North Central 
Affordable Purchase 
Oscar Traynor Woods 
42 
DCC 
North Central 
Cost Rental 
Oscar Traynor Woods 
340 
AHB 
North West 
Affordable  Purchase 
Balbutcher Site 14 
126 
DCC 
North West 
Affordable Purchase 
Parkview Site 25 
32 
DCC 
North West 
Affordable Purchase 
Silloge Site 12 
101 
DCC 
North West 
Cost Rental 
Ballymun LAP Sites 11 
& 13 
77 
AHB 
North West 
Cost Rental 
Ballymun LAP Sites 6,8 
& 9 
206 
AHB 
South Central 
Affordable  Purchase 
Cherry Orchard 
172 
DCC/LDA 
South  Central 
Cost Rental 
Donore 
389 
DCC/LDA 
South Central 
Cost Rental 
Bluebell 
233 
DCCLDA 
South Central 
Cost Rental 
Cherry Orchard Point 
Phase 1 
547 
DCC/LDA 

South Central 
Cost Rental 
Emmet Road 
441 
DCC 
South Central 
Affordable Purchase 
Cherry Orchard Point 
Phase 2 
137 
DCC/LDA 
South Central 
Cost Rental 
Cherry Orchard Point 
Phase 3 
203 
DCC/LDA 
South East 
Cost Rental 
Gulistan 
60 
AHB 
South East 
Affordable Purchase 
Poolbeg 
350 
tbc 
5,615 
 
 
Q.127  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive why ten trees were cut down recently at Ravensdale Park 
Kimmage. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Trees in Ravensdale Park were recently removed as part of the River Poddle Flood 
Alleviation Scheme. The trees were removed to minimise the risk in the possibility of 
blockages occurring during a heavy rainfall event at the inlet to the culvert at the 
Northern Eastern end of the park and to accommodate the upcoming flood defence 
wall works, where due to this blockage risk, a flood water containment area will be 
constructed within the park.  
This containment area will be completed by installing a defence wall along the 
Ravensdale Drive side of the river where the wall will then return back into the park at 
the entrance and along the northern side of the existing footpath, up to the junction of 
the footpath coming from Kimmage Rd Lwr. The existing pedestrian bridge at the 
Builders Providers will also be replaced as part of the works.  
A landscaping plan for the areas affected by the works will also be implemented. 
Works in the park will commence in May 2025 and are expected to take 12 months to 
complete so pedestrian access will be restricted in the Eastern end of the park during 
the works.  
Details on the scheme can be found at www.poddlefas.ie 
 
 
Q.128  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive about the status of moving Bushy Park Market to a new 
location beside the tennis courts. I would ask the Chief Executive to comment on the 
following consequences of the move. Lack of access to the depot car park for trader 
parking means traders' vans would be parked in the street, causing unnecessary 
problems with parking for the Market visitors. Lack of generator storage and general 
market logistics difficulties. The move would not only make operations significantly 
more difficult but would also increase weekly costs for traders, making it harder for the 
market to continue as it is and causing problems with parking around the park. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Under procurement regulations DCC are obliged to advertise the Bushy Park market 
location for tender (as was done in the past). The tender for the provision of the Bushy 
park market will be done in conjunction with the advertisement of other markets located 
within our parks.  It is anticipated to publish this combined markets tender in Q2 2025.  
The current market operator will have the opportunity to tender for Bushy Park market 
& any of the other markets included in this tender. Any proposed changes to the 
location of the market will be detailed in the tender documentation. The successful 
tenderer will be obliged to operate within the terms laid out in the tender 
documentation. The tender will seek clarity from operators on how to address issues 

such as waste management, sustainability, power generation, health and safety and 
traffic management.  
 
 
 Q.129 COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive comment on whether a change of management at Bushy 
Park Market is happening. This change risks ending the unique, community-driven 
initiative that has been thriving for the past ten years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Under procurement regulations DCC are obliged to advertise this market location for 
tender (as was done in the past). The tender for the provision of the Bushy park market 
will be done in conjunction with the advertisement of other markets located within our 
parks.  It is anticipated to publish this combined markets tender in Q2 2025.  The 
current market operator will have the opportunity to tender for Bushy Park market & 
any of the other markets included in this tender. 
 
Q.130  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive if he could open up engagement with parks to devise a 
plan for the meanwhile use of the Georges Dock site, similar to the park at Bridgefoot 
Street, ensuring that this space is utilised by the public, in the short term, rather than 
sit idle and derelict 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following the commitment made at the March Central Area Committee meeting, to 
review the use at Georges Dock, the Docklands Office has appointed Howley Hayes 
Cooney Architecture (HHCA) to update the existing Condition Survey of the dock.   
The survey will assess the current condition of the dock and will also inform both the 
necessary repair works to preserve and protect the structure and considerations for 
future use of the Dock.  It is expected that HHCA’s report will be completed by end of 
May.   
On receipt of the report, Dublin City Council will engage a contractor specialising in 
conservation works to carry out the recommended conservation and maintenance of 
the dock. There is €500,000 funding within the Capital Programme for 2025 and this 
will be allocated towards procurement of appropriate consultants and conservation 
works.   
It would be premature to engage with the Parks Department until the survey report has 
been completed and reviewed.   
 
A progress report and details on the future programme of works will be provided to the 
Members in June 2025.   
 
 
Q.131  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive to address the road safety concerns of residents living on 
Upper Sheriff Street and Castleforbes Road. It is becoming more and more dangerous 
for all road users.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In order for the Area Engineer to assess Sheriff Street Upper and Castleforbes Road, 
the details in the request needs to be more specific with regards to the type of traffic 
problems encountered in the area and the times at which the problems occur. A 
thorough assessment can then be made, and the Area Engineer can recommend 
appropriate measures. 

 
Q.132  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive he would consider plans to introduce traffic calming 
greenery along West Road, East Wall, ones similar to the pocket parks and planters 
along Oxmantown Road, that have been hugely successful and crucial to the slowing 
down of traffic along that road. This initiative would also bring some greenery back to 
that stretch after the removal of the trees.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The traffic calming/greening on Oxmanstown Road was an initiative created by the 
Dublin City Council Parks Department.  The Parks Department had a greening strategy 
for the area and consulted with the Transport Advisory Group to determine if it were 
feasible to build 'green' buildouts.  The Area Engineer had determined that there was 
an issue with motorists speeding on the road so constructing 'green' buildouts was a 
way of creating traffic calming while bringing nature back into the city. 
TAG will assess West Road and East Wall Road for traffic calming solutions including 
pocket parks and planters that were installed along Oxmantown Road. 
 
 
Q.133  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive he has been engaging with the Taoiseach’s office on the 
implementation of the Taoiseach’s Taskforce and if so, has there been any budget 
allocated 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There have been several meetings of the Inter-Departmental Group which was 
established under the auspices of the Department of An Taoiseach following the 
publication of Dublin City Taskforce Report. Funding options to deliver on the 10 “Big 
Moves” identified in the report are the subject of ongoing discussions. 
 
 
Q.134  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will consider additional traffic calming measures at 
(details supplied) 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A request for additional traffic calming measures on (details supplied) (Enquiry Ref: 
7044562) is listed for examination and report by the Transport Advisory Group.   
The Councillor will be informed of the recommendation in due course. 
 
Q.135  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update in relation to the trees on the green 
at (details supplied).  
A. Have they been inspected?  
B. Is there a report available on the condition of the trees? 
C. When were they last pruned? 
D. Is the manager satisfied that they are not at threat of falling?  
E. Are they scheduled to be pruned?  
F. Have they been inspected in the last year since further damage took place  
G. during the recent storms? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

The trees on the green at (details supplied) have not yet undergone a formal 
inspection and there is currently no report on their condition. While they have not been 
pruned recently, they have previously been crown-lifted as part of their maintenance. 
Parks Services will schedule a formal inspection of these trees in Q4 2025/Q1 2026. 
In the meantime, Parks Services staff conduct routine visual assessments during their 
daily work. No damage has been reported following the recent storms. 
 
 
 
 
Q.136  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can arrange for the removal or severe trimming of the 
shrubbery at (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services will attend to the green area at the end of (Details Supplied) to clear 
the overgrown vegetation.  
 
 
 
Q.137  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the removal of the new trees 
planted at (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following the recent tree planting at (Details Supplied) Parks Services received a 
complaint regarding the placement of the new Magnolia trees.  In response, our team 
visited the site to assess the area and explore the possibility of relocating them. 
However, during the visit, a significant number of local residents expressed strong 
support for retaining the trees, highlighting their appreciation for the new planting. 
 
Trees play a vital role in enhancing the urban environment, contributing to cleaner air, 
supporting biodiversity by providing habitats for birds and serving as a food source for 
pollinators. These benefits align with the objectives of the Dublin City Council Tree 
Strategy, which emphasises the importance of urban tree planting in improving 
environmental quality, promoting ecological sustainability and enhancing public 
spaces for the well-being of communities. 
 
Parks Services remains committed to managing and maintaining urban greenery in a 
way that balances community interests with the long-term benefits of trees. 
 
 
Q.138  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the plan to replant trees in Riverston Abbey detailing 
what the timeline is and what trees are being planted and what the level of maturity of 
these trees are? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In 2022, the Riverston Abbey estate was significantly impacted by fireblight, a highly 
contagious plant disease that affected 113 trees. Unfortunately, this necessitated their 
removal, along with proper disposal and stump grinding to prevent further spread. 
Since then, Parks Services has been actively replanting new standard bare-root trees, 
selecting Heavy Standard (12-14cm) or Extra-Heavy Standard (14-16cm) specimens 
where available. To enhance resilience and biodiversity, a variety of tree species have 
been planted, reducing the risk of future disease outbreaks affecting a single species. 

Replanting is a gradual process, as root decomposition must be complete before a 
new tree can thrive in the same location. This can take anywhere from three to five 
years, depending on the tree species and root conditions. 
The replacement program, running from 2022 to 2027, will continue with additional tree 
planting scheduled for Q4 2025 and Q1 2026.  Parks Services remains committed to 
restoring and enhancing the green landscape in Riverston Abbey, ensuring a 
sustainable and thriving urban tree canopy for the community. 
 
 
 
Q.139  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive could he please provide an update on the Development at 
Daneswell Court Glasnevin. Could he please provide a breakdown on social housing 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Co-operative Housing have submitted an application for funding support to acquire 132 
homes in this development, this application has not yet been approved.   
The unit breakdown is as follows; 
 
11 x studios 
 
58 x I beds 
 
55 x 2 beds 
 
8  x 3 beds  
 
Q.140  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on Great Western Square Park, in relation to 
the cleaning up of the Park 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services have carried out hedge pruning outside of the nesting period and the 
grass in Great Western Square is regularly mowed as part of our routine maintenance. 
The park is maintained to a high standard, and at this time, no additional works are 
planned for the year. 
 
 
Q.141  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive could he provide an update on the implementation of a 
Yellow Box at the entrance to St. Vincent’s on the Navan Road 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer has recommended that the existing Yellow Box on Navan Road, at 
the southern entrance to St. Vincent's at Aura De Paul swimming pool is to be 
extended. This is on a works list and should be completed within the next 4 weeks. 
 
 
 
Q.142  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
 
I have reports that the sauna and steam room are frequently out of working order in 
Ballymun Sports and Leisure centre. Management have responded explaining that the 
reason they are frequently broken is because patrons are not using the facility correctly 
and are pouring water onto the heater when this is causing it to break. 

Could a different type of heater be installed such as a Finnish heater so that it doesn't 
get broken due to patrons pouring water onto it. This would eliminate confusion on how 
to use the facilities correctly and the equipment would no longer be damaged by people 
pouring water onto the heater. Pouring water onto the heater is common practice in 
other facilities and could be the cause of the confusion. Perhaps this could be a good 
solution to the prolonged closures of the sauna and steam room and the delays in 
getting parts to carry out repairs. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
I appreciate your comments and suggestions to install alternative system to the Sauna 
in the Ballymun Sport and Fitness facility. There are plans for some refurbishment 
works in the Ballymun Sport and fitness facility. Although the sauna was not originally 
identified as an area to be incorporated in the refurbishment, I will outline the issues 
that we are experiencing with the Sauna and assess the various systems available.  
 
 
 
Q.143  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive if DCC, any contractors employed by DCC or other bodies 
operating in the Dublin City area (e.g NTA, TII, OPW) have used or continue to use 
glyphosate or related herbicides on public roads, in public parks or the public domain 
since DCC phased out the use of glyphosate?   
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks, Biodiversity and Landscape Services does not use glyphosate in its 
maintenance operations. The only exception is for the treatment of specific invasive 
species.   
 
Housing Maintenance can confirm that the use of glyphosate based herbicide is 
prohibited in the tender specification for the landscape maintenance contract. 
 
 
The Public Domain Units across the five administrative areas in Dublin City Council 
co-ordinate the delivery of services relating to weed killing and removal by way of 
contractors working on behalf of Dublin City Council. 
The treatment being used is New Way Spray. The environmental benefits of using 
these alternative methods include - they are glyphosate free, the application method 
produces significantly lower carbon emission compared to that of other methods 
(flame/ hot foam), New Way Spray Contains 240g/L Acetic Acid - naturally occurring 
and bio-degradable, safe for the environment - breaks down naturally in water 
 
Q.144  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive if deaths in homelessness could be included in future 
monthly reports on homelessness in the Dublin region and to request monthly figures 
for deaths in homelessness over the past 5 years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin Region Homeless Executive (DRHE) collates reports of every death 
notified to it of a person experiencing homelessness and shares these with the HSE 
for review. The DRHE received notifications for 47 deaths in 2020, 59 deaths in 
2021, 45 deaths in 2022, 56 deaths in 2023 and 59 in 2024. These numbers include 
deaths in hospitals and locations other than homeless services (e.g. with 
family/friends).  

It was agreed following the Interim report on Mortality in Single Homeless population 
2020 that the Health Research Board was the appropriate body to collect, review and 
analyse deaths among homeless service users and make recommendations on the 
prevention of deaths among the homeless population at a national level.  
The HRB data is more comprehensive and accurate, as it is based on a review of 
coronial files and includes numbers of deaths and type of accommodation at the time 
of death, demographics, known substance use, comorbidities, poisoning and non-
poisoning deaths. The HRB reports note deaths in the Dublin Region.  
 
 
Q.145  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a detailed comment on strategies that DCC are 
following/considering to ensure housing allocations continue in the North West area, 
given the low level of social housing delivery projected in the area over the next 18-24 
months. Will the manager consider prioritising acquisitions in the area in recognition of 
the low level of new homes due for completion? Will the manager prioritise processing 
of voids given supply challenges? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Based on information provided so far to Dublin City Council from the Department of 
Housing, the 2025 programme for acquisitions of second-hand properties will only 
cover acquisitions across the following priority areas; acquisitions for elderly persons, 
persons with a disability, exits from homelessness, tenant in situ, buy and renew. 
Dublin City Council has been advised that acquisitions for general needs only will not 
be covered. The local authority allocations for 2025 will be a capital-funding amount 
and not a target number of acquisitions as was the case in 2024. 
 
DCC currently has just under 2% of its stock that is void, 10 years ago the rate was 
8.5%. Dublin City Council has made great strides over the last number of years to get 
the percentage at a very low level. In 2024 we increased the number of contractors on 
our void’s framework from 11 to 16. We endeavour to prioritise a timely turnover of all 
voids throughout Dublin City.  
 
Housing Allocations will continue to allocate properties in accordance with the Scheme 
of Lettings as the properties become available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix B – Vote No. 1 – Item 8 Amendment to Report No. 105/2025 
 
RECORD OF DIVISION AT                 COUNCIL MEETING  
 
FOR: 
16 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTAIN: 
 3 
AGAINST:  34   
 
 
 
 
ABSENT: 
  
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
 
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
Councillor Ammar Ali 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Feljin Jose 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daryl Barron 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Leslie Kane 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Racheal Batten 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Kourtney Kenny 
 
 
 
 
Lord Mayor Emma Blain 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Patrick Kinsella 
 
 
√ 
 
Councillor Janice Boylan 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Dermot Lacey 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Kevin Breen 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor John Lyons 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Noelle Brown 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Aoibheann Mahon 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Christy Burke 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Micheál MacDonncha 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Claire Byrne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ray McAdam 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Danny Byrne 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Séamas McGrattan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Lesley Byrne 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Paddy Monahan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Mary Callaghan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Carolyn Moore 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Hazel Chu 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Edel Moran 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor David Coffey 
 
 
√ 
 
Councillor Darragh Moriarty 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Anthony Connaghan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Fiona Connelly  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Cat O’Driscoll 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Keith Connolly 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ciarán Ó Meachair 
 
√ 
 
 
Deputy Lord Mayor Donna Cooney  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Colm O’Rourke 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ray Cunningham 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Gavin Pepper 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Hazel de Nortúin 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Cieran Perry 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daithí Doolan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Michael Pigeon 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Pat Dunne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Gayle Ralph 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Daniel Ennis 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Punam Rane 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Cian Farrell  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Conor Reddy 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Alison Field  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Nial Ring 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Declan Flanagan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Aisling Silke  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Mannix Flynn 
 
 
√ 
 
Councillor Supriya Singh 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Deirdre Heney 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Malachy Steenson 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Jesslyn Henry 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor John Stephens 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Rory Hogan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Catherine Stocker  
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Janet Horner 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Philip Sutcliffe  
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Vincent Jackson 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
