Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 7 July 2025 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
Miontuairiscí an Chruinnithe Míosúil a tionóladh ar an 7 Iúil 2025 i Seomra na 
Comhairle, Halla na Cathrach, Sráid an Dáma agus trí fhíschomhdháil iargúlta ag 6.15 
i.n. leis an Ardmhéara Ray McAdam sa chathaoir. 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Ammar Ali 
Daryl Barron 
Racheal Batten 
Emma Blain 
Kevin Breen 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Danny Byrne 
Lesley Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
David Coffey 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Ray Cunningham 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Daniel Ennis 
Cian Farrell 
Alison Field 
Declan Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
Deirdre Heney 
Jesslyn Henry 
Rory Hogan 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Feljin Jose 
Leslie Kane 
Kourtney Kenny 
Patrick Kinsella 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Aoibheann Mahon 
Ray McAdam 
Séamas McGrattan 
Ciaran Meachair 
Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
Paddy Monahan 
Carolyn Moore 
Edel Moran 
Darragh Moriarty 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Colm O'Rourke 
Gavin Pepper 
Cieran Perry 
Michael Pidgeon 
Gayle Ralph 
Punam Rane 
Conor Reddy 
Nial Ring 
Aishling Silke 
Supriya Singh 
Malachy Steenson 
John Stephens 
Catherine Stocker 
Philip Sutcliffe 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Prajwal K. Annibabu 
Dymphna Farrell 
Emer Fhátharta 
John Flanagan 
Anthony Flynn 
Michael Gallagher 
Mary Hayes 
Karen Hosie 
Katie Learmouth 
Natalie Leonard 
Victor Leonov 
Chris Manzira 
Karl Mitchell 
Mick Mulhern 
Ronan O'Byrne 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Richard Shakespeare 
 
 
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
In Memorial: 
Former Dublin City Councillor, Liam Fitzgerald, who died on June 11th last. Liam was a 
member of Dublin Corporation between June 1985 and 2003, serving in the North 
Central Area. He was also a member of both Houses of the Oireachtas. The Lord 
Mayor extended condolences to the Fitzgerald family. 
 

 
 
Michael Flanagan, father of Councillor Declan Flanagan and former Councillor 
Terence Flanagan, passed away on June 11th.  On behalf of the entire Council, Lord 
Mayor extended condolences to Declan and the Flanagan family. 
 
Freeman of Dublin, Brother Kevin Crowley, died last week at the age of 90. Brother 
Kevin dedicated his life to the service of others. Through his tireless work at the 
Capuchin Day Centre, he offered dignity, compassion, and practical support to 
thousands of people across the city, particularly those experiencing homelessness, 
hunger, and hardship. He never sought recognition, only to serve. In 2015, this 
Council rightly awarded him the Freedom of the City of Dublin, in recognition of a 
lifetime spent caring for the most vulnerable. The Lord Mayor extended the Council’s 
collective condolences to his Capuchin brothers, the staff and volunteers of the Day 
Centre, and to all who mourn his loss. 
 
There was a moment of silence to remember Liam Fitzgerald, Michael Flanagan and 
Brother Kevin Crowley.  
 
In Recognition: 
The Lord Mayor informed Members that City Engineer and Assistant Chief Executive, 
John Flanagan was retiring and tonight represented his last City Council meeting. On 
behalf of all the members, the Lord Mayor thanked John sincerely for his service and 
wished him a long, happy and contented retirement. The Lord Mayors sentiments 
were echoed by members from all the political groups.  
 
The Lord Mayor congratulated the Dublin hurlers on their fantastic Championship run. 
They wore the jersey with pride, passion and no fear, which was demonstrated in 
abundance both against Limerick and again on Saturday evening against Cork.  
 
The Lord Mayor acknowledged Dessie Farrell, who recently stepped down as Dublin 
senior football manager. Dessie has given immense service to Dublin and to the wider 
GAA family — as a player, a coach, a manager, and through his leadership in the 
GPA. He guided Dublin to a historic sixth successive All-Ireland title in 2020 and 
added another Sam Maguire in 2023. On behalf of the city, the Lord Mayor thanked 
him for his dedication, passion and enduring contribution to Dublin football. 
 
The Lord Mayor commended the Summer in Dublin initiative, which kicked off this past 
weekend with colour, creativity and great crowds. It is a fantastic new programme of 
city-centre activations taking place across five weekends this July and August. 
Delivered by Dublin City Council in partnership with the Temple Bar Company and 
DublinTown.ie.  
 
Upcoming: 
The Lord Mayor informed Members that he intends to hold a Special Meeting in 
September to clear the backlog of motions. This will be part of a two-item agenda 
meeting, including the anticipated report of the Urban Regeneration Sub-Group that is 
headed up by Councillor Cian Farrell. September will be a busy month of meetings, as 
there will be the monthly Council meeting, a potential Presidential Nomination meeting 
and the annual Climate Action meeting.  
Finally, the Lord Mayor reminded Members that the Local Property Tax meeting will 
take place on Friday 18th July at 6.15pm. 
 
 
 
 

 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Cat 
ODriscoll that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the 
questions lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the 
questions lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and 
Answers are set out in Appendix A to these minutes. 
 
 
3 
  Correspondence was received from the following Local Authorities; 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor Jesslyn 
Henry that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence listed. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
4 
  To confirm the minutes of the City Council Meeting held on 9th June 2025 and the 
Annual Meeting held on 30th June 2025 
 
The minutes of the City Council meeting held on 9th June 2025 and the Annual 
Meeting held on 30th June 2025 having been printed, certified by the Meetings 
Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken as read, were signed by the Lord 
Mayor. 
 
 
5 
  Vacancies:   
 
 
(a)   One Fine Gael vacancy on the Protocol Committee following the resignation of 
Councillor Ray McAdam  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Colm O’Rourke and seconded by Councillor 
Clodagh Ní Mhuirí that Councillor Danny Byrne be appointed to the Protocol 
Committee. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
(b)   One vacancy on the HSE Dublin and North East Health Region following the 
restructuring of the Regional Health Forums (Ballymun-Finglas Local Electoral 
Area)  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Hazel De Nortuín and seconded by Councillor 
Vincent Jackson that Councillor Conor Reddy be appointed to the HSE Dublin 
and North East Health Region. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
(c)   One vacancy on the HSE Dublin and South East Health Region following the 
restructuring of the Regional Health Forums (Pembroke & South East Inner 
City Electoral Areas)  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Darragh Moriarty and seconded by Councillor 
Vincent Jackson that Councillor Dermot Lacey be appointed to the HSE Dublin 
and South East Health Region. The motion was put and carried 
 
 
(d)   One Green Party vacancy on the Community, Gaeilge, Sport, Arts & Culture 
Strategic Policy Committee following the resignation of Cllr. Claire Byrne  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Janet Horner and seconded by Councillor Donna 
Cooney that Councillor Carolyn Moore be appointed to the Community, 
Gaeilge, Sport, Arts & Culture Strategic Policy Committee. The motion was put 
and carried. 
 
 

 
(e)   To appoint a Member to the Board of Dublin City BID Company trading as 
Dublin Town following the resignation of Cllr. Claire Byrne (South East Area)  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Janet Horner and seconded by Councillor Donna 
Cooney that Councillor Hazel Chu be appointed to the Board of Dublin City BID 
Company. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
(f)   To appoint a Member to the Board of the Ringsend Toll Bridge Designated 
Activity Company following the resignation of Cllr. Claire Byrne (South East 
Area)  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Colm O’Rourke and seconded by Councillor 
Ammar Ali that Councillor Danny Byrne be appointed to the Board of the 
Ringsend Toll Bridge Designated Activity Company. The motion was put and 
carried.  
 
 
6 
  Report No. 176/2025 of the Executive Manager (K. Mitchell) - City Council's lead role 
in delivery of City Centre Taskforce Roadmap 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Deputy Lord Mayor 
John Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 176/2025. The 
motion was put and carried.  
 
 
7 
  Report No. 163/2025 of the Senior Executive Officer (L. Brogan) - Nomination of a 
Candidate for the Office of President 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council hereby resolves to hold a Special Meeting on 15th 
September 2025 at 6.15 p.m. to consider all requests for nominations it receives from 
persons wishing to contest the 2025 Presidential Election.  The Council may, at its 
discretion, make a resolution to nominate a candidate. It was further proposed that the 
City Council adopts the procedures for Dublin City Council to make a nomination for 
the 2025 Presidential Election as outlined in Report 163/2025. The motion was put 
and carried. 
  
 
8 
  Report No.164/2025 of the Deputy Chief Executive (E. Quinlivan) - With reference to 
Community Grants Scheme 2025 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 164/2025 and 
hereby approves Community Grants Scheme Awards 2025 as set out therein. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
9 
  Report No. 156/2025 of the Deputy Chief Executive (E. Quinlivan) - With reference to 
Community Arts Grant Award 2025 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 156/2025 and 
hereby approves the Community Arts Grant Awards 2025 as set out therein. The 
motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 
10   Report No.157/2025 of the Executive Manager (F. D'Arcy) - With reference to the 
disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and Tenant (Ground Rents) 
(No. 2) Act, 1978 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas McGrattan and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 157/2025 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and carried.. 
 
 
11   Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
(a)   Report No. 160/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O`Connor) - With reference 
to Grant of a 25-year lease of Tennis Grounds at Herzog Park, Orwell Road, 
Rathgar, Dublin 6  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor 
Jesslyn Henry that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
160/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
(b)   Report No 161/2025 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) - With reference to 
Grant of a 10 year lease for Tearooms at Palmerston Park, Rathgar, Dublin 6 
to Coffee Crowd Ltd  
 
Cllr Dermot Lacey asked when would the tea rooms be open to the public? The 
Manager confirmed that it would be open in 2025. The Lord Mayor agreed to 
circulate the date once the lease is legally finalised.  
  
Cllr Darragh Moriarty raised an issue regarding the need for public signage and 
wayfinding maps in the park advertising these toilets.  Anthony Flynn, Assistant 
Chief Executive advised that condition 11 of the lease is quite general but if the 
word signage is required in Condition 11, he has no issue taking that back.  
  
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor 
Jesslyn Henry that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
161/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
(c)   Report No. 165/2025 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) - With reference to 
Grant of a 5 year short term letting of 35A Moatview Avenue, Priorswood, 
Dublin 17  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor 
Jesslyn Henry that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
165/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
(d)   Report No. 166/2025 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) - With reference to 
proposed Grant of a 5 year licence at Tennis Pavilion Dublin 5 to Rockfield 
Tennis Club CLG  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor 
Jesslyn Henry that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
166/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 

 
12   Disposal of Property:   
 
 
(a)   Report No. 158/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O`Connor) - With reference 
to proposed disposal of plot of land at rear of 24 Broadstone Avenue, Dublin 7  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Lord Mayor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 158/2025 
and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 159/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O`Connor) - With reference 
to an exchange of lands at Dorset Street Upper, Dublin 1 with the ESB  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Lord Mayor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 159/2025 
and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 172/2025 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) - With reference to 
Disposal of a plot of land at Baltray, Howth, Co. Dublin  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Lord Mayor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 172/2025 
and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried.  
 
 
13   Report No. 167/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (J. Flanagan) 
- Quarterly Report of the Active Travel Programme Office 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Fiona 
Connelly that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 167/2025. The 
motion was put and carried.  
 
 
14   Report No. 170/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (J. Flanagan)  
- Quarterly Report of the Traffic Department 
 
 It was proposed by Lord Mayor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Fiona 
Connelly that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 170/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
15   Report No. 175/2025 of the Director of the Dublin Region Homeless Executive (M. 
Hayes) - Draft Dublin Region Homeless Action Plan 2025-2027 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Deirdre Heney and seconded by Councillor Donna 
Cooney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 175/2025 and 
hereby adopts the Draft Dublin Region Homeless Action Plan 2025-2027 as outlined 
therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
16   Report No 171/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Housing Supply 
Report July 2025 
 
The report was not reached so it will be relisted for the September City Council 
meeting.  
 
 
 

 
17   Report No. 173/2025 of the A/Head of Finance (V. Leonov) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas McGrattan and seconded by Deputy Lord 
Mayor John Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
173/2025. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
18   Report No. 162/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Ray McAdam and seconded by Deputy Lord Mayor 
John Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 162/2025. 
The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
19   Report No.168/2025 of the Area Committees - Minutes of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of May 2025. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Donna Cooney and seconded by Councillor Micheál 
MacDonncha that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 168/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
20   Report No. 174/2025 - Minutes of the Planning and Urban Regeneration SPC 23rd 
April 2025, Chairperson Cllr Catherine Stocker. 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Feljin Jose 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 174/2025. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
21   Report No.155/2025 of the Protocol Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on the  
27th May 2025, Councillor Ray McAdam, Chairperson 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Conor 
Reddy that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 155/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
22   Report No.169/2025 of the Protocol Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on the 
13th June 2025, Councillor Ray McAdam, Chairperson 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Conor 
Reddy that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 169/2025. The 
motion was put and carried.  
 
 
23   Topical Issues 
 
No topical issues were submitted for consideration. 
 
 
24   Motions on Notice 
 
Motion No. 2 in the name of Councillor Carolyn Moore and seconded by 
Councillor Donna Cooney  
 
 
 
 
“This council agrees to establish a pilot programme for education and activities in 
nature, providing opportunities for children, particularly in areas of disadvantage, to 
experience the health and wellbeing benefits of access to nature and to get to know, 
understand and value the nature in our city through exploration of key habitats and 
education on key species.” 
The motion was put and carried. 
 

 
The Lord Mayor vacated the Chair to Deputy Lord Mayor John Stephens at 8.35 p.m. 
and returned to the chamber at 8.43 p.m. 
 
Motion No. 1 in the name of Councillor Deirdre Heney and seconded by 
Councillor Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
 
“That the Chief Executive please give a detailed report on proposed works/works in 
progress on Phase 2 of the Wad River Flood Alleviation Scheme to include the section 
under Howth Road at Glaslyn Apartments/Hollybrook Road and collected works at the 
Clontarf Promenade to include time line for completion and also provide as promised, 
a sketch clearly demonstrating the works that will explain the positive changes works 
to day provide for residents and the benefits the proposed works will provide.” 
 
The motion was put and carried. The Manager also agreed to facilitate a site visit for 
Councillors and residents to help alleviate their concerns.   
 
Motion No. 3 in the name of Councillor Micheal MacDonncha   
 
 
 
Aithníonn Comhairle na Cathrach  
• 
Gur cuspóir i mBunreacht na hÉireann é athaontú na hÉireann 
• 
Go bhfuil plé Náisiúnta ag fás faoi athrú bunreachtúil le daoine ó chúlraí 
éagsúla ag fiosrú faoi féidearachtaí na hAontachta  
 
Tugann an Comhairle faoi deara go dtugann Comhaontú Aoine an Chéasta bealach 
daonlathach chun an tír a aontú, trí na reifrinn.  
 
Mar sin glaonn an Comhairle seo ar an Rialtas chun  
• 
Comhthionól Saoránach ar Aontú na hÉireann a bhunú, chomh maith le Coiste 
Oireachtais  
• 
Plean do Aontú na hÉireann a fhorbairt agus a fhoilsiú i gcomhar le sochaí 
sibhialta, agus le príomh geallchoimeádaithe, na húdaráis áitiúla san áireamh 
• 
Dáta do reifreann mar atá leagtha síos i gComhaontú Aoine an Chéasta a fháil 
trí obair ar a shon.  
Dublin City Council recognises that 
• 
The reunification of Ireland is an objective of Bunreacht na hÉireann. 
There is a growing national discussion around constitutional change with people from 
diverse backgrounds now exploring the possibility of Irish unity. 
 
This Council further notes that  
• 
The Good Friday Agreement provides the democratic means to achieve 
reunification, through the unity referendums. 
  
Therefore this Council calls on the Irish Government to plan and prepare for Irish unity 
through the following actions:  
• 
Establish an all-island Citizens’ Assembly and a Joint Oireachtas Committee 
on Irish Unity 
• 
Produce and publish a plan towards Irish unity in conjunction with civic society 
and key stakeholders, including local government 
• 
Work to secure a date for the referendums on unity provided for in the Good 
Friday Agreement.   
 
Following contributions from several group leaders it was agreed to adjourn the motion 
to the September City Council meeting as numerous speakers wished to contribute to 
the debate. 
  

 
25   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
Emergency Motion in the name of Cllr. Darragh Moriarty, Lord Mayor Ray 
McAdam, Cllr. Clare Byrne & The Green Party, Cllr. Daithí Doolan, Cllr. Cieran 
Perry, Cllr. Cat O’Driscoll, Cllr. Donna Cooney, Cllr. Conor Reddy, Cllr Michael 
Mac Donncha, Ciarán Ó Meachair 
 
“That this Council expresses its deep dismay at media reports the weekend outlining a 
developer-led race to the bottom and further reduction in minimum standards and 
guidelines when it comes to apartment developments, without any consultation or 
engagement with local authorities.  
 
It’s not enough for Government to reduce the size and quality of people’s homes, they 
appear to be going a step further to gut the provision of 5% community or cultural 
space in SDRAs and developments of 10,000 sq. M or more – a hard-won provision in 
the 2022-2028 Dublin City Development Plan. 
 
This Council expresses its grave concern at central Government overreach, its 
undermining of local democracy and its efforts to undermine the principle of 
sustainable community development.  
 
The Council seeks immediate clarity from Government on these guidelines and agrees 
to write to Minister James Browne seeking an urgent meeting.” 
 
Councillor Deirdre Heney wished it noted that she did not support the motion. 
 
The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
 

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY 7th JULY 
2025 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive who is in charge of the lottery-based system when it comes 
to the allocation of cost rental properties and why is the lottery-based system not done 
like a proper lottery draw for all the people who applied for these houses? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
Cost rental homes are currently provided by Approved Housing Bodies and the Land 
Development Agency. The Emmet Road development will be a Dublin City Council 
cost rental scheme.  Each available cost rental development is advertised separately 
by the provider of that development.  
 
The applicant applies to the provider by submitting documentation to evidence 
eligibility. A lottery is held after the closing date for applications.  The lottery creates, 
at random, a list of all applicants and the provider will approach applicants from the top 
of the list. It is overseen by the Housing Agency with a full audit trail for transparency.  
 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive who came up with net income figure of 66k for a cost rental 
property in a disadvantaged area 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
The net household income limit of €66,000 includes the income of all household 
members over 18 and was set by Government. This limit was introduced in August 
2023 by the Affordable Housing Act 2021 (Cost Rental Eligibility) Regulations 2023 
(S.I. No. 374/2023). 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding the proposed implementation of pay and display 
parking on Ballygall Road west. If DCC can compromise with the local businesses 
located on that road who will be affected by this and maybe assign the businesses a 
couple of spaces, even if it means that they pay a small yearly fee for those spaces? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
The introduction of Permit Parking and Pay and Display parking schemes are provided 
for in the Dublin City Council Parking Control Byelaws 2024. 
As the Road Authority for the City of Dublin there is no legal requirement for Dublin 
City Council to consult with any resident or business prior to making or changing 
statutory controls with regard to parking on street. Pay & Display/Permit Parking 
Schemes, however, are introduced at the request of residents and following a ballot of 
all properties eligible for a parking permit.   It is not, nor has it ever been, Council policy 
to consult with commercial properties prior to a ballot or the implementation of a 
residential permit parking scheme once voted in. Residential permit parking schemes 
do not exclude non-residents from parking on the street.  They will, however, be 
required to make payment for parking.      
 
Q.4  
COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive, As Ballymun Finglas Constituents are complaining to me 
about Anti-Social Behaviour at the Bus Stop for the Number 40 Bus, to ask the local 
area manager regarding the high concentration of homeless or IPAS accommodation 
in both North Frederick Street and Gardiner Street for a reply / report regarding same 
illustrating: 

How many hostels for the homeless are being funded by Dublin City Council in these 
two streets? 
- how many accommodation operators are involved? 
- how many people are being accommodated per dwelling? 
- Are IPAS involved, officially or unofficially? 
- Is the Spire Hostel near O'Connell St an unofficial IPAS Hostel acting as a precursor 
to mass changes of use viz these Hostels in North Frederick Street and Gardiner 
Street? 
- If DCC has received concerns about anti-social behaviour from neighbourhood 
residents and businesses in the local authority?  
There are at least one thousand tourist beds in the immediate vicinity of these two 
roads and local hoteliers are concerned about the concentration of homeless 
accommodation in the area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
The DRHE does currently provide emergency accommodation on both Frederick 
Street and Gardiner Street.  
In Frederick Street there are a total of 3 Properties with 2 suppliers and in Gardiner 
Street there are a total of 21 properties with 18 suppliers. Due to data protection and 
commercial sensitivity, we do not confirm the number of beds per property. 
IPAS is operated by Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth 
(DCEDIY), any queries regarding IPAS accommodation would need to be directed to 
DCEDIY.  
 
Q.5 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive could a yellow box be installed at the junction of Portland 
Street and NCR Dublin 1. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
The area engineer does not recommend a Yellow Box on North circular Road, at the 
junction with Portland Street North. After a site visit, it was noted that the road wasn’t 
busy, and traffic blocking the entrance doesn’t occur regularly. Yellow Boxes are 
expensive to maintain and therefore it is current Dublin City Council policy to only install 
Yellow Boxes where there is a major traffic generating junction. 
 
Q.6  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive when the first phase of the Old Dorset Street flats 
development will be complete. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The regeneration of Dorset Street flats consists of the demolition of the existing flat 
blocks and the construction of 163 new social homes alongside a multi-use crèche 
space, boxing club and two commercial units. The project started onsite in June 2024 
and is advancing well. The development will be completed in one phase, with a target 
date for handover from the contractor in December 2026.  
 
Q.7 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive to install new windows at (Details supplied).  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
Housing Maintenance will arrange for an inspection of the windows to determine if they 
are in need of repair or replacement.  The tenant will be contacted directly to arrange 
the inspection in the coming weeks. 
 
 
 

Q.8 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE  
To ask the Chief Executive given the reply this Cllr got from traffic dept that no one 
way system will be considered for Clonliffe Ave Ballybough. What traffic can be 
installed to help the ongoing 2-way system that's out of control at times. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
The Transport Advisory Group will only recommend one-way systems in exceptional 
circumstances and where every household on a road is in favour.  One-way systems 
have considerable drawbacks associated with them including: 
• Operational difficulties for emergency service vehicles, refuse and delivery vehicles. 
• Considerable inconvenience to local Residents and other road users due to diverted 
traffic. 
• Increased volumes of traffic on other local streets as traffic volumes due to motorists 
being displaced 
• Increased traffic speeds. 
The two-way traffic flow, combined with parked vehicles along both sides of Clonliffe 
Avenue, serve as effective traffic-calming measure, this is because vehicles moving in 
both directions, in conjunction with parked vehicles, naturally limit motorists’ speeds, 
thereby helping to maintain a safer environment for pedestrians, cyclists and 
Residents.   
Additionally, a one-way system can often lead to inconveniencing Residents due to 
longer travel routes and can significantly impact local traffic patterns and traffic flow in 
the area.   
Therefore, the Area Engineer does not recommend introducing a one-way system on 
Clonliffe Avenue. 
However, the Area Engineer recommends installing a Pay and Display and Permit 
parking scheme on Clonliffe Avenue.  This would formalise parking on the road and 
the design would include ‘buffer zones’, allowing motorists to pull in to allow drivers 
going in the opposite direction to pass.  The Residents can apply for a Pay and Display 
and Permit parking scheme by submitting written, supporting evidence that 35% or 
greater of households on the road are in favour of a scheme.  The criteria for applying 
for a scheme is outlined in this link:   
https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/parking-dublin-city-centre/pay-and-display-
parking 
 
Q.9  
COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
The Chapelizod Steering Group meets regularly with the South-Central area office and 
local councillors to discuss matters of concern in the village. There are frequent 
questions about the status of vacant and derelict buildings in the village, many owned 
by the council. Could the Housing, Planning, and Legal departments, and any other 
relevant departments, commit to sending representatives to the next meeting of the 
Chapelizod Steering Group to update the members and discuss the next steps to be 
taken by the council. The properties of interest include (Details supplied)  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
The Area Office will link in with these departments with a view to having a 
representative attend the next meeting of the Chapelizod Steering Group.  The 
Councillor will be kept informed. 
 
Q.10  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he and his Senior Management Team have formally met 
with the Minister for Housing and Local Government since the Ministers appointment 
and /or the Secretary General of the same Department in that same period, the 
business of the meetings and if he will report on the outcomes. 
 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The Minister visited homeless services in DCC on the 6th March 2025. The following 
 
was discussed: 
 
Standards in Services and Accommodation for People Experiencing 
Homelessness. 
 
Drivers of Homelessness 
 
Prevention  
 
Rough Sleeping and Housing First  
 
PASS and Reporting Developments (IT System) 
 
Private Rented and Social Housing as Exit Pathways 
 
Supports available to households experiencing homelessness 
 
 
The Chief Executive met Minister Browne at the Customs House on 6th March 2025.   
 
A range of issues were discussed across the full range of local authority functional 
responsibilities. The dialogue remained general, with no intensive focus on specific 
issues. 
 
Q.11  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive how he intends to deal with the necessary listing of many 
properties on the list of Protected structures given that every such request in recent 
times evokes a response that it must wait until further work on the National Inventory 
of such properties. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
The current Dublin city Record of Protected Structure has over 8500 entries.  Additions 
to the Record of Protected Structures are progressed in accordance with the 
methodology agreed by the City Council’s Strategic Policy Committee on Planning and 
Property Development in 2018 and 2019 to expedite additions in a systematic manner.  
 
This methodology was used to address large volumes of outstanding proposed 
additions given the associated assessment and administrative workload demanded by 
the statutory procedures under the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as 
amended). It allows for the prioritising of structures for addition to the RPS under the 
two mechanisms available to the planning authority; i.e. Section 12(3) in association 
with the making of the development plan, and Section 55 in all other instances.  
 
This methodology relies on a combination of two processes, briefly (1) a screening 
process to identify buildings of higher significance for action, including categories of 
buildings of special interest that are considered under-represented on the current RPS, 
and (2) prioritisation by location.  
 
Agreement of this methodology also allowed for the development of a fast-track 
protocol for addition of structures to the RPS under the Section 12 process while 
drafting a Development Plan.  
 
This has been adopted, with some amendments, to facilitate bringing larger numbers 
of structures through the Section 55 process where a Ministerial Recommendation has 
been received.   
 

The RPS was updated and reviewed under the current Dublin City Development Plan 
2022-2028 using this methodology and a full-time team of five Conservation Officer’s, 
with supporting administrative staff.  
 
Stage 1, 2 & 3 Ministerial Recommendations were assessed for fast-track additions 
under the Development Plan, where there was an open request, together with some 
requests for addition that fell within the agreed priorities - 20th Century Buildings, 
Industrial Heritage structures and those other building typologies that are currently 
under represented on RPS eg early buildings, buildings in the north inner city North 
Central and North West Areas, etc. In total 100 structure were selected for addition in 
the current Development Plan. Stage 4 Ministerial Recommendations were received 
in November 2021, and were therefore not available to the Conservation Section prior 
to publication of the Draft Development Plan.  
 
Notwithstanding the efficiency of using this methodology it is acknowledged that the 
statutory requirements of both Section 12(3) and Section 55 in terms of owner/occupier 
notification, Ministerial Notification, assessment of submissions/observation, and 
notification of the decision are still considerable and require extensive resources to 
process this statutory process.  
 
Currently there remains a large number of proposed additions / open RPS addition 
files, including 193 candidate additions (proposed by Elected Representatives and 
members 
of 
the 
public) 
together 
with 
c.1,500 
outstanding 
Ministerial 
Recommendations to be assessed for addition to the Record of Protected Structures, 
with further stages of the Dublin survey to be completed by the National Inventory of 
Architectural Heritage (NIAH).  
 
24 of these Ministerial Recommendations have been selected for fast-track addition 
further to assessment under the agreed priority categories, i.e. 
 
1.         Ministerial Recommendations, 
2.         Relevance under DP Objectives for  
a.         20th Century Buildings,  
b.         Industrial Heritage structures 
3.         Those other building typologies that are currently under represented on the 
            RPS e.g.        
a.  early buildings, 
b.  buildings in the North Central and North West Areas 
 
The fast-track addition process for these 24 properties, the most recent and current 
phase of proposed additions to the RPS, commenced in 2024 and will be progressed 
in line with available resources.  
 
 
Q.12 
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the planned renovation of Newcomen 
House 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
Planning permission for the refurbishment of Newcomen Bank (formerly the               
Rates Office) to provide multi-purpose spaces, visitor and staff facilities, and 
offices for Dublin City Council and future tenants was approved in July 2024. 
Works will include conservation and repair of existing historic fabric, and general 
upgrades to meet fire safety and accessibility requirements. Work around the 
Fire Safety Certificate is ongoing and is due to be obtained in coming weeks. 

The next Stage of the project which is subject to confirmation of funding will be 
the submission of tender documents which could commence in Q3 of this year 
with a view to awarding tender in Q2/Q3 of 2026. 
To ensure the buildings good condition is maintained quarterly inspection are 
ongoing. 
 
Q.13  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what discussions took place between the CE and/or the 
DCC Management Team on the serious changes to the membership of the new 
Regional Health Bodies that will see membership from DCC on the South East body 
reduced to one member and if he will make representations to the Minister for Health 
to increase this. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
The HSE was restructured into six HSE Health Regions in March 2024. These regions 
are now responsible for the planning and coordinated delivery of health and social care 
services within their respective geographies. In light of the introduction of the new 
Health Regions, the Department of Health proposes to increase the number of 
Regional Health Forums from four to six to align with the new Health Region 
geographies. Consequently, the membership of the Health Forums will need to be 
aligned to these geographies. 
Dublin City Council was previously split across two Health Forums.  In order to align 
with HSE Health Regions it needs to be split across three regions. Decisions around 
which forum to allocate members to was made on the basis of the population in the 
respective Health Region.  
The impact on Dublin City Council is as follows: 
The Dublin North East Regional Health Forum will now be known as HSE Dublin and 
North East. All eight councillors previously assigned to the Health Forum of Dublin 
North East are assigned to HSE Dublin and North East, and there is an extra 
representative added to account for the population increase. 
The Dublin Mid Leinster Health Forum will now be split between HSE Dublin and 
Midlands and HSE Dublin and South East. Previously there were six members on the 
Dublin Mid Leinster Health Forum.  Five of the existing members will be assigned to 
HSE Dublin and Midlands and one existing member will be assigned to HSE Dublin 
and South East.  
HSE Dublin and Midlands contains the following LEAs: 
• 
Ballyfermot-Drimnagh 
• 
South West Inner City 
• 
Kimmage-Rathmines  
• 
A portion of South East Inner City (77%)  
• 
A small part of Pembroke (8%) 
HSE Dublin and South East contains the following LEAs: 
• 
A portion of South East Inner City (23%) 
• 
The majority of Pembroke (92%) 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
To ask the Chief Executive about the status of the apartments on the corner of the Old 
Naas Road and Kylemore Road in Bluebell. They appear to have been completed long 
ago but still remain vacant.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
There are legal matters ongoing regarding this development, DCC has been advised 
that there may be a resolution by September. 
 

Q.15  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
            To ask the Chief Executive if he can ensure that the Allocations query email for 
Councillors is monitored and emails are replied to more frequently. As it often takes 
weeks to get a response, and many emails are also never responded to. (Details 
supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
The email is monitored and every effort is made to reply in a timely manner to Elected 
Representatives. However, we acknowledge there can be delays at times when there 
is an increase in correspondence. Please forward any outstanding queries you may 
have to the above dedicated email address, and we will ensure a response is issued 
 
Please be advised the above email address is incorrect, the correct email address for 
Councillor queries is electedallocat@dublincity.ie   
 
Q.16  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can liaise with residents in Weaver’s Square, Dublin 
8 with regards to ongoing parking issues. A number of residents have requested that 
permit parking is introduced at Weaver’s Square. Can this be examined in consultation 
with residents. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
If residents of Weavers Square wish to have the road assessed with a view to 
introducing permit parking, they can apply to the Transport Advisory Group (TAG) for 
permit parking on their road via Citizen Hub (traffic service request) at the link below: 
 
Traffic Request - Self 
 
The Area Engineer will then assess the roadway to see if a permit scheme would be 
viable. If found viable, the Parking Enforcement Section would ballot all eligible 
properties on the road to assess demand for the scheme. If a majority vote is received, 
the scheme would return to TAG to carry out statutory requirements. 
 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure DCC liaise with a resident in relation to 
maintenance issues (Details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
Housing Maintenance carried out an assessment on 20/06/2025. The repairs 
mentioned above are now logged and will be completed in the coming weeks. 
 
Q.18  COUNCILLOR CIARAN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can expedite action in relation to an ongoing issue 
being handled by the DCC Environment & Transport section (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Air Quality Monitoring and Noise Control Unit received a complaint in 2019 that 
the machinery at (Details supplied) was causing vibration in the complainant’s 
premises. The complaint was initially investigated but with the onset on Covid the 
premises closed and ceased operations. In 2022 the premises reopened, and further 
complaints were received. The Unit does not have equipment to monitor vibration, and 
an Environmental Engineer was employed to carry out a survey. A Managers Order 
was sought to serve a Statutory Notice under the provisions of the Section 107 of the 
Environmental Protection Agency Act 1992.  

The notice was served on 24/07/2024. The notice specified that levels of vibration must 
be reduced having regard to Table 1 of British Standard 6472-1-2008 Guide to 
evaluation of human exposure to vibration in buildings.  
 
(details supplied) engaged an Acoustic Consultant to address the issue. The most 
effective way to reduce vibration is to install anti-vibration pads underneath the 
looms/machines. 
 
(details supplied) have trialled anti-vibration pads but they issue is if the pads are too 
soft this will affect the integrity/working of the machine and the pads will get worn 
quickly. If the pads are too hard there will be too much vibration transfer.  It is very 
important to have the anti-vibration pads in place that will isolate the machines to 
prevent vibration and be durable so the problem does not resurface. (details 
supplied) are trialling pads (installed week commencing 02/06/2025) and they are 
hopeful they will work. An onsite meeting is arranged (which will include the 
complainant) for 17/07/2025. At this point they will know the effectiveness of the pads 
and the next steps and rollout will be discussed. 
  
Q.19  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive can Speed Bumps be installed at the mid-section of 
(details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
The Area Engineer does not recommend the installation of any additional speed ramps 
on details supplied. The road is already traffic-calmed with on-street parking and 4 No. 
speed ramps appropriately spaced to provide optimal traffic calming. In addition, there 
is a roundabout and a "SLOW" road marking (M106) in place. 
 
According to traffic management guidelines, placing traffic calming features too close 
together is considered poor design, as it encourages harsh braking followed by heavy 
acceleration between features. The existing traffic calming measures are deemed 
effective in reducing vehicle speeds. 
 
Also, (details supplied) is located within a Home Zone/Slow Zone which imposes a 
speed limit of 30 km/h. This warns motorists that the area is residential and that 
children may be present. The relevant signage has been installed at entry points to 
self-contained housing estates where the 30 km/h speed limit is enforced, and a ‘Slow 
Zone’ is being created in the city. 
 
Q.20  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive can extra shrubbery and plants be planted in (details 
supplied) needs some maintenance.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
Parks Services will address the maintenance in (details supplied) 
 
Q.21  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive would there be any possibility of re-installing the playground 
at (details supplied) or any other small playground around this area?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
Parks Services parks improvement programme for the area is at capacity for this year.  
This proposal will be listed for consideration and inclusion in the ’26 programme. 
 
 

Q.22  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive can he provide a detailed report on the results of a ballot 
taken at (details supplied) and provide a timeline when the markings will be painted 
on the road and the machine introduced.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
The introduction of a Pay and Display Parking Scheme at (details supplied) is 
currently in process at present with Parking Enforcement. Ballots were sent to 23 
eligible houses on the 27th February 2025, 17 votes were returned by the deadline of 
the 10th April 2025. There was a majority vote of 11 to 6 in favour of a new scheme 
being introduced.  A Managers Order to approve this Scheme was signed on the 19th 
June 2025. 
  
Due to the introduction of a new parking permit system, all schemes were delayed. 
The new system is now operational and Parking Enforcement and Customer Services 
are working to clear the backlog of permits to be issued. 
  
There are a number of schemes that will be introduced to other roads before Botanic 
Park will be introduced. 
One of the schemes ahead of (details supplied) is the introduction of permit parking 
at Clonliffe Road. As Clonliffe Road is a major scheme, requiring the processing of 
hundreds of permits, this will require some time to complete. 
  
Unfortunately a timeframe for the introduction at (details supplied) cannot be given at 
this time but both teams in Parking Enforcement and Customer Services are working 
tirelessly to clear backlogs and get all schemes in place as soon as possible 
 
Q.23  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
Can the Chief Executive issue a full explanation as to why the commercial units at the 
Herberton Development have been lying idle and derelict since this development was 
first opened. Can the Chief Executive offer a full and frank explanation as to why the 
contract and memorandum of agreement, signed by DCC and the developer, has not 
been honoured? This situation, bearing in mind the issues regarding dereliction and 
vacant properties in the city of Dublin is wholly unacceptable. It is my understanding 
that certain large retailers, supermarkets etc, wish to locate themselves within this 
development and it would appear that they are being held up by DCC executive 
dragging their heels.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply will be issued to the Councillor within two weeks of the Council Meeting. 
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
Can the Chief Executive reassure the council that the Peter Mc Verry Trust and its 
executive officers have cooperated entirely and frankly and honestly with DCC’s 
ongoing investigations into governance and financial accountability within the Peter 
McVerry Trust.  This report to include a full list of all meetings that took place between 
DCC and the Peter McVerry Trust.  What was discussed? And what were the 
outcomes? Also, who was in attendance at these particular meetings and whether all 
investigations between DCC and the regional homeless executive are concluded. It is 
simply outrageous and an absolute insult to all that the Peter McVerry Trust has 
refused to come before the public accounts committee. It undermines Dublin City 
Council, Dublin Regional Homeless Executive and all Councillors within Dublin City 
Council who have supported the Peter McVerry Trust and its homeless policy over the 
years. Furthermore, it entirely undermines the confidence in the overall sector and 
creates a contempt for the many people who have given their time and effort to assist 

those in desperate need who are homeless on our streets. This situation is not 
acceptable and Dublin City Council and the Dublin Regional Homeless Executive need 
to step up to the mark here and call a spade a spade. It would appear that the Peter 
McVerry Trust is absolutely not fit for purpose and that it does not have a future going 
forward with DCC, Dublin Regional Homeless Executive and indeed Central 
Government. Public confidence in this organisation and its founder is zero. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The DRHE has had full cooperation from the Peter McVerry Trust since its engagement 
on financial and governance issues in July 2023. The priority for the DRHE then and 
now is to ensure continuity of service to the people experiencing homelessness living 
in PMVT residential services and to those who previously experienced homelessness 
and are now housed by PMVT. 
 
1. The Director and Deputy Director of the DRHE, together with the DHLGH and a 
CCMA representative, are members of an Oversight Group that meets regularly 
with PMVT.  
Oversight Group 1 was for the purposes of securing the continuity of services to 
people experiencing homelessness and living in PMVT residential services, and to 
those who previously experienced homelessness and housed by PMVT. 
Oversight Group 2 is for the purpose of monitoring the adherence by PMVT to the 
conditions of the Exceptional Funding.  
2. The CEO and Director DRHE meet on an ad hoc basis. These meetings relate to 
updates and service matters. 
3. There are also operational related meetings with PMVT. I have not listed these here 
as they happen frequently between staff at different levels. They relate to frontline 
services, SLAs, applications for funding etc.  
 
 
1. Oversight 
Group 
Meetings 
o May 2025 (OG 2) 
o March 2025 (OG 2)  
o January 2025 (OG 2) 
o Monthly March 2024 - December 2024 (OG 2) 
o Monthly July 2023 – October 2023 (OG 1) 
 
The sole concern of the DRHE is the continuity of service provision to those who need 
accommodation and supports. 
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
Can the Chief Executive issue me with a copy of the full insurance policy and schedule 
for all insurances held by Dublin City Council.   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Law Department will liaise directly with Cllr. Flynn 
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
Can the Chief Executive ensure that a zoom list for all meetings scheduled on our 
meeting list is issued to all Councillors at least two days prior to the meeting. Also, can 
the Chief Executive give a guarantee that all agendas to such meetings will be issued 
three days prior to any such meeting.  There is a growing issue with zoom links not 
being issued and agenda’s arriving late.  Recently at the Housing SPC such an issue 
arose.  I wish to attend many meetings, and it is almost impossible to get the zoom 
link.  It is my understanding that we are entitled to this zoom link whether we attend 
the meeting or not as non-members.  
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The summonsing of a Council meeting and issuing of the agenda is set out in No. 8 
Standing Orders 2025 as follows: 
 
8. 
Summoning of Meetings 
 
I. 
A notification to attend a meeting, other than a local authority budget meeting 
shall (a) be circulated electronically to each member of the Council, (b) 
specifying the place, date and time of the meeting, and (c) give not less than 
three clear days’ notice. The 3 clear days shall only exclude (i) normal day for 
receipt of the notice, and (ii) the day of the meeting. A notification shall include 
or be accompanied by an Agenda listing the business to be transacted at the 
meeting. The Agenda shall also be published on Dublin City Council’s website 
prior to the meeting. No business shall be transacted at a meeting other than 
that specified in the Agenda, which relates to the meeting or business required 
by the Act, or otherwise by law to be transacted at the meeting 
 
For all Area Committee meetings & Strategic Policy Committee meetings, the relevant 
Meetings Administrators provide agendas to all committee members in line with 
Standing Orders and Teams/Zoom links are issued in advance of the meeting. All 
Agendas published by way of Modern.gov appear on our website within 24hours of 
publication. 
 
All councillors get notification of the publication of Agenda from modern.gov. A 
meetings list is also issued to Councillors from Chief Executives Department at the 
start of each month advising Councillors of forthcoming meetings and includes contact 
details for the relevant administrators. 
 
All non-members of committees wishing to attend these meetings should contact the 
Meeting Administrators directly to obtain links and Agenda should they find difficulty 
accessing any agenda on either Modern.gov or our website.   
 
A list of all current Committee Meeting Administrators and their contact details will be 
circulated to Councillors 
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR AMMAR ALI 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange the cutting and removing of thorn bushes 
growing out from the railings at (Details supplied). These pose a danger to children 
playing nearby and to pedestrians. (Pictures attached for reference) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance mobile specialist services crew will arrange for the thorn bushes 
to be pruned back and to have the area cleaned in the coming weeks. 
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR AMMAR ALI 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange thorough street clean inside the cul-de- sac 
(Details supplied). Residents have complained regarding the issue of the lack of 
proper street cleaning in the area. Litter, dirt, cigarette butts, plastic waste, leaves, 
litter, bags, etc. are still around the street curbs of all the above streets. Residents are 
reporting illegal dumping here quite frequently. Some parts are far worse than others 
and clearly have not swept properly in months. Can DCC please make sure that this 
area is cleaned on a regular basis. 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services had the above mentioned streets thoroughly cleaned 
during week beginning the 23rd June 2025. We will ensure this area is cleaned on a 
more regular basis. 
 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive to have the road resurfaced at (Details supplied). The 
road is uneven and unsafe for the cyclists. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This defect has been forwarded to the Area Inspector for repair. We expect it to be 
carried out promptly. The Confirm reference number for this inquiry is 11180086.  
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive, If Dublin City Council has applied for any EU funding 
available so far in 2025 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin City Council’s (DCC) European Programme Support Office (EPSO) 
provides support services for staff participating in or intending to participate in EU 
partnership projects. EPSO also acts as a contact point for educational and research 
institutions as well as other organisations wishing to engage with DCC as a potential 
project partner. The office acts as a key co-ordination, liaison and communications 
point both internally among Dublin City Council staff, as well as with other local, 
regional and European authorities and representatives and the public. The primary aim 
of the EPSO is to support delivery of the Dublin City Council EU Programme 
Participation Strategy 2021 - 2027 ensuring close alignment with Dublin City Council’s 
Corporate Plan 2025-2029, the City Development Plan 2022-2028 and the Dublin City 
Local Economic and Community Development Plan, 2024-2029.   
 
Dublin City Council is also a full member of Eurocities and engages with the shared 
learning opportunities, research and insights and network building provided through 
this network of over 200 European cities. 
 
Year to date Dublin City Council has been involved in submitting 12 EU Program 
applications as set out below, across a number of different funding streams that were 
open to applications in this timeframe.  
 
Details  
Funding Stream 
Date 
1. Muliti Roofs Project 
INTERREG 
Jan-25 
2. Participative CITIes and 
planning for climate 
adaptation, energy, mobility, 
and wellbeing through 
technology for engagement 
HORIZON-CL5-2024-D4-02 
Feb-25 
3. YOUth LABs - Creative 
spaces for young people 
CERV-2025-CITIZENS-
TOWN-NT 
Mar-25 
4. Infirmary Road 
ERDF/Thrive 
Mar-25 
5. VOCAL - Voicing 
Opportunities for Childrens 
Advocacy and Leadership 
CERV-2025-CHILD 
Apr-25 
6. EU Climate Mission Label 
HORIZON/EIB  
May-25 

7. REgional Circular Economy 
Business Acceleration 
ERASMUS-EDU-2025-PEX-
COVE 
Jun-25 
8. The City of Ostrava (CZ) 
project 'Participatory approach 
in creating City Strategic 
Development DCC land for 
housing 
EUI/ Urbact Network 
Jun-25 
9. Temporary Use of Spaces" 
City of Celje, Slovenia  
EUI/ Urbact Network 
Jun-25 
10. Milan Urban Food Policy Pact 
UAEU Food Partnership 
Jun-25 
11. AIRBORNE 
HORIZON-CL5-2025-04 
Sep-25 
12. CICI4UD Citizens Initiatives 
for Urban Development 
EUI/ Urbact Network 
Jul-25 
 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive how many people have been housed from Area B so far in 
2025 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please see the requested figures below, as requested –  
 
1st Quarter Lettings 
Area B    
Grand Total 
118 
 
 
Q.32  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive to clarify which parts of Belmayne have now been taken 
charge by DCC at this point. Can you provide a map 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Discussions are still ongoing with the current Developers with a view to prioritising what 
works are required in the Belmayne area in order to proceed with taking in charge. It 
is not possible to provide a map at this stage until the details have been agreed. 
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive for an upgrade in communications in regard to the 
swimming pool at Trinity Sports and Leisure Centre including an increase in public 
swim times. The pool has only 8 public swims per week of which only 2 (both on 
Sunday) are outside of office hours. It does not accept credit card payment, in an age 
when people no longer carry cash, this needs to change.It doesn't list any swimming 
club information on its website. When requested a list of swimming clubs for adults, a 
spreadsheet with no dates or times of when the clubs practice, just a list of names and 
mobile phone numbers. Adding details to the pool website increases accessibility for 
all.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council does not manage Trinity Sports & Leisure Centre and therefore 
would not have any input into the centre’s programming or opening hours.  This would 
also include the type of payment options for any services or products it has available 
to purchase. 
 

Dublin City Council granted a lease to the Trustees of Trinity Sports and Leisure Club 
now Trinity/Clongriffin Sports and Leisure Club for a period of 99 years from 1st 
January, 2008. 
 
This lease is subject to the property being used as a Recreation and Community facility 
only. The lease is not specific regarding provision of leisure activities or timings 
 
In light of the recent closure of the Northside Swimming Pool it may be that the operator 
at Trinity are not aware of same. Notwithstanding we will engage with the facility 
outlining the local shortfall in pool facilities and requesting that there be better 
consideration in the short term to increase public access to swim times. 
 
 
Q.34  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to erect a “No Dumping” sign as a matter of urgency at the 
entrance gate to Belcamp Park opposite (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The entrance to Belcamp Park can be inspected and the appropriate signage can be 
considered to be included in the future works programme.  Waste Management 
Services have made immediate arrangements to have a “No Dumping” sign erected at 
the above mentioned location. 
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to administer urgent maintenance at (details supplied).   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance mistakenly boarded up this property in October 2022, but this 
was quickly rectified. No further repair requests relating to the door were logged until 
May 2025. A replacement door has now been arranged, and the tenant will be 
contacted in approximately 4 weeks to schedule a date for installation. 
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the Chanel Manor Development, Coolock 
Village. These apartments are meant to have been completed and allocated by now 
but there has been no update so far.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The units at Chanel Manor will be managed by Respond Housing, it is anticipated that 
they will be ready for completion in September of this year. This development will be 
advertised on Choice Based Lettings in due course.  
 
Q.37 
COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE  
 
To ask the Chief Executive on foot of the GAA Club Funding motion passed at the 
June full council meeting, could the council advise when the allocation of funding will 
be confirmed for the joint development of the netball and tennis courts area at Rosary 
College, Armagh Road, Crumlin, in partnership with the local Crumlin GAA club? 
 
This initiative will deliver much-needed sports facilities for use by the school during 
school hours and by the GAA club in the evenings, significantly enhancing 
opportunities for physical activity among both students and club members. A similar 
project has already been successfully delivered at Loretto College, Crumlin Road, in 
partnership with St. Kevin’s GAA club, and this proven model could serve as a funding 
and delivery template for this important community-focused development. 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Subsequent to the June City Council meeting, the City Council made contact with 
Rosary College to advise them of the funding opportunities available. The Area 
Manager will follow up with the new school Principal in September.  
 
Q.38 
COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE  
 
To ask the Chief Executive if a detailed report could be provided on the operation of 
the Tenant In-Situ Scheme for social housing applicants in receipt of Housing 
Assistance Payment (HAP), including the number of applications received, properties 
purchased, properties sale agreed, and applications refused or not proceeding due to 
lack of funding in 2025 to date? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Status of Tenant in Situ Acquisitions July 2025. 
  
Number of new TIS enquires in 2025 
125 
 
 
Purchases complete in 2025  
*52 
Properties in conveyancing 2025 
*63 
No of TIS enquiries not proceeding  
125 
 
*All 52 TIS purchases complete to date in 2025 were sale agreed in 2024 
*All 63 TIS purchases in conveyancing have been in progress since 2024 
 
Q.39 
COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE  
 To ask the Chief Executive to provide details on the number of complaints received 
from members of the public regarding inaccuracies in bilingual signage across Dublin 
City Council, including the nature of such complaints and any corrective actions taken 
to date. As an example, I refer to the incorrect bilingual signage(photo attached) 
currently in place outside Rathmines Dental Clinic (photo attached), where the Irish 
phrase “i bhfeidhm” is misspelled—highlighting the importance of proper quality control 
and the need for prompt rectification of such errors. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
Customer Services have no record of any formal complaints, however we received 26 
reports regarding inaccuracies in bilingual signage across Dublin City Council’s 
administrative area in the last 12 months. 23 of these were from one customer. 
The majority of these reports referred to temporary road works whereby the signs were 
not bilingual. Some of these reports referred to changes to bus lanes and DCC signage 
in and around the Civic Offices.   
 
All reports relating to incorrect signage pertaining to new bus lanes or traffic layouts 
were dealt with by the Traffic Department. All reports relating to signage during the 
construction of cycle lanes were sent to the Active Travel Unit and the Clontarf to City 
Centre Cycleway Team for action. The signs relating to the Civic Offices were reported 
onto Facilities Management for attention. The Transport Advisory Group (TAG) makes 
recommendations for the installation of traffic signs as per the Traffic Signs Manual 
issued by the Department of Transport www.trafficsigns.ie 
 
Any complaints received by TAG regarding inaccuracies in bilingual signage would be 
referred to the appropriate department/ section for their attention. 
 
 
 

Q.40 
COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE  
 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise how many crèches and childcare facilities that 
were included as a condition of planning permission have subsequently sought a 
change of use—from crèche or childcare facility to another use—after construction had 
commenced or been completed, over the past five years. 
 
Could the Chief Executive also detail: 
• 
How many of these change of use applications were granted; 
• 
How many of the originally proposed or conditioned childcare facilities did not  
ultimately materialise as a result; and 
• 
How many new planning applications have been submitted and how many 
granted specifically for crèche or childcare facilities during the same five-year 
period? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
At the February meeting of the Planning & Urban Regeneration SPC it was agreed that 
Planning Department will examine what is feasible in terms of extracting data related 
to childcare from the planning system as it is not easily searched. The information 
requested will be included in the feasibility consideration and an update provided at 
the September meeting. 
 
Q.41  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE  
To ask the Chief Executive for a report of all developments in the South West Inner 
City Area was granted with conditions requiring public access to parts of the site - 
including but not limited to parks, courtyards, pedestrian routes, plazas or other publicly 
accessible spaces as part of the planning agreement.  
Specifically, I am requesting                                                                                                       
1. 
A list of developments in SWIC where planning permission included    
conditions or legal agreements requiring public access 
2. 
The nature and extent of the public access required in each case. 
3. 
Any maps or plans identifying the areas designation for public access 
4. 
Details of any enforcement actions taken in relation to access being blocked 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The following developments within the Cork Street/Liberties area include provisions for 
public access to specific parts of the site as part of their overall planning permissions. 
Detailed drawings and documentation outlining these areas are available through the 
Dublin City Council online planning portal.  
 
Location 
Reference  
Development  
Publically Accessible Areas  
Newmarket Yards 
(Former IDA Site)  
An 
Coimisiún  
Pleanála 
Reference 
307067-20 
Mixed 
use 
development 
including 413 no. 
BTR units, and 
retail/commercial 
units 
 
Condition 22 stated:  
The public open spaces will 
operate 
as 
public 
realm 
in 
perpetuity, with public access and 
use 
operated 
strictly 
in 
accordance with the management 
regime, rules and regulations, 
including any byelaws for public 
open space of the planning 
authority, at all times.  
Reason: 
In 
the 
interest 
of 
residential amenity and to secure 
the integrity of the proposed 

development 
including 
open 
spaces. 
Yugo New Mill, at 
the junction of Mill 
Street 
and 
Warrenmount 
Lane 
Reg Ref 3475/14 
(An 
Coimisiún  
Pleanála 
Reference 
PL29S.244805) 
 
 
 
Student 
accommodation  
Condition 20(b) stated that:  
(b) The management scheme 
shall undertake to ensure that the 
courtyard is publically accessible 
daily during the hours of daylight. 
 
Yugo 
Brewers 
Close, 
at 
the 
junction of Mill 
Street, 
Sweeney's 
Terrace 
and 
Clarence Mangan 
Road, 
An 
Coimisiún  
Pleanála 
Reference 
303436-19 
Student 
accommodation 
and BTR units 
Condition no. 2:  
The proposed development shall 
be amended so that Block D is set 
back from its western boundary by 
a minimum of 2 metres to allow for 
public access to the exposed area 
of the River Poddle from the 
laneway from Sweeney’s Terrace. 
Revised 
drawings 
showing 
compliance 
with 
these 
requirements shall be submitted 
to, and agreed in writing with, the 
planning 
authority 
prior 
to 
commencement of development. 
Reason: To protect the visual 
amenities and character of the 
area. 
 
This permission was amended 
under a subsequent application to 
An Coimisiún Pleanála (305483-
19) stated where Condition 2 
stated:  
2. Public access to the exposed 
area of the River Poddle from Mill 
Street and Sweeney’s Terrace will 
be available between 9.00 am and 
5.00 pm, Monday to  Sunday. 
Reason: To protect the visual 
amenities and character of the 
area. 
 
Grand 
Canal 
Harbour, 
Grand 
Canal 
Place, 
Dublin 8 
Reg Ref 3209/19 
Mixed 
Use 
Development 
including 550 no. 
BTR units  
Condition 17:  
Where the public open space is 
not taken in charge the proposed 
public open spaces shall operate 
as public parks in perpetuity, with 
public access and use operated 
strictly in accordance with the 
management regime, rules and 
regulations including any byelaws 
of the Planning Authority at all 
times. 
 Reason: 
In 
the 
interest 
of 
residential amenity and to secure 

the integrity of the proposed 
development including a public 
park. 
Lands 
at 
Guinness 
Brewery to the 
South of James 
Street, Dublin 8 
Reg Ref 4588/22 
Mixed 
Use 
Development 
including 
BTR 
units, 
hotels, 
offices.  
Condition 11:  
 
The public open spaces will 
operate as public park/public 
realm in perpetuity, with public 
access and use operated strictly in 
accordance with the management 
regime, rules and regulations 
including any byelaws for public 
open space of the Planning 
Authority at all times.  
Reason: 
In 
the 
interest 
of 
residential amenity and to secure 
the integrity of the proposed 
development 
including 
open 
spaces. 
 
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE  
To ask the Chief Executive If Dublin City Council has assessed the need or safe needle 
disposal units in public spaces, particularly in areas where wildflower planting or 
rewilding policies have been implemented.   
 
In light of the increased difficulty in detecting hazardous waste such as used needles 
in long grass or wildflower areas.  What steps are being taken to ensure public safety 
whilst not having to resort to mowing to wildflower areas where drug related activity is 
known to occur? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
While it is generally a good idea to put safe needle disposal units in public places 
particularly in areas frequented by individuals who use intravenous drugs.  Safe needle 
disposal units were piloted the Croppie Acre Park. It was not successful as the needles 
were left beside the brightly coloured yellow box and children were drawn to the 
coloured box adding to the risk of them picking these used needles up. 
All city centre parks are checked each morning by Parks Services before opening and 
throughout the course of the day to remove all drug paraphernalia and ensuring proper 
and safe disposal of used needles. 
 
Q.43  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE  
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council will progress numerous requests for 
traffic calming measures on Cork Street, particularly caused by motorbikes and work 
with relevant agencies to address air pollution level? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Cork Street is an arterial route with a speed limit of 50kph. Generally, traffic calming 
measures are not provided on arterial routes. 
There are 4 no. pedestrian crossings already provided on Cork Street and there are 
no measures available to Dublin City Council to deal specifically with motorbikes.  
 
However Instances of illegal or dangerous driving shall be reported to an Garda 
Síochána for enforcement. at the next Transport Advisory Group in July. 
 

Q.44  COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
To ask the Chief Executive how much the Department of the Taoiseach consulted with 
him on the proposed 10 year roadmap for Dublin city, and on the creation of a special 
purpose vehicle to implement that roadmap. To ask who will be appointed to the project 
management office that will control this vehicle. And to ask in what sense, if any, the 
elected members of the council will have oversight over this strategy and its 
implementation. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An Inter Departmental Group led by the Department of An Taoiseach was set up to 
report to Government on the optimal model to deliver on actions contained within the 
Taoiseach’s Taskforce Report, of which the Dublin City Council’s Executive were 
members of.  
The Inter Departmental Group supported the concept of the City Council establishing 
an independent implementation body (Special Purpose Vehicle) to drive rejuvenation 
of the city core.   
 
It was also agreed at the Inter Departmental Group while the establishment of a legal 
entity is in progress, an interim Project Management Unit would be established within 
the existing City Council’s City Co-ordination Office.  
 
The Project Management Unit will work in advance of the full implementation structure 
but would be charged in the first instance with implementation of a number of key 
actions within the Taskforce Report. 
 
If it is agreed that a Special Purpose Vehicle is established, City Councillors and 
members of the Executive would be part of this legal entity.  
 
A City Centre Councillor Review Group has also been established to work in 
collaboration with the City Co-ordination Office, providing support and guidance on 
policy direction for the city centre. 
In parallel, the City Co-ordination Office is working with the Urban Redevelopment 
Working Group of the Planning and Urban Regeneration Strategic Policy Committee 
(SPC). This group is actively researching the challenges and opportunities 
surrounding dereliction, vacancy, and adaptive reuse across the city. 
Q.45  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask The Chief Executive, can a report be ran to see how many one or two bedroom 
homes are available in Dublin North West for senior citizens in wheelchairs. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are 37 Senior Citizens units vacant in the North West as per table below.  
 
 
0 bed 
1 Bed 
2 Bed 
Total 
Works under 
Depot 
14 
12 
1 
27 
Ready to Let  7 
3 
0 
10 
Total  
21 
15 
1 
37 
 
Any ground units can be adapted to the tenants’ needs through tenant adaptions. This 
year alone we have completed 200 level access showers & 26 ramps along with other 
alterations to the home to suit the tenants’ needs.  
 

 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the chief Executive, Can Balbutcher lane Road be resurfaced, the road has 
many potholes and damaged ramps on it. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Balbutcher Lane is due to be resurfaced between Ballymun Road junction and St. 
Joseph’s Way as part of the North West Area 2025 Carriageway Resurfacing 
Programme. It is intended to include further lengths of Balbutcher Lane in our future 
resurfacing programmes.  
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive, can a report be done on (details supplied). 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance confirms roof repairs have been ongoing over the past three 
years. A full inspection is scheduled for week beginning June 30th to further investigate 
and resolve any remaining issues. 
 
Q.48  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a return visit as soon as possible to (Details 
supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance have revisited the above property and found no evidence of a 
roof leak. However, a potential source of water ingress was identified. Further 
investigation is required to determine the course of action and this will be arranged in 
the coming weeks.  Once identified Housing maintenance will proceed with all works 
necessary to resolve the matter. 
 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive if DCC / HSE Pest Control Service can investigate a Rodent 
infestation at (Details supplied). The premises has been reported as having an acute 
Rodent infestation which is also affecting the neighbouring homes. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Environmental Health section in Dublin City Council has no statutory powers in 
relation to pest control.   
 
The Rats and Mice (Destruction) Act 1919 is enforced by the Health Service Executive, 
Environmental 
Health, 
Pest 
Control 
Section, 
Unit 
13F, 
Nexus 
Building, 
Blanchardstown Corporate Park, Blanchardstown, Dublin 15.  Tel: 1800 211 774 or 
email Pestcontrol.north@hse.ie 
 
Q.50  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to comment on the provision of wheelchair accessible 
equipment in playgrounds under the control of Dublin City Council, future plans for said 
equipment and the planning and research that goes into the precise location of such 
equipment in a playground. Specifically, to comment on the location of the new 
wheelchair accessible swing in St Anne’s and the reasons it is outside the main 
playground area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council prioritizes accessible and inclusive play opportunities for all 
children and young people. They aim to ensure children have access to high-quality 

play spaces, considering their needs in design and planning, and promoting play as a 
fundamental right.  
 
Inclusivity: 
The council is committed to providing accessible and inclusive play opportunities for 
all children, regardless of their abilities.  
 
Consultation: 
Children and young people are actively involved in the design and planning of play 
spaces, ensuring their voices are heard and their needs are met.  
 
Play as a Right: 
The council recognizes play as a fundamental right for children and young people, 
supporting their development and well-being.  
 
Play Sufficiency: 
We adopt the principle of "play sufficiency," ensuring adequate time, space, and 
opportunities for play, both structured and unstructured, for all children.  
 
There are an estimated 391 accessible play pieces in our 69 playgrounds, such as 
accessible swings, hammocks, rockers and other play units which open to assisted 
inclusive play. 97 of those units accessible to people while on their wheelchair such as 
roundabouts, raised sand tables, mazes, play panels, musical instruments, 
trampolines, rotating disks, table tennis and We-Go-Swings.  
 
Parks Services have a programme for upgrading playgrounds on an annual basis and 
we intentionally use this opportunity to introduce multiple accessible high play value 
pieces with each upgrade. This means that upgraded playgrounds can provide a range 
of experiences for disabled children, which all children can enjoy.   
 
The location of the We-Go swing in St Anne’s Park is decided on a number of factors. 
The base area required for the unit is 8.15m x 7.75m and there are a number of existing 
play units located outside the fenced play area, forming a play trail with connection to 
nature. The We-Go swing promotes social interaction for a truly inclusive experience 
by encouraging multiple users to work together to swing.  There is an accessible path 
joining the existing path to the We-Go swing. Within the main playground area there is 
an accessible roundabout.  
 
Q.51  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to explain whether some Dublin City Council workers 
(including fire officers) will be missing a week’s pay due to the use of a new wages 
system and how this will be dealt with so employees are not out of pocket. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Matters relating to the terms and conditions and pay of employees are solely executive 
functions within Local Government.  In this instance it is considered appropriate to 
state that such matters are routinely dealt with through the designated Trade Unions 
that represent employees in Local Government generally, and within Dublin City 
Council, and that the matter has now been concluded through these mechanisms.   
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to explain the persistent neglect of maintenance duties 
along the Malahide Road between Northern Cross and the Fingal boundary – 
particularly in light of regular upkeep work in this area on the Fingal side of the 

boundary. To further ask that he set out how this will be dealt with in the short term 
and on a consistent basis into the future. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services have the above-mentioned area swept on a daily basis. 
 
As this question concerns issues regarding weeding of grass verges and litter, it has 
been passed on to the North Central Area office. Road Maintenance Services do not 
provide weeding or street-cleaning services directly. 
 
Q.53  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to implement physical barriers in the form of sleepers or 
bollards to segregate parked cars from cyclists on parking-protected cycle lanes (such 
as on Griffith Avenue) as drivers frequently encroach on cycle lanes when parking and, 
especially, when opening car doors. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Protected Cycle Lanes are installed in line with the recommendations of both 
the current National Transport Authority’s Cycle Design Manual and the Department 
of Transport, Tourism and Sport’s Design Manual for Urban Streets. Neither document 
recommends the installation of sleepers or bollards to segregate cars from cyclists 
which could potentially obstruct motorists and passengers from opening the doors of 
parked vehicles.  
 
A recommended hatched buffer of 750mm is provided between cyclists and cars to act 
as a door buffer. It is illegal for cars to encroach on this buffer and such instances can 
be reported to Parking Enforcement or An Garda Siochána. 
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR RACHEL BATTEN  
To ask the Chief Executive to have the area (pictures and area supplied) clean 
regularly and have the paths power washed as you can see the paths and the streets 
are very dirty and have not had a power wash in a long time. The edges are in a very 
poor way and the area where the railing is not done at all. The area is constantly having 
broken glass and illegal dumping around the bus stop, which is not being regularly 
cleaned, can we make sure this is on the regular clean up route and the street 
sweepers. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services had the above mentioned location cleaned and washed 
on the 26th June 2025. We will ensure that it is monitored and cleaned on a more 
regular basis. 
 
Q.55  COUNCILLOR RACHEL BATTEN  
To ask the Chief Executive to have the trees trimmed on Collins Avenue especially   
opposite DCU. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In 2021, a comprehensive ground-based visual assessment of the 237 street trees 
along Collins Avenue was conducted by our certified arborist.  Based on the findings 
of this assessment, tree maintenance operations were carried out in late 2022 on 158 
street trees in Collins Avenue. The scope of work primarily involved crown lifting, with 
additional crown reduction performed where necessary. Furthermore, five trees 
identified as dead or in severe decline were removed for safety and health 
considerations. 
 

Following a subsequent inspection at the request of the public, two additional trees 
located at162 and 83/85 Collins Avenue have been scheduled for crown reduction 
within the 2025–2026 tree care program. 
 
We plan to commission a full reassessment of all trees along Collins Avenue in 2026 
to evaluate current conditions and determine future maintenance requirements. 
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR RACHEL BATTEN 
To ask for slow sign Children at play on (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
(Details supplied) is a residential area covered by the 30 km/h Slow Zone, indicating 
the lower speed limit and that the area is a Home Zone/Slow Zone, which alerts drivers 
that they are in a SLOW ZONE residential area and should expect children.  A road 
traffic sign is in place at the entrance from the main road. Additional signage is not 
recommended. 
 
Q.57  COUNCILLOR RACHEL BATTEN 
Can the Chief Executive please arrange that the trees in the park of Courtlands be 
trimmed. There is one tree where there is huge broken branch hanging in the tree so 
a strong wind that could blow on a child killed. The wall around the park has a number 
of cracks also, can we have this repaired. Finally, the tennis court is in a bad state of 
repairs can we get this on the repair list.  
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services will commission a full reassessment of the trees located in Courtland 
Park in 2026 to evaluate current conditions and determine future maintenance 
requirements.  A team will be sent to remove the broken branch. 
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN  
To ask the Chief Executive what action has been taken to address the situation of 
storm overflow in the Ringsend Wastewater Treatment Plant and what other actions 
have been taken to ensure both Sandymont and Dollymount beaches can open as 
soon as possible? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 Uisce Éireann (UE) operates the Ringsend Wastewater Treatment Plant (RWWTP) 
under discharge licence D0034-01, issued by the Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA). Under the terms of this licence, UE is required to notify Dublin City Council 
(DCC) of any incidents that may impact bathing water quality. 
 
If a confirmed or suspected risk to water quality is identified, DCC—following 
consultation with the Health Service Executive (HSE)—issues a public warning to 
protect public health. These warnings should be followed and remain in place until 
water quality is verified as safe. Removal of warnings is also carried out in consultation 
with the HSE. All procedures are conducted in accordance with the Bathing Water 
Regulations 2008, as amended. 
For any operational queries regarding the RWWTP, please contact Uisce Éireann 
directly. 
 
Dublin City Council confirms that no bathing water warnings are currently in place, with 
the exception of the season-long bathing prohibition at Sandymount Strand. This 
prohibition is required because the bathing water at this location is currently classified 
as Poor. The restriction will remain until the next classification assessment is 
completed. 

 
Bathing water classification is based on a four-year rolling average of water quality 
results. This means that a single poor season can influence the classification for up to 
four years. In the case of Sandymount Strand, the 2021 bathing season was 
significantly affected by unexpected water quality failures, which were later attributed 
to dog fouling incidents. However, results from the three most recent seasons show 
steady improvement, with 85% of samples rated as Excellent or Good. If this trend 
continues, DCC is optimistic that Sandymount Strand will achieve a Sufficient 
classification in the near future. 
Bathers are encouraged to check www.beaches.ie before visiting designated bathing 
water sites. This website is updated by local authorities with the latest water quality 
results and any active warnings. 
 
Dublin City Council’s Protection of Water Bodies Office (PWBO) recognises the 
growing challenges posed by climate change—particularly the impact of increased 
rainfall volumes and intensities on the urban environment. To address this, the Council 
promotes nature-based solutions and Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SuDS) to 
reduce the volume of surface water entering the sewer network during heavy rainfall. 
More information on current initiatives, including the Rainscapes Project, is available 
on the Council’s website here. 
 
Q.59 
 COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive, can they assure me that the bundle 5 PPP development 
opposite St. Ultans, Cherry Orchard will go ahead on time and if not that the funding 
will be made available by the department? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council remains committed to delivering all 16 sites that were due to be 
delivered across PPP Bundles 3, 4, 5 & 7. We are currently considering the most 
appropriate and quickest route to bring the housing projects to construction for Bundle 
3 and all other DCC housing projects earmarked for future Bundles. Once this work 
has concluded we will provide an update to the Housing SPC and Area Committees.  
 
A public consultation event was held on 25 June 2025 for LAP Site 2, Cherry Orchard, 
which, was well attended by the community. The next steps for this site is to bring 
forward a report to the July South Central Committee to initiate the formal Part 8 
process. The lodgement of planning is currently programmed for Q3 2025 
 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask DCC management for an update on the Community Safety Partnerships in 
Dublin and have DCC proceeded with employing relevant staff for the partnerships? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Human Resources Department has commenced the recruitment process for both 
Community Safety Coordinator and Administrator for the Local Community Safety 
Partnerships.  Appointments to both roles will take place when the interview process 
has concluded.   
 
Q.61  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the CE to confirm if the extra 100 cleaning staff budgeted for in Budget 2025 
have been employed and where have they been deployed, and if they have not been 
employed how much funding is left and where will it be spent? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
2024 - 56 staff were appointed  

2025 - 11 staff were appointed to date, with a further 39 confirmed to start in August.  
All staff have been deployed to NCOD and the City Centre.  
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the derelict site at (details 
supplied) and to provide an update on the plan for the compulsory purchase of same 
including a timeline.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The site at (details supplied) was entered on the Derelict Sites Register on the 29th 
August 2024. At present there are no plans to acquire the property.  
 
Q.63  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the purchase of (details supplied) 
A) What fund was used to purchase the property 
B) What scheme was it bought under  
C) Were the local area office informed  
D) When will it be allocated  
E) Are any works required before the allocation?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
A) What fund was used to purchase the property - Social Housing Investment 
Programme (SHIP) 
B) What scheme was it bought under – Vacant Acquisitions 
C) Yes Local Area Office are aware of the property. 
D) Property will be allocated in the coming weeks. 
E) There are some very minor works required. 
 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update in relation to neighbourhood traffic 
schemes  
A) When were they discounted? 
B) What happened to the fund allocation to the scheme? 
C) What happened to the staff allocated to the scheme? 
D) Will any planned schemes still be implemented by the traffic section? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A full response will be issued to the Councillor in the coming weeks. 
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the large grass verges at (details supplied) 
to be cut and to be included in future contracts.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This matter has been referred to the Contracts Manager for investigation and a report 
will issue directly to the Councillor. 
 
Q.66  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive That DCC Housing Dept look at (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on Band 2 of the Housing List with an application date of 
25/01/2011 and holds the following positions on the waiting list -  
 

Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
J 
3 
24 
K 
3 
42 
L 
3 
16 
 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 
number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list. 
 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
The applicant should be advised top keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being 
advertised that may be of interest to her and to ensure she makes an application for 
same. A request has been forwarded to the prevention team in Parkgate Hall who will 
make contact with the applicant and advise her of her options.  
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive That DCC Housing allocation look at the following (details 
supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Transfer List and in receipt of Homeless HAP with an 
application date of 25/01/2011 and holds the following positions on the waiting list -  
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
J 
3 
19 
 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 
number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list. 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
The applicant should be advised top keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being 
advertised that may be of interest to her and to ensure she makes an application for 
same. 
 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive that Dublin City Council please look at the proliferation of 
weeds along Ballyfermot Road from Sarsfield Road Railway bridge to the Assumption 
Roundabout. All along these areas large amounts of weeds are now protruding on the 
footpaths and visually look very poor in addition the various islands along Sarsfield / 
Ballyfermot Road are never swept of debris leaving high levels of soil / sand 
accumulation. I am well aware we do not spray weeds, but we need to remove them 
somehow in high visibility areas, people are asking what their property tax is paying 
for. 
 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Our Public Domain Office has for the last couple of months been engaging with Waste 
Management Services regarding the build-up of debris around the numerous road 
traffic islands in the Area.  
 
A survey to identify all the road traffic islands in the South Central Area has been 
undertaken by Waste Management Services, and a programme of work is now being 
planned. A traffic management plan and a programme schedule for these works is now 
underway, these works will be required to be carried out at off peak times i.e. very early 
morning to minimise traffic disruption and for Health & Safety.  
 
It is envisaged that works will start by the end of the month, with an initial programme 
to clear the excessive build ups, and after that a rota programme will be put in place to 
maintain these traffic islands going forward. 
 
Regarding the weeding on Ballyfermot Road, from Sarsfield Road Railway bridge to 
the Assumption Roundabout. This road is on the spray weeding programme for 2025.  
 
The spray weeding programme consists of 4 spray treatments during the weed growing 
season. We just recently had the 2nd spray treatment applied, which does take a few 
weeks to take effect.  Our Public Domain Officer will engage with the contractor and 
review the work undertaken and any omissions or issue will be rectified following that 
inspection. 
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive that the top section of Chapelizod Hill Kylemore Road 
Ballyfermot Dublin 10 be resurfaced as a matter of urgency and the current surface 
which is extremely poor needs resurfacing, over the past couple of years a couple of 
hundred apartments were built here resulting in the current surface being in such poor 
condition. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
At present the resurfacing of Chapelizod Hill Road is not contained within our 2025 
Resurfacing Contract which is currently underway. However, I will strongly consider 
putting forward Chapelizod Hill Road for possible inclusion in our 2026 Resurfacing 
Contract depending on available funding. In the meantime, I will request the Area 
Inspector to inspect and carry out temporary repairs to try and improve the situation in 
the short term. 
 
Q.70  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to prune the trees in Charlemont housing estate.  The 
residents have contacted me in relation to the trees in the estate - particularly when 
you are exiting. They are overgrown and are proving to be dangerous with overhanging 
broken branches occurring. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The trees at the location will be listed for inspection and recorded on the tree 
management system and any required work will be included in the priority tree 
maintenance programme for the area 2025/2026.  
 
Q.71  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to fix a broken path outside (details supplied). The path 
is subsiding which is causing the wall to crumble. The path is unsafe for people 
walking. Can something please be done for the resident as they have put this request 
in several times.  
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Road Maintenance Services will perform an inspection in the coming weeks, but based 
on historical photography of the site, it is unclear there has been subsidence over the 
last ten years. Based on historical photography, the dip in question may have been 
present since at least 2009. It is not clear at this time whether the failure of the wall is 
result of some action taken by or on behalf of Road Maintenance or was caused by a 
long term structural issue.  
 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to review the parking issue around the small green in 
Harmonstown (details supplied).  As cars park around/beside the green and on the 
green at times.  An emergency vehicle would never be able to make its way up to an 
emergency as the road is very narrow.  Some of the residents have asked me for 
yellow lines to be put around the green to stop the parking beside the small green. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Part Reply from Parking Enforcement 
Parking Enforcement will request that Dublin Street Parking Services patrol this area 
and enforce all illegal parking when encountered. Please note that as this area is 
mainly residential, the offences that may be enforced will be footpath, grass verge and 
median offences.  
 
TAG Reply 
The area has already been inspected by TAG, during which instances of illegal parking 
on the green space and/or footpath were identified. 
 
Double yellow lines are not an effective deterrent against parking or driving on green 
areas and are therefore not considered a suitable solution. 
 
Local residents have suggested submitting an application for a Residents' Permit 
Parking Scheme. The aim of implementing a Pay and Display and Permit Parking 
Scheme is to discourage long-term commuter parking near the DART station and to 
address the issue of multiple vehicles per household in residential neighbourhoods. 
 
If residents would like to apply for a Residential Parking Scheme details of the criteria 
can be found on the DCC website:  
 
Q.73  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to move a stop sign as it is in the wrong place (details 
supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Traffic Department investigated Cllr. Field’s request and found that the Stop Sign 
outside (Details supplied) is indeed in the right place as it is beside the Stop Line 
Markings; to move it would mean we would be moving it back up the Avenue away 
from the junction, causing a dangerous situation.  
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council is aware of ongoing drainage issues 
between (Details supplied) and to clarify the Council’s responsibility where drains 
pass through a mix of privately owned and Council-owned properties. 
 

Can the Chief Executive also confirm the current turnaround time for drainage 
inspections or call-outs, whether there is a backlog, and what measures are in place 
to ensure drains in this area are cleared on a regular and proactive basis? 
 
The (details supplied) has experienced repeated drain backups despite being at the 
highest point in the drainage run. Both private contractors and Council staff have 
previously indicated the likely issue lies (details supplied), under privately owned 
gardens. This raises concerns about fairness, as private owners may bear ongoing 
costs even where Council tenants are impacted. Can the Council outline what supports 
or procedures are in place to assist in resolving such shared responsibility issues 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Most houses in Dublin City are served by a single private drain used for the drainage 
of two or more separate premises. Section 70 of the 2007 Act places a duty of care on 
owners and occupiers of premises served by a drain to, among other things, keep their 
drains in a good working order. 
 
Responsibility for maintenance of a drain rests with the users of that drain until it 
reaches the main sewer, normally located in the middle of the road. A drain subject to 
frequent blockages may have suffered structural damage. A CCTV camera survey 
should be undertaken to ascertain the nature and extent of any such damage. Any 
remedial work required should be organised by all those using the drain. 
 
Dublin City owns 2 of the properties between 1-6 Casino Park. We will organise a 
CCTV survey to see what the issues are here and if needed organise a repair. If private 
tenants have incurred costs previously repairing drains, DCC has no issue in paying 
two sixths of the costs. 
 
Q.75  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a detailed report on the new interpretive centre 
on Bull Island and what if any timelines are in place.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A revised Appraisal, Cost Plan and Business Case will be submitted to the Corporate 
Project Governance Board CPGB for approval prior to lodging the planning documents 
with An Bord Pleanala ABP. It is expected that the planning documents will be lodged 
in the fourth quarter of 2025. 
 
Q.76  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a detailed report outlining (all planned Dublin City 
Council works scheduled for the Clontarf Local Electoral Area for the remainder of 
2025. 
 
The report should include a breakdown by area or neighbourhood (e.g. Clontarf, 
Killester, Donnycarney, Raheny, etc.), and cover planned works across the following 
categories: 
• 
Housing maintenance and void refurbishments 
• 
Road and footpath repairs or resurfacing 
• 
Public lighting upgrades or installations 
• 
Parks and open space improvements 
• 
Drainage or flood prevention works 
• 
Waste management, street cleaning, and illegal dumping enforcement 
• 
Community facilities upgrades or refurbishments 
• 
Any active travel, cycleways, or pedestrian infrastructure projects 
      and any other works not mentioned) 

 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks 
Parks and open space improvements works for the Clontarf Electoral area include a 
provision of toilets in St. Anne’s Park at the Red Stables and the Woodside area. 
Additional toilet facilities to be installed on the Bull Island at the Happy Out Café.  
Seating and planting area in the Middle Third, Killester in association with the Heritage 
sign.  Development of nature based play areas in Rockfield Park. Upgrade of the 
existing playground in Maypark. Pitch improvement works to continue on playing 
pitches.    
Waste Management 
Waste Management Services will ensure that street cleaning and bin emptying 
schedules are maintained in the above mentioned area for the remainder of 2025. We 
also will have illegal dumping there investigated and removed in a timely manner. Our 
leaves removal programme will be carried out there during the autumn and winter 
months. 
 
Public Lighting Planned Works 
Under the Public Lighting Upgrade Project works at the locations listed below are 
planned for the remainder of 2025 in the North Central Area with roads in Clontarf, 
Killester, Donnycarney, and Raheny being highlighted in yellow. 
These works include replacing some end of life columns on these roads along with 
upgrading adjacent street lights (to these columns) to LED street lights.  
 
The list of roads are: 
Castilla Park Clontarf East,  Clanhugh Road Donnycarney, Clanmoyle Road Clontarf 
West, Clontarf Park Clontarf, , Raheny Court Raheny, Roseglen Avenue Foxfield 
Raheny, Roseglen Road Foxfield Raheny, Saint Gabriels Road Clontarf, Springdale 
Road Raheny, Sybil Hill Road Clontarf East, Thornville Avenue/Drive/Park Greendal 
Raheny,  
 
Road Maintenance 
Regarding planned works for the year 2025, this information was presented to the 
councillors earlier in the year. In summary: 
 
- 
Resurfacing works and ramp repair planned in Whitehall (Grace Park Road, Swords 
Road), Clontarf (Howth Road, The Court, Dunseverick Road), Marino (Croydon 
Green), Kilmore (Cromcastle Avenue), and Artane (Danieli Road, Brookwood Rise, 
Harmonstown Road). 
- 
Footpath works planned in Artane (Mask Drive), Marino (Marino Crescent), Whitehall 
(Shanbooley Road, Shanard Road), Beaumont (Coolatree Park), Clontarf (Kincora 
Road), Donaghmede (parts of the Grange Park and St Donagh’s estates) and Kilmore 
(Kilmore Drive).  
 
Drainage and Flood Prevention 
In relation to drainage and flood prevention, the Surface Water Management Office 
undertakes regular, scheduled maintenance of rivers and riparian zones within the 
Clontarf Local Electoral Area. This includes the maintenance of river screens and the 
provision of sandbags along the Clontarf Promenade as part of flood resilience 
measures. 
 
Additionally, gully maintenance crews carry out routine gully cleaning across the 
Clontarf area, with a particular focus on locations known to be more susceptible to 
localised ponding during significant rainfall events. 
 

In relation to larger flood prevention infrastructural projects- 
 
The Wad river outfall on Clontarf Promenade is under construction to reduce flood risk 
to areas flooded in Castlecourt, Auburn Apartments and on the Howth Road in August 
2023; as well as reducing flood risk to other areas in the Wad river catchment upstream 
on Clontarf Golf Club, which flooded in 2008, 2009 and 2011. Traffic management for 
this project on the promenade and at the Clontarf Road/Alfie Byrne Road junction is 
currently in place.  
 
A new tunnel under the Howth road again to reduce flood risk in the Wad river 
catchment is programmed to commence in July 2025 and continue for 6 months. The 
line of the tunnel is from No. 96, Howth Road to No. 97, Howth Road, Glasslynn House. 
Traffic management will be in place at the Junction of Howth Road and Hollybrook 
Road. Some delays will be experienced when heavy equipment is being delivered to 
this site. The main site compound area will be at Castlecourt Road. 
 
Voids refurb 
We are currently working to refurb 17 units in the Electoral Area, 9 units are for Senior 
Citizens, 8 are apartments and houses.  3 of these units are acquisitions which 
increases Dublin City Council stock within the area.  
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what measures Dublin City Council currently has in place 
to ensure that all contracts entered into by the Council are negotiated to deliver value 
for money, cost transparency, and accountability, and to outline what systems or 
oversight processes are used to prevent waste or misuse of public funds. 
 
In particular, can the Chief Executive confirm: 
• 
How procurement is monitored for efficiency and competitiveness 
• 
Whether all major contracts undergo independent cost assessments or 
benchmarking 
• 
What safeguards are in place to ensure contractor performance and delivery 
standards 
• 
How contract overruns or cost escalations are managed and reported 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s Central Procurement Unit work with buyers delegated 
responsibility for procuring goods, service and works within their respective 
Departments to ensure that the most beneficial procurement strategy is developed. 
This includes reviewing specification of requirements, appropriate selection and award 
criteria and a clear pricing schedule/bill of works. Dublin City Council ensures that the 
appropriate ratio of marks apportioned to price and qualitative criteria are set out to 
deliver the most economically advantageous tender. 
 
The Central Procurement Unit ensures that all tender documents are compliant with 
European Legislation, National Regulations and internal Policies and Procedures. 
Template documents are available for all procurement processes ensuring that all 
suppliers that win public contracts have declared that they meet with Statutory 
Obligations and are compliant with Irish Law. 
 
During the tender process suppliers are assessed against Performance Indicators, 
Service Level Agreements, delivery times and dates and key milestones as well as 
other measurable indicators. Departments delegate a contract manager or procure an 
employer’s representative to ensure that these KPI’s are met. 
 

All modifications and overruns must meet the requirements and be justifiable under 
Article 72 of the 2014/24/EU Public Procurement Directives. All modifications must be 
sent to the Central Procurement Unit through an Article 72 Form and a signed 
manager’s order authorising the modification and its justification. A modification must 
be published against the original award notice published to eTenders and if applicable 
the Official Journal of the European Union.  
 
With respect to Capital Projects, there is a Governance Board in place which monitors 
and approves all DCC non-housing projects over €500k. The Corporate Project 
Governance Boad (CPGB) is made up of the various Assistant Chief Executives, the 
Head of Finance and the Chief Executive. The board is supported in its function by the 
Corporate Project Support Office (CPSO).  
 
The role of the CPSO is to ensure a consist approach across the organisation in 
relation to Governance requirements, with increased focus on achieving maximum 
value for money in line with the Infrastructure Guidelines published by the 
Department of Public Expenditure, National Development Plan Delivery and Reform 
in December 2023.  
 
All capital projects over €500k are required to be appraised and must get approval 
from the CPGB before they can proceed or progress though the various Project 
Gates. As part of the CPSO governance process, it is recommended that all Capital 
Projects carry out an independent cost report, for projects valued over €5million 
independent cost report are mandatory. 
 
Projects are continually monitored throughout the project lifecycle. The CPGB meet 
quarterly to review project progress, financial performance and general issues and 
risks. The board also considers approval of project budget increases or project 
progression.  
 
DCC is also obliged each year to submit a return and report to the National Oversight 
Audit Committee on all its Capital Projects over €500k. This report details the financial 
commitments and expenditure of all DCCs Capital Projects. A sample of these projects 
are audited and an in-depth review is carried out. The findings of the review are 
published in the report. The report also details information in relation to all Major 
Procurements ran by DCC which are valued over €10 million. This report is required 
to 
be 
published 
annually 
and 
can 
be 
found 
@ 
http://www.dublincity.ie/PublicSpendingCode 
 
 
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive how Dublin City Council operates its other golf and pitch 
and putt courses, for names of operators and operating models. Are there course 
operated directly by the Council or have there been in the past? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
At present TGM Golf management are the contractor involved in the management of 
the following golf courses for Parks, Biodiversity, and Landscape Services, 
Sillogue Golf,  Ballymun, St Anne’s Par 3, Clontarf / Raheny and Tolka Valley  Pitch & 
Putt. 
Their role is to:_ 
• Managing the play on the course as well as the pavilion and organising the order of 
play on the course and operate a booking system. 
 

•  The collecting all green fees and lodging it in a manner prescribed by the Council. 
Green fee charges shall be as determined by the Council and maintain a receipting 
and accounting system in respect of all operations. 
 
•  Provide a trolley/ golf cart service as appropriate 
 
• TGM golf Undertake the day-to-day maintenance and cleaning of the pavilion and 
surrounding area including the car park areas and toilets. 
• TGM are given permission to provide a shop or dock to sell refreshments (tea/ coffee/ 
soft drinks etc.) and snacks (bars, sandwiches etc.) may be operated by the 
management at their discretion, the sale of alcohol is not permitted. 
 
• TGM Golf covers all utility bills incurred in the running of the service. 
 
•  Finally, TGM Golf must ensure the general health and safety of the public and their 
own staff with regard to their direct works within the facility, in compliance with Irish 
Health and safety legislation. 
 
Longmeadows Pitch & Putt Club is managed by Longmeadows/Ballyfermot Pitch & 
Putt CLG (Company Limited by Guarantee. Lansdowne Valley pitch & putt club 
operated by Dublin City Council but has since closed. 
 
TGM Golf served notice to Parks Services to conclude its services for Tolka Valley 
Pitch & Putt  on 28th February 2025. As a gesture of goodwill, they have facilitated an 
extension of service until (end of June ’25) to keep the course open at weekends only. 
Parks Services are currently in negotiation with TGM Golf to maintain the course open 
until end of 2025.  As was outlined in the report to the last North West Area Committee 
meeting the clubhouse needs significant investment if the course is to remain open in 
the longer term. 
 
Parks Services undertake the care and maintenance of all the above mentioned golf 
and pitch & putt courses.  
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive to give a report of plans (past and present) to regenerate 
or replace (details supplied) and to report on numbers and categories of maintenance 
requests for all units in these buildings over the last two years.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Delivery Response: 
DCC housing delivery team is progressing new housing projects in the (details 
supplied). 
 
An assessment of the existing (details supplied) housing project was carried out in 
2020 and at this stage there are no regeneration plans being progressed for the 
development of this existing housing site.   
 
Housing Maintenance Response: 
An assessment of the existing (details supplied) housing project was carried out in 
2020 and at this stage there are no regeneration plans being progressed for the 
development of this existing housing site.   
 
Housing Maintenance can confirm that there are no formal Planned Maintenance 
programmes of work either ongoing or in the current pipeline for the above dwellings. 

However, Housing Maintenance have attended to approximately 37 maisonettes over 
the past two years in matters relating to plumbing, carpentry, electrical, damp and 
mould. All repairs are assessed by the area foreman and completed within deadlines 
set out in Dublin City Council Tenant Handbook.  A comprehensive list of repairs can 
be sent directly to the Councillor if required. 
 
Q.80  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the manager for an update on the replacement of windows and doors on 
Owensilla Terrace, Ballymun, with reference to the motion passed by the NW area 
committee, which called for replacement with a composite material instead of wood 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance inspected all windows in Owensilla Terrace to establish if any 
windows required repair/replacement. PVC windows will be installed at No. 4 & 6 
Owensilla Terrace, these are on order and are estimated for installation within the next 
two-three weeks. The tenants will be contacted to make arrangements and to schedule 
dates for installation.   
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY  
To ask the manager for a report on recruitment of trade apprentices to the Council and 
any schemes that have been introduced to increase the number of apprenticeships 
with DCC. Report should note the motion passed at NW Area Committee July 2024 
calling for apprenticeships in the North West Area and across the Northside of the city.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has a well-established apprenticeship programme with a history of 
supporting and employing apprenticeships across the organisation.  In addition to what 
is set out in respect of traditional trade apprenticeships Dublin City Council is also 
piloting the modern cyber security apprenticeship programme and has recently 
employed an apprentice on this programme in the Information Systems Department. 
 
The current status of 54 apprenticeships is set out below broken down by location, 
trade and current status of progress through the apprenticeship programme 
 
Apprenticeships 
54 Current apprentices  
Housing 
30 
 
Environment & Transportation 
16 
 
Parks and Landscape Services 
3 
 
North City Operations Depot 
2 
 
Dublin Fire Brigade 
2 
 
Information Systems 
1 
 
Breakdown by Trade 
7 
Stonemason 
Environment & Transportation  
6 
Painting & Decorating 
Housing  
16 
Carpentry and Joinery 
Housing  
8 
Plumbing 
Housing  
2 
Metal Fabrication 
North City Operations Depot  

2 
HGV Mechanic 
Dublin Fire Brigade  
3 
Bricklayers 
Environment & Transportation  
3 
Horticulture 
Parks and Landscape Services 
6 
Electrical 
Environment & Transportation  
1 
Cyber Security 
Information Systems 
 
Timeline for Qualification (Subject to availability of off-site training placements) 
Phase 1 & 2 are 3 - 4 years from qualification  
Phase 3 & 4 are 2-3 years from qualification  
Phase 5 are 1-2 years from qualification 
Phase 6 or 7 will be qualified in the next 6 months 
 
Overall Apprenticeship Progression Table 
Craft  
Phase 
Timeline to Qualification 
Painting and decorating Phase 1 
4 years remaining (approx.) 
Painting and decorating Phase 3 
2-3  years remaining (approx.) 
Painting and decorating Phase 3 
2-3  years remaining (approx.) 
Painting and decorating Phase 3 
2-3  years remaining (approx.) 
Painting and Decorating Phase 3  
2-3 years remaining (approx.) 
Painting and decorating Phase 4  
2-3 years remaining (approx.) 
Carpentry and Joinery 
Phase 1 
4 years remaining (approx.) 
Carpentry and Joinery 
Phase 1 
4 years remaining (approx.) 
Carpentry and Joinery 
Phase 1 
4 years remaining (approx.) 
Carpentry and Joinery 
Phase 1 
4 years remaining (approx.) 
Carpentry and Joinery 
Phase 1  
4 years remaining (approx.)  
Carpentry and Joinery 
Phase 1 
4 years remaining (approx.) 
Carpentry and Joinery 
Phase 2 
3-4 years remaining (approx.) 
Carpentry and Joinery 
Phase 2 
3 -4years remaining (approx.) 
Carpentry and Joinery 
Phase 2 
3 -4years remaining (approx.) 
Carpentry and Joinery 
Phase 2 
3 -4years remaining (approx.) 
Carpentry and Joinery 
Phase 4 
2-3 years remaining (approx.) 
Carpentry and Joinery 
Phase 4 
2-3 year remaining (approx.) 
Carpentry and Joinery  
Phase 4 
2-3 years remaining (approx.) 
Carpentry and Joinery  
Phase 4 
2-3 years remaining (approx.) 
Carpentry and Joinery  
Phase 6  
6 months -1 year remaining 
(approx.) 
Carpentry and Joinery  
Phase 6 
6 months -1 year remaining 
(approx.) 
Plumbing 
Phase 1 
4 years remaining (approx.) 
Plumbing  
Phase 1 
4 years remaining (approx.) 
Plumbing 
Phase 1 
4 years remaining (approx.) 
Plumbing 
Phase 1 
4 years remaining (approx.) 
Plumbing  
Phase 3 
2-3 years remaining (approx.) 
Plumbing  
Phase 3 
2-3 years remaining (approx.) 
Plumbing 
Phase 4 
2-3 years remaining (approx.) 
Plumbing 
Phase 5 
 1-2 years remaining (approx.) 
Stonecutting 
& 
Stonemasonry 
Phase 1 
4 years remaining (approx.) 
Stonecutting 
& 
Stonemasonry 
Phase 1  
4 years remaining (approx.) 
Stonecutting 
& 
Stonemasonry 
Phase 1 
4 years remaining (approx.) 

Stonecutting 
& 
Stonemasonry 
Phase 6 
6 months -1 year remaining 
(approx.) 
Stonecutting 
& 
Stonemasonry 
Phase 6 
6 months -1 year remaining 
(approx.) 
Stonecutting 
& 
Stonemasonry 
Phase 7 
6 months- 1 year remaining 
(approx.) 
Stonecutting 
& 
Stonemasonry 
Phase 7 
6 
months-1 
Year 
remaining 
(approx.) 
Brick and Stonelaying 
Phase 4 
3 -4 years remaining (approx.) 
Brick and Stonelaying  
Phase 4 
3-4 years remaining (approx.) 
Brick and Stonelaying 
Phase 4 
3 -4 years remaining (approx.) 
Electrical 
Phase 1  
4 years remaining (approx.) 
Electrical  
Phase 2 
4 years remaining (approx.) 
Electrical  
Phase 2 
3-4 years remaining (approx.) 
Electrical  
Phase 2 
3-4 years remaining (approx.) 
Electrical  
Phase 2 
3-4 years remaining (approx.) 
Electrical  
Phase 4 
2-3 years remaining (approx.) 
Horticulture 
Phase 1  
2 years remaining  
Horticulture  
Phase 1 
2 years remaining  
Horticulture 
Phase 1  
2 years remaining  
HGV Mechanic 
Phase 1  
4 years remaining (approx.) 
HGV Mechanic 
Phase 1 
4 years remaining (approx.) 
Metal Fabrication  
Phase 2 
3-4 years remaining (approx.) 
Metal Fabrication  
Phase 2 
3-4 years remaining (approx.) 
 
Qualified Apprentices  
25 apprentices have qualified through the Apprenticeship Programme in Dublin City 
Council in the last 2 years.  21 are now employed by Dublin City Council on a full time, 
permanent basis in their qualified trade.   
 
• 
3 Electricians  
• 
4 Bricklayers  
• 
7 Plumbers  
• 
7 Carpenters  
Apprenticeship recruitment: 
In late 2023 apprenticeship opportunities with Dublin City Council were advertised in 
the following trades: 
• 
Bricklayer 
• 
Carpentry 
• 
Electrical 
• 
Heavy Vehicles Mechanic 
• 
Metal Fabrication 
• 
Painter 
• 
Plumbing 
• 
Stonemason  
The current status of this recruitment is as follows: 
• 
41 new apprentices have commenced employment with Dublin City Council 
 
• 
3 Bricklayers 
• 
3 Stonemasons  
• 
5 Painting and Decorating  
• 
2 HGV Mechanic  
• 
2 Metal Fabrication  

• 
6 Electricians  
• 
9 Carpenters 
• 
8 Plumbers  
• 
3 Horticulture (horticulture apprentices were recruited internally) 
The pilot cyber security apprenticeship is being run through engagement with the 
LGMA in conjunction with FIT based in Dublin Industrial Estate, Glasnevin and 1 
externally recruited apprentice is employed on this programme. 
 
Dublin City Council has also actively attended apprenticeship recruitment fairs, expos 
and information sessions to promote the apprenticeship opportunities within Dublin 
City Council and the local government sector. 
 
Traineeships 
Dublin City Council has an ongoing traineeship programme for the recruitment of 
skilled general operatives run in conjunction with the CDETB and Ballyfermot 
Education and Training Centre.  Dublin City Council has engaged with Finglas 
Education and Training Centre to assess opportunities to replicate this programme in 
the training centre. 
All opportunities for apprenticeships and traineeships are open to any eligible 
applicants wishing to apply. 
 
Q.82  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ  
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the removal of a tree (details supplied) as 
its roots are damaging the footpath and the resident’s wall. An elderly neighbour 
recently tripped and fell due to the broken footpath and was injured.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Pruning of vegetation around ESB lines is specialist and dangerous works which is the 
responsibility of the utility company.  ESB Networks provide a contact number on their 
website where customers who have concerns in this regard can report it directly to the 
Tree Maintenance Crew who will arrange an inspection. 
   
Q.83  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ  
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for buttons to be provided for pedestrians 
crossing in both directions on the islands at the pedestrian crossings at (details 
supplied). Residents using mobility aids such as wheelchairs and rollators are unable 
to cross the road fully in the time provided. While there is a pedestrian island, a button 
to trigger the lights from the island is currently only available to those crossing in one 
direction, and those using mobility aids would find it very difficult to manoeuvre to press 
it when crossing in the opposite direction 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council Traffic Officers will assess the pedestrian traffic refuge pedestrian 
push button configuration and consider options to resolve the current situation to 
ensure optimal pedestrian safety and ensure all pedestrians, including those with 
mobility issues, can demand the pedestrian easily. A response will be issued via the 
TAMS query system once a solution is decided upon. 
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ  
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for dishing of the kerb at (details supplied) as 
there is currently no way for wheelchair or buggy users to safely cross to either the 
shops or the green, even though there is dishing on the opposite sides of the road. 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This query has been passed on to the Area Inspector, who will conduct a survey and 
assess the need for a new pedestrian access dishing. The Confirm reference number 
for this inquiry is 11180360. 
 
Q.85  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ  
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the proposed pedestrian crossing at 
(details supplied) and whether this work will be undertaken in 2025 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is no proposal to install a Controlled Pedestrian Crossing / Zebra Crossing in 
this location as part of the 2025 programme. However this location will be considered 
for inclusion on the 2026 programme. A meeting will be organised similar to last year 
with TAG, City Centre Projects and the North Central Area Councillors to discuss the 
2026 programme for Controlled Pedestrian Crossing / Zebra Crossings for the North 
Central Area in the next couple of weeks. 
 
Q.86  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive On behalf of The Preservation Committee of the Ringsend 
and District Historical Society, can the Manager  approach the National Transport 
Authority with a view to amending their BusConnects  Dublin -Ringsend to City Centre) 
in relation to the preservation of the Great South Wall and ' The Point' at York Road 
and Ringsend? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Ringsend to City Centre CBC scheme has been approved by An Coimisiúm 
Pleanála. Please provide more information on what you are seeking to preserve, and 
the Bus Connects Liaison Team will pass the details to the NTA for their consideration.  
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive Can the manager please arrange for Leo Fitzgerald to be 
installed with infrastructure that would deter from pigeons nesting? A recent bird mite 
infestation in the complex requires for the roofs and stairwell landing roofs to be treated 
and cleaned.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance are aware of the above issue and are currently coordinating a 
plan for remedial action, with works scheduled to begin within the next four to six 
weeks.  
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive about a parking permit for (details supplied)  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin City Council Parking Control Bye-Laws 2024 govern eligibility of residents 
parking permits.   Under these Bye-Laws, Section 16 (5) (e) states “where the building 
consists of more than 4 housing units and is located on a heavy demand road, 
residents shall not be eligible for resident’s parking permits.”    
(details supplied) I wish to confirm that this property is not eligible for residents or 
visitors parking permits. 
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a breakdown of funding spent in the North Inner City 
from the Urban regeneration funding, and if he is aware of when works might be 
commencing on the National Monument on Moore street and if the department have 

been in contact with DCC as the Moore Street Advisory group had thought works would 
have started by now.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As part of Call 1 and Call 2 of the URDF, the Department of Housing Local Government 
and Heritage approved funding for several projects in the North Inner City. A 
breakdown of funding spent is set out below. 
 
Call 
Subproject 
Funding 
Allocated 
Draw down 
to date   
Remainder 
Draw down 
1 
Refurbishment 
and 
Redevelopment of Rutland St 
School 
 
22,373,364 
 
7,305,043 
15,068,320 
2 
41 Parnell Sq  
665,056.00 
665,056 
0.00 
2 
Five Lamps Public Realm 
5,068,192 
44,280 
5,023,912 
2 
Fruit & Veg Market 
9,568,557 
940,637 
8,627,920 
2 
Mountjoy 
Square 
Conservation  
2,756,250 
404,307 
2,351,943 
2 
Parnell 
Square 
Cultural 
Quarter 
60,443,466 
6,818,740 
53,624,726 
2 
Ryders Row 
1,875,000 
157,323 
1,717,677 
2 
Uillean Piping Centre 
9,834,889 
225,501 
9,609,388 
 
Regarding the National Monument on Moore Street, as advised by the Department of 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage (DHLGH), this project is being led by them. 
 
Q.90  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive for update on plans for even more greening in the city and 
if we can access more funding and resources to execute this positive work as quickly 
as possible. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Biodiversity and Landscape Services are implementing three main greening 
strategies currently. The greening strategies focus on the areas that present the most 
deficits in green infrastructure across the city.  As these deficits are addressed, new 
greening strategies can be considered. While greening is being delivered across the 
city at an operations level by the wider parks team, an expansion of the greening 
strategy programme will require additional technical resources and further funding. 
Both will be considered in 2026 estimates. 
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive when the bin bags are going to be banned on the Northside 
of the city as it's still a litter black spot due to these bags even with the extra cleaning, 
particularly along north strand and on the cycleway.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has decided to remove the derogation allowing waste to be 
presented for collection in plastic bags across its administrative area. In the first 
instance an area consisting of 90 streets surrounding Grafton Street is currently the 
proposed pilot area. Waste collection is a private and commercial market, and 
extensive engagement with the operators is continuing as part of our plans to remove 
the bag derogation. A number of alternative options for residents and businesses to 

dispose of their waste have been proposed by the operators and Dublin City Council 
are supporting these proposals. One of these proposals is the installation of shared on 
street waste compactors. Installation of the compactors is now imminent, and we are 
currently planning Civil Works with our Electrical Services Teams to coordinate the 
installation of the electrical connection works. Once these compactors are in place the 
derogation will be fully removed from this pilot area. Once the derogation has been 
removed, it is our intention to move immediately to the North side of the River Liffey 
and in particular a similar sized area to Phase 1 but surrounding Henry 
Street/O'Connell Street/Abbey Street. It is hoped that this will happen during Q4 2025.It 
is our intention to remove the derogation City wide, but this needs to be carefully 
planned to ensure the necessary communication occurs between the Waste Collectors 
and their customers and that suitable methods for the presentation and collection of 
waste are in place city wide. 
 
Q.92  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
 
Can the Chief Executive provide an update on the below issues at detail supplied 
.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Response from Parking Enforcement 
Parking Enforcement posted ballot papers to the eligible residents of this road on the 
10th June 2025 for a vote on the redesign of the current Pay and Display scheme that 
is in operation on this road at present. 
The closing date for the ballots to be returned is the 17th July 2025. If the result of this 
vote is in favour of the redesign of the scheme, Parking Enforcement will return the file 
to the Traffic Advisory Group for the completion of all statutory requirements to 
implement the changes.  
 
The trees on (details supplied), will be listed for inspection and any required works 
scheduled on the tree maintenance programme. 
The Dublin City Tree Strategy report outlines in section 3.7.11 Shading  
Tree Works will not normally be carried out to address shading of direct sunlight. 
Trees are often perceived to block light to nearby properties and the level of alleged 
nuisance is variable and subjective. There is currently no legal right to direct sunlight 
and there is no expectation for existing buildings or other structures to be removed for 
this reason.    
 
TAG Reply 
(details supplied) is a residential area covered by the 30 km/h Slow Zone, indicating 
the lower speed limit and that the area is a Home Zone/Slow Zone, which alerts drivers 
that they are in a SLOW ZONE residential area and should expect children. 
A road traffic sign is in place at the entrance from the main road. Additional signage is 
not recommended. 
 
Q.93  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
Can the CE give an update on the works to St Luke’s Youth Club 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As reported to the Area Committee at its meeting of 16th June 2025, the Property 
Management Team are working with the Local Area Office with regard to funding and 
procurement of the required works, the most recent of which were carried out in June 
at a cost of circa €15,000 (excl. VAT). These works included -  
• 
Removal and re-instatement of flooring 
• 
Replacement of pipework 

• 
Repairs to tiles 
• 
Flushing out drainage system and follow-up callbacks. 
Remaining works (excl. VAT) include - 
1. Disabled WC installation  
 
 
 
Approx. €15k  
2. Replacement of heating system  
 
 
Approx. €60k 
3. Fire remediation works  
 
 
 
Approx. €30k  
4. Replacement of internal roof with a fire-resistant 
Quotes currently being 
sought 
 
As reported, a licence will be given to one entity on the instruction of the CCLAS 
Department and it will be necessary for the recommended entity to engage with the 
Council’s City Valuers Section to agree terms and conditions to undertake overall 
responsibility for the premises, including payment of the licence fee, repairs and 
maintenance, services, insurance, utility bills etc. and subsequently with the Council’s 
Law Department to complete necessary legal documentation with the benefit of legal 
advice. A new licence agreement should be signed before the entity takes possession 
of the premises. 
 
The Property Development Department are aware of the expressions of interests and 
have advised the Area Office in regard to outstanding information required. It will be 
necessary for the recommended entity to meet the legal, governance and financial 
requirements in order to assume overall responsibility for the building.  
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
Can the Chief Executive provide an update on detail supplied affordable housing 
scheme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is no register for applicants to express interest in future schemes. Interested 
applicants can only apply for newly built homes in developments delivered by Dublin 
City Council when they are advertised. All schemes are advertised on the Dublin City 
Council website: Affordable Housing .This is typically six months prior to the homes 
being ready for occupation. 
 
Dublin City Council plans to advertise the next phase of homes in (details supplied) 
in Quarter 4 of this year, subject to construction progress on the site. Applicants are 
advised to review our Frequently Asked Questions and the list of required documents 
in advance of applying. 
 
In line with our Scheme of Priority, when the number of eligible applicants exceeds the 
number of dwellings available for purchase, 70% of the properties will be assigned on 
a first-come first-served basis with the remaining 30% being allocated through a 
randomised lottery. 
 
Q.95  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
Can the Chief Executive provide an update (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Occasionally anti-social incidents of this nature occur in parks. They are reported to 
the Gardaí when they occur who are best placed to deal with them.  
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive if he could address the complete lack of notification and 
signage indicating approaches to, the vicinity of, and entrances to - Fairview Park. 
There is currently no signage to signal to the public that they are near, entering or in 

Fairview Park. Will he instruct the Parks Department to implement appropriate signage 
to improve visibility and awareness of the park’s location. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Park Services will undertake a review of wayfinding signage in relation to Fairview 
Parks with the intention of improving visibility and awareness of the parks location. 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive can the litter bin be reinstalled at the bottle bank on Alfie 
Byrne Road, and can consideration be given to providing additional bins along the Alfie 
Byrne Road. This area is frequently used by dog walkers and commuters, so improved 
bin provision would help maintain cleanliness and support responsible disposal of 
waste. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services will not be reinstalling a litter bin at the above  mentioned 
bottle bank as it had become a focal point for illegal dumping there. We will monitor 
litter levels along the Alfie Byrne Road regarding a requirement for additional litter bins 
there. 
 
Q.98  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive to work on plans to develop a rugby pitch in Fairview Park 
to support local sports and community use. There is currently little to no access for our 
young people to play rugby due to a lack of play spaces, facilities, and active clubs in 
the area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Playing fields (grass pitches) are an important and essential resource to facilitate active 
recreation and field sports. Pitches are maintained and managed by DCC in public 
parks/open spaces and allocated to local community clubs based on an annual 
application submitted by the clubs and a letting process based on their needs and 
available pitches.  
 
Dublin City playing pitches are at capacity and that is being reflected in competition 
between clubs for access to playing fields. A perusal of the allocations demonstrates 
that there is little or no capacity to increase the play time on existing pitches and there 
is no capacity to accommodate new playing fields in existing public parks and open 
spaces.  
 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive of he would instruct the Parks Department to work on plans 
for adding greenery, pocket parks, and traffic calming measures along the Sheriff 
Street bridge. This area is currently a grey, industrial corridor, and these works would 
enhance both the environment, complement the nearby public realm improvements 
and improve safety for residents and all those using this important route 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services are currently progressing with the greening projects outlined in the 
North East Inner City Greening Strategy. While the Sherriff Street Bridge may be 
subject to weight restrictions that could limit its suitability for large-scale tree planting, 
the Parks Project Team will include it as a potential site for future assessment as part 
of the ongoing greening initiatives. 
 
Q.100  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 

 
I would like to ask the manager we the council is in terms of taking Terenure Gate, on 
Terenure Road ‘in-hand’ or responsibility for the estate from the developer (Kimpton 
Vale). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A review of the records held by the Planning Department in relation to Taking in Charge 
show that a request to take the services in charge was submitted by Kimpton Vale Ltd 
in May 2018.  The request was withdrawn in April 2024 as a number of outstanding 
issues have yet to be resolved. Kimpton Vale Limited are currently responsible for the 
estate. 
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to (details supplied) and respond to same please. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Clontarf Promenade is identified as a feeding site for Brent geese which are a 
migratory bird that visit during the autumn and winter period.  They are also a protected 
species. They require short grass to feed and the management of the grass provides 
for this. Long grass meadow areas are provided in in parks and open spaces.     
 
Q.102  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
 
Can the Chief Executive refer to (details supplied) and respond. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We regret the confusion regarding works on (details supplied). To be clear; as the 
2025 works program is already finalised, the resurfacing of the carriageway in the 
Details supplied will not be included in the 2025 works program. (Details supplied) 
will be considered for inclusion as part of the 2026 works program. Road Maintenance 
Services will engage one of our direct labour crews to carry out local footpath repairs 
in 2025. 
 
Q.103  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to tree at location as per (details supplied) and 
say when it can be arranged to lop/seriously prune same as the matter is ongoing for 
years now. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The tree was inspected on 17th June 2025. It is a middle aged Lime tree (Tilia Spp.) 
and is in fair condition. The required work noted is for a crown reduction and crown 
clean. The required work will be included in the future tree maintenance programme 
for 2025/2026.  
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to location as per (details supplied) and say if a 
bench can be installed here. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The location will be inspected and if a suitable, the addition of a bench will be 
considered as part of the future programme of work.  
 
Q.105  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update from the Drone Strategy Committee and in 
particular in relation to set up of the newly planned drone delivery services in 
Glasnevin. 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council recognises that the commercial use of drones e.g. for deliveries, is 
a complex and evolving situation as the technology itself is moving so fast.  There is 
no published policy, legislation or guidance at a national level so this creates significant 
challenges. The Department of Transport are currently finalising a policy framework to 
guide high-level strategic planning and development of the drone sector in Ireland. A 
joined up approach will be required across government departments to support this 
policy framework. 
 
The City Council published a Drone and Urban Air Mobility 2024–2029 Strategy which 
highlights the potential of the emerging drone sector for Ireland and recognises DCC’s 
role in supporting the wider ecosystem and building capacity for innovative services 
both within the public sector and commercially.  The strategy states that scaling these 
services will depend on public trust, awareness, and early engagement to address 
concerns around safety, privacy, noise, and environmental impact, ensuring long-term 
acceptance and benefit for communities. The City Council has a dedicated drone unit 
that supports services such as surveying and mapping, inspections, emergency 
response and many other positive uses. 
 
For clarity, no commercial drone delivery operators are flying over the Dublin City 
Council area. DCC is aware that Manna Ltd. operates in the Blanchardstown area 
(under Fingal County Council) and has submitted a planning application to South 
Dublin County Council for a site in Tallaght and another one was made for a location 
in Dundrum, which is under Dun Laoghaire and Rathdown County Council. DCC’s 
Planning and Transport Planning teams confirm that no planning applications in 
relation to drones have been lodged with DCC to date. As such, DCC has not engaged 
in formal discussions or made any official statements regarding commercial drone 
operations within its jurisdiction. 
 
Q.106  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to increase the number of quiet areas or noise sensitive 
zones in the city, particularly to include areas where local residents have major 
concerns, and want to include their area as a quiet area in line with EPA guidance, for 
example GADRA residents who want Drumcondra from St Mobhi Road to Drumcondra 
Road and Hampstead Avenue to Hardiman Road included 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The European Communities (Environmental Noise) Regulations 2018 to 2021 sets out 
the requirements with respect to Quiet Areas. 
 
The regulations cite that a “quiet area in an agglomeration” shall be construed in 
accordance with Section 10(1); as follows: 
 
10 (1) An action planning authority may following consultation with the Agency and 
with the approval of the Minister delimit Quiet Areas in agglomerations where particular 
requirements on exposure to environmental noise shall apply, as determined by the 
Agency.  
The Environmental Protection Agency lays out the guidance for Local authorities to 
consider. Access this link for this guidance Guidance Note for Noise Action Planning 
The guidance on Page 26 sets out what types of public open spaces should be 
considered with respect to Quit Areas.  
 
These include : 
• 
Recreational areas; 
• 
Playing fields; 

• 
Playgrounds; · 
• 
Public parks and gardens; · 
• 
Beaches; 
• 
Nature reserves 
• 
Cemeteries; 
• 
River banks; 
• 
Canals. 
 
Urban areas cannot be considered for this purpose. 
 
Q.107  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider asking Park Dept. to prune the trees that go 
out onto Crawford Road. They are in St Columba’s School but are out onto the road 
and could cause dangers to passers. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services do not have the authority to require pruning or removal of trees in a 
private property. As per Section 70, Road Act 1993, Road maintenance has the 
authority to contact the owners and ask for the trees to be pruned. 
 
2) (a) The owner or occupier of land shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that a 
tree, shrub, hedge or other vegetation on the land is not a hazard or potential hazard 
to persons using a public road and that it does not obstruct or interfere with the safe 
use of a public road or the maintenance of a public road. 
 
(b) Where a tree, shrub, hedge or other vegetation is a hazard or potential hazard to 
persons using a public road or where it obstructs or interferes with the safe use of a 
public road or with the maintenance of a public road, a road authority may serve a 
notice in writing on the owner or occupier of the land on which such tree, shrub, hedge 
or other vegetation is situated requiring the preservation, felling, cutting, lopping, 
trimming or removal of such tree, shrub, hedge or other vegetation within the period 
stated in the notice. 
 
Q.108  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive about the traffic management at the exit of Phibsborough 
Shopping Centre onto Connaught Street:  
1. Who is responsible for maintaining the road markings and signage at this location? 
2. Has the Council contacted the management of the shopping centre to address the 
issue?  
3. Were traffic management measures part of the original planning permission, and if 
so, is the Council responsible for enforcing them?  
4. Has the Council raised this matter with An Bord Pleanála or any relevant 
enforcement authority?  
The exit is currently being misused as an entry point, creating a dangerous situation 
for road users. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
1.  The responsibility for maintaining road markings and signage on public roads lies 
with Dublin City Council’s Traffic Department.  The car park and grounds of 
Phibsborough Shopping Centre are private and are not within the jurisdiction of Dublin 
City Councils’ Traffic and Road Maintenance Departments.  The maintenance of the 
car park and grounds is the responsibility of the management company of the 
Shopping Centre.  

2.  It is not the responsibility of Dublin City Council to contact the management 
company of Phibsborough Shopping Centre regarding traffic management.  
 
3.  Dublin City Council is not responsible for enforcing traffic management within the 
privately owned grounds of Phibsborough Shopping Centre.  It is the responsibility of 
the management company of the Shopping Centre to enforce on parking and manage 
traffic within the boundary of the Shopping Centre. 
4. It is not the responsibility of Dublin City Council to raise the matter of traffic 
management with An Bord Pleanála.  The Shopping Centre original planning 
application has exceeded the limit of the statute of limitations and time for appeals to 
An Bord Pleanála has lapsed. 
 
Any irresponsible, dangerous or illegal driver behaviour is a matter of enforcement for 
An Garda Síochána. 
 
Q.109  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a progress report on the implementation of the EV 
charging scheme, particularly fast charging points to facilitate those without 
driveways? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The 4 DLAs are collaborating on a pilot project to install 200 Electric Vehicle chargers 
at 50 locations across Dublin City and County. Following a public tendering process E-
Power were appointed as the successful contractor. 
The concession contract runs for 4 years with the option to extend the term by an 
additional 2 years. 
 
The contractor has reviewed all of the proposed sites and has submitted preliminary 
designs. These designs are currently with the DLAs for final approval.  
 
The contractor has made applications to ESB for new and upgraded power 
connections to the identified sites. Individual contracts between each of the 4 DLAs 
and ePower will be issued in mid-July. 
 
Fingal County Council, as the lead LA on the project are currently finalising a project 
resourcing package with ZEVI (Zero Emissions Vehicles of Ireland) which is a sub 
section of the Department of Transport. 
The following sites in DCC are currently being reviewed: 
 
1.      St. Anne’s Park                             North Central Area 
2.      Clontarf Bus Garage                     North Central Area 
3.      Strand Road, Sydney Parade        South East Area 
4.      Donnybrook (The Crescent)         South East Area 
5.      Milltown (Strand Terrace)            South East Area 
6.      Ballyfermot Leisure Centre          South Central Area 
7.      Raheny Library                             North Central Area 
8.      Cabra Parkside Leisure Centre     Central Area 
9.      Finglas, Wellmount St.                 North West Area 
10.  Clonskeagh (Farmer Browns)       South East Area 
11.  Bushy Park (Rathdown Avenue)  South East Area 
12.  Cabra Library                                Central Area 
13.  Walkinstown Library                    South Central Area 
  

DCC are identifying additional sites on LA owned property that meet the requirements 
of the Dublin Local Authority Electric Vehicle Charging Strategy and where value to 
local communities can be achieved 
 
 
Q.110  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
 
To ask the Chief Executive how many zebra crossing applications have gone in over 
the past 12 months and how many have been approved? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In the past 12 months the following have been installed: 
Blackditch Road, Dublin 12 
• 
Herbert Park Road, Dublin 4 
• 
Marlborough Road, Dublin 4 
• 
South William St, Dublin 2 
 
The following are due to commence on site and be complete this summer: 
• 
2no. Greendale Road, Dublin 5 
• 
Mount Prospect Avenue, Dublin 3 
 
Q.111  QUESTION WITHDRAWN 
 
Q.112  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what has happened with the former Neary pub 77-78 
Parnell St since being acquired by the Council last May 2024 and what is the timeline 
for bringing forward development or future use of the site? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The properties at 77 & 78 Parnell Street vested in the Council last May.   The 
properties then became the subject of legal proceedings/judicial review.  The matter 
was before the courts on Thursday 26th June 2025.  We are awaiting the Court’s 
ruling which is due to issue 10th July 2025. 
 
Q.113  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what plans are to reinstate the park at the end of Portland 
Row on completion of the Greenway works and a play space at the entrance to the 
Royal Canal by St Ignatius Road to stop the informal parking taking place here? These 
were promised in an iteration of the plans in 2019 but have since been said to be 
outside of the scope of the active travel team to deliver so will require other 
departments in the Council to lead on them if they are to be delivered - have they been 
engaged with? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following the successful completion of the Royal Canal Greenway later this summer, 
Portland Place Park (outlined in red) will be vacated as a site depot and the process 
will begin on the refurbishment of the park space. This is allow an opportunity to 
reimagine the space for all. As part of this process, there will be public consultations 
over July/ August in the area, dates of same to be confirmed. Once a proposal is 
agreed, we will report back to the September area committee meeting.   
 
This will be funded by the NTA as part of the Royal Canal Greenway Phase 3. 
 
Q.114  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a list of derelict sites in the city including:  
1. The date each site was designated derelict  

2. The value of each site  
3. The annual derelict sites levy of each site  
4. Total levy paid on each site  
5. Total levy owed on each site 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
1. The date each site was designated derelict 
2. The value of each site  
 
The table below shows the current list of 130 sites on the Derelict Sites Register (DSR), 
along with date of entry and the valuation applied. Sites entered on the Register in any 
given year are not liable until the following year i.e. those entered in 2025 are not liable 
for the derelict sites levy until 2026. 
 
Properties on the DSR are in private ownership, by definition are in a derelict and quite 
often in an unsafe state to inspect. Additionally, many have no existing planning 
permissions. The basis of valuation is of an unencumbered freehold interest. 
Therefore, valuations are effectively desktop/kerbside in nature without the possibility 
or benefit of full due diligence involving internal inspections, cost profiling, assessment 
of structural impacts on adjoining properties, full development analysis, completing trial 
borings or contamination assessment, estimating demolition costs, if applicable, or 
conservation works required, if a Protected Structure/In an ACA/on the NIAH.  The 
valuations included in the DSR are the most recent valuation available. 
 
I would also draw a distinction between properties on the DSR and properties that have 
been vested under the provisions of the Derelict Sites Act, 1990. In the latter case, 
where a valid claim is received, compensation is assessed based on the interest held 
by the claimant as at the date of vesting, which may not be a freehold interest. Greater 
due diligence can be carried out to determine the valuation metrics applying and it is a 
negotiated outcome or by arbitration award. 
 
 
file 
location 
Entered 
on DSR 
Valuation 
DS1585 
Abbeyfield/Middle Third, Legion Hall Building, 
Killester, D.5. 
09/02/202
4 
€80,000 
DS1005 
Annesley Place, 2, North Strand, D3. 
14/04/202
5 
€60,000 
DS1572 
Apollo Way, 33, Coolock, Dublin 5 
05/04/202
4 
€240,000 
DS1287 
Artane Cottages Lower, 12, Malahide Rd, D5  
27/11/202
4 
€250,000 
DS1311 
Aungier Street, 25, Dublin 2 (Protected 
Structure) 
01/11/202
3 
€150,000 
DS623 
Ballybough Road, 22b, D.3. 
25/06/200
9 
€40,000 
DS847 
Ballybough Road, 23, Dublin 3. 
04/07/201
7 
€230,000 
DS846 
Ballybough Road, 24, Dublin 3. 
04/07/201
7 
€230,000 
DS845 
Ballybough Road, 25, Dublin 3. 
04/07/201
7 
€120,000 

file 
location 
Entered 
on DSR 
Valuation 
DS1053 
Bass Place, 11, Dublin 2. 
04/04/202
3 
€230,000 
DS1547 
Beaver Street, 7/8, Dublin 1. 
06/02/202
5 
Awaiting 
valuation  
DS2105 
Benmadigan Road, 144, Crumlin, Dublin 12 
26/06/202
5 
Awaiting 
valuation  
DS1006 
Blessington Street, 23, Dublin 7. 
29/09/201
7 
€250,000 
DS1563 
Botanic Avenue, 19, Glasnevin, Dublin 9. 
04/07/202
3 
€410,000 
DS698 
Bow Lane West, 1, Kilmainham, D8. 
01/06/201
8 
€330,000 
DS1195 
Brainboro Terrace, 1 (aka 1A & 1B), D 8. 
20/03/202
3 
€465,000 
DS1281 
Brickfield Drive, site on - to rear of Moracrete 
Cottages, Crumlin, Dublin 12. 
26/06/202
3 
€50,000 
DS1363 
Bridgefoot Street 39-40, Dublin 8. 
23/02/202
4 
€2,000,00
0 
DS1600 
Broombridge Road, 16, Cabra, Dublin 7 
20/08/202
4 
€300,000 
DS981 
Buckingham Street Upper, 2, D1 
05/04/201
8 
€245,000 
DS912 
Cadogan Road, 18, Fairview, Dublin 3. 
08/07/202
2 
€190,000 
DS960 
Capel Street, 163, Dublin 1. 
03/05/201
8 
€230,000 
DS1196 
Capel Street, 164, Dublin 1. 
03/05/201
8 
€160,000 
DS1197 
Capel Street, 165, Dublin 1. 
03/05/201
8 
€240,000 
DS2034 
Carnlough Road, 531, Cabra, Dublin 7 
14/01/202
5 
Awaiting 
valuation  
DS791 
Chamber Street & Ardee, Site at Junction of, 
Dublin 8. 
27/11/202
4 
€120,000 
DS887 
Chapelizod Road, 2A/B/C, D8 
04/06/201
5 
€290,000 
DS1417 
Church Street, 2, Finglas, Dublin 11. 
30/01/202
4 
€200,000 
DS1797 
City Quay 1-4 & 25 Moss Street, Dublin 2. 
11/02/202
5 
Awaiting 
valuation  
DS1516 
Clanawley Road, 2, Killester, Dublin 5. 
25/06/202
5 
Awaiting 
valuation  
DS1280
B 
Clanbrassil Street Lower, 53, Dublin 8. 
11/06/202
4 
€110,000 
DS1276 
Clanbrassil Street Upper, 36-37, Dublin 8. 
28/03/202
4 
€95,000 
DS1526 
Clonard Road, 398/398A, Kimmage, D.12. 
06/03/202
3 
€260,000 
DS2062 
Clonard Road, 607, Kimmage, Dublin 12 
22/01/202
5 
Awaiting 
valuation  

file 
location 
Entered 
on DSR 
Valuation 
DS1593 
Clonliffe Road, 57, Ballybough, Dublin 3. 
08/07/202
2 
€450,000 
DS1850 
College Street, 6, Dublin 2. 
24/09/202
4 
€500,000 
DS704 
Connaught Street 19, D7 
23/03/201
8 
€350,000 
DS705 
Connaught Street 21, D7 
23/03/201
8 
€350,000 
DS040 
Conyngham Road, site at 10-13, Dublin 8. 
(facades of 10-12 are Protected) 
07/08/201
9 
€300,000 
DS937 
Creighton Street, 6, Dublin 2 
16/11/201
6 
€330,000 
DS1644 
Crumlin Road, 201, Crumlin, Dublin 12 
11/03/202
4 
€200,000 
DS1518 
Dolphin's Barn Street, 43, Dublin 8. 
25/05/202
1 
€200,000 
DS1122 
Dolphin's Barn Street, 44, Dublin 8. 
25/05/202
1 
€300,000 
DS1123 
Dolphin's Barn Street, 45, Dublin 8. 
25/05/202
1 
€260,000 
DS1124 
Dolphin's Barn Street, 46, Dublin 8. 
25/05/202
1 
€310,000 
DS1125 
Dolphin's Barn Street, 47, Dublin 8. 
25/05/202
1 
€390,000 
DS1126 
Dolphin's Barn Street, 48/48A, Dublin 8. 
25/05/202
1 
€350,000 
DS1127 
Dolphin's Barn Street, 49, Dublin 8. 
25/05/202
1 
€260,000 
DS1128 
Dolphin's Barn Street, 50, Dublin 8. 
25/05/202
1 
€320,000 
DS1212 
Dunville Terrace, 2, Canal Road, Ranelagh, 
Dublin 6. 
30/06/202
3 
€240,000 
DS1213 
Dunville Terrace, 3, Canal Road, Ranelagh, 
Dublin 6. 
30/06/202
3 
€240,000 
DS1214 
Dunville Terrace, 4, Canal Road, Ranelagh, 
Dublin 6. 
30/06/202
3 
€240,000 
DS1215 
Dunville Terrace, 5, Canal Road, Ranelagh, 
Dublin 6. 
30/06/202
3 
€240,000 
DS1216 
Dunville Terrace, 6, Canal Road, Ranelagh, 
Dublin 6. 
30/06/202
3 
€240,000 
DS595 
Emerald Street, 15/16, D.1 
23/05/202
3 
€100,000 
DS1105 
Emmet Road, 105-107, Former Horse & 
Jockey Pub, Dublin 8 
11/05/202
3 
€500,000 
DS1999 
Emmet Road, 124, Unit 1, Inchicore, D 8 
11/04/202
5 
Awaiting 
valuation  
DS1330 
Eugene Street, 64, Dublin 8. 
11/07/202
3 
€150,000 
DS1916 
Faith Avenue, 20, Dublin 3 
23/07/202
4 
€275,000 

file 
location 
Entered 
on DSR 
Valuation 
DS934 
Ferguson Road, 10, Drumcondra, D9. 
26/09/201
7 
€100,000 
DS982 
Ferguson Road, 8, Drumcondra, D.9. 
28/09/201
7 
€120,000 
DS1748
A 
Frederick Street North, 17, Dublin 1. 
27/08/202
4 
€100,000 
DS1748
B 
Frederick Street North, 18, Dublin 1. 
27/08/202
4 
€100,000 
DS743 
Frederick Street North, 30, Dublin 1. 
18/04/202
3 
€150,000 
DS1066 
Glenarm Avenue, 5, Drumcondra, Dublin 9. 
24/11/202
2 
€300,000 
DS884 
Greenmount Industrial Estate, Unit 4, D12 
29/04/201
5 
€83,000 
DS980 
Hanover Lane, adj. No.34, D8. 
17/05/201
7 
€300,000 
DS250 
Harold's Cross Road, 144, Dublin 6W. 
08/06/200
7 
€500,000 
DS1033 
Harold's Cross Road, 146, Kimmage, D 6W 
02/08/201
8 
€100,000 
DS1391 
Harold's Cross Road, 285-287, Dublin 6. 
14/04/202
5 
Awaiting 
valuation  
DS1948 
Hatch Street Lower, 32, Dublin 2. 
19/02/202
5 
Awaiting 
valuation  
DS1368 
James's Street, 162-165, D8. 
17/06/201
9 
€2,000,00
0 
DS1161 
James's Street, 23, D8. (Protected Structure) 
23/02/202
3 
€232,000 
DS536 
Killeen Road, 48, Rathmines, D6. 
03/10/201
7 
€600,000 
DS1772 
Langrishe Place, 5, Summerhill, Dublin 1. 
14/11/202
4 
€250,000 
DS1107 
Le Vere Terrace, site adj. No.1, Harold's Cross 
Road, D6. 
29/04/202
4 
€210,000 
DS575A 
Leeson Street Lower, 6, D2. 
16/04/201
9 
€285,000 
DS1380 
Main Street, 39a, Chapelizod, Dublin 20. 
23/01/202
3 
€375,000 
DS1868 
Mellowes Road 158, Finglas, Dublin 11 
25/01/202
4 
€150,000 
DS1369 
Merrion Road, 294, Former Swiftcall Building, 
Dublin 4. 
19/06/202
5 
Awaiting 
valuation  
DS1412 
Moeran Road & Cromwellsfort Road (Site to 
Rear), Walkinstown, Dublin 12. 
11/11/202
4 
€210,000 
DS1616 
Morehampton Road, 132, Donnybrook, Dublin 
4. 
30/07/202
4 
€1,000,00
0 
DS898 
Mulberry Cottages, 1, Martin's Row, 
Chapelizod, Dublin 20. 
26/06/201
5 
€150,000 
DS901 
Mulberry Cottages, 10, Martin's Row, 
Chapelizod, Dublin 20. 
26/06/201
5 
€150,000 

file 
location 
Entered 
on DSR 
Valuation 
DS902 
Mulberry Cottages, 11, Martin's Row, 
Chapelizod, Dublin 20. 
26/06/201
5 
€150,000 
DS899 
Mulberry Cottages, 2, Martin's Row, 
Chapelizod, Dublin 20. 
26/06/201
5 
€150,000 
DS953 
Mulberry Cottages, 5, Martin's Row, 
Chapelizod, D.20. 
10/04/201
9 
€200,000 
DS954 
Mulberry Cottages, 6, Martin's Row, 
Chapelizod, D.20. 
10/04/201
9 
€210,000 
DS900 
Mulberry Cottages, 7, Martin's Row, 
Chapelizod, Dublin 20. 
26/06/201
5 
€135,000 
DS905 
Naas Road Old, Coolfan House, D12. 
04/09/201
5 
€135,000 
DS974 
North Circular Road 74, Dublin 7. 
21/08/201
9 
€625,000 
DS1564 
North Circular Road, 386, Phibsborough, D.7. 
16/06/202
3 
€450,000 
DS580 
North King Street, 86, Smithfield, Dublin 7. 
14/07/202
0 
€200,000 
DS1373 
Old Kilmainham, 72-74, Carrigan's Pub, Dublin 
8 
26/09/202
4 
€700,000 
DS1263 
Park Avenue Sandymount, 40, D.4. 
18/08/202
0 
€425,000 
DS1909 
Parnell Street 93-94, Dublin 1. 
16/04/202
4 
€400,000 
DS1040
B 
Parnell Street, 77, Dublin 1 
14/01/202
2 
€375,000 
DS1040
C 
Parnell Street, 78, Dublin 1 
14/01/202
2 
€204,000 
DS843 
Pleasants Street, 48, Dublin 8. 
14/10/202
2 
€575,000 
DS479 
Prussia Street, 24-25, Dublin 7. 
12/07/201
8 
€270,000 
DS691 
Prussia Street, 68-68a, Dublin 7. 
03/04/202
3 
€195,000 
DS871A 
Ranelagh, 2, Dublin 6. 
12/11/202
1 
€450,000 
DS1012 
Rathmore Park, 49, Raheny, D5. 
19/10/201
7 
€400,000 
DS784 
Richmond Avenue, 21 & 27-29 & lands at rear, 
D.3. 
13/12/201
2 
€445,000 
DS868 
Rowserstown Lane, 6 (a.k.a. 6 High Road), 
Kilmainham, D.8. 
10/09/201
4 
€165,000 
DS1615 
Royston, 11, Crumlin / Kimmage, D.12. 
06/06/202
3 
€350,000 
DS1861 
Saint Assam's Park, 24, Raheny , Dublin 5. 
26/03/202
4 
€500,000 
DS1688 
Saint Ignatius Road, The School of Irish 
Wrestling Building, Dublin 7. 
19/12/202
4 
€200,000 
DS1844 
Saint Patrick's Road, 5, Dublin 9. 
20/08/202
4 
€455,000 

file 
location 
Entered 
on DSR 
Valuation 
DS1464 
Saul Road, 15, Crumlin, Dublin 12. 
12/07/202
4 
€250,000 
DS594A 
Seville Place, 42/43, D.1. 
23/05/202
3 
€320,000 
DS1634
A 
Shannon Terrace, opp 1-2 & adj. to 5 Auburn 
Terrace, Old Kilmainham, D.8. 
12/08/202
2 
€400,000 
DS1596 
Shelmalier Road, 45, East Wall, Dublin 3. 
12/12/202
4 
€204,000 
DS1386 
Shelmalier Road, 53, Eastwall, Dublin 3. 
14/09/202
3 
€204,000 
DS2096 
Slievemore Road, 17, Crumlin, Dublin 12 
26/06/202
5 
Awaiting 
valuation  
DS928 
South Circular Road, 355-361, D.8. 
06/01/202
1 
€3,500,00
0 
DS1336 
South Circular Road, 414-416, D8 
13/02/202
3 
€300,000 
DS1581 
South Circular Road, 646-648, Kilmainham, 
D.8. 
09/07/202
4 
€425,000 
DS1218 
Spencer Place, 4, North Strand, Dublin 3. 
27/06/202
3 
€170,000 
DS1859 
St Anthony's Road, 15a, Dublin 8 
15/07/202
4 
€290,000 
DS514A 
Terrace Place, 6 (rear 23 Rutland St. Lr.), D1. 
20/10/200
8 
€80,000 
DS1371 
Terrace Place, 7 & 8, Dublin 1. 
14/06/201
9 
€140,000 
DS1121
A 
Thomas Court, 1-3, Dublin 8 
28/11/201
8 
€350,000 
DS911 
Thomas Court, 37, Dublin 8. 
18/02/201
6 
€250,000 
DS1789 
Townsend Street, 112-114, D.2 
25/06/202
4 
€480,000 
DS1601 
Tyrconnell Road, 129, The Grotto, Inchicore, 
Dublin 8. 
19/06/202
3 
€200,000 
DS1669 
Walworth Road, 5, Portobello, Dublin 8. 
15/06/202
3 
€400,000 
DS2030 
West Road, Coady's Yard, North Strand, D3 
29/11/202
4 
€3,000,00
0 
DS851 
Wharton Terrace, Wharton Hall, Harold's 
Cross, Dublin 6W 
01/04/201
4 
€140,000 
DS2004 
Willow Park Road, 5, Ballymun, Dublin 11 
29/08/202
4 
€460,000 
 
 
3. The annual derelict sites levy of each site.  
 
All sites entered on the Register are subject to a Derelict Sites annual levy of 7% of 
market value and will continue to apply until the site is rendered non-derelict. Unpaid 
levies also attract interest of 1.25% per month. Furthermore, all outstanding levies 

automatically become a charge on the land and will remain a charge until the full 
amount is paid. 
 
 
4. Total levy paid on each site  
5. Total levy owed on each site 
 
Due to GDPR, the amounts owing on individual sites are not released. At present there 
is a cumulative value of €10,018,036.63 owed in Levies (including interest). 
 
Q.115  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the taking in charge process at Royal 
Canal Park and Rathborne in Ashtown 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Royal Canal Bank Canal Bank Pelletstown (Ballymore Homes) 
The Taking in Charge request was received in November 2021 and forwarded to all 
relevant Service Divisions in December 2021. The service department’s response 
outlined necessary works required prior to the area being taken in charge. 
Engagement between Dublin City Council and the developer is ongoing to resolve 
the outstanding issues. 
 
Rathborne Estate Pelletstown – Castlethorn Developments 
The Taking in Charge request was received in May 2023 and forwarded to the 
relevant Service divisions in May 2023.  The service department’s response outlined 
necessary works required prior to the area being taken in charge. Discussions are 
currently ongoing between DCC and the Developers to resolve outstanding issues. 
 
Q.116  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a timeline on the rollout of secure bike bunkers in the 
city. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The project aims to provide 300 secure bicycle storage units over the lifetime of the 
Framework Agreement. The procurement process has progressed to Stage 3, and the 
successful tenderer has been notified of the outcome. The awarding process is 
currently underway, with the necessary formalities being completed to enable the 
signing of the Framework Agreement and the associated contract. 
Once the contract is formally awarded, the appointed operator will actively promote the 
service and offer multiple channels through which members of the public can express 
interest in having a Bike Bunker installed in their area. 
 
Q.117  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the process whereby defects and hazards on the 
road and footpath network are communicated to the council, logged and then 
repaired/made safe. In particular, can the Chief Executive outline the percentage of 
such defects and hazards are deemed critical and to outline the time frame involved in 
the repair of critical hazards and defects in particular. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Defects and hazards on the road and footpath network are communicated to the 
council through various channels, including Citizen Hub, email, phone, and local 
councillors. Additionally, defects are identified by Inspectors and Engineers during their 
travels and recorded on Confirm. 
  

Defects are prioritized by severity, with Priority numbers ranging from 1 to 8. Priority 1 
defects, being the most severe, are addressed within 24 hours to ensure safety. Priority 
2 defects are repaired within one week, and Priority 3 defects within one month. 
Defects categorized as Priority 4 to 8 are typically scheduled for repair within a 6-to-
12-week period. Various factors may influence the timing of repairs, such as parked 
cars, carriageway width, proximity to signalized junctions, traffic volume, pedestrian 
volume, and the impact on local businesses, especially in urban areas. 
 
Q.118  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail how cities are selected to connect with the Dublin 
Portal and to confirm who makes a decision as to which city will be connected at any 
particular time. Also, can the Chief Executive confirm how the public could be 
encouraged to have a say in which city should be connected at any particular time. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As part of Dublin City Council's designation as European Capital of Smart Tourism in 
2024, DCC published a tender for the procurement of an interactive outdoor 
experience to connect Dublin and New York City. 
We received one submission from a Lithuanian start-up, Portals.org who were 
selected as the preferred bidder. 
Portals.org are responsible for engaging with other cities and regions to establish 
new connections and partnerships and to find new destinations where additional 
portals can be located. 
New locations are dependent on an individual city's willingness to fund and locate a 
portal in their respective city and the Portals.org team's capacity to build and install 
new portals at the relevant locations. 
 
Q.119  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
 
To ask the Chief Executive In noting that funding has been secured from the 
Department of Justice for the launch of Dublin‘s Help Zone, can the Chief Executive 
indicate the extent of the zone and the services it is intended to offer to the public.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In line with the objectives of the Dublin City Council Night-Time Economy Strategy, 
which aims to create a vibrant, safe, and inclusive night-time environment, funding was 
sought to pilot a safety initiative. A recent Your Dublin Your Voice survey identified 
safety as a key barrier to participation in the Night-Time Economy. 
 
Funding has been secured from the Department of Justice under the Community 
Safety Fund to support the pilot of a new initiative, officially known as Dublin’s Help 
Zone, designed to enhance safety and wellbeing for those engaging in the city’s night-
time economy. The Help Zone will be publicly known as “The Nee Naw,” an 
approachable and recognisable name. 
 
Following research into similar initiatives in other cities and an assessment of potential 
sites, a location was chosen in an area of high Night-Time Economy footfall. 
The Help Zone, designed to support vulnerable citizens, will consist of a clearly 
branded, stationary mobile unit located at the corner of Camden Street and Grantham 
Street. It will operate on weekend nights over a period of 6–8 weeks during summer 
2025. 
 
The unit will provide immediate, on-site support for members of the public who may be 
under the influence of alcohol or drugs, unwell, or otherwise vulnerable. Services will 
include first aid, welfare signposting, and assistance from trained staff. The vehicle will 
remain parked throughout and will not be used to transport passengers. 

 
The initiative is being delivered in partnership with the Department of Justice, An Garda 
Síochána, the HSE, Transport Authorities, Fáilte Ireland, and a number of other 
frontline agencies. It supports the high-level objectives of the Night-Time Economy 
Task Force and forms part of the Dublin city pilot actions. The initiative will be subject 
to independent evaluation, with findings used to inform any future plans. All information 
will be made public as part of a formal announcement on Monday, 30 June.  
 
Q.120  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what action is available to ensure that cyclists on the 
Clontarf to City Centre cycle path obey basic rules, specifically stopping at red 
traffic/cycle signals. Currently red lights are being ignored by the vast majority of 
cyclists on these routes (roadside survey completed) and apart from the danger to 
themselves and pedestrians, this behaviour also contributes to general traffic delays. 
In addition, could the Chief Executive agree to carry out a survey or have the traffic 
control room use the CCTV footage available to confirm the actual percentage of 
cyclists ignoring red traffic signals. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Active Travel Programme Office is currently developing the 2nd phase of the ‘Be 
Sound’ Campaign. The campaign will ask all road users to be respectful of each other 
and to ensure that everyone feels safe and respected. Aspects of the campaign will 
focus on the Clontarf to City Centre Cycleway.  
 
Q.121  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
Requesting a detailed report on the current process of DE tenanting of flat complexes 
due for regeneration.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The DE tenanting of Dublin City Council complexes ahead of regeneration are 
completed in line with Dublin City Council’s Scheme of Lettings Priorities. DE tenanting 
status commences once planning permission for the proposed regeneration project is 
achieved. All residents are rehomed based on current housing need as defined by the 
Scheme of Lettings Priorities. 
 
Q.122  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to liaise with the Traffic Department regarding the urgent 
need for traffic calming measures, including the installation of speed ramps, on Grange 
Park Grove and the surrounding streets within the Grange Park estate in Raheny. 
Residents have reported vehicles frequently exceeding the speed limit — in some 
cases reportedly reaching speeds of over 70km/h — creating serious safety concerns, 
particularly for the growing number of young children and families in the area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7046831) has been referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.123  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the Belmayne playground and recreation 
space, which has been delayed for over two years. Residents were advised that it 
would be completed by the second quarter of this year, but work has yet to begin. Can 
a timeframe be provided for the commencement of works?  
 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Belmayne playground surface has recently been resurfaced. Procurement of the 
play equipment suitable to the location has commenced. The installation will be 
scheduled as soon as this process is completed.   
 
Q.124  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive when Pay and Display parking will be installed near the 
shops on Belmayne Main Street and Belmayne Avenue? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Belmayne Main Street and Belmayne Avenue are not in the charge of Dublin City 
Council. The Transport Advisory Group are unable to consider requests or make any 
traffic management decisions in relation to this location. 
 
Q.125  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the current condition and future plans for 
the maintenance and preservation of the old St. Assam’s Church and graveyard in 
Raheny, a protected structure listed on Dublin City Council’s Record of Protected 
Structures. Specifically, what actions will be taken to remove damaging vegetation — 
including ivy and invasive plants — that are currently threatening the structure and 
gravestones? What plans are in place for the ongoing maintenance of the site, 
including addressing structural safety concerns such as the low and potentially 
unstable boundary wall? Also, if the Council can support and facilitate renewed public 
engagement with the site, such as enabling the resumption of heritage tours previously 
held during Heritage Week? This historic site, central to Raheny’s heritage, has seen 
a noticeable decline in condition since 2022 and requires urgent attention to ensure its 
preservation and accessibility for future generations. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A condition survey of the graveyard was produced in 2023. This survey will be 
reviewed with the aim of compiling a list of priority works to be implemented in late 
2025 / early 2026.   
 
