Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 12 May 2025 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 12 Bealtaine 2025 i Seomra na Comhairle, 
Halla na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an 
tArdmheara Emma Blain sa chathaoir 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Ammar Ali 
Daryl Barron 
Racheal Batten 
Emma Blain 
Janice Boylan 
Kevin Breen 
Noelle Brown 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Danny Byrne 
Lesley Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
David Coffey 
Anthony Connaghan 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Ray Cunningham 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Daniel Ennis 
Cian Farrell 
Alison Field 
Declan Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
Deirdre Heney 
Jesslyn Henry 
Rory Hogan 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Feljin Jose 
Kourtney Kenny 
Patrick Kinsella 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Aoibheann Mahon 
Ray McAdam 
Séamas McGrattan 
Ciaran Meachair 
Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
Paddy Monahan 
Carolyn Moore 
Edel Moran 
Darragh Moriarty 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Colm O'Rourke 
Gavin Pepper 
Cieran Perry 
Michael Pidgeon 
Gayle Ralph 
Punam Rane 
Conor Reddy 
Nial Ring 
Aishling Silke 
Supriya Singh 
Malachy Steenson 
John Stephens 
Catherine Stocker 
Philip Sutcliffe 
 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Prajwal K. Annibabu 
Aidan Blighe 
Lorraine Brogan 
John Flanagan 
Anthony Flynn 
Michael Gallagher 
Kirsten Hart 
Derek Kelly 
Yvonne Kelly 
Victor Leonov 
Owen McManus 
Mick Mulhern 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Patricia Reidy 
Paul Rutherford 
Richard Shakespeare 
 
 
 
 
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
In Memoriam 
There Lord Mayor extended her sympathies to Councillor Anthony Connaghan and his 
family on the passing of his son Sean, on 24th April. She also extended her 
8 - 9 

 
sympathies to the family of Garda Kevin Flatley who was tragically killed in the line of 
duty on 11th May. On behalf of the City Council the Lord Mayor expressed 
condolences on the death of Pope Francis on 21st April. A minute’s silence was 
observed in remembrance of those who passed. 
 
Provision of Public Toilets at St. Stephens Green 
The Lord Mayor informed Members that two Emergency motions had been submitted 
following the announcement on Friday 9th April that the public toilets on St. Stephen’s 
Green were due to close. After discussions with the Chief Executive and Executive 
Manager, the Lord Mayor agreed to facilitate a debate under Lord Mayors Business on 
the matter. She invited Executive Manager, Derek Kelly to brief the Members on the 
current position. A copy of this report is attached under Appendix A. Following the 
Managers report the Lord Mayor invited the Political Groups to speak on the matter. 
The Members thanked the Manager for his report and welcomed the commitment to 
retain the existing facilities. There was unanimous support for the provision of public 
toilets throughout the City and for the continued operation of the facilities on St. 
Stephen’s Green. Members regarded the provision of public facilities as a basic right 
that they have advocated for over many years. The Chief Executive confirmed that he 
would bring a report to the June meeting outlining the various options for the provision 
of public toilets and the capital and revenue expenditure associated with such 
provision. The Lord Mayor thanked the Chief Executive and the Members for 
addressing this issue and confirmed that she would also write to the OPW asking 
them to investigate the provision of public conveniences in public spaces which they 
have responsibility for.    
 
Update Tenant in Situ Scheme 
The Lord Mayor informed Members that following the Special Meeting in March on the 
Tenant in Situ Scheme and the agreement of two emergency motions on the same 
matter, she wrote to the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage on 
three separate occasions inviting him to attend a City Council meeting, to meet with 
the Lord Mayor or to meet with a delegation of Councillors to address this issue. She 
informed Members that she had received a very brief reply from the Minister’s Office 
stating that he was unable to facilitate this meeting request. The Lord Mayor felt the 
Ministers response was wholly inadequate and has escalated the matter by writing to 
the Tánaiste and Taoiseach expressing her intense disappointment with the way in 
which the Office of Lord Mayor and the City Council has been treated. The Members 
thanked the Lord Mayor for her strong stance on this matter and were fully supportive 
of her efforts. The Lord Mayor confirmed that she would update the Members as soon 
as she received a response from the Tánaiste and Taoiseach. 
 
Lord Mayor’s Charity Ball 
The Lord Mayor expressed her thanks to all those who supported the Charity Ball 
which took place on Saturday 10th April. It was a great success, raising over €135,000 
for the three very worthy charities - The Alzheimer Society of Ireland, Cystic Fibrosis 
Ireland and Dublin Rape Crisis Centre.   
 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Christy Burke and seconded by Councillor Conor Reddy 
that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the questions 
lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the questions 
lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and Answers are set 
out in Appendix B to these minutes. 
 
 
10 - 50 

 
3 
  Correspondence was received from the following Local Authorities; 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Janice Boylan and seconded by Councillor Séamas 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence listed. 
The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
4 
  To confirm the minutes of the Special City Council meeting held on 20th March 2025 
and the monthly City Council Meeting held on 7th April 2025. 
 
The minutes of the Special City Council meeting held on 20th March 2025 and the 
monthly City Council meeting held on 7th April 2025, having been printed, certified by 
the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken as read, were signed 
by the Lord Mayor. 
 
 
5 
  To fill one Green Party vacancy on the Protocol Committee following the resignation of 
Cllr. Michael Pidgeon. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Michael Pidgeon and seconded by Councillor Donna 
Cooney that Councillor Feljin Jose be appointed to the Protocol Committee. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
6 
  Report No. 118/2025 of the Executive Manager (B. Kelly) - Extinguishment of the 
Public Right of Way over the landing/car park area adjacent to 89 Swords Road, 
Whitehall, Dublin 9. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Jesslyn Henry and seconded by Councillor John Lyons 
that we, the Lord Mayor and Members of Dublin City Council, being the Roads 
Authority for the City of Dublin and being of the opinion that the Public Right of Way 
over the landing/car park area adjacent to 89 Swords Road (the Viscount Pub on the 
junction of Iveragh Road & Swords Road, Whitehall, Dublin 9), as shown on the 
attached Drawing No. SM-2023-0504 is no longer required for public use, extinguish 
the public right of way in accordance with Section 73 of the Roads Act 1993. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
7 
  Report No. 119/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - With Reference to the 
Unaudited Annual Financial Statements 2024 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Janice Boylan and seconded by Councillor Séamas 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 119/2025. The 
motion was put and carried.  
 
 
8 
  Report No. 128/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - With Reference to 
Revised Expenditure For 2024 Submitted In Accordance With Section 104 Local 
Government Act 2001 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Christy 
Burke that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 128/2025 and assents 
to the proposal outlined therein. The motion was put and carried.  
  
 
 
9 
  Disposal of Fee Simple and Freehold Interest:   
 
 
(a)   Report No. 109/2025 of the Executive Manager (F. D'Arcy) - With reference to 
the disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and Tenant (Ground 
Rents) (No. 2) Act, 1978.  
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor John Stephens and seconded by Councillor 
Conor Reddy that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
109/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
(b)   Report No. 123/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - Disposal of the 
Fee Simple interest in a site at 209A Windmill Road, Crumlin, Dublin 12  
It was proposed by Councillor Pat Dunne and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 123/2025 
and assents to the proposal outlined therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
10   Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
(a)   Report No. 122/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - Grant of 5 year 
Lease of a plot adjacent to 74 Fairlawn Road, Dublin 11  
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor 
Jesslyn Henry that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
122/2025 and assents to the proposal outlined therein. The motion was put 
and carried.  
  
 
 
(b)   Report No. 124/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - Grant of 5 year 
Lease of a plot adjacent to 75 Fairlawn Road, Dublin 11  
It was proposed by Councillor Connor Reddy and seconded by Councillor Mary 
Callaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 124/2025 
and assents to the proposal outlined therein. The motion was put and carried.  
  
 
 
(c)   Report No. 125/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - Grant of a 10 
year lease of Unit 1A, Block 20, New Priory, Hole in the Wall Road, Dublin 13 
to RGAM Limited  
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor 
Jesslyn Henry that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
125/2025 and assents to the proposal outlined therein. The motion was put 
and carried.  
 
 
11   Disposal of Property:   
 
 
(a)   Report No. 120/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - With reference 
to the Disposal of the Council’s Title in the properties known as 13 and 14 
Grattan Crescent, Dublin 8  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 120/2025 
and assents to the proposal outlined therein. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
(b)   Report No. 121/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - With reference 
to the proposed disposal of the Council’s estate and interests in the site known 
as Davitt Road (3 plots), Drimnagh, Dublin 12 
 
Councillor Philip Sutcliffe notified the meeting that he had a conflict of interest 
in relation to this item and removed himself from proceedings for the duration 
of the debate on the matter.  
 
 
 

 
Councillor Michael Pidgeon requested further information on the company, 
Randalswood Design and Build Limited, who intend to purchase the Council’s 
interest in the site. In the original report to the South-Central Area Committee 
the assignee of the lease was listed as Emrajare Limited. Councillor Pat Dunne 
also wanted further information regarding the impact the disposal would have 
on the AHB Co-operative Housing Ireland providing 170 Part V housing units at 
the site First Lock, Davitt Road, Dublin 12.    
 
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor 
Janice Boylan that Report No. 121/2025 be deferred until further information 
was provided to Members regarding the ownership of the company involved 
and any impact on the Davitt Road Social Housing Project. The motion was put 
and carried.  
 
(c)   Report No. 126/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - Disposal of a 
plot of land to the front of 226 Malahide Road, Donnycarney, Dublin 3  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Jesslyn Henry and seconded by Councillor Edel 
Moran that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 126/2025 and 
assents to the proposal outlined therein. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
(d)   Report No. 127/2025 of the Acting Executive Manager (B. Corry) - Disposal of 
property at New Ireland Road, Rialto, Dublin 8  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ciaran Ó Meachair and seconded by Councillor 
Jesslyn Henry that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
127/2025 and assents to the proposal outlined therein. The motion was put 
and carried.   
 
 
12   Report No. 111/2025 of the Executive Manager (P. Reidy)  with reference to the 2024 
Annual Report on Climate Neutral Dublin 2030. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 111/2025. The 
motion was put and carried.  
 
The Lord Mayor also confirmed that a Special City Council meeting concerning the 
delivery of Climate Neutral Dublin 2030 would be held in September 2025. 
 
 
13   Report No. 112/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. Collins)  with reference to the 2024 
Dublin City Council Annual Progress report on the implementation of the Dublin 
Agglomeration Noise Action Plan 2024-2028. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 112/2025. The 
motion was put and carried.    
 
 
14   Report No. 115/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Social Housing 
Supply and Delivery Monthly Update Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 115/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 

 
15   Report No. 116/2025 of the A/Head of Finance (V. Leonov) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Patrick 
Kinsella that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 116/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
16   Report No. 117/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Edel Moran 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 117/2025. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
17   Report No. 108/2025 of the Area Committees - Breviates of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of April 2025. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor John 
Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 108/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
18   Report No. 113/2025 of the Area Joint Policing Sub-Committees - Breviates of Area 
JPC meetings held in April 2025. 
 
Councillor Dermot Lacey asked the Manager if there was any update regarding the 
establishment of the Local Community Safety Partnerships? He also advised 
Members that the new Partnerships would operate at a community level and that there 
would be no equivalent to the current Dublin City Joint Policing Committee, which he 
regarded as concerning.  
 
The Manager confirmed that there had been no further updates from the Department 
of Justice on the roll out of the LCSP’s. The Lord Mayor agreed to write to the 
Department of Justice to clarify when the scheme will be commenced, and to request 
a commitment that the Department will revert to Group Leaders with the learnings that 
they may have taken from contributions made by Dublin City Council. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Jesslyn Henry and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 113/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
19   Report No. 107/2025 of the Housing and Social Inclusion Strategic Policy Committee - 
Breviate of the meeting held on the 24th March 2025, Councillor Deirdre Heney, 
Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Jesslyn Henry and seconded by Councillor Pat Dunne 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 107/2025. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
20   Report No. 110/2025 of the Finance Strategic Policy Committee - Breviate of the 
meeting held on 20th March 2025, Councillor Séamas McGrattan, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Jesslyn Henry 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 110/2025. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 

 
 
21   Report No. 114/2025 of the Protocol Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 
27th March  2025, Councillor Ray McAdam, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Conor Reddy 
that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 114/2025. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
22   Topical Issues 
 
No topical issues were submitted for consideration. 
 
 
23   Motions on Notice 
 
Motion No. 1 in the name of Councillor Donna Cooney  
 
 
 
 
 
“It was proposed by Councillor Donna Cooney and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council agrees that the Central Bank of Ireland can and must 
act to end the sale of Israel Bonds under its authority. It must immediately end 
regulation of the bonds. It must end its complicity in genocide. This is a moral 
obligation and a legal obligation under the Genocide Convention, international human 
rights and CFT legislation, under Irish Human Rights Law and Ireland as a neutral 
Country must not act in any way to facilitate these bonds unless there is an immediate 
cease fire, end to killing and a lasting peace.”  
 
The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
24   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
Emergency motions were discussed under Lord Mayors Business.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
 

Appendix A 
 
 
Report on the removal of Temporary Public toilets on Grafton Street and Future 
Provision in City Centre 
Background 
Two temporary public toilets were installed in Wolfe Tone Square and outside St Stephens 
Green shopping centre as an emergency measure due to the closure of retail and hospitality 
businesses during the Covid pandemic of 2020. These units accommodated circa 20,000 
users per week in 2021 when outdoor socialising was at its peak in the city centre. The 
redevelopment of Wolfe Tone Square brought about the need to relocate this unit to Ryders 
Row, however due to complaints of anti-social behaviour in the area and low usage it was 
decided in mid-2022 to permanently remove this unit. 
The St Stephens Green/Grafton Street unit has remained in place since 2020, and has been 
operational from 10.00a.m – 6.00p.m, 7 days a week since its introduction. The installation of 
the unit was initially a short term arrangement, and a temporary operating model was entered 
into with a service provider to provide all operational and security functions.  Usage has 
dropped significantly to 1,500 users per week from its peak in 2021, and the current operator 
for this unit is ceasing trading. Unfortunately, it is not possible to keep the existing Unit in place 
until a permanent solution opens and for the above stated reasons Waste Management 
Services intend to remove this temporary public toilet at the top of Grafton Street shortly.  As 
we are awaiting a date for planned LUAS maintenance downtime from TransDev, it could be 
a number of weeks before the Unit will be removed.  Once this date is known the Elected 
Members will be advised.   
Future Provision 
In order to offer an alternative public toilet service, Waste Management have been in 
discussions with two service providers following an Expressions of Interest process in 2023, 
examining the various options available. One of the service providers who specialise in 
automated units strongly advised against placing an un-manned/automated public toilet unit 
in the city centre, due to the significant risk associated with anti-social activity. Waste 
Management have been exploring other service provision models with our Beta Teams, and 
these discussions are still ongoing. A decision on the preferred operating model has yet to be 
decided.  Waste Management have been engaging with the City Co-ordination Office to 
identify 2 locations where potential modular Toilet Units could be placed.  We are assessing 
a location on Princes Street North (off O’Connell Street) and the site of the existing Temporary 
Unit at the Top of Grafton Street at present.  If these sites prove suitable, a Part VIII process 
will be initiated in tandem with the procurement process for the preferred operating model for 
the toilets.  I hope to bring proposals to the South East and Central Area committee’s during 
Q3 2025. 
In addition, the provision of public toilets has been included in the design brief and scope of 
service for the new College Green Public Realm Scheme, which is due to commence 
construction in 2027. College Green is an ideal location for public conveniences to serve the 
city centre, and incorporating them into a major public realm scheme would be our preferred 
option where there is ample space to consider different design types and alternative operating 
models. 
Next Steps 
 
1. WMS to appoint consultants to prepare Part VIII drawings and associated Public 
Consultation documents (4-6 weeks) 

Appendix A 
 
 
2. Finalise 2 locations for Toilet units (preferred locations are St. Stephens Green 
and Princes St North) 
3. Agree operating model for the toilets 
4. Begin Part VIII process Q3/Q4 2025 (16–20-week period) 
5. Commence procurement process for agreed operating model (running in tandem 
with Part VIII) 
6. Appoint successful tenderer and install new toilets (expected Summer 2026 
subject to all stages happening without issues arising) 
 
 
Derek Kelly 
Executive Manager 
Environment & Transportation 

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY 12th MAY 
2025 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to quantify the supports given by Dublin City Council: 
financial, staff and other to the St. Patricks Festival organisation and if any progress 
has been made on Councillor (separate to the Lord Mayor) representation on the Board 
of the Festival. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply will be issued to the councillor within 2 weeks of the council meeting  
 
 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive further to outline the involvement of Dublin City Council in 
the appointment of a chairperson to the proposed new Community Safety Forum and 
to outline any other aspects of the establishment of the Forum that the Council has 
been involved in. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In advance of the commencement of the relevant legislation, the Department of Justice 
has been working with stakeholders, including Local Authorities, to plan for the 
establishment of Local Community Safety Partnerships. 
Involvement to date has been as follows: 
- 
The North Inner City Local Community Safety Partnership was one of 3 pilot LCSPs 
established in 2021 for a 24-month period. The City Council facilitated the 
establishment and operation of the pilot and supports its continued operation. City 
Council officials and members of the LCSP participated in the evaluation of the 
pilot. 
- 
Liaison with the Department of Justice to keep abreast of progress on legislation, 
requirement for 5 LCSPs in the Dublin City Area, and arrangement of briefings for 
the Elected Members. 
- 
The City Council advertised a call for Expressions of Interest for Chairpersons of 
the 5 LCSPs on 2nd August 2024, to which there was a low response rate. A 
renewed campaign was planned but was not advertised, pending the introduction 
of the enabling legislation. In late February 2025, the Department issued 
correspondence to local authorities advising of a change in the process for 
appointing chairpersons of the LCSPs. The process now is that the chair be elected 
from within the LCSP membership. It is anticipated that this election will be held at 
the first meeting of the Partnership and guidance on the election process will be 
issued in advance by the National Office for Community Safety. 
- 
The City Council will shortly advertise for the 5 Local Community Safety 
Partnership Co-ordinators 
 
Briefings on the LCSPs have been arranged for the Elected Members including: 
• 
a briefing on the LCSPs by the Department of Justice at the City Wide JPC 
Meeting in Quarter 1 2024 
• 
a briefing by the Area Executive Managers for Group Leaders on 16th July 
2024 to inform them of and discuss the roll out of LSCP’s 
• 
details and notice of the advertising of the Expression of Interest for LCSP 
Chairpersons was circulated to Group Leaders on 2nd August 2024 
• 
the item was included on the agenda at the Lord Mayor/Councillors forum on 
safety with An Garda Siochana held on 19th September 2024 

• 
A report on LCSPs was presented to the November 2024 City Council meeting 
• 
A briefing for Group Leaders by the Department of Justice and National Office 
for Community Safety was held on 16th April, 2025 
 
The Regulations setting out the details of the establishment, structure and operation 
of the LCSPs are awaited. 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR DANNY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive for a breakdown of the number of applicants for social 
housing in areas J, K, L, M and N.  (By bedside) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please see requested figures, below –  
 
 
January 2025 HOUSING Waiting List figures by Bedsize Req 
Bedsize Required 
Area J   
Area K    Area L    Area M   
Area N   
1 Bed 
778 
734 
624 
507 
574 
2 Bed 
422 
334 
118 
118 
147 
3 Bed 
127 
146 
60 
46 
49 
4 Bed 
14 
32 
4 
5 
11 
5 Bed 
1 
3 
  
  
  
Grand Total 
1342 
1249 
806 
676 
781 
January 2025 TRANSFER Waiting List figures by Bedsize Req 
Bedsize Required 
Area J   
Area K    Area L    Area M   
Area N   
1 Bed 
486 
422 
667 
477 
443 
2 Bed 
670 
641 
410 
337 
275 
3 Bed 
338 
358 
187 
156 
145 
4 Bed 
37 
52 
15 
23 
24 
5 Bed 
3 
5 
4 
1 
2 
Grand Total 
1534 
1478 
1283 
994 
889 
 
Q.4 
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a housing transfer be granted to mother of four living at 
(details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Transfer List and holds a welfare priority with an 
application date of 07/05/2021, the applicant holds the following position on this list; 
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
E 
4 
5 
 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant.  
 

Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
Applicants can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size 
requirement of their household.  
The applicant’s partner was recently successful in his application to reside at (details 
supplied), the applicant should now be advised to complete an add partner form and 
submit same with a copy of photo identification for her partner to Housing Allocations 
for processing.  
  
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the seating for Ashington Park. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services parks improvement programme for the area is at capacity for this year.  
This proposal will be listed for consideration and inclusion in the 2026 programme. 
 
Q.6 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive when will the rubbish bag ban be put in place on the North 
City. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Head of Waste Management Services Barry Woods gave a detailed report to the 
Southeast Area Committee updating them on the status of the proposed refuse bag 
ban in February. A copy of the report on the project is below. There is no further update 
on this project at present. The operational issues referred to are close to being resolved 
and the trial is expected to commence in early May. 
 
An expansion of the pilot area to include the North City can only take place once the 
initial trial pilot area has been in operation for a period and the results of the trial 
evaluated to determine its effectiveness and what changes and improvements if any 
need to be made before it is expanded to include additional areas of the City.  
 
February South East Area Committee Report 
The full removal of the derogation which allows people to present their waste in plastic 
bags within the Pilot area is progressing, however, a final date is yet to be set as we 
await ESB connections for the on-street infrastructure (Mobile Compactors) for those 
customers that cannot accommodate reusable receptacles, i.e. Wheelie/Euro 
Bins.  There has been a significant increase in the number of customers moving to 
Wheelie/Euro Bins over the past number of months and there is a visible improvement 
within the pilot zone.  
The Waste collectors that operate within the Pilot area, i.e. Panda, Thornton’s and 
Key Waste have advised that over 30% of their customers in the Pilot zone are now 
using Wheelie/Euro Bins.  
  
Waste Management Services and the Waste Collectors that operate in the Pilot area 
have been meeting regularly over the past number of months, following the decision 
to remove the derogation and all parties are working hard to fully implement this 
major change to how waste is presented within the City. The Collectors are 
communicating with their customers within the Pilot area on a regular basis and their 
Sales Reps have been calling to their customers to encourage them to move to 
Wheelie/Euro Bins.  The Collectors are also developing a Mobile Application that will 
allow their larger Bag customers, who cannot accommodate Wheelie/Euro bins and 
where the use of the on-street compactors would not be appropriate, to interact with 
them regarding collection times so waste is only presented when the truck is on the 
street.  

  
The derogation which allows the use of plastic bags will be fully removed in the Pilot 
area once the on-street infrastructure is in place.  
  
Please be assured that there has been significant engagement between DCC Waste 
Management Service and the private Waste Collectors on this matter and all parties 
are agreed on how things will work going forward.  We have also engaged with 
Dublin Town who have brought the matter to the attention of their members and 
Dublin Chamber and again everyone is supportive of this initiative and want to see it 
successfully implemented.  
  
It is our intention to move our attention to the Henry Street/O'Connell Street/Abbey St 
environs shortly and we are meeting the operators on this matter in the coming days. 
Regarding the impact of this change.  The City Councils roll is that of enforcement of 
the Presentation of Waste Bye-Laws.  Waste Management Services made the 
decision to remove the derogation facility from the circa 950 streets within the city that 
are permitted to use plastic bags to present their waste rather than in a reusable 
receptacle i.e. Wheelie Bin, to support our effort to improve the cleanliness and 
presentation of the City following significant criticism over the past 12-18 months. The 
collection of Waste is a private industry and therefore it is the responsibility of the 
Waste collectors to provide a service that complies with the Bye-Laws, however, due 
to the challenges faced by some building occupiers regarding the storage of Bins, we 
agreed to work with the Collectors to support additional options for waste disposal, i.e. 
Door-to-Door collections and on-street communal Waste Compactors.  The City 
Council will facilitate these additional solutions where possible. 
 
The Elected Members were briefed on this proposal as part of the update on the new 
Waste Management Services 3 Pillar Strategy at the City Council meeting on 
2nd September 2024. 
 
Q.7  
COUNCILLOR CHIRSTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the paths in (details supplied) be power washed. As 
they have not being power washed in many years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Arrangements have been made to have the above-mentioned paths power washed as 
requested. 
 
Q.8  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive to ask senior Garda management at Store Street to 
address the anti-social behaviour from 9 am mornings till afternoons Ie drinking being 
very loud outside the (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Central Area Office has formally contacted the Superintendent of Store Street 
Garda Station regarding this matter and has requested a response. Any reply received 
will be forwarded directly to the Councillor 
 
Q.9 
COUNCILLOR CHIRSTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive if the fire department keep checks on fire exits are in place 
and fire alarms are installed in units at (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Fire services Acts 1981 & 2003 places responsibility on the person in control of a 
building for the fire safety in the building. DFB has no responsibility for fire safety in 

buildings and premises. We offer advice to persons in control on fire safety best 
practice and how to maintain fire safety in buildings 
The person in control of a building should ensure that they are aware and understand 
their responsibilities under the Fire Services Act. 
 
Q.10  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the housing file of (detail supplied) and if 
consideration will be given to her application for one of the new homes at Oscar 
Traynor Woods. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing List with an application date of 13/09/2019, the 
applicant holds the following position on this list; 
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
2 
149 
 
The properties at Oscar Traynor Woods have not yet been advertised through Choice 
Based Lettings, the applicant should be advised to keep an eye when they are 
advertised and to make an application.  
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant.  
The applicant has submitted an application in respect of a medical priority, it is currently 
with the Chief Medical Officer for assessment, the applicant will be notified of the 
outcome directly.   
 
Q.11 
COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to write to seek an update from the Minister for Transport 
on the status of the feasibility study for a light rail line from the proposed metro stop in 
Northwood through the Oscar Traynor Road meeting the Harmonstown Dart Station. 
While we note the response stating that it is not in the program, there was a response 
back in 2022 that the Department would review the feasibility of such a project. It is 
noted since then there has been substantial development in the area and Glenveagh 
has left a route for the live in the Oscar Traynor Woods site for a stop along with an 
available stop at the Gardai station in Coolock. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Under the Dublin Transport Authority Act 2008, the National Transport Authority (NTA) 
is mandated to review its transport strategy every six years. As we are only three years 
into the current strategy — the Greater Dublin Area Transport Strategy 2022–2042 — 
commencing a review at this stage would be considered premature. 
The N6 already provides a high frequency bus service along the suggested alignment.  
 
Q.12  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive what actions have been taken on his 2023 Childcare report 
in Dublin City, and to ask the Chief Executive to ensure that Dublin City Councils own 
creche is supported in meeting the demand and being provided with the available sites 
to accommodate the waiting list. With exploring a second location if necessary. Dublin 
City Council should have facilities to ensure their own staff’s childcare needs are met 
as it is imperative that there is no waiting list with our facilities. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Dublin City Council’s staff Crèche is currently located in Dominick Street. The Crèche 
is due to relocate back to the Civic Offices following an extensive refurbishment of the 
on-site Crèche.  
The refurbished Crèche will cater for 38 children.  
There is currently no demand for a Crèche to be provided at a second location.   
 
On foot of the motion below proposed by Councillor Racheal Batten and seconded by 
Lord Mayor, Alison Gilliland at the May 2021 City Council meeting: 
‘That we write to the Minister for Children requesting support for Dublin City Council to 
run their own city crèches and special state insurances be provided’ 
it was agreed that the Chief Executive would commission research on the matter. 
The CE commissioned a study by ‘Unique insight’ Consultants, which looked at the 
current role the Council plays in supporting the childcare sector, and what potential it 
might have in facilitating childcare services in the city. The Corporate Policy Group 
(CPG) referred the study to the Planning & Urban Form SPC.  On the 31st March 2023 
the CPG agreed the establishment of a Childcare Subgroup of the SPC and its terms 
of reference.  
The subgroup identified where changes need to be made and in this regard the Chair 
wrote to Roderic O’Gorman T.D., Minister for Children, Equality, Disability, Integration 
& Youth and Darragh O'Brien T.D., Minister for Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage (see below). An acknowledgement was received and as far as this office is 
aware the guidelines are currently under review. 
Childcare is an agenda item on the current Planning & Urban Regeneration SPC and 
the current Chair in April 2025 wrote to James Browne T.D., Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage and Norma Foley T.D., Minister for Children, Equality, 
Disability, Integration & Youth. The Chair brought to the Ministers’ attention the issues 
that came to the forefront through the work of the subgroup which ‘directly relate to 
national planning policy on childcare’ and reissued the content of the correspondence 
sent to previous Ministers. 
The Chair also wrote to the Department of Children Equality Disability Integration & 
Youth (DCEDIY) to bring to its attention concern raised by members of the SPC at its 
February meeting that there is a ‘lack of a requirement for a democratically elected 
Councillor to be represented on the board of Childcare Committees’ and calling for the 
‘membership requirements to be reviewed and amended’.  
 
Q.13  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that the green spaces on Coolgariff Road in 
Beaumont are tidy up, they have been cut recently but there is growth out on to the 
paths and they look awful 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The area is maintained by way of contract which provides for the cutting back of such 
overgrowth once during the contract period.  Such work is usually carried out outside 
of the active grass growing period.  The matter will be referred to the contract manager 
to have this area inspected and the cutting back at the paths put on the contractor’s 
schedule. 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive that a review be taken place in relation to the double yellow 
lines or ramps in Albert College and the repair of the existing ramps as they are worn 
out. This has been refused but it is a very dangerous bend and is an illegal parking 
black spot. We accept that it is illegal to park on bends but as there is no constant 
monitoring it is happening all the time, especially during college term time. As the road 
is a cut-through, especially during rush hour the speed is very high. 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Regarding the double yellow lines; Road Maintenance Services is not permitted to 
construct new infrastructure, or alter existing infrastructure, only maintain infrastructure 
already in place. This includes changes to existing line markings on roads. Please refer 
this inquiry to Traffic, contactable at traffic@dublincity.ie. 
 
The ramps in question on Albert College Park, Albert College Drive, and Albert College 
Court have been added to the list to be considered as additional work for the 2025 
annual works program or failing that the 2026 annual works program. The Confirm 
reference number for this inquiry is 11177013. 
 
 
It is noted that parking restrictions, in the form of continuous white lines, are present 
along the bends of Albert College Park near properties No. 12 and No. 14.  
 
In accordance with Section 36 of the Road Traffic (Traffic & Parking) Regulations 1997, 
a vehicle shall not be parked on a section of roadway with fewer than three traffic lanes 
where traffic sign number RRM 001 (continuous white line) has been provided.  
Additional parking restrictions, such as double yellow lines, are not recommended. 
 
In accordance with the Design Manual for Urban Roads and Streets guidelines, the 
bends serve as a traffic-calming measure by causing drivers to slow down. Speed 
ramps are not an appropriate or recommended as a traffic calming measure for this 
road because of the bends on the road.  Speed ramps pose a safety hazard during 
directional changes. Therefore, speed ramps are not recommended. 
 
Q.15  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive report on the number of Pedestrian and Zebra Crossings 
installed in each administrative area of Dublin City in the years 2022, 2023 and 2024, 
and the monies spent in each administrative area in those years carrying out the works. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY:  
The pedestrian crossings installed between 2022 – 2024 are as follows: 
 
Area 
No of Ped 
crossings 
No of 
Zebra  
crossings 
Cost 
South East 
7 
1 
€2,000,000 
Central 
5 
- 
€2,000,000 
North Central 
2 
- 
€500,000 
South Central 
1 
- 
€300,000 
 
The 2025 programme is currently at construction stage.  
 
 
Q.16 
 COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange a review of the traffic at the junction of St. 
Margarets Road and Jamestown Business Park / McKelvey Road. There are vehicles 
coming from the Business Park which are having difficulty exiting the area due to traffic 
congestion. The traffic lights are adjacent and there is no yellow box at the entrance 
and cars are illegally parking along this stretch of road making it difficult for lorries to 
exit the Industrial Estate. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Jamestown Business Park access road is not in the charge of Dublin City Council. 
As such, measures cannot be provided thereon nor can illegal parking be enforced. 

The request for a yellow box at the junction of Jamestown Business Park will be 
assessed by the area engineer. With regards to illegal parking, the area engineer will 
liaise with parking enforcement to enforce offending vehicles in the area. In the 
meantime, instances of illegal or obstructive parking should be referred to Dublin Street 
Parking Services, DSPS (email info@dsps.ie or tel. no. 01 602 2500) or an Garda 
Síochána for enforcement. 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the landing at 42-48 Collins Drive to be re-
instated properly. This area has been neglected for a long time now and there are 
several trip hazards here and it is causing difficulty for the elderly and infirmed who live 
in the immediate area who must access the laneway for shops, public transport etc 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This location will be inspected and any repairs deemed necessary will be added to our 
Works List. 
 
Q.18 
 COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive please give me guidance on the following (details 
supplied)  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Under the Tenant (Incremental) Purchase Scheme 2016, a tenant can apply to 
purchase their local authority home subject to conditions.  
The Link above contains guidance, conditions and process of the application. 
Application forms are also available online 
Valuations of properties are conducted post application.  
 
Any further questions can be supported through tenant.purchase@dublincity.ie or 01 
222 5449.  
 
Q.19 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive that the Housing Welfare team for Cherry Orchard Ave in 
Dublin 10, to arrange to meet the following (Detail Supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This applicant currently has a Medical Priority for 3 bedroom accommodation awarded 
on 18/3/25 and will be prioritised for suitable housing. A meeting with a housing advisor 
can be arranged to discuss this further if required. If that is the case please let me 
know and a meeting can be arranged accordingly.  
 
Q.20 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive please look at providing an enhanced cleansing operation 
along Cherry Orchard Ave Dublin 10. The current system is not providing the best 
option for this busy area particularly the lower section along where the only shop in 
Cherry Orchard operates. In addition can the need for enhanced road safety be looked 
at again with ramps / speed cushions, additional signage, this whilst a bus route is 
essential for the safety of children etc. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services will monitor the cleaning of Cherry Orchard Avenue to 
ensure that it is cleaned in the most efficient and effective manner possible. Particular 
emphasis will be given to the lower section at the only shop there. 
 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7045741) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  

The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.21 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive please come up with a proper safe traffic management plan 
for Claddagh Green facing the commercial units and our older persons complex at 
Claddagh Green. The current situation is a free for all with parking on double yellow 
lines, footpaths, disabled parking spaces etc. Bollards, one way system one hour 
parking zone, traffic enforcement would all help ensure the area is safe for all. DCC, 
An Garda Siochana are asked to try and do something here at every Ballyfermot / 
Chapelizod Safety Forum meeting. Can I ask that we do something as it is badly 
needed before a serious accident happens. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer will examine the issues raised at Claddagh Green and the local 
councillors will be kept informed of the assessment outcome and any proposed 
measures in due course. 
To note it is, it is not current Dublin City Council policy to provide bollards to prevent 
parking on the footpath. Bollards are provided in circumstances where vehicles 
mounting the pavement are likely to endanger pedestrians, such as areas where the 
footpath is level with the carriageway. 
A one-way system is not recommended as given the width of the carriageway at this 
location. Vehicular speeds would likely increase as a result and it would inconvenience 
residents and business owners. 
A Pay/ Display Parking Scheme could be introduced and the Transport Advisory Group 
will liaise with the area office and businesses to see if this option is suitable. 
Please see below for information on requesting a Pay and Display scheme for 
Claddagh Green when the criteria is received we can then move forward with your 
application. 
Criteria for the introduction of a Pay and Display and Permit Parking Scheme | Dublin 
City Council 
 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if the Road markings on Dufferin Avenue in Dublin 8 could 
be repainted. They are very faded, and traffic often thinks it’s a one-way street when 
in fact its two-way traffic. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The location will be inspected in the coming days. Faded markings will be renewed 
within 30 working days of the Council Meeting of the 12th May 2025. 
 
Q.23 
COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if street cleaning could be done more frequently on Spa 
Road, Thomas Davis Street and Saint Vincent Street in Inchicore, Dublin 8 and if DCC 
could address related waste incidents on Thomas Davis Street (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services will monitor the cleaning of the above mentioned streets 
and ensure that they are cleaned on a more frequent basis. With regard to the specific 
properties on Thomas Davis Street, our Litter Enforcement Manager will write to them 
advising them of their obligations under the Litter Pollution Act and Waste Management 
Bye-Laws and issue penalties where necessary. 
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 

To ask the Chief Executive if he could outline what penalties can be applied in the 
event of Planning Enforcement actions. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Section 156 of the Planning and Development Act outlines the potential penalties and 
fines associated with breaches of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as 
amended). Attached is the schedule containing the specific information contained in 
Section 156 of the Act. 
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he has received any communication from An Taoiseach 
in the last two months concerning the provision of housing directly by Dublin City 
Council, the nature of that communication and any assistance that the Taoiseach has 
offered towards increasing supply and comment on any other aspect of this that the 
Chief Executive deems relevant. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The CE or Assistant Chief Executive with responsibility for Housing have not received 
any written communication from An Taoiseach regarding the provision of housing 
directly by Dublin City Council.  The team in Housing meet with representatives from 
the Department of Housing on a regular basis regarding the Housing Programme and 
specific projects. 
As part of the current Housing Programme “Housing for All” Dublin City Council is set 
targets for social and affordable housing.  Circular 32-2021 regarding Housing Delivery 
Action Plans Guidance and Templates directed that Dublin City Council would deliver 
50% of the programme in partnership with Approved Housing Bodies. The Council 
delivers its programmes of new builds, regeneration projects, purpose built senior 
citizen accommodation, traveller accommodation across a range of tenures through 
multiple delivery mechanisms including direct delivery, PPPs, partnership with the LDA 
and AHBs.    
It is intended to present to the Housing SPC later this month outlining the current 
programme for delivery across all housing sites including social housing, affordable 
purchase and cost rental by both DCC and the AHBs. As part of this we will provide 
an update on the various funding streams available.   
We are expecting to receive revised and increased housing targets from DHLGH in 
the coming months to reflect the increase need for homes across the Country and once 
we have greater certainty on those numbers we will have to prepare a plan for how we 
can deliver this number of homes for discussion with the Council.   
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on waste management plans ahead of the 
concerts in Fairview Park and to ensure that there are sufficient additional bins 
available and emptied regularly, given the numbers travelling to the area to attend 
concerts.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As part of the planning and implementation of the Fairview Park series of events a very 
detailed clean up takes place during and post-show each night. This clean-up is carried 
out by cleaning contractors engaged by the Promoter both in the park and in the 
immediate surrounding perimeter residential and business areas. The area extends 
from the Annesley House Pub to the bottom of Alfie Byrne Road both sides of the 
Road. Staff from Dublin City Council check this clean up each morning after each 
show. The bins of course get filled and there is litter when large crowds gather 
anywhere. The requirement on event organisers is to ensure that on the days of the 
events a reasonable litter picking regime is put in place. The large and complete clean 

up then takes place post shows overnight to ensure area is clean the following 
morning. Dublin City Council are satisfied that this has been done properly for the last 
3 years. 
In addition to this there is a leaflet drop done to local residences at least 14 days prior 
to the first concert which gives details of a resident liaison e-mail to send any 
complaints, which are monitored in real time and actioned upon as quickly as practical 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive whether it is planned to replace the picnic tables that have 
been removed from the space near the playground in St Anne’s Park over the past few 
years. There are a total of nine concrete circles for tables; five which are currently 
occupied with benches, three which are vacant, and one which has an barrel on it 
acting as a bin. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Replacement picnic benches are being procured and will be in place next month. 
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the procurement process for textile 
recycling.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A Request for Tender for the Collection and Processing of Textiles for Reuse and 
Recycling was published via eTenders on Monday 7th April. Closing date for 
submissions is 9th May. It is anticipated that any contracts arising from the tender 
competition will come into effect in Q3. 
 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive what measures are taken by Dublin City Council to improve 
safety in Fairview Park following a number of recent incidents involving e-scooters and 
scramblers, and whether the Council will give consideration to additional measures 
such as employing a park ranger/warden, installing CCTV, and banning the use of e-
scooters within the park to ensure local residents can use the park safely. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Such incidents are primarily matters for the Gardaí.  The Parks Service works closely 
with local Gardaí and will always follow advice with regard to access control and 
clearance of vegetation or indeed any such works that assist the Gardaí in their 
patrolling of the area.   
 
Fairview Park has a seven-day Park Ranger Service from 12pm until park closing time 
which is 8:30pm at this time of year. The Parks Service does not generally install CCTV 
within public parks.  
Under legislation introduced last year e-scooters are banned from footpaths and 
pedestrianised areas and are also prohibited under City Council Parks Byelaws. 
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report regarding the staging of the American 
football event that is to take place in Dublin annually, this report to include cost to 
Dublin City council and event management also what arrangements if any by the 
organisers have been made to allow us military aircraft to do a flyover regarding these 
American football games 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A report will issue to the councillor in the next two weeks in relation to Dublin City 
Council hosting a five-game series of American College Football. The organisers and 

the Irish Aviation Authority (IAA) will be contacted to respond to flyover part of the 
question and the response will be forwarded to Councillor. 
 
 
 
 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to give an undertaking that the name Markievicz pool will 
continue to be used when the facility is relocated at the new Ringsend Sports Centre 
facility. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Irishtown Leisure Centre Redevelopment project is at an early design stage. 
Regarding the naming of the centre, the project team have taken the above request 
on board and at the appropriate time the South East Area Committee will be consulted 
on the naming of the new centre. 
 
Q.32 
 COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to give a comprehensive update and report regarding the 
change over from Smock Alley to the Dublin Municipal Theatre. This report to include 
board appointments to the new Theatre and entity. The appointment of the artistic 
director and the program, also this report to include a full outlay of the budget and 
expenditure and staffing required for such an entity. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Temple Bar Cultural Trust (TBCT), the owner of the property, has been actively 
engaging with the Board and Executive of Smock Alley Theatre Ltd (SAT) with a view 
to an orderly wind up of the company on the basis that TBCT, in partnership with DCC, 
would turn the building into a municipal theatre. Dublin Municipal Theatre CLG (DMT) 
was incorporated as a subsidiary company of TBCT to be the vehicle to carry out this 
project. It is anticipated SAT will begin the final stages of their orderly wind up in the 
coming weeks subject to the completion of some outstanding legal pieces. The process 
has taken longer than anticipated due to the need to keep the operations of SAT in 
place in parallel to resolving complex legacy issues and building the capacity of DMT 
to take over full control. 
An interim board made up of relevant DCC senior management currently oversees and 
carries out DMT’s legal, company and governance requirements. This board is due to 
step down when the DMT transfer has been completed, and the municipal theatre 
becomes fully operational. A full report will be made to the Arts & Culture SPC in 
advance of this, outlining the process and rationale whereby a new board of directors 
may be nominated. 
The recruitment of a Chief Executive Officer for DMT was conducted in late 2024. An 
HR consultant was engaged to oversee the process, and the position was advertised 
on 5th September. A panel comprising DCC, DMT and independent industry 
representatives was formed to conduct the interview process. The successful 
candidate has been informed and will take up position once DMT has taken charge of 
the theatre. 
In addition to the CEO, a financial manager has been recruited to ensure a smooth 
transition of SAT’s finance function to DMT, while the six full-time employees of SAT 
will transfer to DMT under TUPE rules when the transition takes place. Future staffing 
levels will then be a matter for the incoming CEO and Board of DMT to consider. 
DMT’s budget will be comprised of approved Arts Council and DCC Arts grant funding 
supplemented by operational income from theatre, events and rental of facilities.  
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 

To ask the Chief Executive to issue the full report on the Canal Cordon for 2024 it’s 
long overdue at this stage.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The report is currently being finalised and will be issued in the coming weeks. 
 
Q.34 
 COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive please clarify the parking scheme for Bath Street and 
surrounding areas in Dublin 4?  
Many of the residents have been parking on Bath Street for years, with two wheels on 
the pavement leaving enough room for wheelchairs and buggies to pass. The residents 
have now started to be clamped for doing this. They were told that if anything was to 
ever change, there would be public consultation. There has been no public 
consultation, and many have been clamped for this style of parking. How is it 
recommended for them to park given that this has been permissible for many years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Section 36 (1)(i) of the Road Traffic (Traffic and Parking) Regulations 1997 prohibits 
parking “on a footway, a grass margin or a median strip”. All staff with the current 
enforcement providers have been instructed to enforce this illegal parking when 
encountered. 
If residents of this road wish to have the road assessed with a view to introducing 
permit parking, they can apply to the Traffic Advisory Group (TAG) for permit parking 
on their road by emailing traffic@dublincity.ie. The Roads engineer for that area would 
then assess the road to assess if a permit scheme would be viable. If found viable, the 
Parking Enforcement Section would ballot all eligible properties on the road to assess 
demand for the scheme. If a majority vote is received, the scheme would return to TAG 
to carry out statutory requirements. 
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please clarify light of the development of the Shore Club 
on beach road, will the parking on church avenue for residents be withdrawn. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently no parking restrictions on Church Avenue, Dublin 4 apart from 
double yellow lines along parts of the road. 
Any changes to the road layout would be the decision of the Roads Engineers for the 
area. Any queries can be directed to the Traffic Advisory Group at traffic@dublincity.ie 
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please clarify where the current regeneration projects 
are at?  
Pearse House blocks L M N P  
The last development was that the government were considering withdrawing funding 
if the Council could not provide more than 45 homes. They said they were looking then 
into deep retrofitting them. What is the latest update for the residents?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Stage 2 submission for the redevelopment of Phase 1 Pearse House was 
submitted by DCC to the DHLGH in late 2024.The proposal is for the redevelopment 
of the current housing blocks L, M, N and P which contain 78 flats (6 bedsits, 40 1x 
Bed, 24x 2 Bed and 8 x 3Bed). 
The appointed integrated design team developed proposals to deliver 44 new homes, 
39 of which were proposed to be provided within the existing Blocks L, M, N and P 

while 5 additional new build homes were proposed within the boundary of the Phase 1 
site.  
The Department of Housing in their response to the Stage 2 submission, have 
highlighted their concerns on the proposed loss of 34 homes. The reason for the 
reduction of homes in the proposed scheme is that a lot of the homes currently on site 
are below the size requirements in the adopted Council Development Plan and so 
current homes need to be amalgamated to provide homes of the required size. As we 
are working with the requirement to retain the structure this makes it more challenging.  
As a result, the integrated design team have now been instructed to review the design 
strategy to examine if there is an alternative strategy for delivering the project that 
provides for an increased number of homes. This review is currently ongoing and DCC 
will continue to liaise with the Department of Housing to find an acceptable way 
forward. It is anticipated that a revised Stage 2 submission will be made to the 
Department once all development opportunities are examined.  
A project newsletter updating all Pearse House residents on the status of the 
regeneration proposals is due to be issued shortly. This will also be circulated to the 
local area councillors. 
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive please clarify why the Part V team have concluded their 
negotiations on the Shoreclub and on this development have agreed to go off site? 
They have confirmed there is no social housing in this development, why is that? Part 
V’s are intended to capture a portion of the value increase for the State to be used for 
social and affordable housing.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Under Part V of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) there are 
several options to comply with Part V, one of which is off-site compliance.  There are 
a number of factors taken into consideration when agreeing to go off-site including 
value for money, suitability of on-site units, along with the social demand and profile of 
tenants within the area.  In this instance, as the apartments were to a very high 
standard including the provision of a cinema room, (which would result in significant 
annual management service charges that are not recoupable from the Department) 
there was an opportunity to acquire houses for families on the waiting list.  Often, there 
is limited opportunity for DCC to acquire 4 bedroom homes in this area and therefore 
was deemed a good alternative to meet the  Developer’s obligations under Part V while 
delivering much needed accommodation for families. 
 
 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive how many care leavers received support from DCC in terms 
of housing over the last 5 years and a report on what type of housing supports that 
were availed of and is there an awareness of how many will require support in the next 
5 years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Since 2018, DCC has provided social housing to 174 Care Leavers.   
 
 
Year 
Total 
2018 
7 
2019 
26 

2020 
15 
2021 
9 
2022 
36 
2023 
37 
2024 
44 
Grand Total 
174 
 
Currently, there are an existing 23 care leavers with welfare priority and there is also 
now 49 care leavers who have care leaver priority status on the waiting list.  
It is not possible to project the figures for the next 5 years.  
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that the commitment to a fully accessible public 
pedestrian route through the Cork Street co-living site (WEB 1788/25) is upheld, either 
by attaching a condition to the new permission to re-enforce the requirement for a fully 
accessible and high-quality public route through the site ensuring its timely delivery 
and continued public use. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This question makes reference to a live planning application which has yet to be 
assessed by the Planning Authority. 
Any submissions/observations on live planning applications must be lodged with the 
Planning Department for inclusion on the public file. 
 
Q.40 
COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive what are the design plans and plans for parking 
arrangements for Weaver Square? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Measures have been provided on Ormond Street and Chamber Street to help alleviate 
parking issues around Weaver Park. On Ormond Street, “No Parking” has been 
provided on the eastern side of the carriageway (the park side) and on Chamber Street 
parking has been regularised with parking restrictions beside the park and a Pay and 
Display Permit parking scheme east of the park. 
 
The situation will be kept under review, however if residents on Weaver Square still 
feel parking is an issue, they may wish to apply for a pay and display/permit parking 
scheme (https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/parking-dublin-city-centre/start-parking-
scheme) 
Q.41 
COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to directly respond to a charge made by An Taoiseach 
Micheal Martin in an Irish Times interview that Dublin City Council in particular was not 
delivering sufficient levels of social housing. In singling out Dublin City Council, the 
Taoiseach said as a local authority we were too reliant on AHBs and not delivering 
enough directly. Can you please respond on behalf of DCC? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The CE or Assistant Chief Executive with responsibility for Housing have not received 
any written communication from An Taoiseach regarding the provision of housing 
directly by Dublin City Council.  The team in Housing meet with representatives from 
the Department of Housing on a regular basis regarding the Housing Programme and 
specific projects. 

As part of the current Housing Programme “Housing for All” Dublin City Council is set 
targets for social and affordable housing.  Circular 32-2021 regarding Housing Delivery 
Action Plans Guidance and Templates directed that Dublin City Council would deliver 
50% of the programme in partnership with Approved Housing Bodies. The Council 
delivers its programmes of new builds, regeneration projects, purpose built senior 
citizen accommodation, traveller accommodation across a range of tenures through 
multiple delivery mechanisms including direct delivery, PPPs, partnership with the LDA 
and AHBs.    
It is intended to present to the Housing SPC later this month outlining the current 
programme for delivery across all housing sites including social housing, affordable 
purchase and cost rental by both DCC and the AHBs. As part of this we will provide 
an update on the various funding streams available.   
We are expecting to receive revised and increased housing targets from DHLGH in 
the coming months to reflect the increase need for homes across the Country and once 
we have greater certainty on those numbers we will have to prepare a plan for how we 
can deliver this number of homes for discussion with the Council.   
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update in relation to testing of the water supply in 
Oliver Bond House. Can he confirm if unusual levels of any dangerous or toxic 
substances were found in the water and what actions are taking place to rectify this. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The water tested in Oliver Bond came back within the parameters. 
The note said “The chemical parameters analysed comply with the Drinking Water 
Regulation Limits” 
 
Q.43 
COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if Tree Planting in the road median be included as part of 
the new Road Design in Dolphin’s Barn Village, similar to work recently completed 
nearby at Saint Luke’s Avenue. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
At the design stage Road Design will liaise with Parks Department to allow tree planting 
where possible. 
 
Q.44 
COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive if the Give, Take, return scheme, on public bins, is still 
operating? Currently, there seems to be a lot of people whose dignity is being 
compromised, by having to trawl through bins for discarded plastic bottles and cans. 
There are also a lot of bins throughout the city that don’t have the Give, Take, Return 
scheme rack on them. It is a great scheme, and if it has been discontinued, it would 
be hugely beneficial to re-instate it. Extending the scheme to more bins throughout the 
city would also be of benefit. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Give, Take, return scheme is indeed still operating and more bins throughout the 
City Centre are scheduled to be fitted with these bottle holders within the coming 
weeks. 
 
Q.45 
 COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive to assist in finding a solution to a long-term flooding issue 
at Milltown Luas stop, near Temple Park, at the junction of South Richmond Avenue 
and Temple Road. (Photos of St. Richmond Avenue at Temple Park and Temple Road 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Surface Water Management will investigate this issue at the location above with a view 
to installing a gully within Q2 2025. 
 
 
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive, when will the newly refurbished recycling bring centre, 
near Rutland Grove, Lower Crumlin be operating again. The residents have been 
without the service for over a year. Dumping has increased in the estate, on green 
spaces and laneways, while this vital service hasn’t been available. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The redevelopment of Eamonn Ceannt Park Depot was a project undertaken by Parks 
& Landscaping Services division. Following completion of these works, Parks handed 
the bring centre site back to Waste Management Services. Unfortunately, the works to 
the Parks element did not include work that was required to bring the Bring Centre 
back into operation and it was then necessary for Waste Management Services to 
arrange a new electricity connection from ESB Networks, which took a considerable 
amount of time. This connection has now been completed.  In addition, and in order to 
comply with Health & Safety requirements a new Traffic Management Plan was 
required to be put in place so our service vehicles could access the Parks depot. Parks 
and Waste Management H&S personnel are working on this at present with the Traffic 
Management Consultants and work is nearing completion. Once this is in place, we 
will then be in a position to reinstate the necessary infrastructure to allow the Bring 
Centre to reopen. 
 
Unfortunately, I am not in a position to give a fixed date to reopen the centre, however, 
I would expect that all necessary work and health & safety requirements will be 
completed within the next 8 weeks. Waste Management Services appreciates the 
inconvenience of the closer of this centre to local residents and we are working hard 
to reopen the centre as soon as possible. In the meantime, the nearby Bring Centre 
on Windmill Road is available for local residents to use. 
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to bus travel.  Can we look into the issue of 
paying money on Dublin Bus.  I have seen several Tourists recently having to step off 
the bus as they had no change on them to pay.  Most countries now use a bank card 
tap system.  I am wondering if this option can be investigated or maybe it has, if so, do 
we have an update on when it will be implemented. It would help with the flow of travel 
in Dublin. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This is a matter for Dublin bus not Dublin City Council.  
Councillor queries should be sent to oireachtasliaison@nationaltransport.ie 
 
Q.48  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the bridge on Seville place.  Can some extra 
and more attractive lighting be placed under this bridge. As we have done under 
several bridges in the city 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The lighting project at the Bridge on Seville Place is being managed by the North Inner-
City Area Office. Permissions were required from Irish Rail, and several issues related 
to the bridge’s height over the roadway needed to be addressed. The project has 

commenced and is expected to take approx. eight weeks to complete. It is funded by 
the Northeast Inner City (NEIC) Initiative. 
 
 
 
 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive about placing extra disability play options in the 
playgrounds around the city, please see attached suggestions, pictures are not for 
public. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are an estimated 391 accessible play pieces in our 69 playgrounds, such as 
accessible roundabouts like the one in the attached photo, also, accessible swings, 
hammocks, rockers and other play units which open to assisted inclusive play. 97 of 
those units accessible to people while on their wheelchair such as roundabouts, raised 
sand tables, mazes, play panels, musical instruments, trampolines, rotating disks, 
table tennis and We-Go-Swings.  
In 2025 we are proposing to up-grade the playground at Pelletstown, Crescent Park 
which will include inclusive elements such as a jungle dome explorer which promotes 
physical activity for all ability levels, a nest swing which caters for all abilities and most 
ages allowing it to be a shared experience.  Also the design incorporates sensory items 
such as play panels, mirrors and colour wheels. We will be installing 3 new wheelchair 
accessible We-Go-Swings this year in St Anne’s Park, Fr Collins Park & Johnstown 
Park.  The refurbished Belcamp Playground will have a Wheelchair Carousel. We are 
adding an inclusive swing and trampoline to the Herzog Park Nature Playground. 
Liffey Valley Park at Chapelizod which will have features like accessible trampoline, 
roundabout, percussive units and an accessible multiply unit which was voted for by 
the children who helped us co-design the playground and were strong advocates for a 
playground that is to be accessible for all. 
 
We have a programme for upgrading playgrounds on an annual basis and we 
intentionally use this opportunity to introduce multiple accessible high play value 
pieces with each upgrade.  This means that our upgraded playgrounds can provide a 
range of experiences for disabled children, which all children can enjoy.   
 
Q.50    COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to look at the possibility of implementing a “School Street” 
outside Scoil Assam, Scoil Aine and Scoil Ide in All Saints Drive, Raheny, to restrict 
traffic access during school drop offs and pickups. Several parents have been asking 
me for this. It would be a fantastic idea.  My only fear is it causing a parking issue in 
Raheny Village and on Watermill Road. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We are not currently in a position to install a School Street on All Saints Drive, however 
a School Zone has been installed on this road to improve the traffic situation and safety 
for students on their journey to school.  
 
Q.51 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to address the below please (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Finance department has contacted the Councillor for clarification on this query hence 
there will be no written response for the May meeting. 
 

Q.52  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive can the below person be housed. She is on the priority 
listing (details supplied) 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Transfer List with a welfare priority and an application 
date of 12/03/2024, the applicant holds the following position on this list; 
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
3 
29 
E 
3 
38 
 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant.  
 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
Applicants can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size 
requirement of their household.  
The development on Oscar Traynor Road is not ready for selections, upon it being 
available it will be advertised on Choice Based Lettings, successful applicants will be 
contacted directly.  
 
Q.53 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to resolve the below please (detail supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Santry River Restoration and Greenway Project is currently at preliminary design 
stage. Some decisions related to the content of Ms. Jackson’s e-mail will be addressed 
in more detail during the later stages of design, pending planning approval.  We have 
been engaging with local residents since 2023 to ensure their views are incorporated 
and concerns are addressed as the project develops. 
 
Regarding the points raised: 
 
• 
Removal of railing – No decision has been made at this stage of the project 
design. Specific details of that nature are considered at the detailed design 
stage, which commences subject to planning permission.  While it is preferable 
to provide access from Woodlawn to the proposed greenway to desirable to 
support safe and sustainable travel options (walking, cycling, scooting), it is 
also possible to restrict access from Woodlawn with fencing if necessary. We 
will raise this design consideration again in due course. 
 
• 
Routing the greenway to the north of the river (existing footpath) – 
Feedback from public consultations has consistently highlighted safety 
concerns with the existing underpass due to lack of visibility. The current layout 
has been associated with anti-social behaviour. The preferred route has been 
chosen as it allows for improved sightlines and addresses these safety issues 
more effectively. 
 

• 
Public benches – No decision has been made on this. Benches will only be 
installed where there is community support for them. 
 
• 
Lighting – Different types of lighting will be required at different locations along 
the route.  Lighting will be tailored to specific areas of the greenway, taking into 
account ecological sensitivity. Where appropriate, standard active travel 
lighting will be used. The need for CCTV is also being evaluated. 
 
• 
Tree Removal: Trees will only be removed when absolutely necessary, such 
as in cases where they pose a safety risk (e.g., dead or unstable trees). The 
project aims to enhance biodiversity and preserve existing habitats, and 
substantial new tree planting is expected as part of the scheme. 
• 
Community Services and Accessibility: Since 2023, we have engaged with 
a wide range of community members—including schoolchildren, parents, 
seniors, and people with disabilities—to understand their needs and explore 
ways to enhance amenities through this project. 
 
• 
Safety: A full safety audit will be carried out as part of the project, and we 
remain committed to addressing concerns raised by residents. 
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to raise the below with Beaumont hospital please and 
ensure that the issue is fixed. (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The matter will be investigated and if the fence does come under the control of DCC 
appropriate repairs will be programmed as local schedules allow. 
 
Q.55 
COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive can a safety inspection be done on Tolka Park playground. 
When this inspection is conducted can a plan be made to fix the equipment and put a 
regular maintenance programme in place, so the playground is not left in this way 
again. Can DCC also communicate with residents to identify and prioritise the 
recreational needs of the area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services carry out daily visual and weekly recorded inspections of all our 
playgrounds in the area. Any necessary repairs are logged with our playground 
maintenance contractor. Parks services have included this playground for upgrade in 
our 3-year playground upgrade programme.  It is intended to upgrade and relocate the 
playground within the park, taking into consideration other planned works at the park.  
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive can the Dublin City website be updated to state where 
exactly textile banks are in DNW. On the website it states that there in one located at. 
• 
Supervalu Finglas 
• 
Clear water opposite Burger King 
• 
Ballymun Library  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The website has been updated. Please see: 
https://www.dublincity.ie/sites/default/files/2025-04/bring-bank-locations-april-2025-
1.pdf 
 

Q.57 
COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive is there any update on the land which was the Ballymun 
shopping centre. Has any interest been made to develop the land. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is in discussions with the Land Development Agency regarding the 
delivery of a residential led development on the western side of the old Ballymun 
shopping centre site; identified as Site 1 in the Ballymun Local Area Plan. Currently 
there are advanced discussions on commercial terms and a Memorandum of 
Agreement, taking place between the City Valuers Office and the LDA. 
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive what the plans are for Shangan Park are. I have asked 
twice about things to be added to this park and on both times, they were rejected. Can 
we look at options that will enhance this park for residents. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services main focus is the continued improvement and upgrade of Coultry Park, 
which is the main community park in this location.  General maintenance and upkeep 
of Shangan Park is carried out on a weekly basis.  Parks will liaise with Cllr Kane to 
discuss his specific requests. 
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update and timeline on the repair works needed for 
Rialta na mara (statue of our lady) in Clontarf. In particular the repairs needed to the 
crown as it poses a health and safety risk, the tiles at the base which need attention 
and the general cleaning and the paint which needs attention. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A further assessment of the statue is required.  A new Public Art Officer will be in 
post from mid-May and will progress the assessment. I will report again to the 
Councillor by the end of May. 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive what bye laws are in place to address camper vans and 
public camping in public spaces and public parking spaces. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please see the “Parks and Open Spaces Bye-Laws 2002” below regarding camper 
vans and public camping in public spaces: Parks and Open Spaces Bye-Laws  
 
4.12 
CARAVANS, TENTS ETC. 
(a)No person shall erect any tent or camp in any part of any park or open space save 
with the written permission of the Council and subject to the terms and conditions of 
such permission. 
 
(b)No person shall place or keep any caravan, camper van or dormobile in any part of 
any park or open space save with the written permission of the Council and subject to 
the terms and conditions of such permission. 
 
In Dublin City, a camper van is considered a "vehicle" under the Dublin City Council's 
Parking Control Bye-Laws. Therefore, it must abide by the same parking regulations 
as other vehicles, including paying for parking fees and parking within designated 
bays. Specifically, camper vans are treated the same as other vehicles in terms of 
parking fees, parking durations, and restrictions on parking in certain areas like loading 
bays. 

 
Q.61 
COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive what plans are in place to facilitate more public playgrounds 
for children over the next 2 years in the Clontarf LEA. 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is a longer-term objective to provide a playground on the Clontarf Promenade 
to address the deficit in the area. However, this work cannot be affected until the two 
proposed major infrastructure projects which will significantly impact the area have 
been delivered. The playground in St. Anne’s Park is due a significant upgrade for 
implementation in 2026, which will provide a teenage play zone and a natural play 
area. A we-go-swing has also recently been installed here. 
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the status of the laneway at Celtic 
Park Avenue as Residents have been waiting some time for clarity on the next steps, 
and despite commitments made. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A request to have the public right of way extinguished over the laneway located at 57-
59 Celtic Park Avenue, Dublin 9 was submitted to Dublin City Council’s North Central 
Area Office by the residents directly abutting this section of laneway. The reason given 
for requesting the partial closure was to prevent the ongoing issue of the high volume 
of vehicles using the laneway as a short cut and causing safety concerns for 
pedestrians & residents. 
The statutory process under section 73 of the Roads Act 1993 was initiated in 
September 2022.    On 26th October 2022, notice of the intention to extinguish the right 
of way was advertised with representations or objections invited by 14th December 
2022.  30 submissions objecting to the proposal and 17 submissions supporting the 
proposal were received. 
A report was presented to the members of the North Central Area Committee on 19th 
June 2023, at which time the members agreed to retain the public right of way over the 
laneway.  
 
Q.63 
COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide clarification from DCC on the following (details 
supplied): 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Having live music events without an Entertainment Licence is an offence under 
Licencing Legislation. A complaint can be made to the Licencing Officer of Kevin Street 
Garda Station. Access this link for contact details. https://www.garda.ie/en/contact-
us/station-directory/kevin-street.html 
The Air Quality Monitoring and Noise Control Unit can investigate the complaint about 
loud music under the provisions of the Environmental Protection Agency Act 1992 
(Noise Regulations 1994). 
 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive please provide a timeline for the installation of the Dolphins 
Barn public realm scheme. This improvement scheme was approved in 2018 but has 
been beset by delays. Can the Chief Executive please clarify why these relatively minor 
improvements have not yet been implemented and clarify when DCC will stop its 
neglect of Dolphins Barn village? 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dolphins Barn is on the Road Design priority list and it will be progressed when 
resources are available. 
 
 
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange a full Assessment regarding the re-instatement 
of the  Disabled parking space to its original location ( Photo attached) in front of 
Connolly’s  Public House on Clontarf Road , Dublin 3 , or  the provision of one that is 
fit for purpose unlike the re-located one nearby which disabled users have reported is 
not suitable and cannot be safely used. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 11176751) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.66 
COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if he could provide a timeline for when a decision might be 
made on the future of the Strand Road and also if he would consider meeting with local 
resident groups in the area to consider his options before making his final decision. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The legal judgement is still being processed, and the options and processes are also 
being examined. Once this process is complete an update will be provided to 
councillors. 
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR AMMAR ALI  
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange cleaning outside the derelict site (Parkgate 
House) which is heavily littered. Also, can there be more public bins installed from 
Phoenix Park Gate to Wolfe Tone Quay. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services had the above mentioned location cleaned on the 1st 
May 2025. We are satisfied that there is an adequate amount of litter bins at this time 
along the stretch from Phoenix Park Gate to Wolfe Tone Quay. 
 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR AMMAR ALI 
To ask the Chief Executive to install dog bins for dog waste along the Canal. The 
installation of these bins will help keep the area along the canal cleaner. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This is not for Waste Management. Waterways Ireland look after along canal. 
waterwaysireland.org 
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR AMMAR ALI 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the progress regarding the new football 
pitch at Marrowbone Lane. Many sports clubs and local children in Dublin 8 are in 
urgent need of proper football and playing pitches, as well as adequate sports facilities 
in the area. There are concerns regarding delays in the project 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

In December 2024, Allies and Morrison LLP were appointed to develop an indicative 
masterplan and options study for the existing depot lands at Marrowbone Lane. The 
purpose of this commission is to produce a framework that demonstrates a viable and 
efficient layout for the operational depot facilities while also accommodating a new 
outdoor recreational space, aligned with the Council’s wider regeneration and service 
objectives. 
As part of this study consultations are taking place with City Council service 
departments to establish the operational service requirements for the site. This work 
has taken slightly more time than expected and requires further detailed consideration 
by the relevant departments in relation to the ongoing provision of essential Council 
Services for the City from the site.  Once this work is completed with internal service 
departments the project team will move to engage community stakeholders to arrange 
consultations for their input regarding the site. It is intended that this consultation will 
take place during the summer months.  
 
Q.70 
COUNCILLOR AMMAR ALI 
To ask the Chief Executive to focus on Street cleaning in the Ballyfermot area in 
general. The litter on streets in Ballyfermot area is getting worse. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services will monitor the street cleaning in the Ballyfermot area 
to ensure that it is cleaned in the most efficient and effective manner possible.  
 
Q.71 
COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide an update on the cessation of works 
on the former DIT site on Kevin Street, which is resulting in the potential loss of almost 
40 social homes and a significant loss of funding for local projects. Has DCC engaged 
with the developers regarding the future of the site, has any consideration been given 
to potential purchasing of this site for much needed social, affordable and cost rental 
housing, and if so, has there been any discussions with the Department of Housing on 
the site, and can the CEO please provide details of such discussions.' 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This site is now in receivership with Grant Thornton.  Dublin City Council contacted 
Grant Thornton who advised that the site will be brought to the market in the coming 
weeks, and it is hoped that the sale will complete by the end of the summer.   
Given the extent of the commercial office space within this development, i.e. 407,000 
sq. feet, Dublin City Council do not intend to acquire this site.  There are 299 Build to 
rent units within the scheme and Dublin City Council will liaise with the Developer once 
the sale has completed regarding their obligations under Part V.   
 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive when we can expect a report on the public consultation for 
the College Green Plaza proposal and can he please provide a clear timeline for this' 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The consultation report for Stage I of the College Green Dame St Public Realm project 
is almost complete and is expected to be published by mid-May. The report will be 
uploaded to the engage.ie website page here: https://engage.dublincity.ie/en-
IE/projects/college-green-dame-street-public-realm-project 
Councillors will be notified once the report is published. 
 
Q.73 
COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 

To ask the Chief Executive can he please confirm that funding remains in place for the 
regeneration of Glovers Court, and if so, can he please provide a clear timeline for this 
important project, including an update on the de-tenanting process. 
 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The regeneration of Glovers Court has Stage 1 project and funding approval from the 
Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage. The existing flat scheme 
consists of 38 flats.  
An Integrated Design Team has been progressing the scheme design and the pre-part 
8 process was completed in December 2024. The project proposal is for the deep 
retrofit, amalgamation and extension of the two existing housing blocks to provide 53 
new homes that will be a mix of one, two and three bedrooms.  
The Stage 2 application for budget and project approval to lodge the planning 
application was submitted to the DHLGH in Q4 2024. Further information on the costs 
of the proposals has been requested by the DHLGH and DCC are currently responding 
to these queries. Subject to approval, the next step is to lodge the Part 8 planning 
application which will be a major milestone in the project.  
The target programme is as follows:  
• 
Q3 2025 – Lodgement of Part 8 Planning Application 
• 
Q1 2026 – Receive planning approval 
• 
Q2 – Q4 2026 – Commence detailed design development, preparation of 
tender documentation and issue of tender 
• 
Q1 2027 – Start on site 
• 
Q3 2028 – Delivery of 53 new homes  
 
 In line with DCC’s Housing Allocations Scheme of Letting Priorities Policy, decanting 
will commence once Part 8 planning approval has been granted. Decanting will be led 
out by the local Area Housing Manager in collaboration with DCC Housing Allocations 
and Transfers and will follow the Housing Allocations and Transfers policy. Households 
will be offered new homes on the basis of their current housing need as defined by the 
Scheme of Lettings Priority.  
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive when will the feasibility study on the pedestrianisation of 
South William Street commence as agreed in the City Development Plan 2022 to 2028. 
We are about to commence the new Development Plan process and yet no progress 
has been made on this project to date. Can the CEO confirm that this project will still 
go ahead, and that the zebra crossing recently installed, while welcome, is not a long-
term solution? Can the CEO also carry out road surface and pathway work on the 
areas around the zebra crossing. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A timeline for a feasibility study for South William Street has not yet been established. 
Currently the tie in with other projects including College Green and the Active Travel 
network in the area are being considered. The surfacing around the pedestrian 
crossing will be examined.  
 
Q.75 
COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive if consideration has been given to providing free or 
subsidised access/membership to people with disabilities for DCC Sports and Leisure 
Centres (similar to reduced fees for older people and students)? 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
All of the Dublin City Council Sports & Leisure centres already offer a discounted rate 
for those with disabilities.  They are charged a community rate.  Also, there is no charge 
to any carers required to accompany service users. 
 
 
Q.76 
COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive Further to Question Q143 from the April meeting and 
acknowledging Dublin City Council's commitment to reducing glyphosate use through 
alternative methods such as steam and foam treatments, can the Chief Executive 
confirm whether Dublin City Council or any contractors operating on its behalf currently 
use, or have plans to use, any of the following pesticides within the council's 
jurisdiction: 
MCPA (4-chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic acid) 
2,4-D (2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid) 
Mecoprop, 
Clopyralid, 
Metaldehyde. 
These substances have been identified as common contaminants in Irish drinking 
water supplies, raising environmental and public health concerns. 
Could the Chief Executive provide details on: 
• 
Current Usage: Whether any of these pesticides are currently in use by the 
council or its contractors. Ideally the answer will provide a list of all pesticides 
and herbicides approved for use by Dublin City Council. 
• 
Application Areas: The specific locations or types of areas (e.g., parks, 
roadways) where these pesticides are applied. 
• 
Monitoring and Compliance: The protocols in place to monitor the application 
of these pesticides and ensure compliance with EU regulations, particularly 
concerning environmental safety and public health. 
• 
Alternative Measures: Any plans to replace these pesticides with non-
chemical alternatives, in line with the council's integrated pest management 
strategies. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
• 
The following selective herbicides MCPA (4-chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic 
acid) two, 4-D (2, 4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid) Mecoprop, Clopyralid, are 
selective herbicides to control Broadleaf weeds from cereal crops and 
Grasslands.  Dublin City Council Parks Biodiversity and Landscape Services 
do not use selective herbicides to control broad leaf weeds in its lawns or open 
spaces.  
• 
Contractors have no need to use selective herbicides to eliminate broad leaf 
weeds in our grassed areas as DCC encourage plant diversity in all our grass 
open spaces.   
• 
Because of the nature of the plantings in parks and open spaces there is no 
need to use Metaldehyde to control slugs and snails.  This product is widely 
used in commercial horticulture especially early in the growing season. 
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive for a breakdown of projected social housing delivery for the 
Northwest area for 2025-29 based on planning approvals granted and projects 
commenced. The breakdown should include numbers of 1 bed, 2 bed, 3 bed and 4 
bed homes, as well as social housing designated for senior citizens. 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Details of all Housing projects including expected completions dates, location of 
developments are contained in the monthly housing delivery report.   A new housing 
supply report is currently under development and will be discussed with the Housing 
SPC in May with the intention of having an updated housing supply report to Council 
in June. This will provide more detailed information on projected housing delivery by 
area. 
https://councilmeetings.dublincity.ie/documents/s48482/115.%20Housing%20Supply.
pdf 
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive please confirm, does the grant for boilers in DCC properties 
cover both new and refurbished boilers. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are no longer government grants for boilers in line with the national climate 
action plan to migrate away from fossil fuels in their entirety by 2050. The weekly 
maintenance heating charge however covers all servicing, repairs and replacement of 
boilers with high energy efficiency boilers as required for our tenants. 
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider planting trees in this council property, (details 
supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In accordance with Dublin City Council Tenant Handbook (Pg. 21) external 
maintenance (gardens) fall under the responsibility of the tenant. However, Housing 
Maintenance will link in with the Local Area Office to explore what options are available 
to the tenant in this case. 
 
Q.80 
COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to please carry out works in, (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following the reply to the January Council meeting, Housing Maintenance scheduled 
a visit to the above property on 09/01/2025. The tenant was not present on arrival, 
however, a young adult gave staff access to the house.  Unfortunately, the back garden 
could not be accessed as the tenants’ dog was not under control. 
Housing Maintenance will re-schedule a call out to assess the situation at the tenant’s 
convenience.  An appointment can be arranged by contacting Ph. 01 222 2191 during 
office hours or email  maintenance@dublincity.ie 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline, since January, how many HAP households have 
requested to be considered under TIS scheme, how many have been successful, and 
how many were refused because they do not meet the new criteria or because there 
was not enough funding? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There have been 57 enquiries for acquisitions under the Tenant in Situ Scheme since 
January 2025.  Dublin City Council was allocated €95m under the scheme for 2025 
however, this sum needs to cover  
- 
acquisitions completed in the last quarter of 2024  
- 
acquisitions that had gone sale agreed before the end of October 2024 but were 
not completed in 2024 (circa 122 homes) and  

- 
some outstanding costs related to the refurbishment of some of these properties.   
Taking account of this, we are currently working with the Department to determine the 
extent of funding that remains for the remainder of 2025. While this work is ongoing 
Dublin City Council cannot accept applications under the scheme. 
If any person or family are at risk they should contact DCC homeless services who will 
provide advice and assess the household for eligibility for Homeless HAP. 
For Families at risk of homelessness - 01 222 6977 or family.support@dublincity.ie 
For Singles at risk of homelessness – Freephone 1800 707 707 or 
homelesscps@dublincity.ie 
 
Q.82 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the process involved in the creation of new homes 
by acquiring and adapting vacant commercial property (adaptive reuse project). In 
particular to ask the Chief Executive to detail the cost benefit approach/process taken 
to ensure that the adaption and acquisition represents value for money and is not 
diverting funds from other home acquisition programmes which may provide homes 
much faster, cheaper and in established neighbourhoods. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The process adopted to-date for DCC adaptive reuse projects that create new homes 
from vacant commercial property is illustrated in the infographic overleaf.   
 
After a feasibility study is completed on a commercial building that has been identified 
as potentially suitable for acquisition and conversion to homes, if the project can be 
delivered within the cost guideline limits set by the DHLGH the project proceeds to 
funding application stage. The Department of Housing’s Social Housing Investment 
Programme (SHIP) funding mechanism has been used to support all adaptive reuse 
projects to-date. The SHIP funding mechanism assesses proposals based on the 
requirement that the cost of delivery of homes is less than the limits set out under the 
scheme. The benchmark cost in Dublin is €388,500 and the upper limit is €527,000 for 
a 2-bed apartment. Funding for social housing acquisitions (including Tenant in Situ)is 
not used to acquire properties identified for adaptive reuse. 
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the recipients (and funding amount awarded) of 
funding under the Community Climate Action Program and to indicate the delivery 
status of each program/project. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council was awarded €1,938,000 under phase 1 of the Strand 1 
Community Climate Action Programme: Building Low Carbon Communities. This fund 
is supporting the delivery of 50 projects across the Dublin City administrative area. In 
addition Dublin City Council received an allocation of €57,885 from the Strand 1a 
Building Low Carbon Communities Shared Island Fund. All projects are in the delivery 
phase, with the ‘% funds remaining’ detailed in the table below, providing an update 
on the progress of each of the projects.   
 
Dublin City Council 
Allocation 
 
€1,938,000.00 
Admin Contribution 
€ 92,903.23 
Vouched Expenditure 
Drawdown 

Project Name 
Reference 
Total 
allocated 
Total 
remaining 
% funds 
remaining 
Inchicore Environmental 
Group 
DC01 
€ 10,763.00 
€ 10,763.00 
100% 
Beaumont Community 
Garden 
DC02 
€ 18,142.00 
€ 3,044.27 
17% 
Kingfisher Project  
DC03 
€ 19,693.00 
€ 12,151.23 
62% 
Bonnybrook Parish Care for 
the Earth Community Group 
DC04 
€ 6,900.00 
€ 4.87 
0% 
Brighton Square 
DC05 
€ 11,873.00 
€ 11,873.00 
100% 
Tog Hackerspace 
DC06 
€ 8,488.00 
€ 8,488.00 
100% 
St. Anthony's House 
DC07 
€ 18,724.00 
€ 3,352.69 
18% 
HQ Scout Group Dartry 
DC08 
€ 6,417.76 
€ 0.00 
0% 
Moatview EC 
DC09 
€ 16,913.00 
€ 399.00 
2% 
Doras Buí 
DC10 
€ 19,140.00 
€ 0.00 
0% 
Markiewicz Community 
Centre 
DC11 
€ 10,555.00 
€ 0.00 
0% 
Riversdale Sports Club 
DC12 
€ 14,811.00 
€ 0.00 
0% 
St Benedict's Resource 
Centre 
DC13 
€ 13,000.00 
€ 0.00 
0% 
St. John Bosco Youth Centre 
DC14 
€ 8,410.00 
€ 8,410.00 
100% 
Klear Ltd 
DC15 
€ 13,000.00 
€ 0.00 
0% 
Templeogue Synge Street 
GFC 
DC16 
€ 10,500.00 
€ 10,500.00 
100% 
Our Lady's Hall 
DC17 
€ 9,705.00 
€ 0.30 
0% 
Northside Partnership 
DC18 
€ 29,994.00 
€ 45.38 
0% 
Killester Blooms 
DC19 
€ 25,632.00 
€ 22,703.72 
89% 
Church of the Holy Name 
(Beechwood Parish) 
DC20 
€ 44,064.00 
€ 15,666.29 
36% 
Raheny Tidy Village Group 
DC21 
€ 34,672.00 
€ 34,672.00 
100% 
Railway Union Sports Club 
DC22 
€ 35,902.00 
€ 35,902.00 
100% 
Ringsend and Irishtown 
Community Centre 
DC23 
€ 39,412.00 
€ 2,585.05 
7% 
Clontarf GAA 
DC24 
€ 37,457.00 
€ 19,478.60 
52% 
Killester Donnycarney FC 
DC25 
€ 47,963.00 
€ 5,782.99 
12% 
Ballyfermot Youth Service 
DC26 
€ 41,970.00 
€ 25,512.50 
61% 
Bluebell CDP 
DC27 
€ 23,630.00 
€ 18,710.00 
79% 
Phibsboro Village Climate 
Club 
DC28 
€ 33,375.00 
€ 25,316.50 
76% 
Simon Community 
DC29 
€ 39,554.00 
€ 39,554.00 
100% 
Dublin City Farm and 
Ecological Centre  
DC30 
€ 32,480.00 
€ 24,951.00 
77% 
St. Pauls Artane Football 
Club 
DC31 
€ 25,000.00 
€ 25,000.00 
100% 
Dolphin House 
DC32 
€ 31,256.00 
€ 31,256.00 
100% 
Bloomin /Crumlin Community 
Cleanup 
DC33 
€ 32,557.00 
€ 21,227.00 
65% 
Clontarf Yacht & Boat Club 
DC34 
€ 32,066.00 
€ 14,134.00 
44% 

Darndale Belcamp Newlife 
Centre 
DC35 
€ 30,000.00 
€ 0.01 
0% 
Ballymun Child and Family 
Resource Centre 
DC36 
€ 21,000.00 
€ 0.00 
0% 
Darndale Football Club 
DC37 
€ 46,435.00 
€ 12,262.21 
26% 
St. Monica’s Youth Centre  
DC38 
€ 46,423.00 
€ 6,160.50 
13% 
St Brigids Resource Centre 
DC39 
€ 34,384.00 
€ 0.31 
0% 
Liffey Partnership 
DC40 
€ 92,873.00 
€ 84,104.75 
91% 
Ballyfermot Family Resource 
Centre 
DC41 
€ 100,000.00 
€ 54,398.14 
54% 
Sphere 17 Regional Youth 
Service 
DC42 
€ 68,973.00 
€ 44,706.70 
65% 
Methodist Centenary Church 
DC43 
€ 53,193.00 
€ 53,193.00 
100% 
CLG Na Fianna GAA 
DC44 
€ 85,740.00 
€ 13,542.37 
16% 
Terenure Enterprise Centre 
DC45 
€ 96,477.00 
€ 73,041.72 
76% 
Artane Beaumont Family 
Recreation Centre Limited 
DC46 
€ 81,018.00 
€ 0.00 
0% 
Axis Ballymun  
DC47 
€ 78,135.00 
€ 78,135.00 
100% 
Finglas Celtic 
DC48 
€ 70,000.00 
€ 9,634.52 
14% 
Sandymount Community 
Centre 
DC49 
€ 99,125.00 
€ 5,890.42 
6% 
Matt Talbot Community Trust 
DC50 
€ 100,000.00 
€ 100,000.00 
100% 
 
 
€ 
1,907,794.76 
€ 966,553.04 
51% 
Strand 1a 
The City Farm and 
Community Gardens 
DC51 
€ 21,578.00 
€ 21,578.00 
100% 
St. James Community 
Garden 
DC52 
€ 36,307.00 
€ 36,307.00 
100% 
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive if the installation of SRTS (safe routes to school) school 
zones has had any impact on air and noise levels at the school entrances and in the 
immediate vicinity. Also, to detail how many of the city schools have had school zones 
put in place and what are the plans to provide the same facility for the remaining 
schools in the city. 
  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
In 2024 the Air Quality Monitoring and Noise Control Unit in collaboration with the City 
Centre Transport Projects Team started a Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) survey to determine 
the contribution of traffic associated with school drop offs to air pollution levels in the 
vicinity of schools.  
NO2 (a by-product of combustion) is a major component of traffic-related air pollution.  
NO2 monitoring can be carried out using diffusion tubes.  
The tubes can be placed at chosen location for a one month period approx. and the 
results (the mean NO2 over the period of exposure) are obtained by laboratory 
analysis. More information about this can be found by accessing the below link.  
https://www.epa.ie/environment-and-you/air/diffusion-tube-results/ 

For the survey 24 schools that had were chosen to get a representation across the 
city. 
The results show that for the holiday periods there was a marked drop off in NO2 levels 
with a 50% decrease at some locations. There was also a marked reduction in air 
pollution levels near schools entrances where (SRTS) school zones were in place. 
This survey is ongoing and further details can be provided to Councillor Ring on 
request. 
No noise surveys were carried out, but traffic is a major contributor to noise levels in 
the city generally. Less traffic where SRTS Zones are in place will lead to a reduction 
in noise levels.  
 
School Zones have been installed at 86 schools throughout the city. Round 3 of the 
Safe Routes to School project, which is funded by the National Transport Authority, is 
currently being implemented. Dublin City Council has been allocated 10 schools to 
progress School Zones for under Round 3.  
 
Q.85 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive that noting that Dublin City Council has launched a new 
public awareness campaign calling on road users to “Be Sound” to each other and that 
this campaign encourages everyone to be respectful and to prioritise safety when 
walking, cycling or driving on the city streets, can the Chief Executive confirm if this 
awareness campaign could also include notification to all road users, but cyclists in 
particular, that they are obliged to obey traffic signals.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The general “Be Sound” campaign concluded at the end of February 2025. Our aim 
now is to develop more targeted micro-campaigns focused on specific cohorts or 
behaviours being demonstrated along our carriageways under the title of “Be Sound”. 
Presently, we are working on a campaign that focuses on behaviour of cyclists/e-
scooters along our Greenways. Our aim is to roll this out during the summer months.  
 
Q.86 
COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive if there are plans to install solar photovoltaic canopies at 
any Dublin City Council owned car parks as Wicklow County Council has done 
at Wicklow County Council Buildings in Wicklow town. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently no plans to install solar photovoltaic canopies at any Dublin City 
Council Owned Carparks as per the installation in Wicklow Town.  
Dublin City Council will consider renewable energy solutions on all new builds to 
support A1 BER Rating and Zero Energy Building design. 
Dublin City Council will also consider PV installations as part of an overall energy 
management solution on retrofit projects to our building stock including Offices, Leisure 
Centres, Fire Stations and Libraries. 
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive what steps are being taken to deliver cost-effective 
neighbourhood charging of electric vehicles for residents without access off-street 
parking. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council have engaged ePower to deliver high speed EV charging hubs 
across the city. The aim of this project is to encourage the private sector to invest in 
public EV charging infrastructure.  

Dublin City Council do not control or influence the pricing structure for the use of public 
EV charging facilities.  
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive to engage with the Irish Aviation Authority in relation to their 
role in restricting flight paths for commercial drones over Dublin City's designated Quiet 
Areas. 
 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Dublin City Council through it’s Smart City and Survey and Mapping Units established 
a Drone Innovation Partnership with Maynooth University and the Irish Aviation 
Authority in October 2024 which is co-funded through Research Ireland. Through this 
Partnership, DCC is working collaboratively to explore the opportunities and concerns 
around the use of drones. The City Council has a dedicated drone unit that supports 
services such as surveying and mapping, inspections, emergency response and many 
other positive uses.   
DCC recognises that the commercial use of drones is a complex and evolving situation 
as the technology itself is moving so fast.  There is no published policy or guidance at 
a national level for drones so this creates significant challenges. The Department of 
Transport are currently finalising a policy framework to guide high-level strategic 
planning and development of the drone sector in Ireland. A joined up approach will be 
required across government departments.  
DCC’s Drone and Urban Air Mobility 2024–2029 Strategy highlights the potential of the 
emerging drone sector for Ireland and recognises DCC’s role in supporting the wider 
ecosystem and building capacity for innovative services both within the public sector 
and commercially.  The strategy states that scaling these services will depend on 
public trust, awareness, and early engagement to address concerns around safety, 
privacy, noise, and environmental impact, ensuring long-term acceptance and benefit 
for communities. 
 
Drone flying restrictions are regulated by the Irish Aviation Authority (IAA), which 
publishes maps showing restricted zones. These geographical zones restrictions are 
established by the IAA under the IAA Act. A number of these already exist for safety 
and security reasons, for example around airports and prisons. Access to a restricted 
UAS (drones) Geographical Zones can be requested through the published zone 
authority. DCC is not a zone authority in this respect.  
 
Airspace is managed by AirNav Ireland. Anyone wishing to fly a drone in restricted 
airspace must submit a UF101 request to AirNav for review. The zone authority, for 
example Dublin Airport Authority or the Irish Prison Service must be consulted before 
permission to fly is granted. Temporary restrictions can also be requested by other 
organisations for events like the St. Patrick’s Festival or major concerts at Croke Park 
or Aviva Stadium. 
 
DCC has established an internal Drones Governance Group dedicated to discussing 
the potential role of the city in any future legislation or regulations regarding drones in 
the urban space. In addition to the Governance Group, DCC has engaged with 19 
internal sections to proactively explore where additional drone flying restrictions might 
be appropriate – this is work that is currently in progress through our Drone Innovation 
Partnership. Quiet Areas were highlighted during these discussions as potential zones 
for further consideration under the Environmental Noise Directive.  

 
Following that engagement, initial discussions surrounding DCC Quite Areas are 
ongoing reviewing relevant regulations to see how a proposal for permanent restriction 
zones can be made to the IAA. Note that current research on the specific drone noise 
impact is limited. To progress with such proposals, additional testing and trials will be 
required to assess whether drone operations over Quiet Areas would exceed noise 
thresholds — for example, whether altitude limits or specific buffer zones are needed 
to mitigate noise levels and remain compliant with Quiet Area standards. 
 
It is important to note that Restricted Zones are not absolute no-fly areas. Instead, they 
require operators to seek permission from the relevant Zone Authority, which will need 
to allocate resources and staff to assess and manage these requests on a case-by-
case basis. 
 
For clarity, no commercial drone delivery operators are flying over the Dublin City 
Council area. DCC is aware that Manna Ltd. operates in the Blanchardstown area 
(under Fingal County Council) and has submitted a planning application to South 
Dublin County Council for a site in Tallaght. DCC’s Planning and Transport Planning 
teams confirm that no planning applications or pre-planning requests have been 
lodged with DCC to date. As such, DCC has not engaged in formal discussions or 
made any official statements regarding commercial drone operations within its 
jurisdiction. 
 
As with many new and emerging technologies, Dublin City Council will continue to 
explore and examine how these can to enhance service delivery and benefits to 
citizens in accordance its Corporate Plan and the Dublin City Development Plan. 
Importantly, DCC values the voices of our citizens to ensure transparency, 
accountability, and the continued trust of the community. 
 
We are in the process of arranging further engagement and consultation around 
drones in the city and will be hosting a series of community engagements to discuss 
issues outlined. Once a date has been agreed for these engagements, DCC will 
contact you and all residents interested in attending will be welcome. 
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive when works to extend Mount Bernard Park will begin. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services have recently carried out clearance of certain shrubbery areas in Mount 
Bernard Park extension lands and developed a perimeter route.  Parks Services had 
a follow up meeting with local residents’ groups last Monday to discuss plans. We are 
currently putting together a tender for the construction of universal tarmac pathway 
around the site and intend to appoint a contractor in the coming weeks. 
 
Q.90 
COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive What is the timeline for the granting of the licence for the 
tearooms in Palmerston Park? Many residents have been in touch and are eager to 
know when the tearooms in Palmerston Park will open. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Twenty four (24) proposals were received in relation to this item and were assessed 
by the Agent. A preferred bidder has been identified and the Heads of Terms are 
currently under negotiation. It is anticipated that terms will be presented to the Local 
Area Committee in June for recommendation to City Council for approval.  
 

Proposals from interested parties have been assessed with a view to selecting an 
operator for the tea room.  A preferred bidder has been identified, and terms are being 
issued for their acceptance.  Once accepted, a report will be prepared by Property 
Disposal Sections seeking statutory approval of the Southeast Area Committee to 
grant a licence to the successful bidder.  If agreed, a further report will be submitted to 
the City Council and subject to approval, the matter can then be referred to the Law 
Department for the completion of legal documents.  Until statutory approvals to grant 
a licence have been obtained, it is not possible to provide an exact timeline for the 
opening of the tearoom. 
 
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive would it be possible to repaint/touch up the Rainbow 
crossings in Dublin City Centre ahead of the Pride celebrations in June? Could we 
update the crossings to include the Full Progress Rainbow Flag or include some new 
strategic locations in the city centre with the Full Progress Rainbow Flag? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The locations will be inspected in the coming days. All existing Rainbow crossings will 
be repainted in time for the Pride celebrations in June. 
 
(Currently, there are no new locations under consideration for Pride markings. 
However, the road lining team would be open to considering new locations for next 
year’s celebrations - where appropriate locations are identified and brought to the 
team’s attention – Subject to the carriageway surface areas - being in good condition)  
 
Q.92 
 COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive if there has been any correspondence or commitment from 
the Taoiseach’s office regarding funding from the Central Government in conjunction 
with the Taskforce to redevelop, retrofit, and upgrade all the flat complexes and senior 
citizen accommodations around the North Inner City. It is one of the ten “Big Moves,” 
yet there has been no action from the Government to act on these recommendations, 
especially on this point, which is one of the most important. I have had constituents 
from Ballybough House, Courtney Place, Teeling Way, Island Key, Queen Street, 
Brendan Behan House, Temple Hill, Dunne Street, North Clarence Street, James 
Larkin House, North William Street, St. Michan’s House, and Matt Talbot Court contact 
me over the last few months about the substandard living conditions they must endure. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Taoiseach’s Taskforce completed in work in August 2024 and submitted its action 
plan to the then Taoiseach as required within the timeframe set out in its establishment 
terms of reference. (Dublin City Council was one member of this grouping which was 
independently chaired) 
An Inter Departmental Working Group was then established under the auspices of the 
Department of An Taoiseach. 
Dublin City Council and other statutory agencies have been involved in this group and 
have provided information, reports and outline cost estimates for various actions 
contained with the original Taskforce Report. 
We are currently awaiting for confirmation from Government on next steps in relation 
to the overall Taskforce Report and its 10 Big Moves. 
Once we receive any update we will go back to all members with the information and 
schedule it as an agenda item for the Councillors City Centre Review Group. 
 
Q.93 
COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 

To ask the Chief Executive if he could provide a commitment to the redevelopment of 
Liberty Park, ensuring that any redevelopment is undertaken in close consultation with 
local residents and places the highest priority on safety, particularly for residents and 
children attending the adjacent crèches. Given the ongoing challenges with antisocial 
behaviour in the park and open drug dealing, will the Manager consider incorporating 
principles of good urban design to mitigate these issues and create a welcoming, safe, 
and functional space for the community? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks, Biodiversity and Landscape Services, the Area Office and the North East Inner 
City Task Force have been working closely with the Liberty Park Working Group, over 
the last number of months and years. The most recent meeting/engagement was on 
the 24th of April, following up on previous discussions and proposals discussed and 
shared with the Cllrs previously, and valuable input was received regarding the 
ongoing improvements to Liberty Park. We are pleased to confirm that the agreed 
works will be progressed. Prior to any proposed works going to site, a leaflet will be 
distributed to the wider community to inform them about the planned improvements 
and provide relevant contact details. 
As discussed/requested from the Liberty Park Stakeholders the current project is going 
to include the following interventions: 
• 
A play Trail - catering for diverse abilities. 
• 
Upgraded footpaths throughout, including a Resin and Chip surface to 
introduce colour and improve the sense of the parkland setting. 
• 
Upgraded drainage within the Park. 
• 
Levelling and localised grading within the Park. 
• 
To improve sightlines/light and eliminate the current shelter/gathering location 
for anti-social behaviour– An Arboricultural Assessment of the existing trees 
along Foley Street will be carried out, in order to strategically reduce the number 
of the existing mature trees which have grown together to form one solid 
boundary. Bird Boxes will also be included in the trees throughout the Park. 
• 
Additional bulb and tree planting will also be included to create seasonal 
interest. 
 
Based on feedback provided during the most recent meeting last month,  additional 
requests discussed as part of these refurbishment works were noted and were 
discussed with a contractor on the 29th of April last. All additional works are being 
progressed; 
• 
New lighting within the park along Railway Street 
• 
New In-Ground Power Units to facilitate events 
• 
New Gates – wider vehicular access to further facilitate the events and vehicle 
access, a larger path (Plaza area) will be created at the gates. Which will protect 
the lawn area from compaction and create an alternative small events area for 
when the lawn is not suitable to host such events. 
 
As discussed in our meeting with the residents group, Dublin City Council is dedicated 
to developing this park for the benefit of the community. The installation of new play 
equipment will be accompanied by regular maintenance checks conducted by DCC, 
ensuring enhanced passive security within the park. These works form part of a layered 
and strategic approach by Dublin City Council to enhance Liberty Park and ensure it 
remains a safe, inclusive, and vibrant space for the local community. 
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 

To ask the Chief Executive if he could provide the most recent update on the Rutland 
Street School Redevelopment. What is the current status of the project, timeline of 
works, and completion date? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The public works contract for the redevelopment of Rutland Street School to provide a 
new civic centre for the North Inner City is currently under construction. The original 
contract programme was for May 2025 however this will not be achieved. DCC Senior 
Management continue to meet with contractor Directors on a fortnightly basis to review 
programme. The contractor has submitted a revised programme which is under review 
by Employer's Representative and the Project team. Although it is still pending 
confirmation, the most recent programmed completion is noted for delivery in 2026. 
Dublin City Council continue to engage with the intended tenants for the building to 
plan the transition to the new building on completion. 
 
Q.95 
COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive given the unacceptable conditions at the CASPr afterschool 
programme in Mountjoy Square, what immediate actions Dublin City Council will 
undertake to address the severe disrepair of the facilities. This includes addressing the 
security issues posed by holes in doors and walls, inadequate restroom facilities, poor 
window conditions, and inefficient heating systems. Additionally, what measures will 
be taken to repair the cracked and uneven path outside, ensuring the safety and well-
being of both staff and children? Finally, will the Council commit to funding these urgent 
repairs rather than placing the financial burden on the afterschool programme? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Road Maintenance Services are currently working in the vicinity of Mountjoy Square. 
The Area Inspector will carry out an inspection of the footpaths outside CASPr 
afterschool and carry out any necessary repairs. 
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive if an investigation can be carried out in relation to the 
flooding at (details supplied) can the reply include an answer from both Road 
Maintenance and Drainage.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An investigation will be carried out by Surface Water Maintenance within Q2 of 2025 
and if necessary, Surface Water Maintenance will liaise with Road Maintenance. 
 
This location will be inspected to examine if any works to the carriageway surface are 
required to alleviate the localised flooding. 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive his plans to run an awareness campaign in relation to the 
bye laws dictating the on and off lead times for dog walkers in Parks managed by 
Dublin City Council and can additional signage stating the on and off lead times be 
placed in all Parks in Dublin North West in particular Kildonan Park and Poppintree 
Park. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In relation to Byelaws for the Control of Dogs under the Local Government Act 1994 a 
dog may be unleashed in such areas (but excluding the North Bull Island and any other 
such area for which a Special Amenity Area Order is made) provided that such dog 
must still be under the effectual control of the person-in-charge of the dog in 
accordance with the Control of Dogs Acts, 1986 and 1992: 

 
January & December: 8.00 a.m. - 11.00 a.m. 
4.00 p.m. - 5.00 p.m. 
February & November: 8.00 a.m. - 11.00 a.m. 
4.30 p.m. - 5.30 p.m. 
 
At this time Parks Services have no plans to provide additional signage or run an 
awareness campaign. The situation in Kildonan and Poppintree Park will be monitored 
by parks staff in association with the local area office and if it is the case that dogs are 
persistently off the leash outside of these hours and/or out of control and causing a 
nuisance or danger to parks users then the dog warden services will be contacted to 
enforce the byelaws and all options will be considered to tackle the problem. 
 
 
Q.98 
COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive he can arrange for an inspection of (details supplied) 
following recent Road Maintenance works in the area.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We are currently clarifying whether these grass verges are in charge to the Road 
Maintenance Services Division or the Parks Department. An inspection of the grass 
verges will then be arranged. 
 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive his plans for a café at (details supplied).  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services have identified a number of potential sites for the installation of a café 
at (details supplied). and intend to progress plans in the coming months as resources 
allow.  
 
Q.100  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive manhole cover at (details supplied) and say if he can 
arrange to repair same as soon as possible as it’s hazardous in its current half-covered 
condition. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council will carry out an investigation to identify which utility is responsible 
for the manhole cover and frame. Once the owner has been determined, the Council 
will inform the appropriate utility and request that they complete all necessary repairs 
to their infrastructure at the specified location. 
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to location as per (details supplied) and say if he 
can bring about a solution. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking arrangements are usually based on common courtesy between neighbours; 
Under The Road Traffic (Traffic & Parking) Regulations, Section 36 paragraph (2); a 
vehicle shall not be parked:  
(g) in any place, position or manner that will result in the vehicle obstructing an 
entrance or an exit for vehicles to or from a premises, save with the consent of the 
occupier of such premises; 
Instances of illegal parking should be reported to Dublin Street Parking Services, the 
City Council’s parking enforcement contractor (Ph: 01-602 2500 or Email 

parkingenforcement@dublincity.ie), or to the local Gardaí, as it is a matter for 
enforcement under the Road Traffic Regulations. 
 
Q.102  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to location as per (details supplied) and say if he 
can bring about a solution. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Administration team have been in touch with the Councillor for further information 
and when we receive this (Enquiry Ref: 7045750) will be referred to the Area Engineer 
for assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group. 
 
Q.103 COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY  
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to location as per (details supplied) and say if he 
can arrange for the erection of a children at play sign. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
(Details supplied) is in the area covered by 30 km/h Slow Zone signage, indicating 
the lower speed limit and that the area is a Home Zone/Slow Zone, which warns 
motorists that it is a residential area and to expect children. 
The signage is clearly marked at the entrance from (details supplied). Further signage 
such as Children Crossing are not recommended within the estate, as this would lead 
to a proliferation of signs where motorists have already been warned on entering the 
estate. 
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise regarding a traffic issue (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer recommends extending Double Yellow Lines on (details 
supplied). 
 
Q.105 COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise regarding electric vehicle charging infrastructure 
(details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Policy SMT29 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022–2028 supports the expansion 
of the EV charging network across both public and private lands, subject to site-specific 
design considerations and compliance with planning and public safety requirements. 
 
While it is not appropriate to comment on individual cases the installation of fixed 
private EV charging arms on public footpaths presents several issues of concern: 
 
1. Impact on Pedestrian Safety and Accessibility: The introduction of physical 
infrastructure such as charging arms or trailing cables may reduce available 
footpath width and create potential trip hazards. This would be contrary to 
Policy SMT18, which seeks to protect and enhance the safety and accessibility 
of pedestrian routes, particularly for those with mobility challenges.  
 
2. Encroachment into the Public Realm: Volume 2, Appendix 5, Section 8.3 of the 
Development Plan (Taking in Charge Standards) prohibits private 
developments from overhanging or encroaching onto public space. Proposals 

of this nature would require a Letter of Consent from DCC, which is not typically 
granted due to the implications for public access, liability, and maintenance.  
 
3. Use of Public Space for Private Benefit: Charging arms dependent on access 
to the public roadway raise issues around the use of public on-street parking 
for individual benefit. Such arrangements are inconsistent with Policy SMT25, 
which promotes equitable and efficient management of parking resources in 
support of accessibility, turnover, and sustainable travel objectives. 
 
In light of these considerations, private EV charging infrastructure extending into the 
public domain is generally considered contrary to the principles of proper planning and 
sustainable development. There are currently no exemptions under the Planning and 
Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) to allow for such installations without 
formal planning permission or consent.  
 
It is acknowledged that residents without access to off-street parking are seeking viable 
EV charging solutions. This issue is under active consideration by government at 
national level, through the implementation of the “Regional and Local EV Charging 
Network Plan” which recognises the need to balance sustainability goals with the 
protection of public space and pedestrian safety. 
 
DCC continues to collaborate with the government to identify and pilot safe, accessible 
on-street shared infrastructure models that do not obstruct the public realm. Residents 
are encouraged to engage with the Council’s Smart City and Environment & 
Transportation Departments for updates on public EV charging initiatives and 
forthcoming pilot projects. 
 
Q.106  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive re dumping (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services recently removed two unauthorised clothes banks from 
(details supplied) car park.  
All bring bank locations across the city are subject to daily inspections by area-based 
cleaning teams who are responsible for removing litter around these banks, including 
bottle and textile banks, and ensuring the areas remain clean.  
Due to legislative changes introduced in the Climate Action and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act 2022, the use of CCTV cameras for the prevention of litter at bring bank 
sites is not permissible at this time. However, in line with the new legislative 
requirements, Dublin City Council intends to reintroduce CCTV cameras to problematic 
bring bank facilities, subject to compliance with the aforementioned legislation, over 
the course of 2025. (details supplied) has been identified as one such location. 
 
Q.107  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding school (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The School Zone project team is currently resourced to deliver front of school safety 
interventions to Round 2 and Round 3 schools on the Safe Routes to School 
programme, which is funded by the National Transport Authority. As (details supplied) 
is not on our current list of schools for these treatments, the team is not currently in a 
position to progress School Zone works at this location. However we hope to be in a 
position to engage with interested schools in the future subject to the availability of 
future resources.    

The team is also keen to manage expectations in terms of the impact that School 
Zones can make. While they can improve the situation at schools, they are only one of 
many solutions to the traffic challenges that school communities face. Ultimately there 
is a need to reduce the number of cars causing congestion at the school gate which 
creates the unsafe environment for children. Some softer measures to help reducing 
the number of students being driven to school, such as Park and Strides, walking 
busses and cycling busses, could also help to improve the situation. We encourage 
school communities to work with the parents and children in developing and trying out 
these solutions. If these schools would like more information on these initiatives or 
support with getting them started, please email sustainablemobility@dublincity.ie   
 
Q.108  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive can you look into making improvements to the Tolka Valley 
Playground as it is a hazard to the locals in the area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services have included this playground for upgrade in our 3-year playground 
upgrade programme.  It is intended to upgrade and relocate the playground within the 
park, taking into consideration other planned works at the park.  
 
Q.109  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive to address the continuous sewage problem in Ballymun 
especially the Coultry area.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Uisce Eireann has responsibly for all foul infrastructure. 
Accordingly, questions/requests relating to water supply services should now be made 
directly to Uisce Eireann.  
For your convenience of reference. 
Uisce Eireann provides a dedicated service for Local and Elected Representatives 
nationwide to ensure efficient and effective triage and resolution to any queries that 
they may have.  Uisce Eireann’s Local Representative Support Desk (LRSD) is open 
Monday to Friday (excluding Bank Holidays), between the hours of 09:00 to 17:30.  
The LRSD can be contacted either by telephone (0818 178 178) or by email at 
localrepsupport@water.ie.  Uisce Eireann’s LRSD team receive prioritised support 
from across the Uisce Eireann business and have direct relationships with the Regional 
Engineers so that information from the ground can be gathered and fed back where 
necessary. 
 
Q.110  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive to have the council explored the possibility of a staff taxi 
scheme for hospitality staff due to safety concerns in the city. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Council has not included or budgeted for a staff taxi scheme as part of the Night-
Time Economy Strategy for 2025.  
The Night-Time Economy Advisor has been researching similar schemes in UK cities 
to assess their viability in a Dublin context. This includes reviewing their effectiveness, 
cost implications, and potential to address safety concerns for hospitality workers 
during night-time hours. 
We expect to have findings and indicative costings later this year, which will help inform 
any decisions or proposals for inclusion in the 2026 strategy. 
 
Q.111  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPER 

To ask the Chief Executive are there any plans to ensure that proper labelling on 00 
beer glasses to ensure that publicans, bar staff and customers do not endanger the 
public by way of accidental alcohol consumption. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has no role in the labelling of alcohol products or glassware in 
licensed premises. It is a matter for the individual establishments, distributers and 
breweries to put in place processes and procedures to manage health and safety and 
ensure the safety of their customers.  
The Member is advised to establish contact with the Licensed Vintners Association 
and the Vintners' Federation of Ireland, who are the sectoral trade bodies, to discuss 
this matter further. 
