Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 4 March 2024 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 12 Márta 2024 i Seomra na Comhairle, Halla 
na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an 
tArdmheara Daithí de Róiste sa chathaoir. 
 
 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Daryl Barron 
Eimer McCormack 
Carolyn Moore 
Patricia Roe 
Declan Meenagh 
Danny Byrne 
Deborah Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Caroline Conroy 
Deirdre Conroy 
Donna Cooney 
Dearbháil Butler 
Kelsey May Daly 
Tara Deacy 
Michael Watters 
Catherine Stocker 
Kevin Donoghue 
Michael Pidgeon 
Colm O'Rourke 
Terence Flanagan 
Cat O'Driscoll 
James Geoghegan 
Sophie Nicoullaud 
Janet Horner 
Darragh Moriarty 
Racheal Batten 
Darcy Lonergan 
Briege MacOscar 
Tom Brabazon 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Anne Feeney 
Claire O'Connor 
Daithí de Róiste 
Séamas McGrattan 
Janice Boylan 
Mannix Flynn 
Paddy McCartan 
Declan Flanagan 
Alison Gilliland 
Deirdre Heney 
Jane Horgan Jones 
Vincent Jackson 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Anthony Connaghan 
Ray McAdam 
Naoise Ó Muirí 
Damian O'Farrell 
Larry O'Toole 
Cieran Perry 
Nial Ring 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Pat Dunne 
Daithí Doolan 
Noeleen Reilly 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Ruth Dowling 
Anthony Flynn 
Richard Shakespeare 
Prajwal K. Annibabu 
Yvonne Kelly 
Natalie Leonard 
Kathy Quinn 
John Flanagan 
Michael Gallagher 
Deirdre Scully 
Tatiana Kearney 
Frank d'Arcy 
Mary MacSweeney 
Darach O'Connor 
Donncha Ó Cathaisaigh             Ray Yeates                                Daithí de Buitléir 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1   Gnó an Ardmhéara - Lord Mayor's Business. 
 
The Lord Mayor asked that Council approve attendance at the Annual Suck Valley 
Way Conference that will take on the 13th and 14th March in Hannon’s Hotel, 
Co.Roscommon. The Members approved the conference. 
 
The Lord Mayor extended his sympathies to the family and friends of the former 
Dublin City Councillor Ita Greene who passed away recently.  Ita served as a City 
Councillor from 27th June 1991 to the 18th June 1999.  A minute silence was observed.  
 
The Lord Mayor acknowledged that this was the first time a council meeting has been 
conducted entirely in Irish and recognised the strong role that Dublin City Council has 
in promoting and advancing the use of the Irish Language in the City.  This includes 
the use of the Irish language in the provision of our services, tourism and when 
dealing with our customers.  The Lord Mayor thanked Councillors for their support in 
holding the meeting in Irish, he also thanked Julian de Spáinn and Conradh na 
Gaeilge for all their assistance and the Management and staff of Dublin City Council 
for their work in facilitating the meeting. 
 
The Chief Executive welcomed the Lord Mayor’s initiative to hold the meeting in Irish 
and thanked all those involved. 
 
In further recognition of the new generation of Irish Speakers within the City, the Lord 
Mayor proposed the following motion:  
 
“That Dublin City Council supports the campaign to establish a Gaelcholáiste in the 
Dublin school districts 2,4,6,8 and the Council requires the Minister for Education, 
Norma Foley, TD to take a decision to do this immediately.” 
 
This motion was seconded by Councillor Deirdre Heney. The motion was put and 
carried.  
 
 
2   Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18. 
 
It was moved by Councillor Naoise Ó Muirí and seconded by Councillor Micheál 
MacDonncha that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering 
the questions lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the 
questions lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and 
Answers are set out in Appendix A to these minutes. 
 
 
3   Fuarthas comhfhreagras ó na hÚdaráis Áitiúla seo a leanas - Correspondence; 
 
Sligo County Council  
 
Cork County Council  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by Councillor 
Deirdre Heney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence 
listed. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
4   Miontuairiscí Chruinniú na Comhairle Cathrach a tionóladh ar an 12 Feabhra 2024 a 
dheimhniú.  
To confirm the minutes of the City Council Meeting held on 12th February 2024. 
 
The minutes of the City Council meeting held on 12th February 2024 having been 
printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken 
as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor 
 
 

 
5   Tuarascáil Uimh. 75/2024 ón bPríomhfheidhmeannach, i gcomhréir le hAlt 138 den 
Acht Rialtais Áitiúil 2001 ag cur na Comhairle ar an eolas faoi oibreacha atá ar tí tosú 
agus i gcomhréir leis na Rialacháin um Pleanáil agus Forbairt 2001, Cuid 8: Droichead 
Pontúin na Life, Droichead na hInse, Baile Átha Cliath 8.  
 
Report No. 75/2024 of the Chief Executive, in compliance with Section 138 of the 
Local Government Act 2001 informing the Council of works which are about to 
commence and in compliance with the Planning and Development Regulations 2001, 
Part 8: River Liffey Pontoon, Islandbridge, Dublin 8. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Michael Pidgeon and seconded by Councillor Hazel de 
Nortúin that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 75/2024 and hereby 
approves the contents as set out therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
6   Tuarascáil Uimh. 67/2024 ón bPríomhfheidhmeannach Cúnta agus ón Innealtóir 
Cathrach (J. Flanagan) - le tagairt don chomhairliúchán poiblí atá beartaithe do 
Dhréacht-Fhodhlíthe Scipe Chomhairle Cathrach Bhaile Átha Cliath, 2024.  
 
Report No. 67/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (J. Flanagan) - 
with reference to the proposed public consultation for the Draft Dublin City Council 
Skip Bye-Laws, 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Dermot 
Lacey that Dublin City Council approves the initiation of the consultation process in 
relation to formulating Bye Laws for Dublin City Council Skip Bye-Laws as outlined in 
Report 67/2024.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
7   Tuarascáil Uimh. 61/2024 ón mBainisteoir Feidhmiúcháin Cúnta (M. Robinson) - 
Maidir le diúscairt an Leasa Shimplí Táille faoin Acht um Thiarnaí Talún agus 
Tionóntaí (Bunchíosanna) (Uimh. 2), 1978.  
 
Report No. 61/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Robinson) - With reference to the 
disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and Tenant (Ground Rents) 
(No. 2) Act, 1978. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Séamas 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 61/2024 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
8   Diúscairt Réadmhaoine - Disposal of Property:   
 
 
(a)   Tuarascáil Uimh. 69/2024 ón mBainisteoir Feidhmiúcháin Cúnta (M. Igoe) - 
Maidir le 11 Plás Bass agus plota a dhiúscairt ar chúl Shráid na bhFíníní, Baile 
Átha Cliath 2 chuig Airíonna Rith Óir Teoranta.  
 
Report No. 69/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the disposal of 11 Bass Place and plot to the rear of Fenian Street, Dublin 2 to 
Gold Run Properties Limited.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by 
Councillor Naoise Ó Muirí that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No. 69/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
 

 
(b)   Tuarascáil Uimh. 72/2024 ón mBainisteoir Feidhmiúcháin Cúnta (M. Igoe) - Le 
tagairt do dhiúscairt plota agus cead slí a dheonú ag Cúirt an Ghleanna, 
Garrán an Ghleanna, Baile Átha Cliath 17 do Bhord Soláthair an Leictreachais 
(BSL).  
 
Report No. 72/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) -With reference to 
the disposal of plot and grant of wayleave at Glin Court, Glin Grove, Dublin 17 
to the Electricity Supply Board (ESB).  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Micheál MacDonncha and seconded by 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No. 72/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
(c)   Tuarascáil Uimh. 73/2024 ón mBainisteoir Feidhmiúcháin Cúnta (M. Igoe) - 
Maidir le plota talún a dhiúscairt ar chúl 16 Bóthar Uí Chairealláin, Marino, 
Baile Átha Cliath 3.  
 
Report No. 73/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the disposal of a plot of land to the rear of 16 Carleton Road, Marino, Dublin 3.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Naoise Ó Muirí and seconded by Councillor 
Donna Cooney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
73/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
(d)   Tuarascáil Uimh. 74/2024 ón mBainisteoir Feidhmiúcháin Cúnta (M. Igoe) - 
Maidir le plota talún a dhiúscairt ar chúl 33 Bóthar an Chasaíne, Marino, Baile 
Átha Cliath 3.  
 
Report No. 74/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the disposal of a plot of land to the rear of 33 Casino Road, Marino, Dublin 3.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Deirdre Heney and seconded by Councillor 
Donna Cooney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
74/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
9   Deonú Ceadúnais agus Léasanna - Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
(a)   Tuarascáil Uimh. 71/2024 ón mBainisteoir Feidhmiúcháin Cúnta (M. Igoe) - 
Maidir le síneadh a chur le téarma léasa Pháirc an Phaidrín, Crois Araild chuig 
Club Óige Chrois Araild CLG trí Ghníomhas Aistrithe.  
 
Report No. 71/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the extension of the term of a lease of Rosary Park, Harold's Cross by Deed of 
Variation to Harold's Cross Youth Club CLG.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Pat Dunne and seconded by Councillor Anthony 
Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 71/2024 
and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
 
 
(b)   Tuarascáil Uimh. 70/2024 ón mBainisteoir Feidhmiúcháin Cúnta (M. Igoe) - 
Maidir le ceadúnas breise de chuid Phailliún an tSeomra Tae a dheonú ag 
Páirc Hoirbeaird, Droichead na Dothra, Baile Átha Cliath 4 do Lolly agus Cooks 
Ltd.  
 

 
Report No. 70/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the proposed grant of a further licence of the Tea Room Pavilion at Herbert 
Park, Ballsbridge, Dublin 4 to Lolly and Cooks Ltd.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor 
Anthony Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
70/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
10   Tuarascáil Uimh. 68/2024 ón Leas-Phríomhfheidhmeannach (E. Quinlivan) - Cur Chun 
Cinn na Gaeilge i gCathair Bhaile Átha Cliath.  
 
Report No. 68/2024 of the Deputy Chief Executive (E. Quinlivan) -  Promotion of the 
Irish Language in Dublin City. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Micheál MacDonncha and seconded by Councillor 
Deirdre Heney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 68/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
Presentations were given by Eileen Quinlivan, Deputy Chief Executive; Darach 
O’Connor, Executive Manager, Corporate Service and Transformation Department; 
Deirdre Scully, City Planner; Mary MacSweeney, Acting Executive Manager, Culture, 
Recreation & Economic Services; Ray Yeates Arts Officer; Donncha Ó Cathasaigh, 
Administrative Officer, Human Resources  and Daithí De Buitléir, Programme 
Manager Gaeilge 365, Irish Innovation Unit.   
 
Cllr Deirdre Heney thanked Donncha Ó Cathasigh for all his work in promoting the 
Irish Language and wished him well in his retirement. 
 
A copy of this presentation can be found in Appendix B to these minutes. 
 
 
11   Tuarascáil Uimh. 60/2024 ón bPríomhfheidhmeannach Cúnta (F. d'Arcy)- Tuarascáil 
ar Nuashonrú Míosúil ar Sholáthar agus Seachadadh Tithíochta Sóisialta.  
 
Report No. 60/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive (F. d'Arcy) - Social Housing 
Supply and Delivery Monthly Update Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Anthony 
Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 60/2023. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
12   Tuarascáil Uimh. 64/2024 ón gCeann Airgeadais (K. Quinn) - Ráiteas Míosúil Ciste 
Áitiúil.  
 
Report No. 64/2024 of the Head of Finance (K. Quinn) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Deirdre Heney and seconded by Councillor Séamas 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 64/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
Cllr Séamas McGrattan thanked Fintan Moran, Head of Management Accounting for 
all his work and service to Dublin City Council particularly in relation to the Annual 
Budget and wished him well in his upcoming retirement. 
 
 
 

 
13   Tuarascáil Uimh. 65/2024 ón bPríomhfheidhmeannach (R. Shakespeare) - Tuarascáil 
Mhíosúil Bhainistíochta.  
 
Report No. 65/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Naoise Ó Muirí seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 65/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
14   Tuarascáil Uimh. 59/2024 ó na Coistí Ceantair - Achoimrí ó na cruinnithe Coistí 
Ceantair a reáchtáladh i mí Feabhra 2024.  
 
Report No. 59/2024 of the Area Committees - Breviates of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of February 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Deirdre Heney and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 59/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
15   Tuarascáil Uimh. 58/2024 ón gCoiste um Beartas Straitéiseach Tithíochta - Achoimre 
ar an gcruinniú a tionóladh ar an 17 Eanáir 2024, an Comhairleoir Alison Gilliland, 
Cathaoirleach.  
 
Report No. 58/2024 of the Housing Strategic Policy Committee - Breviate of the 
meeting held on the 17th January 2024, Councillor Alison Gilliland, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Alison Gilliland and seconded by Councillor Daithí 
Doolan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 58/2024. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
16   Tuarascáil Uimh. 63/2024 ón gCoiste um Beartas Straitéiseach Tráchta agus Iompair - 
Achoimre ar an gcruinniú a tionóladh ar an 7 Feabhra 2024, An Comhairleoir Noeleen 
Reilly, Cathaoirleach.  
 
Report No. 63/2024 of the Traffic and Transport Strategic Policy Committee - Breviate 
of the meeting held 7th February 2024, Councillor Noeleen Reilly, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Deirdre Heney and seconded by Councillor Séamas 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 63/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
17   Tuarascáil Uimh.76/2024 ón gCoiste um Beartas Straitéiseach Pleanáil agus Foirm 
Uirbeach - Achoimre ar an gcruinniú a tionóladh ar an 22 Samhain 2023, an 
Comhairleoir Ray McAdam, Cathaoirleach.  
 
Report No. 76/2024 of the Planning and Urban Form Strategic Policy Committee - 
Breviate of the meeting held 22nd November 2023, Councillor Ray McAdam, 
Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor Deirdre 
Heney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 76/2024. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
 

 
18   Tuarascáil Uimh. 62/2024 ó Chomhchoiste Póilíneachta Bhaile Átha Cliath - Achoimre 
ar an gcruinniú a tionóladh ar an 29 Eanáir 2024, an Comhairleoir Tara Deacy, 
Cathaoirleach.  
 
Report No. 62/2024 of the Dublin Joint Policing Committee - Breviate of the meeting 
held on 29th January 2024, Councillor Tara Deacy, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas McGrattan and seconded by Councillor Deirdre 
Heney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 62/2024. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
19   Tuarascáil Uimh. 66/2024 ón gCoiste Prótacail - Achoimre ar an gcruinniú a tionóladh 
ar an 25 Eanáir 2024, An Comhairleoir Deirdre Heney, Cathaoirleach.  
 
Report No. 66/2024 of the Protocol Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 
25th January 2024, Councillor Deirdre Heney, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Deirdre Heney and seconded by Councillor Naoise Ó 
Muirí that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 66/2024. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
20   Ceisteanna Tráthúla   - Topical Issues 
 
No topical issues were submitted for consideration. 
 
 
21   Rúin ar Fhógra   - Motions on Notice 
 
1) Motion No. 1 in the name of Councillor Ray McAdam 
It was agreed that this motion be deferred to the next Council meeting.  
 
2) Motion No. 2 in the name of Councillor Keith Connolly 
It was agreed that this motion be deferred to the next Council meeting.  
 
 
3) Motion No. 3 – It was proposed by Councillor Deirdre Heney and seconded by 
Councillor Alison Gilliland that:  
 
“Dublin City Council agrees to an audit of all vacant private housing with a view 
to approaching owners of same in relation to purchase of same.” 
 
The motion was put and carried.  
 
4) Motion No. 4 in the name of Councillor Máire Devine  
It was agreed that this motion be deferred to the next Council meeting.  
 
5) Motion No. 5 – it was proposed by Councillor Alison Gilliland and seconded by 
Councillor Deirdre Heney that:  
 
“Dublin City Council commits to working with all national and local stakeholders 
to make Dublin a Safe Place for Women. It commits to promoting and 
implementing policies that enhance women's safety and promote access to 
justice for all forms of gender-based violence. In particular within its remit 
Dublin City Council commits to 
 
(a) Providing gender sensitivity and awareness training around gender-based 
violence, human trafficking and practices harmful to women and girls (female 
 

 
genital mutilation, early and forced marriages, forced sterilisation) for all Dublin 
City Council staff and all staff working under a DCC Service Level Agreement 
with those working in homeless services, housing management and first 
responders being a top priority for such training;  
 
(b) Systematically considering women's safety and needs when planning and 
designing public realm enhancements, new infrastructure and housing 
developments 
 
(c) Systematically considering women's safety and needs when deciding on 
budget measures related in particular to public services such as public lighting, 
public realm around public transport  and resources in our housing and 
homeless social services to deal with gender-based violence victims;  
 
(d) Using the Council’s planning authority and bye law authority to apply a zero-
tolerance policy to sexist advertising in public spaces as this promotes harmful 
gender stereotypes; 
 
(e) Organising educational programmes/training/presentations in our libraries and 
other community buildings to raise awareness from an early age about the 
impact of gender-based harassment and violence; 
 
(f) Raising and supporting local agency public awareness about gender-based 
violence through communication campaigns, aimed also at informing victims 
about where and how to access support services, with such activities 
culminating around the International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against 
Women (25 November);  
 
 
(g) Remaining vigilant and immediate reporting suspected and actual cases of 
human trafficking and practices harmful to women and girls (female genital 
mutilation, early and forced marriages, forced sterilisation); 
 
(h) Remaining vigilant and apply zero tolerance to any forms of gender-based 
cyberviolence; 
 
(i) Promoting and facilitating through Joint Policing Committees direct and 
uninterrupted access to specialised, secure and comprehensive support 
services for victims of gender-based violence, including domestic and sexual 
violence; 
 
(j) Promoting and facilitating through Joint Policing Committees the prompt 
reaction of the services competent for the non-discriminatory registration and 
handling of incidents of gender-based violence and to providing for measures 
for the effective and immediate protection of victims and their children; 
 
(k) Leading by example in the organisation and workings of the Dublin City Council 
to ensure all women consider it a safe place to work and to promote the safety 
of women and girls.” 
 
The motion was put and carried.  
 
6) Motion No. 6 in the name of Councillor Deborah Byrne 
It was agreed that this motion be deferred to the next Council meeting.  
 
 

 
7) Motion No. 7 in the name of Councillor Hazel De Nortúin. 
It was agreed that this motion be deferred to the next Council meeting.  
 
8) Motion No. 8 – It was proposed by Councillor Donna Cooney and seconded by 
Councillor Alison Gilliland that: 
 
“Dublin City Council as part of its obligation under EU nature restoration law set 
out plans to increase urban space for nature.” 
 
The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
22   Rú(i)n Éigeandála  - Emergency Motion(s) 
 
No emergency motions were submitted for debate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT 
THE MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY, 4th 
OF MARCH 2024 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will have the following issue and suggestions 
contained therein examined with a view to increasing safety at Ashfield Road, 
Ranelagh. In particular if he will examine if the narrowing of the road through extended 
footpaths could be considered as part of the proposed Cycle Way through Ranelagh. 
 
Due to a delivery service operating in the vicinity there are multiple motorbikes (maybe 
20/30) driving the wrong way up Ashfield Road every day without any repercussion. 
This is extremely dangerous. I know people can breach one-way systems here and 
there on a bike or by accident but this is systematic due to the delivery service which 
operates out of the back laneway. Something needs to be done about it as I am certain 
there will be an accident with someone seriously hurt and this is completely 
preventable.  
 
Things which could help is narrowing the bottom of the road by broadening the 
footpath, putting up clearer signs that it’s one way, maybe putting up CCTV, maybe 
having a Garda there on a busy night to put them off. I am genuinely concerned that 
I’ll hear a horrendous crash on my road due to the ignorance of these delivery drivers 
driving up our road to get down the back laneway. And this is something which 
everyone is ignoring. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The Transport Advisory Group (TAG) area engineer has conducted an assessment of 
the traffic situation on Ashfield Road, resulting in the following recommendations: 
 
The road currently lacks road markings indicating the direction of flow. Therefore, it is 
proposed to install 4 no. RRM 004 Direction Arrows on Ashfield Road (SE). 
Additionally, the "No Entry" road marking at the exit point of Ashfield Road into 
Ranelagh Road (R117) will be renewed. 
 
The issue of vehicles traveling in the wrong direction on Ashfield Road has been raised 
by TAG during the monthly meeting, and it has been brought to the attention of the 
local Gardaí for necessary action. In future instances, non-compliant vehicles should 
be reported to the Gardaí for enforcement. 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
As part of the Sandyford Clonskeagh to Charlemont Street (SC2C) permanent active 
travel scheme, it is proposed to install priority pedestrian and cyclist access by means 
of raising the road level to footpath level where Ashfield Road intersects with Ranelagh. 
 
The proposals were presented at public consultation in Q1 2023, and are available on 
the DCC Active Travel Website (dublincity.ie/activetravel). The preliminary design is 
being progressed currently, with ongoing engagement with local stakeholders. 
Construction of the permanent scheme is scheduled to commence in Q2 2025, with 
an interim scheme in Ranelagh to commence in Q3 2024. 
 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR ALISON GILLILAND  
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the inspection of (details supplied) with a 
view to determining it a derelict building and entering it in the Derelict Sites Register. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council identified land in scope for the RZLT tax through the publication 
of draft and supplemental maps in 2022/23. The first annual mapping process is now 
complete with the publication of the final map on 1st December 2023.  The site at 
(details supplied) is included on this final map.  In Budget 2023 The Minister for 
Finance, and the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage, announced 
the deferral of the initial liability date for the RZLT by one year, from 1 February 2024 
until 1 February 2025.  
  
The Annual draft RZLT map for 2024 was published on the Dublin City Council 
website on 1 February 2024.  The site at (details supplied) is included on this 
map.  Landowners will have the opportunity to make submissions regarding the 
inclusion of their land on the map and interested individuals or third parties may also 
make submissions in respect of land.  In December 2024, Local Authorities will 
publish final maps which will reflect outcomes of all submissions and appeals and 
any zoning or servicing changes which have taken land out of scope or brought land 
within the scope of the tax during 2024. This final map will form the basis for the 
administration of the tax measure by the Revenue Commissioners 
 
 
 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR JANE HORGAN-JONES 
To ask the Chief Executive the following question with in regards the installation of 
water pipes at (details supplied) 
 
 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As the issues raised are a matter for Irish Water they should be referred directly to Irish 
Water.  
Please call the telephone number on 0818 178 178 / 0818 578 578 and identify yourself 
as an Elected Representative. You will be put through to the Local Representative 
Support Desk in Irish Water’s Customer Contact Centre who will deal with you directly. 
Alternatively, there is a specific e-mail address at Irish Water for Councillors: 
LocalRepSupport@water.ie. 
 
The Local Representative Support Desk at Irish Water operates from 9.00am – 
5.30pm, Monday to Friday. 
 
Q.4 
COUNCILLOR JANE HORGAN JONES 
To ask the Chief Executive the following question.  
  
There is obviously major disruption going on with the construction of the cycleway at 
Fairview/Clontarf. However, I wish to highlight that there is increasing danger for 
pedestrians coming on-stream at the Malahide Road/Marino Crescent and Clontarf 
Road junctions. There is an ‘island’ there with a popular bus stop. There is a pedestrian 
light crossing to and from Fairview to the ‘island’. However, there is no safe crossing 
at the Malahide Road/Marino Crescent junction for pedestrians to get to and from the 
‘island’. There is also no safe crossing for pedestrians at the Clontarf Road/Marino 
Crescent slip road junction. 
  
There is extensive traffic now taking the slip road at Marino Crescent not just from the 
Malahide Road but also from St Aidan’s Park Road (cars avoiding the Fairview 
cycleway). Most of the day there is a build-up of traffic on the slipway.  
  
I am aware that there has been at least one elderly person injured at this location. 
  
Can Dublin City traffic engineers please re-examine the two junctions referred to and 
put in at least ramps and pedestrian zebra crossings at the locations highlighted. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Clontarf to City Centre Scheme continues to review the crossing points at the 
bottom of Malahide Road and the junctions with Marino Crescent and Clontarf Road.  
The crossing proposals need to take account of a number of elements when 
considering how these locations are to be managed. The route from Malahide Road 
and the left turn onto the slip lane to Marino Crescent and to Clontarf Road is (i) a HGV 
route (ii) an abnormal loads route and (iii) potentially a bus route in the future. 
Please see sketch below which identifies the 3no. Crossing locations at Malahide 
Road/Marino Crescent and Clontarf Road. Please also see below for relevant bullet 
points to try summarise the current proposals for each of the 3no. crossing locations; 
1. Crossing no. 1 – Malahide Road onto slip road at Marino Crescent Crossing; 
 
Current design proposal indicates an uncontrolled pedestrian crossing 
 
It is not believed that this crossing point is suitable for any form of controlled 
crossing due to the HGV and bus movements expected from Malahide 
Road and onto Marino Crescent and the proximity of the Malahide and 
Clontarf Road junction. The proposed design layout is essentially the same 
as existed previously with the bus stop also in the same location as was the 
case previously. 
 
A raised table which is utilised on side-roads elsewhere along the Scheme 
is not deemed to be appropriate at this location due to the anticipated traffic 
expected to utilise the route. 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
 
A raised kerb on each side of the cycle-track coming down Malahide Road 
is to be constructed with the intention of slowing traffic which intends to 
make the left-turn onto the slip road. 
 
At present no changes to the proposed layout are planned for this crossing 
 
2. Crossing no. 3 – Marino Crescent/Clontarf Road; 
 
Current design proposal has provided for an uncontrolled pedestrian 
crossing  
 
It is noted that this crossing point facilitates abnormal loads travelling in 
both directions (escorted loads). 
 
A raised table is not deemed to be appropriate due to the HGV and bus 
movements expected down Malahide Road and onto the slip to exit onto 
Clontarf Road. 
 
A raised kerb on the Clontarf Road outbound cycle-track is to be 
constructed which is intended to slow traffic making the left-turn from the 
slip-road. 
 
A further design review shall be undertaken at this crossing point to see if 
there is any form of controlled crossing which can be incorporated at this 
location. The Project Team can report once this review has been 
undertaken. 
 
In summary, we shall endeavour to provide a raised table at Crossing no. 2 (as per 
below at Marino Crescent) and conduct a further design review of Crossing no. 3. With 
regard to Crossing no. 1 it is for now intended to leave the arrangement as per the 
current design which is similar to what existed previously prior to the Scheme being 
undertaken. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Crossing no. 1 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
Q.5 
COUNCILLOR ALISON GILLILAND 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a review of the traffic light sequence at the 
Griffith Ave/Swords Rd junction, in particular the duration of the green light for vehicles 
travelling through the junction east/west (Collins Ave - Griffith Ave).  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
At the junction of Swords Road/ Griffith Ave, the Swords Rd approaches receive a 
majority of available green time each cycle of the traffic signals as the Swords Road is 
a main public transport artery to/from the city and the main city transportation route to 
Dublin airport, Northern Ireland and northern commuter areas. 
 
Allocation of extra green time to Griffith Ave approaches reduces the green time 
available to the Swords Road and thus increase public transport journey times, 
delaying hundreds of passengers, contrary to Dublin City Council policy to prioritise 
sustainable modes of transportation. 
 
Every effort is made to keep traffic moving on all routes in so far as possible, however 
increasing volume of traffic, coupled with the need to service priority demands from 
pedestrians, cyclists and public transport means that a balance needs to be struck 
between these multiple modes, on multiple approaches to junctions.  
 
It is therefore not always possible to prioritise one route over others. 
 
However, the matter has been referred to Brendan O’Brien Head of Technical Services 
(Traffic) and he is arranging to have an in depth traffic survey carried out at this location 
to determine the current situation.  
 
Once this has been undertaken if will be assessed to determine if there are any 
changes that could be made to allow for the situation on Griffith Avenue to be 
ameliorated while keeping the main public transport corridor working and protecting 
the safety of pedestrians and cyclists.  
We will also continue to monitor the junction in question and amendments to traffic 
signal timings will be made as required, where there is scope to do so. 
 
Q.6  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive the management arrangements for purchase of the new 
Columbarium Walls at the Donnybrook Cemetery and the overall management of the 
newly restored facility. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Columbarium Walls project has commenced on site construction with an intention 
to have it ready for leasing in Q4 2024. The detailed management of the new facility 
has not been finalised at present, this information will be brought to the Area 
Committee when available. 
 
Q.7  
COUNCILLOR JANE HORGAN-JONES 
To ask the Chief Executive to fix the path on Melrose Avenue urgently as it is very 
dangerous and people will fall. It’s broken from the tree.  (Details supplied).  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11153702) has been created and forward to the Area Inspector who 
will carry out a survey as soon as possible given the circumstances & arrange for any 
necessary repairs. 
 
 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
Q.8  
COUNCILLOR JANE HORGAN-JONES 
To ask the Chief Executive again about the illegal parking on Brookwood 
Rise/Harmonstown Road.   People are parking on the paths still and it’s very 
dangerous to pedestrians which many are very elderly.   I have had several residents 
contact me, something needs to be done.  The speed Ramps need to be fixed also 
they are broken.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement Part Reply: 
Dublin Street Parking Services, our parking enforcement contractor, have monitored 
and enforced this area over the last number of weeks.  They will continue to patrol and 
enforce this area.  I have asked the Area Engineer to assess if parking restrictions can 
be implemented here to deter illegal parking. 
 
Road Maintenance Services Reply; 
The request for repairs to the defective ramps Brookwood Rise/Harmonstown Road 
has been forwarded to the Area Inspector who will assign a crew to carry out temporary 
repairs. 
 
These ramps will be added to subsequent works programmes for full resurfacing. 
 
Q.9 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive at what stage are the discussions with Dublin City Council 
the HSE and government ministers are at regards the €17 million owed to Dublin City 
Council for ambulance service s to HSE over a number of years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Department of Health and the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage 
are developing a joint memo to Government outlining the arrangements and seeking 
approval to implement the Task & Finish Group’s recommendations and to provide the 
necessary funding.  
CE has yet to see the actual contents of the memo but believes it does take account 
of the work undertaken by the Task and Finish Group. 
 
Q.10  COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on what stage funding has been approved 
regards (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Stage 1 project and funding approval was received from the Department of Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage in January 2024 for the regeneration of (details 
supplied). 
 
The City Architects Division are now appointing a consultant led design team in order 
to develop the plans for the project. The approach for redeveloping the existing housing 
scheme is to retain the buildings and carry out a deep retrofit to provide quality new 
homes. 
 
Surveys are ongoing onsite and it is envisaged that the Part 8 process will commence 
in Q4 2024, ahead of planning lodgement in Q2 2025.  
 
Q.11  COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive for details of the number of applicants on the housing list 
with Dublin City Council 
 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please find attached the latest housing report setting out the figures requested. 
 
Q.12  COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive when will the new Dog Warden staff be in place and on 
duty in the City Dublin? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Council are required to provide one or more persons to provide dog warden 
services under Section 15(1) of the Control of Dogs Act 1986 
 
15.—(1) Every local authority shall employ one or more persons to be dog wardens for the 
purposes of this Act and every person so employed shall be furnished with a certificate of 
his appointment and when exercising a power under this Act shall, if requested by any 
person thereby affected, produce such certificate for inspection by the person. 
 
To this end Dublin City Council has completed a successful recruitment process for 
Animal Wardens (to cover both Control of Dogs and Control of Horses services).   
Offers have been made to 5 successful candidates. The first 2 wardens have taken up 
their posts with effect from the 12th February 2024. A further 2 wardens will take up 
duty on the 26th February and the remaining post will be filled at a later date. This will 
bring the full staffing compliment of Animal Welfare & Control Services up to 12. 
 
All new Wardens will follow an extensive education programme to include dog and 
horse handling skills, health and safety training and familiarity with animal welfare 
legislation. The Council will continue to contract an external resource to provide 
warden services until the new wardens are fully trained.  
 
Q.13  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive how much community funding has Dublin City Council 
given the Artane Beaumont Family Recreation Centre over the past 5 years? Who 
owns the community centre, can you provide background to same. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Community and Social Development Office would use the centre for hire of the hall. 
From 2018-2024 the section has paid €5,300 for room hire. Discretionary budget 
funded the upgrade of a door, totalling €5,170 in 2019. Artane Beaumont Recreation 
Centre did not receive community grants through our central fund from 2018-2023. 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the update on Parnells Football Club and Club 
house. Has Dublin City Council had any meetings with the club over the past two years, 
the club is in financial debt? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Manager has met with Parnell’s football club in the past two years however 
no discussion was brought up with regards to financial debt. 
 
Q.15  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive can the continuous white line outside (Details supplied) 
be removed ASAP please? Why was this continuous white line placed outside the 
houses when the occupants have to park their vehicles there, why are Dublin City 
Council placing fines on the cars here? 
 
 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The request for rescinding the continuous white line (Enquiry Ref: 7037593) will be 
referred to the Area Engineer for assessment and report to the Transport Advisory 
Group for their consideration. The Councillor will be informed of the final 
recommendations of the Transport Advisory Group in due course. 
 
Q.16 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLNAGAN 
To ask the chief executive is there new parking enforcement personnel operating 
around the Coolock area, if so can you advise on the background to this please. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin Street Parking Services, the parking enforcement contractor, patrol and carry 
out enforcement in the administrative area of Dublin City Council. 
 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive for the details of the “Legal Warrantees” that the Council 
agrees with and signs contracts for with tendered construction firms of social/public 
housing – either new or refurbished units? Can this be provided in a tabulated format? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
For homes using the Direct Delivery Route (where DCC enters into a building contract 
with a builder), we use the forms of Contract for Public Works which are published by 
the Office of Government Procurement. Following substantial completion of direct 
delivery housing schemes, defects that may arise are dealt with under Clause 8. 
Quality, Testing and Defects. 
 
Substantial Completion in practical terms is when the completed building is placed on 
the Building Control Management System Register and the contract administrator, the 
Employers Representative (ER) confirms the building has reached substantial 
completion and the homes are then available for people to move into.   
 
There is a Defects Period starting on the date of substantial completion of the works 
and continuing for the period stated in the Schedule (which is generally set at 12 
months).Where defects arise during this period the ER brings them to the attention of 
the Contractor and DCC, and subsequently the defects are addressed. 
 
DCC Contracts are normally under seal and therefore the parties have rights for 12 
years. 
If a defect becomes apparent after the Defects Period, and there are no contributing 
causes that may have impacted post occupancy, DCC would engage with the 
Contractor to examine the cause of the defect , review the possible solutions and agree 
remedial actions. 
 
If the Councillor has any specific housing scheme in mind or would like further 
information, I am available at any time to discuss. 
 
Q.18 
COUNCILLOR LORCAN O’TOOLE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the contractors refrain from leaving ‘grass cuttings’ on 
public footpaths after mowing as it causing a danger to pedestrians.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Service has issued an instruction that all arisings from their grass cutting 
activities be removed after they are finished in the respective areas. 
 
 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
Q.19 
COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that the damaged footpath outside (Details 
Attached) is repaired immediately; and if he will make a statement on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (Ref: 11153988) has been created and forwarded directly to the area 
inspector to assess the location and carry out any necessary repairs as soon as 
possible.  
 
Q.20 
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will give a comprehensive reply to the issues contained 
in the letter (details supplied) with this Question relating to the issuing of (Residential) 
Disc Parking permits for foreign registered cars. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin City Council Parking Control Bye Laws 2024 govern the issuing of 
Residential Parking Permits.  There are certain criteria that must be met in order to be 
eligible to apply for a permit (eg: type of property, quota available at property, if 
applicant is a resident etc).  An applicant is also requested to submit an application 
form where they declare that they reside at the property for at least 183 days per year, 
two proofs of residency, an Insurance Certificate at the address in which they reside 
and are applying for the permit and a copy of their Drivers Licence.  Our remit is in 
relation to the issuing of a permit to a resident and whether or not a person is eligible 
to apply for a permit and, if they are, to ensure the correct supporting documentation 
is submitted with the application.  We don’t have the authority or the right under GDPR 
Guidelines to request any other type of information that doesn’t relate to the issuing of 
a permit directly.  Whether the vehicle is registered in Ireland or outside Ireland is of 
no significance to the eligibility of obtaining a permit.  
 
Q.21 
COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive and Roads Department to investigate the safety along the 
road to the Harold’s Cross Educate Together children’s school. I was notified by a 
school enquirer that there are several serious road safety issues on the way into 
Harold's Cross Educate Together National School, which pose a risk to the local school 
children. I request that school traffic wardens be installed at all three of these points 
along the school route before an accident involving a child happens. Also that suitable 
signage is placed in these three areas. Many of the children who come from the Mount 
Argus/Lower Kimmage Rd area take this route daily. Please note that there is no 
alternative route for a lot of children travelling from the Mount Argus/Lower Kimmage 
Rd area. Many children are in Junior Infants and 1st Class and their journey into school 
would be fairly typical of children using this route. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A request for a school warden to assist children will be assessed and referred to the 
Traffic Advisory Group for examination. The Councillor will be informed of the 
recommendation in due course. 
 
The Transport Advisory Group (TAG) area engineer have conducted a preliminary 
assessment of the traffic safety issues presented at the junctions of Harold's Cross 
Road (SE) / Mount Argus Road (SE), and Harold's Cross Road (SE) / Parkview Avenue 
(SE). Based on the TAG preliminary assessment, please see the following 
recommendations: 
 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
Location 1 – Junction of HAROLD'S CROSS ROAD (SE) / MOUNT ARGUS ROAD 
(SE) 
1. “Dangerous Road Situation 1” speed of cyclists and breaking the traffic light during 
green time for the pedestrians, further on site assessment will be conducted by the 
TAG area engineer, and the Councillor will be informed of the recommendation in 
due course. 
 
2. The junction of Harold's Cross Road (SE) / Mount Argus Road (SE) including the 
pedestrian crossing, is subject to some upgrade works as part of the BusConnects 
Kimmage to City Centre route as shown in the screen shot below.  
a. For more information, please refer to page 10 of the General Arrangement 
Drawings 
of 
BusConnects 
Kimmage 
to 
City 
Centre 
route 
at 
https://kimmagescheme.ie/. 
 
Location 2 – Junction of HAROLD'S CROSS ROAD (SE) / PARKVIEW AVENUE 
(SE) 
1. “Dangerous Road Situation 2” relates to the pedestrian crossing layout, speeding, 
sudden take off and driving over the pavement. Further on site assessment will be 
conducted by the TAG area engineer, and the Councillor will be informed of the 
recommendation in due course. 
 
2. The pedestrian crossing at both arms of the junction is subject to some upgrade 
works as part of the BusConnects Kimmage to City Centre route as shown in the 
screen shot below.  
a. For more information, please refer to page 10 of the General Arrangement 
Drawings 
of 
BusConnects 
Kimmage 
to 
City 
Centre 
route 
at 
https://kimmagescheme.ie/. 
 
3. “Dangerous Road Situation 3” relates to the cyclists and cars breaking read light 
when turning right (outbound) on Harold’s Cross road, and the conditions of the 
traffic sign posts at this junction. The TAG will conduct an onsite assessment for 
the renewal of existing road signs and road markings on the road. 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to report on the current status on the move to a 30 KPH 
speed limit across Dublin City and if it is possible, or in traffic terms desirable, to move 
to such a limit on the stretch of the N11 from Nutley Lane to Donnybrook Church and 
through Donnybrook. In particular what possibilities exist to introduce sensible traffic 
controls in tandem with the Bus Connects project throughout the City and specifically 
the stretch of road mentioned above in this question. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council Road Safety Strategy Action No 8 explains that 30 Kph is the speed 
limit in all areas in Dublin City except arterial routes. The remaining routes will be 
examined when the guidelines for setting speed limits have been updated.  
 
Q.23 
COUNCILLOR LARRY O’TOOLE 
To ask the Chief Executive to repair and restore and make safe the paving/pathway 
around the MUGA/Green on Bunratty Road. 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11154151) was created and forwarded to the Area Inspector, who will 
carry out a site inspection and assign any footpath defects to a crew for repair. 
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR LARRY O’TOOLE 
To ask the Chief Executive To conduct a full weed removal and road cleaning of 
Bunratty Road inclusive of cul de sac areas. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The weed spraying contract does not start until early April and the public domain team 
can include Bunratty Road on the list of roads to be sprayed in 2024. Waste 
Management Services had Bunratty Road, inclusive of cul de sac areas, cleaned on 
the 22nd February 2024. 
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR MÁIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive to seek interim funding from the Department for significant 
“meantime” refurbishment of the Tyrone Place D8 flat complex ahead of any plans for 
its future.” 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As the Regeneration Programme Manager I will liaise with Housing Maintenance 
Management to understand options that may be available in the interim and to examine 
if Tyrone Place could be considered for future Enhancement Work programmes. 
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR MÁIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive to organise a site visit to Tyrone Place D8 to discuss with 
the family resource centre managers the numerous issues, in particular the significant 
damp and mould, that residents are enduring which is proving detrimental to their well-
being. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
Housing Maintenance Engineering Section will arrange to meet with the management 
of the Family Resource Centre in Tyrone Place to discuss the above issues. 
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR LARRY O’TOOLE 
To ask the Chief Executive to make provision for pedestrian crossing facilities at 
(details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7037769) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR MÁIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update with regards to the request by Sporting 
Liberties & Donore Project Consultative Forum that resources be ring-fenced for the 
playing pitch at St Teresa’s Gardens , Dublin 8 that protect the project from future 
economic downturns or known unknowns?” 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC and the LDA are partnering in developing a mixed use scheme of 543 homes on 
the site of the Former St. Teresa’s Gardens lands. Planning was granted for this 
development in June 2023. Contractor procurement is underway and construction will 
commence late this year. The Development will be delivered in phases up to the 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
beginning of 2028. As part of these works DCC are developing a new municipal pitch, 
changing rooms and boxing club.  
 
A planning application was submitted to An Bord Pleanala for the municipal pitch, 
changing rooms and boxing club last year. A decision on this was due to be determined 
by November 2023. However no decision has been made to date and there is no 
indication of date for such decision. 
 
In lieu of this, DCC intend on submitting a planning application for the development of 
Municipal pitch and changing rooms through a Part 8  Planning route. Once planning 
is granted DCC will jointly develop the pitch and changing rooms with the LDA as part 
of the overall delivery of the mixed use scheme outlined above.  
 
At present DCC are in ongoing correspondence with Sporting Liberties defining their 
requirements for the facilities.  
DCC with the DHPLG are committed to the delivery of this scheme including the pitch 
facilities.  
 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to help get medical priority for (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing Transfer List, with an application date of 
16/01/2019, the applicant holds the following position on this list; 
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
N 
1 
378 
P 
1 
210 
 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
 
I note from the applicant’s file that he has recently submitted a medical application, a 
decision on this is expected soon. The applicant will be notified of the decision.  
 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household.  
 
The applicant should continue to liaise with Housing Maintenance regarding the 
concerns surrounding the safety issue of the property.  
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
 
To ask the DRHE to provide, in tabular form, a breakdown of the number of beds by 
room type i.e. 1 bed per room, 2 bed per room, 3 bed per room, for all room 
configurations, and to provide these figures over the past 5 years. 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The DRHE does not keep records in this format. Room configurations can change 
depending on factors like need, family size and accessibility requirements. 
Additionally, room configurations were changed in the years during the pandemic, in 
response to social distancing rules. 
 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
 
To ask the DRHE for the number of hours provided in support and key worker services 
in privately operated homeless hostels and to provide the amount of hours and 
services offered. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
All privately operated homeless hostels (singles and families) are provided support 
from the Housing Support Officer (HSO) teams in Parkgate Hall. This support amongst 
other things takes the form of regular clinics in each accommodation. HSO’s work with 
residents to ensure their housing files are up to date and work with them to identify 
suitable exits from homelessness through Homeless HAP, LTA supported 
accommodation, CBLS’s etc. Contact details for each housing Support officer are 
prominently displayed in each service they are linked to so that every resident access 
to a HSO. In the case of singles accommodation  
 
The PACT team provide additional supports across all PEA’s and work closely with the 
HSO team around housing but also provide more holistic supports around 
health/addiction supports etc. Every person is given an initial assessment within the 
first 4 days of entering accommodation for the first time to identify these support needs. 
To date the team have carried out 3,416 initial assessments, and 12,297 visits and 
have case managed 2,222 individuals, with 1,185 cases currently opened. 
 
In the case of families the majority of private family Hubs have Focus Ireland support 
workers attached but for the ones that don’t, where additional support is required  the 
HSO team will refer the family to the Focus Ireland family Centre team for additional 
visiting supports.  If the only support needs are around housing these families will still 
have a HSO linked to them on an ongoing basis to support around exiting 
homelessness. 
 
Q.32 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will re-visit providing on-street charging options for 
people living in areas without gardens. Does the manager accept that the lack of on 
street charging points is a barrier for people in buying EVs and will he do something to 
encourage more EVs in areas like Phibsborough with limited or no off street parking? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The DLAs are currently evaluating tenders received for a pilot project to provide public 
EV charging facilities across the County. Dublin City Council has identified 14 locations 
suitable for fast charging hubs. The pilot project will be rolled out in 2024. Based on 
the findings of the pilot project we may consider additional locations for fast charging 
hubs. 
The Environment & Transportation Department accepts that the preferred method of 
EV charging for many owners is from a domestic supply. Unfortunately it is not always 
possible to install a domestic EV charger as many properties and neighbourhoods 
are unsuitable. 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
The City Council’s transport strategy prioritises active travel (walking and cycling) as 
the most sustainable mode of transport for the future of Dublin City. Public transport is 
the next preferred mode of transport. The City Development Plan and Draft Transport 
Plan aim to increase walking, cycling and public transport use by 2028. 
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive when the Oscar Traynor Road Consultative Forum will be 
re-established,  when the Oscar Traynor Road Community Fund will be established, 
how will funding decisions be made and by whom and what is the defined area within 
which Community Fund monies can be allocated.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Enabling works commenced on site just before the end of last year. These works are 
ongoing and expected to continue to mid-year. The Main contract commences in April 
next and as such we intend re-establishing the Consultative Forum to align with this 
timing. 
 
The Area Office are currently working on governance and oversight proposals for the 
Oscar Traynor Community Gain Capital Fund. We are also working on a Terms of 
Reference for the proposed Liaison Committee and the establishment of a community 
audit that could guide the distribution and allocation of funding in the future.  We will 
bring these proposals to Local Councillors over the coming weeks. 
 
Q.34 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive look into the possibility of developing bring centres that 
would allow persons using the facilities for personal use remove and reuse, timber, 
cycles, furniture etc. could be easily re-used by others. Can I ask what currently 
happens to goods left in bring centres. Is anything re-used? Can management indicate 
will Ballyfermot ever get a proper bring centre. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s Civic Amenity Sites and Bring Centres operate under Certificates 
of Registration (CoRs) issued by the Environmental Protection Agency. CoRs currently 
prohibit any scavenging of materials from these sites. This may however change in the 
future as objectives relating to a focus on re-use have been included in the forthcoming 
National Waste Management Plan for A Circular Economy.  
 
There is a variety of ways items left in bring centres and Civic Amenity Sites are dealt 
with, namely preparation for re-use, recycling and recovery - depending on the 
particular stream. High value clothing and textiles are typically re-sold for re-use on 
international markets, while damaged or lower value goods are repurposed as furniture 
stuffing and/or industrial cleaning rags. Garden waste is recovered via an industrial 
composting procedure. Glass bottles are crushed and ultimately recycled as new 
bottles. WEEE items are typically stripped to their component parts and recovered for 
a variety of uses, depending on the materials extracted, as is furniture and other bulky 
waste items. Any materials that cannot be prepared for reuse are typically recovered 
as Solid Recovered Fuel (SRF) for use in the cement making industry. 
 
While there are currently no plans to develop an additional or alternative bring centre 
in Ballyfermot, Waste Management Services intend to undertake a study this year to 
assess our current recycling infrastructure and to develop a strategy for the future 
development of such facilities in line with the aforementioned national waste plan, 
projected population increase and relevant land use zoning.  
 
 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive to once again please look at why the left turn light was 
removed from Grattan Crescent Inchicore turning onto Emmet Road at the Black Loin 
Public House there is no logic in containing traffic for long periods and condemning 
motorists, buses etc to long delays whilst waiting for traffic lights to change.  Traffic 
travelling towards the City can now take 20 minutes from Sarsfield Road Ballyfermot 
to the Black Loin turn. The same T-junction operates all over the City and Country 
without any problems? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following on from a number of queries from local vulnerable road users in relation to 
near misses with traffic, the signal operation of this site was changed in February 2021 
to remove the left turning filter from operating at the same time as traffic is exiting from 
Emmet Road, as a large number of vehicles were still trying to pass through the 
junction when the pedestrian crossing was operating even with a delay on the 
pedestrian crossing. This had to be rectified due to safety concerns. 
 
In order to help traffic after this change the time allocated to the left turn and straight 
movement from Grattan Crescent was increased. There are currently no plans to 
change the operation of this site. 
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive contact the NTA as a matter of urgency to impress upon 
them the need to hold proper updated consultation / information sessions with the 
people of Ballyfermot in relation to the proposed changes to the road network with Bus 
Connects. The element of confusion with the poor scale of maps and what is proposed 
is shocking. The last thing the people of Ballyfermot want is a Bus system that forgets 
about the existing community. The loss of Park lands, valuable space along 
Ballyfermot Road and hugely unpopular decision to remove the Iconic Assumption 
Roundabout at the Church of the Assumption Ballyfermot Road needs to be discussed 
with the local community as this Roundabout currently works very well and relieves 
pressure on our Roads. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The NTA applied to An Bord Pleanála in July of 2023 for approval of the Scheme under 
Section 51(2) of the Roads Act 1993 (as amended), along with a submission for 
confirmation of the associated Compulsory Purchase Order. 
An Bord Pleanála has now issued its decisions, being to approve the Scheme, subject 
to conditions, and to confirm the Compulsory Purchase Order (CPO).  
 
Following An Bord Pleanála’s determinations, various public notices and notifications 
are required to be issued and this will be published/issued at the appropriate time. 
Subject to completion of various processes, the NTA will now be developing a 
construction sequence taking account of any planning consents received, along with 
documentation to allow procurement to commence for the construction stage of the 
Scheme. 
It is expected that all twelve corridors will be completed in 2030 with the first 
construction contracts to be awarded at the end of 2024 and on-site construction 
commencing early next year.  The construction of the corridors will be delivered on a 
phased basis in order to reduce the traffic impacts that could arise should all twelve be 
constructed concurrently. In relation to the Liffey Valley to City Centre Core Bus 
Corridor, it is likely that the Scheme will be implemented in the first half of the overall 
Core Bus Corridor construction programme. 
During 2024, detailed communication arrangements for the construction phase will be 
developed to ensure that residents, community groups, businesses and public 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
representatives are kept fully informed and have access to relevant liaison personnel 
during the delivery of the Scheme.  
Detailed 
zoomable 
drawings 
remain 
available 
on 
the 
NTA 
website 
at 
https://liffeyvalleyscheme.ie/ under chapter 4.2 General Arrangement.  
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive that that the lose flag stones outside the Roma / Chemist 
on Le Fanu Road Ballyfermot Dublin 10 with are a serious trip hazard be repaired / 
replaced as a matter of urgency. I was told last year these words would be done 
however to date they are still awaiting attention. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
For the purpose of clarification this location has been inspected twice following 
representations from the Councillor regarding repairs of loose concrete flags outside 
the above locations and on two separate occasions Road Maintenance have 
inspected, logged to their works list and repaired both defects.  
 
Upon further inspection, a separate concrete flag has now worked its way loose and 
will be repaired in the same way. I also inspected some of the footpaths along the 
Ballyfermot Road where I picked up some more loose flags outside Berkeley and Larry 
Massey Funeral Home, which will also be added to our works list for repair. 
 
 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive to report on when the public spaces will be power washed, 
the outside of the complex painted and gates fixed at Sheridan Court, Dublin 1. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance Caretaking Section will add the above complex to the works 
programme and it will be power hosed on rotation. 
As exterior painting was carried out in 2016 this complex is not due to be painted for 
another couple of years. 
The gates at the entrance to the car park have been repaired by Electrical Services 
following vandalism. 
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive to report on when the works at Botanic Avenue outside the 
gate of Griffith Park opposite to Mannix Road will be completed and are all works on 
Crawford Avenue also now fully completed? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An Inspector from the Council’s Roadworks Control Unit checked said locations on the 
28th February and reported that he could not find any public domain works in progress 
at the time. 
 
The Pay & Display / Permit Parking Scheme on Botanic Avenue is due to be completed 
by Friday the 8th of March 2024 as long as there are no cars impeding the line marking 
team and weather permitting. TAG will assess Crawford Avenue to confirm that all 
requested work is complete. 
 
Q.40 
COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive to report on when will the construction commence of a 
sensory room and ramp at the front door (details supplied). 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance Adaptations Section received an application for a sensory room, 
however this does not fall under the remit of the scheme.  An extra bedroom or 
bathroom are provided for under the scheme.  We did not receive an application/OT 
Report in relation to the provision of a ramp at this property.  However, if the tenant 
wishes to provide us with same, we can have it assessed for this family. 
 
Q.41 
COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive to report on what efforts can be made by Dublin City Council 
outside of Garda cooperation to address the issue of drug dealing and use at 
Blessington Street, Basin Park, The Royal Canal Bank, Western Way, and Mountjoy 
Street beside the TUD Grangegorman Campus and Broadstone Luas station? Is there 
anything can be done regarding the provision of CCTV and enhanced public lighting 
to discourage such antisocial behaviour. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Under the Lighting Upgrade project the street lights on Blessington Street, Royal Canal 
Bank, Western Way and Mountjoy Street will be upgraded to LED street lights. 
 
An exact timeframe for this upgrade work cannot be provided at this time except to say 
that this upgrade work will be carried out in the next five years or so. 
 
In the meantime the existing street lights will continue to be maintained in accordance 
with existing maintenance regimes. 
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive clear the overgrown weeds, ensure regular cleaning and 
remove graffiti from (details supplied) Residents say these laneways are regularly 
used by workers from the nearby NCH for after work drinking and I witnessed a number 
of broken glass bottles down this laneway on a recent visit. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services had the above mentioned laneways cleaned on the 22nd 
February 2024. We will ensure that they are monitored and cleaned on a more regular 
basis. 
 
I have confirmed that weekly litter picks take place along this lane from the entrance 
at Brookfield Street to the old Thornton’s garage on SCR. Each intersection is 
inspected and cleaned. The broken glass observed on Thursday 29th of February has 
been removed. The entire lane was scraped between the end of December and the 
start of January and all debris removed. The graffiti is on private property and thus the 
responsibility of the property owner. I will speak to the contractor regarding anti-social 
behaviour at the laneway entrance and monitor the location going forward. 
 
 
Q.43 
COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARY 
To ask the Chief Executive to explain the rationale behind the City Council’s housing 
allocation priority system whereby a person living long-term (6 months +) in homeless 
emergency accommodation (EA), who is eligible for Homeless HAP, is not deemed to 
be Band 1 homeless priority on the housing waiting list. Should that same person 
somehow find a property available for rent within Homeless HAP limits and secure a 
tenancy in the private rented sector with state support, they would move to Band 1 
homeless priority on the housing list. Can the Chief Executive confirm if this is the case, 
and if so, explain the rationale? Why is somebody who has successfully moved out of 
Homeless EA given higher priority than somebody still stuck in Homeless EA? 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following an amendment to the Scheme of Lettings in May 2018, there is no longer a 
“Homeless Priority” housing list, however, a small amount of the applicants remain on 
the housing list with this priority. Housing Allocations have made contact with 
Councillor Moriarty and have discussed this in more detail.  
 
Q.44 
COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
 
At the February City Council meeting, in response to a question from me during the 
meeting on the Social Housing Delivery Report, the Assistant Chief Executive stated 
that the City Council was looking at “alternative delivery streams” for the regeneration 
of the Dolphin House flat complex – while it is welcome in principle that alternative, 
presumably quicker, delivery streams are being looked at, can the Chief Executive 
outline what alternative streams are currently being considered? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A non-statutory masterplan has been developed by Dublin City Council (DCC) and 
agreed with the local community and the Regeneration Board. This Masterplan has 
been reviewed and revised a number of times over the years. The most recent 
masterplan was agreed with the Regeneration Board in 2021. 
The master plan for the regeneration of Dolphin House includes for: 
 Complete regeneration of the existing estate and delivery of over 750 homes 
 Both social and affordable housing to be provided  
 Provision of community amenities including a community centre and park  
 
To date, 100 new social homes have been provided in the Phase 1 regeneration 
project, as well as 43 Older Person homes delivered by Fold Approved Housing Body. 
The next step is to proceed with Phase 1B which will deliver 28 new homes. We hope 
to commence the Pre-Part 8 process for phase 1B in the coming months. As the project 
is subject to an Environmental Impact Assessment Report (EIAR) and a Part 10 
planning lodgement in order for DCC to meet statutory planning requirements, no other 
demolition or construction can commence until this is completed.  
 
Following a meeting with Minister O’Brien and the Dolphin House Regeneration Board 
in February 2023, a review was undertaken where all options were discussed and 
investigated with the aspiration of reducing the significant time lines involved in 
progressing the regeneration of Dolphin House. 
 
The indicative timeline for the Masterplan is now as below: 
Demolition of Dolphin Park to commence March 2024 
Dolphin Master Plan EIAR consultant tender advertised March/April 2024 
Appointment and commencement of EIAR Design Team 2025 
Submission of Dolphin Master Plan Part 10 Planning application for Phases 2 & 3 mid 
2026 
Dolphin Phase 1b currently at pre Part 8 planning stage to deliver 28 homes in 2027 
Dolphin House Phase 2 to deliver 190 homes in 2031 
Dolphin Phase 3 to deliver approximately 430 affordable homes post 2031 
 
While DCC considers every opportunity to shorten and alleviate project timescales, in 
construction projects of this scale and nature, we have statutory requirements to meet.  
These steps cannot be fast tracked and sometimes the timelines are beyond the 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
control of DCC.  Similarly, as with all planning approvals, we may be subject to 
challenges that can have further impacts on delivery timelines. 
In order to advance the project, the capacity of Dublin City Council’s Housing and 
Community Services Department has to be considered. This is a major investment in 
housing delivery and requires a robust examination of different delivery streams 
available to us in order to consider how best we can deliver Phase 2 and Phase 3 so 
that we ensure project success in delivering quality, mixed tenure homes, within a 
reasonable timeframe while also achieving value for money.  
With all large scale projects, delivery streams examined include via DCC Direct 
delivery, Developer - led, Approved Housing Bodies, Land Development Agency and 
Public Private Partnerships. 
In order to examine this further, Public Spend Code reports are currently being 
progressed with our external consultants and once these have been completed and 
decisions are required to be made, further consultation and information  will be 
available to the Council members and local community.  
 
Q.45 
COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARY 
To ask the Chief Executive to address the following (details supplied): 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Road Maintenance carried out resurfacing works on the laneway between Inchicore 
Terrace North and Inchicore Terrace South as part of the 2022 Resurfacing contract. 
At present there are no plans or scope to include the resurfacing of this requested 
portion of laneway at (details supplied) in the 2024 contract. However, I will put it 
forward for possible inclusion in our 2025 resurfacing contract which is dependent on 
available funding. In the meantime, I will request the Area Inspector to visit and log any 
defects to our works list for a temporary repair. 
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive as a matter of urgency to reinstate the bollards at ball Lane 
beside Glovers Court flats in order to stem the antisocial behaviour which is occurring 
there on a regular basis. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The unauthorised bollards were erected on a public road by a private entity and were 
blocking access to a public road. They were subsequently removed by Road 
Maintenance Services.  
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to give an update on the motion that was agreed at the 
Central Area committee to take back in charge Taylors Hall under the management of 
Dublin City Council as a community resource centre also can give an update on the 
Planning Enforcement that was initiated regarding unlawful development at this historic 
location. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An updated advisory warning letter has been sent to all parties that have leasehold 
interests in this property on Friday the 16th of February 2024 relating to the alleged 
unauthorised use of the lower ground floor area. As this is a live planning enforcement 
case no further comment can be made on the matter at this time. 
 
Q.48  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to investigate the possibility of placing showers / wash 
rooms for counsellors within City Hall buildings or the Civic offices.  

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Civic Offices: 
We note that showering and washing facilities are available in the Civic Offices, please 
find attached list of toilets and showers recently circulated by facilities. 
If additional sanitary facilities (or designated facilities) are required, it more feasible to 
retrofit these to the Civic Offices than to City Hall.  
 
City Hall: 
Part M of the Building Regulations identifies instances where achieving standards of 
accessibility associated with new buildings is not feasible because of particular 
circumstances. The following is noted in relation to protected structures; ‘Where the 
works would have a significant adverse effect on the historical significance of the 
existing building, facility or environs e.g. works to a Protected Structure’  
It is City Architects view that a fully functional, adequately accessible changing places 
facility or additional showers cannot be installed in City Hall without the challenges of 
very significant re-planning of the existing basement visitor WC facilities and the 
provision of new water supply and drainage into areas of the building currently without 
services. We are available to discuss as required.  
 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive Can to issue a report as to how many staff at Dublin City 
Council have reported attacks or threats upon them in the past two years also to 
include this report how many times Dublin City Council staff had to call on Garda 
Siochana to an assist them in the exercise of their duty or in order to protect them from 
assault attack,or treat.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In 2022 there were 91 cases of reported attacks / threats upon DCC Staff.  In 2023 
there were 140. 
We (Health, Safety & Wellbeing Unit) do not gather information relating to calls made 
to An Garda Siochanna so would not be in a position to comment on same 
  
Q.50  COUNCILLOR SÉAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider buying the (details supplied) for the provision 
of senior citizen accommodation in the area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We note the Councillors request, and we will investigate this proposal. 
 
Q.51 
COUNCILLOR SÉAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what position is (details supplied) on the financial 
contribution scheme and if he could be considered for one of the new units in St 
Finbarrs Court. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Financial Contribution housing list, with an application 
date of 22/03/2016, the applicant holds the following position on this list; 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
E 
1 
59 
 
The applicant’s interest in the new units in St Finbarr’s Court has been noted on his 
file.This development is scheduled to be complete December 2024 for 46 older person 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
units. Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently 
there are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered 
as suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR SÉAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on when (details supplied) will be reached 
as part of the ongoing insulation programme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance Energy Liaison Officer will make contact with the tenant with a 
view to carrying out a site survey on the property in Q2/Q3 2024. Should the property 
be deemed eligible for inclusion in our Energy Efficiency Retrofitting Programme, we 
will endeavour to include the property in our 2024/2025 programme of works.  
 
Q.53 
COUNCILLOR SÉAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive could Dublin City Council develop the waste land between 
(details supplied) into a community facility for Dunard. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council does not own the land in question.  Should the land become 
available to us we would give consideration to the suitability of the site, the type of 
resource required and the availability of the finance to construct any such facility. 
 
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive in accordance with Section 15 of the Local Government 
Rates and Other Matters Act 2019, can now prepare a scheme providing for the waiver 
of a portion of Commercial Rates due to it from businesses along the Clontarf to City 
Centre Cycle Route , and if necessary, write to the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to make any necessary regulations, as provided for under 
s.15 (5) of the Local Government Rates and Other Matters Act 2019, to enable Dublin 
City Council to prepare and implement such a scheme. 
  
The construction of the €63m cycle route, together with ancillary works,  along 
Fairview, North Strand and Amiens Street has resulted in a dramatic downturn in 
business for the retailers etc. along the route (some have ceased trading). A recent 
survey undertaken by me shows an average decrease in turnover of over 30%, with 
some businesses recording over 75% decreases. 
 
Finally, does the Chief Executive agree that it would be reasonable for Dublin City 
Council to waiver an agreed amount of rates to compensate these businesses for the 
fall off in trade and profits over the past 18 months, caused directly by the construction 
of the cycle route. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There have been previous calls for compensation payments for businesses impacted 
by works related to the C2CC project.  It is understood that this matter has been the 
subject of discussion at meetings of the North Central Area committee.  There has 
been reference to both specific works at the Bus Gate at Main Street Belmayne and 
also to the C2CC project works in Fairview.    
 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
The City Council recognises that infrastructural projects may cause disruptions to both 
businesses and citizens and can be difficult to live with but such projects nonetheless 
are essential to the future economic life and development of the city.  During the course 
of major infrastructure projects and other civic improvement works it is almost 
inevitable that some ratepayers will be subjected to inconvenience despite the best 
efforts to keep such inconvenience to a minimum.  In a city of Dublin’s size many 
ratepayers will at some time be affected by such projects or works.  However the long-
term benefits to businesses arising from these works greatly outweigh the 
inconvenience caused during their construction phase. 
 
DCC project staff, whether in respect of the C2CC project team, the Belmayne Bus 
Gate project or any other, make every best effort to complete the works at the earliest 
opportunity so that benefits can accrue to businesses, residents and visitors.  It is 
worthwhile to clarify the legislative framework relating to commercial rates.  Rates are 
a tax on property. The City Council at the Statutory Budget meeting determines the 
rate on valuation each year which is applied to the valuation of all rateable properties 
and from which commercial rates are determined. There is no legislative provision or 
discretion to waive or reduce rates on any business in regard to any mitigating 
circumstances and therefore rates liabilities cannot be reduced. In situations where 
financial pressures are impacting on the business flexibility, however limited, is offered 
through engagement between the ratepayer and the rate collector resulting in a 
mutually agreeable arrangement to discharge the outstanding rates over a period of 
time.  All ratepayers are urged to engage with their rate collector.    
 
There are no exchequer financial supports to businesses in such circumstances.  It 
must be noted that were a mechanism to be provided by Central Government to reflect 
disruption to business during project construction phase, it would be appropriate that 
such a scheme would also reflect the benefits to business (betterment) post project 
completion.   
 
Both schemes referenced are funded by the National Transport Authority (NTA).    I 
have not been advised of proposals being considered by either the Minister for 
Transport or the NTA to introduce a national a scheme of compensation related to the 
negative impacts on local businesses during implementation of transport related 
works.      
 
The Local Government Rates and Other Matters Act 2019 was passed by the 
Oireachtas and enacted on 11th July 2019.  The purpose of the Act is to modernise the 
collection of rates, which are a vital source of funding for local authorities representing 
approximately 30% of the revenue income across all local authorities.  The Act 
contains a provision in section 15 relating to potential alleviation schemes.  These 
provisions empower the Elected Members of local authorities to devise and achieve 
policy objectives through locally targeted rates waiver schemes.  This will enhance the 
capacity of local authorities to address important issues and challenges particular to 
their local areas and to enable them to support specific objectives to promote 
community, social and economic development, urban planning.  
 
The regulations to be made under this section will specify the maximum percentage of 
waiver and other matters particular to the operation of alleviation schemes, which may 
include time period applying to schemes, the process and sequencing to be followed, 
public consultation and the review and report on completion of schemes. The elected 
members will have discretion to introduce waiver schemes that support objectives 
outlined in the City Development plan, local area plans, the Local Economic and 
Community plan or the National Planning framework.   Section 15 was commenced on 
1st January 2024.  Dublin City Council understands that the intention of the Minister 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
and Department of Housing is that section 15 will apply from 2025 for rates waiver 
schemes.  The making of such a scheme must be closely aligned to the preparation 
of the draft budget for the financial year.  Section 15 of the Act is set out below for 
information purposes.  
  
Section 15: 
Subject to subsection (4) and in accordance with such regulations as may be made 
under this section, a local authority may make a scheme providing for the waiver by 
the authority of all or a portion of the rates due to it by ratepayers in order to support 
the following: 
 
a. the implementation of the National Spatial Strategy within the meaning of the Acct 
of 2000 
b. the implementing of a development plan within the meaning of the Act of 2000 
C. the implementation of a local area plan within the meaning of the Act of 2000 
d. the implementation of a local economic and community plan within the meaning of 
the Act of 2001. 
 
The making of a scheme under this section shall be a reserved function within the 
meaning of the Act of 2001. 
A local authority may amend a scheme under this section. 
A local authority shall not make a scheme under this section until the adjustment period 
within the meaning of section 20 of the Act of 2014 ceases for every specified area 
within its administration area of the authority. 
 
The Minister may make regulations for the purposes of this section and in particular 
but without prejudice to the foregoing regulations under this section may make 
provision tin relation to all or any of the following matters: 
 
a. the specification of the maximum percentage of rates that may be waived by a 
local authority under this section 
 
b. the period in relation to which a scheme may be made and  
 
c. any other matters which appear to the Minister to be necessary of expedient for 
the purposes of this section. 
 
Q.55 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the Dublin City Centre Transport Plan can the 
Chief Executive answer the following regarding the consultation process and 
the online survey? 
 
a. Does the Chief Executive agree that the consultation process was inherently 
discriminatory and non-inclusive given that the consultation page was online only, thus 
excluding the significant proportion of the population who have no access to or ability 
to use the internet (I refer to the Age Action report "Digital Inclusion and an Ageing 
population  which concluded that 65% of people over 65 experience digital exclusion 
and that 25% of people aged 60-74  and 56% of people aged 75+ are not using the 
internet) 
b. Can the Chief Executive explain why  the entire consultation promotion consisted 
of  an information desk in the atrium of Dublin City Council's Civic Offices, social media 
posts, two media releases and 6 "events", such "events2 attracting c.451 attendees, 
of which 100 were Dublin City Council staff?  
c. I note the report mentions that the draft plan was covered by RTE and "it reached 
1.4m people". This "reach" figure must be put in context with the fact that only one 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
quarter of one percent of these "reached" participated in the consultation process. 
Could the Chief Executive comment? 
c. Does the Chief Executive agree that this lack of promotion was designed to ensure 
that minimal information about the plan would be made public, thus ensuring that a 
broad and representative opinion on the plan would be received? 
d. Can the Chief Executive explain why no information events were held in public 
libraries, colleges and local community centres as was the case, for example, with the 
Climate Action Plan consultation process? 
e. In relation to the online survey, does the Chief Executive agree that this, just like the 
overall consultation process, was both discriminatory and non-inclusive (as (a) 
above)? The fact that it was an online survey surely answers this question but it would 
be useful to get the Chief Executive's response. 
f. Who designed the survey in terms of layout, questions and reply mechanism? 
g. How much did the survey design etc. cost? 
h. Does the Chief Executive agree that the first six questions were all prompted, closed 
and heavily loaded? 
i. Does the Chief Executive agree that the way these questions were asked resulted in 
fundamental biased answers given that they were prompted and loaded? 
j. In light of the ongoing controversy about the draft plan and the very real facts 
emerging that the process was fundamentally flawed, would the Chief Executive agree 
that the consultation process should be undertaken again to ensure that all opinions 
are sought, that a non-biased survey is conducted so that, inter alia, the public 
concerns that the process was covert and clandestine would be alleviated. The very 
reputation of Dublin City Council and the way it engages with the people of Dublin is 
at stake here. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The consultation documentation material was available for the public to view, read, 
download and make submissions through a range of options including online, email, 
post and in person at information events and stakeholder meetings. This consultation 
process incorporated all the normal and standard elements DCC avail of to 
communicate to the public.  All the information and documentation was available both 
in the Civic Offices and the offices of the NTA as well as online. As part of the process 
people did attend and make written comments having studied the documentation 
available to them. They also could send us a response by post and people chose to 
also do this.  
The consultation process was put in place following the Transportation SPC meeting 
and there were press releases, which included details of how the public could view the 
documentation and give their feedback. There was wide spread media coverage of the 
draft city centre transport plan. The public could view the plans at the DCC and NTA 
offices.  All Councillors were informed of the consultation process and were updated 
in the monthly report and, also the quarterly traffic report to the full City Council 
meeting, where Councillors had the opportunity to raise any issues regarding the City 
Centre plan.  No observations or concerns were received from Councillors at any stage 
during the process.  
The figures for the reach of the consultation is based on our press office figures. The 
participation figures for this consultation were very high in comparison, for example to 
the Climate Action Plan consultation, which received 88 submissions in comparison to 
the City Centre Transport Plan, which received over 3,500 observations.  It should also 
be noted that one submission may represent multiple organisations for example the 
Health Alliance submission represented multiple heath organisations. 
 Consultation sessions were held with any organisation that requested consultation, 
for example the Westbury, and briefing sessions were also held with all the main 
business organisations, i.e., IBEC, Chamber of Commerce, Dublin Town, Lord Mayor’s 
Forum and An Garda Siochana. 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
  
The consultation process was fair open and representative, and it was not exclusively 
an on-line survey as people could fill in the questionnaire in person, or post in their 
submissions. 
  
The layout was designed in house. 
  
As above. 
  
The questions were based on the text of the draft Dublin City Centre Transport Plan 
and the purpose and objective of the Plan was set out clearly in the Transport Plan as 
an objective of the Dublin City Development Plan. 
 
There was no requirement to fill out the questionnaire and people who disagreed with 
the plan had multiple ways of expressing their preference, in person, by post, by email 
and on line. 
   
We do not agree that the consultation process was flawed and the fact that the Draft 
City Centre Transport Plan was out for consultation for 11 weeks, which is considerably 
longer than an average consultation period, was referenced by all the main media in 
Ireland and in the end attracted 40 times more submissions than the Climate Action 
Plan, which was also out to consultation around the same time, shows that the process 
worked extremely well.  A lot of citizens took the time and trouble to make their views 
known to us both for and against and it would be completely wrong in our view to re-
open the consultation when so many people have already taken part.  
 
It should be noted that the various different measures contained in the plan will go 
through the appropriate statutory route, so for example the final College Green Dame 
Street plaza design will have to go through the necessary and appropriate public 
consultation, and therefore, will provide another opportunity for the public to express 
their views and to have their say. 
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive in light of the rising number of lethal and sometimes fatal 
active traffic collisions, whether Dublin City Council in partnership with a Gardai 
Siochana would engage with the team behind the newly launched Collision Tracker in 
Dublin City to allow citizens to report active travel collisions, hazards and near misses. 
This could help to identify a greater number of collision hotspots, improve 
infrastructure, penalise offenders and promote safer, greener travel in Dublin City. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following a road fatality, the DCC road safety engineer, in collaboration with An Garda 
Síochána, carry out a site investigation and complete the LA 16 form. The outcome of 
the site investigation is given to the Road Management Office. The road safety section 
is waiting for the final data collision from the Road Safety Authority.  
 
Currently, the road safety engineer is conducting a report based on analyzing the 
Regional Road Network Safety Analysis report for Dublin City Council from 2017-2019. 
The analysis will focus on the top 10 locations with the highest incidence of accidents. 
Through this analysis, the Environment and Transportation Department aims to 
determine where immediate actions should be taken to begin a program of 
interventions where a specific risk has been identified.  
 
Q.57 
COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding D-Light studios if, in light of the shortage of artist 
spaces in the city, D-Light’s monumental efforts and significant expense spent 
refurbishing a once-derelict building and providing valued services at a sliding scale to 
the local community, and in recognition of the fact that its closure would be hugely 
detrimental to the local area, whether Dublin City Council will make every effort to 
ensure that D-Light Studios can remain in-situ, undertaking the required fire safety 
works as a matter of urgency while respecting their occupancy, and providing them 
with a long-term lease.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Darby Mullen, Senior Executive Engineer, Climate Action Office, Dublin City Council 
attended the recent UTRAP meeting on 20/10/2023. Dublin City Council updates and 
progress reports implementing the measures outlined in Annex 1 of the report were 
provided to the group.  
 
The DCC actions required include the following; 
 
Recommendation 2- The Air Quality Monitoring and Noise Control Unit and the EPA 
are carrying out a targeted indicative monitoring programme (Diffusion Tube Survey) 
in the Dublin 7 area for 2024. 
 
Recommendation 9 - The Air Quality Monitoring and Noise Control Unit and the EPA 
held a meeting on 12/02/2024 to discuss air quality modelling. DCC will provide the 
data needed for this including traffic counts. 
 
Recommendation 10- On the 17th February 2020 the four Local Authorities that make 
up the Dublin region signed a commitment to the Breathe Life Campaign and to meet 
World Health Organisation (WHO) air quality guideline values by 2030. 
More information about the WHO levels can be viewed at  
https://www.who.int/news-room/feature-stories/detail/what-are-the-who-air-quality-
guidelines 
 
In 2019 there was a breach of the Air Quality Standards limit value for NO2 at the Saint 
Johns Road Air Quality Station. The NO2 limit value averaged over a calendar year is 
40 micrograms per metre cubed. The level recorded in 2019 was 43 ug/m3 
(micrograms per metre cubed)  
 
This necessitated writing an Air Quality Management Plan and annual progress reports 
are provided to the EPA.  
 
The air quality has improved on Saint Johns Road since the plan was written and 
implemented and in 2023 a mean NO2 level of 32 ug/m3 was recorded at the Saint 
Johns Road Site.       
  
This is an improvement of 25 %  
 
This improvement is evidence that implementing the measures in the Plan is reducing 
air pollution in the City. 
 
Dublin City Council is committed to continually implement these measures to achieve 
further improvement and is committed to the measures outlined in the following existing 
plans, projects and strategies  
 
Dublin City Centre Transport Plan 2023   
The Active Travel Programme  

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
The Greater Dublin Area Transport Strategy 2022 – 2042 
The Dublin City Council Climate Action Plan 2024 – 2029 
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive what action(s) have been taken by Dublin City Council on 
foot of the recommendations of the 2023 UTRAP synthesis report and to ask for 
evidence of the improvement in air quality in parts of the city on foot of this action and 
if he will comment on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Darby Mullen, Senior Executive Engineer, Climate Action Office, Dublin City Council 
attended the recent UTRAP meeting on 20/10/2023. Dublin City Council updates and 
progress reports implementing the measures outlined in Annex 1 of the report were 
provided to the group.  
 
The DCC actions required include the following; 
 
Recommendation 2- The Air Quality Monitoring and Noise Control Unit and the EPA 
are carrying out a targeted indicative monitoring programme (Diffusion Tube Survey) 
in the Dublin 7 area for 2024. 
 
Recommendation 9 - The Air Quality Monitoring and Noise Control Unit and the EPA 
held a meeting on 12/02/2024 to discuss air quality modelling. DCC will provide the 
data needed for this including traffic counts. 
 
Recommendation 10- On the 17th February 2020 the four Local Authorities that make 
up the Dublin region signed a commitment to the Breathe Life Campaign and to meet 
World Health Organisation (WHO) air quality guideline values by 2030. 
More information about the WHO levels can be viewed at  
https://www.who.int/news-room/feature-stories/detail/what-are-the-who-air-quality-
guidelines 
 
In 2019 there was a breach of the Air Quality Standards limit value for NO2 at the Saint 
Johns Road Air Quality Station. The NO2 limit value averaged over a calendar year is 
40 micrograms per metre cubed. The level recorded in 2019 was 43 ug/m3 
(micrograms per metre cubed)  
 
This necessitated writing an Air Quality Management Plan and annual progress reports 
are provided to the EPA.  
 
The air quality has improved on Saint Johns Road since the plan was written and 
implemented and in 2023 a mean NO2 level of 32 ug/m3 was recorded at the Saint 
Johns Road Site.       
  
This is an improvement of 25 %  
 
This improvement is evidence that implementing the measures in the Plan is reducing 
air pollution in the City. 
 
Dublin City Council is committed to continually implement these measures to achieve 
further improvement and is committed to the measures outlined in the following existing 
plans, projects and strategies  
 
Dublin City Centre Transport Plan 2023   
The Active Travel Programme  

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
The Greater Dublin Area Transport Strategy 2022 – 2042 
The Dublin City Council Climate Action Plan 2024 – 2029 
 
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive if actions have been taken, specifically for St Johns road 
west, to reduce nitrogen oxide concentrations, given that the UTRAP group was 
originally formed on foot of the air quality breaches found on that road in 2019 and to 
ask for the evidence of improvement in air quality on that road on foot of these actions 
and if he will comment on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In 2019 there was a breach of the Air Quality Standards limit value for NO2 at the Saint 
Johns Road Air Quality Station. The NO2 limit value averaged over a calendar year is 
40 micrograms per metre cubed. The level recorded in 2019 was 43 ug/m3 
(micrograms per metre cubed)  
 
This necessitated writing an Air Quality Management Plan and annual progress reports 
are provided to the EPA.  
 
The air quality has improved on Saint Johns Road since the plan was written and 
implemented and in 2023 a mean NO2 level of 32 ug/m3 was recorded at the Saint 
Johns Road Site.       
  
This is an improvement of 25 %  
 
This improvement is evidence that implementing the measures in the Plan is reducing 
air pollution in the City. 
 
Dublin City Council is committed to continually implement these measures to achieve 
further improvement and is committed to the measures outlined in the following existing 
plans, projects and strategies  
 
Dublin City Centre Transport Plan 2023   
The Active Travel Programme  
The Greater Dublin Area Transport Strategy 2022 – 2042 
The Dublin City Council Climate Action Plan 2024 – 2029 
   
Q.60  COUNCILLOR DANIEL CÉITINN 
To ask the Chief Executive if Stannaway Avenue could be included in the 2024 
Footpath Resurfacing Programme 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer will carry out an inspection of Stannaway Avenue for potential 
inclusion in the 2025 programme.  
 
Q.61 
COUNCILLOR DANIEL CÉITINN 
To ask the Chief Executive if the bollards at the Derravaragh Road/Aideen Drive & 
Mount Tallant Avenue/Derravaragh Road junctions could be repainted, and if planters 
could also be installed at the bollards in conjunction with this. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Will have this checked within 30 days of today’s date 29/02/24. 
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR DANIEL CÉITINN 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if the footpaths on the corners of Ashfield Park at the 
junction with Ashdale Road could be resurfaced as they are very badly damaged. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer has recommended that pavements either side of Ashfield Park at 
the junction with Ashdale Road be renewed. The footpaths have been added to the 
works list and will be completed as soon as possible 
 
Q.63 
COUNCILLOR DANIEL CÉITINN 
To ask the Chief Executive can he arrange for the stairwells in (details supplied) to 
be power washed and to be put on a regular cleaning schedule. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance Caretaking Section are in the process of completing a deep 
clean of this complex including weeding, scutching (removal of moss from brickwork) 
and power-washing of all shared areas. 
 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR JAMES GEOGHEGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if Oaklands Crescent, Oaklands Drive and Oak Apple 
Green, Rathgar, Dublin 6 can receive a clean sweep and the roads be cleaned. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services had Oaklands Crescent and Oakslands Drive swept and 
cleaned on the 22nd February 2024. Oak Apple Green is a private estate which doesn’t 
come under our cleaning remit. 
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR JAMES GEOGHEGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can outline when Road Maintenance intend installing 
a road side gully in the location provided in the photo attached which is on Lower 
Baggot Street and opposite Doheny and Nesbitts pub.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Road Maintenance Services will carry out a level survey and subject to the findings 
consider the installation of a gully in conjunction with our drainage colleagues. 
Q.66 
COUNCILLOR JAMES GEOGHEGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can set out in tabular form all new pedestrian crossings 
that have been installed in Dublin 4 and Dublin 6 between June 2019 and today’s date.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please find below in tabular form all new pedestrian crossings that have been installed 
in Dublin 4 and Dublin 6 between June 2019 and today’s date. 
 
Location. 
Area. 
Works Description. 
Sandymount 
Green 
@ 
5 
Sandymount 
Green (Old Borzas 
Burger). 
D4 
Controlled 
Pedestrian 
Crossing. 
Sandymount 
Green 
@ 
Bennetts 
Auctioneers. 
D4 
Controlled 
Pedestrian 
Crossing. 
Palmerston Road / 
Cowper Road. 
D6 
Controlled 
Pedestrian 
Crossing. 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
Thorncastle 
St. 
/ 
Bridge St. 
D4 
Controlled 
Pedestrian 
Crossing. 
Mountpleasant 
Avenue / Richmond 
Hill. 
D6 
2 No. Uncontrolled 
Pedestrian 
Crossings. 
Mount 
Drummond 
Square. 
D6 
Uncontrolled 
Pedestrian 
Crossing. 
Seafort Avenue. 
D4 
Zebra Crossing. 
 
 
From June 2019 to date there have being 4 No. Controlled Pedestrian Crossings, 3 
No. Uncontrolled Pedestrian Crossings and 1 No. Zebra Crossing installed in the 
Dublin 4 / Dublin 6 Area. 
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR JAMES GEOGHEGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can set out in tabular form all roads that have been 
resurfaced (full resurface not pothole filing) and all footpaths that have been resurfaced 
(full repair programme) in Dublin 4 and Dublin 6 between June 2019 and today’s date.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer has emailed Cllr. Geoghegan the information requested on 
26/2/2024. 
 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report on the Dublin Cycling Buddy App to 
include current users, use of the feedback provided by users and future plans for the 
project. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply to this question will be issued to the Councillor by the 14th Of March. 
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to progress the taking in charge of Fairfield Court, Fairfield 
Road, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, to progress the switching of public lighting and installation 
of yellow lines at the entrance and to provide a report on the process to date. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Planning department have no records of a Taking in Charge application being 
submitted from the developer or the homeowners for the services in Fairfield Court to 
be taken in charge. I have attached the Taking in Charge Procedure if the homeowners 
want to initiate the process for the services to be taken in Charge.   
 
Q.70 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive if, following on from the reply to my question No.47 last 
month, if Dublin City Council could give their tenants a vote as Proxy as the tenant 
would be in the best position to vote at AGSs etc. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As previously noted Dublin City Council owns properties in a large number of multi-
unit schemes across the City and it may not always be practical for the Council to 
participate in an AGM. However if the tenant wishes to advise Housing Maintenance 
on their views this will be considered and, if practical to arrange, Dublin City Council, 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
as the owner of the property concerned will reflect on this and vote accordingly at the 
AGM.  
 
Q.71 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive if there are any Dublin City Council employees seconded 
to other local authorities, state agencies, NGOs or government departments and 
likewise if there are employees of similar organisations seconded to Dublin City 
Council. Also, to ask the Chief Executive if any employees working for Dublin City 
Council are being paid, either directly or indirectly, by any such bodies. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are a number of secondment arrangements in place in Dublin City Council.  
Dublin City Council currently has 6 employees employed on a secondment basis from 
other public bodies, and 7 employees seconded to other public bodies.  Secondments 
are 
agreed 
for 
a 
specific 
period 
of 
time 
and 
are 
a 
blend 
of 
Professional/Managerial/Administrative staff.  The salaries associated with each 
secondment are paid by the permanent employer and the salary recouped from the 
secondment organisation. 
 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR NAOISE Ó MUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive please respond on tree-related issues on Calderwood Road 
and Griffith Avenue as set out in the correspondence below (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The 2 small purple plums were removed as they were picked up in the tree survey of 
the area as having significant decay and structural issues.  The condition of these 2 
specimens was noted during a joint inspection with the residents association last year 
with significant decline, cavities and decay clearly evident. 
 
The challenges in planting reported gaps in the tree planting along the boulevard was 
discussed on site last year with the residents association.  The sheer size and shade 
cast (and water competition) due to the exiting trees renders many of the verges 
identified as plating opportunities as unsuitable for new avenue tree planting.  Newly 
planted plane trees will not establish or thrive in the deep shade cast by the existing 
mature trees here as has been seen with the excessively high failure rates of the trees 
that were planted in empty verges over the last 2 years.   
 
There are no proposals for tree planting here in the coming weeks as the priority is 
scheduling the necessary pruning works identified in the tree survey.  Approximately 
200 crown reductions along the Avenue have been included in a tender just published 
to continue this work.  The area will be inspected later in the summer and any viable 
tree planting opportunities listed for inclusion in next winter’s tree planting programme. 
 
 
 
Q.73 
COUNCILLOR NAOISE Ó MUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive confirm the status of the following vehicle (details 
supplied) and if abandoned organise for its removal from Belgrove Road. 
 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This is already under investigation since 20.2.2024 through Citizenhub request.  
The following is the process: 
 Approximately 2-3 days from first report on Citizenhub I correspond with the registered 
owner through details sourced from Motor Tax Office post first inspection. 
I then allow 14 days for reply before revisiting the vehicle where if still in situ I affix a 7 
day removal notice. In real time this can lead to a fortnight or more to identify if the 
vehicle is actually abandoned depending on contact form original correspondence and 
interested parties who see my notice and feel the need to share their information, 
however insightful it may be. 
The vehicle mentioned below is due reassessment / notice in early March (reported 
16.2, inspected 20.2 and written out to 21.2). This investigation is relatively 
straightforward in that the vehicle is secure (locked) and has no broken glass creating 
health and safety issues. 
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR NAOISE Ó MUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive to comment on local residents’ concerns that discarded 
nitrous oxide (laughing gas) canisters are being dumped in All Saints Park? Are Dublin 
City Council Parks aware of this issue and can Dublin City Council officials advise local 
residents as to how best deal with the material appropriately. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Service is aware of this behaviour which unfortunately is becoming more 
and more common across the area.  Advices with regard to best practice for the 
disposal of these and indeed any other pressurised container is that they be brought 
to a recycling centre as if they are disposed of in a domestic bin or skip there is a risk 
of explosion if they are crushed. 
 
Q.75 
COUNCILLOR NAOISE Ó MUIRÍ  
To ask the Chief Executive organise for the tree outside No 4 Marino Park Avenue to 
be pruned back as it is over-bearing and causing loss of natural light at this location. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
While pruning works are not normally carried out to address shading of direct sunlight 
an inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks and any works deemed 
necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care programme for the 
area 2024 – 25. 
 
 
Q.76 
COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive For an update on the status of the following properties 
(details supplied 1, 2&3) 
 
Details supplied 1:  19 & 21 Connaught Street 
Details supplied 2:   8 & 10 Ferguson Road 
Details supplied 3:  414 North Circular Road 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Details supplied 1 is complete and the property is currently being lived in. 
Details supplied 2 have a design, however when HM were due to start on site, there 
was an issue with the foundations and front façade of the buildings, so we are currently 
implementing emergency works to safe guard the structure of the buildings. 
Details supplied 3, these 3 properties came as a package. No. 12 is currently being 
refurbished, however similar to details supplied 2, the structure of Nos. 8 and 10 are 
currently being reviewed.   

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive how Dublin City Council tracks and enforces compliance 
with the parking obligation outlined in Section 7(c) Control of Stationless On-Street 
Bicycle Hire Bye-Laws 2017. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC has a Service Level Agreement with both licensed stationless bike hire operators, 
Bleeper and Moby. Under this SLA operators have a certain amount of time to 
remove/relocate badly parked bicycles (all bikes have to be tethered to a Sheffield 
stand). If operators do not remove/relocate a bicycle within the set timeframe DCC has 
the power (under Section 71 of the 1993 Roads Act) to remove the bicycle and charge 
a fee for removal and storage. In addition both Moby and Bleeper have a fines system 
in place for users who do not park bikes properly with recurring bad parking resulting 
in a user being barred from the service. Bleeper, Moby and DCC work in partnership 
with each other and since the service commenced in 2017 there have been very few 
instances of bad parking due to the DCC bye-laws stipulating that bikes must be 
tethered to a Sheffield stand. DCC was the first local authority in Europe to adopt this 
position which is now being adopted across Europe. 
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive how many licences for slot machines and gaming halls 
have been issued in the Dublin City Council are and in Dublin 1 specifically? And how 
many enforcement actions have been taken against unlicensed gaming halls in the 
past year? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Part III of the Gaming and Lotteries Act, 1956 concerns the licensing of amusement 
halls and funfairs. There is currently no resolution by Dublin City Council in force 
adopting Part III of this Act. As a result there are a number of applications which have 
been refused by the District Court and which are currently under appeal.  The appeals 
have yet to be heard.  
 
The Local Authority is a notice party to applications for gaming licences under 16 of 
the 1956 Act, but it would have no other role in the issuing of the gaming licences. This 
would be a matter for the Revenue Commissioners. The Revenue Commissioners are 
obliged since 2019 to have a Register of Gaming Licence applications. I note that there 
are 
no 
details 
of any 
Gaming 
Licences for 
Dublin 
on the 
Register. 
https://www.revenue.ie/en/corporate/information-about-
revenue/statistics/excise/licences/gaming-licences.aspx. 
  
The grant of a new Gaming Licences is a matter for the District Court on notice to DCC. 
No new licences have been granted in DCC area in the past number of years due to 
the fact that there is no resolution of the elected members adopting Part 3 of the Act 
of 1956. DCC has no role in enforcement for unlicensed premises other than under the 
planning code if there is an unauthorised use.  Planning Enforcement may have a role 
if there is an unauthorised use of a particular premises. Planning Enforcement have 
confirmed that they have no current enforcement files relating to unauthorised use of 
premises for gaming purposes. 
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive his plans to implement illegal dumping strategies and the 
next steps following the passing of the LGMA report  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
With regard to the Codes of Practice for the operation of CCTV; 
1. The WERLA office with the support of the LGMA are working to develop a suite of 
documents to assist Local Authorities in the implementation of the Codes of 
Practice for the operation of CCTV.   These document will include, inter alia, 
templates for Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA), CCTV Scheme, Data 
processing agreement.    
2. An Oversight Board will be established which will include senior management such 
as the Data Processing Officer, The Head of Information Services and Executive 
Managers. 
3. Business units will forward a business case for a CCTV scheme for approval to the 
Executive Manager in whose area the CCTV scheme is planned.  
4. The business case will then be forwarded to the oversight Board for their approval. 
5. Business case then forwarded to the Chief Executive for his approval. 
 
Q.80 
COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a breakdown of the number of dog fouling and 
illegal dumping fines per LEA for the past 5 years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Number of fines issued under Section 22 (Dog Fouling) of the Litter Pollutions Acts 
1997 – 2009 over the last 5 years are as follows:- 
 
 
Central 
N.Central 
N.West 
S.Central 
S.East 
Total 
2019 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2020 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
2 
2021 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2022 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2023 
0 
4 
2 
0 
0 
6 
 
Number of fines issued under Section 3 (Illegal Dumping) of the Litter Pollutions Acts 
1997-2009 are as follows 
 
 
Central 
N.Central 
N.West 
S.Central 
S.East 
Total 
2019 
151 
35 
31 
86 
119 
422 
2020 
95 
151 
204 
127 
152 
729 
2021 
193 
147 
118 
331 
118 
907 
2022 
202 
180 
19 
237 
165 
803 
2023 
312 
92 
6 
345 
354 
1109 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a breakdown of the number of claims against 
Dublin City Council in relation to falls and trips on pathways and carriageways for past 
5 years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Outlined below are the number of claims against Dublin City Council in relation to falls 
and trips on pathways and carriageways for the past 5 years. 
 
  
        YEAR 
NUMBER OF CLAIMS  
 
  
2019 
572 
 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
  
2020 
455 
 
  
2021 
447 
 
  
2022 
413 
 
  
2023 
 
 
       350 
 
 
 
Claim received numbers do not reflect payment made in a given year.        
Q.82 
COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive to investigate whether lighting improvements via lighting 
upgrades and canopy pruning can take place on (details supplied) as the street is 
very dark due to the dense tree canopies which cover much of the lights and often 
stretch across the entirety of the carriageway. The area has experienced a spate of 
break-ins and attempted break-ins. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks services will arrange for an examination of the trees along (details supplied), 
any necessary works will be listed in our Tree Care programme for the area. All trees 
works are carried out on a prioritised basis subject to available budget. 
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive advise if work can take place on the trees on (details 
supplied) particularly across from number 1 as it is extremely large for an estate of 
this nature. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks services carried out a survey of (details supplied) and a number of trees along 
(details supplied) including the subject tree above have been listed for pruning in our 
programme of works for the year. 
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise if interventions are possible to deal with illegal 
parking on (details supplied) as there is frequent double parking during school 
collection and drop off times making access for residents difficult and causing concerns 
about access for emergency vehicles 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement Part Reply: 
We will arrange for the Parking Enforcement Inspector to monitor the parking situation 
on (details supplied) during school drop off and collection times and to arrange the 
necessary enforcement action. 
 
School Zone Part Reply: 
As part of the Safe Routes to School programme, funded by the National Transport 
Authority, DCC implements School Zones which aim to improve safety for students at 
the school gate. For 2024 DCC has been allocated funding to install School Zones at 
12 schools in Dublin city. As schools on (details supplied) are not on the list for this 
year, the team is not in a position to install a School Zone at this location at the moment. 
 
Q.85 
COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise if the right turn filter light at the junction of (details 
supplied) can always be used as there is often dangerous situations where drivers 
turn right due to a green light for traffic proceeding south even though the pedestrian 
light for people crossing St Pappin's Road is also green. 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The right-turn filter for traffic turning right from (details supplied) runs when demanded 
by traffic activating the detector loop in the right turning lane. Operating the right-turn 
filter every phase whether it was demanded or not would result in delays to 
pedestrians, public transport and all other users of the junction. Motorists who turn right 
when only a straight ahead green arrow is lighting are clearly breaking the law which 
is a matter for enforcement by An Garda Síochána. 
 
Q.86 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
Chun Iarraidh ar an bPríomhfheidhmeannach socrú a dhéanamh ( sonraí curtha ar fail) 
go dtógfar an crann os coinne 22 Bóthar Dhún Sinche anuas ( Sa Pairc Farnham ). 
Gealladh é seo roimhe seo mar go bhfuil sé contúirteach 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the tree opposite to (details provided) to be 
taken down. This was promised before because it is dangerous. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
De réir ár dtaifid, bhain Parks géag chontúirteach de chrann os coinne bóthair (sonraí 
tugtha) anuraidh. Déanfar iniúchadh arís ar lócas na bpáirceanna agus déanfar aon 
oibreacha crann is gá a sceidealú. 
 
According to our records, Parks removed a dangerous limb from a tree opposite 
(details supplied) road last year. Parks will have the locus inspected again and any 
necessary trees works will be scheduled. 
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
Iarraidh ar an bPríomhfheidhmeannach socrú a dhéanamh chun na crainn a ghearradh 
ag (sonraí tugtha) 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the trees to be cut at (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Déanfar cigireacht ar na crainn ar an bhfaiche thall (sonraí tugtha) sna seachtainí atá 
romhainn de réir mar a cheadaíonn an sceideal, áireofar aon oibreacha riachtanacha 
inár gclár oibreacha crann tosaíochta don cheantar. 
 
The trees on the green opposite (details supplied) will be inspected in the coming 
weeks as schedule allows, any necessary works will be included in our prioritised tree 
works programme for the area. 
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
Iarraidh ar an bPríomhfheidhmeannach balla an ghairdín ar chúl (sonraí tugtha) a 
shocrú le hardú nó le fál. 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange the garden wall of the rear of (details supplied) 
to be raised or fenced 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
De réir Lámhleabhar Tionóntaí Chomhairle Cathrach Bhaile Átha Cliath (Lch. 7) is ar 
an tionónta atá an fhreagracht as ballaí gairdíní, geataí, sconsaí, ráillí, fálta agus 
teorainneacha gairdíní eile. 
 

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
In accordance with Dublin City Council’s Tenant Handbook (Pg. 7) responsibility for 
garden walls, gates, fences, railings, hedges and other garden boundaries rests with 
the tenant. 
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the Bottle Bank at (details supplied) be monitored by 
the Litter Warden, be regularly cleaned apart from the collections at the bank, that the 
environs be improved and that CCTV be installed here in the future to deal with the 
issues here. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The bring bank facility at (details supplied) is a very problematic site. Due to its remote 
location, it is prone to high levels of illegal dumping. In addition to regular servicing by 
glass and textile recycling service providers, the site is also visited on a daily basis by 
the Area Cleansing team to remove any illegally dumped items. Unfortunately, illegal 
dumping continues after the area is cleaned and it may be up to 24 hours before 
Cleansing staff return to the site. In addition to the daily visits by Area based Cleansing 
staff, Waste Management Services is currently engaged in a pilot bottle bank 
maintenance program in the north city, and a new Bottle Bank Maintenance Team has 
been established. We have identified the most problematic sites in the north city and 
established a schedule whereby ten such sites are visited each day, and each site is 
visited several times per week. (details supplied) is one such site. 
 
The use of CCTV for the purposes of Prevention, Detection and Prosecution of litter 
offences has been affected by changes in legislation introduced in the Circular 
Economy and Miscellaneous Provisions Act 2022, and of use CCTV for these 
purposes is not currently possible. While the Code of Practice for the operation CCTV 
cameras for the purposes of Prevention, Detection and Prosecution of litter offences 
has very recently been agreed by the relevant Departments and agencies, it must be 
noted that while the relevant legislation and commencement date has been signed into 
law, there is still a large body of work that needs to be done in preparation for the 
deployment of CCTV cameras.  Dublin City Council’s Litter Prevention Officer is 
currently working with the Waste Enforcement Regional Lead Authority office who 
are preparing a suite of documents to assist Local Authorities in preparing Data 
Protection Impact Assessments (DPIA’s) and CCTV schemes.   
 
An Oversight Body must be set up and all of the above will ensure that Dublin City 
Council will have undertaken a “privacy by design and default” process prior to the 
deployment of CCTV. It is Dublin City Councils intention to proceed to tender for a 
contractor to provide CCTV services.  It is envisaged that all of the above will take 
some time. 
 
I have requested the Litter Warden Service Manager to direct his staff to regularly 
monitor the bring bank facility on Ballybogan Road. 
 
Q.90 
COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Manager that the road at (details supplied) be resurfaced. There are 
dangerous potholes here and the road surface is in an extremely poor condition. 
Furthermore, could a timeline be given as to when this road surface can be repaired? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Road Maintenance has carried out an inspection of the condition (details supplied) 
and carried out a localised potholes repairs and will continue to do the same if any 
defects arise. In addition, the location is already on our list to be considered for future 
works programmes should the funds become available.  

Appendix A – Council Questions and Replies 
 
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that speed ramps as requested by residents be installed at 
(details supplied) and that other measures be also put in place to deal with speeding 
at this location. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Recently a speed survey was conducted on (details supplied). The resultant 85% 
percentile speed was found to be appropriate and have not indicated the presence of 
speeding vehicles which suggests that the road is compliant with the speed limit. Traffic 
volumes are low and do not meet the warrant for traffic calming. 
 
The road is narrow and not conducive to speed. It was observed that vehicles have 
been illegally parked on the footpath. (Details supplied) is wide enough for 1 side 
parking. On street parking naturally traffic calm the roads by reducing the carriageway 
width and raising driver’s attention.  
 
Q.92 
COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the trees be pruned at (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks services have listed the above streets for consideration and inclusion in our city 
wide tree survey programme. Any recommendations emerging from this report will 
inform future pruning works. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Réamhrá

Réamhrá Straitéiseach

Dublin City Council
A place to live, work and play
Straitéisí
33
accusantium
sapiente
et
minima mollitia et reprehenderit
maxime ut architecto molestias
et
harum
consequatur!
Est
facere
architecto
non
ipsam
magni sit possimus eaque rem
voluptas sunt.
Dualgaisí
33
accusantium
sapiente
et
minima mollitia et reprehenderit
maxime ut architecto molestias
et
harum
consequatur!
Est
facere
architecto
non
ipsam
magni sit possimus eaque rem
voluptas sunt.
Dualgaisí
33
accusantium
sapiente
et
minima mollitia et reprehenderit
maxime ut architecto molestias
et
harum
consequatur!
Est
facere
architecto
non
ipsam
magni sit possimus eaque rem
voluptas sunt.

Straitéisí
Forbartha
Dualgaisí

Cad é an staid reatha na Gaeilge i 
gcathair BhÁC?
Daonra iomlán
588k
Líon na ndaoine gur mhaith leo níos mó 
Gaeilge a labhairt
359k
Líon na ndaoine le Gaeilge
164k
Cainteoirí Laethúla
6k

Cad é an staid reatha na Gaeilge i 
gcathair BhÁC?
Daonra iomlán
588k
Líon na ndaoine gur mhaith leo níos mó 
Gaeilge a labhairt
359k
Líon na ndaoine le Gaeilge
164k
Cainteoirí Laethúla
6k
+2%
ó 2006
-22%
ó 2006
+16%
ó 2006

Cad é staid reatha na Gaeilge i mBÁC?
Daoine le Gaeilge de réir aoise i mBÁC
Teasléaráid déine do chainteoirí 
laethúla Gaeilge de réir toghlimistéir
Teasléaráid déine do % do dhaoine a 
bhfuil Gaeilge acu de réir toghlimistéir

Reachtaíocht
Straitéisí
Cén dualgaisí/creatlaigh polasaí atá againn?
Straitéis 20 Bhliain don Ghaeilge.
• 250,000 cainteoirí laethúla Gaeilge.
• Plean teanga do BhÁC
• Ionad Gaeilge
Acht na dTeangacha
Oifigiúila 2021
• Cumarsáid leis an bpobal
• Earcaíocht
• Caighdéan Teanga
An tAcht Rialtáis Áitúil
• Cur chun cinn na Gaeilge
Plean Corparáideach CCBÁC
• Cur chun cinn na Gaeilge
Plean Forbartha Cathrach
• Forbairt na Gaeilge.
• Forbairt na Gaelscolaíochta.
• Ceathrún Gaeltachta

Pleanáil

Seirbhísí Cultúrtha

Na hEalaíona




An Ghaeilge

An scéal mar atá anois

02
Scoileanna
Foghlaim Ar-Líne
Cúrsaí Gaeltachta
Oideachas Fasta
Seirbhísí Phoiblí
Grúpaí Pobal
Clubanna Spóirt
Cairde
Gnó/Obair
Teaghlaigh
Grúpaí Cultúrtha
Céim 1: Foghlaim
Céim 2: Deiseanna Labhartha
Céim 3: Nós
Ag trasnú droichid an 
dícheangailt
Céim 0: Munlú Dearcadh
Feachtas / 
Feasacht
Comharsanacht
Líon na ndaoine atá againn
588k
Líon na ndaoine le spéis
347k
Daoine le Gaeilge
164k
Cainteoirí Laethúil
6k
Teaghlaigh

Seirbhísí Phoiblí
Grúpaí Pobal
Clubanna Spóirt
Gnó/Obair
Grúpaí Cultúrtha
Comharsanacht
Staid Reatha: Deiseanna 
Labhartha
0.14%
líon na ngrúpaí 
pobail/spóirt/cultúrtha sa 
limistéir atá ag feidhmiú trí 
Ghaeilge dar le Bunachar an 
Líonra Pobail. 1 grúpa as 698.
0.1%
líon na tradálaithe sa 
chatháir atá cláraithe le 
scéimeanna tacaíochta ar 
nós BÁC le Gaeilge

•

Diríonn Cumasú ar scileanna a fhorbairt i measc ár bhfostaithe le gur féidir leis an gComhairle níos mó deiseanna labhartha Gaeilge
a chruthú don phobal.
Fostaithe
Cumasú
An Chomhairle Chraiceáilte
• Clár forbartha cinnireachta 
agus cruthaitheachta trí 
Ghaeilge d’fhostaithe le gur 
féidir leo deiseanna a aithint le 
seirbhísí a láidriú ag baint leas 
as an nGaeilge.


Cén cinéal smaointí atá ag eascairt as?
Bí linn don Shárthaispeantas Nuálaíochta de chuid An 
Chomhairle Chraiceáilte ar 6ú Márta i Halla na Cathrach ag 
10am

Nuálaíochtaí
Scalú
Cruthú / Cruinniú 
Scalú
• Beidh muid ag diriú ar na 
tograí lena torthaí is fearr 
a scalú le gur féidir le 
pobail fud fad na cathrach 
leas a bhaint as.
Nuálaíochtaí (x 10)
• Táimid ag súil le 10 x togra 
nuálach a thastáil i mbliana a 
chruthaíonn deá-cleachtas 
maidir le fás i líon na deiseanna 
labhartha Gaeilge.
Tá Cruthú agus Cruinniú ag iarraidh an dícheangailt idir líon na ndaoine gur féidir leo Gaeilge a labhairt (164k) agus líon na ndaoine a 
labhraíonn Gaeilge lá (6k) a thrasnú.
• Diríonn Cruthú ar feidearachtaí do thogra nuálach a chruthaíonn deá-cleachtas don Ghaeilge laistigh de sheirbhísí an 
Chomhairle.
• Diríonn Cruinniú ar chaidreamh a fhorbairt le heagraíochtaí eile a bhfuil ag súil le labhairt na Gaeilge a láidriú sa chathair idir 
eagraíochtaí Gaeilge, eagraíochtaí stáit, ollscoileanna, gnólachtaí srl.


Seirbhísí
Straitéis
Deá-Cleachtas
Plean Forbartha Cathrach
• Tacaíocht a chuir ar fáil lena 
cuspóirí sa phlean a bhaint 
amach.
Reachtaíocht
• Cinntiú go gcomhlíonann muid 
ár ndualgáisí reachtúla.
Oideachas
• 200 fostaí tar éis suim a léiriú i 
ranganna Gaeilge i 2024.
Taighde
• Taighde a dhéanamh ar conas 
na deiseanna a chuireann an 
Ghaeilge ar fáil dúinn a bhaint 
amach m.sh. forbairt 
turasóireachta.
Tomhas
• Tomhas leanúnach ar 
eifeacht na hoibre.
Plean Teanga
• Plean a fhorbairt le cinntiú 
go mbaintear amach an 
plean teanga don chatháir 
mar atá leagtha amach sa 
Stráitéis 20 Bhliain don 
Ghaeilge.
Comhordú (Co-ordinate)
Bíonn an buncloch seo ag diriú ar thacú leis an obair ar fad atá ag tarlú laistigh den Chomhairle le cinntiú go bhfuil deiseanna a 
thapú fud fad na heagraíochta chun an Ghaeilge a láidriú agus trí chinntiú go bhfuil an tacaíocht cuí ann d’fhoirne an Chomhairle a 
gcuspóirí i leith na Gaeilge a bhaint amach.


Conas a mbreathnaíonn rath dúinn?
Mór-sprioc
Méadú 10x ar líon na deiseanna labhartha 
Gaeilge breise roimh dheireadh 2027.
Spriocanna tacaíochta
• Go bhfuil an struchtúr & na hacmhainní cuí ag an nGaeilge sa 
Chomhairle.
• Leabhar beartaíochta a chruthú do mhodhanna fáis a n-oibríonn, 
atá inchruthaithe agus a bhfuil tionchar intomhaiste acu a chuir 
ar fáil d’udaráis áitiúla eile.
• Go gcruthaímid caighdéan órga nua a bhíonn mar bhunchloch do 
Phlean Teanga BhÁC a bheidh foilsithe roimh dheireadh 2026.

