Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 1 September 2025 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
 Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 1st Meán Fómhair 2025 i Seomra na Comhairle, 
Halla na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an 
tArdmheara Ray McAdam sa chathaoir 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Ammar Ali 
Daryl Barron 
Racheal Batten 
Emma Blain 
Janice Boylan 
Kevin Breen 
Noelle Brown 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Danny Byrne 
Lesley Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
David Coffey 
Anthony Connaghan 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Ray Cunningham 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Daniel Ennis 
Cian Farrell 
Alison Field 
Declan Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
Deirdre Heney 
Jesslyn Henry 
Rory Hogan 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Feljin Jose 
Leslie Kane 
Kourtney Kenny 
Patrick Kinsella 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Aoibheann Mahon 
Ray McAdam 
Séamas McGrattan 
Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
Paddy Monahan 
Carolyn Moore 
Edel Moran 
Darragh Moriarty 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Colm O'Rourke 
Gavin Pepper 
Cieran Perry 
Michael Pidgeon 
Gayle Ralph 
Punam Rane 
Conor Reddy 
Nial Ring 
Aishling Silke 
Supriya Singh 
Malachy Steenson 
John Stephens 
Catherine Stocker 
Philip Sutcliffe 
Ciarán Ó Meachair 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Prajwal K. Annibabu 
Aidan Blighe 
Malachy Bradley 
Lorraine Brogan 
Dermot Collins 
Emer Fhátharta 
Anthony Flynn 
Kirsten Hart 
Yvonne Kelly 
Natalie Leonard 
Victor Leonov 
Mick Mulhern 
Ronan O'Byrne 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Richard Shakespeare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
 In Memorium 
A minutes silence was observed in memorium of Sean Rocks, Advocate for the Arts 
and Broadcaster, and Cian Neville from Ringsend who died recently.  
 
Congratulations 
The Lord Mayor congratulated The Dublin Ladies GAA team for their win in the All 
Ireland Football Final and Shelbourne FC for reaching the group stages of the UEFA 
Conference League further acknowledging recent success of Shamrock Rovers.  He 
looks forward to welcoming Crystal Palace and others to Dublin in the coming weeks.  
 
Acknowledgment and Best Wishes 
The Lord Mayor advised members of the resignation of Councillor Catherine Stocker 
and thanked her for her work as a councillor.  Since 2019 she has been a committed 
and thoughtful voice as a member of this council working tirelessly for her 
constituents’ across Dublin North Central and in particular in her own Electoral Ward.  
He extended his best wishes to her & her family for the future and advised members 
that the Social Democrats will have an opportunity to fill this seat at a future council 
meeting.  
 
Future Meetings 
The Lord Mayor advised members of the various council meetings to take place in 
September:  
- 
Monday 15th September - Nomination of a Candidate for the Office 
of President  
- 
Tuesday 23rd September – Clearing of Motions on Notice   
- 
Monday 29th September – Climate Action 
 
Other Items 
- 
The Lord Mayor wished to remind Members that September is Recovery 
Month 
 
- 
The Lord Mayor informed members of his upcoming meeting with Deputy 
James Browne, Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage and 
outlined the issues he will discuss and raise on behalf of the City Council.  
He will provide an update on this meeting in the coming days  
 
- 
The Lord Mayor provided a brief update following his meeting with 
Assistant Garda Commissioner Paul Cleary regarding many issues 
including maintaining strong Garda visibility across all communities, 
tackling retail crime, reassurance to migrant communities and the ongoing 
work of the Gardaí seizing drugs and dangerous weapons especially in a 
number of our City Parks.  The Assistant Garda Commissioner and the 
Lord Mayor have agreed to put together a focused response to address 
these issues and remove dangerous weapons from public spaces and our 
parks.  The work was about reassurance and keeping our city and 
particularly our parks safe and he will be circulating details to all councillors 
shortly.  
 
Emergency Motions 
The Lord Mayor confirmed he will not be taking any emergency motions for debate but 
outlined the steps to be taken, including correspondence he has agreed to issue in 
relation to the various motions received.   
 

 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Daryl Barron 
that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the questions 
lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the  questions 
lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and Answers are set 
out in Appendix A to these minutes. 
 
10 - 66 
3 
  Correspondence was received from the following Local Authorities; 
 
• 
Waterford City and County Council 
• 
Wexford County Council 
 
• 
Clare County Council 
• 
Limerick City & County Council  
• 
Tipperary County Council  
• 
Offaly County Council 
• 
Galway County Council  
• 
Donegal County Council 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Aoibheann Mahon seconded by Councillor Conor 
Reddy that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence listed. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
It was agreed that correspondence received from Wexford County Council would be 
forwarded to the Housing SPC.  
 
 
4 
  Vacancies:   
 
 
(a)   Two Fianna Fáil vacancies on the Climate Action and Urban Resilience 
Strategic Policy Committee following the resignation of Councillor Deirdre 
Heney and Councillor Daryl Barron.  
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Deputy Lord 
Mayor John Stephens that Councillor Aoibheann Mahon be appointed to the 
Climate Action and Urban Resilience Strategic Policy Committee.  The motion 
was put and carried.  
 
It was agreed that the filling of the second vacancy would be deferred to the 
next monthly Council Meeting.  
 
 
(b)   One vacancy on the Local Travellers Accommodation Consultative Committee 
following the resignation of Councillor Darragh Moriarty (Councillors from 
Ballymun/Finglas; Artane/Whitehall; South West Inner City and Ballyfermot-
Drimnagh LEA's are eligible)  
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Lord Mayor Ray 
McAdam that Councillor Hazel De Nortúin be appointed to the Local Travellers 
Accommodation Consultative Committee.  The motion was put and carried.   
 
 
5 
  To confirm the minutes of the City Council Meeting held on the 7th July 2025 and the 
Local Property Tax meeting held on 18th July 2025. 
 
The minutes of the City Council meeting held on the 7th July 2025 and the Local 
Property 
Tax 
meeting 
held 
on 
the 
18th 
July 
2025 
having 
been 
printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken 
as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor. 
 

 
 
6 
  Report No.185/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) in compliance with the 
provisions of Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) 
and Part 8 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) and in 
compliance with the provisions of the Local Government Act 2001: Proposed 
residential development at Bluebell Waterways, Bluebell Avenue and Bluebell Road, 
Bluebell, Dublin 12. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Daithí 
Doolan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 185/2025 and hereby 
approves the contents therein.  The motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
7 
  Report No. 196/2025 of the A/Executive Manager  (C. Manzira) - Notification under 
Section 138 Local Government Act, 2001 intention to proceed with Dodder Greenway 
- Fitzwilliam Quay to Londonbridge Road Scheme. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Councillor Mannix 
Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 196/2025.  The motion 
was put and carried.   
 
 
8 
  Report No. 190/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - with reference to the 
proposed disposal of a site at Saint Anne’s Court, Senior Citizens Complex, Raheny, 
Dublin 5 to the ESB. 
 
 It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Jesslyn 
Henry that Dublin City council notes the contents of Report no. 190/2025 and assents 
to the proposal therein.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
9 
  Report No. 191/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - with reference to the 
proposed disposal of lands at Braithwaite Street, Pimlico, Dublin 8 to o Focus Housing 
Association CLG. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ammar Ali and seconded by Councillor Michael 
Pidgeon that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report no. 191/2025 and 
assents to the proposal therein.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
10   Report No.183/2025 of the Executive Manager (F. D'Arcy) - With reference to the 
disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and Tenant (Ground Rents) 
(No. 2) Act, 1978. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Deputy Lord Mayor 
John Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 183/2025 
and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
11   Report No. 184/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - with reference to 
Proposed Variation No. 6 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028: Lands at 
One Royal Canal House, Royal Canal Park, Pelletstown, Dublin 15. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Deputy Lord Mayor 
John Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the initiation of the variation (No.6) of 
the Dublin City Development Plan 2022 – 2028 as outlined in Report No. 184/2025.  
The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 

 
12   Report No. 189/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - with reference to 
Proposed Variation No. 8 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028: 
Designation Of Iveagh Gardens & Environs, Crumlin, Dublin 12 as an Architectural 
Conservation Area. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by the Deputy Lord Mayor 
John Stephens, that Dublin City Council notes the initiation of the variation (No.8) of 
the Dublin City Development Plan 2022 – 2028 as outlined in Report No. 189/2025.  
The motion was put and carried.  
  
 
 
13   Report No. 192/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - with reference to 
Proposed Variation No. 7 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028: Lands at 
16 - 23 Bow Lane West, Dublin 8. 
 
 It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Deputy Lord Mayor 
John Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the initiation of the variation (No.7) of 
the Dublin City Development Plan 2022 – 2028 as outlined in Report No. 192/2025.  
The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
14   Report No.199/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (A. Flynn) with reference to 
Guidelines under Section 28 of the National Planning Framework regarding Housing 
Growth Requirements 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the content of report 199/2025. The motion 
was put and carried.  
 
 
15   Report No. 186/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Social Housing 
Supply and Delivery Monthly Update 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 186/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
The Lord Mayor vacated the Chair to Deputy Lord Mayor John Stephens at 8.10 p.m. 
and returned to the chamber at 8.17 p.m. 
 
 
 
16   Report No. 187/2025 of the A/Head of Finance (V. Leonov) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement 
 
It was proposed by Deputy Lord Mayor John Stephens and seconded by Councillor 
Séamas McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
187/2025. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
17   Report No. 188/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Mannix 
Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 188/2025. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
18   Report No. 182/2025 of the Area Committees - Minutes of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of June 2025. 
 

 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Fiona 
Connelly that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 182/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
19   Topical Issues 
 
No topical issues were submitted for consideration. 
 
 
20   Motions on Notice 
 
1. Motion No. 1 in the name of Councillor Micheál MacDonncha and seconded by 
Councillor Conor Reddy 
 
Aithníonn Comhairle na Cathrach  
• 
Gur cuspóir i mBunreacht na hÉireann é athaontú na hÉireann 
• 
Go bhfuil plé Náisiúnta ag fás faoi athrú bunreachtúil le daoine ó chúlraí 
éagsúla ag fiosrú faoi féidearachtaí na hAontachta  
 
Tugann an Comhairle faoi deara go dtugann Comhaontú Aoine an Chéasta 
bealach daonlathach chun an tír a aontú, trí na reifrinn.  
 
Mar sin glaonn an Comhairle seo ar an Rialtas chun  
• 
Comhthionól Saoránach ar Aontú na hÉireann a bhunú, chomh maith le 
Coiste Oireachtais  
• 
Plean do Aontú na hÉireann a fhorbairt agus a fhoilsiú i gcomhar le 
sochaí sibhialta, agus le príomh geallchoimeádaithe, na húdaráis áitiúla 
san áireamh 
• 
Dáta do reifreann mar atá leagtha síos i gComhaontú Aoine an 
Chéasta a fháil trí obair ar a shon.  
 
Dublin City Council recognises that 
• 
The reunification of Ireland is an objective of Bunreacht na hÉireann. 
There is a growing national discussion around constitutional change with 
people from diverse backgrounds now exploring the possibility of Irish unity. 
 
This Council further notes that  
 
• 
The Good Friday Agreement provides the democratic means to achieve 
reunification, through the unity referendums. 
 
Therefore this Council calls on the Irish Government to plan and prepare for 
Irish unity through the following actions:  
 
• 
Establish an all-island Citizens’ Assembly and a Joint Oireachtas 
Committee on Irish Unity 
• 
Produce and publish a plan towards Irish unity in conjunction with civic 
society and key stakeholders, including local government 
• 
Work to secure a date for the referendums on unity provided for in the 
Good Friday Agreement.    
 
The motion was put and carried.  
 
2. Motion No. 2 in the name of Councillor Kourtney Kenny and seconded by 
Councillor Cat O’Driscoll 
 

 
 
This Council deplores those corporations that profit from protracted armed 
conflict and systematic violations of human rights, particularly in the context of 
Israel’s continuing brutal assault on the people of Gaza and escalating settler 
terrorism in the West Bank, Russia’s ongoing war of aggression against 
Ukraine, and other conflicts around the world. With this motion, the Council 
encourages companies to meet their obligations to avoid contributing to 
adverse human rights impacts through their own activities, and to prevent or 
mitigate human rights abuses linked to their operations.  
 
The Council is aware of the crucial role of local authorities and their public 
procurement procedures in ensuring respect for human rights by companies, 
as well as their obligations under widely accepted business and human rights 
norms – as laid down in the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human 
Rights, OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, and the Global Sullivan 
Principles (1999) – to promote respect for human rights by companies with 
which they do business.  
 
The Council affirms that every endeavour is made to ensure that councils 
tender processes are consistent with the above principles, including under the 
Fourth Geneva convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time 
of War and under customary international humanitarian law, prohibiting the 
importation or sale of goods or services originating in occupied territories. This 
Council resolves to adopt a rights-based Ethical Procurement Policy (EPP) that 
takes fully into account existing obligations and standards. 
 
The EPP will incorporate widely accepted and precisely formulated 
international standards and explain clearly how the policy will be implemented. 
The primary aim of the EPP is to ensure that human rights obligations are 
properly acknowledged, observed and respected at all stages of the 
procurement process. 
 
The motion was put and carried.  
 
3. Motion No. 3 in the name of Councillor Cian Farrell was deferred to the next 
meeting.  
 
4. Motion No. 4 in the name of Councillor Daniel Ennis was deferred to the next 
meeting.  
 
5. Motion No. 5 in the name of Councillor Nial Ring and seconded by Councillor 
Dermot Lacey 
 
Cuireann Comhairle Comhairle Cathrach Bhaile Átha Cliath fáilte roimh fhógra 
an Aire Forbartha Tuaithe, Pobail agus Gaeltachta Dara Calleary TD ar an 10 
Aibreán 2025 go bhfuil maoiniú aonuaire ag luach €630,000 le bronnadh ar 
Fhoras na Gaeilge (an eagraíocht tras-teorann freagrach as cur chun cinn na 
Gaeilge) le dul i ngleic leis an ngéarchéim mhaoinithe agus leis na ciorruithe a 
fógraíodh ag deireadh Eanáir. Aithníonn an Chomhairle gur faoiseamh 
tábhachtach ach gearrthréimhseach atá i bhfógra an Aire. Bhí €17 milliúin de 
mhaoiniú ag Foras na Gaeilge i 2003 agus breis is 20 bliain níos déanaí tá €17 
milliún fós acu (is ionann sin agus laghdú 45% nuair a tógtar boilsciú san 
áireamh). Tá roinnt seirbhísí, imeachtaí agus grúpaí Gaeilge i gcathair Bhaile 
Átha Cliath ag brath ar mhaoiniú ó Fhoras na Gaeilge agus tá an maoiniú seo 
fós i mbaol mar sin. Aontaíonn na baill scríobh chuig an Taoiseach, an 

 
Tánaiste, an tAire Airgeadais, an tAire Caiteachais Phoiblí, agus an tAire 
Gaeltachta le héileamh orthu go nglacfaidh an Rialtas, i bpáirt leis an Rialtas ó 
thuaidh, le samhail mhaoinithe nua ar bhonn práinne a chinnteoidh do´thain 
croi´-mhaoiniu´ do dheontaithe Fhoras na Gaeilge agus maoiniú sásúil le 
haghaidh imeachtaí agus seirbhísí Gaeilge don phobal.  
 
Leagan Béarla/English Version: 
 
Dublin City Council welcomes the announcement made by Minister for Rural 
and Community Development and the Gaeltacht, Dara Calleary TD on 10th 
April 2025 of a once-off funding package to the value of €630,000 for Foras na 
Gaeilge (the cross-border body with responsibility to promote the Irish 
language) in an attempt to address the funding crisis and the cuts announced 
by the body at the end of January. DCC recognises that this announcement 
brings important but temporary respite. Foras na Gaeilge had €17 million in 
funding in 2003 and, over 20 years later, they still have €17 million (this 
amount can be reduced 45% reduction when inflation is taken into account). A 
number or Irish language services, events and groups in Dublin city depend on 
funding from Foras na Gaeilge and this funding is therefore still in danger. The 
members agree to write to the Taoiseach, the Tánaiste, the Minister for 
Finance, the Minister for Public Expenditure, and the Minister for the Gaeltacht 
to ask that the Government, in conjunction with the Government in the north, 
adopt with urgency a new funding model that will ensure sufficient core funding 
for Foras na Gaeilge grantees and for sufficient funding for Irish language 
events and services for the public. 
 
The motion was accepted without debate.  
 
6. Motion No. 6 in the name of Councillor Gavin Pepper was deferred to the next 
meeting.  
 
7. Motion No. 7 in the name of Councillor Hazel De Nortúin was deferred to the 
next meeting.  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
21   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
No emergency motions were taken for debate.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
 

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY 1th 
SEPTEMBER 2025 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will list the State/Government/ Statutory and other 
relevant Public Bodies that are exempt from paying Commercial Rates on their 
properties in the Dublin City Council area and in addition to supplying this information 
in reply to this Question to refer the response to the next meeting of the Finance SPC 
for further discussion. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Per Schedule 4 of the Valuation Act 2001 State/Government/Statutory and other public 
bodies are exempt from paying Commercial Rates. 
 
Prior to the revaluation of Dublin City in 2014, property directly occupied by  
State/Government/Statutory and other public bodies was valued and entered on the 
Valuation List but was not rateable.  This is no longer the case. Táilte Éireann no longer 
values these properties and as such it is not possible to gauge the value of exempt 
rates in respect of these buildings. 
 
2013 was the last year for which a valuation on State/Government/Statutory and other 
public bodies structures was included in the Valuation List. The estimate for these 
buildings would have been €29.6m at the time. 
 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
Requesting a detailed report on the projected costings of the College Green Plaza 
project. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The College Green Project is at an early stage of developing plans for the revitalisation 
of the historic heart of Dublin. Extensive consultation is underway with a wide range of 
stakeholders to help inform the design. This Project is significantly broader in scope, 
scale and ambition than the initial project brought to planning in 2017. 
 
The preliminary cost estimate for the project is €80m, which is an order of magnitude 
estimate based on the information available at this early stage of the project. The 
preliminary estimate has been prepared on the basis of current market rates and in 
accordance with the guidelines set out in the Department’s Infrastructure Guidelines.  
Estimated construction and design costs associated with delivering the current project 
brief have been included, along with projected inflation increases and a contingency 
sum. The budget will be reviewed and refined as the project design is developed, and 
the costs of accommodating consultee’s needs are more defined. 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the manager for an update on the monies owed to DCC by the HSE for the 
costs incurred in operating the ambulance service in the city. Please include details on 
the annual running costs and the level of annual funding provided by the HSE, as well 
as information on the total amount of monies owed historically. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Despite several years of engagement, the contribution from HSE/NAS towards the cost 
of DFB’s emergency ambulance service has remained insufficient.  In 2013, the 
contribution amounted to €9.2 million and it has remained at this level to date.  
However, this amount covers only approximately 32% of the total cost of providing the 

service in 2024.  The disparity between the actual cost and the contribution from 
HSE/NAS has created an ongoing source of dispute, with the funding gap continuing 
to grow as DFB’s service faces increased challenges. 
A series of structured discussions are currently underway between the Department of 
Health, the Health Service Executive (HSE), and Dublin City Council to address the 
funding issues and evaluate the future direction and model for the Dublin Fire Brigade 
(DFB) ambulance service. 
Progress to Date: 
The meetings to date have been constructive and positive, with all parties 
demonstrating a shared commitment to safeguarding high-quality emergency medical 
care for the citizens of Dublin. There is a clear recognition of the vital role played by 
DFB in the integrated fire-based emergency medical response model. 
Key Areas of Discussion: 
• 
Service governance and accountability 
• 
Funding and financial sustainability 
• 
Operational integration and interoperability with the National Ambulance Service 
• 
Future service delivery models that maintain clinical excellence and emergency 
response times 
Outlook: 
While discussions are ongoing and a final agreement has not yet been reached, 
progress continues to be made. All sides have expressed a willingness to work 
collaboratively towards a sustainable and effective resolution. It is hoped that a final, 
agreed pathway forward will be identified soon, one that respects the strengths of the 
current system while addressing future challenges and expectations. 
 
Q.4  
COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
            To ask the Chief Executive to provide a map of the speed limits that apply in the South 
Central area and describe the process to follow for changing those limits.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A map showing the existing speed limits in the South Central Area is available on the 
Dublin City Council website at the following link: 
 
https://www.dublincity.ie/travel-and-transport/read-latest-traffic-news/current-speed-
limits-dublin-city 
 
In line with the Government Road Safety Strategy Phase 2 Action Plan (2025-2027), 
any expansion of 30 km/h zones in urban or built-up areas must be implemented 
through the making of Special Speed Limit Bye-Laws. 
 
Implementing a Special Speed Limit Bye-Law is a formal statutory process set out 
under the Road Traffic Act 2004. It involves a detailed technical review of roads, 
drafting a bye-law specifying the proposed limits, and holding a public consultation to 
gather feedback. The Chief Executive then reports to the elected members, who must 
approve the bye-law by vote. Once adopted, it is formally sealed, published, and new 
signage is installed to make the limits legally enforceable. This process is guided by 
the Department of Transport’s national guidelines and typically takes several months 
to complete. 
 
Dublin City Council is currently awaiting the publication of updated national Guidelines 
for Setting and Managing Speed Limits by the Department of Transport. Once these 
guidelines are issued, DCC will carry out a full citywide review of speed limits to ensure 
compliance. 
 

In the meantime, Road Safety and Micromobility Unit are undertaking internal 
assessments of the road network, in preparation to progress any necessary changes 
promptly when the guidelines become available. 
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR  JOHN LYONS 
How many fully accessible homes (wet rooms, lowered kitchens) for wheelchair users 
have been delivered in the last five years and what is the projected number for this and 
the next four years? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In the last 5 years Dublin City Council Disabled Adaptations Section has completed 
the following works. 
 
• 
30 wheelchair accessible extensions 
• 
 94 Ramps  
• 
232 stairlifts 
• 
353 other alterations 
• 
987 adapted bathrooms 
 
Dublin City Council is committed to continue to support tenants with adaptations, there 
is no set targets as each case is individual and has specific needs. However, the 
number Disabled Adaptions has increased and as the need increases we will increase 
the adaptations we complete.  
 
Housing Regeneration Response: 
 
Universal Design Guidelines for Homes are based on a two-tiered system of UD Home 
and UD Home+. UD Home+ dwellings, include for wheelchair liveable homes. 
 
The following DCC housing developments include homes built to UD+ standards: 
 
DCC 
Housing 
Development 
Completed in 
Number of UD+ homes 
provided 
Cornamona Court, Dublin 10 2022 
4 
Dominick Hall, Dublin 1 
2021 
6 
Bunratty Road, Dublin 17 
2023 
4 
Bonham Court, Dublin 8 
2023 
3 
Cork Street, Dublin 8 
2023 
2 
Springvale Court, Dublin 20 
2024 
2 
 
Across our current Housing Regeneration programme, the following UD+ homes have 
been granted planning permission and are due for delivery:  
 
Project 
Due for Delivery 
Number of UD+ homes 
proposed  
St Finbars Court, Dublin 7 
Completing 
in 
Q3 
2025 
2 

Dorset Street, Dublin 1 
2026  
8 
St Annes Court, Dublin 5 
2028  
6 
St Andrew’s Court, Dublin 2 
2028  
3 
Glover Court, Dublin 2 
2028 
1 
Crumlin Road/Rafters Lane, 
Dublin 12 
2029 
2 
 
Approved Housing Bodies have proposals for approximately 304 UD and UD + units 
in their pipeline over the years 2026 -2028, subject to planning. On nomination or 
during the construction phase many of these units will be individually adapted to 
accommodate specific households with a physical disability.  
 
Q.6  
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive to clarify who are the allowed users on the traffic free streets 
of Capel Street and Parliament Street. In particular, can the Chief Executive confirm, 
whether, or not, motorised bicycles and/or electric scooters are allowed use these 
streets as recent City Council announcements allude to the streets being re-allocated 
to walking and cycling specifically. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Pedestrians and cyclists are permitted on Capel Street and Parliament Street. All bike 
types and scooters are permitted and must comply with relevant legislation and speed 
limits. An Garda Siochána are carrying out enforcement on the speed and type and 
have been carrying out checkpoints recently on Capel Street. 
  
Q.7 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive what input, if any, Dublin City Council has in the designation 
of bus lanes as 24-hour lanes. If Dublin City Council has no influence on this decision-
making process can the Chief Executive at least write to those making such decisions 
pointing out that, where a 24-hour bus service is not available, it would be logical to 
allow traffic use bus lanes that are not being used by buses. One example of this 
unusual, and for car users, frustrating situation is the outbound bus lane on Clontarf 
Road which is a 24-hour bus lane but facilitates just one bus route i.e. the number 130 
which, during the day only runs at 12-to-20-minute intervals from 6.30am and does not 
run after 11.30pm. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s transport policy prioritises a modal shift away from private vehicle 
use toward more sustainable mobility options, such as the bus. In alignment with this 
objective, DCC has been reviewing and updating bus lane operational hrs throughout 
the city. To date, 100 kilometres of bus lanes within the DCC area have been reviewed 
and updated. 
 
Key anticipated outcomes from operating bus lanes on a 24-hour basis include: 
• 
Enhanced bus transit speed and service reliability through uninterrupted 
dedicated lane access. 
• 
Increased public transport patronage driven by improved travel efficiency. 
• 
Elimination of ambiguity associated with variable bus lane operational hours, 
contributing to consistent user compliance. 
• 
Strengthened enforcement capabilities due to simplified operating parameters. 

 
Additionally, the provision of an extra general traffic lane between midnight and 6:30am 
would yield minimal benefit, attributable to the low vehicular volumes during these 
hours. 
 
Q.8 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive to clarify a matter which arose recently when a couple 
made enquiries of Dublin City Council about purchasing their council house. They have 
an adult son living with them who is on the Housing List in his own right and they were 
told that if they purchased the house from Dublin City Council, their adult son, who will 
remain living with them, would be removed from the Housing List . Can the Chief 
Executive clarify if this is the case and if not, confirm that in such a scenario an adult 
child on the Housing List would not be affected by parents purchasing their council 
home.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In the circumstances outlined above, the son’s Social Housing application would not 
be impacted if he has a housing application in his own right. 
 
Q.9  
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm that there are 25 units in Ballybough House 
which have been vacant for over 12 months and, furthermore, to confirm that these are 
the only units in the city which have been vacant for this period which are not either 
ready to let or being worked on by either contractors or DCC directly. Also, can the 
Chief Executive comment on this state of affairs whereby nearly one in four (c.25%) of 
the units within a flat complex can be allowed to be vacant for over 12 months and that 
no effort is being made to refurbish these properties.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Yes there currently are 25 units vacant within Ballybough Housing Complex. There is 
an issue within the complex with the current layout of the soil stacks (Drains at the side 
of the building). These stacks are antiquated and in need of upgrading.  
We have issued out these units to contractors on our Frameworks. The regrettable 
delay is down to the fact that we need units vacant along the soil stack line. I have 
instructed our contractors to proceed where possible in returning units for social 
Housing. I will update the Councillor with progress in the coming months. 
 
Q.10 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive, If DCC have any plans to provide new stalls for street 
traders in Dublin City 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A pilot trader’s stall has been installed on Cole’s Lane, marking the final component of 
the recent improvement works carried out in this area. 
This initiative forms part of the wider project to enhance the lane’s functionality and 
public appeal.  Other components of the scheme included surface repairs, installation 
of temporary feature lighting, and the addition of greening and seating—all aimed at 
creating a more welcoming and vibrant environment for both visitors and local 
businesses. 
 
The pilot stall will offer valuable insights into how trading activity can be supported in 
this location, helping us assess potential for more permanent solutions in future. 
 
 
 

Q.11  COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
          To ask the Chief Executive, If he would confirm that media reports in July 2025 stated 
that a redevelopment program was in place for Sherriff Street Dublin 1. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Further to various media reports in July 2025, there are currently no approved 
redevelopment plans in place for the Sheriff Street environs. The area is located within 
the Strategic Development and Regeneration Area (SDRA) in the Dublin City 
Development Plan 2022–2028, specifically SDRA 6. This SDRA identifies Connolly 
Station and its immediate surroundings as an opportunity site with regeneration 
potential, including an improved public realm along Sheriff Street. 
Planning approval for the Dublin Arch development adjacent to Connolly Station was 
granted under Reg. Ref. 2723/20 (as amended by 5501/22 and 3054/22). However, 
this project has not commenced and is distinct from any speculative or illustrative 
content circulated in the media. 
The planning process is open and transparent. Any formal development proposals 
brought forward by applicants are subject to the statutory development management 
process under the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended). There are 
currently no planning applications for any redevelopment of the Sheriff Street area. 
Should a relevant planning application be submitted in the future, the record of any 
associated Section 247 pre-application meetings—including details of attendees and 
key issues raised—will be placed on the public planning file. 
 
Q.12 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive, to install the disabled space at (Details Supplied) due to 
reinstatement. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The disabled space outside of (Details Supplied) has already been reinstated.   
 
Q.13  COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive, if DCC have any plans to provide power washing vans for 
the city. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services currently have seven power washing vans operating in 
the city. 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR SEAMUS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many people are on the waiting list for extensions on 
the disabled persons scheme and how many people have been turned down 
extensions because of lack of funding? 
 
CHIEF EXECTUVES REPLY: 
We follow the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage guidance for 
the approval of house extensions outlines that extensions should only be carried out 
where no alternative option is available.  Local Authorities must explore alternative 
options including transfers within stock (own stock or long term leased properties), 
transfers to an available and suitable unit with the Approved Housing Body sector or 
the use of judicious acquisitions.  They further note that an extension is a last resort 
and they must carry out works in lieu or exhaust all other options before an extension 
is granted.   
 
28 people have been refused extensions in 2025 as the Council was of the view that 
the issues raised could be addressed by carrying out other works to the property or 

move tenants to other more suitable accommodation, as per guidance from Dept of 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage guidance. Works in lieu can consist of 
adding a downstairs bathroom to the existing space, stairlifts and bathroom 
adaptations. These works have positively impacted that tenants’ wellbeing and 
capacity to live independently. 
  
In 2022 we completed 2 extensions. 
In 2023 we completed 6 extensions. 
In 2024 we completed 18 extensions. 
In 2025 we completed 4 extensions to date. 
We currently have 24 people on the waiting list for extensions. 
 
Q.15  COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if the playground surfaces at Oliver Bond House and the 
Bridgefoot Street housing complex could be resurfaced. In both cases they are very 
hard and uneven with loose pieces, this could cause injury to a child. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will arrange an inspection of the playground surfaces at Oliver  
Bond House and Bridgefoot Street flat complexes in the coming weeks to determine 
what remedial works are required. 
 
Q.16  WITHDRAWN  
 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if the nettles growing out onto the footpath at the Robert 
Emmet Close/Bridgefoot Street junction from the car park could be cut back. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This site is managed by Development.  I will request that the Buddleia and nettles 
growing out of the site are manually treated to ensure pedestrians can access the 
footpath. I will come back to the Councillor with a progress report. 
 
Q.18  COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if a choke car could be arranged for Oliver Bond House as 
waste is shooting back out of sewers at a number of locations (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance choke car attended to this request on 19/08/2025.  On 
inspection a related issue was identified with the gutters.  This repair is currently being 
examined by Housing Maintenance with a view to carrying out remedial work as quickly 
as possible.  
 
Q.19  COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council could arrange annual training on 
domestic, sexual, and gender-based violence (DSGBV) for Dublin City Councillors, in 
order to equip councillors with the knowledge and guidance necessary to respond 
appropriately and sensitively to constituents disclosing experiences of DSGBV, and to 
effectively advocate on their behalf within the limits of their role. This training 
programme has already been introduced for councillors elsewhere such as Wexford 
and South Dublin County Councils respectively. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is required to adopt an annual Training and Development 
Programme for the Elected Members. The 2025 Training and Development 

Programme was agreed in January 2025.  This programme sets out the courses for 
which expenses for attendance may be paid, the types of training available and the 
budget allocation for the programme.  It also makes provision for adding courses to 
the programme throughout 2025 as required. 
 
The Chief Executive’s Office are engaging with course providers to source appropriate 
training on domestic, sexual and gender-based violence for Dublin City Councillors. 
This course will be added to the 2025 Training and Development Programme and 
considered by the Elected Members for inclusion in future Training Programmes. 
 
Q.20  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the traffic situation at junction of the North 
Road/Seamus Ennis Road in Finglas village to be reviewed. 
1. There were road works here some time ago and the double yellow lines weren’t 
re-instated fully. This causes congestion with parked vehicles so close to the 
junction 
2. There were parking restriction signs placed at the creche here months ago but 
there has been no enforcement follow ups 
3. Can all traffic lines be repainted along this stretch of road 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement will request that Dublin Street Parking Services patrol the area 
and enforce all illegal parking when encountered. 
 
This location will be inspected in the coming days. Any requirement for renewal will 
take place within 30 working days of the NCAC meeting. 
 
Q.21  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if street lighting closer to ground level can be considered 
throughout the city or other methods of lighting such as string lighting in very dark 
areas with large trees. There are many streets with large trees that tend to block 
streetlights creating darker areas which can instil a sense of fear in some people. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The provision of ‘lower mounting height’ street lighting throughout the city or other 
methods of lighting such as the use of string lighting unfortunately isn’t practical or 
feasible for a number of reasons.  
 
These reasons include 
  
1. Variation of Road & Footpath dimensions around the City 
Road and footpath dimensions vary enormously throughout the city and, in many 
cases, lower height lighting will not adequately light wider streets in particular. This 
can result in patchy lighting, i.e. dark and bright patches, on the street. 
In general Light level standards for streets and footpaths are easier to meet using 
taller columns/lights rather than shorter ones. 
  
2. Cost Prohibitive 
Even if ‘lower mounting height’ lights could achieve the required light levels on a 
street new infrastructure such as ducts, cables and supplies would be required to 
supply these lower height lights not to mention providing new columns and the 
removal of the existing columns and infrastructure. The provision of low mounting 
height lights would necessitate extensive footpath excavations and re-instatements 
and would be very costly. 
 

3. Underground Services Congestion 
Many roads and streets around the city are already full with various underground 
services, such as gas, water, comms, ESB and so on. Installing new lower 
mounting height lighting infrastructure may be problematic due to the constraints 
on spare capacity underground. 
 
Dealing with large trees that are blocking lights on streets can, realistically, only be 
dealt with on a case by case basis and requires co-ordination between DCC Parks & 
Landscape Services and DCC Public Lighting Services.  
 
If details of particular streets of concern can be provided these can be looked at. 
 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the status of the apartments on the corner 
of the Old Naas Road and Kylemore Road in Bluebell. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This apartment development, now known as Bluebell Mills, commenced construction 
in July of 2018.   
The following matters under the Building Control Act 1990 (as amended), the Building 
Regulations 1997 (as amended) and the Building Control Regulations 1997 (as 
amended) have arisen with regard to this development; 
 
• 
Enforcement Notices 
Two Enforcement Notices under Section 8 of the Building Control Act, 1990 (as 
amended), have been served by the Building Control Authority on the owners of this 
development for failing to comply with the requirements of the Building Regulations. 
Building Control Enforcement Notice, served August 2019, has not yet been 
satisfactorily complied with. 
Building Control Enforcement Notice, served October 2020, was appealed to the 
District Court by the developers.  A hearing on this appeal is scheduled to be heard in 
the District Court from September 15th, 2025. 
 
• 
Disability Access Certificate 
The building is not constructed in accordance with the requirements of the granted 
Disability Access Certificate.  
 
A recent Revised Disability Access application, refused by Dublin City Council on the 
27/06/2025, is currently under appeal to An Coimisiún Pleanála. 
In line with Article 20F of the Building Control Regulations 1997 (as amended), a 
Certificate of Compliance on Completion must be submitted to Dublin City Council and 
recorded on the Building Control Register before any building covered by this 
requirement can be legally opened, occupied, or used. 
 
At present, the Enforcement Notices referenced have not yet been satisfactorily 
concluded, with one pending an appeal hearing in the District Court.   
In addition, the Disability Access Certificate (DAC) and/or Revised DAC applications 
remain unresolved, including waiting for the outcome of the appeal process currently 
being considered by An Coimisiún Pleanála.   
 
As a result of these impediments, the Building Control Authority is not permitted by the 
Building Control Regulations to register a Certificate of Compliance on Completion. 
Accordingly, the building must not be opened, occupied, or used until these matters 
are satisfactorily concluded and the certificate is properly registered. 
 

Q.23  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
           To ask the Chief Executive what action DCC is going to take to tackle the 
weaponization of the tri-color, our national flag, by far-right and malicious agitators who 
seek to use our flag as a means to intimidate. Specifically, can the Chief Executive 
confirm what DCC’s policy is with regard to the erection of flags and bunting by known 
anti-immigrant actors across our city’s street lights and DCC social housing 
complexes? This attempted capture of our flag for hateful intent must be faced head 
on by the country’s largest local authority. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is aware of the concerns expressed by both elected members as 
well as members of local communities and residents' groups regarding the proliferation 
of the National Flag being hung across particular areas of the city.  
  
Dublin City Council is taking the matter seriously; it is a sensitive issue which requires 
a considered response from all stakeholders, and which should be informed by a 
comprehensive risk assessment of the situation. 
 
In this regard, area managers are meeting with Senior Garda representatives in the 
coming week and are contacting other local groups to discuss the issue before any 
decisions are taken on the best way to proceed. At the same time, DCC will also 
engage with local elected members to seek their input in finding a resolution.  
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
           To ask the Chief Executive to provide the latest update with respect to DCC’s support 
for the redevelopment of Richmond Park, Inchicore. The last update received in 
February 2025 stated: 
 
• 
The City Valuer's Office was continuing to secure acquisitions of adjacent properties 
by agreement – can you please confirm the properties that have been acquired to date, 
how much public money has been spent on these acquisitions so far and confirm at 
what point DCC will move to CPO rather than by consent purchases? 
 
• 
DCC continues to seek all necessary information from St. Patrick’s Athletic in relation 
to redevelopment of the stadium and grounds – has the club been forthcoming with 
any further information in the past six months? Have pre-planning discussions begun? 
If yes, what specific updates can be provided? 
 
Generally, this process has not progressed with the speed it was originally intended. 
DCC initially said it planned to complete and publish the CPO Map by end of 2023, 
then it was in 2024, then by end of 2024 and now we are three-quarters of the way 
through 2025. Can DCC please provide clarification as to why it has allowed this 
project to stall? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
To date, the City Valuer's Office have acquired, by agreement, the following properties 
as noted below : 
 
119/119A Emmet Road 
129 Emmet Road  
131 Emmet Road  
133 Emmet Road  
 
The total cost of these acquisitions amounts to 
€3,003,000 
 

DCC and St Patrick’s Athletic have been in discussions around Draft Heads of Terms 
outlining the relationship between the parties moving forward and continue to work 
through the detail. 
 
St Patrick’s Athletic are currently engaging with Dublin City Council’s Flood Projects 
Office and Drainage Division regarding the proposed redevelopment of Richmond Park 
and any potential impact on the Camac River. However, the formal planning process, 
including any relevant Section 247 pre-application consultations, has not yet 
commenced. 
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
            To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on PPP projects Basin Lane and 
Forbes Lane, due to regeneration and deliver significant much-needed housing in the 
Liberties area. Can the Chief Executive clarify his current understanding of the timeline 
for the delivery of these projects? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Basin View and Forbes Lane projects are part of the National Social Housing 
Public-Private Partnership (PPP) Programme, Bundles 4 and 5. 
Dublin City Council has been informed by the Department of Housing, Heritage and 
Local Government that a review of Bundles 4, 5, 6, and 7 of the National Social 
Housing PPP Programme is currently underway. Dublin City Council, along with the 
other participating local authorities, is awaiting the outcome of this review. 
 
The DCC Project Team is actively exploring the most appropriate and expedient route 
to progress the PPP housing projects with planning permission to the construction 
phase. A comprehensive update on the programme and delivery timelines for these 
sites will be provided to Councillors and key stakeholders in Q4 2025. 
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive to install a belly bin in Sunshine Park on Corrib Road in 
Terenure. The park is locked at nighttime so there is less chance of people dumping 
their domestic waste in the belly bin, as has happened in the past at other parks. There 
are also several residents who are very vigilant about the care of the park. Currently, 
dog walkers have nowhere to deposit bags of dog waste and dumping of these bags 
has happened within the park when there is no access to a bin. Nearby Eaton Square 
had an ordinary bin removed and it has been replaced with a belly bin. This addition 
has been hugely effective in managing waste at that park, particularly in relation to the 
disposal of dog waste. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The park on Corrib Road is very small, approximately half the size of Eaton Square, 
and it is not considered necessary to install a big belly bin at this location at this time. 
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive to actively advertise the work of Dublin Community 
Mediation and Community Law and Mediation services and to ask these services to 
provide a detailed, GDPR compliant breakdown of reports of anti-social behaviour to 
Dublin City Council. 
 
Since the closure of the DCC Mediation Service two years ago many tenants feel lost 
and do not know where to turn. This results in many minor incidents of anti-social 
behaviour being reported to DCC. It is my view that if tenants knew of the availability 
of the above services minor conflicts could be addressed prior to complaints to DCC, 

while also alleviating unnecessary stress for council tenants experiencing anti-social 
behaviour. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s Neighbour Mediation Service ceased on 28th February 2025 due 
to low/no referrals over an extended period. 
 
Whilst it was recognised and acknowledged that the mediation process had provided 
a useful dispute resolution mechanism over a number of years, in more recent years 
the total number of referrals received in the service was extremely low.  
 
Of the referrals received, they were assessed as being either unsuitable for mediation 
(e.g. both sides not agreeable to participating) or, the conflict had escalated quickly 
prior to initial referral evaluation and/or pre-mediation, thereby resulting in mediation 
no longer being a suitable dispute resolution option.  
 
Additionally, there was also a significant reduction in the number of available qualified 
mediators within the service due to staff departures. There are currently no registered 
mediators available.  
 
Given the low demand and the significant reduction in the number of referrals received 
over a sustained period of time, combined with overstretched mediator resources, it 
became no longer viable to continue to resource and provide an underutilised service. 
  
Q.28  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive what the future planning is in relation to expanding the 
current sewage infrastructure. With the popularity of sea swimming growing, both in 
season and out of season across Dublin, it is alarming that we have a sewage 
infrastructure that malfunctions constantly during large amounts of rainfall. The 
resulting swimming bans, particularly during the fine weather, are impacting large 
amounts of sea swimmers. According to the DCC website, ‘Sandymount Strand was 
classified as having Poor Water Quality in both 2024-2025 based on water quality 
results from the preceding four-year periods.’ This resulted in a swim restriction applied 
at Sandymount Strand for the entire 2025 season. For sea swimmers, both in season 
and out of season, one of the simplest joys is a swim in the sea. With the current level 
of swimming bans these joys are being seriously curtailed year after year. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The growing popularity of sea swimming across Dublin underscores the importance of 
ensuring safe and accessible bathing waters year-round, especially during the 
designated bathing season. 
 
Responsibility for the planning, maintenance, and expansion of wastewater 
infrastructure lies with Uisce Éireann, the national sanitary authority. While Dublin City 
Council does not directly manage these systems, we continue to work closely with 
Uisce Éireann and other stakeholders to advocate for improvements that support 
public health and environmental protection. 
 
In accordance with EU Bathing Water Regulations, Dublin City Council issues public 
warnings when bathing water quality is suspected or confirmed to have deteriorated. 
These warnings are made in consultation with the Health Service Executive and remain 
in place until water quality is verified as safe. The classification of Sandymount Strand 
as “Poor” over the past four years has resulted in a season-long prohibition for 2025. 
However, recent results are encouraging, and if current trends continue, this restriction 
may be lifted as early as next year. Our most recent bathing Water quality results from 

samples taken on the 19th of August returned an assessment of ’Excellent’ water 
quality, (all past and ongoing results are available on our website). 
 
To support long-term improvements, the Council is guided by a robust legislative and 
policy framework, including the Water Framework Directive, the Bathing Water 
Regulations and our Bathing Waters Taskforce strategy. These frameworks enable us 
to implement targeted interventions aimed at improving water quality and these actions 
are showing positive progress. 
 
One such initiative is the promotion of nature-based solutions and Sustainable Urban 
Drainage Systems (SuDS), which help reduce the volume of surface water entering 
the sewer network during heavy rainfall. This, in turn, can mitigate overflow events and 
reduce the frequency of emergency activations. The recently launched Rainscapes 
Project in Artane is a key example of this approach in action. 
Our Bathing Water Taskforce continues to make incremental progress in improving 
water quality at Sandymount and Merrion Strands. We remain committed to building 
on this momentum and working collaboratively to restore and protect Dublin’s coastal 
waters for all who enjoy them particularly at locations where seas swimmers regularly 
congregate, such as the designated Half Moon Bathing site and Dollymount Strand.  
 
Further information on current initiatives and bathing water updates is available on the 
Council’s website and the National Bathing Water website, beaches.ie. 
 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many trees will be replanted after completion of the 
Poddle Flood Alleviation Scheme works at Ravensdale Park, Kimmage. The works 
necessitated the removal of at least ten established trees; therefore, it is crucial that 
these trees are replanted along with the planting of more trees to preserve this green 
space in what is a very concrete heavy and tree sparse surrounding area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The planning conditions for the project specified that 2 trees be planted for every tree 
removed during the works associated with the River Poddle FAS. This condition will 
be delivered, if not in the immediate park then in parks and open spaces nearby. 
 
Q.30  WITHDRAWN 
 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if a light sensitivity study has been conducted prior to the 
installation of the new Public Lighting system across the city and if he can supply me 
with a synopsis of the outcome of the study. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Environmental Consultants were engaged to carry out an Appropriate Assessment 
(AA) screening and an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) screening on the 
Public Lighting Upgrade Project prior to the commencement of works on site.  
 
The conclusions reached in each of the screenings carried out by the Consultants are 
included in the attachment.  
 
Q.32  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive the full benefits accrued to the City Council from the 
operation of the Big Grill Festival in Herbert Park and if he considers it acceptable that 
neither the Parks Department nor the Organisers engaged in any consultation with 
Local Councillors on the event. 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Big Grill Festival showcases Herbert Park and attracts approximately 18,000 
visitors to the park over the course of the weekend.  Funding generated from the event 
is used by DCC to support the annual work programme for parks upkeep and 
improvement. 
 
It is usual that the organisers engage with local residents to discuss concerns in 
advance of the event. In advance of the Big Grill organisers met the local resident 
association at an in person meeting, carried out a leaflet drop to houses in the vicinity 
and posted public notices which included contract details for the organisers on the 
gates to the park.  
 
Parks can request that local councillors are included in these various communications 
going forward. 
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive what properties, further to the announcement by the 
Minister for Housing and Local Government, owned by the Peter Mc Verry Trust in 
Dublin City will be transferred to Dublin City Council and if the property (details 
supplied) is included in that list. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has been engaging with the PMVT and the Department of Housing 
on the transfer of a number of properties over the last twelve months. This process is 
in the final stages and property transfers will fully complete by year end.  (Details 
supplied)  is currently not included on the list for transfer to DCC 
.   
Q.34  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive what, if anything, DCC can do to assist with the removal of 
a redundant telegraph pole on a residential property. Eir has accepted ownership of 
the pole but is seeking €450 from the resident just to assess it which doesn’t seem fair. 
Is this a common problem and is there anything we can do to help? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
It should be noted that utility issues on private property are outside the remit of Dublin 
City Council. However, contact was made with EIR in relation to the above to provide 
assistance and the response from EIR is as follows: 
 
There is a Plant Alterations process where we charge for a survey to analyse how to 
move/remove network. In this case. whilst a resident may think a pole is not in use 
and deem it redundant, it could be part of planned works. Plantalterations@eir.ie is 
the mailbox of the team that deal with this. 
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive what powers he has to deal with “abandoned” cars parked 
legally on non-permit roads and lanes. These tend to non-taxed, non-insured, owned 
by a local resident, but left to rot on our public roads … so they don’t seem to be legally 
abandoned, as ownership has been established, but the owners are using our public 
roads to store old cars, sometimes for many years.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The primary reason people report vehicles to us is because one or all of the required 
certificates (Tax/Insurance/NCT) are out of date and the vehicle has been on their road 
for a considerable period of time. However this is not something that the City Council 
have any legal authority to take action on.  These are all issues under Road Traffic 

Legislation for An Garda Síochána to investigate and action as they deem 
appropriate.  Nonetheless waste management will always investigate any such reports 
made to us.  
 
The primary reason we would designate a vehicle as abandoned would be because 
we have failed to identify the owner of a vehicle, or the registered owner has failed to 
respond to our written correspondence requesting them to contact us within a specified 
period of time.  In general once we designate a vehicle as abandoned we arrange 
collection and immediate disposal of such vehicles as the City Council do not have 
storage facilities to retain vehicles.  
 
The primary reason we designate a vehicle as not abandoned is because the 
registered owner of that vehicle has informed us, when contacted, that their vehicle is 
not abandoned as happened in the case of three of the vehicles you 
queried.  Effectively we do not have the authority to seize and destroy a person’s 
vehicle against their wishes or agreement.  The general condition of the vehicle is not 
relevant in a case where the owner has informed us that it is not abandoned and in 
such cases waste management can take no further action, and it would be a matter for 
the Gardaí to investigate further should you choose to report it to them.   
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a breakdown of the full cost to the Council of 
administering the Bus Shelter Enhancement Programme. This should include: 
• 
 Contractor costs. 
• 
 Any involvement of depot crews or direct labour. 
• 
 Estimated staff time spent on coordination, site selection, and engagement 
with other bodies. 
• 
 Whether any delays or additional costs arose from inter-agency   processes 
or approvals; and 
• 
 Confirmation of whether any previously planned depot works or public realm 
improvements were delayed or scaled back as a result of this programme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Bus stop Enhancement Programme (BSEP) was setup by the NTA to improve bus 
stop infrastructure through all local authorises. As specified in the Councillor’s query 
there is a significant amount of work involved such as criteria for site selection, 
planning permission for the shelter and construction works under an established 
procurement framework. 
 
With the current workload Dublin City Council have not been in a position to resource 
a team, so as to facilitate these works. This may change next year if staff are available 
to implement this public realm improvement scheme. 
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise on how the schedule for street    
cleaning/sweeping is organised, and how often would one expect to see a street 
cleaner on their road? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council provides street cleaning services to all roads, footpaths, laneways 
and bridges within its administrative area using manual and mechanical sweeping 
methods.  

We use a grading system that considers location and footfall to decide how often we 
clean each street. Areas are also inspected daily by locally-based waste management 
teams who determine whether additional cleaning is required.  
 
    Street Cleaning Category 
 
 
Suburban residential areas are on a twelve-week cleaning schedule. These areas 
are regularly monitored and extra cleaning is arranged when necessary between 
scheduled cleanings or following a request for a cleaning made through our citizen 
hub. Cleaning schedules for specific streets can be found on our website 
www.dublincity.ie. 
 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive what preparations this Council has made for the 
implementation of the new default 30km/h speed limits on urban roads, which came 
into effect on Friday, 7th February 2025. In particular, can the Chief Executive outline: 
 
• The timeline for the replacement or updating of road signage, 
• Any public awareness or education campaigns planned to inform road users of the 
change, and 
•  Whether additional enforcement measures are being considered to ensure 
compliance with the new limits? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Department of Transport’s Circular 4-RS04/2024, outlines a phased reduction in 
default sped limits across various road types. The first phase, which was effective as 
of 7th February 2025, reduced the default speed limits on rural local roads only, from 
80kph to 60kph. 
 
Future phases will focus on reducing speed limits in urban cores to 30kph, and on 
national secondary roads from 100kph to 80kph. For urban roads, there has been no 
change to the default limit.  
 
In line with the Government Road Safety Strategy Phase 2 Action Plan, any extension 
of 30 km/h zones in urban or built-up areas will be implemented through Special Speed 
Limit Bye-Laws rather than by changing the default limit. 
 
Dublin City Council will review all speed limits once the updated national Guidelines 
for Setting and Managing Speed Limits are published, after which any necessary 
changes to signage, awareness measures, and enforcement coordination will be 
addressed. 
 
Currently, in Dublin City Council’s functional area, the default speed limit of most roads 
is 30kph, covering all residential areas. With most arterial routes having a speed limit 
of 50kph. Speed limit signs are erected at all points where there is a speed limit change. 
A link to the map showing the existing speed limits is available on the Dublin City 
Council website, and here; 
rt3369_13 - 30KP Speed Limit Review 2019-11.12.2019 Rev D.dgn 
Category 
Area description 
Sweeping 
Frequency 
Category A Main city centre streets, high footfall locations  
Daily  
Category B Other high footfall locations: Suburban villages, main 
bus route into city centre. 
Daily 
Category C Medium footfall: Residential locations. 
Weekly 

Please note that the enforcement of speed limits is a matter for An Garda Síochána. 
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
            To ask the Chief Executive to provide, broken down by Local Electoral Area, the 
proportion (or percentage) of the current Dublin City Council housing stock that meets 
the standards of Universal Design and Universal Design Plus, as defined by the 
National Disability Authority (NDA). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC has 26,500 rent paying tenants and due to the age of our stock over 81% were 
built prior to the Building Regulations of 1992.  
However in recent years we have installed:  
• 
30 wheelchair accessible extensions 
• 
 94 Ramps  
• 
232 stairlifts 
• 
353 other alterations 
• 
987 adapted bathrooms 
 
Q.40  COUNCILLOR MICHEAL PIGEON 
            To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council is the enforcement body for the 
requirement for waste collectors to offer segregated waste streams and, if the city 
council is not, who is responsible? Several apartment blocks do not offer segregated 
waste, and it is unclear which public body has oversight over this issue. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Enforcement enforce the Waste Collection Permit Regulations and the 
conditions therein of each Waste Collection Permit issued by the National Waste 
Collection Permit Office (NWCPO). However, the segregation and presentation of 
waste would be the remit of Litter Management who Waste Enforcement work in 
collaboration with. 
 
Where there is a report that an operator is not offering segregation e.g. the three bin 
system a complaint can be logged at waste.enforcement@dublincity.ie and this will be 
investigated and enforced through the conditions of the operators permit.  
 
Issues related to non-segregation and presentation can be referred to Litter 
Management for enforcement under the byelaws.  
 
Q.41  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive, can speed ramps be placed from Dane Road to Cromlech 
Court to allow traffic to reduce speed at St Joesphs School.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dane Road has already been traffic calmed with 3 no. speed ramps, a raised table at 
the junction with Poppintree Parade and a slow road marking heading northbound 
towards Cromlech Court. Furthermore, a school zone has been provided on Cromlech 
Court with further road markings provided on Dane Road to alert road users to that 
fact. These measures are considered appropriate and no changes are recommended 
at this time. 
 
Instances of illegal or dangerous driving should be reported to an Garda Síochána for 
enforcement. 
 
 

Q.42  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive, for an update on the ninety-three homes for older people 
on Shangan road. That should have been part of the PPP scheme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Shangan Road (LAP Site 10) housing project was included in Bundle 3 of the 
National Social Housing Public-Private Partnership (PPP) Programme. The PPP 
Bundle 3 project is now the subject of judicial review proceedings. Accordingly, no 
further information can be disclosed until such time as those proceedings have been 
concluded. 
 
Q.43  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive, for an update on the proposed site for housing at Carton 
Lands in Poppintree Ballymun. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Carton Lands projects are part of the National Social Housing Public-Private 
Partnership (PPP) Programme, Bundle 7. 
Dublin City Council has been informed by the Department of Housing, Heritage and 
Local Government that a review of Bundles 4, 5, 6, and 7 of the National Social 
Housing PPP Programme is currently underway. Dublin City Council, along with the 
other participating local authorities, is awaiting the outcome of this review. 
The DCC Project Team is actively exploring the most appropriate and expedient route 
to progress the PPP housing projects. A comprehensive update on the programme 
and delivery timelines for these sites will be provided to Councillors and key 
stakeholders in Q4 2025 
 
Q.44  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive, can the footpath be fixed at Whiteacre park. The footpath 
has been damaged since October. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks, Biodiversity and Landscape Services will investigate the footpath in Whiteacre 
Park to ascertain the area of damage and schedule any necessary repairs.  
 
Q.45  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive if and how it is envisaged to incorporate the Bank of Ireland 
building into plans for College Green and whether the possibilities of this becoming a 
public building have been explored.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Bank of Ireland building is outside the scope of the College Green project. 
However, the public realm design will take account of the wider urban fabric, including 
all the adjacent culturally important buildings, to renew the sense of place and revitalise 
this historic heart of the city. 
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that Dublin City Council engages with (details 
supplied) as part of the consultation in respect of the planned pedestrian crossing on 
the Howth Road at the Garda Retirement Home as they have been campaigning for 
the installation of same for some time, including by organising a residents’ petition. 
 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The design team are in possession of the petition submitted by the resident’s 
association including a sketch indicating their preferred location. Careful consideration 
will be given to this request as part of the design process. 
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive for the Parks section in Dublin City Council to engage with 
Gardaí in respect of recently-reported racist assaults in Fairview Park and to agree a 
plan to improve safety and security for all in this and other parks in the city, particularly 
in light of the fact that there has been a pattern of physical and verbal assaults reported 
by local residents in Fairview Park in recent months. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Park Service regularly liaises with local and community Gardaí with regard to anti-
social and criminal behaviour in public parks.  The Parks Service is always receptive 
to suggestions by the Gardaí with regard to removal of cover and opening up views in 
and out of parks to facilitate their patrolling of such public spaces.  However, such 
criminal behaviour is exclusively a matter for the Gardaí and any plan to address same 
must come from the Gardaí.  The matter will be raised at our next meeting with local 
Gardaí with regard to Fairview Park. 
 
Q.48 
COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the trees at (details supplied) to be cut back 
and to outline any planned works on trees in this and the adjoining estate. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Tree trimming is carried out by the North Central Area Office, with Road Maintenance 
Services providing the funding. This request will be sent to the Area Office. The 
Confirm reference number for this inquiry is 11182263. 
 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive what plan is in place to tackle the ever-increasing problem 
of weeds throughout the city. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks, Biodiversity and Landscape Services policy on the use of glyphosate, a 
commonly used herbicide for vegetation control, has been to progressively reduce and, 
where possible, eliminate its use in most  operations. The policy is part of a broader 
commitment to enhancing biodiversity in  Dublin City. The  Biodiversity Action Plan 
outlines a strategy to minimise pesticide use and promote more natural management 
of green spaces, including creating pollinator-friendly areas. 
 
The main exception to the policy is for the control of invasive species, such as 
Japanese knotweed. In these specific cases, glyphosate may still be used as a last 
resort when no other effective alternatives are available. Parks Services  has made 
significant progress in the complete elimination of glyphosate and other herbicides. 
The process involves trials of alternative methods, which may not always be as efficient 
or cost-effective as traditional herbicides. Additionally, there is a need for public 
tolerance of wildflowers in certain areas. Use of glyphosate on the public road network 
is not something that Parks Services would support as it runs counter to  our message 
of promoting biodiversity  in the City and DCC’s wider policy of restricting glyphosate 
in public places. 
 
 
 

Q.50  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive can the parking times at Berkley Road be changed to 
facilitate patients going for hospital appointments. At present you can only park on this 
Road after 10am and many patients have earlier out-patient appointments. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The parking restrictions on Berkeley Road are in place to ensure the safe and efficient 
movement of traffic, particularly during peak morning hours. The current arrangement, 
which does not allow parking before 10:00 a.m. on this side of the road, is considered 
necessary for traffic management. However, pay-and-display parking is available on 
the opposite side of the road, providing an option for those attending earlier hospital 
appointments. 
 
Q.51  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
           To ask the Chief Executive what plans have DCC in place to make Dublin City more 
accessible for all. Especially for pedestrians who use footpaths. Wheelie bins, Dog 
Fouling and Street Furniture make some footpaths inaccessible especially for the 
visually impaired and the wheelchair users of the city. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Transport Advisory Group are committed to being an advocate for the pedestrian 
road user, especially for the vulnerable road user such as pedestrians who have a 
disability and for children or the elderly. When considering measures on the road, be it 
road markings, road signage, physical buildouts or pedestrian crossings, the Transport 
Advisory Group always consider the person who has a disability, is visually impaired, 
is a wheelchair user, pushes a pram or is a child or elderly person. The Transport 
Advisory Group recommends that all footpaths be a minimum, clear, 1.8 metres in 
width only recommending planters, street furniture or signage at locations where the 
footpath is wide enough to allow for a clear 1.8 metres minimum. The Transport 
Advisory Group’s priority is always the safety of the pedestrian and ‘Accessibility for 
All’. 
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
          To ask the Chief Executive could a definitive date be given when the Compactors will 
be introduced into the North-Inner City. As you are aware litter is at an all-time high 
and black bags are being torn apart by wildlife throughout the city. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We cannot give a definitive date on when compactors will be introduced into the North 
Inner City. The provision and use of such compactors requires the co-operation and 
support of private waste collection operators as this is essentially a service they will be 
offering to their customers. The time scale for the expansion of the service from the 
initial trial area in the South Inner City will be contingent on an assessment of the 
relative successes or failures of the compactors installed in the first week of September 
which will be located on Fownes Street and St, Stephens Green. This is the first stage 
in the City Council’s ongoing project to fully remove the derogation permitting the 
presentation of waste in bags city wide. We will in consultation with private operators 
take lessons from any unforeseen problems or issues that might arise with the scheme 
at these locations and look to eliminate them as quickly as possible so that they are 
not repeated at future locations. 
When we are satisfied that the scheme is been managed and working efficiently then 
we will look at expanding it across the whole of the City on a phased basis. 

Q.53  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the number, nature and outcome of tenancy 
management issues in council properties in the Belmayne area for 2023, 2024 to the 
present. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Tenancy Management Issues 2023 -2023: Belmayne Area  
 
2023 - Nature of Complaint 
2023- Outcome of Complaints 
Breach of Tenancy – Parking Issue  
Closed 
 
Number of Tenancy Management Issue in 2023 = 
1  
  
2024 - Nature of Complaint 
2024- Outcome of Complaints 
Breach of Tenancy – Illegal Dumping  
Closed 
Anti-Social Behaviour- Threatening 
Behaviour  
Closed 
Breach of Tenancy- Damage to Property / No 
Residing at Property  
Closed 
Breach of Tenancy- Noise Nuisance 
 
Anti Social Behaviour- Threatening Behaviour  
Closed 
 
Closed 
 
Number of Tenancy Management Issue in 2024 = 
5 
 
2025 - Nature of Complaint 
2025- Outcome of Complaints 
  
 
 
Number of Tenancy Management Issue in 2025 = 
0  
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to fix the small wall that is broken on the green across from 
(details supplied).  I think it would be a better idea to replace the wall with a small 
ramp at this location as the wall is broken from tractors mounting the wall to cut the 
grass. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The locus will be investigated and necessary repairs or alternative arrangements 
included on the schedule of repair works. 
 
Q.55  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to fix the path outside (details supplied) as the path is 
very high from tree roots and badly broken and extremely dangerous to residents and 
passersby of all ages. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This defect has been forwarded to the Area Inspector for repair. The Confirm reference 
number for this inquiry is 11182338. 

Q.56  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to replace the tarmac patch at Edges Corner, Fairview, as 
it takes away from the amazing work done in Fairview.  I have been asking this to be 
replaced for over ten months now. (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The tarmac patches are a temporary reinstatement done by a utility provider after 
digging a trench. They are obligated to replace it with a permanent reinstatement as 
part of the conditions of their road opening license. The Confirm reference number for 
this inquiry is 11182324. 
 
Q.57  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to prune the trees on Brookwood lawn, Artane, as there 
are many trees now, with very low branches that could seriously damage a child’s 
eyesight if they ran into them when playing.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks and any works deemed necessary 
will be included in the prioritised tree care programme for the area.  
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on Progress at the Oscar Traynor Woods 
Development and a Timeline of the expected delivery of Homes. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Oscar Traynor Road  
 
1. Works  
In Phase 1A the following works were carried out or are currently in progress.  
 
• 
Where internal plasterboard has been exposed to moisture or damaged during the 
weathering of the buildings the plasterboard has been pre-emptively removed to 
mitigate the potential for mould growth and will be reinstated in accordance with an 
agreed process with Building Control. 
• 
Investigation on elements of the facades remains ongoing and on a block by block 
basis in Phase 1A, any issues identified by the design team during these investigations 
are rectified or reinstated where required.  
• 
Monitoring of the moisture content of these units is ongoing throughout these works to 
mitigate the potential for mould growth. 
• 
External render has commenced on a number of blocks in Phase 1A 
• 
Landscape works commencing to private driveways in Phase 1A  
• 
Timber frame erection of homes in Phase 1A to commence on at the end of August   
 
 In Phase 1B and 1C the following works were carried out or are currently in progress.  
• 
Blockwork in Duplex units in phase 1B has been removed in response to FSC and 
DAC certificate requirements and the quality of blockwork.  
• 
The constructed floor slabs including the radon membrane around the perimeter of the 
units have been temporary protected. Where damage has occurred to the exposed 
membrane during the works a repair patch detail has been agreed with Building 
Control. 
• 
Where internal plasterboard has been exposed to moisture or damaged during the 
weathering of the buildings the plasterboard has been pre-emptively removed to 
mitigate the potential for mould growth and will be reinstated in accordance with an 
agreed process with Building Control 

• 
In phase 1C Substructure works are to be completed by the end of August. Erection of 
the timber frame homes to commence thereafter.   
  
In Phase 2 
 
Following on from requests for information from Building Control work has 
recommenced across Phase 2.  
 
In BA01 the erection of the precast structural elements is ongoing and is now at roof 
level. Internal fitout is ongoing.  
 
In BA02 the ground beams are being prepared.  The precast superstructure is due to 
commence at the end of September.  
 
In the Community Centre the erection of the structural steel frame is now complete and 
blockwork is commencing.  
 
In the Creche building RC elements will be complete by the end of August.  
 
The Park lands is largely complete with snagging and maintenance of landscaped 
elements is ongoing.  
 
The connection of the Naniken river is now open and live.  
 
2. Programme 
 
The 64 units in Phase 1A remain on schedule for delivery in 2025.  
The programme is ultimately scheduled for full completion in early 2028, and it is not 
anticipated that there will be any delay to the overall programme. 
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the proposed Santry River Greenway in 
relation to the current Design Stage for the Coolock/ Santry  Area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Due to a delay in receiving the question, a report to update Cllr Moran will be issued 
following the full council meeting, no later than Sept 5th 2025. 
 
 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive to have the tree outside (Details supplied) removed. The 
tree is not suitable for the road; it has caused cracks in the path around it and the 
boundary wall of the house.   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The tree at this location was fully assessed and recorded to Park Services digital 
inventory of Street Trees in 2024.  The tree was found to be in an acceptable condition 
with no tree works required or recommended.  This tree does not meet the criteria for 
removal under the adopted tree policy. 
 
Q.61  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive, for an inspection of the tree outside (Details Supplied).  
Over the last year, there has been a marked change in the tree’s condition: The canopy 
has grown significantly heavier and now extends further over the footpath and the 
driveway. The weight and angle of some branches raise concerns about potential limb 

failure, particularly in high winds. Sap fall from the overhanging branches is constant 
and affecting vehicles parked in the driveway. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This tree was fully assessed and recorded to Parks Services digital inventory of street 
trees last week on foot of an inspection request received.  The tree was found to be in 
an acceptable condition and crown lifting above the public footpath will be programmed 
within the next 6 months as recommended.   
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the resurfacing of the playground in Father 
Collins Park 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Service has repaired the majority of the damaged areas and will continue 
to undertake necessary repairs as required.  The complete replacement of the safety 
surface in Fr. Collins playgrounds will be considered in the context of the estimates for 
2026.   
 
Q.63  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive if there are any plans for improvements to Streamville park? 
New equipment, benches etc. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are no such plans on the Parks Improvements Works Programme for 2025 but 
consideration can be given to same in the programme for 2026. 
 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the derelict houses on details supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
These properties went out to Part 8 Planning in June. The process takes around 20 
weeks. Alongside this we will need to identify the most appropriate funding source to 
carry out these works.  
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR SEAMUS MCGRATTAN 
         To ask the Chief Executive when will the weeding programme begins in Villa Park 
Estate. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Villa Park Estate is included in this year's weeding programme and has already 
received 3 weeding sprays. The programme is subject to funding, and we are 
endeavouring to have all of Villa Park ( incl. Avenue and Drive) covered in 2026. 
 
Q.66  COUNCILLOR SEAMUS MCGRATTAN 
           To ask the Chief Executive to consider a new design at the entrance to Blackhorse 
Grove as the current red brick structure has become rundown. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The red brick structure will be inspected and any hazardous defect will be rectified. 
Request for a new design should be referred to the concerned department. 
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR SEAMUS MCGRATTAN 
         To ask the Chief Executive to arrange to have the following works carried out in Violet 
Hill Estate. 

 • repair damaged footpaths  
 • prune trees 
 • repair damaged decorative wall at the green area 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Violet Hill Estate footpaths were reconstructed a few years ago and most of the 
footpath are still in very good condition. However, an enquiry (ref. 11182336) has been 
created and passed on to the Area Inspector who will inspect this and arrange any 
necessary repairs.  
 
Biodiversity and Landscape services have included the following trees for pruning 
works in the 2025 /2026 program.  Refer to table below for details of trees, some of 
which are in the Green area on Violet Hill Drive. Repair to damaged footpaths and 
walls are not within parks remit.  
 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR DANNY BYRNE 
To ask the Manager to outline the social housing application position of details 
supplied who is currently in a precarious living position. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on Band 3 of the Housing List, with an application date of 
2/12/2022, and holds the following positions on the list; 
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
H 
2 
119 
L 
2 
110 
M 
2 
108 
 
 
It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 
number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list.  
 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household. If a number of applicants apply for the same property on a Choice 
Based Lettings competition, the final offer will be made to the applicant with the highest 
position on list. 
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR DANNY BYRNE 
With the Tenant-In-Situ Scheme already paused this year due to funding exhaustion, 
what concrete actions is the council taking—and by when—to secure additional 
resources or restore the scheme before more families fall into homelessness? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As per Departmental Circular issued earlier this year DCC was allocated €95 million to 
cover the following categories; Tenant in Situ (TiS), Vacant property purchases for 
households exiting from homeless services, disability and older persons requiring 
urgent housing, Buy and Renew (B&R) acquisitions, Approved Housing Bodies (AHBs) 
acquisitions plus associated refurbishment works to these acquisitions. To date in 
2025 Dublin City Council has acquired 56 properties with tenants in situ and 32 

properties for exits from homelessness and 2 properties for households with a 
Disability. 
 
Dublin City Council is currently working through this Capital Allowance (95M) and 
based on acquisitions in progress and refurbishment commitments we are not currently 
proceeding with new tenant in situ acquisitions at this time, Dublin City Council has 
received 126 tenants in situ enquiries since January 2025.  
 
Dublin City Council has recently received correspondence from the Department of 
Housing on the 2025 Second-Hand Social Housing Acquisitions Programme, advising 
that there maybe  a further allocation of Capital directed to this scheme for 2025.  
    
Dublin City Councils Housing Department is currently assessing where any additional 
funding allocation will be directed to have the greatest impact on those on our waiting 
lists and those households currently residing in homeless accommodation.  
 
Q.70  COUNCILLOR DANNY BYRNE 
According to CSO data, planning permissions issued by Dublin City Council dropped 
by over 50% in 2024 compared to the previous year, severely straining the housing 
supply. What is the council doing to streamline approvals and remove procedural 
roadblocks to accelerate housing delivery? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Central Statistics Office (CSO) reported a 55.7% decline in apartment planning 
permissions across all four Dublin local authorities combined—not specifically for 
Dublin City Council (DCC). The CSO does not publish granular data for individual -
councils. 
 
DCC assesses and determines planning applications that it receives in accordance 
with the legislation and the City Development Plan. DCC has no control over the type, 
number or timing of applications submitted. The pace of housing delivery is shaped by 
many factors including national government policy, market conditions, landowner 
decisions, and developer readiness. 
 
The Q1 2025 “4Dublin Housing Supply Pipeline Monitor” shows that more homes are 
now being built, especially on sites that already have planning permission. This reflects 
improved market conditions, with developers increasingly activating sites and 
progressing construction. 
In the DCC area, there are currently 14,701 residential units with planning permission 
that have yet to commence construction. Of these, 13,108 units are located on 113 
inactive sites, meaning no development activity has started. These uncommenced 
units represent 56.7% of the total 25,905 units with planning permission in the DCC 
administrative area. 
 
Across the wider Dublin Region, which includes all four local authorities (Dublin City, 
Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown, Fingal, and South Dublin), there are 44,529 uncommenced 
units, with 37,186 units located on 279 inactive sites. This marks a 23.4% year-on-year 
decrease from Q1 2024, when the region had 58,108 uncommenced units, indicating 
a positive trend in site activation and housing delivery. 
 
As of Q1 2025, over 11,200 units are either built or under construction in the DCC 
administrative area—representing a 51% year-on-year increase. This reflects a 
concerted effort to activate previously permitted sites and expedite delivery. 
 

DCC continues to facilitate delivery through the Large Residential Development (LRD) 
and Strategic Housing Development (SHD) processes. Over 15,000 units are currently 
permitted under these fast-track mechanisms, with 7,875 units already commenced. 
 
DCC actively engages with developers to resolve delays, including those caused by 
Judicial Reviews, which currently accounts for only 5.3% of uncommenced residential 
units.  
 
Through the “4Dublin Housing Supply Pipeline Monitor”, DCC is using data to find 
inactive sites, track expiry timelines, and identify developments with the highest 
delivery potential. 
 
DCC is proactively monitoring the supply and delivery of housing units. DCC remains 
committed to collaborating with all stakeholders to meet the urgent housing needs of 
Dublin City. 
 
Q.71  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
            Can the Chief Executive issue a full report regarding how much money DCC has made 
by financial contribution and subsidy to private swimming pools and all other private 
sports/fitness facilities in the past 5 years? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A number of Sports Facilities which are not owned or directly managed by Dublin City 
Council receive contributions from Sports Section towards the running of costs of 
programmes and/or services which are available to the public.  For example, these 
would include open public swims or swimming lessons to children or provide 
opportunities for people to take part in physical activity.  
 
I have attached a spreadsheet stating any financial contributions paid to date for the 
last 5 years. It must be noted, although some of these payments have occurred 
annually, some are subject to the terms & conditions set out in MOU’s, while other 
facilities submit a request annually. Those who submit a request for a financial 
contribution are not guaranteed this payment for subsequent requests.   
 
Please see attached spreadsheet with information on contributions paid to privately 
owned sports facilities. 
 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
           Can the Chief Executive issue a full progress report regarding the motion that was 
passed at the South-Central Area committee regarding taking charge of Tailors Hall.  
This report also includes the issues around unlawful planning and the issues of 
unlawful use of the premises as a public house.  It is imperative that Dublin City Council 
take this premises into their own charge and use it as a much-needed community 
activity Centre for the entire community of Nicholas Street, Bride Street, Ross Road 
and those in the Meath Street area. It is simply outrageous that such a substantial 
property with many possibilities for community and arts activity would be still in the 
hands of An Taisce who use it as an office. They could be facilitated in many other 
spaces, and I would respectfully ask that DCC execute the wishes that were contained 
in the successful motion that was before the South-Central Area committee. We serve 
our citizens first before any entity. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Planning Enforcement Section have no current outstanding issues in respect of 
the premises concerned. 
 

In 1968, Dublin Corporation, in line with the relevant legislation, entered into a lease 
for a term of 99 years with An Taisce, the current Lessee, for the premises known as 
Tailors Hall, Back Lane, Dublin 8. The residual term of the Lease is 43 years.  The 
Property Management Section is awaiting advice from Senior Counsel with full regard 
to the tenancy rights of the Lessee. 
In the interim, consent was sought by An Taisce, as the head lessee, to allow for a 
planning application to be made by the sub-lessee, for a restaurant on the lower ground 
floor.  Previous approved uses in relation to the lower ground floor are for dancing at 
private events and for small theatrical events and concerts. The lease allows for use 
of the space as a café/restaurant and consent for permission to apply for planning was 
not unreasonably withheld. 
 
Q.73  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
Can the CHIEF EXECUTIVE, as a matter of urgency, address the issue of the 
deplorable state of the footpaths outside of the Harcourt Hotel and the Iveagh Hotel at 
Harcourt Street.  There have been many trips and falls here, from elderly people to 
guests at the hotel.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer will carry out a site investigation at the location. Any damaged or 
broken paving slabs will be scheduled for repairs once a work crew are available. This 
service request has been logged under Enq. No. 11182361 
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
            Can the Chief Executive to issue a full report regarding the nighttime service van that 
has been deployed around the city Centre to assist nighttime revelers.  This report 
includes a full breakdown of costs. A full breakdown of staff and their expertise and a 
full breakdown of all users who have used this facility. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In response to the question raised by Councillor Mannix Flynn regarding the night-
time service van, the official title of the initiative is the Dublin Nights Help Zone 
(publicly known as the “Nee Naw”). 
The pilot operated across a number of weekends during summer 2025. It was 
delivered through a contracted operator, supported by the Department of Justice, as 
part of Dublin City Council’s work on the Night-Time Economy. 
Costs 
• 
Operational costs were just under €40,000. 
• 
Additional set-up and marketing costs were incurred at the time of the initial launch. 
Staffing 
• 
Over 70% of operational costs related to staffing. 
• 
Each night an average of six staff were on duty: an overall manager, one or two 
medics, a welfare officer, and two trained PSA-licensed security staff. 
• 
A project manager coordinated operations during the week. 
• 
Staff backgrounds included welfare support, crowd management, and first aid.  
Users 

• 
Across the 14-night pilot, just over 400 people engaged with the service. 
• 
In line with Data Protection requirements, only aggregate figures can be provided. 
• 
Engagements ranged from: 
o 
Medical interventions 
o 
Welfare support 
o 
General assistance (e.g. directions, lost items, provision of flip flops, water, condoms 
etc) 
o 
Public engagement and reassurance 
o 
Support to Gardaí and other emergency services 
Feedback from An Garda Síochána, businesses, and the public has been positive. 
The visible presence of the Help Zone van has contributed to perceptions of safety in 
the city centre at night. 
It is the intention of the Night-Time Advisor to recommence the service shortly, details 
will follow. The next phase will be of a similar length to the Summer run. This next 
phase can be supported by existing Department of Justice funding. Any continuation 
beyond that will require additional contributions from stakeholders such as 
Government Departments, HSE and business representatives, in line with the 
recommendations of the National Night-Time Economy Taskforce. 
 
Endorsements from stakeholders 
• 
“The Help Van has been a valuable addition to Dublin’s night-time safety measures. 
The operators provided assistance in a number of incidents alongside Gardaí and 
offered support to vulnerable individuals late at night. It is a visible, practical resource 
that helps create a safer environment for all who come into the city.” 
Assistant Commissioner Paul Cleary, Dublin Metropolitan Region 
• 
“The Dublin Nights Help Zone has been a fantastic initiative, providing care and 
reassurance to people enjoying the city at night. It’s a welcome addition that benefits 
the wider community and supports the positive experience Dublin nightlife is known 
for.” 
The Mercantile Group (Whelan’s, Café En Seine, The George, Opium, etc.) 
• 
“The Help Zone (the Nee Naw) has been a very useful support to Gardaí in the city 
centre. On several occasions during the pilot, the team assisted us directly with 
incidents, providing reassurance and practical help on the street. Initiatives like this 
make a positive contribution to public safety at night.” 
Chief Superintendent Anthony M. O’Donnell, South Central Division (Kevin 
Street Garda Station) 
• 
“The Help Van has been a great support on weekend nights and a tremendous 
source of comfort. Knowing that it is there to help people that need it, and avoiding 
the frustration of waiting for an ambulance to deal with someone in difficulty, not 
knowing how bad they are hurt… It is real evidence that the City Fathers care for all 
its citizens, even those out late at night and in the early hours of the morning. Please 

keep up the good work. Long may it last.” 
Paul Clinton, Owner, Flannery’s Late Night Bar, Camden Street 
Q.75  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
            To ask the Chief Executive is there any plans to deal with the football clubs parking on 
Ellenfield road and Glencorp road. The residents have complained numerous times as 
people are parking illegally and blocking the footpath. Would it be possible to come up 
with a solution to stop this. When people are being confronted, they become verbally 
aggressive towards residents.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement will request that Dublin Street Parking Services patrol the area 
and enforce all illegal parking when encountered. The Roads Engineers for this area 
may be able to provide a solution to prevent this illegal parking. They can be contacted 
at traffic@dublincity.ie. 
 
Q.76  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive how much has been allocated for the housing adaption 
grant this year and how much of the fund is remaining?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Housing Adaptation Grants for Older People and People with a Disability Section 
administers three Housing Grants Schemes designed to provide assistance to people 
making adaptations to their privately owned homes to meet their medical needs and to 
older people in inadequate housing conditions carrying out essential repairs to their 
owner-occupied homes. These measures enable people to stay in their own 
communities and prevent or delay their placement in residential care thereby reducing 
social segregation, assisting their carer’s and strengthening families.   
 
The three Housing Grants are as follows: - 
 
1) Housing Adaptation Scheme. 
2) Mobility Aids Scheme. 
3) Housing Aid for Older People. 
 
The total amount of funding allocated to Dublin City Council for the provision of the 
Housing Adaptation Grants for Older People and People with a Disability for 2025 was 
€11,808,246.00.   
 
This was made up of €10,037,009.00 (85%) from the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage and €1,771,237.00 (15%) from Dublin City Council’s own 
resources. 
 
To date €6,415,788.31 is spent on the Housing Adaptation Grants for Older People 
and People with a Disability for 2025 (private houses). 
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive if a list could be sent of all houses purchased by DCC over 
the last 12 months in the Dublin North-West area? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Over the past twelve months, Dublin City Council (DCC) has successfully acquired 60 
residential properties within the Northwest Area as part of its social housing 
acquisitions programme. These properties are being utilised to provide secure 
accommodation for households from our social housing waiting lists, including those 

at risk of homelessness. In line with tenant privacy requirements, Dublin City Council 
does not publicly disclose the full addresses of acquired properties. (Details attached) 
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive the exact number of people who applied for ESG in the last 
12 months in the Dublin.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There was a total of 1005 ESG applications from 26th Aug 2024 to 26th Aug 2025. 
This includes appeals. 
 
 
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive - Can a full and accurate breakdown be provided of how 
the Local Property Tax (LPT) will be spent, and will he ensure that a clear quarterly 
report on LPT spending and timelines is presented and published for each Local 
Electoral Area - so that residents can clearly see where funds are being allocated and 
both councillors and city management can be held to accountable. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
LPT revenue received by Dublin City Council is not location specific and so it is not 
possible to provide evidence of funding per Local Electoral Area. At the LPT meeting 
on Friday 18th July the Council passed a resolution to maintain the LPT at the basic 
rate for the years 2026 to 2029. This gives the Dublin City Council an additional €16.4m 
per annum. It was agreed that this funding be expended on the following services in 
2026: 
 
Q.80  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive - Could the area from Ossory Road to Strandville Avenue 
be power washed, cleaned, and thoroughly cleansed as a matter of urgency - The 
paths are in a poor condition following the recent concerts in Croke Park and require 
immediate attention.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services will have the above mentioned area power washed and 
cleaned by the middle of September 2025. 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive to engage with the Parks Department to implement 
additional greenery and/or a small pocket park at the side of Bruno’s Newsagent, at 
the junction of Oxmantown Road and Cowper Street, Stoneybatter, Dublin 7, to help 

deter the high levels of illegal dumping occurring on a daily basis. Will he also liaise 
with Waste Management to ensure this location is considered for the implementation 
of CCTV, in order to further address and prevent ongoing dumping. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks, Biodiversity & Landscape Services are currently focused on implementing 
greening projects within Stoneybatter which were already identified as part of the 
Stoneybatter Greening Strategy. This list of extensive and will be implemented over 
the next few years, however, we will add Cowper Street (Outside Brunos) as a potential 
project to our future project list. 
  
The process of any greening intervention on  street involves consultation with local 
residents and investigation of existing services/utility surveys to ascertain feasibility of 
incorporating tree pits/ planted areas on the road, developing detailed drawings and 
specifications for tendering and appointing of a contractor in due course, which can 
take at least a year, assuming all stages run smoothly.   
 
The request to deploy CCTV cameras for the purposes of Prevention, Detection and 
Prosecution of litter offences should be submitted to the Area Office in the first 
instance. The Area Office having knowledge of their area will consider the purpose and 
rationale of the request in accordance with the Code of Practice for the Operation of 
CCTV for the purposes of Prevention, Detection and Prosecution of Litter Offences. 
 
When the Area Office is satisfied that the request to deploy CCTV cameras is 
necessary and proportionate, the request will be forwarded to the CCTV Project Team, 
Litter Management Office, Waste Management Services. 
 
Q.82  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive if he would prioritise urgent plans for a safe pedestrian 
crossing and improved road safety measures on East Road, East Wall, Dublin 3, to 
provide a safe route for residents of Island Key, Teeling Way, the local school, and 
those accessing local shops and businesses along the east side of the carriageway. 
Given the high volume of traffic and hazardous conditions currently faced by 
pedestrians and all road users - including schoolchildren and elderly people with 
mobility issues, most of whom live on the other side of East Wall - and with major works 
under the Active Travel Network still some way off, immediate interventions are needed 
to ensure safety. Could I suggest a crossing close to the local shops, as this area is 
frequently used by both local schoolchildren and elderly residents. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref:7047651) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration. The 
Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport Advisory 
Group.  
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
            To ask the Chief Executive his plans for additional public bins at Kildonan Park 
following the opening of the new playground and skatepark. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks, Biodiversity & Landscape Services are currently assessing the installation of 
additional waste bins at the entrance to Kildonan Park.  We will revert with a response 
once this review has been completed. 
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 

To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the financial contribution scheme  
a) the status of the scheme 
b) the number of people broken down per area on the list for the same scheme  
c) the number of house purchases through the financial contribution scheme for the 
years 2022,2023,2024 and 2025 to date 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
A) Status of the Scheme  
Under the new Dept of Housing Acquisition guidelines 2025, DCC cannot operate the 
financial contribution scheme which DCC would have used previously to facilitate 
downsizing into older persons accommodation for homeowners. Acquisition of 
second-hand properties are only allowable for the following categories;  
➢ Homeless Prevention; 
➢ Exits from homeless services; 
➢ People with a disability and older persons requiring urgent housing 
responses; and 
➢ Buy and Renew (B&R) acquisitions which tackle vacancy 
 
B) the number of people broken down per area on the list for the same scheme 
C)  
FCS by Area 
Area Of Choice 
Total Apps 
Area B 
48 
Area D 
12 
Area E 
130 
Area H 
17 
Area J 
21 
Area K 
40 
Area L 
17 
Area M 
13 
Area N 
20 
Area P 
7 
Grand Total 
325 
 
C) the number of house purchases through the financial contribution scheme 
for the years 2022,2023,2024 and 2025 to date 
 
Acquisitions under the Financial Contribution Scheme by year -  
2022 – 0 
2023 – 5 
2024 – 1 
2025 – 6 
 
Q.85  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
            To ask the Chief Executive to confirm that (details supplied) is a pruning list for the 
year. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The trees on the green at the side and to the front of number (details supplied) are 
on the tree pruning works program for 2025/26. Refer to table attached for details.  

 
Q.86  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
            To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the repair of the badly damaged footpath at 
(details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The footpath at (details supplied) will be inspected. This defect and any others in 
the vicinity, deemed to require repair, will be added to our Works List. Enq. Ref. 
11182363 
 
 
 
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the GAA posts to be replaced in Tolka Valley 
Park and for contact to be made with details supplied in relation to the potential use 
of temporary lights for winter training. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks, Biodiversity & Landscape Services will investigate the feasibility of replacing 
the GAA posts at Tolka Valley Park and the potential use of temporary lights for winter 
training and will revert back. 
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief executive if the overgrown weeds at the empty creche adjacent to 
details supplied can be cut back and any information on the empty unit to be provided. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The property, formerly the creche at (details supplied) is now vacant and a 
maintenance contractor has been assigned. We have asked for the overgrown weeds 
to be removed as a priority. I will follow up on this. 
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can please ask the Park’s Department, when will New 
Playground at  (Details Supplied)   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
While initial discussions were held with regard to the provision of a new playground to 
serve Donaghmede, no agreement as to a preferred location was reached and further 
discussion is required.  It remains the position of the Parks Service that if such a facility 
is to be provided it should ideally be located in the centre of Donaghmede accessible 
to the majority of the population rather than at the periphery as suggested above. 
 
Q.90  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON 
            To ask the Chief Executive if he can please ask the Water Section if would supply 
Water Station’s (Details Supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC has no role in Water Services which is the responsibility of Uisce Eireann.  
However, Uisce Eireann do not install public water stations and generally it’s the Local 
Authority who install and maintain these units. 
 
I’d suggest that the Councillor liaise with the Area Office, if it is agreed that the above 
are suitable location for drinking water fountains the unit would need to be procured, 
installed and an application made to Uisce Eireann for a water connection. 

 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can please ask Road Maintenance Services for a 
wayleave (Details Supplied)   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Applications for T2 permits are made through the Maproad Licensing system, at 
maproadroadworkslicensing.ie/MRL/. The contractor hired to carry out the works 
would be expected to make the application. The Confirm reference number for this 
inquiry is 11182368. 
 
Q.92  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can please ask the Traffic Department to enhance 
child safety precautions at both, St Francis of Assisi PS, Balgriffin, Dublin 13 and St 
Malachy’s, Boys and Girls NS, Edenmore, Dublin 5. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
With regards to St. Francis of Assisi PS in Balgriffin, the area is not in DCC charge so 
we cannot take any actions. In this instance, Cllr Barron should contact the developer 
for any intervention requests.  
 
Regarding schools in the DCC area, the Sustainable Mobility team is currently   working 
through Round 3 applicants to the NTA’s Safe Routes to School initiative and does not 
currently have the resources to work outside of that list. DCC is currently unaware 
whether or not the NTA will re-open the SRTS process when Round 3 has ended. 
 
Q.93  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
Can the Chief Executive please refer to my constituent as per details supplied, whose 
completed application for the Housing Aid for Older Persons Grant went missing and 
say if he can now agree to award the grant for the amount specified at details attached, 
on foot of his second completed and submitted application form. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
I wish to confirm that the above named received the Application Form for the Housing 
Adaptation Grants for Older People and People with a Disability Scheme, and I wish 
to confirm that I have received the returned completed Application Form. 
 
The above named was missing some documentation and I wish to confirm that I have 
contacted the above named in relation to this item. 
 
Following the assessment of the above named Application Form, the Home Grants 
Inspector will carry out the inspection of the adaptation works and the above named 
will receive the correct Grant in accordance with the yearly household income and the 
findings of the Home Grants Inspector. 
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
            Can the Chief Executive arrange to reinstate road markings as there is big problems 
with cars coming down the road the wrong way; it is a one-way street coming in from 
the main Drumcondra Road. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The traffic Officer has been up to inspect Church Avenue and will have road markings 
refreshed within the next two weeks. 
 
Q.95  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 

            To ask the Chief Executive for a statement on the possibility of a Continuous footpaths 
on Collins avenue East. This stretch of road has three schools, an elderly population 
and wheelchair users; the crossing points are not fit for purpose and continuous 
footpaths have been implemented as best practice by DCC before.   
There's an opportunity to improve safety at the junctions of Collins Avenue East. A 
continuous footpath across the crossing points would greatly improve safety for all road 
users and help with calming the speed of traffic leaving the avenue into the 
Donnycarney Clans neighborhood. 
• 
Clanree Road,  
• 
Clanawley Road 
• 
Clanhugh Road  
• 
Clancarthy Road 
• 
Killester avenue  
• 
Potentially at the Clanmoyle rRoad entrance and at the new Easra Court 
entry/exit. 
This would help ensure pedestrian priority, protect vulnerable road users and reduce 
the levels of speed on residential side roads. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following an investigation of the issues involved a response will issue to the Councillor 
within two weeks of the City Council meeting.  
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
Can the Chief Executive please permanently secure a very noisy temporary metal 
covering placed over manhole at details Supplied as the constant noise from it every 
time a vehicle drives over it, is causing serious distress to local vulnerable residents. 
The last time this matter occurred it took me over 8 months to get the City Council to 
secure the manhole cover. Can you please arrange to the cover secured without 
further delay. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The cover belongs to Lumen Technologies, a telecommunications company with 
infrastructure in Dublin City. Their networks have not been upgraded in recent years, 
and no contact details are available in the national Roadworks system (RML). 
 
Road Maintenance Services placed a temporary steel plate over the cover earlier this 
year. Due to traffic impact, it had shifted but was reset and made safe during the week 
commencing 18th August 2025 
. 
In the absence of contact details of the manhole owner, Dublin City Council issued 
a Section 70 Notice under the Roads Act 1993 to all utilities and asset owners on 26th 
August 2025. If no response is received, Road Maintenance Services will proceed 
to permanently remove the defective manhole chamber. 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive how much does the council spend on housing management 
fees to management companies for the years 2020 thought to and including 2025 and 
how long are leasing arrangements for each company? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The total amount spent on Housing Management Fees to Management Companies 
from 2020 to date is as follows: 
 
Year 
Amount 

2020 
2,749,222.29 
2021 
3,311,632.56 
2022 
3,966,405.24 
2023 
4,735,078.04 
2024 
6,218,769.01 
2025 to 21/08/2025 
3,395,200.52 
Total 
€24,376,307.66 
 
The above management fees are paid on Council owned properties only. There are 
no leasing arrangements with management companies.  
 
Q.98  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask Chief Executive how many H/HAP tenants had to leave their private rented 
properties for the years 2020 through to and including 2025 due to H/HAP ceasing to 
be paid because of a prohibition notice being served to property owner? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Tenancies 
closed due 
to 
Prohibition 
Notice 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 so 
far 
Mainstream 
4 
7 
3 
5 
7 
5 
Homeless 
10 
14 
13 
16 
22 
13 
 
Dublin City Council manages the mainstream HAP applications for tenants on the DCC 
social housing waiting list. The Dublin Regional Housing Executive manages 
Homeless HAP Applications on behalf of the four Dublin Local Authorities. 
 
The responsibility for inspecting rental properties is that of the Environmental Health 
Section of the Local Authority in whose administrative area the property is located. 
Mainstream and Homeless HAP applicants can search for a property, subject to 
income limits, in any county in Ireland. 
 
There were 31 mainstream HAP tenancies closed from 1st January 2020 to date due 
to the serving of Prohibition Notices. In the same period there were 88 Homeless HAP 
tenancies ceased  
 
Prohibition Notices are served after the landlord/agent has not carried out the required 
works to bring the property up to the legal standard and appeal periods have passed.  
 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many applications of interest were received by DCC 
for the TIS scheme for each month since January 2025 and how many have been 
successfully processed, can the manager also confirm if there has been any contact 
with the Department of Housing or directly with the Minister of Housing about the future 
of the scheme and future funding for acquisitions? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As per Departmental Circular issued earlier this year DCC was allocated €95 million to 
cover the following categories; Tenant in Situ (TiS), Vacant property purchases for 
households exiting from homeless services, disability and older persons requiring 
urgent housing, Buy and Renew (B&R) acquisitions, Approved Housing Bodies (AHBs) 

acquisitions plus associated refurbishment works to these acquisitions. To date in 
2025 Dublin City Council has acquired 56 properties with tenants in situ and 32  
properties for exits from homelessness and 2 properties for households with a 
Disability. 
 
Dublin City Council is currently working through this Capital Allowance (95M) and 
based on acquisitions in progress and refurbishment commitments we are not currently 
proceeding with new tenant in situ acquisitions at this time, Dublin City Council has 
received 126 tenants in situ enquiries since January 2025.  
 
Dublin City Council has recently received correspondence from the Department of 
Housing on the 2025 Second-Hand Social Housing Acquisitions Programme, advising 
that there will be a further allocation of Capital directed to this scheme for 2025.     
Dublin City Councils Housing Department is currently assessing where any additional 
funding allocation will be directed to have the greatest impact on those on our waiting 
lists and those households currently residing in homeless accommodation. 
 
Q.100  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Dublin City Council planning department, to clarify why the private 
apartments at the junction of Old Nass Road and Kylemore Road D12 remain empty, 
how long have they been empty for, would DCC consider acquiring them for social 
housing and has there been any contact or discussions with the owners to ensure they 
can be occupied as soon as possible? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This apartment development, now known as Bluebell Mills, commenced construction 
in July of 2018.   
The following matters under the Building Control Act 1990 (as amended), the Building 
Regulations 1997 (as amended) and the Building Control Regulations 1997 (as 
amended) have arisen with regard to this development; 
 
• 
Enforcement Notices 
Two Enforcement Notices under Section 8 of the Building Control Act, 1990 (as 
amended), have been served by the Building Control Authority on the owners of this 
development for failing to comply with the requirements of the Building Regulations. 
Building Control Enforcement Notice, served August 2019, has not yet been 
satisfactorily complied with. 
Building Control Enforcement Notice, served October 2020, was appealed to the 
District Court by the developers.  A hearing on this appeal is scheduled to be heard in 
the District Court from September 15th, 2025. 
 
• 
Disability Access Certificate 
The building is not constructed in accordance with the requirements of the granted 
Disability Access Certificate.  
 
A recent Revised Disability Access application, refused by Dublin City Council on the 
27/06/2025, is currently under appeal to An Coimisiún Pleanála. 
 
In line with Article 20F of the Building Control Regulations 1997 (as amended), a 
Certificate of Compliance on Completion must be submitted to Dublin City Council and 
recorded on the Building Control Register before any building covered by this 
requirement can be legally opened, occupied, or used. 
 
At present, the Enforcement Notices referenced have not yet been satisfactorily 
concluded, with one pending an appeal hearing in the District Court.   

In addition, the Disability Access Certificate (DAC) and/or Revised DAC applications 
remain unresolved, including waiting for the outcome of the appeal process currently 
being considered by An Coimisiún Pleanála.   
 
As a result of these impediments, the Building Control Authority is not permitted by the 
Building Control Regulations to register a Certificate of Compliance on Completion. 
Accordingly, the building must not be opened, occupied, or used until these matters 
are satisfactorily concluded and the certificate is properly registered. 
 
There is a Part V obligation here, however negotiations cannot progress until such time 
as legal matters are resolved. 
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
           Could the Chief Executive provide a detailed account of the actions undertaken over 
the past 12 months to identify and pursue ownership of unused zoned land within the 
city, especially where the council is engaging vacant site leavy fee ? Additionally, how 
many new sites have been identified during this period as potentially suitable for 
development or acquisition? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Residential Zoned Land Tax (RZLT) introduced in the Finance Act 2021 has 
replaced the Urban Regeneration and Housing Act 2015 which gave effect to the 
Vacant Site Levy. This new measure is designed to stimulate the activation of zoned 
and serviced residential development lands, including mixed-use lands, that have 
remained undeveloped.  
 
In accordance with the Finance Act, the final RZLT map for 2025 was published on 31st 
January 2025 and a draft map showing the lands in scope for the 2026 tax was 
published on the 1st February 2025.  This annual consultation asked landowners and 
the public to consider the draft map and final map and make submissions based on 
the following by 1st April 2025 
 
• 
Request to Include or Exclude land on the Annual Draft Map  
• 
Request for a variation of the zoning of lands identified on the Final Map 
 
A total of 50 submissions were received and were evaluated by Dublin City Council’s 
Planning Department to determine whether or not the site constituted land satisfying 
the relevant criteria or were eligible to apply for rezoning.  In accordance with the Act, 
Notice of Determinations issued to all site owners by 1st July 2025. 18 appeals against 
the Determinations were subsequently received by An Bord Pleanála in respect of the 
Determinations that issued. No appeals are decided. 
 
The RZLT Section has administered this transition, ensuring that the transition from 
the Vacant Site Levy has been managed in a manner that upholds both confidence 
and clarity. 
 
Q.102  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
           Can the Chief Executive confirm the number of applications submitted by Dublin City 
Council in 2025 to the Department of Housing for council-led self-build funding, and 
indicate how many of these applications have received approval to date? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council applies for social housing capital funding from the Department of 
Housing, Local Government and Heritage in accordance with its 4 Stage Approval 
Process.  

 
Below are the applications submitted between 1st January 2025 to date: 
Project 
Funding 
Application 
Date of 
Submission 
Date Approval 
Received 
Constitution Hill 
Phase 1, Dublin 7 
Stage 4 
22/01/2025 
17/04/2025 
St Annes Court, 
Dublin 5 
Stage 3 
06/02/2025 
01/05/2025 
 
St Andrews Court, 
Dublin 2 
Stage 3 
31/07/2025 
Awaiting 
response 
 
Cromcastle Court, 
Dublin 17 (enabling 
works) 
Stage 3 
20/06/2025 
Awaiting 
response 
 
Glover Court,  
Dublin 2 
Revised 
Stage 2 
13/06/2025 
16/07/2025 
 
Dolphin House 
Phase 2, Dublin 8 
Stage 1 
22/07/2025 
Awaiting 
response 
 
Donore / St. 
Teresa's Gardens, 
Dublin 8 
Stage 4 
23/01/2025 
28/05/2025 
 
Cherryorchard 
Point, Dublin 10 
Stage 3 
28/01/2025 
09/06/2025 
 
An Droichead Órga, 
Dublin 8 
Stage 4 
Sept. 2025 
Pending 
submission 
 
 
Q.103  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
Can the Chief Executive give an update on the Council’s engagement with off-site fast 
build/ 
factory 
build 
housing 
solutions 
that 
meet 
standard 
building 
regulations.  Specifically, could the Chief Executive outline the current status of 
discussions with the Department of Housing regarding the initiation of a tender process 
for council-led self-build projects in the city centre, as I am sure the Council is looking 
at every option to speed up delivery of housing builds delivery? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Councils Council’s engagement with off-site fast build / factory build 
housing solutions includes: 
• 
DCC have demonstrated a leadership role with Modern Methods of Construction 
(MMC) 
• 
We started with two storey modular housing in 2015 utilising factory-built components. 
• 
We set up the first Framework 
• 
We then progressed to higher density buildings up to 8 storeys. By necessity this 
introduces greater complexity including with structure and fire safety. The lessons 

learned on these projects have informed how DCC continues to evaluate which 
projects lend themselves to MMC, and all potential delivery options. 
• 
DCC are currently on site with Bartra and Sisk’s (contractor) delivering 1047 new 
homes. The six multistorey apartment blocks, ranging in height from 9 to 14 storeys 
are constructed using twin-wall precast wall and floor panels, fully finished and 
serviced bathroom pods and prefabricated clip-on balconies. The prefabrication allows 
the building to be quickly made weathertight. The project is ahead of programme. 
• 
DCC continually seek improvements in how our buildings are designed and 
constructed, for example DCC participated in workshops and practical site visits this 
June organised by Enterprise Ireland that demonstrated Lean Construction 
improvements in construction efficiency and hence improved delivery times. 
• 
On completion all projects comply with the Building Regulations. 
 
• 
The Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage (in conjunction with the 
Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment) has issued a “Roadmap for 
increased adoption of Modern Methods of Construction in Public Housing” The 
recommendations identified in the roadmap reflect the need for collective action across 
the public and private sectors. 
• 
More widespread adoption of Modern Methods of Construction (MMC), an umbrella 
term for a range of innovative construction processes, is a key pillar in increasing 
innovation adoption and achieving productivity gains in the delivery of housing. MMC 
represents a significant ongoing transformation in construction, incorporating 
increased levels of offsite manufacturing and assembly; new technologies, products 
and building systems; and increased digitalisation. Though factory-based offsite 
construction methods are not new, ongoing technological advances, the advent of 
digitalisation and the environmental sustainability imperative are promoting continued 
evolution of the construction sector to deliver quality housing. 
 
• 
DCC are in ongoing discussions with the Department of Housing (DHLGH) as to the 
optimum delivery route on each of our direct delivery sites including those in the city 
centre. 
• 
DCC are progressing work on new contractor frameworks which will allow flexibility in 
the selection of optimum delivery routes including by scale of project. 
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
            Could the Chief Executive provide figures on the total number of individuals who have 
been housed from the social housing waiting list in the year to date for 2025, and offer 
a comparative figure for the full calendar year of 2024? In relation to the same can the 
causes for variation be provided for context. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Lettings to 28/08/25 are 1,285 (subject to increase on additional notifications). Full year 
allocations 2024 was 2,836.  
 
The 2024 figures are comparatively higher, but this relates to the timing of when large, 
new developments come in for allocation.  
 
Q.105  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive, with the Beatty's Ave and Herbert Park Dodder Greenway 
almost completed, could we get the pathways and Roads around Dodder View 
Cottages resurfaced. Last resurfaced over 50 years ago. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Road Maintenance Services are liaising with our colleagues on the Active Travel Team 
to ensure that the defects on Beattys Ave are repaired as part of the scheme.  

I will arrange for an inspection of Dodder View Cottages. Any defects identified will be 
repaired and if deemed necessary the road will be added to a list of roads to be 
considered for resurfacing in 2026. 
 
Q.106  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he could examine traffic calming measures for Terenure 
Road West. 
  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A School Zone scheme outside Presentation Primary School, Terenure is currently 
progressing, with the support of the National Transport Authority, to improve safety for 
students and other vulnerable road users. The proposed measures are intended to 
reduce vehicle speeds, enhance pedestrian crossing facilities, and create a safer 
environment at the school entrance. 
 
The proposed measures include: 
 
• 
Enhanced road markings and signage to highlight the School Zone. 
• 
Installation of physical traffic calming features to reduce vehicle speeds. 
• 
Improvements to pedestrian crossing facilities to support safer access. 
 
The scheme is currently at the procurement stage. Following completion of 
procurement, the works are expected to be implemented in the coming months, subject 
to funding and scheduling. 
 
For 
more 
information 
please 
visit 
the 
following 
DCC 
webpage: 
https://engage.dublincity.ie/en-IE/projects/school-zone-works-presentation-primary-
school-terenure/2  
 
 
 
This road currently accommodates nine bus stops, multiple driveways, and 
approximately eleven side roads feeding onto it, as well as three signalised junctions, 
including one at Greenlea Road located roughly mid-way along the route. These 
features contribute to a calming effect on traffic on the road. 
 
A speed survey carried out on 09/05/2024 recorded that the 7-Day 85th percentile 
speed is within the legal speed limit for Terenure Road West. Therefore, further 
measures are not recommended at present. 
 
Q.107  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 

To ask the Chief Executive if he could consider getting trees pruned on Derryvaragh 
Road. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently no plans to prune the trees on Derryvaragh Road. The species is 
Carpinus Betulus which is a problematic street tree. The Parks Service has launched 
a trial project this year which aims to address the issues associated with Carpinus as 
a street tree through a programme of pollarding – a technique of regularly pruning in 
order to control the natural growth habit of a tree. If the results of the trial are positive, 
the trees on Derryvaragh Road will be nominated for future attention. 
 
Q.108  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide an update on the delivery of the 
Portobello Harbour Park, with clear dates and deadlines. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The main construction tender for Portobello Harbour Park has been issued. The return 
date for tenders is September 2025. Subject to a successful tender process and the 
returned tenders being within budget, the current  project commencement date on site 
is Q1 2026. 
Q.109  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive can he provide statistically evidence that street cleaning 
and litter has improved in the city centre with the increased investment in cleansing 
machinery and staff. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The introduction of additional resources along with improvements we have made in 
service delivery are all quite recent to be able to provide statistical evidence of 
improvements in cleanliness. However, recent comments from IBAL surveys have 
reported improvements in cleanliness of the city centre commercial area which is a 
positive validation of our actions. Also, we have not yet implemented all planned 
projects in our “strategy to deliver a cleaner city” but would expect appreciable 
improvements in cleanliness to be realised once all projects have been delivered. 
 
The evidence of the success of our strategy, will be based on a number of factors and 
sources, some of which will include: - 
 
a. The General Public Opinion of the cleanliness of the city 
b. Results of IBAL surveys and other independent littering surveys. 
c. DCC Inspector and grading surveys of resultant cleanliness standards on individual 
streets 
d. Measurement and effectiveness of service delivery through work validation 
applications 
e. Reduction of Littering and Illegal duping via tonnage of material collected, and 
monitoring frequency and quantities of litter in targeted areas. 
 
Q.110  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
 To ask the Chief Executive can he provide an explanation as to why the planning 
office keeps granting     planning permission for hotel and hostel accommodation in 
the city centre within 1km radius of existing hotel and hostel accommodation, without 
the applicant providing evidence as is requested in the City Development Plan. Can 
the CHIEF EXECUTIVE also let us know when we can expect the audit of hotel and 
hostel accommodation in thr city as committed in the City Development Plan.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Where it is considered appropriate in planning terms, Dublin City Council (DCC) 
Planning Department may grant planning permission for hotel and hostel development 
within the city. As part of the application process and in accordance with Section 15.14 
and Policy CEE28 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022–2028 (the Development 
Plan), applicants are required to submit an audit of existing hotel and hostel 
accommodation within a one-kilometre radius of the proposed site. This requirement 
is intended to ensure that new developments contribute positively to the city’s overall 
land use balance and do not result in an overconcentration of such uses. 
The Planning Authority has refused permissions where proposals were deemed to be 
in conflict with the City Development Plan, including the Housing Strategy and policy 
QHS N38, which promotes sustainable residential communities through diverse 
housing types and tenures.  
 
To avoid a hollowed-out city core, developers are encouraged to incorporate a range 
of uses within new schemes, including residential, in line with the principles of 
sustainable development and the policies of the Development Plan. Nonetheless, hotel 
and hostel accommodation is a permissible or open for consideration use under a 
number of city centre land use zonings, and in many cases such developments are 
considered in the interest of proper planning and sustainable development.  
 
Regarding the broader audit of hotel and hostel accommodation across the city, the 
Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028 includes a objective to carry out an analysis 
of the supply and demand for tourism related accommodation including hotels, 
aparthotels, hostels, Bed and Breakfast Accommodation and other short-term letting 
in the Dublin City area.  The Planning Department remains committed to this objective 
and is scoping out this study in conjunction with Fáilte Ireland, who are the relevant 
stakeholder for this information.  The Planning Department is actively working to 
progress this matter and intends to conduct the study once the necessary resources 
are in place.  
 
Q.111  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
            To ask the Chief Executive when can we expect a report on the recent public 
consultation on the pedestrianisation of College Green. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The report will be published on in early September on engage.ie: 
 
https://engage.dublincity.ie/en-IE/projects/college-green-dame-street-public-realm-
project 
 
Q.112  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
            Can the Chief Executive please outline the policy that disallows a tenant to have their 
home refurbished/retrofitted as a result of succeeding a tenancy? Why it is not possible 
for tenants who have succeeded a tenancy to have the home brought up to standard 
as a vacant one would be?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is no reference to maintenance in Section 10 of the current Scheme of Lettings 
Priorities that relate to succession. 
 
Housing Maintenance will liaise with the tenant regarding any outstanding repair 
requests / maintenance issues reported when the succession has been finalised and 
they become the tenant. 
 
Q.113  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 

            Can the Chief Executive please provide details on how many 3- and 4-bedroom homes 
will be built by 2030 in areas: M& L?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The below table is based on DCC’s owned projected build programme up to end of 
2029 and what information we have access to about AHBs projected housing delivery 
for the next 2 years. It should also be noted that not all of these schemes have planning 
and funding permissions in place yet and so these will be subject to change. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q.114  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
Can the Chief Executive please provide an update on the regeneration of Pearse 
House? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The regeneration of Pearse House Phase 1 is currently at feasibility stage.  In late 
2024, DCC applied to the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage for 
Stage 2 project and funding approval to proceed with our proposals for the 
regeneration of Blocks L, M, N and P. However, the Department of Housing in their 
response highlighted their concerns at the loss of 34 homes in the proposed Phase 1 
plans.  
 
Since receiving the response from the DHLGH, DCC instructed the Integrated Design 
Team to review their design strategy and to examine all options for delivering the 
project  while preserving the number of current flats (78). The team are also looking at 
the wider masterplan in terms of providing the same number of homes in a regenerated 
estate, through retrofit and new build measures. This work is currently ongoing, and 
the options are being reviewed in line with our City Development Plan and Planning 
and Building Regulations. Once we have an agreed way forward, consultation will 
begin as early as possible with Pearse House residents and local representatives, and 
a revised funding application will be to submitted to the DHLGH. 
 
Q.115  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
can the Chief Executive please provide an update on the plans for Elizabeth O Farrell 
Park?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks, Biodiversity & Landscape Services are currently working with our consultants 
to develop a phased approach to implementation of Elizabeth O Farrell Park. 
  
We are currently developing drawings based on the consultations of October 2023 with 
a view to holding a final round of consultation with residents in Q3 of 2025. The 
Area   
Project Name  
3 Bed  
4 Bed  
L 
Glover Court  
8 
 
L 
Oliver Bond House  
12 
 
L 
School Street 
18 
 
L 
Dolphin House 1B  
11 
 
L 
Basin View Project 
13 
4 
L 
Forbes Lane 
13 
 
L 
Donore Project 
44 
 
L 
An Droichead Órga 
46 
 
L 
Steelworks  
4 
 
M 
Pearse House  
6 
 
M 
St Andrews Court  
5 
 

proposed plans take due consideration of the health of trees and existing services in 
the park area which were surveyed. Following consultation, we will develop Phase I 
detailed drawings and specifications for tendering of paved areas with a view to 
appointing a contractor to complete the works in Q4 2025. 
  
Q.116  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
            To ask the Chief Executive for a detailed report on the Adapt national stock survey of 
social housing. Report should include: (i) what Adapt captures about properties, (ii) 
estimated timeline for rollout and completion of the survey, (iii) any area specific 
information related to the rollout across (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The LGMA in Partnership with the Department of Housing have rolled out a National 
Survey App called “ADDjust”. The idea is that each Local Authority will start carrying 
out Condition Surveys of our Housing Stock which will identify works required on the 
properties and this in turn will reduce the need for Void Refurbishment as each LA will 
already have carried out intermittent works on the property prior to it becoming void. 
 
(i) 
The survey is a comprehensive look at the property and takes around 2 hours 
to complete. It is a visual survey and looks at all facets of the property. The 
idea is to pick up on issues with the current Standards For Rented Houses.  
(ii) 
DCC has begun trialling the App and we have started carrying out surveys in 4 
locations at present, 2 on the North side and two on the South side of the city. 
The Department would like all surveys to be completed by 2030. At present we 
are at the very early stages of the surveys and once we become more familiar 
with the process it is hoped to ramp up the number of surveys. 
(iii) 
Of the two areas on the North side we have started in Cromcastle Court and 
Owensilla and Woodhazel. 
 
Q.117  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
            To ask the Assistant Chief Executive if he would consider installing defibrillators at all 
DCC older persons' accommodation and to report on what senior citizens' complexes 
currently have defibrillators. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance are not aware of any defibrillators currently in place and currently 
have no plans to install defibrillators in older persons' accommodation. However, this 
is a proposal that can be considered further by housing management as to how this 
proposal could work practically and be funded.  
 
Q.118  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
            To ask the Chief Executive to account for the denial of a special rate to people with 
disabilities who access the Sports and Leisure Centre in Ballymun. A previous question 
submitted to CGSAC SPC stated that a special rate is in place citywide and set at the 
same level as the senior citizen rate. This is not advertised for all DCC Sports and 
Leisure Centres and has been denied to people with disabilities at Ballymun sports 
and leisure centre. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
To respond accordingly to Cllr. Q 118 (Cllr. Conor Reddy) will need time to collate the 
required information. A response will issue to the Councillor within two weeks of the 
Council meeting. 
 
Q.119  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 

To ask the Chief Executive for an update on green infrastructure, planting in Dublin 
City and what increase in funding from LPT is available for more planting rainscapes 
and vertical greening in areas with a lack of greening.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks, Biodiversity and Landscape Services are implementing several Greening 
Strategies across the city, these include the Liberties Greening Strategy, NEIC 
Greening Strategy, Stoneybatter GS and Whitefriars GS. The parks team also provide 
technical support for other departments delivering greening infrastructure. Our 
greening strategies prioritize areas that have a deficit in green infrastructure. To date 
our strategies have delivered significant improvements including a 150% increase in 
public open space in the Liberties and a 50% increase in the quantity of trees in the 
NEIC. 
 
Q.120  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the contract for the clothes recycling 
tender and why there is a delay in implementing, as DCC are still cleaning up at the 
clothes banks daily.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The result of the recently held tender competition to establish a new framework for 
Collection and Processing of Textiles for Reuse and Recycling was challenged by an 
unsuccessful tenderer. Waste Management Services will not be able to conclude the 
competition and appoint a contractor until the challenge has been fully dealt with.  
 
Q.121  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if there are plans to employ more litter wardens to help 
reduce dumping offences in our city.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Since the 1st May 2025 we have taken on six new litter wardens which will help tackle 
the illegal dumping in the city. 
 
Q.122  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
Can the CHIEF EXECUTIVE please ensure that as Part of the proposed NTA Bus 
Connects proposals for the Liffey Valley Scheme that a proper Yellow Box be placed 
at the junction of Cleggen Park / Ballyfermot Road. It is horrific for people entering and 
existing the Drumfinn Area with the current Road markings. The Drumfinn Area housed 
the Garda Station, Local Area Partnership, Youth Reach 3 primary Schools a new adult 
learning training Centre, Sports Complex. and approx 1,000 housing units. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Thank you for your query. In relation to the retention of the yellow box at the junction 
of Cleggan Park and Ballyfermot Road, we have informed the NTA regarding your 
request and this will be considered in the Detailed Design meetings between DCC and 
the NTA. 
 
Q.123  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
That DCC parks Dept look at the possibility of providing disability access at the Caritas 
College / Californian Hills access point at the end of Drumfinn Road / Rossmore Road 
Ballyfermot Dublin 10. The new Adult Learning Network Centre will open on the 18th 
of September here housing up to 250 students some of which have mobility issues. 
The Park is a wonderful asset and could be well used if they have close access. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Parks Services are looking at ways of improving access for all to California Hills while 
also preventing access by scrambler bikes which are still a problem at this location. 
The councillor will be kept informed of any developments. 
 
Q.124  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
Can DCC please look at getting the builder who is developing the old De La Salle Site 
on Ballyfermot Road / Stoneboat Park to ensure that as some sort of community gain 
that a portion of the remaining school building left is made available for the 
development of a Gaelscoil for the Ballyfermot, Cherry Orchard, Drimnagh Area, I 
regret to date no visible community gain for the local community have being made. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Planning permission for the redevelopment of the former De La Salle site was granted 
by An Coimisiún Pleanála in November 2022 (Ref: 313320-22), with construction 
currently underway. The permission remains valid until 2027. 
 
As part of the approved scheme, the existing school building was permitted for a 
change of use to accommodate childcare facilities (1,005 sq.m across ground and first 
floors) and a dedicated community space (92 sq.m on the ground floor).  
In addition, a 0.5-hectare site has been set aside within the development to support 
potential future educational use. The delivery of a Gaelscoil or any other specific 
educational facility on this site would be subject to engagement with the Department 
of Education, relevant stakeholders, and the submission of a separate planning 
application. 
 
Separately, the approved childcare and community spaces within the retained school 
building contribute positively to the provision of local social infrastructure. 
 
Q.125  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
That a heritage plan be drawn up for the Lawns Park Blackditch Road Ballyfermot 
Dublin 10 to include visible displays to indicate to Park users and visitors the historical 
significance of this Parks location i.e. graveyard, castle, church et,. I am asking about 
these promised works for over 15 years and was told things would be done. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services intend carrying out survey work in the corner of Le Fanu Park to 
establish the extent of the former settlement at this location. This project is expected 
to progress over the coming months. The councillor will be updated in due course. 
 
Q.126  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
Could we please have a detailed report on the rollout of school zoning in the Dublin 
City Council area, including: the total number of primary and secondary schools in the 
DCC area; how many schools have completed school zoning; how many are currently 
in progress; how many have applied but are still waiting; and how many schools have 
not engaged in the process. 
 
Can the Manager also outline the anticipated timeline for completion of all schools in 
the Dublin City Council area. 
 
Finally, can the Manager clarify how schools are chosen for the scheme and what 
criteria are used in determining priority? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Safe Routes to School Programme is a National Transport Authority programme 
that all schools in the country were invited to apply for directly. Dublin City Council 

receives funding from the NTA each year to progress School Zones at schools 
throughout the city and is allocated a list of schools to work with from the list of SRTS 
applicant schools. At the moment the team is only resourced to work with schools on 
the Safe Routes to School programme.  
 
Schools are selected to take part in the programme based on the following criteria: 
 
▪ 
Mix of school type – primary, post-primary, other; 
▪ 
Mix of location – urban (village, town, city), suburban, rural; 
▪ 
Socio-economic mix – non-DEIS, DEIS schools; 
▪ 
School’s commitment to sustainable travel – (a) the school is interested in 
promoting walking and cycling to school or b) has already demonstrated a 
commitment to walking, cycling and other active modes by running initiatives 
such as: Walk on Wednesday, Scoot on Wednesday, Cycle on Wednesday, 
Cycle Bus, Park ‘n’ Stride etc.; and 
▪ 
Cluster of schools – if schools are located on the same campus or 
street/section of road. 
 
Before the Safe Routes to School programme was rolled out, DCC had a separate 
NTA-funded School Zone programme which received applications from approximately 
100 schools (including some overlap with schools that applied to the NTA for the Safe 
Routes to School programme). As our funding is tied to the SRTS programme many 
of these applicant schools are currently on a waiting list. We hope to be in a position 
to progress works with these schools in the future, subject to the availability of future 
resources.   
 
Applications for both Safe Routes to School programme and School Zone programme 
are now closed, however we have received a number of expressions of interest from 
schools interested in taking part in these programmes and they are included on our 
waiting list. In total 201 schools have applied for a School Zone, for the Safe Routes 
to School Programme or have sent in an expression of interest in the programme. DCC 
has installed 88 School Zones at schools throughout the country so far.  
 
We are currently working with 11 schools on the Safe Routes to School programme to 
design and deliver School Zones for their school communities. We hope that 
installations for these School Zones will begin in Q4 2025. When these installations 
are complete, we will have completed Round 3 of the Safe Routes to School 
programme. It has not yet been announced if there will be a Round 4 of this 
programme.  
 
Q.127  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
Can the Manager provide details on the number of traffic wardens currently employed 
across schools in the Dublin City Council area, including: what percentage of schools 
have a traffic warden allocated; how many schools are operating without any support 
from traffic wardens; and how many schools have applied for, but been refused, the 
allocation of a traffic warden? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
School wardens are provided to assist unaccompanied children crossing the road on 
their way to and from school. Their role is distinct from that of traffic wardens: school 
wardens do not manage general traffic but are authorised only to stop vehicles in order 
to allow children to cross safely 
 
As of August 2025, Dublin City Council employs 233 school wardens across its five 
electoral areas. The service currently supports 136 schools. Since January 2022, the 

council has received 26 requests for additional wardens that were not recommended. 
These requests were declined as they did not meet the established criteria. For 
example, where children are accompanied by a parent or guardian, or where the 
numbers of children walking to school was too low. 
 
Q.128  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask Chief Executive to prepare a detailed report and provide a full list of all buildings 
currently being rented or leased by Dublin City Council from any landlord or owner, 
including private landlords, developers, investment funds/REITs, Approved Housing 
Bodies, hotels/hostels, religious orders, charitable organisations, or commercial 
property owners, and including but not limited to those used for social housing, 
homeless services, or administrative purposes? 
• 
The annual cost of the lease. 
• 
The identity of the beneficiary/landlord receiving the lease payments. 
• 
The total length of the lease, and the remaining duration. 
• 
The annual cost of maintenance. 
• 
Whether maintenance responsibilities rest with the Council, the landlord, or another 
party. 
• 
Whether the building has been unoccupied for any period longer than six months 
during the term of the lease, and if so, the duration of such vacancy. 
• 
The purpose for which the building is being used (e.g. social housing, homeless 
services, office accommodation, etc.). 
• 
The number of housing units, families, individuals, or staff the building can 
accommodate. 
• 
Any capital expenditure or refurbishment costs committed by the Council in 
addition to lease payments. 
• 
Whether the lease includes a break clause or other exit mechanism. 
• 
How many of the buildings under lease are currently derelict or otherwise not in 
use, and the duration of such vacancy. 
• 
The location of each building under lease. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Housing Response: 
• 
The annual cost of the lease.  
Long Term Lease units for Social Housing 
1835 Long Term Leased Social Housing Tenancies €38,899,312.92 leases 
ranging from 10 to 25 years.  
 
• 
The identity of the beneficiary/landlord receiving the lease payments.  
• 
The total length of the lease, and the remaining duration. 
A report will be made available in due course, to the Councillor, once 
confidential information has been extracted.  
 
• 
The annual cost of maintenance.  
 
Long term Leased units for use as social housing - Maintenance costs are 
covered and managed by Tuath Housing All external (structural) 
maintenance works, and associated costs are covered by the landlord.  
 
• 
Whether maintenance responsibilities rest with the Council, the landlord, or another 
party.  

 
Long term Leased units for use as social housing External/Structural 
maintenance is the landlord’s responsibility. Internal maintenance is the 
responsibility of Tuath/DCC. In some leasing schemes (Enhanced Leasing), 
the landlord is responsible for both internal and external maintenance. 
 
• 
Whether the building has been unoccupied for any period longer than six months 
during the term of the lease, and if so, the duration of such vacancy.  
Long term direct leasing currently have 10 properties void longer than 6 
months – see below: 
Property 
Weeks 
Catherine's Close, Carmen's Hall 
74 
Gresham House, Dublin 1 
67 
Hampton Court, Dublin 8 
63 
Springmount, Finglas 
45 
Tyrconnell Grove, Inchicore 
41 
Cremona Road, Dublin 10 
39 
Tolka Road, Ballybough 
33 
La Rochelle, Christchurch 
32 
Ballygall Parade, Finglas East 
32 
St James Court, Dublin 8 
25 
• 
The purpose for which the building is being used (e.g. social housing, homeless 
services, office accommodation, etc.).  
 
All long term leased units are allocated to tenants from our social housing 
waiting lists via Allocations section. 
 
• 
The number of housing units, families, individuals, or staff the building can 
accommodate.  
Long Term Leased units for Social Housing  
1 bed  
707 units 
2 beds 
823 units 
3 beds  
275 units 
4 beds 
29 units  
• 
Any capital expenditure or refurbishment costs committed by the Council in 
addition to lease payments. 
Long Term leased  
No capital expenditure for Long Term Leasing. €100K committed in the 2025 
Revenue Budget to cover property damage claims. 
• 
Whether the lease includes a break clause or other exit mechanism. Leases can        
be ended.  
 

Long Term Leased units for Social Housing 
If there are breaches of Material Obligations as set out in the lease 
agreement, and this is not remedied within 28 days by either the Lessee or 
Lessor. The lessor/Lessee may give 8 weeks’ notice in writing to terminate 
the lease. This is done in conjunction with our Law Department.  
 
• 
How many of the buildings under lease are currently derelict or otherwise not in 
use, and the duration of such vacancy.  
 
Long Term Leased units for Social Housing 
DDC direct leasing have 45 units vacant at present. There would be a variety 
of reasons for this which include:  
1. Tenants decanted to alternative properties while necessary 
maintenance repairs are being completed.  
2. Void works being completed for end of lease tenancies where tenants 
have been transferred to a different property. 
3. Awaiting landlord to complete void works follow incident e.g. fire 
4. Tenants moved under estate management grounds or awaiting 
surrender of tenancies in cases where there has been abandonments 
or other major breaches of tenancies. The process must be concluded 
before void works can commence and a new tenant allocated. 
 
• 
The location of each building under lease.  
Long Term Leased units for Social Housing  
The breakdown of DCC directly leased units across the five DCC 
administrative areas are as follows: 
 
Central Area 
 
404 units 
North Central Area 
522 Units 
North West Area  
135 units 
South Central Area 
682 units 
South East Area  
91 units 
 
A report will be made available in due course, to the Councillor, once confidential 
information has been extracted.  
Response from Planning, Property & Economic Development Department 
As part of the response for this question, attached spreadsheet provides details of 35 
leases acquired for the Council’s various departments through Derelict Sites & 
Acquisitions Section – containing lease address, lease term, annual rent, expiry of 
lease, occupying department, lease type and landlord. 
 
Q.129 COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a new speed survey to be conducted on 
(Seapark Drive, Clontarf, Dublin 3,) with a view to the installation of speed bumps due 
to the very serious concerns of residents regarding vehicle speeds on the road, 
particularly given that over 80 children reside on the street. 
I am aware that a speed test was previously conducted; however, this was carried out 
at the bend in the road where cars typically slow down due to parking. A new survey 
should be undertaken on the straight section of the road where children regularly play, 
as it is expected that average vehicle speeds are significantly higher there. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

The speed survey was not conducted near the bend, but rather at the midpoint of the 
road, on a straight section close to house number (details supplied.) The resulting 
85th percentile speed was recorded at 33.2 km/h, indicating no significant presence of 
speeding vehicles. This suggests that the road complies with the designated speed 
limit. Seapark Drive benefits from natural traffic calming due to the presence of on-
street parking. These passive measures effectively narrow the carriageway, 
encouraging greater driver caution in line with the Design Manual for Urban Roads and 
Streets (DMURS) guidelines. Based on these findings, no additional measures are 
recommended for Seapark Drive. 
Q.130 COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive what measures Dublin City Council is currently undertaking 
to reduce stigma around mental health. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In line with Dublin City Council’s Health & Wellbeing Strategy for staff, one of our four 
key pillars is ‘Emotional Wellbeing’. The aim of this pillar is to: 
 
• 
Create a culture of open discussion around stress and mental health  
• 
Support individuals to better manage their psychological wellbeing, develop 
personal resilience and maintain positive mental health 
• 
Provide better access and information on supports, advice and the Staff 
Support  
 
Service (free & confidential counselling service available to all DCC employees) 
The Health & Wellbeing Unit roll out initiatives for staff on an ongoing basis to ensure 
that the above is met. 
Some of these initiatives include:  
 
• 
SafeTalk – ½ day suicide awareness training 
• 
Building Resilience webinars 
• 
Keynote speakers on topics around mental health 
• 
Health & Wellbeing Hub with information & supports on mental health 
• 
Online mental health awareness training 
 
We are also a sponsor of Elephant in The Room Project. Our elephant sculpture is 
moved to various depots and area offices to represent DCC's support for a culture of 
open discussion around mental health. The sculpture also has a QR code that links 
you a list of mental health supports. It is currently located in the Atrium, Civic Offices. 
 
Q.131 COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the chief executive what measures Dublin city council are taking or have taken 
in the last 6months to improve Fairview Park, May Park and McCauley Park. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Aside from the routine and ongoing maintenance and repair a new playground was 
delivered in McAuley Park earlier this year.  The tender package for the upgrade of the 
playground in May Park was published, returns assessed and contracts issued to the 
preferred contractor.  It is expected works here will commence later this autumn.  The 
were no major works carried out in Fairview Park during this time period.  
 
Q.132 COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
Can the Chief Executive advise where the constituent is on the housing list currently 
and if she can be housed asap, please? Details Supplied. 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The constituent in question is on the Dun Laoghaire Rathdown County Council 
Housing Waiting List and therefore we do not have access to their details. 
 
Q.133 COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
Can the Chief Executive arrange to cut down the trees in the neighbour’s garden which 
are encroaching on details supplied property and causing him great distress. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council will look into cutting back the encroaching trees, in the garden of 
(details supplied).  Arrangements will be made with the tenant of the relevant 
property. 
 
Q.134 COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
Can the Chief Executive arrange for the tree beside (Details Supplied) to be cut down 
as it is causing problems for residents and becoming a hazard in some weather 
conditions. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The trees to the side of (details supplied) appear to be in private property and 
therefore outside of the remit of Parks, Biodiversity & Landscape Services. 
 
Q.135 COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
Can the Chief Executive instruct staff to remove the national flag from the (details 
supplied) area being used outside of the official means to mark territory and 
homogenise spaces. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The North Central Area Office has noted the concerns of elected members regarding 
the flying of tricolours in the area. Local management is scheduled to meet with An 
Garda Siochana this week to discuss the issue and will also reach out to other groups. 
Given the sensitivity of the issue, the Area Office will also engage with local Councillors 
to seek the best resolution and to address the objections that have been raised. 
 
Q.136 COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive when construction on the new Dalymount Park stadium will 
begin. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The redevelopment of Dalymount Park is a flagship project for Dublin City Council. 
Since planning permission was secured in February 2024 the project has been delayed 
due to uncertainty around funding. The LSSIF Stream 2 grant, which was allocated to 
the Dalymount Park Redevelopment Project in November 2024, is substantial. 
However, it still leaves the project with a significant shortfall. The City Council’s Culture, 
Community, Leisure and Area Services (CCLAS) Department are currently examining 
options to fund this shortfall including a revised business case. In tandem detailed 
design has commenced which includes  a value engineering exercise. It is expected 
that the ground will continue to operate for the 2026 League of Ireland season. 
 
Q.137 COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive when the current parking enforcement contract is due to 
expire and when the new parking enforcement contract will be awarded 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

 The current enforcement contract expires on 31st July 2026. We hope to award the 
new contract in April 2026. There will be a 3 month implementation period. 
 
Q.138 COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
            To ask the Chief Executive what progress has been made in 2025 on the taking in 
charge of Royal Canal Park and Rathborne in Dublin 15 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please find below the current situation regarding the taking charge of estates in 
Pelletstown/Rathborne.  
 
Royal Canal Bank Canal Bank Pelletstown – Ballymore Homes the Taking in Charge 
request was received in November 2021. Request forwarded to Service Divisions 
December 2021. The service department’s response outlined works that were required 
to be carried out prior to the area being taken in charge. Engagement between Dublin 
City Council and the developer is ongoing to resolve the outstanding issues prior to 
the development being taken in charge. 
 
 Rathborne Estate Pelletstown – Castlethorn Developments 
The Taking in Charge request was received in May 2023. Request forwarded to 
Service divisions May 2023.  The service department’s response outlined works that 
were required to be carried out prior to the area being taken in charge. No response 
has been received to date from the developer.  
 
We are unable to provide an update as to when the Taking in Charge process will be 
concluded as we are awaiting the developer’s response to the outstanding issues.  
 
Q.139 COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
            To ask the Chief Executive for a list of derelict sites in the city including: 1. The date of 
designation of each site 2. The value of each site 3. The date of last valuation of each 
site 4. The owner of each site 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently 137 entries on the Derelict Sites Register.  The table attached 
provides the location, date of inclusion on the DSR and the most recent valuation – 
which is valuation at date of entry onto DSR or if a 5-year re-evaluation has been 
carried out. There are a number of new entries onto the register which are still awaiting 
a valuation. 
 
On the advice of the Law Agent, ownership details are treated as personal data under 
GDPR. While such information is included on the Register and therefore a public 
record, we do not release these details into the public domain, particularly in electronic 
format. This is due to the inability to control onward circulation and the enduring nature 
of digital footprints, which may persist indefinitely once published online and after a 
record has been removed from the Register. 
 
The total amount of levies due (plus interest) for 2025 is €9,796,462.37 
The total amount of levies paid (plus interest) so far for 2025 is €960,822.00 
 
Q.140 COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
            To ask the Chief Executive when the right turn filter light is due for Baggot road onto 
the Navan Road 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The right turn traffic filter for the junction of Baggot Road and the Navan Road is 
scheduled to be installed before the end of October this year.  
 
Q.141 COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
            To ask the Chief Executive for an update on taking in charge in terms of timings and 
specific asks by constituents that have been submitted. Residents of Royal Canal Park 
have raised concerns about dangerous driving and inadequate pedestrian crossings 
in the Royal Canal Park. Can the Council add these two measures to the snag list of 
conditions for the Taking in Charge of Royal Canal Park? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A Taking in Charge request for Royal Canal Park was received by the Planning & 
Property Development Department in November 2021. This request was subsequently 
forwarded to the relevant service divisions in DCC.  Discussions are currently ongoing 
between the Developer and DCC to resolve outstanding issues prior to taking in 
charge. Any concerns about dangerous driving must be addressed with an Garda 
Síochána. 
 
Q.142 COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
            To ask the Chief Executive to investigate and report on the efficacy of traffic calming 
and road safety measures in the vicinity of St Eithne’s, St Monica’s and St Malachy’s 
National Schools in Edenmore. These schools are in very close proximity, albeit 
separated by roads where speeding and dangerous driving are unfortunately common. 
Given the attraction of the shopping centre across the road, the area is dangerous for 
the hundreds of young children attending these schools. The roads need proper school 
signage, painted road markings and better traffic calming measures. Can the chief 
executive please also report on the suitability of this area for designation as a school 
zone? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7047880) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.143 COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
            To ask the chief executive what are the short to medium term plans to deal with the 
hostile conditions facing pedestrians and cyclists at the junction of Dame Street and 
George’s Street. The College Green Dame Street Public Realm Project is inspiring and 
will do wonders for this central area of our city. However, it is a project that will take 
many years to complete. In the meantime, the junction of Dame Street and George’s 
Street remains an extremely off-putting environment to those engaging in active travel. 
The waiting times for pedestrians are far too long and by the time the green man 
appears the crowds gathered number like fans exiting a football match or rock concert. 
The situation facing people on bicycles continuing straight on Dame Street at the 
George’s Street junction is one of the worst examples in the city when it comes to 
hostility to cyclists. When traffic gets a left turn filter light at this junction, are cyclists 
who are continuing straight supposed to merge into the outside lane of traffic while the 
lane to the left of them continues to move, often at speed? Or can the chief executive 
set out what a person on a bicycle continuing straight at this junction is supposed to 
do when faced with a red light and a green filter light for the left lane? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

The junction of Dame Street with George’s Street serves key public transport routes 
into and out of the city. This junction is closely monitored on our SCATS and CCTV 
systems, and the pedestrian phase runs typically every cycle throughout the day. 
Inbound/outbound cyclist movements are with general traffic and, with the current 
number of lanes in the junction to serve all public transport movements, the junction is 
somewhat constrained in terms of dedicated cycling facilities for cyclists. In the 
absence of these facilities there is limited scope from an ITS / Traffic Signals 
perspective to offer a higher level of service to cyclists at the moment. However, we 
would expect that plans for College Green will offer more potential for cycling 
infrastructure at the junction at which stage we can review the operation of the signals 
at this junction. This would be a matter for the City Centre Projects team. 
 
Regarding the specific query for outbound cyclists - please note that cyclists do not 
have specific cycle signals as there is no dedicated cycle lane outbound and cyclists 
must proceed with caution under the straight-ahead green arrow which comes on in 
the main traffic phase for the junction. When this signal is on red and the filter light for 
the left turning movement is on green, straight-ahead cyclists must wait on this signal 
as indeed is the case for all straight-ahead traffic and public transport movements as 
well. Regarding the operation of the junction for pedestrians the ITS team will continue 
to monitor and review the operation of the junction to seek opportunities to run the 
pedestrian phase more frequently when possible, with reduced wait times.  
 
 
