Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 11 May 2026 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
 
  
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 11 Bealtaine 2026 i Seomra na Comhairle, 
Halla na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an 
tArdmheara Ray McAdam sa chathaoir 
 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Ammar Ali 
Daryl Barron 
Racheal Batten 
Emma Blain 
Janice Boylan 
Kevin Breen 
Noelle Brown 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Danny Byrne 
Lesley Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
David Coffey 
Anthony Connaghan 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Ray Cunningham 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Cian Farrell 
Alison Field 
Declan Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
Deirdre Heney 
Jesslyn Henry 
Rory Hogan 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Feljin Jose 
Leslie Kane 
Kourtney Kenny 
Patrick Kinsella 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Aoibheann Mahon 
Ray McAdam 
Séamas McGrattan 
Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
Paddy Monahan 
Carolyn Moore 
Edel Moran 
Darragh Moriarty 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Colm O'Rourke 
Gavin Pepper 
Cieran Perry 
Michael Pidgeon 
Gayle Ralph 
Punam Rane 
Conor Reddy 
Nial Ring 
Supriya Singh 
Karl Stanley 
Malachy Steenson 
John Stephens 
Philip Sutcliffe 
Ciarán Ó Meachair 
 
 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Celina Barrett 
Aidan Blighe 
Lorraine Brogan 
Dermot Collins 
Rory Flannery 
Anthony Flynn 
Samantha Gill 
Dennis Keeley 
Natalie Leonard 
Chris Manzira 
Mick Mulhern 
Brendan O'Brien 
Ronan O'Byrne 
Eileen Quinlivan 
 
 
 
  
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 

 
 
The Lord Mayor welcomed members and sought to suspend standing orders to extend 
Lord Mayor’s business for discussion of the Emergency Motion, as agreed by group 
leaders.  This was agreed.  
 
In Memoriam 
Prior to the discussion taking place the Lord Mayor called for a minutes silence 
following the passing of Fiona Holland, a much loved local teacher, wife and mother 
who died from her injuries following a collision with a bus at Terenure Cross on the 6th 
April. He extended our sympathies to her family and friends while acknowledging that 
this incident reminds us of our solemn duty to make our streets, villages and junctions 
safer for pedestrians, cyclists and public transport and every person that moves 
through the city.  
 
Emergency Motion No. 2 in the name of Cllr Darragh Moriarty (Lab) and co-
signed Michael Pidgeon (GP), Lesley Byrne (SD), Ciaran Ó Meachair (SF), 
Ammar Ali (FF), Colm O'Rourke (FG), Vincent Jackson (Ind), Hazel de Nortúin 
(PBP).  
 
a. Expresses its deep dismay and frustration at the Department of Housing 
and Local Government’s refusal to fund Phase 1 of the Oliver Bond House 
Regeneration, a project for which plans were only presented to April’s 
Regeneration Forum meeting and ready to be submitted for planning 
subject to funding approval; 
 
• 
Restates its full commitment for the regeneration of Oliver Bond House, 
one of the oldest and largest social complexes in the State and accepts 
that in the context of delivering a sustainable mixed tenure community, 
amalgamation of units, which are almost a century old, is inevitable and will 
necessitate some loss of units as part of the regeneration process; 
 
• 
Stands in full solidarity with the Oliver Bond House Regeneration Forum, 
including resident representatives, who are committed to the physical and 
social regeneration of their community and have tirelessly volunteered to 
ensure their lived experience is part of the regeneration process; 
 
• 
Calls for the Lord Mayor to write to An Taoiseach, Micheal Martin, who 
visited the complex in 2020, An Tanáiste, Simon Harris, and Minister for 
Housing and Local Government, James Browne to request an immediate 
reversal of the Government’s decision to refuse Phase 1 funding; and 
 
• 
Welcomes Minister James Browne's agreement to meet the Oliver Bond 
Regeneration Forum and calls for his Department to work with DCC to 
deliver regeneration of the complex as soon as possible.  
 
Following robust discussion, the Lord Mayor agreed, at Councillor Lacey’s request, to 
write to the Minister and invite the Department of Housing’s Secretary General, 
incorporating Councillor Burke’s advice. He will also include other ideas raised, such 
as Councillor Pidgeon’s proposal for separate funding, and will share the 
correspondence issued with the Taoiseach and Tánaiste. 
 
The motion agreed was put and carried.   
 
 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
11 - 70 

 
 
It was moved by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor Daryl Barron 
that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the questions 
lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the  questions 
lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and Answers are set 
out in Appendix A to these minutes. 
 
 
3 
  Correspondence received from Roscommon County Council 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ammar Ali and seconded by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence listed. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
4 
  To confirm the minutes of the City Council Meeting held on 13th April 2026. 
 
The minutes of the City Council meeting held on 13th April 2026 having been 
printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken 
as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor. 
 
 
 
5 
  Vacancies   
 
 
 
(a)   Co-Option of a new member of Dublin City Council following the temporary 
absence of Councillor Aishling Silke.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Patricia Roe be co-opted as a member of Dublin 
City Council following the temporary absence of Councillor Aishling Silke. The 
motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
(b)   One Social Democrat vacancy on the Housing and Social Inclusion Strategic 
Policy Committee following the resignation of Councillor Aisling Silke  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Councillor Patricia Roe be appointed to the 
Housing and Social Inclusion Strategic Policy Committee following the 
resignation of Councillor Aishling Silke.   
 
 
 
(c)   One Social Democrat vacancy on the Fire/Ambulance Services and 
Emergency Management Committee following the resignation of Councillor 
Aisling Silke  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Councillor Patricia Roe be appointed to the 
Fire/Ambulance Services and Emergency Management Committee.  The 
motion was put and carried.    
 
 
 
(d)   One vacancy on the South Central Local Community Safety Partnership 
following the resignation of Councillor Michael Pidgeon (SCA)  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daithí Doolan and Seconded by Councillor 
Michael Pidgeon that Councillor Ciaran Ó Meachair be appointed to the South 
Central Local Community Safety Partnership. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
 
(e)   One vacancy on the Dublin North East Regional Health Forum following the  

 
resignation of Councillor John Stephens  
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by 
Councillor Conor Reddy that Councillor John Lyons be appointed to the Dublin 
North East Regional Health Forum.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
(f)   One vacancy on the Board of the Ringsend Toll Bridge Designated Activity 
Company following the resignation of Councillor Christy Burke (Central Area)  
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by 
Councillor Christy Burke that the vacancy on the Board of The Ringsend Toll 
Bridge Activity Company be deferred to the next Council meeting. The motion 
was put and carried.  
 
 
 
6 
  Report No. 105/2026 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Camden Yard & Civic 
Offices; A Strategic Report for Elected Members 
 
Rory Flannery Assistant Chief Executive, Finance and Aidan Blighe, Assistant Chief 
Executive, Human Resources, Corporate Services, Transformation & IS provided a 
presentation and over view of the plans for Camden Yard & Offices.  A copy of the 
presentation can be found attached to these minutes in Appendix B.   
 
The Lord Mayor vacated the Chair to Councillor Colm O'Rourke at 7.38p.m. and 
returned to the chamber at 7.54 p.m. and again at 8.38 p.m. returning at 08.53 p.m. 
 
Following the discussion of the report it was proposed by Lord Mayor Ray McAdam 
and seconded by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents 
of Report No. 105/2026.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
71 - 87 
 
7 
  Report 106/2026 of the Executive Manager (K. Mitchell) - with reference to the Dublin 
City Centre Rejuvenation Roadmap 
 
An amendment to Report No. 106/2026 was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey to 
increase the councillor membership on the Interim Advisory Board that is to be 
established to drive the work of the Project Management Unit from 4 Councillors to 5 
Councillors. This motion was seconded by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll.  The motion was 
put and carried.  A copy of the amendment form circulated to Council in advance of 
the meeting is attached to these minutes as Appendix C. 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Cat O'Driscoll that the following members be appointed to the Interim Advisory Board: 
1. Councillor Colm O'Rourke 
2. Councillor Deirdre Heney 
3. Councillor Neil Ring  
4. Councillor Kourtney Kenny 
5. Councillor Cian Farrell  
 
The motion was put and carried.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cian Farrell and seconded by Lord Mayor Councillor 
Ray McAdam, in noting that this is an interim appointment, that prior to the actual 
board being agreed that an independent skill assessment is carried out for all 
members over the coming months, resulting in a 6 month review of the establishment 
of the PMU (Project Management Unit).  The motion was put and carried. It was 
proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Cat 
88 

 
O'Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 106/2026 and 
endorses the recommendations outlined herein. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
8 
  Reports of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) in compliance with the provisions of 
Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) and in Part 8 
of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) and in compliance 
with the provisions of the Local Government Act 2001:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 99/2026 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - The proposed 
redevelopment of a site located at the existing School St / Thomas Court Bawn 
Estate, Dublin 8  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Darragh Moriarty and seconded by Councillor 
Michael Pidgeon that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
99/2026 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 97/2026 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - The proposed 
construction of 323 residential units at a site located at Sillogue Road and 
Avenue, Ballymun, Dublin 11  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ciaran Ó Meachair and seconded by Councillor 
Conor Reddy that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
97/2026 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
9 
  Report No. 95/2026 of the Assistant Chief Executive (E. Quinlivan) - With reference to 
Community Grants Scheme 2026 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas McGrattan and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O'Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 95/2026 and 
hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
10   Report No. 96/2026 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - The Proposed 
Borrowing for Housing Capital for Construction of Affordable Homes 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Lord Mayor Councillor 
Ray McAdam That Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 96/2026 and 
hereby approves the borrowing requirement as set out therein, subject to the sanction 
of the Minister for Housing, Planning and Local Government. The motion was put and 
carried.  
 
 
 
11   Report No. 102/2026 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - With reference to 
the disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and Tenant (Ground Rents) 
(No. 2) Act, 1978. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Séamus 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 102/2026 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12   Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 

 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 103/2026 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) - With reference to 
the proposed grant of a 5-year lease at Rivermount Hall, St. Helena’s Road, 
Finglas, Dublin 11 to Rivermount Boys Football Club  
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Dermot Lacey that Report No. 103/2026 be deferred to June Council meeting.  
This is to facilitate the requirement for further information regarding the 
possibility to extend the years on the lease as put forward by Councillor Gavin 
Pepper, Councillor Dermot Lacey and Councillor Gayle Ralph.  The motion 
was put and carried.  
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 104/2026 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) - With reference to 
the proposed grant of a 5-year Short Term Business Letting of Rooms at the 
Pigeon House Hotel, Pigeon House Road, Dublin 4 to Celtic Anglian Water 
Limited.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Nial 
Ring that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 104/2026 and 
assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
13   Disposal of Property:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 91/2026 of the Executive Manager (D. O`Connor) - With reference 
to the disposal of a plot to the rear of 27 Broadstone Avenue, Phibsborough, 
Dublin 7  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Councillor 
Aoibheann Mahon that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 
91/2026 and assents to the proposal outlined therein. The motion was put and 
carried.  The motion was put and carried.  
  
 
 
(b)   Report No. 98/2026 of the A/Executive Manager (B. Corry) - with reference to 
the disposal of a plot of land to the rear of 165 Botanic Avenue, Dublin 7  
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by 
Councillor Aoibheann Mahon that Dublin City Council notes the contents of 
Report No 98/2026 and assents to the proposal outlined therein. The motion 
was put and carried. The motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
14   Report No. 76/2026 of the Assistant Chief Executive (C. Barrett) - Quarterly Report of 
the Active Travel Programme Office 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O'Driscoll that Report No. 76/2026 be referred to the Special Meeting for Climate for 
which the date is yet to be confirmed.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
15   Report No. 77/2026 of the Assistant Chief Executive (C. Barrett) - Quarterly Report of 
the Traffic Department 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O'Driscoll that Report No. 77/2026 be referred to the Special Meeting for Climate for 
which the date is yet to be confirmed. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
16   Housing Supply and Delivery Monthly Reports   
 

 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 66/2026 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Housing 
Supply and Delivery April Update  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daithí Doolan and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam  that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No. 66/2026. The motion was put and carried. 
 
It was agreed that the Housing Supply Report for June Council meeting will be 
listed on the Agenda after vacancies to ensure the item is reached for 
discussion. 
  
 
 
(b)   Report No. 92/2026 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Housing 
Supply and Delivery May Update  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daithí Doolan and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam  that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No. 92/2026. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
17   Monthly Local Fund Statement and Reports   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 67/2026 of the Head of Finance (R. Flannery)- April Local Fund 
Statement and Reports as submitted under the EU/IMF Framework  
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by 
Councillor Ciaran Ó Meachair  that Dublin City Council notes the contents of 
Report No. 67/2026. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 94/2026 of the Head of Finance (R. Flannery) - May Local Fund 
Statement.  
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by 
Councillor Ciaran Ó Meachair that Dublin City Council notes the contents of 
Report No. 94/2026. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
18   Chief Executive's Monthly Management Reports   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 68/2026 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - April 
Management Report  
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by 
Councillor Ciaran Ó Meachair that Dublin City Council notes the contents of 
Report No. 68/2026. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 93/2026 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - May 
Management Report  
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by 
Councillor Ciaran Ó Meachair that Dublin City Council notes the contents of 
Report No. 93/2026. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19   Report No. 89/2026 of the Area Committees - Minutes of Area Committee meetings  

 
held in the month of March 2026 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Ciaran Ó Meachair that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 89/2026. 
The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
20   Report No. 100/2026 of the Planning and Urban Regeneration Strategic Policy 
Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on the 25th February 2026, Councillor Cian 
Farrell, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Ciaran Ó Meachair that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
100/2026. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
21   Report No. 90/2026 of the Minutes of the Mobility and Public Realm Strategic Policy 
Committee, - Minutes of the meeting held on 12th November, 2025, Councillor Janet 
Horner, Chairperson 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Ciaran Ó Meachair that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 90/2026. 
The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
22   Report No. 101/2026 of the Protocol Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on the 
2nd April 2026, Councillor Deirdre Heney, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Ciaran Ó Meachair that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 
101/2026. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
23   Topical Issues 
 
No topical issues were submitted for consideration. 
 
 
 
24   Motions on Notice 
 
Standing Orders were suspended to allow debate to continue on Item No. 105/2026 - 
Camden Yard  & Civic Offices.   
  
 
 
25   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
1. Emergency Motion No. 1 in the name of Councillor Gavin Pepper 
 
Emergency Motion: Public Safety Measures for Parks in Dublin North 
West 
  
I note with grave concern the recent discovery of a loaded firearm concealed in 
bushes adjacent to a playground in Ballymun. This incident represents a 
serious threat to public safety, particularly to children and families who rely on 
our parks as safe community spaces. The potential outcome of this could have 
been catastrophic. 
  
I further note that repeated requests have been made to address ongoing 
safety concerns in parks across the Dublin North West area, including issues 
relating to anti-social behaviour, lack of supervision, and insufficient deterrents. 
 Accordingly, I would like to call for: 
 

 
  
1. 
The immediate installation of CCTV surveillance systems in all public 
parks and playgrounds across the Dublin North West area, prioritising 
locations with known safety concerns. 
 
2. 
The full staffing and resourcing of local park ranger services, ensuring a 
visible, consistent presence in parks to deter criminal and anti-social 
activity. 
 
3. 
A coordinated safety review of all parks and playgrounds in the area, in 
partnership with An Garda Síochána, to identify risks and implement 
preventative measures. 
 
4.  
The development of a clear timeline for the rollout of these measures, 
with regular progress reports to the council. 
  
This council believes that proactive investment in safety infrastructure and 
personnel is essential to protect our communities, restore public confidence, 
and ensure that our parks remain safe, welcoming environments for all the 
community 
  
The Lord Mayor agreed to accept this motion without debate and refer it to the 
Parks Superintendent. He also agreed to the Assistant Commissioner for 
Dublin. 
 
 
2. Emergency Motion No. 2 in the name of Cllr Darragh Moriarty (Lab) and co-
signed Michael Pidgeon (GP), Lesley Byrne (SD), Ciaran Ó Meachair (SF), 
Ammar Ali (FF), Colm O'Rourke (FG), Vincent Jackson (Ind), Hazel de 
Nortúin (PBP).  
 
Lord Mayors Decision 
The Lord Mayor passed this Emergency Motion for discussion.  The item was 
discussed under Lord Mayors Business.  
3. Emergency Motion No. 3 in the name of Councillor Janice Boylan 
 
This council calls on the CEO to immediately postpone the transition from waste 
bags to wheelie bins. No further changes should proceed until a comprehensive 
consultation process is completed and a clear, accessible communication strategy 
is established for all affected residents. 
 
Lord Mayors Decision 
The Lord Mayor agreed to accept the motion without debate. Following 
discussions with the Chief Executive and Waste Management officials, it was 
confirmed that residents will not be required to use large wheelie bins where 
unsuitable. The council will instead explore on-street compactors in the Phase 3 
area, with flexibility ahead of the planned 6 July implementation. 
 
 
 
 
4. Emergency Motion No. 4 on behalf of the Green Party Councillors, Cllr Claire 

 
Byrne, Cllr Ray Cunningham, Cllr Hazel Chu & Cllr Donna Cooney. 
 
That this Council notes its objection to the Dublin City Council planning office's 
decision to grant planning permission for the demolition and redevelopment of St 
Stephen's Green Shopping Centre for mostly offices, and calls on the CEO to 
request that the planning office outline exactly the rationale behind this decision, 
how it aligns with the Dublin City Development Plan 2022 to 2028, how they 
believe this would be positive thing for the city right now in a retail and housing 
crisis, and why the planning office has completely ignored the multiple objections 
and the public sentiment around this issue. 
 
Lord Mayors Decision 
 
This was not considered to be an Emergency Motion.  This decision is currently 
within the statutory appeal period, during which any person or body who made a 
submission on the application may appeal this decision to An Coimisiún Pleanála.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
  

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY 11th MAY 2026. 
 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, for a report on the housing file of details supplied who has 
been on the housing list for nearly a decade and a half now, has applied for so many 
choice-based lettings in recent times, has a young family and sees no hope of ever being 
housed by Dublin City Council. The report should include an explanation of her current 
position on the housing list as well as an explanation of the numerous rejections her CBL 
applications have received. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Transfer List in receipt of Homeless HAP with an application 
date of 06/03/2012, and holds the following position(s) on the waiting list –  
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
3 
46 
 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, it 
is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The number 
of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants could 
expect to be on the waiting list. 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
The applicant should be advised to keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being 
advertised that may be of interest to her and to ensure she makes an application for same. 
Whilst the applicant may have made application for Choice Based Lettings, as per the 
Scheme of Lettings, Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and 
currently there are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be 
considered as suitable vacancies arise. 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the ownership and leasing arrangements of the 
Scouts Hall in Larkhill, Whitehall, Dublin 9. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Scouting Association of Ireland hold a lease from Dublin City Council for the Scouts 
Hall at Larkhill, Whitehall. 
 
The lease is for a term of 99 years from the 28th October 1976 to the 28th October 2075. 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR PAT DUNNE 

 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for our Traffic Section to reinstate the double yellow 
lines at the entrance to the laneway at the Village Inn. Lisle Road Crumlin. They are faded 
and vehicles are constantly parking over them and as a result blocking access for 
deliveries to the pub. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The location will be inspected in the coming days. Any requirement for reinstatement will 
be carried out within 30 working days of the Council Meeting of the 11th May 2026. 
 
Q.4  
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the €14 million fund arising from the Oscar 
Traynor Road deal with Glenveagh Living Ltd: details on any monies spent to date and a 
list of the projects in the North Central Area the fund will support. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As previously noted, the development at Oscar Trayor Woods comprises a plan to build 
over 850 homes on land that was previously a long term vacant green field site (which had 
been in Council ownership), using the Housing Land Initiative model that was approved in 
January 2017 by City Councillors. It also includes a number of community amenities, 
communal spaces, a sustainable cycle-centric design and a multi-use play area. Following 
a competitive tender process, the contract for the development was awarded 
to Glenveagh Living Limited and Glenveagh Homes. As part of this, the developer agreed 
to assume responsibility for the site infrastructure, park development, play areas, 
community facilities, landscaping, design, planning and financing. It also agreed to a 
payment of €14 million to Dublin City Council. At the monthly Council meeting on 1 
November 2021, City Councillors agreed to ring-fence 50% of this as a Community Gain 
Initiative (CGI) for capital projects in the general area of the site. It is envisaged that this 
fund will provide a significant legacy project for the area.  
  
As part of the project, Dublin City Council has facilitated a Community Consultative 
Forum in order to provide a platform for the mutual exchange of information between 
stakeholders associated with the Oscar Traynor Road site. Besides the elected 
councillors, local resident groups are represented on the forum. In addition, the North 
Central Area Office has established a sub-group of local councillors in order to keep 
elected members informed of developments. The Area Office has met with the sub-group, 
the Consultative Forum and directly with residents’ groups in the immediate vicinity of 
the site and is in the process of agreeing a series of works with them. Each of these 
meetings involved a positive exchange of views and have facilitated closer cooperation 
between all stakeholders. Further meetings to provide updates are planned over the 
coming weeks. 
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the capital allocation contained in the 2026-
2028 Capital Programme for each of the five administrative areas of Dublin. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Finance Department is working with the Executive Managers of the Areas Offices and 
the Assistant Chief Executive of CCLAS to deliver a presentation to each Area on the 
Capital Programme Expenditure in their Area over the coming months. 
Q.6  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 

 
To ask the Chief Executive details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
A reply will be issued directly to the Councillor. 
 
Q.7 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive how many litter fines have been issued in Dublin central over 
the last 12 months. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A total of 840 litter fines were issued in the Central Area between April 2025 and April 
2026. 
 
Q.8 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will be reviewing the existing waste disposal operations in all social 
housing flat complexes in the coming months. This review will be carried out by the newly 
structured Caretaking and Grounds Maintenance team with a view to drawing up a 
programme for rollout of bin chamber upgrades including replacement of bins where 
necessary.   
 
Q.9  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive when applicants will move into Marshals yard Complex East 
wall. As on the past applicants have been waiting to move into some developments for 
some months. I would ask if all legal issues and other issues are resolved. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Choice Based Letting for Marshall’s Yard closed on 10th April. The selection process 
is now being carried out by the Vacancies team along with re-assessment and estate 
management clearance. All successful applicants will be contacted by a member of the 
Vacancies team in due course.  
 
Q.10 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to please do a paint job on all Public Lamp standards in 
Cleggen Road, Park, and Ave area of Ballyfermot Dublin 10. The narrow poles owned by 
DCC have not had a paint job for many years in addition can DCC ask the ESB to paint 
there electrical poles again these poles have not had a paint job in many years and can 
our paving dept look at footpaths where they are lifting with the pavement trees leaving 
serious trip hazards along details supplied and please check along the street for dangers 
with lifting paths. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As mentioned in the question there is a mixture of ESB Network poles and DCC owned 
poles on Cleggan Road, Park and Avenue respectively.  
The ESB is responsible for the painting of ESB Network Poles and Public Lighting Services 
will forward the request onto them for their consideration. 
Regarding the DCC owned poles these will be put on the list for painting this year.  
 

Road Maintenance has surveyed the footpaths along Cleggan Avenue and in general the 
footpaths are in a reasonable condition however; I can report that the defect outside 
details supplied is on our works List for repair (Enquiry 1179541) and has been allocated 
to a works crew. There is some uplift to a pillar that does not appear to have a foundation, 
but I will request the Parks Inspector to review and revert. 
 
The footpath at the above address has been reinstated. The tree stump will be removed 
in due course. 
 
Q.11  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to please have a full set of traffic lights erected along 
Ballyfermot Road outside the Stonemount Park Apartment Complex this new development 
of over 800 housing units are existing onto an already very busy road and serious 
accidents will happen if a full set of lights is not erected. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A Service Request has been created SR Ref:7051633 and has been referred to the area 
engineer for assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their 
consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
Q.12 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to work with the resident environmental group along details 
supplied in helping to deliver a sustainable safe green area by removing horses, horse 
manure, waste on a regular basis and that a kerb / footpath be installed to define this fine 
potential linear area. I am asking that this area get a high level of maintenance to support 
the local residents. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply will be issued directly to the Councillor. 
 
Q.13  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to please look at creating a safe environment for children 
attending St Cillian’s National School at Ballymount Dublin 12 the School in almost on the 
City / South Dublin Co Council boundary hence an effort from both councils may be 
needed to improve the area to enable safe areas, cycle / walk-ways for children most of 
the children attending the school reside with the City administrative areas and will all the 
proposed building in the area it will progressively get more dangerous if we don’t act now 
and create a safer environment for all. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This school location corresponds to an area in South Dublin County Council and as 
Robinhood Road, where the school is situated, is outside of Dublin City Council's remit 
the correspondence should be referred to South Dublin County Council. 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR HAZEL DE NORTÚIN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for the budget of rubbish removal from Traveller specific Sites 
in DCC from 2025 to date. 
 

To ask where the funding/budget for the removal of said rubbish is taken from? 
 
Is the waste removal department of DCC’s budgeting for the removal of waste from 
Traveller Specific Sites? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Traveller Accommodation Unit Waste Management Budget/rubbish removal details are: 
Year 
 
 
Budget € 
 
Actual Spend € (incl. VAT) 
2025  
 
283,200 
 
183,095.75 
2026 Q1 
 
265,000 
 
289,135.28 
 
The above budget and spend include weekly Household Waste Collection Service for the 
following sites: 
• 
St. Margarets 
• 
Grove Lane (1 unit) 
• 
St. Josephs Park 
• 
Labre Park Units & Houses 
• 
Kylemore Grove 
• 
St. Mary’s Park  
• 
Tara Lawns 
 
The budget for waste management is allocated as a revenue budget for the TAU.  
Recoupment for waste management spend from the DHLG&H is calculated on the 
following basis: 
Total costs for the period (subject to a maximum eligible expenditure of €550 per bay per 
years) x 50%. 
 
Housing TAU are the budget holders for waste management removal and service to 
traveller specific accommodation.  
 
Q.15  COUNCILLOR HAZEL DE NORTÚIN 
To ask for an update on any additional sites identified for Traveller Specific 
Accommodation within DCC. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC Housing Development Section are currently completing feasibility studies of lands 
that are in DCC’s ownership. The feasibility study includes traveller specific 
accommodation. 
 
Q.16  COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
 
To ask the Chief Executive how compliance with Construction Traffic Management Plans 
(CTMP) is monitored during construction, what the penalties are for non-compliance, and 
how many such penalties have been applied each year for the last five years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The responsibility for compliance with approved Construction Traffic Management Plans 
rests with the developer of a site. Where any issues are raised or come to the attention of 
Dublin City Council that approved traffic management plans are not being complied with, 
Planning Enforcement in consultation with the traffic division, where required, will 
investigate any alleged breaches or deviations. Warning letters and enforcement notices 

are issued in cases where is sufficient evidence that the developer is not complying with 
their requirements. In cases where there are continued breaches following the issuing of 
enforcement notices, legal proceedings can be taken in respect of such non-compliance. 
Matters relating to non-compliance with approved traffic management plans are generally 
dealt with by direct engagement between the case Planning Enforcement Officer and site 
management. 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what the process is for detecting or reporting HGVs in the city 
centre that do not have a valid permit, what penalties are applied when vehicles are 
detected without a valid permit, and how many such penalties have been applied each 
year in the last five years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
HGV permit scheme enforced  
 
Authorisation must be sought by electronic registration on the HGV permit scheme, 
www.hgv.ie and any printouts are for the applicant’s information only. An Garda Síochána 
are the enforcing body and have direct access to the HGV permit scheme database. If an 
applicant is found in breach of the terms and conditions of the permit scheme, they are 
liable to receive a fixed charge notice of €200.  
 
HGV Checker App 
 
The public can check in real time if a 5+ axle vehicle has a valid permit to be in the city. 
The APP is used to complement Dublin City Council’s HGV Management Strategy which 
provides for a ban on 5+ axle vehicles during restricted hours seven days a week within a 
designated cordon area in the city. 
 
The public can assist the City Council by downloading the free HGV Permit Checker App 
and if they spot a 5+ axle vehicle they can check in real time if it has a valid permit to be 
in the city. 
 
The App is available to download for Android devices on the Google Play Store and Apple 
devices on the App Store. Please search for HGV Permit Checker or Dublin City Council 
or Permit Checker. Dublin City Council submits a report to An Garda Síochána every 4 
months regarding HGV’s that are in breach of the HGV Management Strategy. 
 
Q.18  COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
 
To ask the Chief Executive when the front door at Walkinstown Library will be replaced, 
allowing the library to operate as an Open Library again. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We are currently working with the door supplier to identify a temporary solution that will 
allow My Open Library services to resume in the short term. 
However, the door will need to be fully replaced. This will involve a more substantial 
piece of work and will require a formal procurement process. 
Q.19  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 

 
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council can bring forward a statutory planning 
framework (Local Area Plan or Urban Area Plan) for Dublin 8. If not, what mechanism 
exists that makes any part of the system accountable for coordinated, place-based 
delivery of essential infrastructure. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin City Development Plan 2022 – 2028 plans growth in Dublin 8 as follows: 
 
Strategic Development and Regeneration Areas (SDRA’s ) 
The Dublin City Development Plan 2022 – 2028 contains in total 18 city-wide discrete 
statutory planning frameworks (Strategic Development and Regeneration Areas – SDRA’s 
Final 1-13 SDRAs.pdf and Broombridge - Hamilton). 
  
These framework plans, with related ‘guiding principles’, set out anticipated housing and 
employment growth, along with an overall strategy for each area in terms of the 
appropriate form and scale of development, key routes and permeability, open space 
provision and the required supporting infrastructure etc.   
 
Eight of the SDRA’s are located in Dublin 8 – highlighted in blue in Table 1 below.    
 
(1) Other Dublin 8 related policies / objectives 
 
The development plan, in addition to the above, contains other policies and objectives 
pertaining to regeneration in the Dublin 8 area.  These are set out in Table 2 below. 
 
(2) Delivery 
Chapter 16 of the Development Plan (Monitoring and Implementation) outlines how Dublin 
City Council is to secure the implementation of the policies and objectives of the city 
development plan, including via: 
 
• 
on-going collaboration and engagement with citizens, stakeholders, sectoral interests, city 
partners and adjoining authorities, 
• 
collaboration with communities and community networks, 
• 
actively monitoring development patterns occurring in the city and the nature of new 
development that is being delivered, 
• 
proactive land management 
• 
liaising with other state agencies and infrastructure providers to ensure the timely delivery 
on infrastructural programmes, 
• 
preparing an annual Development Plan Core Strategy Monitoring Report on the City 
Performance Indicators, which measures the city’s performance and progress.   
 
There has been a change in planning legislation and with the enactment of Part 3 of the 
Planning and Development Act 2024 Local Area Plans are now defunct and their plan 
making function has been replaced by a series of other statutory plans (UAP, PAP, CAP). 
Due to this and the increased statutory focus on alignment of the hierarchy of plan making, 
it would be premature to commence a new statutory plan in advance of a full review of the 
Dublin City Development Plan which is expected to commence after the completion of 
plan making at a Regional level with the Regional Spatial and Economic Strategy.  This is 
to be confirmed in legislation that is currently be progressed through the houses of the 

Oireachtas.   In advance of this occurring it is considered that the current policies and 
objectives outlined in this response are sufficient provisions for the Dublin 8 area.  
 
Table 1: Strategic Development and Regeneration Areas 
 
SDRA 
Ref. 
City Area Name 
Estimated 
Capacity 
Area 
(Ha) 
Supporting 
Infrastructure  
SDRA 1 
Clongriffin/Belmayne and 
Environs 
6,950 – 
7,350 
52 
DART+, 
BusConnects, 
completion of Main 
Street, social 
infrastructure 
SDRA 2 
Ballymun 
2,200 – 
2,350 
35 
Metrolink, Bus 
Connects 
SDRA 3 
Finglas Village Environs and 
Jamestown Lands 
2,800 
52 
Luas Finglas, 
BusConnects, social 
infrastructure 
SDRA 4 
Park West/Cherry Orchard 
2,500 – 
3,100 
49 
DART+, 
BusConnects, social 
infrastructure. 
SDRA 5 
Naas Road 
3,300 
18 
Bus Connects, Luas 
stop, 
Water service upgrade 
SDRA 6 
Docklands 
7,900 
24 
DART+, 
Dodder Bridge, 
BusConnects, Luas 
Poolbeg, District 
Heating, social 
infrastructure 
SDRA 7 
Heuston and Environs 
1,250 
14 
DART+, 
BusConnects 
SDRA 8 
Grangegorman/Broadstone 
1,200 
11.5 
BusConnects 
SDRA 9 
Emmet Road 
1,050 
15 
BusConnects, social 
infrastructure 
SDRA 
10 
North East Inner City 
850 
12 
DART+, 
BusConnects, social 
infrastructure 

SDRA 
11 
St. Teresa’s Gardens 
1,500 
13 
BusConnects 
SDRA 
12 
Dolphin House 
350 
6 
Bus Connects 
SDRA 
13 
Markets Area and Environs 
400 
8 
Public realm 
SDRA 
14 
St. James’s Healthcare 
Campus and Environs 
- 
- 
BusConnects 
SDRA 
15 
Liberties and Newmarket 
Square 
2,500 
30 
BusConnects, social 
infrastructure, public 
realm 
SDRA 
16 
Oscar Traynor Road 
850 
17 
BusConnects 
SDRA 
17 
Werburgh Street 
0 
2 
Public realm 
SDRA 
18 
Broombridge-Hamilton 
 
8,500 
60 
Dart+, Luas Finglas,  
BusConnects, social  
infrastructure 
 
 
 
Table 2: Dublin City Development Plan Policies and Objectives for Dublin 8  
 
SCI ‘Consolidation of the Inner City’ 
To consolidate and enhance the inner city, 
promote compact growth and maximise 
opportunities provided by existing and 
proposed public transport by linking the 
critical mass of existing and emerging 
communities such as Docklands, Heuston 
Quarter, Grangegorman, Stoneybatter, 
Smithfield, the Liberties, the North East 
Inner City and the south and north 
Georgian cores with each other, and to 
other regeneration areas. 
QHSN38 ‘ Housing and Apartment Mix’ 
To encourage and foster the creation of 
attractive, mixed use, sustainable 
residential communities which contain a 
wide variety of housing and apartment 
types, sizes and tenures, in accordance 
with the Housing Strategy and HNDA, with 
supporting community facilities and 
residential amenities. Further detail in 

regard to unit mix is set out in Chapter 15: 
Development Standards. Unit mix 
requirements for the Liberties and the 
North Inner City are set out in Section 
15.9.1 and Table 37 of the Housing 
Strategy in Appendix 1. 
GIO3 ‘Current and Future Greening 
Strategies’ 
To expand the preparation and 
implementation of urban greening 
strategies, with particular focus on key 
streets in the city area between the Royal 
and Grand Canals. To support the 
implementation of the: ‘Liberties Greening 
Strategy’ (2015), the ‘North East Inner City 
Greening Strategy’ (2018) and the 
‘Stoneybatter Green Strategy’ (2021) and to 
implement the greening strategies in the 
Council’s Public Realm Strategies 
programme. 
CSO4 ‘Programme for the Preparation of 
Local Area Plans/Village Improvement 
Plans’ 
To implement a programme for the 
preparation of Local Area Plans/Village 
Improvement Plans and to prioritise areas 
in accordance with the strategic objectives 
of the core strategy including those areas 
which are experiencing or likely to 
experience large scale development and 
regeneration.   
Drimnagh, Kilmainham/Inchicore, 
Liberties are identified in Table 2-14 as 
potential plan areas. 
Policy CEE31 ‘Strategic Role of Hospital 
Complexes’ 
(ii) To promote and facilitate the continued 
development of the Dublin 8 area including 
SDRA 14 (St. James’s Healthcare Campus 
and Environs) as a medical hub of 
excellence. 
 
CUO12 ‘Cultural Spaces in Dublin 8’ 
To deliver a number of new cultural spaces 
and artists workspaces in the Dublin 8 
area, including the renovation of 
Kilmainham Mills and the establishment of 
the Creative Campus space. 
CUO14 ‘Dublin 8 Regeneration’ 
To ensure that the wider regeneration of 
Dublin 8 contributes to the cultural 
assets of the community with new 
spaces provided at street level in larger 
regeneration projects that will 
accommodate and provide for new local 
cultural uses. 
Objective QHSNO14 ‘Community 
Infrastructure Audit SDRA’s’ 
‘To carry out and maintain an audit of 
community infrastructure for Strategic 

Development and Regeneration Areas, 
where appropriate’. 
 
Objective CUO36 ‘Audio-Visual Sector 
To support the growth of the audio-visual 
sector within the city, and the continued 
growth of the existing clusters in Dublin 8 
and Dublin 2 and the emerging cluster in 
Dublin 7, including encouraging start-up 
space provision. 
Section 15.7.3.1 District Heating Enabled 
Development 
SDRA 15 (Liberties and Newmarket 
Square): The Climate Action Energy 
Statement will be required to investigate 
possible connections or interconnections to 
existing heat networks in these areas, to 
ultimately create a district heating ‘node’. 
 
Q.20  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR: 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if the site at Hannover Lane, Dublin 8 which is on the Dublin 
City Council register of derelict sites (ref: DS 980), can be cleaned out as it has been 
attracting illegal dumping for some time, and is now infested with rats which poses serious 
health and safety issues. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Derelict Sites Section have an active file on this site, which is privately owned.  
Following recent complaints, the Derelict Sites Inspector had written to the owners 
requesting that they take the appropriate actions to deal with litter removal and rodent 
infestation.   
The matter has also been referred to the Council's Environmental Health Section to carry 
out a site inspection.   
The Environmental Health Office (HSE) has the legal power to deal with infested premises 
or land, however the responsibility to rid a premises or land of rodents rests primarily with 
the person occupying it. The HSE Pest Control can be contacted at tel: 1800 211 774 or 
via e-mail: pestcontrol.south@hse.ie 
The Council's Public Domain Officer has also previously written to the owners and has 
initiated action under Section 9 of the Litter Pollutions Acts 1997. 
 
The Environmental Health Section of Dublin City Council has carried out a site visit and 
has determined that there is no statutory role here for this Section. 
The Rats and Mice (Destruction) Act 1919 is enforced by the Health Service Executive, 
Environmental Health, Pest Control Section, Unit 13F, Nexus Building, Blanchardstown 
Corporate Park, Blanchardstown, Dublin 15.  Tel: 1800 211 774 or email 
pestcontrol.south@hse.ie 
 
Q.21  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will respond to the customers comments set out below in 
relation to the Ringsend Bring Centre: 
 
I wanted to mention the recycling centre in Ringsend. I visit every week or two now, and 
it’s great to bypass the household waste collections. Do those arrangements come up for 
review? 
 

My beef this time is the apparent neglect of that recycling facility. In particular, the sorting 
can be haphazard, which kind of undermines the whole concept. 
 
They have huge bins, with compressing capacity. One has been out of commission for 
what seems like months, leading to stuff being mixed together. That sends the wrong 
message. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s Civic Amenity Sites/Recycling Centres are operated under contracts 
which are awarded by way of competitive tender competitions. Frameworks arising from 
such competitions are typically of four years duration, and typically consist of a two-year 
initial contract, including a six-month probationary period, followed by two potential one-
year extensions, subject to review.  
 
One dry recyclables compactor has been removed from Ringsend Recycling Centre for 
repair and a replacement compactor has been installed. No compactors on site are out of 
commission. 
 
There are several compactors that serve as receptacles for dry recyclables of different 
types, e.g. paper, cardboard plastic. Upon occasion, when compactors are full, there may 
be a short period when different types of packaging materials are placed in the same 
compactor. However, when removed from site all materials are transported to a materials 
recovery facility where they are electronically and manually segregated into various waste 
streams for further processing. 
 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if the issue of bad smells coming from sewers on Margaret 
Kennedy Road could be addressed. This problem has worsened with recent construction 
work. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As the issues raised are a matter for Irish Water they should be referred directly to Irish 
Water.   
   
Please call the telephone number on 0818 178 178 
0818 578 578 and identify yourself as an Elected Representative. You will be put through 
to the Local Representative Support Desk in Irish Water’s Customer Contact Centre who 
will deal with you directly. Alternatively, there is a specific e-mail address at Irish Water for 
Councillors: LocalRepSupport@water.ie.  
   
The Local Representative Support Desk at Irish Water operates from 9.00am – 5.30pm, 
Monday to Friday.  
   
The following are the contact details for Irish Water:  
   
Telephone: 
 
0818 178 178 / 0818 578 578  
Web:  
 
www.water.ie   
Twitter:  
 
@IrishWater  
Postal Address: 
Irish Water, PO Box 860, South City Delivery Office, Cork City.  
 

Q.23  COUNCILLOR MICHEÁL MACDONNCHA 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will publish the consultants' report on the alleged extent 
of upgrading required, and alleged cost of such upgrading, for the Civic Offices, Wood 
Quay.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Council has undertaken various high-level assessments over time in relation to the 
condition and future requirements of the existing Civic Offices at Wood Quay, as part of 
its broader consideration of accommodation needs for the organisation. 
These assessments are internal in nature and form part of the overall evaluation informing 
the proposed Camden Yard development. They do not constitute a single definitive or 
stand-alone report of the type referenced by the Councillor. 
There are no current plans to publish such material. Relevant information will be brought 
forward through the appropriate governance processes as part of the Council’s ongoing 
consideration of its office accommodation strategy. 
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR MICHEÁL MACDONNCHA 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on Council co-operation with the OPW with 
regard to the development of the Commemorative Centre at the National Monument 14-
17 Moore Street. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Government have tasked the OPW, in conjunction with the Department of Housing 
Local Government & Heritage, with undertaking a project to conserve the historic 
properties at 14/17 Moore St and to open them to the public as a heritage visitor site in 
the centre of Dublin.    
Dublin City Council have recently received information from the Department of Housing 
Local Government & Heritage relating to the legal situation to consents for developments 
of the commemorative centre at the National Monument at Nos 14 to 17 Moore Street.  
Dublin City Council is looking to arrange to meet with the OPW and Department of 
Housing Local Government & Heritage Officials to get the most up-to date position 
regarding the National Monument.   
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for all information held within Dublin City Council’s 
records to be identified and compiled in respect of details supplied, and to include any 
available documentation, archival material, and photographs, and to make same available 
to me so I can share with his family. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A response will be issued directly to the Councillor. 
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for assistance regarding the Blackhorse/Naas Road junction. 
The lane of traffic coming straight from the Naas Road into Inchicore retains a green light 
even when outward traffic (Inchicore to the Naas Road), and traffic turning right from Davitt 
Road towards Inchicore, have a red light. This means that a Luas coming to Blackhorse 
Station from Tallaght / Saggart can sweep around to the station while pedestrians left 
stranded behind an often-fast-moving stream of motorists driving into Inchicore. Could the 
pedestrian signals be harmonised with the Luas to ensure better and safer crossing for 
pedestrians. 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We recently made adjustments to this junction involving the operation of the Luas, which 
at certain times of the day inadvertently resulted in longer wait times for pedestrians across 
Blackhorse Bridge. Following this, we have now made some further adjustments at this 
crossing to shorten the wait time for pedestrians. We will continue to monitor this junction 
closely over the coming weeks. 
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if a larger “Belly Bin” can be installed at Irishtown Nature 
Reserve (see map) to replace the existing small bin, which is inadequate for the level of 
footfall in the area. The current bin fills very quickly and, due to the site’s relatively remote 
location, this often results in rubbish being dumped around it once it overflows. A larger 
capacity bin would help address ongoing litter issues and better manage waste at this 
popular amenity. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We understand the concerns regarding the current waste management at Irishtown Nature 
Reserve. To address this issue, Parks will relocate a larger Big Belly Bin from a less 
suitable or underutilized location and place it at the border of Sean Moore Park, close to 
the existing bin at Irishtown Nature Reserve. This new bin will help alleviate the current 
waste management challenges and improve the overall cleanliness of the area. 
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the playground at Sean Moore Park. 
A number of children’s play features have been vandalised in recent years, including a 
serious arson attack on the central play structure in September of last year. Can the Chief 

Executive outline when repairs and reinstatement works are expected to commence, and 
whether additional security measures will be put in place to protect these amenities, which 
are generously provided by Dublin City Council and enjoyed by the local community? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following incidents of antisocial behaviour at Sean Moore Park playground, the Parks 
Service carried out repairs to the playground which involved removing the fire damaged 
equipment.  The playground was fully operational within a week of the arson attack. 
 
In relation to the provision of new equipment (which will replace the removed damaged 
equipment and provide additional new equipment), the Parks Department took the 
opportunity to engage with local schools and community groups to inform a more 
considered and sustainable long-term response. This community-led consultation is 
central to ensuring future investment addresses underlying issues, improves the resilience 
of the playground, and responds to the needs of a broader age range, in particular facilities 
for older teenagers, with the aim of reducing antisocial behaviour.  
 
This process will enable us to progress to tender with well-developed proposals for Sean 
Moore Playground in Q2 2026 with new units in place for Q2 2027. 
 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for repairs to the road surface on Church Avenue, 
Irishtown, particularly outside details supplied. 
The deteriorated condition of the road, combined with the recent introduction of bus traffic, 
is causing noticeable vibrations to nearby properties. Residents are concerned that these 
ongoing vibrations may result in structural damage to their homes. An assessment and 
timely remedial works would be appreciated to address these concerns. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Road Maintenance Engineer will refer the location for localised repairs once a 
work crew becomes available. 
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to liaise with the Waste Management team to identify and 
implement effective measures to address the ongoing littering of the canal area adjacent 
to The Barge Pub. 
The level of littering at this location is unacceptable, recurring and concentrated. It would 
be preferable for this issue to be tackled at source, as prevention is more effective than 
repeated clean ups. In this regard, the Chief Executive and the Waste Management team 
might consider liaising with An Garda Síochána to address the frequent illegal activities 
contributing to this problem. Dublin City Council should not be required to continually clean 
up after large gatherings engaged in unlawful behaviour in our city’s public spaces.         
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services are aware that with the onset of the summer period, there 
will be additional pressure on the delivery of services. In response, additional resources 
will be deployed, and temporary bins will be provided in areas of high footfall and known 
gathering points, including the referenced location in Portobello, to help manage and 
mitigate increased litter levels during this period. 

Monitoring of this location will continue, and we will engage with relevant stakeholders 
with a view to identify and implement more sustainable and preventative long-term 
solutions to address these ongoing issues.                                                                                         
Q.31  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise on the following please, can we get something like 
details supplied on the Oscar Traynor Road please, Vianey have this one on their pitch 
so can we get one please? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Office will liaise with the Parks Department to find a suitable solution for provision 
of a toilet for this location. 
 
Q.32  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN  
 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise what they can do on details supplied below please? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A response will issue directly to the Councillor.  
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm how many vacant and derelict council properties 
there are in the Artane Whitehall Ward currently and if he can provide a breakdown on 
same. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Derelict Sites Section confirm that within the Artane Whitehall Ward there are 
currently 11 derelict properties included on the Derelict Sites Register.  There are 31 active 
files at different stages of investigation which includes monitoring, engagement with 
owners and requests for reference & title searches. 
 
The Council’s Housing Department have been asked to comment on the number of vacant 
homes within the area. 
 
The voids section is currently refurbing 453 units throughout the Dublin City Catchment 
Area. All at various stages of the refurb, these units will become ready to let in 2026. 
Please see table below for a breakdown of each area.  
 
Central 
North 
Central 
North West 
South 
Central 
South East 
Total 
100 
50 
97 
142 
64 
453 
 
 
Q.34  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if they will provide additional funding to details supplied as 
part of the 2027 Budget to allow for pay increases for staff in the facility in line with all 
other public sector workers. The workers at details supplied have not had a pay rise 
since 2015. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

The City Arts Office who are responsible for Axis funding will consider this request in the 
budgetary process for 2027. 
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what role the Council play in delivery of milk and fruit to primary 
schools across the city, particularly Deis primary schools and if details supplied could be 
included in the programme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council are responsible for the administration of the Urban School Meals 
Scheme. This scheme entitles schools to order Milk/Fruit/Sandwich for those pupils in 
need of school lunches. 
 
DCC have a contract with Glanmore foods Ltd who deliver directly to each school.  
 
An application form will be forwarded to Finglas Parochial NS so they can be included in 
the scheme. 
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive whether action can be taken to secure the derelict property at 
122 Quarry Road, Cabra and whether the Council will use Compulsory Purchase to 
acquire the property. Neighbours report regular dumping and antisocial behaviour at the 
property including entry to the property. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This property is not currently entered on the Derelict Sites Register (DSR) however the 
Derelict Sites Section do have an active file which is listed for inspection to determine if 
action is warranted under the Derelict Sites Act 1990. Following this inspection if action is 
warranted, a Section 10 warning letter will issue to the owner. If there is no engagement 
from the owner following this letter, a Section 8(2) Notice of Intention to Make an Entry on 
the DSR will issue, if there is no engagement from the owners following this or they make 
representations that the Council are not satisfied with the site will be entered on the DSR. 
Only sites that are entered on the DSR can be considered for Acquisition under the 
Derelict Sites Act 1990.  
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if a meeting could be arranged between relevant people from 
housing and social work teams and the tenant at details supplied, who has been 
struggling with social and serious maintenance issues for some time. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will liaise with relevant parties with a view to assessing the issues 
at hand. 
 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive, in respect of the junction between St David’s Wood    (Dublin 
5) and Malahide Road/Killester Avenue: 
- 
What measures are under consideration to improve safety at this junction  
- 
Whether there are plans to review the layout, signage, or visibility of the traffic 
signals 

- 
Whether additional enforcement, road markings, or traffic calming measures can 
be introduced at this location. 
Residents report regular near misses at this junction, in particular due to drivers 
proceeding through the junction through a red light, posing serious danger to other road 
users and pedestrians. One resident’s car was crashed into on Easter Sunday while they 
crossed the junction. It should be ensured that it is clear to drivers that the signals apply 
to the full traffic-controlled junction and not the pedestrian crossing only.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This junction will be upgraded under the planned Bus Connects Clongriffin to City Centre 
Core Bus Corridor. 
 
Details can be found at: 
 
https://busconnects.ie/cities/dublin/core-bus-corridors/core-bus-corridor-
information/clongriffin-to-city-centre/ 
 
Any queries relating to the Bus Connects project should be sent to: 
 
InternalEnvTBusConnects@dublincity.ie 
 
Issues relating to vehicles breaking the law should be referred to the Gardaí as they occur. 
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what measures Dublin City Council can take to ensure that 
commitments made by housing bodies to provide cost-rental homes on Council land are 
followed through, given the significant demand for such homes and need for secure 
options for those who do not qualify for social housing and are not in a position to buy a 
home. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council seeks to ensure that commitments made by Approved Housing Bodies 
(AHBs) to deliver Cost Rental housing on Council‑owned land are followed through by 
applying clear conditions at site allocation stage, ongoing project oversight.  
The Housing Department assigns sites to AHBs through an Expression of Interest 
process, which sets out DCC’s vision for each site based on identified local housing needs. 
AHBs are required to submit a detailed feasibility study demonstrating how the housing 
benefit of the site will be optimised, including the proposed tenure mix and funding 
approach. 
AHBs are advised to consider the most appropriate funding model for the scheme, 
including CALF, CAS or CREL, as applicable. Any disposal of Council land to facilitate an 
approved development is subject to Section 183 of the Local Government Act 2001. The 
Section 183 approval incorporates specific terms and conditions designed to support 
delivery of the approved scheme, and these conditions are agreed in advance with the 
successful AHB. 
AHBs are required to progress schemes through the planning process. Following the grant 
of planning permission, and once final development costs are confirmed, AHBs must 
secure the necessary funding to deliver the scheme. Where DCC has requested  a 
mixed‑tenure outcome on a site, AHBs are required to apply for both CALF and CREL 
funding to support delivery. 

There have been some Cost Rental schemes that having some viability challenges for a 
number of reasons such as increased cost of materials, labour and professional services, 
which disproportionately affect apartment developments. 
Where possible, DCC works collaboratively with AHBs to value‑engineer schemes in order 
to bridge viability gaps and support the delivery of Cost Rental housing. However, it is not 
always possible to design out all additional costs impacting scheme viability. In 
circumstances where a Cost Rental scheme cannot be delivered, DCC may support the 
delivery of social housing as an alternative tenure, to ensure the site continues to 
contribute to meeting housing need. 
 
Q.40  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm which bye-laws and/or planning requirements 
apply to mobile coffee and food units in Dublin City Council’s area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Casual Trading in the Public Domain is governed by the Casual Trading Act 1995 and the 
Casual Trading Byelaws 2013. All trading locations for mobile food units are agreed with 
An Garda Siochana.  The Casual Trading Act & Casual Trading Byelaws do not cover 
trading on private property. 
Planning permission is not automatically required for mobile coffee or food units. However, 
planning permission may be required where a unit becomes fixed or permanent in nature, 
or where its operation results in a material change of use of the land.  
Each proposal is assessed on a case‑by‑case basis having regard to the specific 
circumstances of the site and the nature and scale of the activity, and where necessary, 
a Section 5 Declaration under the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) may 
be sought to determine whether planning permission is required. 
 
Q.41  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that the green area at Castlecourt is returned to its 
previous condition now that its use by contractors working on the Wad River flood 
alleviation scheme is complete. Residents were told on a number of occasions that the 
green would be returned to its previous state, but the green is now very uneven underfoot, 
swampy in parts, and with very patchy grass in other parts. It is used by many young 
children in the area, and the uneven surface creates a risk of falls. Dublin City Council 
previously used to maintain and cut the grass on this green. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above will be investigated and will respond directly to the Councillor.  
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to implement traffic calming measure on details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The request for traffic calming measures at details supplied has been added to the list 
along with other locations in the North Central Area and will be re-assessed at the end of 
the year to determine inclusion on the 2027 Minor Works Programme. 
 
The minor works list for 2026 is already at capacity for Works that can be carried out in 
the year. 
 
Q.43  COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 

 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a detailed report on the proposed change in tenure 
at the Bannow Road development (144 homes), specifically regarding Clúid’s proposal to 
convert 40 intended Cost Rental units into Social Housing. In the report, please address 
the following: 
 
a) 
What specific covenants or conditions were included in the Land Disposal Agreement to 
ensure the agreed-upon tenure mix (i.e., the inclusion of Cost Rental) would be 
maintained? 
 
b) 
Given that the disposal of this land was a Reserved Function of the Elected Members, 
does a unilateral change in the tenure mix by the AHB constitute a breach of the disposal 
terms? 
 
c) 
Does the Council hold any claw back that can be triggered if the AHB fails to deliver the 
specific housing types promised at the time of sale? 
 
d) 
What measures will the Chief Executive take to ensure that future land disposals to 
Approved Housing Bodies (AHBs) include legally binding conditions that prevent 
changes to tenure without a formal return to the Council for re-approval? 
 
e) 
Has the Chief Executive explored alternative funding streams with the Department of 
Housing to bridge the viability gap cited by Clúid, rather than accepting a permanent loss 
of Cost Rental units in the Cabra area? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The disposal of the Bannow Road site was approved by the elected members subject to 
specific legal covenants and conditions governing the use of the land. These conditions 
require that the site be used solely for the provision of social, affordable and/or cost rental 
housing. An inhibition is registered on title restricting the use of the lands accordingly. 
Dublin City Council also retains 100% nomination rights to all social housing units 
delivered on the site. In respect of cost rental or affordable units, the provisions of the 
Affordable Housing Act 2021 apply. 
 
The Disposal Agreement does not specify a fixed numerical split between social and cost 
rental units. Rather, it requires delivery within the approved tenure categories. On that 
basis, the proposed change in tenure does not constitute a breach of the disposal terms, 
provided the development continues to comply with the permitted housing uses set out in 
the agreement and the statutory framework. 
 
The agreement includes robust protective provisions, including a clause whereby the units 
will revert to Dublin City Council without charge should the site cease to be used for social, 
affordable or cost rental housing during the term of the CALF loan, save where a secured 
lender has an interest. Further safeguards apply where the AHB fails to proceed with or 
complete the development within the agreed timeframe, in which case the benefit of the 
planning permission, design and certification transfers to the Council. These clawback and 
reversion provisions are not triggered by a change in tenure mix within the permitted 
categories. 
 
Prior to contract exchange, Clúid Housing Association is required to demonstrate that 
planning permission had been secured and to provide evidence of funding capacity, 
including finance in principle. 

AHBs have advised the Council that they are experiencing significant challenges in 
delivering Cost Rental housing in the Dublin city area, including construction cost inflation, 
higher lifecycle and maintenance costs associated with apartment schemes, regulated 
rent limits, and long term financing risk. Despite supports such as CREL funding and 
discounted public land, some schemes remain marginal or unviable. 
In the case of Bannow Road, Clúid advised the Council that it could no longer deliver the 
originally proposed 40 Cost Rental homes due to increased construction, maintenance 
and lifecycle costs, particularly given the inclusion of arts, culture and community space 
within the cost rental element of the scheme. Given project timelines and the 
commencement of enabling works on site, Clúid proposed that these units revert to social 
housing in order to allow construction to proceed. 
 
CREL remains the only funding mechanism currently provided to support the delivery of 
Approved Housing Body Cost Rental housing. No supplementary or alternative funding 
streams are available to address viability challenges specific to these schemes.  
 
As a result, and in order to avoid delay to the overall delivery of homes on the site, it was 
not possible to maintain the Cost Rental units once the viability issues became clear. 
 
Q.44  COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm the number of outstanding extensions & adaptations 
requests for the last 5 years by type and area?  
What budget has been made available from the Department of the Environment for 
extensions & adaptations for the last 5 years? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Department of Housing assigns a yearly budget to cover all adaptations and 
extensions in 2026 Dublin City Council was awarded 3.8 million. Please see table below 
for the last 5 years budget and spend. Each year our budget is increased.  
 
Year 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
2026 
Funding 
Received  
  
 €1,681,971.00  
 
€3,157,325.0
0  
 
€3,451,158.0
0  
 
€3,891,161.0
0  
Total 
Actual 
Send  
 
€1,911,484.0
9  
 €2,288,434.22  
 
€7,888,862.6
6  
 
€8,109,428.3
3  
 
€6,038,978.7
2  
 
We plan to build 10 extensions for tenants with disabilities this year. 1 of these is near 
completion. Works such as bathrooms and stairlifts are started within 3 weeks of the 
tenants receiving in writing the approvals of works, Ramps can take time as they are 
weather dependant. We have 26 applications to be assessed these will be assessed by 
June 2026.  
 
We have completed 30 extensions please see by area below.  
 

Central 
Area 
North Central 
North West 
South Central 
South East 
6 
4 
10 
6 
4 
 
The 10 extensions planned for this year by area below.  
 
Central 
Area 
North Central 
North West 
South Central 
South East 
1 
1 
4 
3 
1 
 
Q.45  COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive in a presentation to the Central Area Committee on Housing 
Maintenance a survey system called ADDjust was mentioned. Can the Chief Executive 
provide more details on the ADDjust system?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
+AddJust is a computer program that is used to complete stock condition surveys of local 
authority housing in conjunction with the LGMA. We are in the process of surveying all 
DCC units with a target completion by 2030. The survey involves recording the condition 
of each unit and photographing each room. 
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can issue me with a response to the issues referred to in 
the email submitted with this question. Details Supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Response will issue directly to the Councillor.  
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive answer as to whether the Council is actively seeking more 
units to use in the adaptive reuse scheme in similar to Fitzwilliam Quay? If so, have any 
such been identified. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Projects on the Adaptive Reuse Programme have been placed on hold, with the exception 
of the Fitzwilliam Quay Project. Dublin City Council is not actively seeking further 
properties for adaptive reuse at present.  
 
Q.48 
COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to answer as to why the planning permission has been granted 
to redesign and redevelop the Stephens Green Shopping Centre? There has been 
significant outcry about the redevelopment of the centre. In line with our planning and 
carbon goals surely it would make more sense to have the current design retained and 
replenished before a part of history and beautiful architecture is completely destroyed in 
the Georgian Quarter of Dublin. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

The Chief Executive does not comment on individual planning applications or decisions, 
as this would be contrary to the statutory planning process. 
The application was assessed in accordance with the Planning and Development Act 2000 
(as amended), the Dublin City Development Plan 2022–2028, relevant Ministerial 
Guidelines.  
The decision is currently within the statutory appeal period, during which any person or 
body who made a submission on the application may appeal this decision to An Comisiun 
Pleanála. It would therefore be inappropriate for the Chief Executive to comment further. 
All associated documentation, including the planner’s report and decision, is available on 
Dublin City Council’s online planning portal. 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please address the extremely long waiting times to get a 
response from the Allocations department? Questions are submitted and are only partially 
answered by the team, is this down to a resource issue? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Allocations teams receive a high volume of correspondence.  The team endeavour to 
respond to all elected representative correspondence within a two week time frame.   
 
Please be advised that the dedicated email address for all correspondence for elected 
representative is electedallocat@dublincity.ie  
 
Q.50  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to please outline the cost of the proposed 300 tonne crane to 
remove a flag attached to the Spire? Where would this money be taken from and why is it 
that a drone operation for removal cannot be used? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
At present, a crane is not being considered for the removal of the flag due to the cost and 
disruption to traffic. The use of a drone to remove the flag has been considered in detail 
and is no longer being considered as an option due to practical issues and aviation 
regulatory issue. 
 
Q.51  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive are DCC on course to meet targets for delivery of universal 
design homes? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
City Architects Response: 
City Architects does not have a numerical target for the delivery of universal design homes 
by Dublin City Council. The requirement to provide universally designed homes in new 
apartment developments comes from the Dublin City Development Plan 2022–2028. The 
Plan requires that where apartments are larger than the minimum size, at least 50% of 
them must be designed in line with the Universal Design Guidelines. 
 
It should be noted that apartment schemes with fewer than 10 homes, retrofit schemes 
and build-to-let schemes, are not required to include oversized apartments and therefore 
are not required to provide UD homes.  

 
Housing Regeneration Response: 
The Dublin City Development Plan 2022–2028 emphasises integrating Universal Design 
(UD) and accessibility into new developments to enhance life quality. Under Objective 
QHSNO11 in the plan, it requires that 25% of homes in any proposed scheme of 10 or 
more apartments/units be designed as Universal Design homes. 
 
All projects progressed by DCC’s Housing Department would endeavour to meet the 
guidelines set out under the DCC City Development Plan.  
 
It should be noted that in retrofit schemes of existing housing, the UD provision is not 
required due to the nature of the of the project.  
 
Across our current Housing Regeneration programme, the following UD and UD+ units 
are currently in planning, at detailed design stage or onsite:   
 
 
Project 
Status 
UD 
UD+ 
Dorset Street, Dublin 1 
Onsite  
0 
8 
Constitution Hill Phase 1, Dublin 
7 
Onsite 
11 
0 
St Annes Court, Raheny, Dublin 5 
Onsite  
96 
6 
St Andrew’s Court, Dublin 2 
Part 8 Approved- Tender 
Assessment 
5 
3 
Dolphin 1B, Dublin 8 
Part 8 Approved – Detailed Design 
5 
0 
Glover Court, Dublin 2 
Part 8 Approved – Detailed Design  
5 
1 
Cromcastle Court & Old 
Coalyard, Dublin 5 
Part 8 Approved - Detailed Design 
36 
2 
Crumlin Road/Rafters Lane, 
Dublin 12 
Part 8 Approved – Detailed Design 
8 
2 
Constitution Hill, Phase 2, Dublin 
7 
Part 8 Approved - Detailed Design 
11 
0 
School Street & Thomas Court 
Bawn, Dublin 8 
Going through Part 8 Planning 
Process  
17 
3 
Kildonan lands, Finglas 
Pre-Part 8 Planning Process 
47 
9 
 
Approved Housing Bodies have a pipeline of 513 UD homes for delivery over the years 
2026 – 2028 across thirteen individual sites. 
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update and timeframe for the development of Liffey 
Park/East Timor Park and can DCC if any funding has been allocated for this project? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
East Timor Park is listed in the Parks Works Programme for pitch improvements this year. 
Additional works can be considered in subsequent years. 
 
Q.53  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 

 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider de-tenanting residents from maisonettes on 
Bluebell Road into the new LDA development in Bluebell, allowing DCC renovate, retrofit 
or rebuild these maisonettes? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Bluebell Waterways is a DCC/LDA partnership project which will deliver 383 Social and 
Cost Rental homes over 2 phases. This development was granted via the Part 8 Planning 
process in September 2025. In the first phase it is anticipated that 80 Social and 169 Cost 
Rental homes will be delivered. This is due to be completed in Q4 2027.  To deliver Phase 
2 of the project, which will provide 70 Social and 64 Cost Rental homes, the Maisonettes 
will need to be demolished.  
  
This is not expected to commence until Phase 1 is complete, allowing residents who wish 
to, to transfer to Phase 1 of Bluebell Waterways. Priority for Social homes in Phase 1 will 
be given to existing residents of the Bluebell Road Maisonettes. This process will be 
managed in association with the Housing Allocations team, Local Area Office and in 
consultation with residents over the coming months. Any remaining units will be offered 
via the Choice Based Lettings system.  
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to please confirm when will DCC carry out a door-to-door 
survey of Bernard Curtis House to ascertain the level of damp and mould in these flats 
and a timeframe for action? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance can confirm that information leaflets were delivered on 29/04/26 
and we are calling tenants to arrange appointments for week commencing 04/05/26. 
 
Q.55  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to have the Utilities Chambers inspected in the Woodlawn 
Estate, Dublin 17. These Chambers have been in situ over 34 years and have been 
displaced and damaged by the roots of adjacent Trees, which have quadrupled in size 
they are a hazard for children and pedestrians, provide shelter for vermin and need to be 
re-instated. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has notified Eir on the 8th of May 2026 regarding the defective 
chambers and requested that the repairs to these chambers be carried out at the above 
location. 
                                        
Q.56  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the long-term chronic parking situation in 
Kilmore West, Dublin 5. Has there been any consultations/ communications with the 
management of Beaumont Hospital regarding the Hospital’s role in this problem, or trying 
to find solutions? 
There have been many reports of incidents with local residents and people from outside 
the area parking their long term daily, one example was an 84-year-old lady who was 
blocked into her driveway by two unknown vehicles parked either side of her entrance 
meaning she could not navigate her own vehicle to exit. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Parking Enforcement have instructed Dublin Street Parking Services to continue to patrol 
this area regularly and enforce all illegal parking when encountered.  
Any issues of resident’s access being blocked illegally can be reported to Dublin Street 
Parking Services on 01 602 2500.  
 
The appropriate measure to deal with the issues raised for a residential area such as 
Kilmore West is with the introduction of a Pay and Display and Permit Parking Scheme. 
The purpose of a Pay and Display and Permit Parking Scheme is to eliminate the amount 
of long-term commuter/business parking in residential areas.   
 
Dublin City Council will proceed with the preparation of a Pay and Display and Permit 
Parking Scheme and subsequent ballot of residents, where it is first established that there 
is a demonstrable and clear desire in favour of a Scheme. 
 
If residents would like to apply for a Pay & Display and Permit Parking Scheme details of 
the criteria can be found on the DCC website:  
 
https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/parking-dublin-city-centre/start-parking-scheme 
 
Q.57  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report as to how much money and resources 
have been spent on the upkeep and maintenance of the civic officers Wood Quay in the 
past five years this report will include where money was spent and on what this report all 
to include the cost of security at Civic office.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A report is et below detailing expenditure incurred in relation the upkeep and maintenance 
of the Civic Offices, Wood Quay, over the five-year period from 2021 to 2025. The figures 
provided are categorised by area of spend, including security services. 
 
Expenditure 
Description 
2021 
Spend 
Total 
2022 
Spend 
Total 
2023 
Spend 
Total 
2024 
Spend 
Total 
2025 
Spend 
Total 
Overall 
Expendit
ure 
COMPUTER 
SOFTWARE 
0.00 
461.25 
0.00 
0.00 
3,008.35 
3,469.60 
COMPUTER 
HARDWARE 
561.17 
3,927.26 
0.00 
7,817.87 
17,847.83 
30,154.13 
COMPUTER 
REPAIRS & MTCE 
0.00 
0.00 
52,741.17 
28,228.32 
5,221.00 
86,190.49 
COMPUTER 
SERVICES 
0.00 
0.00 
25,320.80 
39,292.57 
0.00 
64,613.37 
TELEPHONE / FAX/ 
INTERNET MAN SER 
112,425.8
9 
87,783.97 
62,788.05 
38,939.61 
69,744.12 
371,681.64 
PRIVATE CIRCUIT 
LINE 
1,166.60 
1,171.36 
1,171.36 
1,171.36 
1,434.94 
6,115.62 

POSTAGE/COURIER 
SERVICE 
215,532.8
6 
333,309.6
0 
335,158.2
5 
329,591.9
0 
413,616.7
0 
1,627,209.
31 
GAS 
257,782.3
9 
561,279.8
9 
330,096.6
3 
235,920.6
3 
450,875.2
7 
1,835,954.
81 
ELECTRICITY 
552,216.9
6 
1,245,588.
76 
1,499,428.
24 
914,147.9
2 
1,094,980.
25 
5,306,362.
13 
FUEL 
0.00 
36,670.57 
18,104.77 
12,359.31 
0.00 
67,134.65 
FEES 
8,474.05 
8,079.09 
8,552.78 
8,937.13 
9,365.55 
43,408.60 
CONSTRUCTION / 
REFURBISHMENT 
MATERIALS 
32,058.17 
52,510.82 
46,347.20 
53,442.41 
48,256.29 
232,614.89 
STORES ISSUES 
27,769.22 
16,795.55 
60,974.59 
75,900.64 
58,789.32 
240,229.32 
PURCHASE OF 
TOOLS & 
EQUIPMENT 
30,835.02 
23,536.26 
48,951.90 
95,595.84 
25,549.15 
224,468.17 
MECHANICAL 
SPARES & 
EQUIPMENT 
9,941.74 
4,570.51 
2,357.39 
5,616.25 
5,238.56 
27,724.45 
PURCHASE OF 
FURN/EQUIP 
9,932.98 
36,630.88 
770.20 
27,204.51 
19,066.18 
93,604.75 
CHEMICALS 
1,675.54 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1,675.54 
LIME CALCIUM 
HYROXIDE 
921.46 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
921.46 
CLOTHING 
3,724.78 
1,587.29 
3,376.48 
73.36 
513.53 
9,275.44 
CLEANING 
SUPPLIES 
22,149.31 
44,929.83 
38,428.20 
57,486.79 
41,616.02 
204,610.15 
ELECTRICAL 
SUPPLIES 
24,041.97 
32,138.58 
41,584.82 
43,289.29 
19,968.50 
161,023.16 
GARDENING 
SUPPLIES 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1,230.00 
1,230.00 
LABORATORY 
SUPPLIES 
958.35 
617.66 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1,576.01 
STATIONERY / 
PRINTING 
9,796.25 
13,225.68 
5,180.01 
18,785.45 
13,823.67 
60,811.06 
PURCHASE OF 
WATER 
17,975.89 
26,770.64 
25,349.21 
36,211.20 
39,880.55 
146,187.49 

RATES 
1,376,984.
00 
1,376,984.
00 
1,402,674.
00 
1,423,226.
00 
1,448,916.
00 
7,028,784.
00 
PROFESSIONAL 
SERVICES 
9,938.40 
28,279.61 
0.00 
-0.00 
556.15 
38,774.16 
SURVEY 
0.00 
0.00 
44,513.70 
0.00 
0.00 
44,513.70 
CONSULTANCY 
25,483.08 
26,168.10 
0.00 
2,177.10 
0.00 
53,828.28 
TELEMETRY 
CHARGES 
0.00 
969.00 
1,028.00 
1,050.00 
1,069.00 
4,116.00 
CONSTRUCTION / 
REFURBISHMENT 
CONTRACTS 
65,715.25 
31,457.89 
21,652.08 
38,698.78 
151,606.3
7 
309,130.37 
LANDSCAPING 
25,156.20 
30,331.80 
23,065.50 
26,695.51 
15,799.20 
121,048.21 
SITE 
CLEARANCE/DEMOLI
TION 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
930.70 
0.00 
930.70 
FENCING 
0.00 
0.00 
3,658.11 
0.00 
0.00 
3,658.11 
INSTALLATIONS 
21,462.86 
2,179.20 
12,421.44 
8,133.92 
681.00 
44,878.42 
ELECTRICAL  REPAI
RS & MTCE 
75,386.93 
154,920.3
6 
72,215.98 
181,927.1
8 
75,268.89 
559,719.34 
PLANT & EQUIP 
REPAIRS & MTCE 
226,782.3
6 
255,153.6
4 
259,036.9
2 
380,593.4
2 
256,188.9
2 
1,377,755.
26 
VEHICLE REPAIRS & 
MTCE 
2,403.89 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
10,271.75 
12,675.64 
LIFT MAINTENANCE 
26,292.86 
80,927.21 
124,952.6
7 
19,067.99 
102,267.7
6 
353,508.49 
GENERAL REPAIRS 
& MTCE 
2,481.43 
7,834.80 
948.30 
118,806.8
6 
74,305.20 
204,376.59 
WASTE DISPOSAL 
24,861.78 
13,954.84 
12,324.36 
15,460.22 
20,171.49 
86,772.69 
GRAFFITTI 
REMOVAL 
204.30 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
204.30 
RECYCLING 
4,800.55 
20,741.59 
7,441.70 
7,141.90 
980.97 
41,106.71 
FIRE SAFETY 
SERVICES 
6,769.60 
3,660.68 
14,858.40 
11,969.39 
15,610.14 
52,868.21 
CCTV SERVICES 
12,318.49 
15,186.85 
13,647.27 
43,298.36 
8,223.58 
92,674.55 
CLEANING 
SERVICES 
105,636.7
1 
118,312.7
5 
94,392.90 
95,595.29 
83,062.89 
497,000.54 

CHEWING GUM 
REMOVAL 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1,430.10 
0.00 
1,430.10 
SECURITY 
SERVICES 
718,900.8
4 
759,050.8
0 
846,334.0
0 
985,241.7
2 
1,063,602.
22 
4,373,129.
58 
IBS MANAGED 
SERVICE 
467.98 
0.00 
811.80 
5,799.33 
33.50 
7,112.61 
GENERAL SERVICE 
CONTRACTS 
55,781.08 
106,164.2
1 
50,625.23 
124,872.2
1 
101,784.9
2 
439,227.65 
SKIP HIRE 
862.10 
1,573.03 
817.63 
500.46 
3,706.44 
7,459.66 
VEHICLE HIRE 
1,499.19 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
1,499.19 
GENERAL HIRE 
CHARGE 
16,705.90 
10,835.53 
15,889.28 
0.00 
4,436.82 
47,867.53 
ALLOC - FLEET 
MANAGEMENT 
1,513.05 
1,640.15 
1,455.60 
1,569.59 
1,888.18 
8,066.57 
INSURANCE 
CHARGEOUT 
117,240.1
2 
110,084.7
6 
113,508.6
3 
107,765.7
6 
104,661.2
8 
553,260.55 
EXPENDITURE 
TOTAL 
4,265,589.
55 
5,687,996.
25 
5,744,955.
55 
5,631,964.
15 
5,885,118.
45 
27,215,623
.95 
 
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to initiate a survey regarding the potential of opening up what 
remains of the Viking settlements that were covered over during the building of Civic 
Offices? This present site is a huge significance and heritage importance not just for Dublin 
and Ireland but for the European cultural history. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There has been extensive recording of the archaeology discovered during the construction 
of the Civic Offices in Wood Quay, these records are with the National Museum of Ireland.  
There is no requirement for survey work of the Wood Quay area at this time, however if 
any proposals are progressed, appropriate surveys may be carried out to inform these 
proposals.  
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange a presentation to the Southeast Area Committee of 
the capital program and its expenditure and economic impact with particular reference to 
the south side of the city at the earliest opportunity.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Finance Department is working with the Executive Managers of the Area Offices 
and the Assistant Chief Executive of CCLAS to deliver a presentation to each Area on 
the Capital Programme Expenditure in their Area over the coming months. 
 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 

 
To ask the Chief Executive to examine the possibility of an overall name change of the 
massive development that’s taken place at Kevin Street known as Camden Yard, a 
fantastic opportunity is here now that Dublin City Council is the developer and owner of 
this site 
To acknowledge the deficit of named structures and places that are not called after women 
and to correct this in equity in public buildings and place naming and this site be named 
in honour of a female member of Irish Society. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Council recognises the importance of inclusive and representative place naming, 
including the opportunity to reflect the contribution of women in the naming of public 
buildings and spaces. 
The Camden Yard development is a significant civic project and, as it progresses, naming 
proposals will be considered in line with the Council’s established naming conventions, 
relevant policies and governance processes. This will include appropriate engagement 
with the elected members. 
While no decisions have been made at this stage in relation to the naming of the 
development or individual elements within it, the principles outlined by the Councillor, 
including the promotion of gender balance in naming, will form part of that consideration. 
 
Q.61  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
 
To ask the Chief Executive about the ownership of the laneway at details supplied, it 
seems that residents don’t have access to the gate and a resident has welded it shut – 
the residents are wondering who owns this laneway and what can be done regarding the 
welding and blocking by a resident of the gate access? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is the freehold owner of the laneway at the address provided.  
 
The Area Office does not possess any records concerning the closure of this laneway. We 
are actively investigating the matter and will provide an update to the councillor at the 
earliest opportunity. 
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if the white lines for car spaces can be repainted outside the 
shops on details supplied, after the recent road works the lines are now faded? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The location will be inspected in the coming days. Any requirement for re-painting will be 
carried within 30 working days of the Council Meeting of the 11th of May 2026. 
 
Q.63  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if there is a list of proposed sites for the development of all-
weather pitches and what the criteria used to determine where is a priority? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are many requests for all-weather facilities across the City and the City Council 
endeavours to address these needs where possible. In recent years the Parks, 
Biodiversity and Landscape Services team have constructed facilities at Kilbarrack, St 
Annes Park, Brickfields Park and Clongriffin as well as other smaller facilities including in 
Stardust Park which is currently under construction. Plans are also under consideration 

for a facility in Tolka Valley Park, Finglas and a report on this will be brought to the Area 
Committee shortly. 
In addition, several facilities managed by the Sports and Recreation team have been 
refurbished over the last couple of years including Clontarf Road Pitches, Finglas Sports 
& Fitness Centre and Irishtown Athletics Track. Pearse House, Common Street and 
Digges Street are planned for 2026. There are new full-size (GAA & Football) All Weather 
pitches planned for Glin Road, Marrowbone Lane and Donore Ave. 
In relation to Parks, the development of all-weather synthetic astro pitches with associated 
fencing and flood lighting requires careful planning so that these developments don’t 
negatively impact on residential amenity and the enjoyment of the particular park by other 
park users. Impacts on the environment and biodiversity are also a consideration. A Part 
8 planning consultation for an all-weather pitch in the Central Area drew in the order of 
2,000 submissions from the public, stakeholders, NGOs and the Department of Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage which recommended that the City Council carry out a 
Natura Impact Statement “to consider the possible in combination effects of other 
presently mooted developments of artificial pitches on playing field sites utilized by the 
Brent geese in the Dublin area as well as that proposed in the current Part 8 proposal”.  
Surveys of brent geese feeding grounds are currently underway and this data together 
with previous surveys will be important in helping to identify suitable green field sites for 
future development including all weather facilities.  
There are many clubs seeking all weather facilities and each request has to be considered 
in its own right in the context of environmental constraints, impact on residential amenity 
and in the case of public parks the impact on the heritage and integrity of the park and 
impact on other park users. There is also an expectation with some clubs that a DCC 
constructed pitch comes at no cost. In reality, the cost of a facility with floodlighting and 
other ancillary works is a significant investment and clubs are expected contribute to the 
cost of maintenance, lighting and to a sinking fund to cover the cost of re-surfacing in due 
course. 
 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive, to examine a new and more proactive approach to tackling 
the issue of abandoned cars parked all over the city on Dublin City Council grounds. These 
abandoned cars affect many communities across the city. Abandoned cars not only create 
an eye sore but can also attract antisocial behaviour, it is clear that this is a growing 
problem that requires renewed attention and more effective solutions. Residents of DCC 
and other dwellings usually end up in parking wars over the extreme shortage we have on 
parking spaces while in some cases cars are abandoned for many years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The abandoned vehicles section investigates any reports made to it of suspected 
abandoned vehicles however it is worth noting that in almost 90% of cases were 
vehicles are reported as abandoned these are later deemed not to be abandoned by the 
registered owner following investigation.  
Dublin City Council does not have the legal authority to designate any vehicle as 
abandoned or to remove it from a public road simply because that vehicle is not displaying 
one or all of the required current tax, insurance or NCT certificates. Failure to display any 
or all of these certificates are offences under National Road Traffic Legislation and as such 
are entirely matters for An Garda Siochana to enforce.  
 

It would therefore require a change to primary legislation rather than a change to any 
Local Authority bye-laws to allow us to effectively seize the property of residents against 
their expressed wishes.  
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, to take immediate action to address the serious concern for 
the safety at Coultry Park after the recent discovery of a firearm. I ask the council to take 
immediate action to address these concerns. This could include increased lightening, 
instillation of CCTV, gates around the park that can be locked at night and engage with 
An Garda Siochana to ensure the park remains a safe environment for the community. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The existing public lighting installed on the main routes / footpaths through this park is 
considered adequate and increased lighting isn’t needed. See map below showing these 
lights. 
However, a special night check will be arranged to ensure that all these lights are operating 
normally and any faulty lights will be repaired. 
 
 
The Parks Service maintains regular liaison with the local Gardaí and remains available 
to discuss any emerging or ongoing issues in relation to the park. The incident in question 
was a one-off event and it is understood that the matter has been successfully followed 
up on by the Gardai. 
Coultry Park is intentionally designed as an unfenced park on the basis of good landscape 
design principles which promote accessibility and inclusivity. We know from experience 
that the fencing of open spaces does not resolve anti-social behaviour, maintenance and 
litter issues. For these reasons, the Parks Service has no proposals to introduce gates or 
boundary fencing around the park. 
 
Any recommendations that AGS might have in relation to lighting and CCTV will be taken 
into consideration, however as a policy it is not feasible or desirable to install these into 
every open space where anti-social activity takes place. 
 
Q.66  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, for a full and detailed report for the ongoing drainage issues, 
which have previously been on-going for ten years in details supplied. 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance recently contacted Irish Water to request an assessment of the 
area at details supplied. Once a report is provided Housing Maintenance will review 
and carry out necessary associated works.  
Q.67  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council has plans to introduce or expand a Mobile 
Sauna Scheme by identifying and approving suitable locations for temporary public sauna 
facilities, particularly near sea-swimming and outdoor recreation areas, and whether local 
councillors and communities will be invited to make submissions on potential sites. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are a lot of companies who wish to gain access to Dollymount and the North Bull 
wall. Given that the North Bull Island is a nature reserve we are conscious of not 
introducing new attractions which might impact on sensitive habitats. If a site was to be 
identified at this location it would have to be tendered and this process will take some time. 
I am not aware of any other locations where temporary public sauna facilities are being 
sought.   
 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, having regard to warnings from the World Meteorological 
Organisation on sea-level rise and extreme weather events, and in light of the Council’s 
Major Emergency Plan which identifies coastal and fluvial flooding as key risks, what 
specific scenario planning has been undertaken for a combined event involving storm 
surge, high tide and heavy rainfall, and to outline the evacuation arrangements in place, 
including identified triggers, evacuation routes, and the provision of rest centres, that have 
been developed in response to such a scenario. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Each flood risk event is different. Events with significant low-pressure zones are monitored 
by Dublin City Council’s Flood Assessment Group (FLAG) a number of days in advance 
and an assessment is made of the potential risk they carry as per the Council’s Flood 
Emergency sub-Plan, link below. The degree of rainfall associated with each event is also 
assessed as well as forecast high tide level and associated waves. Briefings on significant 
storms are given by the National Directorate for Fire and Flood Emergency Management. 
Met Eireann issues yellow, orange and red warnings of forecast significant impending 
meteorological events.   
It is then determined whether any mitigating measures required can be handled locally or 
if dealing with the event needs to be escalated to a higher level. At the Severe Warning 
Assessment Team (SWAT) level, all of the Divisions within the City Council are activated 
to assess the event risks and decide what mitigating measures are required in each 
instance and whether dealing with the event needs to be escalated further. The overall 
availability of resources to deal with more severe events are listed in the Dublin City Major 
Emergency Plan. 
 
Flood Emergency Plan October 2024 - FINAL 
 
During yellow, orange and red warnings, Dublin City Council activates a coordinated flood 
and severe weather response focused on prevention, monitoring and targeted 

interventions across key locations. Flood gates and barriers are closed along vulnerable 
rivers such as the Dodder River and the Liffey River, including the boardwalk. 
In coastal locations like Clontarf and Sandymount, promenades, car parks, and cycle 
tracks are often closed to prevent damage from overtopping waves and flooding. 
The Council deploys crews to inspect and clear drainage systems, including river 
screens/racks to ensure water can flow freely. Emergency response teams are placed on 
standby or deployed across the city.  Pumps are deployed where needed, and response 
teams address flooding incidents in real time. 
5,000 sandbags are in storage, and they are deployed strategically to protect critical 
infrastructure and high-risk flooding areas. Dublin City Council working closely with other 
local authorities such as Fingal County Council, Dublin Bus, ESB, Luas etc 
Please note that the rest centre element of the question is a matter for the Civil Defence. 
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide details of the number of Dublin City Council owned 
properties purchased by Council tenants under the Incremental Tenant Purchase Scheme 
in the years 2023, 2024 and 2025, with a breakdown of the number of purchases by each 
Local Electoral Area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Tenant Incremental Purchase Scheme allows eligible tenants to purchase their 
homes from Dublin City Council at a discounted cost of either 40%, 50% or 60% of the 
market value of the property. The discount awarded is based on the tenant’s income at 
time of application.   As part of the Tenant Incremental Purchase Scheme criteria, the 
period of time a tenant is required to be in receipt of social housing support to be 
considered eligible under the Scheme is 10 years. 
 
The following is the breakdown of tenant purchase sales under the Tenant Incremental 
Purchase Scheme 2016 by electoral area for the years 2023, 2024 and 2025: 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Further information can be obtained from the Tenant purchase section at Phone Number 
01 222 5449 or by emailing tenant.purchase@dublincity.ie  
 
Full details of the Tenant Incremental Purchase Scheme can be found via the following 
link 
https://www.gov.ie/en/service/12558-incremental-tenant-purchase-scheme-for-
existing-local-authority-houses/ 
 
Q.70  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
 
Electoral Area 
 
2023 
 
2024 
 
2025 
Central Area 
1 
1 
2 
North Central Area 
3 
6 
7 
South Central Area 
3 
2 
4 
North West Area 
4 
9 
5 
South East Area 
0 
0 
1 
 
Total Sales Closed 
 
11 
 
18 
 
19 

To ask the Chief Executive to provide a breakdown of the number of households removed 
from the Dublin City Council housing list in the last year, where applicants had been on 
the list for 10 years or more, and to indicate how many of these cases included a child of 
working age who was included as part of the housing application. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
It is not possible to generate a report setting out the requested information, above.  
Councillor Rane will be contacted directly to discuss the information that can be made 
available through our reports.  
 
Q.71  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, in his capacity as a member of the Board of the National 
Transport Authority (NTA), to bring forward a proposal for a systematic review of 24-hour 
bus lane designations across the city. Specifically, can the Chief Executive request that 
the NTA evaluates the feasibility of reverting selected 24-hour lanes back to 'peak-time 
only' operation? 
The background to this request is the significant financial burden placed on motorists by 
rising fuel costs as well as the detrimental environmental impact of idling in traffic. In many 
bus corridors, off-peak traffic is forced into a single lane while a 24-hour bus lane remains 
underutilised. (the bus lane on Clontarf Road serves one route only for example – every 
15/20mins) By allowing general traffic to use these lanes during off-peak hours, we could 
reduce stop-start congestion, lower localised emissions from idling vehicles, and improve 
fuel efficiency for drivers. Can the Chief Executive provide a statement on whether such 
a balanced approach could be considered by the NTA to alleviate the present economic 
and environmental pressures on the city’s drivers or will DCC and the NTA continue 
pursue their joint overtly anti-driver bias and hard-line approach against motorists by 
ignoring the practical realities of essential road users. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s Bus Priority team have been reviewing and updating bus lane 
operational times for the past number of years. To date, just over 200km of bus lane have 
been reviewed and have had their operational hours increased. These changes are to 
support Dublin City Council's policy to prioritise a modal shift from private vehicle use to 
more sustainable mobility options, such as the bus. These changes have all been 
approved by the Transport Advisory Group (TAG) and have been noted by the relevant 
area committees.   
 
Some of the benefits of operating the bus lane on a 24-hour basis include: 
• 
Improved bus speed and reliability.   
• 
Increased public transport ridership. 
• 
It’s safer for cyclists who sometimes share the bus lane.  
• 
The 24-hour operation makes it more evident to other road users when the 
bus lane operates.  
• 
Improved ability to enforce.  
 

The provision of an extra general traffic lane during off-peak periods would yield minimal 
benefit, attributable to the low vehicular volumes during these hours. 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, in light of a recent vehicle fire on Spring Garden Street, North 
Strand, on Friday, April 24th, which required the attendance of the Dublin Fire Brigade, 
can the Chief Executive address the following: 
 
1. What specific emergency response protocols are currently in place for the Dublin Fire 
Brigade when dealing with electric vehicle fires, particularly regarding the risk of 
thermal runaway (the chain reaction relating to lithium batteries) as well as the toxic 
gases emitted? 
2. Has the Council conducted an assessment on the risk of spontaneous combustion in 
EVs parked in high-density residential areas, and what advice is being issued to the 
public regarding charging safety and street parking? 
3. Given that Dublin City Council is actively transitioning its own corporate fleet to electric 
vehicles, what specific safety measures and maintenance schedules are in place to 
ensure these vehicles are safe for Council staff to operate and do not pose a risk to 
the public when parked in Council depots or on public streets, or indeed, can such 
assurances be even given? 
4. Is the Chief Executive satisfied that the Dublin Fire Brigade is currently equipped with 
the necessary specialised equipment (such as fire blankets for EVs or high-volume 
water injection systems) to manage these incidents efficiently in our city? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
1. Dublin Fire Brigade (DFB) are in the process of developing response protocols for 
dealing with electric vehicle fires. As part of this process DFB continue to research 
equipment available on the market and review learnings from other fire services on how 
to enhance our existing response to such incidents. Understanding the risks associated 
with such incidents a key part of developing our operational processes.  The fire service 
internationally are still in a learning phase regarding dealing with EV fires. 
 
4. DFB have purchased new equipment specifically for dealing with electric vehicle fires 
and this equipment is introduced into the service via an introduction of new equipment 
process. This involves evaluation, feedback, training and maintenance schedules. Fire 
blankets for EVs and high-volume water injection systems are part of the new equipment 
process. DFB continue to monitor the market for new equipment and engage with other 
services to ensure the service is up to date regarding best practice on managing such 
incidents efficiently. 
 
Responses to points 2 and 3 will issue directly to Councillor 
 
Q.73  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, in relation to the Triton and Tide Watch early warning systems 
mentioned in the Capital Programme 2026-2028 (Implementing Flood Resilient City 
Outcomes – Programme Group 3, Project 6), could the Manager outline the current 
operational status of these systems, specifically the following: 
A.  
What is the total number of active sea-level, river, and rainfall sensors currently 
feeding data into the Council’s central monitoring system and what are their 
locations? 

B.  
Are these sensors and ancillary equipment owned and maintained directly by 
Dublin City Council, or is the Triton and Tide watch early warning system managed 
under a private third-party contract?  If the latter, what is the annual cost of this 
maintenance contract, and how is the accuracy of the 'alarm messages' sent to 
personnel verified to prevent false positives or system failures during surge 
events?" 
C.  
Can this technology be extended to include gully sensors that detect if a drain is 
blocked? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The following are our responses to each element of your question: 
 
A. 
Ignition System: 
 
The Ignition system comprises the following monitoring infrastructure: 
 
Rain Gauges:55 
Weather Stations: 6 
Cameras: 3 
Level Monitors: 39 
Pumping Stations: 1 
Flow Monitors: 3 
Pollution Monitors: 2 
 
Locations: 
Location 
Location 
Ailesbury PS 
Alexandra Basin (Marine Institute) 
Alfie Byrne Road (Marine Institute) 
Arbour Hill 
Arklow Town, Co. Wicklow 
Ballymore Eustace Liffey Level 
Ballymun Coultry Parks Depot 
Ballymun Library 
Bannow Road Depot 
Beatty's Ave 
Beaumont Road (The Wad) 
Bedford Lane 
Blackditch Stream 
Bohernabreena Weir (Dodder River) 
Brookwood Rise Syphon 
Cardiffe Lane 
Chapelizod 
Civic Offices 
Clanmoyle Road MH 2407 
Clonshaugh Industrial Estate 
Clontarf Golf Club Pond Level 
Clontarf Storm Tank 
Collins Park River Monitor 
Core Store, Pigeon House Road 
Crumlin Recycling Centre 
Davitt Road 
Dublin Port Operations Centre 
Dunboyne 
Elm Park Golf Club Flow Monitor 
Elm Park Stream 
Elm Park GC CSO 
Enniskerry WWTW 
Finglas Weir 
Gandon Close 
Greystones WWTW 
Grosvenor Place, Rathmines 
Hannover Street 
Harmonstown Road 
Herzog Park 
Keepak Clonee 
Kilcoole 
Kincora Court PS 

Kippure 1 
Kippure 2 
Ladys Lane (Camac River) 
Leix Road 2 
Leix Road, Cabra 
Leixlip WWTW 
Maryfield Crescent (Naniken) 
Mellowes Road PS 
Osberstown 
Pigeon House 
Raheny Church 
Raheny Library 
Rathmines RG 
Ringsend MLPS 
Ringsend Park 
Rory O’Moore Bridge 
Rye Water Leixlip 
Shanganagh 
Shrewsbury PS 
Sillogue Golf Club 
St. Anne’s Golf Club Well Monitor 
St. Anne’s Trash Screens 
Tara Street Fire Station 
Terenure Library 
UCD 
Unit 11 Dunboyne Business Park 
Waldron's Bridge (Dodder) 
Wellington Place Donnybrook 
West Pier 
Wicklow Town WWTW 
 
Triton System: 
 
TRITON uses gauges at: 
 
Tom Clarke Bridge,  
Alexandra Basin   
Alfie Byrne Road (Howth & Skerries available too).  
 
DCC & the Marine Institute have an arrangement - DCC owns the gauges, MI receives 
the Data and transmits it to a hosting website. The gauges are serviced by NVM.  
 
Levels at the gauges are recorded and displayed in 15 minute intervals. Multiple gauges 
on TRITON & Ignition allow cross checks and prevent false alarms. A UK Met Office 
Forecast is received every 12 hours giving DCC an accurate 48 hour forecast (Extended 
Forecasts available on TRITON too.) 
 
B. 
 
All equipment is owned by DCC and is maintained under external service contracts. The 
total running external running costs are approximately €180,000 per annum. 
 
System Performance 
The system provides high accuracy, with:  
o 
Continuous monitoring of parameters 
o 
Ongoing refinement and calibration as required 
 
C. 
 
The Environmental Waters Operations Division is currently in the process of awarding a 
contract for a trial gully monitoring system, as well as installing approximately 300 sensors 
across the city. 

The purpose of the trial is to monitor gully performance and identify blockages, provide 
real-time data to trained operational staff, and support proactive maintenance and flood 
mitigation measures. 
The expected benefits of this initiative include improved identification of localised drainage 
issues, enhanced response capability during forecast flood events, and more effective 
data-driven operational decision-making. 
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, in light of the Approved Housing Bodies Regulatory Authority's 
(AHBRA) recent determination of non-compliance by and the ongoing oversight by 
independent experts of the Peter McVerry Trust (PMVT), can the Chief Executive give a 
detailed update on the Council’s on-going engagement with and contingency planning 
regarding the trust and it’s provision of housing to DCC listed tenants? Also, given the 
closure of significant PMVT facilities in the city (such as the 125-bed hostel near St. 
Stephen’s Green due to fire safety notices in April 2026), what is the current status of DCC 
tenants housed in PMVT-managed social housing units?   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is aware of the Approved Housing Bodies Regulatory Authority’s 
determination of non-compliance in respect of the Peter McVerry Trust (PMVT).   
The Council has been maintaining ongoing and active engagement with PMVT at senior 
management level and continues to liaise closely with the Department of Housing, and 
relevant statutory bodies in respect of governance, financial, and operational matters.  
At present, DCC-nominated tenants housed in PMVT-managed social housing units 
remain in situ, and the Council is not aware of any immediate risk to tenancies arising from 
the current regulatory process.  
PMVT recently withdrew for a long-term lease agreement with the OPW for eight units in 
Clare Lane, these properties required significant remedial works to bring them up to the 
required rental standard, so the decision was taken by DCC and the PMVT to not continue 
with the lease agreement and to rehousing the resident into more suitable 
accommodation.  
 Dublin City Council is also on the process to accepting the transfer of  
PMVT 
unencumbered residential assets. The majority of which are already tenanted, in order to 
maintain continuity for these tenants who are receiving additional supports from the PMVT, 
DCC will enter into a Service Level Agreement with the PMVT to continue to provide a 
tenancy sustainment service once the properties transfer to DCC ownership. 
 
Q.75  COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what, if any, controls are in place to ensure that designated 
wheelchair spaces and electric car charging spaces included in housing developments 
are reserved for the use of blue badge holders and electric car owners respectively? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Car parking standards for all new developments is set out within Volume 2 – Appendices 
(Appendix 5) of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028, with specific provision for 
Accessible Car provided in Section 4.2. 
 
Where car parking is provided, whether for residents, employees, visitors or others, a 
number of car-parking spaces for people with accessibility requirements shall be provided 
on a proportional basis.   At least 5% of the total number of spaces shall be designated 
accessible car-parking spaces, with a minimum provision of at least one such space, 

which ever one is the greatest.   In particular circumstances, the planning authority may 
require a higher accessible parking content depending on the nature of development. All 
accessible parking shall be allocated and suitably signposted for convenient access 
 
For EV spaces, Section 5.0 (Electric Vehicles) of the same Appendix 5 of the City 
Development Plan sets out the requirements for all new developments including 
residential.  
 
All new developments must be futureproofed to include EV charging points and 
infrastructure. In all new developments, a minimum of 50% of all car parking spaces shall 
be equipped with fully functional EV Charging Point(s).  
 
The remaining spaces shall be designed to facilitate the relevant infrastructure to 
accommodate future EV charging. Space for EV charging infrastructure shall be clearly 
detailed in planning applications. 
 
Publicly accessible EV Charging locations shall allow for ad-hoc payment methods for 
users. EV Charging enabling works for accessible and other reserved parking spaces shall 
also be included in the development where these exist. 
 
All new or upgraded commercially operated car parking development shall be required to 
provide for a minimum of 50% of spaces with EV charging facilities. 
 
When detailed Guidance for EV charge points, which is currently in preparation by Dublin 
City Council in association with the other Dublin local authorities, the SEAI and the 
Department of Transport becomes available, it shall replace the standards set out in the 
Development Plan. 
 
Q.76  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, now that a School Zone has been confirmed for St. Gabriel’s 
School on Cowper Street, if he could provide a clear timeline for the implementation of the 
works. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The school zone at St. Gabriels School on Cowper Street is due to go on site in Summer 
2026.  
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, in recognition of the dearth of childcare facilities in Dublin, if 
he will commit to an audit of any council-owned properties in these areas, to establish if 
any such properties may be suitable for future use as childcare facilities. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY:   
Dublin City Council recognises the shortage of childcare facilities across Dublin 1, 3, 7 and 
9 and the importance of identifying opportunities to support additional provision. 
 
While the Council is not statutorily mandated in respect of childcare provision, it contributes 
to sustainable communities and currently provides accommodation to over 40 childcare 
facilities at abated rent. 
 

At present, the Council is not aware of any vacant Council-owned units within these areas 
that are suitable for immediate conversion to childcare use. The majority of Council 
property in these areas forms part of the occupied housing stock or is in operational use 
and is therefore not readily available for repurposing. 
 
While we are not currently resourced to undertake a comprehensive audit of all Council-
owned properties for childcare suitability, we can undertake a targeted review where 
specific properties are identified, or where units become vacant and available.  
 
In this regard, if the Councillor wishes to nominate particular properties for consideration, 
these can be submitted to the Property Management Section for initial assessment and 
follow-up. Correspondence and suggested property details may be sent to: 
property.management@dublincity.ie 
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to intensify street cleaning and waste management 
enforcement in Dublin 7 particularly in areas such as Manor Street, Aughrim Street and 
the Blessington Basin/Phibsborough area, Street areas. Residents have consistently 
raised concerns about illegal dumping in the area, and the problem appears to be getting 
worse. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above-mentioned streets are serviced by the Waste Management Operational crews 
on a daily basis.  The Litter Enforcement Manager will increase Litter Warden Patrols in 
the area, and where evidence is found, appropriate enforcement action will be taken.  
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive how many planning enforcement complaints relating to illegal 
subdivisions or misuse of pre-’63 exemptions have been received in Dublin 1, 3 and 7 
over the past two years, how many have resulted in enforcement action, and to outline the 
current staffing levels within the planning enforcement section, including whether 
additional resources are being sought. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Information relating to Planning Enforcement cases are held against specific addresses. 
It is not possible to give a specific total of how many complaints have been received 
against a specific complaint type over the last two years. In terms of all complaints 
received relating to unauthorised development in 2024 and 2025 the number of complaints 
received Citywide in 2024 was 1674 and in 2025 was 1307. 
 
There are currently 30 staff working in the Planning Enforcement Section. The Section 
comprises of 3 units General Planning Enforcement, Short-Term Letting Enforcement and 
the licencing and coordination of statutory involvement in large scale outdoor events that 
require licencing under the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended). There are 
currently 3 vacancies for Planning Enforcement Officers within the section. It is anticipated 
that these vacancies will be filled following an open competition in the 3rd quarter of this 
year. 
 
Q.80  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for details of the Tree Pruning Programme to be carried out 
this year in the Ashington, Kinvara, Priory and Riverston areas and to give an assurance 

that the large overgrown tree on Ashington Grove at its junction with Ashington Avenue 
which was overlooked last year is included in the Programme and to further state when 
this work will be carried out. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Summer 2025–Summer 2026 Tree Care Programme is nearing completion. Work is 
now underway on the development of the Summer 2026–Summer 2027 Tree Care 
Programme. Upon its completion, the full plan will be formally presented to the councillors 
for information.  In the meantime, I can confirm that the programme includes tree works 
being carried out in the Ashington, Kinvara, Priory and Riverston areas. The tree located 
on Ashington Grove beside the junction with Ashington Avenue will be pruned as part of 
the tree care programme. 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider a transfer for details supplied due to the severe 
impact the open drug dealing is having on the teenage child in residence. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Transfer List and in receipt of Homeless Hap with an 
application date of 16/03/2021, and holds the following position(s) on the waiting list –  
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
J 
3 
364 
E 
3 
388 
H 
3 
144 
 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, it 
is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The number 
of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants could 
expect to be on the waiting list. 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
The applicant(s) should be advised to keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being 
advertised that may be of interest to them and to ensure they makes an application for 
same. 
 
Q.82  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for update on status of details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on Band 2 of the Housing List with an application date of 
19/03/2025, and holds the following position(s) on the waiting list –  
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
E 
1 
1290 

H 
1 
1256 
P 
1 
595 
 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, it 
is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The number 
of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants could 
expect to be on the waiting list. 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
The applicant should be advised to keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being 
advertised that may be of interest to him and to ensure he makes an application for same. 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
 
To ask the Chief Executive re details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on Band 3 of the Transfer List with an application date 5/07/2006, 
and holds the following position(s) on the waiting list –  
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
D 
2 
31 
H 
2 
62 
P 
2 
55 
 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, it 
is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The number 
of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants could 
expect to be on the waiting list. 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
The applicant should be advised to keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being 
advertised that may be of interest to her and to ensure she makes an application for same. 
Housing Maintenance have no recent repair request for mould, the request is now 
logged for assessment, the tenant will be contacted directly to schedule an appointment. 
The most direct way for tenants to report maintenance issues is to contact Ph. 222 22 22 
Monday to Friday 9am to 5pm or email maintenance@dublincity.ie  
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR SÉAMAS MCGRATTAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on reimbursement of monies owed to DCC from 
the HSE for ambulance services. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Dublin City Council has an established arrangement with the Health Service Executive 
(HSE) in respect of the provision of ambulance and emergency response services by 
Dublin Fire Brigade. 
Discussions between Dublin City Council and the HSE regarding the reconciliation of costs 
and the reimbursement of monies owed are ongoing.  
The Council continues to actively engage with the HSE to ensure that an equitable funding 
model is agreed and arrears are appropriately addressed.  
While progress has been made in recent engagements, a number of matters remain 
subject to detailed review and agreement between both parties. Further updates will be 
provided to the Council as discussions progress and greater clarity is achieved on the 
outstanding matters. 
 
Q.85  COUNCILLOR SÉAMAS MCGRATTAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a financial breakdown of all foreign travel by Councillors 
and DCC officials during this term of the Council. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Financial details of all Foreign Travel by Councillors and Staff are made available on the 
Dublin City Council Website Foreign Travel Records | Dublin City Council. Q1 2026 will 
be available in May. Foreign Travel Records | Dublin City Council 
 
Q.86  COUNCILLOR SÉAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to assist Cabra Boxing Club to find a new premises as they 
have no long-term security in their current location. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council understands Cabra Boxing Club currently has a lease for the premises 
in which the club is based. 
 
If in the future this lease is terminated by the landlord of the premises, Dublin City Council 
will assist the club in identifying and assessing suitable options for relocation. 
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR SÉAMAS MCGRATTAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a timeline on the proposed demolition of Stephens Green 
shopping centre. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The decision is currently within the statutory appeal period, during which any person or 
body may appeal to An Coimisiún Pleanála. It would therefore be inappropriate for the 
Chief Executive to comment further. 
Notwithstanding this, no demolition or development works may commence unless and 
until full compliance is achieved with the requirements of the planning permission and, 
where applicable, the issuing of a final decision by An Coimisiún Pleanála. 
The timing of any demolition or development works is a matter for the developer, subject 
to compliance with all conditions of the permission, the submission of a valid 
commencement notice, and adherence to all relevant legislative and regulatory 
requirements. 

There is therefore no confirmed or agreed timeline at this time. All relevant planning 
information is available on Dublin City Council’s online planning portal. 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report on the numbers of parking permits in place 
and the max available on St Peter's Road, Norfolk Road and Cabra Park and consider the 
introduction of a transfer waiting list for moving between neighbouring streets. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Details of parking permits and spaces available are below: 
Saint Peter’s Road- 60 spaces and 63 permits issued.  
 
Norfolk Road- 60 spaces and 55 permits issued. 
 
Cabra Park- 127 spaces and 119 permits issued.  
 
There is currently no allowance for the introduction of a transfer waiting list for moving 
between adjacent streets in the Dublin City Parking Control Bye-Laws 2024, which govern 
the issuance of residential parking permits. 
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a breakdown in tabular form of the Housing Waiting List for 
Area’s K and N i.e. Allocation, Transfer, Homeless, Welfare etc and to include how many 
from these lists have been housed in the past three months. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Waiting List 
Waiting List - Housing List
Area K Crumlin/Walkinstown
Area N Ranelagh/Rathmines Grand Total
Band 2 Housing List
715
308
1023
Band 2 Housing List older person
25
30
55
Band 3 Housing List
407
286
693
Band 3 Housing List older person
46
68
114
Care Leaver Priority
4
1
5
Traveller Priority
8
8
Housing Medical Priority
32
18
50
Housing Medical Priority older person
4
7
11
Welfare Priority
2
3
5
Homeless Priority
3
2
5
Homeless Priority older person
2
2
4
Grand Total
1248
725
1973
Row Labels
Area K Crumlin/Walkinstown
Area N Ranelagh/Rathmines Grand Total
Band 2 Transfer List
299
161
460
Band 2 Transfer List older person
28
32
60
Band 3 Transfer List
650
408
1058
Band 3 Transfer List older person
56
72
128
Surrendering Larger priority
21
4
25
Transfer HAP Band 1
448
245
693
Transfer HAP Band 1 Older Person
4
8
12
Transfer Medical priority 
32
9
41
Transfer Medical priority older person
11
10
21
Transfer Welfare priority
37
10
47
Transfer Welfare priority older person
1
2
3
Band 1 Transfer List Grand Total
1587
961
2548
 
 

Allocations for the last 3 months in Area K & N 
 
Housing List Allocations
Area K Crumlin/Walkinstown
Area N Ranelagh/Rathmines Grand Total
Band 2
57
6
63
Band 3
13
4
17
Care Leaver Priority
1
1
Homeless Priority
1
1
Medical Priority
3
1
4
Welfare Priority
2
1
3
Grand Total
77
12
89
Transfer List Allocations
Area K Crumlin/Walkinstown
Area N Ranelagh/Rathmines Grand Total
Band 2
16
4
20
Band 3
4
1
5
Medical Priority
1
1
2
Surrender Larger
2
2
4
THA
4
4
Welfare Priority
3
3
Grand Total
30
8
38
 
 
Q.90  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if the date has been set for the planned site visit by The 
Transport Advisory Group South Central engineers, together with Children’s Hospital 
Ireland, Crumlin, with regards to managing traffic issues on Cooley Road Drimnagh. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A meeting with Children’s Hospital Crumlin with regards to traffic issues on Cooley Road 
is being finalised and is expected to take place shortly. Councillors will be informed of the 
date and time of said meeting once arranged. 
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the request that Parks facilitate a feasibility 
study regarding providing basketball facilities in and around Crumlin village. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks are seeking prices from suitable contractors for the installation of a half court in 
Bunting Park. There are basketball facilities already in existence in Eamonn Ceannt Park 
and Walkinstown Park, which are free to use. 
 
Q.92  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the inspection of the footpath and tree causing 
an issue at details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A response will be issued directly to the Councillor. 
 
Q.93  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive can the rezoning of the Shanowen lands in Santry be 
postponed until a clear masterplan for the area is put in place, 
Without an overall plan, there is a risk of uncoordinated development that may not 
properly address infrastructure, traffic, and community needs. 

Could you please confirm if a masterplan and whether rezoning will be deferred until it is 
in place. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Proposed variation no.11 to the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028 has been 
prepared under the provisions of Section 58 of the Planning and Development Act 2024 
(as amended).  The statutory provisions provide for a: public display for a period of 4 
weeks, that a Chief Executive’s Report will be prepared and issued to the elected 
members of Dublin City Council, no later than 8 weeks after commencing the public 
consultation process, and that consideration of the proposed variation and the Chief 
Executive’s Report shall be completed not later than 6 weeks after the submission of the 
Report to the elected members and members may, by resolution as they consider 
appropriate, make the variation, with or without modifications, or they may refuse to make 
it.  The statutory timelines provide no scope to defer a proposed rezoning to allow a 
masterplan to be prepared for separate lands.    
 
Variation No. 11 proposes an amendment to Objective CS04: Programme for the 
Preparation of Local Area Plans / Village Improvement Plans, to prioritise and prepare a 
framework plan for Santry, including lands at Santry Key Urban Village and Santry 
Industrial Estate. 
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to facilitate a request from residents and park users at 
Ravensdale Park Kimmage, for an onsite meeting with the Parks Department, to discuss 
ongoing issues related to illegal dumping and safety. 
For some time now, Ravensdale Park has been repeatedly affected by illegal dumping, 
persistent littering, and antisocial behaviour. These issues have had a negative impact on 
the local community, discouraging residents from using the park and raising concerns 
about personal safety, particularly at night. 
Ravensdale Park is a community amenity with the potential to be a safe, enjoyable space 
for all and a vital green space for the area. It is also a busy means of access according to 
a survey of park users (survey details supplied). 
Ravensdale is currently undergoing flood alleviation works. This presents an opportunity 
to address long-standing problems, and to hear directly from residents and park users via 
an onsite meeting. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks are available to attend a meeting to discuss the issues outlined above. 
 
Q.95  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN  
To ask the Chief Executive why the trial for the cycle lane on Strand Road, Sandymount, 
has not yet started given that Dublin City Council contested lengthy court proceedings in 
order to go ahead with the scheme and succeeded in said court proceedings a year ago.  
Can the Chief Executive comment on recent media reports that he is opposed to the 
scheme proceeding and explain his reasoning? Alternatively, can he say when the trial 
will commence? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY:  
The original Strand Road project was a trial scheme, developed as part of the Covid 
response.  The city has thankfully moved on from that time.  Dublin City Council is 

currently examining all the options for bringing forward a scheme in this location.  To 
support our decision-making additional traffic count data is being collected, alongside a 
comprehensive review of all relevant documentation, consideration of other projects in the 
area and an assessment of changes since 2020. 
 
Dublin City Council is fully committed to the delivery of active travel measures across the 
city.  That commitment is reflected in the significant expansion of the walk-wheel-cycle 
network in recent years and in the continued prioritisation of active travel in the Council’s 
transport, climate and development strategies. 
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive whether the roll out of active travel schemes across the Dublin 
City Council area is slower than expected and why this is the case. Given the fuel crisis 
and rise in the cost of living could the roll out of active travel schemes be prioritised and 
fast-tracked across the city, using temporary infrastructure, if necessary, to offer the 
people of Dublin an alternative to car use? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The practice of DCC when carrying out repairs to footpaths damaged by tree roots as is 
the case on Glenavy Park is to replace the concrete with asphalt which is more flexible 
than concrete hence less prone to cracking. 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
To ask the Chief Executive about the footpaths in Glenavy Park. The council a number of 
months ago repaired the footpath and replaced concrete with tarmac on a temporary basis 
and we’re still waiting on the concrete been reinstated. When the council started this 
process, we lost a number of trees where concrete was replaced with tarmac and this 
weakened the trees and due to the last storm the trees fall.  This still hasn’t been resolved, 
trees and tarmac not replaced. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Department will investigate this location to assess the condition in which the 
tree pits have been left, including whether any stumps or obstructions remain within the 
path. Where works are required to reinstate tree pits, Parks will liaise with the Roads 
Department to progress the necessary reinstatement. Subject to condition and available 
resources, tree replanting will then be considered as part of a future tree‑planting 
programme. 
 
 
       
Q.98  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to review the details regarding Whitton Road and if he will 
make a statement on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
A reply will be issued directly to the Councillor. 
 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will consider adding seats to Herzog Park. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Parks can arrange for some benches to be installed into Herzog Park in late 2026 /early 
2027. 
 
Q.100  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if a bike bunker can be placed on Fitzgerald Street, Rathmines, 
Dublin 6. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The programme for the BikeBunker project operates on a demand led basis, with 
installations being the response of a cluster of expressions of interested submitted by 
residents through the BikeBunker website. All expressions of interest are geographically 
mapped and used to inform delivery planning. 
 
BikeBunkers are only installed where expressions of interest have been received from 
residents. Each space within a bunker is individually assigned and subject to a fee. 
Residents of Fitzgerald Street, Rathmines, Dublin 6 who wish to avail of this facility may 
register their interest directly on the website www.bikebunkers.ie  
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive how many young people leaving State care are currently on 
the Dublin City Council housing list broken down by area, how many have priority status, 
and what is the average waiting time for allocation? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please find table below outlining care leaver’s with a priority status. 
Waiting List
Area B   Area D   Area E  Area H   Area J   Area K   Area L   Area M  Area N    Grand Total
Care Leaver Priority
37
12
18
15
10
5
7
3
2
109
Welfare Priority
1
2
2
1
6
Homeless Priority
2
3
1
2
1
9
Grand Total
40
14
23
17
10
5
9
3
3
124
 
 
Dublin City Council are allocating properties based on time spent on the waiting list or time 
spent on priority waiting list and it is not possible to indicate a timeframe for any applicant 
to be housed as the number of vacancies arising will be the determining factor in the length 
of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list. 
Q.102  COUNCILLOR KARL STANLEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a timeline for the release of commercially non-
sensitive documents relating to the redevelopment of Wood Quay post the move to 
Camden Yard. These documents should include the embedded carbon report and any 
architectural sketches / concepts / drawings relating to the future development of Wood 
Quay. If there is no defined release date at present the report is to outline the steps DCC 
is taking to clear the path to make these documents. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

The redevelopment of the Wood Quay site will be considered in the context of the 
proposed relocation of Civic Offices to Camden Yard. At this stage, no detailed 
redevelopment proposals for Wood Quay have been developed or approved. 
As a result, there are currently no finalised documents of the nature referenced by the 
Councillor, including embedded carbon reports or architectural drawings, available for 
release. 
The Council’s immediate focus is on progressing the Camden Yard project. Consideration 
of the future use and development of the Wood Quay site will follow, at which point 
appropriate feasibility, design and environmental assessments will be undertaken. 
Any such work, and associated documentation, will be brought forward through the 
appropriate governance processes and shared with elected members at the relevant 
stages, subject to normal considerations regarding commercial sensitivity and 
procurement. 
 
Q.103  COUNCILLOR KARL STANLEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report outlining progress on delivery of the Strand 
Road trial cycle path after the Court of Appeal judgement in April 2025 that confirmed that 
DCC has a right to install such a temporary lane using its executive powers. The report is 
to include any progress to date on preparation for installation of the bike lane, as well as 
a schedule for when the council is expecting to implement said temporary infrastructure, 
together with a list of any known risks to delivery or potential delays in implementation. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Options for a cycle route on Strand Road are being considered. An update will be provided 
to councillors once the next steps have been determined. 
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR KARL STANLEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report outlining the impact of the Grow College 
Green project on north-south public transport connectivity from the North East of the city. 
Report to confirm whether or not any buses will be allowed travel north-south along the 
Luas line in front of Trinity College.  
Report should also describe the suggested alternative public transport routes from  
 
a) Marino -> College Green  
b) Summerhill Health Centre -> College Green given that the 123 is now defunct and the 
replacement 73 service no longer connects these points.  
 
Report to include any distances to be covered on foot in these alternative routes. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Bus movements in both directions along the Luas line will be permitted.  
The main routes that will operate on this alignment include the A, E and F spines.  
A spine: Swords to Terenure  
E spine: Ballymun to Foxrock Church 
F spine: Finglas to Kimmage 
 
College Green can be accessed from Marino and from Summerhill Health Centre by 
taking route 73, disembarking at stop 4720 on Aston Quay and walking 400m to College 
Green. 
 
Q.105  COUNCILLOR KARL STANLEY 

To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report describing the specific additional resources 
(financial / internal headcount increase / agency staff increase) to be applied to the 
maintenance of council owned residential properties, in the light of the additional 
resources available under the new differential rent scheme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In Q2 2025 an additional 8 staff were approved for the Council’s housing operations and 
maintenance teams.  
 
With additional funding now available for maintenance, an updated business case has 
now been prepared and recently agreed with the CE of DCC. This includes resource for 
housing maintenance and operations teams. Discussions are now underway with DHLGH 
to secure final approval for these additional staff. Once the business case is finalised and 
agreed, information on this staff increase can be shared with Councillors and then  DCC 
will commence appointing staff into these newly created roles.    
 
Q.106  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council has ever pursued prosecutions against 
anyone for damage to any council owned property i.e. Council owned housing possibly 
damaged whilst vacant by being broken into or graffitied, Playgrounds maliciously 
damaged, football pitches, Tree’s cut down illegally and without council permission. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An Garda Síochana have arrested persons for criminal damage to vacant Dublin City 
Council properties. Dublin City Council have assisted An Garda Siochana by providing 
witnesses to secure convictions. DCC have been successful in these type of cases. 
 
Q.107  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a list of locations in the North West area reported to 
have potholes/road damage on the Citizen Hub system following inclement weather early 
in the year and to provide details of when these might be repaired. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please see information below as requested which was extracted from our Transportation 
Asset Management System. 
 
Please note that Enquiry Status - Resolved indicates that repair works have taken place. 
Enquiry Status - Job Raised/Passed to a crew indicates that the pothole has been 
inspected and repair works will be carried as soon as a crew is available in the area. 
 
Enq. Ref. 11198284 
Enquiry 
Source 
Enquiry Date 
Road Name 
Enquiry Status as at 
07.05.26 
Enquiry 
Reference 
CITIZENHUB 
31/01/2026 21:46 
KILDONAN ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS793116376 
CITIZENHUB 
09/02/2026 17:31 
MELLOWES ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS796781129 
CITIZENHUB 
04/02/2026 10:48 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
6-Job Raised 
RMS794628235 
CITIZENHUB 
07/02/2026 20:40 
MCKEE ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS796060507 
CITIZENHUB 
31/01/2026 21:46 
KILDONAN ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS793116376 
CITIZENHUB 
07/02/2026 20:40 
MCKEE ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS796060507 
CITIZENHUB 
07/02/2026 20:40 
MCKEE ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS796060507 

CITIZENHUB 
26/02/2026 12:31 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS803982595 
CITIZENHUB 
29/01/2026 16:33 
SAINT MARGARET'S 
ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS792293102 
CITIZENHUB 
27/02/2026 17:36 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS804578529 
CITIZENHUB 
26/02/2026 12:31 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS803982595 
CITIZENHUB 
11/02/2026 14:02 
RATHVILLY ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS797654866 
CITIZENHUB 
24/02/2026 16:51 
JAMESTOWN ROAD 
(NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS803137852 
CITIZENHUB 
24/02/2026 16:44 
CARDIFFSBRIDGE 
ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS803125474 
CITIZENHUB 
04/02/2026 10:48 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
6-Job Raised 
RMS794628235 
CITIZENHUB 
12/02/2026 13:16 
BALLYMUN ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS798093123 
CITIZENHUB 
21/02/2026 15:54 
SAINT PAPPIN ROAD 
(NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS801775811 
CITIZENHUB 
05/02/2026 14:45 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
2-Passed to Engineer 
RMS795228849 
CITIZENHUB 
19/02/2026 09:56 
CASEMENT ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS800855886 
CITIZENHUB 
19/02/2026 09:02 
RATOATH ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS800828746 
CITIZENHUB 
18/02/2026 15:09 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS800565692 
CITIZENHUB 
09/02/2026 13:50 
BALLYMUN ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS796660409 
CITIZENHUB 
11/02/2026 08:41 
BALLYMUN ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS797479369 
CITIZENHUB 
14/02/2026 07:01 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS798814459 
CITIZENHUB 
14/02/2026 07:01 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS798814459 
CITIZENHUB 
14/02/2026 07:01 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS798814459 
CITIZENHUB 
16/02/2026 15:54 
BALCURRIS PARK WEST 
(NW) 
8-Job Completed 
RMS799638774 
CITIZENHUB 
11/02/2026 08:41 
BALLYMUN ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS797479369 
CITIZENHUB 
14/02/2026 07:01 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS798814459 
CITIZENHUB 
13/02/2026 15:07 
SEAMUS ENNIS ROAD 
(NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS798611863 
CITIZENHUB 
04/02/2026 18:22 
BALLYMUN ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS794863848 
CITIZENHUB 
12/02/2026 16:07 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS798194255 
CITIZENHUB 
12/02/2026 16:04 
MELLOWES ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS798192924 
CITIZENHUB 
09/02/2026 17:31 
MELLOWES ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS796781129 
CITIZENHUB 
12/02/2026 13:16 
BALLYMUN ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS798093123 
CITIZENHUB 
11/02/2026 18:38 
AVILA PARK (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS797783668 
CITIZENHUB 
11/02/2026 17:07 
RATOATH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS797752981 
CITIZENHUB 
11/02/2026 14:02 
RATHVILLY ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS797654866 
CITIZENHUB 
09/02/2026 20:44 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS796842746 
CITIZENHUB 
11/02/2026 10:04 
SAINT CANICE'S ROAD 
(NW) 
6-Job Raised 
RMS797520683 
CITIZENHUB 
11/02/2026 08:41 
BALLYMUN ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS797479369 
CITIZENHUB 
09/02/2026 20:44 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS796842746 
CITIZENHUB 
09/02/2026 20:44 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS796842746 
CITIZENHUB 
09/02/2026 17:31 
MELLOWES ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS796781129 
CITIZENHUB 
09/02/2026 14:17 
BALLYMUN ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS796674411 
CITIZENHUB 
09/02/2026 13:50 
BALLYMUN ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS796660409 
CITIZENHUB 
09/02/2026 10:24 
BALLYMUN ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS796531130 
CITIZENHUB 
07/02/2026 20:40 
MCKEE ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS796060507 
CITIZENHUB 
06/02/2026 15:21 
AVILA PARK (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS795687758 
CITIZENHUB 
06/02/2026 15:12 
AVILA PARK (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS795681246 

CITIZENHUB 
04/02/2026 16:06 
CAPPAGH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS794802275 
CITIZENHUB 
06/02/2026 09:06 
BALBUTCHER LANE 
(NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS795501081 
CITIZENHUB 
04/02/2026 16:06 
CAPPAGH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS794802275 
CITIZENHUB 
05/02/2026 14:45 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
2-Passed to Engineer 
RMS795228849 
CITIZENHUB 
04/02/2026 18:22 
BALLYMUN ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS794863848 
CITIZENHUB 
04/02/2026 16:06 
CAPPAGH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS794802275 
CITIZENHUB 
04/02/2026 14:40 
GLASNEVIN AVENUE 
(NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS794759226 
CITIZENHUB 
04/02/2026 14:19 
AVILA PARK (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS794744455 
CITIZENHUB 
04/02/2026 13:04 
SAINT HELENA'S ROAD 
(NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS794704586 
CITIZENHUB 
04/02/2026 10:57 
CARDIFFSBRIDGE 
ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS794635366 
CITIZENHUB 
04/02/2026 10:55 
CARDIFFSBRIDGE 
ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS794633284 
CITIZENHUB 
31/01/2026 21:46 
KILDONAN ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS793116376 
CITIZENHUB 
04/02/2026 10:48 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
6-Job Raised 
RMS794628235 
CITIZENHUB 
29/01/2026 16:33 
SAINT MARGARET'S 
ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS792293102 
CITIZENHUB 
03/02/2026 10:00 
WELLMOUNT ROAD 
(NW) 
8-Job Completed 
RMS794107721 
CITIZENHUB 
15/01/2026 11:57 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS786224745 
CITIZENHUB 
01/02/2026 10:00 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS793229936 
CITIZENHUB 
31/01/2026 22:53 
KILDONAN ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS793127552 
CITIZENHUB 
31/01/2026 21:46 
KILDONAN ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS793116376 
CITIZENHUB 
30/01/2026 13:28 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS792663120 
CITIZENHUB 
29/01/2026 16:33 
SAINT MARGARET'S 
ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS792293102 
CITIZENHUB 
26/01/2026 09:44 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS790600259 
CITIZENHUB 
26/01/2026 09:31 
BALLYMUN ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS790596549 
CITIZENHUB 
26/01/2026 09:24 
CARDIFFSBRIDGE 
ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS790592662 
CITIZENHUB 
22/01/2026 11:56 
CARDIFFSBRIDGE 
ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS789213587 
CITIZENHUB 
20/01/2026 10:12 
SAINT PAPPIN ROAD 
(NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS788175941 
CITIZENHUB 
15/01/2026 11:57 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS786224745 
CITIZENHUB 
17/02/2026 11:52 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS799988632 
CITIZENHUB 
25/02/2026 15:16 
RATOATH ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS803577927 
CITIZENHUB 
21/02/2026 10:25 
BALCURRIS PARK WEST 
(NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS801690834 
CITIZENHUB 
17/02/2026 11:52 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS799988632 
CITIZENHUB 
13/02/2026 16:12 
FINGLAS ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS798644566 
CITIZENHUB 
12/02/2026 10:22 
COULTRY DRIVE (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS798003512 
CITIZENHUB 
08/02/2026 17:25 
FINGLAS ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS796304966 
CITIZENHUB 
06/02/2026 16:02 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS795702482 
CITIZENHUB 
03/02/2026 20:24 
KILDONAN AVENUE 
(NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS794415537 
CITIZENHUB 
31/01/2026 22:23 
FINGLAS ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS793122740 
CITIZENHUB 
30/01/2026 12:07 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
Enquiry Resolved 
RMS792626576 

CITIZENHUB 
20/01/2026 16:28 
GRIFFITH AVENUE (NW) 
6-Job Raised 
RMS788404426 
CITIZENHUB 
17/01/2026 22:28 
NORTH ROAD (NW) 
7-Job Passed to Crew 
RMS787219650 
 
 
Q.108  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if he is aware of an incident in Finglas village where an elderly 
lady was on the ground after a fall and in place for over 4 hours before an ambulance 
arrived. Can the Chief Executive explain this delay and provide reasons for this?  
Anecdotally it is said that ambulances sit in queues at hospitals waiting for the people they 
are carrying to be booked into the hospital. Can the Chief Executive write to the Minister 
for Health to come to a solution to this problem. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DFB are aware of the incident mentioned in the question to the CE. The incident has been 
investigated by the Third Officer with responsibility for the East Region Communications 
Centre.  
 
A review of demand on the day showed, Dublin Fire Brigade (DFB) received over 50 
requests and call-backs for ambulances in the previous two hours and over 70 requests 
and call backs in the subsequent two hours to the incident. This resulted in a large number 
of incidents placed on a priority queue waiting for an ambulance to become available to 
respond. Typically, immediately life threatening (cardiac and respiratory arrest) and life 
threatening (Heart attack, Stroke etc.) calls account for approximately 45% off calls. 
Demand for ambulances as detailed means DFB could not provide an immediate 
response to every call received.  
When a queue develops, the agreed policy is to request extra resources from the HSE 
National Ambulance Service (NAS).  NAS were contacted and could not provide a 
resource.  
 
As hospital emergency departments come under pressure, this impacts on their ability to 
complete the handover of patients arriving by ambulance in a reasonable timeframe, 
leading to off load delays at hospitals. Increased demand and offload delays at emergency 
departments impacts on our ability to provide an efficient service to the public.  
Whilst offload delays at hospitals have improved in recent times so that we are not 
experiencing many delays at emergency departments more than two hours, during April 
2026, we recorded hundreds of incidents with an offload delay of greater than one hour. 
Offload delay data is reported to the National Ambulance Service monthly. 
 
Q.109  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAM    
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for Waste Enforcement to investigate the constant 
dumping just inside the entrance of Avila Park and to provide a report on same. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Traveller Accommodation Unit (TAU) are actively liaising with DCC Waste 
Enforcement Section in relation to illegal dumping in Avila Park.  Waste Enforcement 
Section are currently liaising with the relevant statutory bodies to arrange suitable 
operational days of actions in the near future as a matter of priority. 
Following these operations Waste Enforcement will issue an update to TAU. 
 

It should be noted that DCC Waste Enforcement Section have scheduled checkpoints and 
a programme in place with the relevant statutory bodies on several TAU sites where an 
increase in illegal dumping is occurring. 
 
Q.110  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a breakdown of the ownership of lands proposed 
for rezoning for residential use under the current Development Plan, including the 
proportion in private, institutional, and public ownership, and to outline what mechanisms 
are in place to ensure that any uplift in land value arising from such rezonings delivers a 
clear public benefit, particularly in terms of social and affordable housing provision. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The current proposed rezonings by way of proposed variation to the current City 
Development Plan 2022-2028 are a response to the revision to the National Planning 
Framework and the Ministerial request to rezone lands for additional housing capacity.  
The planning process of making a zoning objective on lands is a statutory process and 
one that is “bind” to land ownership, this is required to be so by way of legislation and case 
law.  Therefore, land ownership is not a consideration in the plan making process.   With 
regards to any uplift in land value for public benefit, all residential development in Dublin 
City is subject to the provisions of the Development Plan and the Housing Strategy which 
requires 20% social and affordable housing provision as part of any residential 
development subject to agreement with the housing department of Dublin City Council. 
Q.111  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update in relation to the planned improvements 
at details supplied to include a costing and timeline.  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A playground specialist contractor has been appointed to complete a full refurbishment of 
the older railing bound section of this playground which will include footpath 
improvements, safety surfacing and other improvements to the connectivity and inclusivity 
of the playground. It is anticipated works will start in the coming weeks, as soon as all 
equipment orders are secured by our contractor. The costs of this project have been 
allocated from our Parks Playground Capital Programme. The additional grant funding 
from the Department will contribute to the overall project. 
 
Works are to commence Monday 18th May 2026. The works will take approximately 8 
weeks to complete.  
 
Q.112  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the management of parking in city: 
 
A) When is the current contract with DSPS due to expire  
B) If regional bases will be considered under the new contract for example one in each 
LEA 
C) When the tender process will begin 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A) The current contract expires on the 31st July 2026 

B) Dublin City Council is not in a position to release details in the contract document as it 
contains information that if disclosed could prejudice the conduct and outcome of other 
negotiations for Dublin City Council 
C) The Supplemental Request for Tender has been published on E-Tenders since the 1st 
December 2025 
 
Q.113  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update in relation to the inspection of the trees 
at details supplied what works have been scheduled following the inspection and when 
will this commence.  
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply will be issued directly to the Councillor. 
Q.114  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the planned resurfacing of the small 
astro at details supplied if it will be included in a Sports Infrastructure application by the 
Council. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services recently inspected this astro pitch and found it to be in good condition for 
its intended casual/informal use. There are no immediate plans to carry out any upgrades, 
but we will continue to keep the facility under review. 
 
Q.115  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to organise the repairs of the swings in McAuley park, and to 
outline a timeline for the completion of these works. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Service removed the damaged item and reported the damage to the swing to 
the manufacturer and has been assured that repairs will be affected as soon as is 
practicable.  A firm date for the necessary repair is now being sought and will be shared 
once available. 
 
Q.116 COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to the dumping taking place at location as per details 
supplied and say what enforcement action he can take against landlord in both cases. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Litter Enforcement Manager has received reports of illegal dumping taking place on 
details supplied, and this is currently under investigation.  
Where evidence has been identified appropriate enforcement action will be taken. 
Q.117  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY  
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to the communication received below and respond to 
each of the points raised on the matter as well as the three requests at the end of details 
attached. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply will be issued directly to the Councillor. 

Q.118  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY  
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the traffic situation at location as per details 
supplied and please say what further action he can take to alleviate the distress being 
experienced by my constituent in relation to above as well as the dreadful situation with 
potholes as mentioned by my constituent. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A response will issue directly to the Councillor.  
 
Q.119  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY  
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to email thread as per details attached at A and say 
at when the ramps can be installed at details supplied at B. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply will be issued directly to the Councillor. 
Q.120  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive In light of the extremely serious incident in Coultry Park in 
Ballymun, where a loaded firearm was discovered concealed in bushes beside a children’s 
playground, what immediate and concrete steps is Dublin City Council taking to install 
CCTV coverage and provide dedicated park ranger patrols in the park? 
Given that I have raised the need for both CCTV and park ranger presence in this area on 
multiple previous occasions, can the Chief Executive outline: 
 
(a) why these measures have not yet been implemented,  
(b) whether funding has been allocated, and 
(c) a clear timeline for delivery of these safety measures? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The incident in question was a one-off event and it is understood that the matter has been 
successfully followed up.  A ‘Park Ranger’ Service would not have prevented this incident 
and would not have the skills to investigate or the enforcement powers to take any action. 
Coultry Park was intentionally designed as an unfenced park on the basis of best practice 
landscape design principles which promotes good natural surveillance from the 
surrounding houses which overlook the park. The use of cctv would give a visual record 
post any event or incident, however we know from experience that the individuals involved 
in anti social activity are generally hooded and not identifiable from such footage so the 
value of cctv is limited and its value for money must be considered against the cost of 
installing and on-going monitoring. The Parks Service maintains regular liaison with the 
local Gardaí (who have the powers to tackle individuals engaged in anti-social or criminal 
behaviour) and will continue to monitor any emerging issues in relation to the park.  
Q.121  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER: 
To ask the Chief Executive The number of Dublin City Council social housing units 
allocated in the past 3years to applicants who previously resided in International 
Protection Accommodation Services (IPAS) for a period of two years or more, 
Whether any such applicants were assessed under the homeless category and placed in 
a priority housing band prior to allocation and the number of such applicants who have 
been supported through rent allowance and Homeless HAP? 
What criteria is used by Dublin City Council when assessing housing need for persons 
exiting IPAS, particularly those with long-term stays? 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The information requested above cannot be extracted from the Housing System. 
 
All households that apply for Social Housing are assessed by the same criteria in 
accordance with Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 and Social Housing 
Assessment Regulations 2011, as amended. 
 
Q.122  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER: 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding a mother who has the option of renting suitable 
accommodation from a family member, if the family member owns the property but resides 
in another property they own, is not permitted to do so under the HAP scheme and instead 
is being placed in emergency accommodation with her 4 children at a significant greater 
cost which is up to 180,000 a year to keep a family that need a 3 bed in emergency 
accommodation and only about 30,000 in HAP a year. Where is the sense in this? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Under the HAP scheme, the HAP applicant’s tenancy must be agreed in good faith in 
respect of the property for which the HAP payments will be made. Where there is a family 
relationship between the tenant and the landlord, the local authority will seek evidence of 
a previous landlord-tenant relationship between the landlord and the HAP applicant. If the 
tenancy is a new tenancy, the HAP application may be considered if the property was 
rented to another tenant in the previous 12 months. This evidence may include but is not 
limited to the following: 
• 
proof of consistent rental payments 
• 
a lease or tenancy agreement for the property for current/previous tenants 
• 
registration of the tenancy with the Residential Tenancies Board (RTB) for 
current/previous tenants 
 
The onus is on the applicant and landlord to prove that the tenancy being proposed is a 
bona fide tenancy. HAP cannot be paid in cases where the tenant is seeking to rent within 
the family home. 
 
Q.123  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the new parking enforcement contract. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Supplemental Request for Tender has been published on E-Tenders since the 1st 
December 2025, the extended deadline for tender submission is the 7th February 2026.  
 
An assessment of tender submissions is almost at completion. Once all required timelines 
have been observed, the contract will be awarded to the winning tenderer. 
 
Q.124  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for:  
1. The number of clamps placed by DSPS that were illegally removed or destroyed,  
2. The number of prosecutions initiated for illegally removed or destroyed clamps,  
3. The number of successful prosecutions for illegally removed or destroyed clamps in the 
years 2022, 2023, 2024 and 2025. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Please see details below: 
 
1. The number of clamps placed by DSPS that were illegally removed or destroyed,  
02/01/23-31/12/23 – 3,574 
01/01/24-29/12/24 – 3,704 
30/12/24-28/12/25 – 3,610 
 
2. The number of prosecutions initiated for illegally removed or destroyed clamps, 
The prosecution of the illegal removal and criminal damage of property ie clamps falls 
under the remit of An Garda Siochana. This portion of the question should be directed 
to An Garda Síochána or the courts service for response. 
 
3. The number of successful prosecutions for illegally removed or destroyed clamps in 
the years 2022, 2023, 2024 and 2025. 
The prosecution of the illegal removal and criminal damage of property ie clamps falls 
under the remit of An Garda Siochana. This portion of the question should be directed 
to An Garda Síochána or the courts service for response. 
 
Please note that statistics for parking are retained for three years and therefore we 
cannot provide details for the year 2022. 
 
Q.125  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for:  
1. The number of clamps placed on vehicles by DSPS  
2. The number of de-clampings carried out by DSPS in the years 2022, 2023, 2024 and 
2025. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please See details below: 
 
4. The number of clamps placed on vehicles by DSPS in the years 2023, 2024 and 2025. 
02/01/23-31/12/23 – 44,128 (incl. valid writeoffs) 
01/01/24-29/12/24 – 45,636 (incl. valid writeoffs) 
30/12/24-28/12/25 – 43,124 (incl. valid writeoffs) 
 
5. The number of de-clampings carried out by DSPS in the years 2023, 2024 and 2025. 
02/01/23-31/12/23 – 40,473 (incl. valid writeoffs) 
01/01/24-29/12/24 – 41,722 (incl. valid writeoffs) 
30/12/24-28/12/25 – 39,367 (incl. valid writeoffs) 
 
 
Please note that statistics for parking are retained for three years and therefore we cannot 
provide details for the year 2022. 
 
Q.126  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide an update on the footpaths on details 
supplied. Are these footpaths due to be replaced/repaired. Has an audit taken place? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The location corresponds to an area in Fingal County Council, as it is outside of Dublin 
City Council's remit the correspondence should be referred to Fingal County Council. 
 

Q.127  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide a timeline when the ESB are going to 
repair the overhead cables at details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This fault was sent to ESB as a defective overhead cable fault. The ESB have 
subsequently investigated the fault and informed us that the fault rests with the old 
ESB/DCC interface box on the ESB pole. 
 
It is now with DCC to install a new replacement interface box on the ESB pole and this is 
scheduled to be installed in the coming week. Once that work is completed the ESB will 
be requested to reconnect the supply as soon as possible. 
 
Q.128  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive can the low wall at details supplied be raised? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Sulky racing is a dangerous activity in a public place and should be reported immediately 
to An Gardai Siochana.  Dublin City Council’s Drainage Department has proposed the 
introduction of nature-based solutions in this open space, including additional tree planting 
and the creation of swales. These enhancements will make the area less suitable for such 
activities in the future. The replacement of the existing wall with a higher wall would be a 
costly and unproductive exercise given existing commitments in the Parks Works 
Programme. 
 
Q.129  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide details of Greening Strategies in the 
details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
A reply will be issued directly to the Councillor 


SUMMARY 
DCC aims to acquire the Camden Yard site on Kevin Street 
for future residential and commercial development.
Prime central location currently on the market, offering a 
rare opportunity for strategic land acquisition.
Site status:
•
Full planning permission in place and partially 
constructed
•
Capacity for 299 residential units 
•
Office GFA ~ 60,000 m2
•
Capacity for ~ 2,800 DCC staff
Relocating from Civic Offices (Wood Quay) would unlock the 
site for redevelopment enabling for up to 530 additional 
residential units.

Provide additional public housing units within Dublin 
City Council’s administrative area.
Assess the potential for new or consolidated Dublin City 
Council offices as part of the project.
Support compact urban growth through the efficient 
use of serviced urban land and regeneration.
Ensure that the project represents best value for money 
over its lifecycle and is affordable.
AIM

Located 350 metres from St. 
Stephen’s Green close to the 
intersection of Wexford Street 
and Cuffe Street, Camden 
Yard will offer four HQ office 
blocks and two residential 
buildings set on 3.6 acres 
with incredible views.
An exemplar in sustainability 
with NZEB standards, the 
reduced carbon footprint will 
provide you a smart campus 
with future-proofed office 
spaces that can comfortably 
accommodate a workforce of 
4,000 people.
The permitted scheme also 
provides for the delivery of a new 
luxury residential development 
set to grace the most desirable 
part of Dublin city centre, 
perfectly located between the 
cosmopolitan St. Stephen’s Green 
and the colourful Grand Canal.
The masterful blend of cultural 
spaces, retail, green outdoor 
areas, apartments and eateries 
along with the proposed 
landscaped areas will bring a 
24/7 vibrancy, energising anyone 
who lives, works or socialises at 
Camden Yard.
PLAN FOR THE FUT

Camden Yard is easily accessible via numerous 
public transport options including bus routes and 
the LUAS. The area is within walking distance of
key city centre amenities, such as shops, bars and 
restaurants, making it a convenient location for 
both residents and employees.
TRANSPORT SERVIC

Q1 2026
Site Due Diligence
Q2 2026
Land Acquisition and 
Preliminary Business 
Case 
Q3 2026
Design Updates & Detailed 
Business Case 
Q4 2026
Procurement
2027
Construction
2029
Completion 
Q1 2027
Final Business 
Case Approval
TIMELINES

▪
Project will be required to be approved by central 
government as it will be considered a Major Project
▪
Ministerial approval no longer required prior to tendering
▪
Requirement for Preparation of Preliminary, Detailed and 
Final Business Case
▪
Requirement for the Major Projects Advisory Group review
INFRASTRUCTURE G

The purchase price of € 90 million is lower 
than the excess of € 100 million 
construction costs incurred to date.  
Opportunity to re-develop a number of 
other adjoining residential developments 
owned by Dublin City Council in the 
immediate area.
Risk reduction on site as the work 
completed to date is the most time 
consuming and carries the most risk 
(basement excavation, archaeological). 
Deliver 299 Residential units and new 
office and unlock Wood Quay for major 
residential development. 
COMMERCIAL
03
02
04
01

07
06
08
The site was acquired in 2019, for a 
reported price of € 140 million (including 
purchase and planning costs of c€10m it 
comes to €150m), and was without 
planning permission.
A significant amount of work is 
already completed on this project 
(more than € 100m) bringing the total 
expenditure to-date over €250m.
It would take in excess of €100m of 
development cost to bring the site from 
Brown field to its current state – this is 
excess of the purchase price.
05
Limited viable large scale offices 
capable of accommodating Dublin 
City Council’s space, location, and 
operational requirements.
COMMERCIAL

LEGAL & 
▪
SITE ACQUISITION COMPLETE
▪
STAMP DUTY AND VAT ASSESSED

▪Parent Planning Permission 2682/20 / ABP Ref.: 
309217-21 – GRANTED 30/08/21
▪10 Year Planning Permission
▪Amendment 1 – 3565/22 – GRANTED 12/08/22
▪Amendment 2 – 4308/23 – GRANTED 20/11/23
PLANNING

OPTION 
01
WOOD QUAY 
OFFICE 
REFURBISHMENT
 
(single phase)
€487m
OPTION 
02
WOOD QUAY 
OFFICE 
REFURBISHMENT
(phased)
OPTION 
03
CAMDEN YARD
DEVELOPMENT
€504m
€338m
€102m
€141
€581m
DCC OFFICE
SUBLET OFFICE
RESIDENTIAL UNITS
COST

COST

COST

FUNDING

▪
Prepare Preliminary 
Business Case
▪
Carry out independent 
cost review
▪
Progress Funding & 
Approvals
▪
Finalise Construction 
Contract and commence 
on site
NEXT STEPS

▪
Award contract for Corporate Finance Advisor to secure 
Camden Yard funding and office tenant 
▪
Engagement with incumbent Contractor for construction
▪
Procurement of project consultants
▪
Commencement of Dublin City Council transformation 
workstream
▪
Commencement of Wood Quay consultation process
▪
Continue site maintenance activities 
ONGOING

