Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 12 January 2026 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 12 Eanáir 2026 i Seomra na Comhairle, Halla 
na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an 
tArdmheara Ray McAdam sa chathaoir 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Ammar Ali 
Daryl Barron 
Racheal Batten 
Emma Blain 
Janice Boylan 
Kevin Breen 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Danny Byrne 
Lesley Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
David Coffey 
Anthony Connaghan 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Ray Cunningham 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Daniel Ennis 
Cian Farrell 
Alison Field 
Declan Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
Deirdre Heney 
Jesslyn Henry 
Rory Hogan 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Feljin Jose 
Leslie Kane 
Kourtney Kenny 
Patrick Kinsella 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Aoibheann Mahon 
Ray McAdam 
Séamas McGrattan 
Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
Paddy Monahan 
Carolyn Moore 
Edel Moran 
Darragh Moriarty 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Colm O'Rourke 
Gavin Pepper 
Cieran Perry 
Michael Pidgeon 
Gayle Ralph 
Punam Rane 
Conor Reddy 
Nial Ring 
Aishling Silke 
Supriya Singh 
Karl Stanley 
Malachy Steenson 
John Stephens 
Philip Sutcliffe 
Ciarán Ó Meachair 
 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Aidan Blighe 
Malachy Bradley 
Lorraine Brogan 
Dermot Collins 
Emer Uí Fhátharta 
Rory Flannery 
Anthony Flynn 
Dennis Keeley 
Yvonne Kelly 
Natalie Leonard 
Chris Manzira 
Mick Mulhern 
Brendan O'Brien 
Ronan O'Byrne 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Richard Shakespeare 
 
 
  
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
In memoriam 
A minutes silence was observed to remember the passing of former North Inner City 
Councillor Marie Metcalfe who passed away on the 27th December 2025.  The Lord 
Mayor extended his deepest condolences to her husband, children and family during 
this time.   
 

 
He also mentioned the atrocity that took place in Clondalkin resulting in the loss of life 
of 12 year old Oisín Reddin which has left our city shocked and heartbroken.  He 
extended his sympathies to Oisín's mother, family, friends, classmates and the wider 
communities of Ballyfermot and Clondalkin. He called for lessons to be learned and 
every protection strengthened to ensure that children are safer and families get help 
earlier.  
 
He also wanted to mark the tragic death of Samuel Benjamin Small, a South African 
tradesman who died in a workplace accident on the former Irish Glass Bottle site, 
Ringsend on 12th December. On behalf of the City Council he extended our deepest 
condolences to his family, loved ones and friends in Ringsend and Irishtown, all who 
worked alongside him and also those grieving overseas who may be mourning from 
afar. 
 
Christmas in Dublin  
The Lord Mayor took the opportunity to thank Tony Smithers and the events team, 
partners and local traders for delivering the successful Twinkle Town in Smithfield. In 
sharing statistics received, he outlined the impact and success of the event. Twinkle 
Town generated an estimated €12 million for the local and Dublin wide economy, 
attracting between six and seven hundred thousand visitors with an 85% positive 
sentiment. Exceptional by any benchmark.  The €5 Panto sold 25,000 tickets helping 
to remove cost barriers for families.  Feedback included the magical atmosphere, 
accessibility and real benefits for local traders.  
 
Dublin Nights Mapped 
Last week, the Lord Mayor together with Councillors Cat O'Driscoll, Councillors Gayle 
Ralph, Councillor Rory Hogan, launched the Dublin Nights Mapped, an easy to follow 
guide to what is open and happening in Dublin after 6 p.m.  This is about celebrating 
Dublin and recognising that the City doesn't shut down after 6 p.m. He wished to 
publicly acknowledge the work of the Night Time Economy Advisor Ray O'Donoghue 
and to all those involved including the City Council and Dublin.ie teams.  This is an 
initiative that will show our support in building a night-time city that is welcoming, safe 
and  inclusive for everyone.  
 
Donation Statements 
The Lord Mayor advised members that it is time for Donation Statements to be 
completed, witnessed and returned to Natalie Leonard, Administrative Officer, Chief 
Executive Office by the 31st January 2026. 
 
Welcome 
The Lord Mayor took the opportunity to welcome our new Assistant Chief Executive 
Celina Barrett wishing her the very best of luck in her new remit, Transportation and 
Public Realm Department.  
 
Happy Birthday 
The Lord Mayor wished to congratulate Councillor Vincent Jackson wishing him a 
happy birthday as he celebrates a significant birthday.  
 
 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Lord Mayor Councillor 
Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering 
the questions lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the  
questions lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and 
Answers are set out in Appendix A to these minutes. 
11 - 52 

 
 
 
3 
  Correspondence was received from the following Local Authorities; 
• 
Clare County Council  
• 
Derry and Strabane District Council  
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Vincent Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence 
listed. The motion was put and carried. 
 
In relation to the correspondence received from Derry and Strabane District Council 
and Cllr Conor Reddy's comments raised in noting this correspondence, the Lord 
Mayor agreed to write to the British Ambassador  and the British Prime Minister.  
 
 
 
4 
  To confirm the minutes of the Statutory Budget Meeting held on 24th November 2025 
and the Monthly City Council Meeting held on 1st December 2025. 
 
The minutes of the Annual Budget Meeting held on the 24th November 2025 and the 
City 
Council 
meeting 
held 
on 
the 
1st 
December 
2025 
having 
been 
printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken 
as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor. 
 
 
 
5 
  To fill one vacancy on the City of Dublin Education and Training Board following the 
resignation of Councillor Feljin Jose. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O'Driscoll that Councillor Hazel De Nortúin be appointed to the City of Dublin 
Education and Training Board.  The  motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
6 
  Reports of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) in compliance with the provisions of 
Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) and in Part 8 
of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) and in compliance 
with the provisions of the Local Government Act 2001:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 20/2026 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare): Proposed 
construction of 30 no. new dwellings units located at Dolphin House Estate, 
Dolphins Barn, Dublin 8.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
Anthony Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
20/2026 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
 
(b)   Report No. 21/2026 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare): Proposed 
construction of a residential development comprising 102 no. dwellings at the 
lands at Sillogue, Ballymun, Dublin 11  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor 
Anthony Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
21/2026 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
7 
  Report No. 03/2026 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Proposed Variation No. 
9 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028: Broombridge Hamilton Masterplan 
(SDRA 18) Chief Executive's Report on the Submissions received during the Public 
Consultation Process 
53 

 
 
The members were provided with a presentation on the variation by Emer Uí 
Fhátharta, Acting City Planner and Malachy Bradley, Deputy City Planner, that was 
followed by a questions and answers session.  
 
A total of 17 proposed amendments to the Variation Plan were put to Council for 
decision.  A full list of the decision can be found attached to these minutes in Appendix 
B. 
 
It was then proposed by the Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by 
Councillor Donna Cooney that the members of the authority having considered, 
proposed Variation No. 9 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028 and 
accompanying Strategic Environmental Assessment Environmental Report, Natura 
Impact Report, Strategic Flood Risk Assessment and accompanying Rainwater 
Management Strategy, the Chief Executive’s Report No. 003/26 on the submissions 
and observations received regarding proposed Variation no. 9 and the proposed 
amendments, the proper planning and sustainable development of the City, the 
statutory obligations of the local authority, including the requirement to be consistent 
with the objectives of the National Planning Framework, the Regional Spatial and 
Economic Strategy and Specific Planning Policy Requirements and the relevant 
policies and objectives of the Government or any Minister of the Government; it is 
hereby recommended that this City Council resolves that proposed Variation No. 9 of 
the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028 is made, and that the necessary notices 
of the making of Variation No. 9 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028 be 
published. 
 
The Variation will come into effect immediately, upon the making of the resolution by 
the City Council.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
Following adoption of the report, Emer Uí Fhátharta, Acting City Planner thanked 
Councillors and provided the following statement; 
 
Ba mhaith liom buíochas a ghabháil, 
I would like to thank you the elected members tonight for the support, enthusiasm and 
leadership which you have shown during this process and thank the whole planning 
team and the wider team across the City Council who helped to bring this proposed 
Variation before you tonight. 
  
This process has demonstrated how working in collaboration with you the elected 
representatives, together with local communities and key stakeholders can deliver 
plan-led, compact and sustainable growth to facilitate the creation of sustainable 
communities 
  
This decision tonight to embed Broombridge Hamilton Masterplan into Dublin City 
Development Plan as SDRA 18 is a very significant milestone in addressing the urgent 
need to accelerate housing delivery in the City, by delivering new homes, at scale, in a 
strategically located area. 
  
Tonight you have provided the receiving environment to facilitate the delivery of up to 
8,500 new homes for existing and future Dubliners.   
  
Mar a déarfá 
Ní neart go cur le Chéile! 
Go raibh mile maith agaibh a comhairleoirí 
 
 

 
8 
  Report No. 02/2026 of the Assistant Chief Executive (E. Quinlivan) - Arts Grant 
Funding 2026 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Lord Mayor Councillor 
Ray McAdam, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.02/2026 and 
hereby approves the Arts Funding awards as set out therein.  The motion was put and 
carried.  
 
 
 
9 
  Report No. 17/2026 of the Executive Manager (F. D'Arcy) - With reference to the 
disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and Tenant (Ground Rents) 
(No. 2) Act, 1978. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Daryl 
Barron that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.02/2026 and assents 
to the proposal outlined therein. 
  
 
 
10   Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 07/2026 of the Executive Manager (D. O`Connor) - With reference 
to the granting a 10 year lease of Retail Unit 1A, Block 20, New Priory Retail, 
Hole in the Wall Road, Dublin 13 to RGAM Limited.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O'Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.07/2026 
and assents to the proposal outlined therein. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 09/2026 of the Executive Manager (D. O`Connor) - With reference 
to the grant of a lease for a site at Croftwood Crescent, Cherry Orchard, Dublin 
10 to Cherry Orchard Childcare Services Ltd.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No.09/2026 and assents to the proposal outlined therein. 
  
 
 
11   Disposal of Property:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 06/2026 of the Executive Manager (D. O`Connor) - With reference 
to the Disposal of a plot to the side of 163 Botanic Avenue, Glasnevin, Dublin 9 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No.06/2026 and assents to the proposal outlined therein. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 08/2026 of the Executive Manager (D. O`Connor) - With reference 
to Disposal of Lands at 33-37 Dolphin's Barn Street and South Circular Road, 
Dublin 8 to the Iveagh Trust  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ciarán O Meachair and seconded by Councillor 
Vincent Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No.08/2026 and assents to the proposal outlined therein. 
 
Councillor Malachy Steenson asked for his objection to this disposal be noted 
for the record.  
The Lord Mayor with the full agreement of the Council suspended Standing 
Orders to complete the business on the agenda.  
 
 

 
12   Report No. 15/2026 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (D. Collins) - 
Quarterly Report of the Active Travel Programme Office 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Conor Reddy that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 15/2026.  The 
Motion was put and carried.   
 
The Lord Mayor vacated the Chair to Councillor Gayle Ralph at 8.31 p.m. and 
returned to the chamber at 8.39 p.m. 
 
 
 
13   Report No. 16/2026 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (D. Collins) - 
Quarterly Report of the Traffic Department 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Conor Reddy that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 16/2026.  The 
Motion was put and carried.   
  
 
 
14   Report No.11/2026 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Housing Supply 
and Delivery Monthly Update 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor Cieran Perry 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 11/2026. The motion was put 
and carried. 
 
 
 
15   Report No. 14/2026 of the Assistant Chief Executive (R. Flannery) - Community 
Wealth Building Update 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas McGrattan and seconded by Councillor Janet 
Horner that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 14/2026.  The motion 
was put and carried.  
 
It was agreed that a more detailed report would be provided to Council at the April 
Council meeting. 
 
 
 
16   Report No. 04/2026 of the Chairperson of the Audit Committee - Annual Report of 
Dublin City Council’s Audit Committee for the year ended 31/12/2025 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Colm O'Rourke and seconded by Councillor Feljin Jose 
that Dublin City Council note the contents of Report No. 04/2026.  The motion was put 
and carried.  
 
 
 
17   Report No. 05/2025 of the Chairperson of the Audit Committee - Audit Committee 
Charter and Annual Work Programme 2026 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Colm O'Rourke and seconded by Councillor Feljin Jose 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 05/2025.  The motion was 
put and carried.  
 
 
 
18   Report No. 10/2026 of the Head of Finance (R. Flannery) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement and  Reports as submitted under the EU/IMF Framework 
 
Report No. 10/2026 on the agenda was not reached and will carry forward to the next 
Council meeting.  
 
 
 
 

 
19   Report No. 18/2026 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report 
 
Report No. 18/2026 on the agenda was not reached and will carry forward to the next 
Council meeting.  
 
 
 
20   Report No. 12/2026 of the Area Committees - Minutes of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of November 2025. 
 
Report No. 12/2026 on the agenda was not reached and will carry forward to the next 
Council meeting.  
 
 
 
21   Report No. 22/2025 of the Community, Gaeilge, Sports, Arts & Culture SPC - Minute 
of meeting held on 22nd September 2025, Councillor Darragh Moriarty., Chairperson. 
 
Report  No. 22/2026 on the agenda was not reached and will carry forward to the next 
Council meeting.  
 
 
 
22   Report No. 13/2026 of the Economic Development and Enterprise Strategic Policy 
Committee - Minute of meeting held on 9th September, Councillor Racheal Batten, 
Chairperson 
 
Report No. 13/2026 on the agenda was not reached and will carry forward to the next 
Council meeting.  
 
 
 
23   Report No. 19/2026 of the Protocol Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on the 
23rd October 2025, Councillor Deirdre Heney , Chairperson. 
 
Report No. 19/2026 was not reached and will carry forward to the next Council 
meeting.  
 
 
 
24   Topical Issues 
 
No topical issues were submitted for consideration. 
 
 
 
25   Motions on Notice 
 
Motion No. 1 in the name of Councillor Lesley Byrne and seconded by 
Councillor Cat O'Driscoll 
 
That this Council states clearly that having a home is of fundamental importance to 
quality of life and that access to adequate housing, by facilitating the development of 
family, social and community relationships, promotes the common good. Therefore the 
council upholds that housing is a fundamental human right, and that everyone should 
have a right to access adequate housing and commits to enshrining this principle in all 
Dublin City Council housing policies and actions. 
To support this, the Council agrees to: 
1. Set an Adequacy Standard for all Council housing, outlining the basic 
requirements every home should meet – including habitability, safety, warmth, 
ventilation, accessibility, and a healthy living environment. 
2. Improve the Council’s housing maintenance systems so that all Council homes 
are brought up to this standard and kept at that level. This should include 
 

 
better repair reporting, clearer timelines, quality of service provided, and 
regular inspections. 
3. That council tenants are treated as rights holders of all aspects of the right to 
housing – including treatment with dignity, respect and participation in 
decisions that affect them. 
4. That the Council sets out a rights based housing policy that will ensure the 
right to access adequate housing for everyone living in the city – including 
social, affordable rental and purchase housing. 
5. Write to the Minister for Housing requesting that the Government hold a 
referendum to insert the right to access adequate housing in the Constitution, 
and provide the support needed for local authorities to uphold this right. 
The motion, taken without debate, was put and carried.  
The Fine Gael group wished for their objection to this motion be noted.  
 
 
26   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
Emergency Motion No. 1 in the name of Cllr Darragh Moriarty, Cllr Conor Reddy, 
Cllr Jesslyn Henry, Cllr Lesley Byrne and seconded by Cllr Anthony Connaghan  
That this City Council: 
  
Rejects the baseless claim that "a lot of people who are in homeless emergency 
accommodation don't have a housing right in Ireland" made by Tánaiste and Fine 
Gael Leader, Simon Harris. 
  
Fully supports the position as outlined by Mary Hayes, Director of the DRHE, stating 
"Anyone who presents for and is provided emergency accommodation has a right to 
housing or establishes that right very quickly." 
  
Condemns the Tánaiste's blatant efforts to scapegoat and demonise migrants for his 
Government's decade and a half of failure to meaningfully address the housing and 
homelessness crisis. 
  
Calls for the Lord Mayor to write to the Tánaiste to defend the position of the DRHE 
and call out the Tánaiste's blatant attempts to blame migrants for his Government's 
own failings. 
 
The motion was put and carried.  
 
The Fine Gael Group, Councillors Malachy Steenson and Councillor Gavin Pepper 
wished for their objection to the motion be noted.  
 
 
Emergency Motion No. 4 in the name of Cllr Ciarán Ó Meachair and seconded by 
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam 
Dublin City Council reaffirms our support for International Law and the United Nations 
Charter. Dublin City Council notes with great concern the recent events in Latin 
America and condemns the United States' abduction of The President of Venezuela, 
Nicolás Maduro. In addition, this council condemns the threatened military action 
against both Colombia and Mexico. This council encourages all parties to this crisis to 
engage in peaceful diplomacy as a means of resolving any disputes. 
54 

 
 
This motion, was taken without debate, and put and carried.  The Lord Mayor agreed 
to write to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. 
 
Councillor Malachy Steenson and Councillor Gavin Pepper wished for their objection 
to the motion be noted.  
 
 
Emergency Motion No. 5 in the name of Cllr Rory Hogan and Cllr David Coffey 
and seconded by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam  
 
That Dublin City Council initiate an urgent review of its current policy regarding the use 
of glyphosate in public realm maintenance, and that a report be brought to Council 
outlining the findings of this review and any policy options arising. 
  
The motion, taken without debate, was put and carried.  It was also agreed that this 
Motion would be referred to the Mobility and Public Realm SPC 
 
Emergency Motion No. 6 in the name of Cllr Janet Horner, Cllr Fiona Connelly, 
Cllr Colm O'Rourke, Cllr Donna Cooney and Cllr Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by 
Councillor Conor Reddy 
 
Dublin City Council recognises that the Complex is a vital arts hub and resource for 
Dublin and calls for inmediate and urgent interventions to find a resolution to its 
imminent closure. We call for the Chief Executive to make urgent appeals to Ministers 
Chambers and O'Donovan to make funding available to ensure the building can be 
purchased, brought into public ownership and retained as a hub for arts. Dublin City 
cannot afford to lose another world class arts space. 
 
The motion was put and carried.  A copy of the response from Eileen Quinlivan, 
Assistant Chief Executive can be found attached to these minutes in Appendix C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
  

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY 12th 
JANUARY 2026 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council was involved in this event, ever invited 
to previous iterations of this event, if Local Government was represented by the CCMA 
or the LGMA and to further ask the Chief Executive to enquire of the Department of 
Rural and Community Development and the Gaeltacht how Local Government has 
been and will be represented at these Fora in the future? 
 
On 14 November the 4th Annual National Civic Forum, hosted by the Department of 
Rural and Community Development and the Gaeltacht at the Millennium Hall in Cork. 
  
The event, which was opened by Minister of State Jerry Buttimer T.D. and Ardmhéara 
Chorcaí Fergal Dennehy, brought together community groups, policymakers, and local 
government to discuss the vital role of civic engagement and partnership 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply will be issued directly to Councillor Lacey. 
 
 
 Q.2  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive details supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services have a litter bin at the junction of details supplied. This 
bin is serviced regularly by our city centre staff as it is constantly being filled with 
illegally dumped household waste. We would not be in favour of putting another litter 
bin down in details supplied outside the school as it too would become a focus for 
dumping illegal household waste and not a good look directly outside a school. 
 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive details supplied  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement will direct Dublin Street Parking Services to patrol this area once 
a week and enforce all illegal parking when encountered. 
 
 
Q.4  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive details supplied  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Details Supplied is a Dublin City Council Housing Department Scheme on the list of 
protected structures.  In making additions or deletions from the Record of Protected 
Structures a statutory process must be followed.   
 
The decision on whether to add or delete a structure from the Record of Protected 
Structures is a reserved function of Dublin City Council (i.e. for the decision of the 
Elected Members only).  The members are involved at the commencement of the 
process, when a report is submitted to the relevant Area Committee for approval to 
initiate the process where it must be outlined why the protection of the structure is no 
longer warranted.   

Following the public consultation phase, a further report is brought to the City Council 
meeting which includes a written consideration of all the submissions and observations 
received.  This report may recommend to proceed or not with the proposed deletion, 
or with a recommendation including amendments to the proposed deletion.   
The process for making a deletion to the RPS takes 20 weeks from the date of 
notification and inspection, with a prior period of some 12-24 weeks preparing the 
assessment report and other documentation; i.e. a total of 32-44 weeks. The statutory 
requirements of this process in terms of Ministerial Notification, assessment of 
submissions/observations, and notification of the decision are considerable and 
require extensive resources to undertake this statutory process.  
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive details supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer does not recommend the installation of a “No Buses” sign to 
prevent buses from using details supplied.  No such sign is provided for in the Traffic 
Signs Manual. 
 
Q.6  
COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
           To ask the Chief Executive for an update in relation to the refurbishment of Weir Nurse's 
Home on Cork Street, Dublin 8 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This is a HSE owned property, a former Nurses’ home (protected structure) which has 
been considered for conversion to social housing by two Approved Housing Bodies, 
the property is located adjacent to a burial ground which is a recorded monument 
(DU018 -020503).  Any building listed in a Local Authority’s Record of Protected 
Structures including interiors, exteriors, curtilage, fixtures is subject to extensive 
development controls.  
As a protected structure only minimal structural intervention is allowable therefor it is 
not likely to meet standards in terms of accessibility, energy efficiency without 
significantly altering spatial layouts.  
Conservation led construction works requires specialist skills and materials which 
would significantly increase development costs. In the case of Weir Home, it is not 
possible to maintain the heritage integrity of this building and also deliver long term 
social housing in a financially viable way.   
 
Q.7 
COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive for a timeline on management of trees on Rialto Street, 
Dublin 8. These trees urgently need pruning and thinning of the crowns 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The twelve trees located at Rialto Cottage were inspected on 28 December 2025. The 
tree population along this street comprises eight London plane trees (Platanus × 
hispanica), two Norway maples (Acer platanoides), and two ornamental pear trees 
(Pyrus calleryana ‘Chanticleer’). 
The proposed works include crown reduction of the London plane trees and one 
Norway maple. The remaining Norway maple is recommended for removal due to the 
presence of the decay fungus Meripilus giganteus. 
These works are scheduled to be undertaken in the second half of 2026. 
 
 
 
 

Q.8 
COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on DCC taking over management of the 
Quaker Burial Ground on Cork Street, Dublin 8 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks, Biodiversity and Landscape Services are liaising with the  
Property and Law Departments on the potential for taking in charge the  
Quaker Burial Grounds, on Cork Street.  
 
A report will be brought to update the Area Committee in due course.  
 
Q.9  
COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if security doors/gates could be installed on the flat blocks 
that are mostly vacant in Dolphin House as a way of countering antisocial behaviour 
in them. Specifically, could DCC confirm if the concerns related to fire safety and these 
doors/gates been resolved 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council have looked at the possibility of installing new security doors/gates 
in these areas.  
 
We currently have engaged a contractor to install new railings in certain areas of 
Dolphin House. These railings are currently being fabricated and will be installed when 
ready.  
 
 
Q.10 
COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an urgent report on the ongoing and dangerous issue 
of red-light running at the Edge’s Corner junction (inbound right-turn towards Fairview 
Strand), which has been repeatedly raised by local residents. Pedestrians and cyclists 
– including children travelling to St. Mary’s National School – are routinely placed at 
risk by vehicles ignoring the red signal and driving through the pedestrian crossing 
during the green man phase. A resident has recently reported a serious incident in 
which, after running a red light, a taxi driver stopped to verbally threaten them, raising 
significant concerns about public safety and driver behaviour at this location. 
Can the Chief Executive outline: 
1. Whether DCC’s Traffic & Transport Division is aware of the issue, and whether 
any monitoring or enforcement data exists relating to red-light compliance at this 
junction. 
2. What immediate safety measures can be implemented, including changes to signal 
timings, stop-line markings, signage, or physical measures to improve compliance. 
3. Whether this junction can be assessed as a priority for targeted enforcement, 
including the deployment of Garda traffic operations or consideration for a red-light 
enforcement camera (in coordination with An Garda Síochána and the NTA). 
4. Whether the junction can undergo an urgent post-implementation safety audit, 
given recent Active Travel upgrades and the continued reports of dangerous driver 
behaviour. 
What steps can be taken to safeguard vulnerable road users, particularly 
children attending the nearby school and families accessing Fairview Park 
 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
ITS Traffic Signals response 
Red light running by motorists is a road traffic offence and therefore is the responsibility 
of An Garda Siochana rather than that of a Local Authority. 
 
The safety timings and settings for vehicles movements versus pedestrian movements 
were carefully assessed / calculated at the time of upgrade of this junction for the 
implementation of the Clontarf to City Centre Cycle scheme in 2024. 
 
The junction is regularly monitored, and observation has not highlighted any large 
incidence of red light running. 
 
Red light running monitoring /enforcement / cameras is currently not in operation 
across the city although a steering group is currently evaluating such a scheme in 
conjunction with AGS, NTA, TII etc. There is currently no further information available 
on progress of this process. 
 
As an immediate measure the pedestrian signal delay timing (the timing interval 
between motorists being shown a red signal and pedestrians being shown a green 
signal) will be increased slightly to further enhance pedestrian safety 
 
 
The issues highlighted in the Councillor’s question are a matter of enforcement by An 
Garda Síochána.  TAG will report the issue to the Gardaí in attendance at the January 
2026 TAG meeting. 
 
Q.11  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
            To ask the Chief Executive to address the long delays in applications for succession 
of tenancies across the city 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
It is imperative an applicant submit their application for succession in a timely manner 
upon the death of the previous tenant and include the relevant documentation that is 
required to fully process the application.  
The processing of a succession application can take a number of weeks owing to the 
administering of same in accordance with the Scheme of Lettings.  
If an applicant is eligible to succeed, an estate management check needs to be 
completed in respect of the applicant, again this can take time to process owing to the 
volume of requests of this kind from Housing Allocations.  
If an applicant is refused their application to succeed, they can appeal this decision. 
An appeals meeting will be arranged, and the outcome will be relayed to the applicant, 
arrangements will be made for the surrender of the keys or alternatively if successful 
on appeal, a signing for the tenancy will be arranged.  
 
 
Q.12 
COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
           To ask the Chief Executive what income is expected to be generated from the new 
derelict property tax and if this money will be ring fenced for urban redevelopment 
projects in the City Centre  
 
 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The proposal to replace the current Derelict Sites Levy with a new Derelict Property 
Tax was announced in the October budget. This new tax will be collected by the 
Revenue Commissioners and there is no guidance on whether or not this will be 
ringfenced for urban regeneration projects in Dublin City centre. 
The rate for the Derelict Property Tax has not yet been set (although the budget 
referred to a minimum rate of 7%). In accordance with agreed recommendations of the 
elected member’s Cross-Party Working Group on Dereliction and Vacancy, the council 
has a target of trebling the number of properties on our derelict sites register within 
three years and we are committed to working towards this. 
 
Q.13  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what services are available for children in Cabra library 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Cabra Library provides a broad and inclusive range of services and activities for 
children and young people, supporting reading for pleasure, early literacy, learning, 
creativity and family engagement. These services are designed to cater for different 
age groups and abilities, including children with additional sensory needs, and are 
delivered through a mix of regular programmed activities, seasonal events, and 
dedicated facilities within the children’s library. In addition, Cabra Library works closely 
with local schools and early-years settings to support reading, literacy and educational 
engagement in the area. 
 
Regular Events: 
• 
Toddler mornings every Monday and Thursday from 10.30am to 11.30am (ages 0-3) 
• 
Storytime every Wednesday at 3.15pm (ages 3-7) 
• 
Construction/Lego club every Tuesday at 3pm (ages 5-10) 
• 
Junior Book club once a month (ages 8-12) 
• 
Grúpa Spraoí gach ceathrú Aoine sa mhí (Seisiún cairdiúil do thuismitheoirí/feighlí 
agust a bpáistí óga le cohmrá, spraoi agus nascadh le chéile) 
• 
Sensory Hour every Thursday from 5-6pm (Children with sensory needs are 
welcome to use the sensory pod, sensory books and toys in a room with reduced 
sensory triggers) 
• 
Additional activities available in children’s library: 
• 
Jigsaws/Board games 
• 
Colouring Sheets 
• 
Boxes of Sensory toys available to use while in the library 
• 
Noise cancelling headphones available to use while in the library 
• 
Sensory Pod can be booked by parents/guardians/families 
• 
Magic Table can be booked by parents/guardians/families 
• 
C-Pen can be booked by parents/guardians 
• 
Wide range of stock including picture books, emerging readers, fiction, computer 
games, dvds, books in different languages, books for children with dyslexia, and non-
fiction. 
 
Seasonal Staff Run Events: 
• 
Arts and Craft Sessions 
• 
Children’s Quizzes 
• 
Family movie times 

• 
Themed storytimes 
 
Events for Schools: 
• 
Class Visits 
• 
Storytimes 
• 
Outreach visits 
• 
Teacher library cards 
• 
Class Novel Sets 
• 
Library Tours 
• 
Deis Literacy Camp Visits 
• 
Creative Hubs Workshops (in partnership with the ARK, Dublin City Council Arts 
Office and Dublin City Libraries) 
 
Cabra Library has a monthly what’s on guide as well as a monthly newsletter. Sign up  
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide an update on when the Double -
Yellow-Lines will be installed at Details Supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Line Marking Team have informed the Transport Advisory Group that the Double 
Yellow Lines have now been installed. 
 
Q.15  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
            To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide the cleaning schedule to remove 
leaves from Detail Supplied. Can he also confirm who is responsible to provide 
cleaning for this stretch of the road. Details Supplied  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services have and will include the above-mentioned stretch of 
road as often as possible during the course of our leaf’s removal programme during 
the autumn and winter months. 
Priority is given to tree-lined streets, footpaths with heavy pedestrian use and area 
particularly prone to flooding. As it is not possible to get everywhere at once, we also 
assist resident groups in clearing  
leaves from their areas and remove the collected bags for them. Waste Management 
Services is responsible for the cleaning of this stretch of road. 
 
Q.16  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide the cleaning schedule for Details 
Supplied. This area needs to be maintained on a daily basis 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services clean details supplied five days a week, Monday to 
Friday. In addition, we remove dumped rubbish from there on a regular basis. 
Unfortunately, we are not in a position to provide weekend cleaning there. 
 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
            To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide an update on the damage that is 
being caused by a 122 Bus Driver at the 122 Bus Terminus in Ashington. The bus 
driver is mounting the grass verge damaging it and causing a huge amount of damage. 
The muck is going into the shore and blocking the shore causing flooding. I have 

reported this issue to DCC and the grass verge was repaired and was damaged again 
within 12 hours 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council will contact the operator of the applicable bus routes and carry 
out a site visit to assess the damage being reported at the 122 Bus Terminus in 
Ashington. We will revert in due course. 
 
Q.18  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if the upcoming plan to resurface a part of Lansdowne Park 
in January can be broadened out to include the whole road and not just a section in 
the middle. The residents have been waiting for the resurfacing for years 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A section of Lansdowne Park is programmed for resurfacing in Q1 this year. It is not 
possible to resurface all of Lansdowne Park due to budget constraints. 
 
The remaining sections of Lansdowne Park have been added to a list, along with other 
roads in the South East area, requiring/requesting road resurfacing. 
 
Q.19  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to remove the dead tree stump outside of details supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This dead tree will be removed by the end of January 2026. 
 
Q.20  COUNCILLOR DAIVD COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can have a gully/drain installed in, Sandymount details 
supplied as the road is prone to flooding 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Roads Maintenance Engineer will carry out a site inspection at the 
aforementioned location. Any defects identified regarding road surface will be added 
to the work list for repairs and if deemed necessary the road will be included on this 
years programme resurfacing works. 
The drainage division have been requested to clear the existing gully. 
 
Q.21  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he could send a litter warden to Northbrook Avenue / 
Dartmouth to issue warnings or fines to residents who keep their wheelie bins on the 
footpaths throughout the week, forcing elderly residents and people in wheelchairs out 
on to the road details supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Our Litter Enforcement Officer will send a litter warden to this location and he will 
take appropriate action to address this issue. 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to examine the possibility of delisting certain Dublin City 
council housing flat complexes in order to fast track fit for purpose social housing 
 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The following Dublin City Council Housing Department schemes are protected 
structures : 
 
Pearse House 
Ballybough House 
Northumberland Road 
Mercer House 
Countess Markievicz House  
Henrietta House 
James Larkin House 
Thomas Court 
Saint Audeon’s House 
Marrowbone Lane 
Beggars Bush Court 
Ormond Square  
 
In making additions or deletions from the Record of Protected Structures a statutory 
process must be followed.   
 
The decision on whether to add or delete a structure from the Record of Protected 
Structures is a reserved function of Dublin City Council (i.e. for the decision of the 
Elected Members only).  The members are involved at the commencement of the 
process, when a report is submitted to the relevant Area Committee for approval to 
initiate the process where it must be outlined why the protection of the structure is no 
longer warranted.   
Following the public consultation phase, a further report is brought to the City Council 
meeting which includes a written consideration of all the submissions and observations 
received.  This report may recommend to proceed or not with the proposed deletion, 
or with a recommendation including amendments to the proposed deletion.  
The process for making a deletion to the RPS takes 20 weeks from the date of 
notification and inspection, with a prior period of some 12-24 weeks preparing the 
assessment report and other documentation; i.e. a total of 32-44 weeks. The statutory 
requirements of this process in terms of Ministerial Notification, assessment of 
submissions/observations, and notification of the decision are considerable and 
require extensive resources to undertake this statutory process.  
 
Q.23  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to give a report regarding lands at Ballsbridge that were 
rezoned for an American embassy instead of housing will go ahead or can the council 
revert the land back for much needed housing construction 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The lands at the former Ballsbridge Hotel Site, Ballsbridge, Dublin 4 are zoned ‘Z6’ 
which aims ‘to provide for the creation and protection of enterprise and facilitate 
opportunities for employment creation’ in the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-
2028.  An ‘embassy office’ is a permissible use under this zoning objective.  There has 
been demolition of the Ballsbridge Hotel and all associated site works permitted under 
Ref 3461/21, and recently a 5-year temporary permission was granted for 40 no. car 
parking spaces associated with the Embassy of the United States.  There are no 
proposals to vary the Development Plan in relation to this site.  

 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to give a full report regarding DCC and its interest in 
acquiring the lands and site of Camden Yard on Kevin Street, this report to include 
DCC intentions for this site and where the financing for the purchase of this site would 
come from 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council can confirm that it is in exclusive discussions regarding the 
potential acquisition of the Camden Yard site on Kevin Street. Heads of Agreement 
have been signed to facilitate a 10-week due diligence period. The proposed 
acquisition remains subject to due diligence and the Council’s statutory governance 
and approval processes. 
 
The Council’s intention for the site, should the acquisition proceed, is to deliver a new 
Civic Offices and up to 300 public homes, while relocating from Wood Quay would 
unlock the potential for more than 500 additional homes on that site. This approach 
supports the Council’s objectives to provide modern, energy-efficient accommodation 
for staff, improve public services, and deliver significant housing supply. 
 
Any potential acquisition and subsequent development and funding remain subject to 
due diligence, statutory approvals, and the Council’s governance processes. Dublin 
City Council will continue to keep elected members informed and will provide further 
briefings at the appropriate points in line with these processes. 
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report on the use and future working order of 
the 4 umbrella coverings  on Meeting House SQ, these umbrellas have been out of 
use for some time now resulting in reduced use of the square for events and activities, 
this situation has been ongoing for years with the umbrellas constantly failing and 
breaking since they were first installed. Resulting in Meeting House Square looking 
like a derelict site 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Meeting House Square umbrellas were damaged during routine maintenance 
carried out in May 2023, the umbrellas have not been deployed since. Negotiations 
with the contractor in respect of repair and upgrade of the installation have been 
ongoing since then. The key element of the repair involved putting mitigation measures 
in place to stop the recurrence of the issue which led to one of the arms being broken. 
The contractor failed to provide us with comfort that the project could be carried out to 
agreed specifications and has now dropped out of negotiations. There are no other 
contractors in the market sufficiently qualified to deal with the particular design 
elements involved with this installation. No decision has been made on the future of 
the umbrellas, we are currently carrying out a full review with our partners in DCC.  
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive how many units DCC owns (and managed by an AHB) in 
The Bay and The Links apartment complex at Elm Park Green, how many units this 
represents as a portion of the votes for the Management Company and if DCC always 
exercises their votes at same and who exercises the authority in this regard 
To further ask if DCC will liaise with DCC/AHB tenants on how these are cast in future 
and if DCC will support the call for an EGM that has been called to deal with Energy 
related issues and other matters 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has ownership of 11 units in The Links, Elm Park Green. Dublin 
City Council can attend any relevant AGM / EGM and act in the best interest of the 
tenant / tenancy.  
Dublin City Council does not own any units in The Gardens, Elm Park.  
In addition, there are 8 units which are leased by Clanmill in The Links & The Bay Elm 
Park. Where there is a leasing arrangement in place the AHB may request a proxy 
vote from the owners of the properties.  
Co-operative Housing own 22 units in The Gardens Elm Park.  
The AHB Section will make contact with both AHBs regarding this matter and we will 
update the Councillor once we receive their response.   
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive how many units it owns in The Gardens part of the Elm 
Park Green complex and how it exercises its involvement in the Management 
Company of same 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has ownership of 11 units in The Links, Elm Park Green. Dublin 
City Council can attend any relevant AGM / EGM and act in the best interest of the 
tenant / tenancy.  
Dublin City Council does not own any units in The Gardens, Elm Park.  
In addition there are 8 units which are leased by Clanmill in The Links & The Bay Elm 
Park. Where there is a leasing arrangement in place the AHB may request a proxy 
vote from the owners of the properties.  
Co-operative Housing own 22 units in The Gardens Elm Park.  
The AHB Section will make contact with both AHBs regarding this matter and we will 
update the Councillor once we receive their response.   
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive in light of the current average processing times for HAP 
applications, will the Chief Executive outline what specific measures are being taken, 
or planned, to reduce delays and ensure that applicants receive timely access to 
housing supports? 
Further, can the Council confirm whether additional staffing, process improvements, 
or digitalisation initiatives are being considered to improve efficiency and prevent 
applicants from experiencing housing insecurity due to prolonged application 
processing times 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The processing time for HAP applications has significantly reduced over the last 12 
months and I can confirm that the current processing time is approx. 3-4 weeks. The 
processing time is dependent on how promptly the correct paperwork is provided to 
the HAP section. Dublin City Council is liaising with Limerick City and County Council’s 
Shared Services Centre to improve the HAP online portal which has the potential to 
improve processing times further. Both Homeless Hap and Mainstream Hap 
processing times are up to date, and delays are primarily due to incorrect paperwork 
being submitted. Every effort is made by the Hap team to obtain correct paperwork 
promptly. 
 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide details of the number of requests received by 
Dublin City Council from prospective applicants seeking meetings in relation to the 
Local Authority Home Loan Scheme over the past 12 months; to confirm how many of 
these meetings have taken place; to outline the average waiting time between a 

meeting request and the meeting itself; and to advise on any measures currently in 
place or planned to improve access and reduce waiting times for applicants 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Local Authority Home Loan was introduced in January 2022.  The Local Authority 
Home Loan is a National Scheme devised by the Department of Housing, Local 
Government & Heritage.  Local Authorities (incl. Dublin City Council) are charged with 
administering the Scheme in their administrative areas.  Therefore, Dublin City Council 
are bound by the Terms and Conditions of the Local Authority Home Loan as set out 
in the Housing Loans (Credit Policy) Guidelines 2021. 
We have received no requests from prospective applicants seeking meetings in 
relation to the Local Authority Home Loan Scheme over the past 12 months. 
If an applicant meets the eligibility requirements and can afford the repayments on the 
amount they require to borrow, the applicant must complete the Local Authority Home 
Lome Application Form.  All Applications Forms must be signed and submitted to the 
Local Authority in person or by post. 
All Applications are reviewed by staff in the Local Authority to ensure all relevant 
documentation is submitted and that the Application Form is completed accurately.  If 
there is an issue with the Application Form, the staff in the Local Authority will contact 
the Applicant by email or by telephone. 
As part of the terms and conditions of the Local Authority Home Loan, all Applications 
for a Local Authority Home Loan must be sent to the Underwriters for assessment.  
The Underwriters will advise whether to approve or decline an application for a Local 
Authority Home Loan. 
The Applicants are then advised of the decision in writing by the Local Authority. 
The process for the Application for the Local Authority Home Loan is very streamlined, 
and generally no meetings with the Applicants are required.  However, if an Applicant 
requests a meeting with the Loans Team in Dublin City Council, this meeting can be 
arranged within one to two days.  There are no waiting times for Applicants to meet a 
member of staff from the Loans Team.  
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline Dublin City Council’s role in facilitating broadband 
and digital connectivity across the city; to provide details of current engagement with 
broadband and telecommunications providers; to identify any areas within the city that 
continue to experience inadequate or unreliable broadband connectivity; and to advise 
on any measures or initiatives being undertaken by the Council to address digital 
exclusion and improve broadband access for residents, businesses, and community 
facilities 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Dublin City Council’s Role in Broadband & Digital Connectivity.   
 
The Council has a dedicated Telecoms Unit to act as a central point of contact for 
telecommunications-related issues. This unit encourages investment, streamlines 
engagement with the telecoms industry, and facilitates access to city assets (such as 
ducting, streetworks and buildings) for deployment of digital infrastructure, including 
fibre and mobile networks. It also ensures that future Council capital projects are 
“telecoms-proofed.”   
 
The Council has created and published processes and rate cards on it’s website 
providing fair, transparent and cost-effective access for operators to deploy fibre, 4G 
and 5G infrastructure.   
 

The Council has developed a planning condition included in relevant Commercial and 
Residential planning applications to require the provision of open access shared fibre 
optic infrastructure and consideration of mobile connectivity requirements.  
An accompanying “Guide to the Installation of Telecoms Infrastructure in Residential 
and Mixed- Use Developments” is available to download from the Council’s website.   
 
Current Engagement with Broadband & Telecoms Providers 
 
Through the Telecoms Unit, the Council works with mobile network operators, 
broadband providers, and industry stakeholders to support deployment of fixed and 
mobile connectivity across the city. This includes maintaining an asset registry to assist 
industry in identifying suitable locations for equipment and infrastructure deployment.   
 
Engagement with universities, research centres (e.g., CONNECT), and industry 
partners supports innovation and the development of future-ready digital connectivity 
as part of broader smart city strategies. 
 
Public information campaigns such as “Telecoms for Everyone” aim to raise 
awareness and understanding of telecommunications infrastructure, supporting 
community confidence and informed public engagement. 
 
Areas with Inadequate/ Unreliable Connectivity  
 
Dublin City Council plays an enabling and facilitation role rather than directly providing 
broadband or telecommunication services. While most of Dublin city benefits from 
broadband coverage, the Council recognises that connectivity can be variable and that 
some areas experience inadequate or unreliable services.   
 
The Council’s Telecoms Unit meets regularly with Industry to facilitate and support 
solutions aimed at improving connectivity for residents, businesses and communities.   
 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline what catering contracts have been entered into 
by the Council over the past 12 months; to advise to what extent these contracts have 
implemented the “Greener by Default” model, as recommended by the Climate Action, 
Biodiversity and Environment Strategic Policy Committee and in support of the 
objectives and targets set out in the Dublin City Council Climate Action Plan, including 
measures related to carbon reduction, sustainable procurement, and minimisation of 
food waste; and to indicate what catering contracts are expected to be initiated or 
reviewed over the next 12 months, including how the “Greener by Default” model will 
be applied to further advance the Council’s climate mitigation, sustainability, and 
responsible procurement targets 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
CFT 3799754 established a framework for the provision of catering and vending 
services at the following locations: 
• 
Civic Offices, Wood Quay, Dublin 8 
• 
North City Operations Depot 
• 
Marrowbone Lane 
• 
Motor Tax Office, Smithfield 
• 
Dublin Fire Brigade Training Centre 
• 
Ballymun Civic Centre 

Tenders were invited on 21/2/205 by public advertisement on the Irish Government 
Procurement Portal (www.etenders.gov.ie) 
Following the evaluation process Campbell Catering Ltd T/A Aramark Food Services 
was identified as the preferred tenderer. Criterion E – Sustainability & Social Value 
accounted for 10% of the available marks.  
 
Q.32  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the rollout of the BikeBunkers 
programme, including: 
1. The projected timeline for delivery and installation of BikeBunkers across 
Dublin City, including anticipated commencement dates by area; 
2. The number of expressions of interest or applications received to 
date from residents; 
3. The criteria and decision-making process used to determine the 
prioritisation and allocation of BikeBunkers locations; and 
4. When residents who have registered their interest can reasonably expect the 
installation of a BikeBunker in or near their neighbourhood if successful 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The BikeBunkers project is being delivered under a framework that provides for a 
phased rollout over a period of up to 10 years across the functional area of Dublin City 
Council. This framework may also be utilised by all the other Dublin Local Authorities.  
 
The programme for the project operates on a demand led basis, with installations being 
the response of a cluster of expressions of interest submitted by residents through the 
BikeBunkers 
website 
www.bikebunkers.ie. 
All 
expressions 
of 
interest 
are 
geographically mapped and used to inform delivery planning. 
 
Due to competing demands for kerbside space, BikeBunkers are being installed 
incrementally. Initial rollout has prioritised areas with the highest demonstrated 
demand, beginning within the canal cordon. The first BikeBunkers were installed in 
December 2025 in Stoneybatter on the northside, followed closely by installations in 
Rialto on the southside. Future installations will continue on an alternating northside/ 
southside basis, subject to demand and site suitability.  
 
Prioritisation of locations is based on the number and concentration of expressions of 
interest received, alongside assessment of available kerbside space, local constraints 
and suitability for installation. BikeBunkers are only installed where expressions of 
interest have been received from residents.  
 
Each BikeBunker provides 6 secure bike parking spaces, which are individually 
allocated and subject to a bike parking permit fee.  
 
As of 06.01.2026, a total of 1188 expressions of interest have been received, 
representing a demand for 2248 bike parking spaces. While it is not currently possible 
to provide definitive installation dates for individual neighbourhoods or areas, residents 
who have registered their interest will be contacted as proposals progress in their areas 
and once a suitable location is identified and approved. 
 
Residents who wish to avail of this facility may register their interest directly on the 
website www.bikebunkers.ie 

 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to immediately carry out repairs to the footpaths at 
Hollybrook Grove, which are in a dangerous and unacceptable condition 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An Enquiry (ref. 11189393) has been created in relation to this request to repair the 
footpaths on Hollybrook Grove. An inspection of this locus will be carried out by the 
Area Inspector and a crew assigned to carry out the necessary repairs. 
 
Q.34  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
           To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the status of planned bridges across the 
River Liffey in the IFSC/Docklands area, specifically between the Matt Talbot Bridge 
and the Tom Clarke Bridge. This area represents a significant gap in cross-river 
connectivity (with the exception of the Samuel Beckett Bridge and the Sean O’Casey 
pedestrian bridge) , which impacts active travel, public transport, and the overall 
integration of the North and South Docklands communities. 
My understanding from previous Dublin City Development and Docklands Plans is that 
multiple new bridges have been planned for this section of the Liffey. I would be 
grateful if you could confirm the details and current status of the following proposals: 
A. Blood Stoney Bridge: The planned pedestrian and cycle bridge connecting Sir John 
Rogerson's Quay with North Wall Quay. 
B. Tom Clarke Bridge Widening: The planned new bridge or structural enhancement 
directly adjacent (west) of the Tom Clarke Bridge, intended to improve capacity for 
pedestrians, cyclists, and vehicular turning movements. 
C. Forbes Street and Castleforbes Road Bridges:  Earlier plans mentioned proposals 
for bridges at Forbes Street and/or Castleforbes Road. To ask the Chief Executive to 
detail the current status of the above, which I understand may have been 
superseded/shelved.  Are these proposals definitively abandoned, or are they being 
retained as deferred, long-term options in the City Development Plan? 
D. Commons Street/Creighton Street Bridge: To ask the Chief Executive if there were 
ever plans to have a bridge at this crossing or has this crossing ever been assessed 
for such an infrastructure 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A. Blood Stoney Bridge project: 
An Bord Pleanala have previously rejected plans to amend the North Lotts & Grand 
Canal Dock SDZ to locate a bridge at Blood Stoney Road, so the proposed bridge 
location will revert to the original Forbes St location.  A bridge will not be progressed 
at Blood Stoney Rd. 
 
B. The Point Pedestrian & Cycle Bridge and Tom Clarke Bridge Widening Works: 
Project is currently at planning stage and it is envisaged that a planning application 
will be lodged to An Coimisiún Pleanála in 2026 subject to other approvals including 
a MARA Maritime Area Consent. 
 
C. Forbes Street and Castleforbes Road Bridges: 

 
DCC propose to progress plans for a new Pedestrian Cycling Bridge at Forbes St., 
connecting Sir John Rogerson's Quay with North Wall Quay. Tender documents are 
currently being prepared to appoint a design team to progress the design. 
 
The Castleforbes St bridge is included in the North Lotts & Grand Canal Dock SDZ but 
there are no plans to progress a bridge at this location at this time. 
 
D. Commons Street/Creighton Street Bridge:  
Due to the close proximity to the Sean O’Casey and Samual Beckett Bridges there 
are no plans to progress a bridge at this location.  
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to a planning application, a constituent of mine 
has received a letter advising that it has come to the attention of Dublin City Council 
that one of the conditions of the planning application had not been complied with - 
namely the financial contribution. The person was advised that according to Dublin 
City Council records there is still a balance outstanding on the application and that the 
person is therefore non-compliant with the conditions of the planning permission. 
Given that the planning permission was granted in 2011 and no correspondence has 
been received by the person since c. 2013 can the Chief Executive advise on the 
legality of this debt having regard to the Statute of Limitations Act.  Also, if the debt is 
statute barred, can DCC refuse to issue a letter of compliance if the owner wishes to 
sell the property? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
When the statute of limitations applies to a debt, while it cannot be legally pursued it 
remains outstanding. In the case of any outstanding development contributions, they 
must be paid to be compliant with the relevant condition of the planning permission. 
As a result, a compliance letter cannot be issued until all outstanding contributions 
due have been paid in full. 
 
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm how many Dublin City Council housing 
applicants/tenants referred to and  currently housed in Peter McVerry Trust units and 
to further ask the Chief Executive if DCC has been in contact with them to give them 
reassurances about the stability and security of their tenancies, rental agreements and 
overall housing status in light of the ongoing highly publicised investigations into the 
governance and financial management of the trust 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The PMVT has 383 residential units under management/ ownership, PMVT is in 
regular contact with their tenants providing housing and tenancy support where 
required. In addition, where tenants have had specific queries regarding individual 
tenancies the PMVT housing team engage directly with tenants on these matters. It 
has been and will continue to be the priority of the PMVT and DCC that there is a 
continuity of service, support and tenancy arrangements for all PMVT tenants.   
 
 
 
 

Q.37  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive given Dublin City Council's decision to maintain a paid 
Bulky Household Waste Collection Service, and the on-going public concern regarding 
illegal dumping, can the Chief Executive provide a detailed review of the service's 
performance and financial viability for the most recent calendar year (2022, 2023 and 
2024) to include the following: 
A. What was the total tonnage of bulky household waste collected through the paid 
service for each year.? 
B. How many individual collection bookings were processed through the service? 
C. What measure does the Council use to assess the "success" of this paid service 
(e.g., number of items collected vs. target, or correlation with a reduction in illegal 
dumping reports)? 
D. What was the total income generated by the collection fee paid by users of the 
service? 
E. What was the total cost to the Council for operating the service, including direct and 
indirect staff costs, disposal/treatment costs, vehicle running costs, and other 
operational costs? 
F. Based on the figures provided at D and E above, is the Bulky Household Waste 
Collection Service currently operating as a profit-making scheme or a loss-making 
service for Dublin City Council 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council introduced a Residential Household Bulky Waste Service in May 
2016 largely in response to concerns raised by Councillors that households should 
have a facility to dispose of large bulky household Items of furniture responsibly and 
legally. The service proved very successful from its implementation date and currently 
we receive an average of 55 requests for collections every week. The service is now 
available on line and orders can be placed 24/7 throughout the year. 
It is not possible to give an exact figure for the total tonnage of waste collected as this 
is not recorded separately. The same trucks that collect the household bulky waste 
orders are also used to collect illegally dumped bulky waste and so it cannot be 
separated. We have however in the past been able to get an estimate weight for the 
average household bulky waste collection and it is possible from this to calculate an 
approximate tonnage of weight collected. Average collection weights per household 
bulky waste collection are approximately 0.1 Tonne per collection.   
The estimated costs below include all costs for the provision of this service including 
staff wages, vehicle rental costs and disposal costs. NB: It is not possible to assign 
exact costs for this service as there are no specific dedicated staff or vehicles assigned 
to the service on a permanent basis. Rather all staff and vehicles involved in the 
provision of the service also carry out other duties as required throughout the day and 
the amount of time spent is likely to be directly related to the number of orders received 
in any given week. Therefore below costs are estimated only costs based on average 
hourly rate of pay for staff, vehicle rental costs per year, fuel usage, insurance and 
disposal costs.  
 

Year 
Number of 
Orders 
Placed 
Income 
Received 
Estimate
d Tonnage 
Collected 
for Year.  
Est. Cost for 
Provision 
of 
Service 
Est. Loss for Service 
Provision 
2022 
2449 
€101,330.00 
 244.9 
Tonne 
 €228,143.00 
 €126,813.00 
2023 
2702 
€113,160.00 
 270.2 
Tonne 
 €236,697.00 
 €123,537.00 
2024 
2885 
€121,090.00 
 288.5 
Tonne 
 €244,725.00 
 €123,635.00 
 
The service was never intended to operate as a profit making service and you can see 
that it has operated at a significant loss every year since its inception. There are no 
targets for the service as it is entirely reactive in nature and reflects the demands from 
householders who want to use it. The fact that users are climbing every year is in itself 
a clear indication of the relative success of the service. The current charge for the 
standard collection is €40.00 per 5 items which had remained constant since the 
beginning of the service in May 2016. It will rise to €50.00 per 5 items in January 2026. 
When we factor in the increasing costs of wages, a recent increase in disposal charges 
along with vehicle rentals and fuel charges in 2025 and going forward into 2026 it is 
estimated that in order to make this service cost neutral then the City Council would 
have to impose a collection service charge of around €100.00 per collection or a 100% 
increase on the proposed €50.00 charge currently in effect from January 2026. 
 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask The Chief Executive, can public lightening be added from Shangan Road to 
Shangan Avenue there is a large stretch of public footpath that offers no lightening 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The footpath in question traverses a site reserved for future development. There is an 
alternative route along the public road which has public lighting, so it is not proposed 
to consider installing public lighting as part of the Parks Works Programme. 
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask The Chief Executive, what is the period we should expect to wait from logging 
public lightening outages to it been repaired. I have experienced high wait times waiting 
on public lightening to be fixed 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
For routine faults reported by Councillors, members of the public and other 
agencies/departments the normal timeline for repairs to be carried out is five working 
days. For routine faults captured by night checks the normal timeline for repairs to be 
carried out is ten working days. 
Non routine faults take longer. These can include cable faults on public lighting cables 
that require fault location identification & civil excavations, loss of electrical supplies to 
lights that require ESB attendances and so on. 
Unfortunately, there have been some recent non routine light outages that have taken 
longer than desired to repair for reasons outside of DCCs’ control. 
If there are particular light outages of concern please provide location, house number 
or pole number and these can be investigated further. 
 
 
 

Q.40  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask The Chief Executive, how many roof repairs are outstanding in the Ballymun 
area 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance currently have 120 live roof repairs requests for the Ballymun 
area.  These repair requests are at various stages of the assessment process. The 
Area Maintenance Officer is actively reviewing all requests and will progress them as 
assessments are complete. 
 
Q.41  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive, how many people are on the waiting list for a 4-bedroom 
property in the Dublin Northwest 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently 142 applicants waiting for 4-bedroom properties in Northwest area 
which would take in Area D and E. 
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to set out, in tabular form, the number of bicycle parking 
places in car parks under the control of Dublin City Council. To further ask the Chief 
Executive whether Dublin City Council exerts any influence or authority over the 
provision of bicycle parking places in privately operated car parks. Finally, can the 
Chief Executive set out Dublin City Council’s policy on the provision of bicycle parking 
in car parks in Dublin 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
LOCATION 
NUMBER of CYCLE PARKING PLACES 
Drury Street Car Park 
338 
Jervis Street Car Park 
68 
Spire Car Park 
102 
 
It is Dublin City Council’s policy to explore all opportunities where private car park 
operators are open to leasing space to Dublin City Council for cycle parking.  
However steep access and egress ramps, narrow entrances that don’t allow for the 
safe segregation of cyclists and motorists, and other similar constraints, mean that a 
lot of purpose-built, multi-storey car parks are unsuitable for use for cycle parking. 
 
In terms of policy on the provision of bicycle parking in car parks in the city, it has been 
the policy, as set out within the last number of City Development Plans to ensure the 
provision of a range of quality cycle parking in all developments both private and public.   
For new developments it is often the case that cycle parking accommodation is 
provided within safe & secure locations within car parks.   
 
Under the current Development Plan, the standards by which all developments must 
comply with can be found in  Volume 2,  Appendix 5, Section 3: Volume 2 - Appendices 
| Dublin City Council. 
 
 
Q.43  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive, further to Q 42 of 1st December 2025, to explain the 
rationale for on-road pencil bollards in some school zones and on-path in others 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The location of bollard placement is based on observations by local authority engineers 
and the Green Schools Safe Routes to School Infrastructure Officer at school drop off 
and collection times. These visits allow the team to assess what behaviours are most 
dangerous and need to be discouraged, e.g. if parents are parking on footpaths, 
bollards will be suggested for that footpath. Or if parents are observed idling outside, 
semi-rigid bollards may be placed in the carriageway to improve safety at the front of 
the school, which is the goal of the Safe Routes to School initiative.  
 
Q.44  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive for a reply to the allegations made Details Supplied  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
All public sector contract payees must have a valid tax clearance cert to receive 
payments over the €10,000 threshold. Tax clearance certs are issued on a rolling 12 
month period. The issuing of Tax Clearance certs is under the remit of the Revenue 
Commissioners and if a company is not compliant, Revenue will place a hold on its tax 
clearance, and no payments will be made by Dublin City Council until a valid tax 
clearance is issued.  
 
Q.45  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive who can I acquire assistance from in order to address a 
number of some very serious issues emanating from The Football Pitch in Northway 
Estate Park because kids and adults of both sexes and all ages are being deprived 
from having the necessary privacy required in order to change into sportswear so they 
can play on the pitch  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
It is understood that McKelvey Celtic FC who hold the annual allocation for the pitch 
currently have their own grounds/facilities situated a short distance away on St. 
Margarets Road. In general, it is our experience that most players arrive togged out 
in advance of games. Northway is a small park with one pitch therefore providing a 
changing facility is not considered a priority. 
 
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to look at the following housing application Details 
Supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The succession application in the above case is currently being reviewed by Housing 
Allocations, it is anticipated that a final decision in the application will be issued to the 
applicant in due course 
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to please indicate the cost of repairs to our Playgrounds, 
Football Pitches / general Park infrastructure over the years 
2022 - 2023 
2023 - 2024 
2024 - 2025 
And if any successful prosecutions came out of this before the courts 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Repairs are carried out from the Parks annual revenue budget. 
 

Costs for repairs to playgrounds breakdown as follows: 
2022 - €330,000 
2023 - €277,000 
2024 - €486,000 
2025 - €449,000 (€235,000 currently committed) 
 
Costs for general repairs to Park infrastructure including pitches: 
2022 - €220,000 
2023 - €336,000 
2024 - €307,000 
2025 - €426,000  
 
Parks have no information with regard to prosecutions; it is our understanding that 
prosecutions are difficult due to a lack of evidence and the inherent transient nature of 
these incidents. 
 
Q.48 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to please give me an update on our future plans for 
Lansdowne Park Drimnagh, this beautiful area has the capacity to become a very 
positive leisure amenity for the local communities of Bluebell, Drimnagh, Inchicore etc 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
It is agreed that this part of the Camac River Valley has the potential to be a very 
positive amenity for the Local community however at present there is no path network.  
A pavement through the valley to form the Camac Greenway project is within the 
current 2025-2028 programme of project delivery and will be delivered by the Active 
Travel Programme Office. Public Consultation will be included as part of this process.  
 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to please investigate if they could apply for Village 
Improvement Scheme for Ballyfermot Road retail district similar to South Dublin Co 
Council at Bawnogue Shopping Centre and can DCC identify a possible location in an 
adjoining Industrial Estate in the Ballyfermot Area where it may be possible to develop 
a modern Shopping Centre, all we seem to get is traffic and additional housing units 
however the area needs a proper modern Shopping Centre 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Liffey Valley to City Centre Core Bus Corridor is currently under construction. 
Delivered by the National Transport Authority, the project will be carried out in line 
with the planning permission granted by An Bord Pleanála, including comprehensive 
public realm upgrades along the entire route. 
More information on the scheme, including detailed drawings of what is proposed can 
be found at https://liffeyvalleyscheme.ie/ 
 
The provision of retail in the City, including Ballyfermot is supported by the policies 
and objectives of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028, where it is 
recognised that the retail environment is significantly changing.  The Retail Strategy 
for Dublin City in the Development Plan is to consolidate the city centre retail core as 
the premier retail destination in the State, to promote and consolidate the role of the 
Key Urban Villages with a level of retail development commensurate to the 
catchment to cater for surrounding communities.  Retail development is a commercial 
development that is built and operated by commercial operators 
 
 

Q.50  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive in noting that there is only one astro pitch in Cherry Orchard 
and that the Cherry Orchard park development will not be complete until at least 
2027/2028, will Dublin City Council ensure that the astro they removed in December 
be replaced as soon as possible 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A temporary tarmac surface was laid in the last couple of weeks as a temporary 
measure as the existing astro surface was potentially hazardous. Given the timescale 
for the implementation of a longer term plan for the park we will review the appropriate 
short term surface for the pitch early in 2026. 
 
Q.51  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline in tabular form how many reported falls happened 
on Sean O’Casey Bridge, Ha’penny Bridge and Parliament Bridge for the years 2024 
and 2025 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following clarification that the information sought is how many claims for falls on the 
above-mentioned bridges in the above-mentioned years, searches carried out by the 
law department and IPB Insurance indicate the following: 
 
(It is important to note that if full details (GPS, claim location or circumstances) 
were not provided to us at registration, claims that may have taken place at the 
location in question may not be captured when pulling the data.) 
 
 
2024 
2025 
Sean 
O’Casey 
Bridge 
0 
0 
Ha’penny Bridge  
0 
0 
Parliament Bridge * 
0 
0 
 
* We understand the request to refer to Grattan bridge which is at the foot of Parliament  Street. 
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many applications were made in 2025 for the TIS 
scheme and how many were successfully completed 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
   
The Acquisition section completed 76 tenants in situ purchases in 2025.   
 
The following table is the status of TIS enquiries since September 2025.  
 
 
Tenant In Situ since Sept 2025 
Total 
Total number of enquiries received  
75 
 
 
 
Eligibility & tenant checks ongoing  
13 

Building Inspector 
2 
 
Valuer 
8 
 
Total - In process 
23 
 
  
  
 
Not progressed  
40 
Criteria not met re 2 yr 
rule for property to be 
in receipt of HAP or the 
scale level of 
refurbishment works 
required. 
Properties not in DCC Admin Area and so 
the request was sent to relevant LA 
10 
Offered alternative Housing 
2 
 
 
Q.53  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask Chief Executive to outline in tabular form, how much funding did DCC receive 
from the department for adaption grants for 2023, 2024 and 2025, how many 
households applied for the disability adaption grants for the years 2023, 2024 and 
2025, how many were successfully processed and how many remain on the waiting 
list 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Tenant Adaptions Section receive a budget from the Department at the beginning of 
each calendar year; we have yet to receive this for 2026.  
 
Table below shows the approved amount from the Department and the amount 
received.  
 
Departmen
t  
2023 
2024 
2025 
Funding 
Approved  
€ 1,931,850.00 
€ 3,022,189.00 
€ 3,157,328.00 
Funding 
Received  
€ 1,681,971.00 
€ 3,157,325.00 
€ 3,451,158.00 
Total 
Actual 
Spend  
€2,888,434.22 
€7,888,862.66 
€8,109,428.33 
 
Tenant Adaptions has a waiting list for extensions this has 25, we have completed 30 
in the last 3 years.  
We do not have a waiting list as works such as showers, grab rails & stairlifts come in 
we prioritise and try to complete these within the year of receiving applications. 
   
However, ramps are weather dependant, so we continuously work through the list of 
people approved while battling the unpredictable weather.  
 
Please see table below of works completed.   
Works  
2023 
2024 
2025 
Ramps  
33 
40 
41 
Stairlifts 
61 
71 
79 

Showers 
251 
364 
382 
Extensions  
6 
18 
6 
Other 
alterations  
113 
93 
16 
 
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive, to facilitate work with the Parks Department to build on the 
potential of Eaton Square in Terenure and bring it up to the standard of nearby parks 
like Neagh Road. 
A community garden, set up and maintained by a local resident has been hugely 
successful over the last few years, as the park is a busy spot for residents and local 
people. As a result, many residents are now growing more pollinator friendly plants in 
the locality, because of the garden, which is a hugely positive outcome. 
Eaton square could be revitalised with, for example, chess installations, outdoor 
exercise, and small-scale interactive play devices, which would create a more 
engaging experience for park users. Eaton Square also lacks a Communication Board 
which is crucial as a large amount of work is being done by local advocacy groups to 
create an Autism Friendly Terenure. The paths within Eaton Square Park are also in 
extremely poor condition and a hazard to those with mobility issues as they are made 
from rough asphalt. The grass edges are also unkempt and as a result mud and leaf 
litter are in abundance, creating a potentially slippery, dangerous surface for park users 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We have engaged with local councillors and residents on several occasions to discuss 
the future of the park. For example, we worked closely with community groups to add 
the wildlife corner, and we believe we have addressed the key requests made during 
those consultations. 
In terms of the park’s paths, we recognise their current condition and have included 
this upgrade in the 2026 parks works programme. We aim to improve accessibility and 
ensure safer routes for all users. 
While we are committed to enhancing Eaton Square, it is important to consider that 
the park is relatively small. Introducing numerous features, such as chess installations 
or interactive play devices, could overwhelm the space and detract from its character. 
Our focus remains on making thoughtful, impactful improvements that align with the 
needs of the community, while maintaining the integrity and functionality of the square. 
We will continue to work closely with local groups to ensure Eaton Square evolves in 
a way that best serves its users. 
 
Q.55  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive, to work with the Environment and Transport Department, 
and residents in Rathgar, to address urgent concerns around traffic management 
regarding the approved development at Kenilworth Square Rathmines. 
In recent months, there have been several accidents on Rathgar Avenue, which is the 
primary road serving the site being developed. These repeated incidents demonstrate 
that the existing road network is already overloaded and hazardous.  
The approved development technically has access from Rathgar Avenue, but given 
the number of accidents already occurring there, it is reasonable to worry that 
construction vehicles may attempt to divert through Garville Lane to avoid adding 
further pressure to this already dangerous road. Garville Lane, however, is a single-
access laneway with only one way in and out. Using this lane as an alternative route 
for construction-related traffic would be unsafe. Any obstruction, even briefly, would 
trap residents, block emergency vehicles, and severely compromise safety. If an 
evacuation, medical emergency, or fire were to occur, residents could be left with no 

means of exit. Currently, Rathgar Avenue cannot safely manage additional 
construction traffic and Garville Lane cannot safely be used as a backup access route 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The site mentioned above, has an agreed Construction Management Plan, however 
the use of Rathgar Road wasn’t included in the plan. Construction vehicles are to 
access Kenilworth Square South from Rathmines Road Lower side. The suspected 
alternate use of Garville Lane will not be permitted as it is not a suitable traffic route.  
 
Roadworks Control will contact the main contractor on site and have them reroute all 
construction vehicles, associated with the site, to the approved and agreed route.   
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive, to request a meeting with the management of Children’s 
Health Ireland Hospital, Crumlin to see what measures they are putting in place to 
manage traffic issues on Cooley Road in Drimnagh 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Transport Advisory Group South Central engineers with liaise with Children’s 
Hospital Ireland, Crumlin, regarding a site visit in 2026 
 
Q.57  COUNCILLOR AMMAR ALI 
To ask the Chief Executive to take Details Supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services clean details supplied on a daily basis, Monday to 
Friday. In addition, we remove illegally dumped rubbish from there on a regular basis. 
A litter warden will include this location as part of his regular patrol to tackle the illegal 
dumping there. 
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR AMMAR ALI 
To ask the Chief Executive Details Supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The footpaths of details supplied are particularly problematic for the successful and 
safe planting of street trees for the following reasons: 
 
-Overhead utilities 
-Underground utilities 
-Vehicular entrances that limit the length of adequately sized tree pits. 
-Insufficiently wide enough footpaths to accommodate both tree pits and 
pedestrian/wheelchair access. 
-Cracks in walls  
 
Given the numerous constraints, it will not be possible to plan trees in this location. 
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR AMMAR ALI 
To ask the Chief Executive Details Supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Details Supplied will be completely reconstructed under the proposed Bus Connects 
Scheme. However, this does not alleviate the situation of a wheelchair user in the 
meantime. I have logged this disabled dishing outside the details supplied shop to our 
works list for repair and will be carried out when I have a crew available in the new 
year. 

 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7049586) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a comprehensive reply to the following questions 
in relation to the unauthorised development at Details Supplied? 
a)       What is the status of the enforcement proceeding in this matter? 
b)       Can DCC and Planning Enforcement confirm if this matter is still before 
the Courts? 
c)       If not can DCC and Planning Enforcement provide details on the matter? 
d)       What are the legal costs to date for DCC in pursuing this matter? 
e)       Will DCC pursue the developer for their costs? 
f)         Can the developer apply for further planning permission while matters 
relating to the planning enforcement file are still unresolved?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
a) This matter came before the District Court on 28.01.2025 and the court found in favour 
of DCC and a conviction was obtained, costs of €4,173.55 were awarded and a court 
order issued requiring that the enforcement notice was to be complied with within 6 
months – the case was adjourned until 22.07.2025. 
 
An appeal was submitted to the Circuit Court and was listed for mention on the 
08.12.2025. 
 
This case was adjourned by the Circuit Court on consent on 08.12.2025 until 
14.05.2026. The defendants had lodged another amended retention application on the 
27.11.2025, planning register reference WEB5788/25 refers. The adjournment will 
allow time for the application to be determined in advance of the case next coming 
before the courts. 
 
b) This matter is still before the courts and is next listed for mention in the Circuit Court 
on 14.05.2025. 
 
c) N/A 
 
d) Legal fees in this matter to date are €6,326.05 inc. VAT 
 
e) DCC will pursue the defendant for the costs. 
 
f) Yes, a further application has been submitted. An application for retention permission 
was submitted on 25.11.2025 under planning register reference WEB5788/25. 
 
Q.61  COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the proposed works on the National 
Monument in Moore Street by the Office of Public Works 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Government have tasked the OPW, in conjunction with the Department of Housing 
Local Government & Heritage, with undertaking a project to conserve the historic 
properties at 14/17 Moore St and to open them to the public as a heritage visitor site 
in the centre of Dublin.    

The OPW has informed us that considerable progress has been made in developing a 
suitable project and this has advanced to a stage where the Minister for Heritage, 
acting on a recommendation from the Department, has, in mid-December last, 
approved a grant of Ministerial Consent under the National Monuments Act.   The OPW 
states that this is a significant statutory step and represents the achievement of a major 
project milestone, clearing the way for the development of detailed designs and 
construction plans. We are informed that this step will involve close consultation with 
Dublin City Council officials, as the OPW contend that Dublin City Council remain a 
significant partner to the project and will have a significant input into its realisation. 
The OPW are now working on the next phase of the project with a view to invitation of 
tenders from construction forms at the earliest possible opportunity. 
Dublin City Council awaits further information on the next steps from the OPW and 
Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage before convening a meeting of 
relevant representatives. 
On receipt of this information, we will also ask the OPW/Department Officials to brief 
the City Council members. 
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the number of households who have availed of the 
Home Swapper scheme and whether the scheme is still active 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The Home Swapper Scheme is no longer active.  
 
Please find the number of cases completed for the years 2019 – 2022, below –  
 
Year 
Number of Home Swapper cases 
completed 
2019 
24 
2020 
5 
2021 
16 
2022 
13 
 
Q.63  COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the expenditure by DCC on the Halloween 
festivities in the five administrative areas in Dublin 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s Waste Management section operated a Halloween Action Plan 
this year including co-operation with Parks, Housing, Waste Enforcement, Media 
Relations, Dublin Fire Brigade and Area Offices. The objective of the Halloween Action 
Plan is to identify locations where there is collection and storage of potential bonfire 
material in the run up to Halloween night and arrange for immediate removal and safe 
disposal of same in order to reduce the environmental and social consequences of 
bonfires. Based on previous experience it was decided that waste management would 
have two on call crews working over the Halloween period (Saturday 18th October to 
Thursday 30th October) with one Inspector Supervising the operations. 
 
The on-call crews during this period responded to a significant number of requests for 
assistance from the Garda, DCC Housing, Parks and customer services. In addition 
contractors were engaged by local area offices to assist in the removal of stockpiled 
bonfire materials. In total 662.60 tonnes of bonfire materials were removed in the run 
up to Halloween night. The cost for the disposal of this waste was €69,573.00. 

Manpower costs are restricted to the on call crews that operated over this period 
although there were many other bonfire removals that took place throughout the day 
during normal working hours and these cannot be quantified. 
 
Area offices also incurred costs that they can outline for you. 
 
 
 
 
 
Description  
Tons 
Disposal Costs 
 Manpower 
Costs WMS 
DCC Own Vehicles 
Collections 
147.12 
€15,447.60 
  
Breffni re DCC 
Waste Management 
401.58 
€42,165.90 
  
Breffni re DCC 
Parks 
113.9 
€11,959.50 
  
Total Tons 
662.6 
€69,573.00 
 €28,000.00 
 
 
Area Expenditure 
 
 
South 
Central 
North West 
North 
Central 
Central 
South 
East 
Events 
Programme & 
Management  
€90,710.91 €212,109.00 €251,713.79 €358,501 
 
€202,602 
Grants 
€43,070.00 €7,300.00 
€20,698.00 
€3,500 
€757.19 
Public Domain 
€31,598.40 €14,953.37 
€3,995.20 
€36,306 
€31,008.20 
 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if there is currently a policy or procedure in place to support 
staff and residents when managing complex waste-related situations, such as 
hoarding. Given that hoarding is a recognised mental illness and waste management 
staff are not trained mental health professionals, is there a framework for involving 
appropriate mental health services to ensure these situations are addressed safely, 
effectively, and compassionately 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Hoarding inside a residence is not a matter for waste management staff and we have 
no role to play in addressing or clearing out homes where the resident is a hoarder. 
There are no specific policies, framework or procedures currently in place within Dublin 
City Council to support waste management operational staff when managing complex 
waste-related situations, such as hoarding. As you state Waste Management 
Operational staff are not trained mental health professionals and as such would never 
engage directly with residents on such issues. Such engagement would be very 
exceptional as waste management staff never remove refuse from either inside a 
resident’s home or the front or back gardens regardless of their mental health state as 
it is outside our remit to do so. 
 
Waste Enforcement staff and all front line staff in Dublin City Council are provided 
training on dealing with difficult members of the public, as part of standard Health and 
Safety precautions in order to ensure their own safety. The resolution of such matters 

does generally require engagement from a number of different public bodies and would 
always be treated in a compassionate manner and in accordance with any applicable 
laws. All mental health issues remain matters for the requisite medical professionals 
to deal with and on occasions where staff from Waste Enforcement find it necessary 
to engage with a resident on the storage of waste materials either in their front or back 
gardens they would do so through liaison with our local area offices, local garda and 
public health officials as necessary.  
 
The Social Work Section has initiated a planned response to work alongside other 
stakeholders in Dublin City Council in dealing with tenants who are assessed as 
displaying extreme hoarding behaviour that impacts on their functioning and quality of 
life and which may, in some cases, impact on neighbours. Referrals are accepted from 
all sections within DCC and external agencies who have concerns about hoarding in a 
DCC tenancy. The Referral form is available in www.dublincity.ie. 
 
Our aim is to reduce health and safety risks, sustain tenancies and improve quality of 
life. The initiative will involve interagency working with a range of other stakeholders 
such as Mental Health to ensure that a holistic planned response is achieved in 
responding to this complex issue. 
 
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm when, and by what means, tenants will be 
formally notified of the new rents they will be required to pay from April onwards, 
including whether notification will issue by letter, online portal, or other means, and 
what supports will be in place for tenants seeking clarification or review 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Changes to Dublin City Council’s Differential Rent Scheme will come into effect from 
Monday, 6th April 2026. 
Dublin City Council will issue letters directly to tenants to advise them of the upcoming 
changes and how these changes will impact their weekly rent charge. Letters will be 
issued to tenants from February 2026. The letters will include an information leaflet 
outlining the changes and how their new rent charge is calculated. 
A FAQ section has already been added to Dublin City Council’s website providing 
information on the upcoming changes and giving some examples of how the new rent 
charge will be calculated and how the changes will impact tenant’s current weekly rent 
charges.  
If there have been any changes to a tenant’s household i.e. occupant and/or income 
changes, that they have not notified Dublin City Council about, they should contact 
Dublin City Council’s Rent Section as soon as possible with the relevant details of the 
changes to their household to ensure that their weekly rent charge is being assessed 
correctly.  
 
Q.66  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive what support is available to tenants who cannot absorb 
rent increases, how these are applied in practice, how long do applications take to 
process on average, and how many households have successfully accessed such 
measures in the last 12 months 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s Differential Rent Scheme includes a Hardship Clause which 
tenants can apply for if they find themselves in extreme need and following a referral 
to our Welfare Section.  

Each application is dealt with on a case-by-case basis and supporting documentation 
is required for review and consideration i.e. Social Worker referral, medical reports, 
financial statements, etc. 
The Hardship Clause can be used in situations of extreme need to reduce a tenant’s 
weekly rent charge for a specific period of time or to reduce outstanding arrears to 
facilitate the tenant entering into a manageable repayment arrangement.  
Tenants should contact their Executive Housing Officer or the Rents Section at 
rents@dublincity.ie should they require any further information.  
During 2025, 7 requests were received for consideration under the Hardship Clause 
and of the 7 received, 5 were successful. In terms of timeframes for decisions, this is 
dependent on the availability of the required supporting documentation and the 
tenant’s availability and ability to engage with the process. 
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline the statutory process required to bring forward a 
variation to the Dublin City Development Plan 2022–2028 that would introduce 
additional restrictions on the location and proliferation of gambling arcades and other 
gambling establishments, including separation distances from residential areas, 
mixed-use areas, healthcare facilities, funeral parlours, places of worship and other 
sensitive land uses, beyond those currently provided for in the Development Plan 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin City Development Plan (CDP) 2022 - 2028 contains retail policy in 
connection with gambling premises located in betting shops, bookmakers, casinos, 
members club etc. as set out in Chapter 7 - The City Centre, Urban Villages and Retail 
and under policy CCUV 14 - Adult Shops, Betting Shops and Gaming Arcades, which 
states: 
‘That there will be a presumption against adult shops, betting shops and gaming 
arcades in proximity to residential areas, places of public worship and schools and 
similarly, there will be a presumption against an excessive concentration of such uses 
having regard to the existing presence of such retail outlets in an area.’ 
Furthermore, development standards with provisions relating to gambling are 
contained in Chapter 15 of the development plan as follows:  
 
15.14.8 - Off Licences  
15.14.9 - Betting Shops/Adult Store  
15.14.10 - Amusement Centres / Events  
15.14.12 - Night Clubs/Licenced Premises/Casinos/ Private Member Clubs  
 
It is an objective of Dublin City Council to prevent an over concentration of betting 
offices / adult stores in the city, thereby, ensuring the number of units in a city street, 
district or neighbourhood centre is not disproportionate to the overall number of 
community facilities and shop units. This is controlled by the statutory development 
plan process carried out by the planning authority.  
With regard to the statutory process of a variation of the Development Plan, Chapter 5 
of Part 3 of the Planning and Development Act 2024 will come into operation on 31 
December 2025.  Chapter 5 (Development Plans) provides for the making of a 
development plan, including the procedures for preparing, making and varying a 
development plan. 
Under Section 58 of the 2024 Act a planning authority may at any time, for stated 
reasons, decide to make a variation of a development plan for its functional area for 
the time being in force.  This is a process initiated by the chief executive or the elected 
members, commencing with a 4 week public consultation process and concluding with 
the elected members considering the chief executive’s report on the consultation and 
making, amending or refusing to make the variation.  

 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive to clarify why the housing application of Details Supplied 
has seen no substantive progress over a period exceeding three years, including three 
Christmas periods, and to outline what actions, if any, are currently being taken to 
progress this application 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on Band 2 of the Housing List with an application date of 
16/07/2013, and holds the following positions on the waiting list -  
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
E 
2 
46 
 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 
number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list. 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
The applicant should be advised to keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being 
advertised that may be of interest to her and to ensure she makes an application for 
same. 
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to details supplied and let me know when the 
necessary works to the footpath will be carried out 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An Enquiry (ref. 11189398) has been created for this request. This section of broken 
carriageway/pedestrian crossing shall be repaired by the end of February 2026 
 
Q.70  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to refer to case as per details supplied and say if this can 
be accommodated 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Transfer List and in receipt of Homeless Hap with an 
application date of 17/09/2013, and holds the following positions on the waiting list -  
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
2 
55 
E 
2 
73 
H 
2 
18 
 
I have noted the applicant’s interest in the above property.  
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 

number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list. 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
The applicant should be advised to keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being 
advertised that may be of interest to her and to ensure she makes an application for 
same. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q.71  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide me with an update on progress in relation to 
details supplied and say what funding has been applied for in the past from the 
National Monuments fund or other 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Community Monuments Fund 
Regarding the details supplied a Community Monuments Fund application has not 
been made at time of writing.   
Information about successful CMF grants in the Dublin City area since the start of the 
scheme 
(i.e. 
2021-5) 
can 
be 
found 
on 
the 
Council 
webpage 
here: 
https://www.dublincity.ie/archaeology-conservation-and-heritage/creating-
monuments-and-commemorations/community-monuments-fund.  
The call for CMF applications is currently open, with a closing date of 30 January.  All 
potential Local Authority and Community applicants are encouraged to review the 
information on the above webpage and contact archaeology@dublincity.ie in advance 
of the closing date to discuss their project proposal. 
 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to details supplied, say if he can assist in having 
the area cleared back in some way to alleviate the problems outlined in detail supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref.11189399) has been created in relation to the above request for the 
overhanging trees trimmed back. The Area Inspector will issue a notice to the 
properties, to instruct them to cut their trees/bushes back such that they don’t encroach 
into the public realm. 
 
Q.73  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive for a full investigation of the gullies at details supplied 
which were recently partially covered by cement follow road works 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A Contractor recently carried out footpath renewal works on details supplied on behalf 
of Road Maintenance Services. On foot of a complaint received in relation to 2 no. 
gullies on the road, we have asked the Contractor to investigate if the reported 
blockages in these gullies were caused by concrete from their adjacent works. When 
these investigations are complete, an update will be available on this matter. 
 

Q.74  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the tenant in situ scheme. 
A) How many applications were received in 2025, 
B) How many applications were finalised  
C) How many applications were rejected  
D) How many applications are pending  
E) How many applications have been received to date with an eviction date in 2026 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Acquisition section completed 76 tenants in situ purchases in 2025.   
We have received 19 NOTs with a 2026 eviction notice 
The following table is the status of TIS enquiries since September 2025.  
 
 
Tenant In Situ since 
Sept 2025 
Total 
Total 
number 
of 
enquiries received  
75 
Eligibility 
& 
tenant 
checks ongoing  
13 
Building Inspector 
2 
 
Valuer 
8 
 
Total - In process 
23 
 
  
  
 
Not progressed  
40 
Criteria not met 
re 2 yr rule for 
property to be in 
receipt of HAP or 
the scale level of 
refurbishment 
works required. 
Properties not in DCC 
Admin Area and so the 
request was sent to 
relevant LA 
10 
Offered 
alternative 
Housing 
2 
 
 
Q.75  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the Housing Aid for older persons grant  
A) How many applications were received in 2025 
B) How many applications were received in 2024 
C) How many applications were rejected in 2024 
D) How many applications were rejected in 2025 
E) Can a breakdown be provided of the categories of drawdown i.e. roofs, heat pumps,  
F) The average timescale for an application to be processed before an inspection 
G) The average timescale for an application to be fully processed including payment 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Housing Adaptation Grants for Older People and People with a Disability Section 
administers three Housing Grants Schemes designed to provide assistance to people 
making adaptations to their privately owned homes to meet their medical needs and to 

older people in inadequate housing conditions carrying out essential repairs to their 
owner occupied homes. These measures enable people to stay in their own 
communities and prevent or delay their placement in residential care thereby reducing 
social segregation, assisting their carer’s and strengthening families.   
 
The three Housing Grants are as follows: - 
1) Housing Adaptation Scheme. 
2) Mobility Aids Scheme. 
3) Housing Aid for Older People. 
 
The Housing Aid for Older People Grant is for people 66 years old or more to do 
essential repairs, so that they can continue to live in their own home. Sometimes this 
grant can be paid to people under 66 years old, but only in cases of hardship.  
The Housing Aid for Older People Grant is to do essential repairs for e.g.,  
Repair or replace the roof. 
Upgrade the electrical wiring. 
Repair or replace doors and windows.  
 
A) The number of applications for the Housing Aid for Older People Grants received in 
2025 was 433. 
B) The number of applications for the Housing Aid for Older People Grants received in 
2024 was 585. 
C) The number of applications that were returned to the applicant (rejected) during 2024 
was 257.   
D) The number of applications that were returned to the applicant (rejected) during 2025 
was 133.   
 
 The reason the applications were returned (rejected) were as follows: - 
• 
Under the age of 66. 
• 
Applicants did not meet the necessary criteria e.g.; Applicants were over the income 
limit. 
• 
Missing supporting documentation e.g., Income, Local Property Tax, Reports. 
• 
Outside the Dublin City Council electoral area. 
• 
The Works applied for were not eligible under the Housing Aid for Older People Grant. 
• 
Works were completed prior to the Application. 
 
E) The breakdown of the categories of drawdown of the Housing Aid for Older People is 
as follows: - 
Heating 
Windows 
Roofing 
Re-wiring 
Ancillary Works 
 
F) Currently, the average waiting time for an Inspection of a Grant is dependent on the 
nature of the Grant that is applied for.  Priority cases are dealt within 1 – 6 weeks, and 
other cases, depending on the priority can take up to 4 months.  However, considering 
the nature of these important Grants, we always endeavour to reduce this waiting time 
as much as possible. 
G) There is no fixed timeframe for an application to be fully processed, including payment, 
as this depends on several factors. These factors maybe as basic as waiting for 
Applicants to provide the necessary documentation.  Or, as Works may only be 
commenced by a Contractor once approval has been provided by the Grants Section, 

the Applicant is then waiting for a commencement date from the Contractor which 
could also delay the completion of the Application.   
 
As a result, there is no fixed timeframe for an application to be fully processed including 
payment. 
  
Q.76  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the Croi Conaithe vacancy grant 
A) How many applications were received in 2025 
B) How many applications were received in 2024 
C) How many applications were rejected in 2024 
D) How many applications were rejected in 2025 
E) The average timescale for an application to be processed before an inspection 
G) The average timescale for an application to be fully processed including payment  
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A) 402 applications received in 2025 
B) 359 applications received in 2024 
C) 16 applications rejected in 2024 
D) 10 applications rejected in 2025 
E) Applications are processed within 2 weeks of receipt 
F) Applications are processed within 2 weeks of receipt; 1st inspections are completed 
within 4 weeks of a valid application. Approval is granted/denied within 2 weeks of 
1st inspection. Following approval, the timeframe for works to be complete is 13 
months, however this time can be unrealistic and difficult to meet, applicants may 
only have a quote at this stage and won’t have a builder in place so we would allow 
an extension of time in certain cases. Once works are completed and the applicant 
has submitted vouched expenditure a 2nd inspection is scheduled within 4 weeks 
with a final grant sum calculated within 2 weeks of same. Finally when the payment 
is being drawdown this process is carried out by two independent solicitors (DCC’s 
and the Applicants), this can take up to 8 weeks with payment following the legal 
process within 2 weeks. 
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to investigate the ownership of the public Boat Slipway 
/Pier on the Clontarf Promenade opposite CYBC so that repairs and other 
improvements can take place to protect and improve this essential amenity, also to 
investigate if there are any foreshore licences 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council do not hold a registered title of this area, however the City Council 
is in charge of the area. 
 
Further follow up is required and information will be provided to Cllr. Cooney. 
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if the build-up of silt at the outer walls of Clontarf 
baths/outdoor pool could be dredged, as it's creating more flood risk with wave over 
topping, could Dublin Port be asked to do this work when doing other maintenance 
works, birds do not appear to be using these areas for wading it's not a flat surface 
they prefer 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

This has been forwarded to Dublin Port for answer. Any dredging campaigns are 
generally restricted to the shipping lane into Dublin Port only. They are extremely costly 
and take place every 2 years. There are multiple environmental concerns. 
 
The build up of material around the Clontarf Baths generally reduces the height of 
waves and aids their breakup. There are other material buildups occurring which also 
reduce waves hitting the sea wall. The main reason for more wave overtopping is rising 
sea levels which are estimated to have risen in this area by around 200mm (8”) since 
the turn of the century. 
 
 
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the derelict vacant building at the corner 
of Richmond Avenue and Richmond estate which DCC had been working to address, 
as it's an eyesore and has been like this for many years 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The site on Richmond Road was acquired compulsorily pursuant to Section 14 of the 
Derelict Sites Act 1990. 
 
The acquisition is the subject of an ongoing court case. Unfortunately, until matters are 
resolved, DCC’s Housing Department, who have indicated their interest in developing 
the site, are not in a position to progress at this time. 
 
Q.80  COUNCILLOR DONNA COONEY 
To ask the Chief Executive for the Light-bellied Brent Geese survey of feeding sites in 
Dublin as commissioned by DCC, which the Minister for Heritage has seen and RTE 
have a copy to be made available to the Councillors even if in draft and incomplete 
form 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The information in question was released, we understand, by National Parks and 
Wildlife Services, on foot of an AIE request. This data however is incomplete and 
requires further deliberation, the report has not been released by DCC. 
 
If any Councillor requires more information please contact Les Moore, City Parks 
Superintendent. 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR AISHLING SILKE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the site at the old bring centre on 
Collins Avenue, Dublin 9, which was to be the site of a social housing project 
comprising 83 homes under a PPP bundle before being cancelled earlier this year; and 
if the City Council will consider the site for new affordable housing on a cooperative 
and community-led basis 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DCC Housing is progressing with two sites on Collins Avenue that were part of the 
National Social Housing PPP programme.  
 
Collins Avenue/Swords Road Project 
This development will deliver 83 social homes, along with public realm, a playground, 
and private open space for the residents. DCC is leading the delivery of this project to 
appoint a construction contractor to build the homes in accordance with the Part 8 
planning consent.  

Construction is scheduled to commence in Q4 2026. Once construction is complete, 
DCC Housing will assume ownership and management responsibilities for these 
homes. 
 
Former DCC Depot & Bring Centre, Collins Avenue Project 
This development will deliver a mix of 106 social and age friendly homes, along with 
public realm, a playground, community, cultural and arts space.  
It is anticipated that the Social Housing PPP programme review will be concluded by 
Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage in Q1 2026. DCC is working on 
a procurement strategy to progress the remaining DCC PPP sites through an 
alternative procurement competition, most likely Design and Build. There will be no 
changes to the scheme design.  
The Housing Team will continue to engage with Councillors and key stakeholders 
throughout 2026, as the sites progress.  
 
Q.82  COUNCILLOR AISHLING SILKE 
To ask the Chief Executive, further to Q56 submitted to the North Central Area 
Committee for its meeting on 8th December 2025, to confirm whether any action has 
been taken in 2024 or 2025 in relation to specific cases of council tenants engaging in 
anti-social behaviour or criminality in Larkhill, Whitehall, in breach of their tenancy 
agreement; and to list any meetings the Council has had with local Gardaí to date in 
2025 in respect of same 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council Estate Management spoke to tenants in relation to minor 
indiscretions in 2024/2025. Following this intervention no letters were warranted or 
issued to tenants in Larkhill in relation to alleged breach of tenancy. 
Dublin City Council engage with the Gardaí on a bi-monthly basis at which all areas of 
estate management are discussed. The concern of alleged anti-social behaviour or 
criminality in Larkhill, Whitehall will be discussed again at the next Garda meeting in 
February.  
Instances of alleged anti-social behaviour can be reported to the Darndale office by 
contacting Ph: 2226930 or mailing Darndale@dublincity.ie 
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR AISHLING SILKE 
To ask the Chief Executive, in relation to the site at Beaumont Road/Beaumont 
Grove/Grace Park Court/Ellenfield Road, Beaumont, Dublin 9 (An Coimisiún Pleanála 
- Case reference: PL29N.321996, Planning Authority Case Reference: 2569/21), to 
provide a full update from the Council’s Derelict Sites Section regarding a site 
inspection and any enforcement action to be taken under the Derelict Sites Act 1990; 
and to outline any immediate work being done by the City Council in response to 
concerns from residents regarding anti-social behaviour, loitering and trespassing at 
the site 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This site is currently included on the RZLT (Residential Zoned Land Tax) maps and 
therefore cannot also be included on the Derelict Sites Register.   
The Derelict Sites team will carry out an inspection of the site and open a file on the 
matter. Consideration may be given in the future as to which is more appropriate and 
applicable levy in this instance.  
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR AISHLING SILKE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on possible funding streams available 
to assist Lorcan Residents Association in renovating and developing their community 
centre; if funding from the Glenveagh fund associated with the Oscar Traynor Road 

development will be used in this respect; and if the Council will respond to the concerns 
of local resident’s details supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Area Office staff are available to work with community groups across the city who are  
seeking advice or assistance in investigating funding streams for local projects. The 
Area Community & Social Development Officer has been passing on information on 
grants to this Residents Association and providing support where required. A meeting 
of the Oscar Traynor Woods Consultative Forum was held in January at which issues 
connected to this development were discussed. The Area Office will make contact 
with the elected members in the area regarding any follow-up actions arising from 
this.  
Q.85  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please provide us with a report on when we will receive 
confirmation of the number of homes that will be secured under the affordable homes 
scheme for the Glass Bottle Site 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council along with Co-Operative Housing Ireland continue to work with 
Pembroke Beach DAC in relation to the affordable element at the Glass Bottle Site.  It 
is envisaged that Block D in Phase 2 will be an affordable cost rental block.  The 
developer is working with the Planning Department in Dublin City Council with the 
intention of submitting a revised planning application to increase the number of units 
in Phase 2 which will achieve additional efficiencies and cost savings by applying the 
new apartment guidelines and Design Manual Standards.   It is expected that this 
application will be lodged in the coming weeks.   The AHB are also liaising with the 
Housing Agency in relation to modelling the costs and discussing the cost rental 
finance model. 
 
Q.86  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please provide a report on the intervention of the council 
on DIT Kevin Street Camden Yard development? How many social homes does the 
council plan to have on this site? Are there plans for mixed development? Where will 
this funding come from 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is currently in exclusive discussions regarding the potential 
acquisition of the Camden Yard site on Kevin Street, formerly the DIT campus. Heads 
of Agreement have been signed to enable a 10-week due diligence period. The 
proposed acquisition remains subject to due diligence and the Council’s statutory 
governance and approval processes. 
 
Should the acquisition proceed, the intention is to deliver a new Civic Offices and 
approximately 300 public homes on the Camden Yard site. Relocating from the current 
Civic Offices at Wood Quay would unlock the potential for more than 500 additional 
public homes on that site. The development strategy will prioritise public housing and 
modern, sustainable workplaces, and the Council will explore options for mixed 
development in line with statutory planning requirements and housing policy. 
 
Any potential acquisition and subsequent development and funding remain subject to 
due diligence, statutory approvals, and the Council’s governance processes. Dublin 
City Council will continue to keep elected members informed and will provide further 
briefings at the appropriate points in line with these processes. 
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 

To ask the Chief Executive to please provide us with an update on Fitzwilliam Quay 
adaptive use development 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Fitzwilliam Quay Adaptive Reuse Project involves the conversion of a vacant office 
building in Ringsend to apartments for use as social housing. The project has an 
estimated completion date of April 2028. 
Following the establishment of the new framework for Multi-Disciplinary Design Team 
Services for Adaptive Reuse Projects, a procurement competition was held to 
engage a design team for the design, planning and construction stages of the 
project. This process concluded in Quarter 3 of 2025 with appointment of the 
design team. 
The proposed design will create 15 x 1-bedroom apartments for use as social 
housing. The approach has been for minimal intervention in the existing building 
structure to provide 5 apartments over each of the three floors. This project is 
being delivered as a circular economy project for Dublin City Council with a focus 
on reducing waste by reuse, relocation and recycling of the existing materials and 
building fabric.  
The next stage in the project program is to initiate the Pre-Part 8 Planning Process 
at the February 2026 South East Area Committee meeting, with submission of the 
Part 8 application in March 2026 with a view to being included on the agenda of 
the July 2026 City Council meeting for approval.  
In the interim, the building has been benefiting from active ‘meanwhile use’ as a 
Neighbourhood Regeneration Office for the Horizon 2020 REGEN project. The office 
provides information to the public on REGEN, the Decarbonising Zone, Waste to 
Energy Facility, District Heating and other EU projects. 
Information on the project is updated regularly on Adaptive Reuse page of the Dublin 
City Council website.  
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please provide an update on the Saint Andrews Court 
Development? When will the demolition happen? When will it start to be built 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The St. Andrew’s Court redevelopment proposal consists of the demolition of the 
existing flat block, which has 14 vacant units, and the construction of a new housing 
block providing 33 new social homes. The new development will consist of 12 one-
bed, 16 two-bed and 5 three-bedroom homes.  
  
The project is currently out to tender and is live on e-tenders, the national tendering 
website. The Council hopes to complete the tender process, and subject to Department 
of Housing funding approval, appoint a contractor and commence works on site in 
summer 2026. 
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR KARL STANLEY 
To ask the Chief Executive for a timeline on when the trampoline in the playground in 
Fairview Park will be repaired. It is damaged and has been cordoned off for most of 
2025 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As this item had come under repeated attack at night the decision was taken when it 
was damaged for the third time to replace it with an inclusive swing which was installed 
in early November 2025. 
 
Q.90  COUNCILLOR KARL STANLEY 

To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the development work on the site 
at Richmond Ave / Richmond Estate. The site was CPOed a number of years ago but 
is still derelict / vacant. Please provide a timeline of council actions relating to this site 
since CPO and the planned timeline for bringing this site into use 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The site on Richmond Road was acquired compulsorily pursuant to Section 14 of the 
Derelict Sites Act 1990. 
 
The acquisition is the subject of an ongoing court case. Unfortunately, until matters are 
resolved, DCC’s Housing Department, who have indicated their interest in developing 
the site, are not in a position to progress at this time. 
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR KARL STANLEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report into the planning process that was 
followed for details supplied (WEB1125/20). The planning application does not refer to 
a change of use of the front garden from a green space to a driveway, however the 
response from the planning dept does mention a driveway - this appears to be a 
copy/paste error from a different planning application. This means that other residents 
were unaware of the proposed changes and were denied their legal right to make 
observations on this planning application. The applicant appears to have taken 
advantage of this error and has installed a driveway. To access this driveway, a driver 
needs to cross a public paid parking space and a footpath. The footpath is low but has 
not been dished. The net result is that details supplied has lost a permit parking space 
that up until very recently was available to all residents. Can the Chief Executive 
confirm that this error will not create a precedent that will lead to other Melrose Ave 
residents applying to have their gardens converted to car parking 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Planning Permission was applied for and granted under Web1125/20 for a single 
storey extension to the rear of details supplied. 
A condition was inserted as part of this planning approval referencing that “the car 
parking area to the front of the dwelling shall be constructed using permeable 
materials”. It appears that this condition was an unintentional addition to the granted 
permission. The permission granted and the associated condition will not create a 
precedent for similar off street parking developments. Any future applications for 
vehicular entrances in this area will be fully and properly assessed in accordance with 
the criteria set out in Appendix 5 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028 in 
particular section 4.3 Parking in Front Gardens which states: “ Proposals for off street 
parking in the front gardens of single dwellings in mainly residential areas may not be 
permitted where residents rely on-street car parking and there is a strong demand for 
such parking.” 
 
Q.92  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive what shopfront guidelines apply in suburban areas, and 
how these guidelines are implemented and enforced at local level 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028 contains policy CCUV12 relating to 
Shopfront Design.  Under CCUV12, it is policy ‘To require a high quality of design and 
finish for new and replacement shopfront signage and advertising. Dublin City Council 
will actively promote the principles of good shopfront design as set out in Dublin City 
Council’s Shopfront Design Guidelines and Chapter 15’. 
 

Development Standard 15.17.5 relates to Shopfront and Façade Design indicating that 
‘Proposals for shopfront signage shall have regard to the contents of the Retail Design 
Manual, 2012, Dublin City Council’s Shopfront Design Guide, 2001’.  The shopfront 
design guide can be found at the following link: 
 
Guides and Strategies for Development in Dublin City | Dublin City Council 
 
Shopfront policy in the Development Plan and the shopfront design guidelines are 
applicable throughout the Dublin City Council area, including suburban areas.  These 
provisions are implemented through the statutory development management process 
and enforced by the Planning Enforcement service. 
 
 
Q.93  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive for the maintenance of footpaths (including repair and 
widening) along with traffic calming measures at Abbeyfield, Killester to be prioritised 
in 2026 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7049587) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
Road Maintenance Services will assign a crew to commence repair works to the 
footpaths in Abbeyfield in January 2026. 
 
Please refer to the request for widening of the footpaths to Traffic Division. 
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive what options are available to residents who had cladding 
or other insulation measures installed on their homes some years ago which has now 
reached the end of its effective lifespan and now wish to have same removed and 
disposed of responsibly. Given that there are schemes to support residents to insulate 
their homes, what supports exist for removal or replacement of such insulation after a 
period of time? 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The external insulation systems employed on the Housing Maintenance, Energy 
Efficiency Retrofit Programme are certified by NSAI Agrément (formerly the Irish 
Agrément Board) and have a life span of over 30 years. On this basis it is unlikely that 
insulation installed on any social homes in Council ownership are at the end of their 
current certified life span. 
However, if there are specific homes where the tenants have concerns with their 
installed insulation then please do share the details of the home and the tenant and 
we can make contact. Alternatively tenant maintenance requests relating to the 
external structure of the property should be logged by contacting Housing Maintenance 
ph. 222 22 22 during office hours or emailing maintenance@dublincity.ie.   
 
Q.95  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive what is planned for the derelict site at details supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY:  

The site on details supplied was acquired compulsorily pursuant to Section 14 of the 
Derelict Sites Act 1990. 
The acquisition is the subject of an ongoing court case. Unfortunately, until matters 
are resolved, DCC’s Housing Department, who have indicated their interest in 
developing the site, are not in a position to progress at this time. 
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to bike parking around the city there seems to 
be a lack of bike parking facilities at the Point Cinema. I have had several people email 
me in relation to this in recent months 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The area around the Point Village is in private ownership and is not in charge to DCC.  
There would appear to be a good supply of cycle parking in the vicinity. 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for a timeline for procurement for the Dalymount Park 
redevelopment 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The procurement of a construction contractor for the Dalymount Park Redevelopment 
will be a two stage process. The 1st stage will take the form of an SAQ issued to the 
market. This will be uploaded to eTenders in Q1 2026. Following the completion of 
stage 1, a tender will be issued to the shortlisted applicants in Q3 2026. Demolition is 
expected to commence before the end of 2026.   
 
Q.98  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for a timeline for the procurement of the new parking 
enforcement contract 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Supplemental Request for Tender has been published on E-Tenders since the 1st 
December 2025, the deadline for tender submission is the 31st January 2026. 
An assessment and award of contract process will then be followed and once the 
contract is awarded, there will be a three month implementation phase.  
As the current contract will expire on the 31st July 2026, the new contract will be active 
from the 1st August 2026. 
 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a timeline for the redlight camera pilot in 
partnership with the National Transport Authority that was supposed to be installed in 
early 2025 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The red-light running camera which is being installed in conjunction with Irish Rail for 
the Merrion Gates crossing is currently in testing mode. Regarding a wider rollout, the 
NTA and AGS are currently investigating future proposals. 
 
Q.100  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive how many vacancies there are currently in the Parks 
Department broken down by Parks District or division 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

 
The table below outlines the number of current vacancies per grade in the Parks and 
Landscape Division. 
 
Grade 
Number of Vacancies 
Administrative Officer 
1 
Assistant Parks and Landscape Officer 
5 
Chargehand Gardener 
1 
Craft Bricklayer 
1 
Craft Gardener 
3 
Executive Landscape Architect 
2 
General Operative 
9 
Senior District Parks Officer 
1 
Staff Officer 
1 
Senior Parks and Landscape Officer 
1 
Total 
25 
 
 
The overall number of posts in the Parks and Landscape Division is 270.  The current  
number of vacant posts is 25. 
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR MALACHY STEENSON 
To ask the Chief Executive can he confirm that Loux Ltd and Layla Investments Ltd 
who have been paid €7,797,861.30 and €2,818,800.08 in respect of Emergency Acc / 
IPAS is the first nine months of this year have up to date accounts filed in the CRO 
and that they currently have tax clearance certificates. Can he also confirm that all 
companies receiving payments from DCC in respect of Emergency acc / IPAS are fully 
compliant with the Revenue Commissioners and the CRO 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
All public sector contract payees must have a valid tax clearance cert to receive 
payments over the €10,000 threshold. Tax clearance certs are issued on a rolling 12-
month period. The issuing of Tax Clearance certs is under the remit of the Revenue 
Commissioners and if a company is not compliant, Revenue will place a hold on its tax 
clearance, and no payments will be made by Dublin City Council until a valid tax 
clearance is issued.  
 

Appendix C 
 
Report No. 03/2026 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Proposed Variation 
No. 9 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028: Broombridge Hamilton 
Masterplan (SDRA 18) Chief Executive's Report on the Submissions received during 
the Public Consultation Process  
Variation 9 – Proposed Amendments  
No.  
Decision 
Proposed by  
Seconded by  
1.  Agreed  
Cllr Cat O’Driscoll  
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
2.  Agreed 
Cllr Séamas McGrattan 
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
3.  Agreed 
Cllr Vincent Jackson  
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
4.  Agreed 
Cllrs Anthony Connaghan Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
5.  Agreed 
Cllrs Anthony Connaghan Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
6.  Agreed 
Cllr Jesslyn Henry 
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
7.  Agreed 
Cllr Cat O’Driscoll 
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
8.  Agreed 
Cllr Séamas McGrattan 
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
9.  Agreed 
Cllr Conor Reddy  
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
10.  Agreed 
Cllr Jesslyn Henry 
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
11.  Agreed 
Cllr Cat O’Driscoll  
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
12.  Agreed 
Cllr Anthony Connaghan 
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
13.  Agreed 
Cllr Conor Reddy  
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
14.  Agreed 
Cllr Anthony Connaghan 
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
15.  Agreed 
Cllr Patrick Kinsella  
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
16.  Agreed 
Cllr John Stephens  
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
17.  Agreed 
Cllr Séamas McGrattan 
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam  
 

Appendix D  
Emergency Motion 
 
Cllrs Janet Horner, Fiona Connelly, Colm O'Rourke and Donna Cooney. 
 
Dublin City Council recognises that the Complex is a vital arts hub and resource for Dublin 
and calls for immediate and urgent interventions to find a resolution to its imminent closure. 
We call for the Chief Executive to make urgent appeals to Ministers Chambers and 
O'Donovan to make funding available to ensure the building can be purchased, brought into 
public ownership and retained as a hub for arts. Dublin City cannot afford to lose another 
world class arts space. 
 
Manager’s Response 
 
The Complex Arts Centre on Arran Street East has been in ongoing contact with Dublin City 
Council for over a month following the announcement by the building owner that its lease 
could not be extended beyond January 14, 2026, following repeated extensions over the last 
two years. 
 
The City Council has been assisting the Board and the Executive of The Complex to source 
alternative buildings of a size and location that might be suitable in the event of closure, and 
we have been liaising with the Complex, the Arts Council and the Department of Culture and 
Sport on the issue. 
 
We acknowledge the high standard of arts programming, community engagement and studio 
provision provided by The Complex on this site over many years. 
 
Dublin City Council’s engagement with The Complex has been long-term. Through the Arts 
Office we supported the Board in its case to Government for funding to secure their tenure in 
the event of sale and redevelopment of their premises. The City Council also provides 
programme funding through the Area Office and Arts Office. Particular support was provided 
in 2024 to enable the organisation to commission a Business Case for Government capital 
support and it is important to acknowledge the Arts Council Revenue funding and 
Department of Culture and Sport refurbishment and equipment funding that resulted. 
 
Notwithstanding these achievements and support The Complex development challenge was 
daunting given the physical size of the building and site involved and exceeded €11m of 
capital investment. 
 
It was hoped that given time that solutions or further support could emerge and the Lord 
Mayor wrote to the owners before Christmas to seek a further extension but they did not 
agree to this request. 
 
Dublin City Council acknowledges the impact of an Arts Centre of this standard in this 
strategically important area of the City and that its closure will affect the Artists, audiences 
and local area negatively. 
 
The Council will continue to support The Complex as it searches for alternative 
accommodation and most importantly will engage with any future development on this site in 
the hope of retaining the cultural use. 
 
If the motion is agreed, correspondence will issue to the Ministers as requested to see if 
central government funding is available to assist The Complex. 
 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Assistant Chief Executive, Culture, Community, Leisure and Area Services  
