Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 2 December 2024 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
 
  
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 2 Nollaig 2024 i Seomra na Comhairle, Halla 
na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an 
tArdmheara James Geoghegan sa chathaoir 
 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Ammar Ali 
Daryl Barron 
Racheal Batten 
Emma Blain 
Janice Boylan 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Danny Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
Anthony Connaghan 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Ray Cunningham 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Daniel Ennis 
Cian Farrell 
Alison Field 
Declan Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
Deirdre Heney 
Jesslyn Henry 
Rory Hogan 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Feljin Jose 
Leslie Kane 
Kourtney Kenny 
Patrick Kinsella 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Ray McAdam 
Séamas McGrattan 
Paddy Monahan 
Carolyn Moore 
Edel Moran 
Darragh Moriarty 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Colm O'Rourke 
Gavin Pepper 
Cieran Perry 
Michael Pidgeon 
Gayle Ralph 
Punam Rane 
Conor Reddy 
Nial Ring 
Patricia Roe 
Aishling Silke 
Supriya Singh 
Malachy Steenson 
John Stephens 
Philip Sutcliffe 
 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Lorraine Brogan 
John Flanagan 
Anthony Flynn 
Tatiana Kearney 
Yvonne Kelly 
Natalie Leonard 
Victor Leonov 
Mick Mulhern 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Richard Shakespeare 
 
 
  
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
In Memoriam 
A minutes silence was observed in remembrance for the family and friends of former 
Mick Perry, brother-in-law of Councillor Hazel De Nortúin who died suddenly on the 
29th November 2024.  
 

 
  
Request to have a Special Meeting of a Local Authority 
The Deputy Lord Mayor Donna Cooney gave notice to members of her intention to 
convene a Special Meeting of Dublin City Council as per schedule 10 of the Local 
Government Act 2001 in order to co-opt 7 new members of Council following the 
Election of members to Dáil Eireann including the election of a New Lord Mayor 
following the election of Councillor James Geoghegan to Dáil Eireann.  
  
It was further proposed to fill other vacancies that have arisen due to the election of 
members such as SPC Chairs and Committee Members, Audit Committee and 
Outside Bodies at this meeting.  This meeting will take place on the on the 18th 
December 2024 at 6.15p.m. 
  
Agreement to Engage Senior Counsel 
The Chief Executive, Richard Shakespeare, sought agreement of Council to engage 
Senior Counsel to explore the legal options open to DCC to recover costs from the 
HSE in relation to our Fire and Ambulance Service. This was agreed by Council.  The 
Chief Executive confirmed that he would report back to Council.   
  
  
 
 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Christy Burke and seconded by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll 
that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the questions 
lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the questions 
lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and Answers are set 
out in Appendix A to these minutes. 
 
9 - 44 
 
3 
  Correspondence was received from the following Local Authorities; 
 
         Waterford City and County Council 
  
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas MacGrattan and seconded by Councillor 
Rachael Batten that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence 
listed. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
4 
  To confirm the minutes of the City Council Meeting held on 4th November 2024 and 
the Special Council Meeting held on 11th November 2024. 
 
The minutes of the City Council meeting held on 4th November 2024 and the having 
been printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and 
taken as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor.  
 
 
 
5 
  Reports of the Chief Executive, in compliance with the provisions of Section 179 of 
the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning 
and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) and in compliance with the 
provisions of the Local Government Act 2001:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 241/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Proposal to 
construct a residential development comprising 77 no. dwellings on a site 
bound by Cardiffsbridge Road, Wellmount Road and Wellmount Drive, Finglas, 
Dublin 11  
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
 

 
Christy Burke that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
241/2024 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
  
 
 
(b)   Report No. 242/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Proposal to 
construct a residential development comprising 110 no. dwellings for older 
persons on the site of the former Church of the Annunciation, Finglas, Dublin 
11  
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Christy Burke that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
242/2024 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 243/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Proposal to 
construct a residential development comprising 106 no. dwellings on the site of 
the former Bring Centre and Dublin City Council Depot Site, Whitehall, Dublin 9  
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor  
Christy Burke that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
243/2024 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
(d)   Report No. 244/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Proposal to 
construct a residential development comprising 52 no. dwellings on the site of 
the former Croke Villas complex, Sackville Avenue, Dublin 3  
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor  
Christy Burke that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
244/2024 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
6 
  Report No. 245/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive (A. Flynn) - Community Arts 
Grant Award 2024 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Jesslyn 
Henry that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.245/2024 and hereby 
approves the Community Arts Grant Awards 2024 as set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried.   
  
 
 
 
7 
  Report No. 246/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern)- Community 
Grants Scheme 2024 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor John 
Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report Number 246/2024 and 
hereby approves Community Grants Scheme Awards 2024 as set out therein.  The 
motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
8 
  Report No. 248/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - The Traveller 
Accommodation Programme 2025-2029. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of report 248/2024 and hereby 
 

 
adopts the Traveller Accommodation Programme 2025 – 2029.  The motion was put 
and carried.  
 
 
9 
  Report No. 257/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Dublin City Council 
Strategic Policy Committees 2024 – 2029: Sectoral and Public Participation Network 
Membership 
 
It was proposed by Councillor John Stephens and seconded by Councillor Jesslyn 
Henry that Dublin City Council notes the contents of report no. 257/2024 hereby 
approves the SPC membership 2024-2029 and the nominations included therein.  The 
motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
10   Disposal of Fee Simple and Freehold Interest:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 239/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Robinson) - With 
reference to the disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and 
Tenant (Ground Rents) (No. 2) Act, 1978.  
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Anthony Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
239/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 251/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With reference to 
the Disposal of the Council’s Fee Simple interest in the property known as 63 
Keeper Road, Crumlin, Dublin 12  
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Anthony Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
251/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
11   Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 249/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - With further 
reference to the grant of 35 year Lease for playground use at St. Laurence 
Place East, Seville Place, Dublin 1 to St. Laurence O’Toole Diocesan Trust 
Company Limited by Guarantee  
It was proposed by Councillor Christy Burke and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 249/2024 
and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
  
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 250/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - Grant of a 20 
year lease of the Ground Floor Unit at 19 Dawson Street Joshua Dawson 
House to BO and WEI Ltd t/a Musashi Sushi  
It was proposed by Councillor Christy Burke and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 250/2024 
and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
  
 
 
 
12   Report No. 258/2024 of the Executive Manager (K. Mitchell) - update on the work of 
the City Co-Ordination Office. 
 
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Colm O’Rourke and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of report no. 258/2024.  The 
motion was put and carried.  
  
It was further agreed to defer the nomination of candidates to the City Centre Review 
Group to the January meeting.   
 
 
13   Report No. 253/2024 of the A/Head of Finance (V. Leonov) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Anthony 
Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 253/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
14   Report No. 252/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Social Housing 
Supply and Delivery Monthly Update Report 
 
It was proposed by Councillor John Stephens and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 252/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
15   Report No. 254/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive (E Quinlivan) - Draft Dublin City 
Council Corporate Plan 2025-2029 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Micheál MacDonnacha that the following amendment 
be included in the plan on Page 11 under Strategic Objective 3 regarding the Irish 
language: 
  
"Promote and lead cohesive communities through a range of social inclusion, 
community development, equality, age friendly, intercultural integration and Irish 
language programmes and activities" 
  
This was unanimously agreed by Council.  
  
It was proposed by Councillor Jesslyn Henry and seconded by Councillor Micheál 
MacDonncha that Dublin City Council notes the contents of report no. 254/2024 and in 
accordance with Section 134 of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended, the 
Dublin City Council Corporate Plan 2024-2029 recommended by the Deputy Chief 
Executive, as amended, is hereby adopted. 
  
It was further agreed that Dublin City Council in accordance with Section 134 11(a) 
approves that the Annual Corporate Plan Progress Report be submitted to the City 
Council in March each year.  The motions were put and carried.  
  
 
 
 
16   Report No. 255/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas McGrattan and seconded by Councillor 
Rachael Batten that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 255/2024. 
The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
17   Report No. 240/2024 of the Area Committees - Breviates of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of November 2024. 
 

 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Christy Burke and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 240/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
18   Report No. 256/2024 of the Protocol Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 
24th October 2024, Councillor Ray McAdam , Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Daryl Barron 
that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 256/2024. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
19   Topical Issues 
 
No topical issues were submitted for consideration. 
 
 
 
20   Motions on Notice 
 
1.    Motion No.1 
It was proposed by Councillor Michael Pidgeon and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council backs the call for a Fossil Fuel Non-Proliferation 
Treaty and urges the Irish government to support the initiative. 
  
The motion was put and carried.  
  
2.    Motion No. 2 
It was proposed by Councillor Paddy Monaghan and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O’Driscoll that Dublin City Council commits to the provision of on-road markings (e.g. 
a yellow box) in front of all dished kerbs to ensure parked cars do not block them for 
people with disabilities and mobility issues.  
  
The motion was put and carried.  It was further recommended that this motion be 
referred to the Mobility and Public Realm SPC to look at ways this can be facilitated.  
  
3.    Motion No. 3 
It was proposed by Councillor Jesslyn Henry and seconded by Councillor Edel Moran 
that she recognises and commends the ongoing efforts of Dublin City Council in its 
aim to become an Autism Friendly City. In line with this, it is crucial that we ensure that 
all Dublin City Council events are made as accessible as possible for the neurodiverse 
members of our community. 
I call on Dublin City Council to make the following commitments: 
         Provision of designated sensory or quiet spaces at all public events, allowing 
individuals who may become overwhelmed by sensory input a place to 
regulate. 
         Inclusion of social stories or materials similar to those seen in Dublin City 
Council libraries to be made available prior to events, outlining key information 
about what attendees can expect, which can be essential for neurodiverse 
individuals who may experience anxiety around attending events.  
         Where possible, consideration of adjustments to the sensory environment, 
such as reduced noise levels, dimmed lighting or fast pass options to be 
factored into event planning.  
         A commitment to ongoing consultation with neurodiverse individuals, their 
families and advocacy groups to ensure that all efforts towards accessibility 
and inclusion are led by the neurodiverse community themselves, and reflect 
 

 
the diverse needs as such. 
  
The motion was put and carried.  
  
4.    Motion No. 4 in the name of Councillor Feljin Jose.  It was agreed that this be 
referred to the next Council meeting.  
  
5.    Motion No. 5 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Councillor Aishling 
Silke that poor air quality causes an estimated 1,300 premature deaths in Ireland per 
year. This is a particular problem in urban centres and particulate matter from internal 
combustion vehicles is a major contributor. The Clean Air Strategy for Ireland has 
noted the role of transport demand management in improving air quality. 
This motion calls for the introduction of ultra-low emissions zones in Dublin City and 
supports the introduction of WHO guideline values prior to 2040. 
The recent Environmental Protection Agency publication ‘Air quality in Ireland 2022’ 
shows that poor air quality causes an estimated 1,300 premature deaths in Ireland per 
year due to particulate matter. 
  
The World Health Organisation has estimated that 4.2 million premature deaths 
globally were linked to ambient air pollution in 2019, mainly from heart disease, stroke, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, lung cancer, and acute respiratory infections in 
children. The EPA’s air quality monitoring has shown that while we met the EU legal 
requirements in 2022, we did not meet the more stringent World Health 
Organisation air quality guidelines for health and the comments by the EPA that 
“reducing our use of cars to go to school, work and play are actions that will contribute 
towards achieving the WHO guidelines”. 
 
The 2019 report commissioned by the Irish Heart Foundation estimates that by 
achieving the final WHO Guidelines, Ireland could reduce annual premature deaths by 
more than 500. The Clean Air Strategy for Ireland says “the establishment of low 
emission zones or congestion charging as well as other demand management 
measures in our cities is something which has been highlighted as a potential solution 
to air quality issues in highly trafficked urban areas.” The findings of a recent review of 
the use of ultra-low emissions zones in The Lancet Public Health on low emission 
zones around the world which found positive air pollution-related health outcomes, 
with the most consistent effect being on cardiovascular disease. 
 
As a city council we agree to introduce ultra-low emissions zones in Dublin City and to 
meet the WHO guideline values prior to 2040. 
  
The motion was put and carried.  
  
6.    Motion No. 6  
It was proposed by Councillor Patricia Roe and seconded by Councillor Aisling Silke 
that This council agrees that we should adopt a Housing First for Youth (HF4Y) 
strategy modelled on that in use in Waterford which involves the county council, Focus 
Ireland and the Department of Housing and provides extensive wrap around care and 
ongoing support to the service users, many of whom are leaving foster care or other 
care settings or homeless as a result of their LGBTQ+ status. The outcomes from this 
approach have been extremely positive. The model adheres to the core principals of 
  
-          A right to housing with no preconditions 
-          Youth choice, youth voice and self determination 

 
-          Positive youth development and wellness orientation 
-          Individualised client driven support with no time limits 
-          Social inclusion and community integration 
  
To that end, the council should establish a working group within the Housing SPC with 
elected representatives, management engagement, representatives from Focus 
Ireland and other potential relevant stakeholders to ensure delivery of same. 
  
The motion was put and carried.  
  
  
 
 
21   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
No Emergency Motions were submitted for consideration. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
 
