Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 8 April 2024 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 8th Aibreán 2024 i Seomra na Comhairle, Halla 
na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an 
tArdmheara Daithí de Róiste sa chathaoir 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Daryl Barron 
Eimer McCormack 
Carolyn Moore 
Máire Devine 
Patricia Roe 
Declan Meenagh 
Daniel Céitinn 
Danny Byrne 
Deborah Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Caroline Conroy 
Deirdre Conroy 
Donna Cooney 
Dearbháil Butler 
Kelsey May Daly 
Tara Deacy 
Michael Watters 
Catherine Stocker 
Kevin Donoghue 
Michael Pidgeon 
Colm O'Rourke 
Terence Flanagan 
Cat O'Driscoll 
James Geoghegan 
Sophie Nicoullaud 
Janet Horner 
Darragh Moriarty 
Racheal Batten 
Darcy Lonergan 
Briege MacOscar 
Tom Brabazon 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Anne Feeney 
Claire O'Connor 
Daithí de Róiste 
Séamas McGrattan 
Janice Boylan 
Mannix Flynn 
Paddy McCartan 
Declan Flanagan 
Alison Gilliland 
Deirdre Heney 
Jane Horgan Jones 
Vincent Jackson 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Anthony Connaghan 
Ray McAdam 
Naoise Ó Muirí 
Damian O'Farrell 
Larry O'Toole 
Cieran Perry 
Nial Ring 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Pat Dunne 
Daithí Doolan 
Noeleen Reilly 
 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Ruth Dowling 
Anthony Flynn 
Richard Shakespeare 
Yvonne Kelly 
Natalie Leonard 
Kathy Quinn 
John Flanagan 
Brendan O'Brien 
Deirdre Scully 
Michelle Robinson 
Andy Walsh 
Kirsten Hart 
Frank d'Arcy 
Aisling Browne 
Donncha Ó’Dúlaing 
 
 
 
 
1   Lord Mayor's Business 
 
Charter of Inclusion 
The Lord Mayor advised councillors that the Charter of Inclusion Presentation is 
deferred to the  May Council meeting.  
 
8 - 21 

 
 
 
Department of An Taoiseach – Presentation on the Shared Island Unit 
Eoghan Duffy, Principal Officer, and Aoife Budd, Assistant Principal of the Department 
of An Taoiseach presented to the Members on the Shared Island Unit. A copy of this 
presentation can be found in Appendix A. 
 
2   Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Séamas 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the 
questions lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the  
questions lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and 
Answers are set out in Appendix B to these minutes. 
 
22 - 64 
3   Correspondence was received from the following Local Authorities; 
 
 
Louth County Council  
 
Clare County Council  
 
Westmeath County Council  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Anthony 
Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence listed. 
The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
4   To confirm the minutes of the City Council Meeting held on 4th March 2024 
 
The minutes of the City Council meeting held on 4th March 2024 having been 
printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken 
as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor. 
 
 
5   To fill one vacancy on the City of Dublin Education and Training Board (CDETB) 
following the resignation of Cllr. Catherine Stocker with effect from the 29th February 
2024. 
 
It was agreed that this vacancy would be deferred to the next council meeting.  
 
 
6   Report No. 84/2024 of the Senior Executive Officer (R. Dowling) - Local Elections 
2024 - Issue of Polling Information Cards. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Larry O’Too
Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.84/2024 and assents to the pr
outlined therein. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
7   Report No. 91/2024 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (T. Flynn)  - The Dublin City 
Sports Plan 2023-2028. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Declan Meenagh and seconded by Councillor Fiona 
Connelly that Dublin City Council notes Report No 91/2024 and approves the Dublin 
City Sports Plan 2024-2029 as outlined therein. The motion was put and carried.  
 
Councillor Cieran Perry wished for it to be noted that he was opposed to any 
suggestion of outsourcing the management of Sport and Leisure Facilities. 
 
 

 
8   Reports of the Chief Executive, in compliance with Section 138 of the Local 
Government Act 2001 informing the Council of works which are about to commence 
and in compliance with the Planning and Development Regulations 2001, Part 8:   
 
 
(a)   Report No. 83/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - The proposal to 
extend and refurbish Ringsend Library and to carry out improvements to the 
surrounding public realm.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Claire Byrne and seconded by Councillor 
Anthony Connaghan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
83/2024 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 99/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - proposed 
development at the site located at Dublin City Moorings, Custom House Quay, 
Dublin 1 on an existing pontoon structure adjacent to the current Dublin 
Docklands office building.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor 
Vincent Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
99/2024 and hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
9   Report No. 78/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - with reference to 
Proposed Variation No.5 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028: : A 
technical update in relation to 'Build-To-Rent' (BTR) accommodation on foot of the 
publication of Sustainable Urban Housing: Design Standards for New Apartments - 
Guidelines for Planning Authorities, DHLGH, 2023. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Donna Cooney and Seconded by Councillor Mannix 
Flynn that the Members of the authority having considered the proposed Variation and 
the Chief Executive’s Report No. 78/2024, and the issues raised, the proper planning 
and sustainable development of the City, the statutory obligations of the local authority 
and the relevant policies or objectives of the Government or of any Minister of the 
Government; the City Council resolves that Variation No. 5 of the Dublin City 
Development Plan 2022-2028 is hereby made and that the necessary notices of the 
making of Variation No. 5 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028 be 
published.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
10   Disposal of Fee Simple:   
 
 
(a)   Report No. 81/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Robinson) - with reference 
to the disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and Tenant 
(Ground Rents) (No. 2) Act, 1978.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
Mannix Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
81/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 95/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - with reference to 
the Disposal of the Fee Simple in the property known as site at Seamus Ennis 
Road, Finglas, Dublin 11 to Finglas Credit Union Limited.  
 
 
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor 
Donna Cooney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
95/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
11   Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
(a)   Report No. 94/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - with reference to 
the proposed Licence for a Plot of Ground to Rear of 647A Howth Road, Dublin 
5.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mícheál MacDonncha and seconded by 
Councillor Mannix Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No. 94/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 96/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - with reference to 
Grant of a 3 year Short Term Letting at 81, The Coombe, Dublin 8 (Ground 
Floor) to Shannon’s Hopeline CLG.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor Máire 
Devine that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 96/2024 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 97/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - with reference to 
the assignment of lease in respect of Unit 5/E1 Ballymun Industrial Estate, 
Dublin 11 to Sika Ireland Limited.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
Mannix Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
97/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
12   Disposal of Property:   
 
 
(a)   Report No. 93/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) with reference to the 
proposed grant of a Short Term Business Letting Agreement in Unit 1A 
Shangan Neighbourhood Centre, Ballymun, Dublin 11 to Ballymun Community 
Law Centre CLG.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
Dermot Lacey that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
93/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 98/2024 of the A/Executive Manager (M. Igoe) - with reference to 
the proposed Exchange of lands and air rights at Kevin Street Library Dublin 8 
between Dublin City Council and GA Development ICAV.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor 
Dermot Lacey that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
98/2024 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 

 
 
 
13   Report No. 92/2024 of the A/Executive Manager  (B. O'Brien) - The Draft Dublin City 
Centre Transport Plan. 
 
The following motion was proposed by Councillor Damian O’Farrell and seconded by 
Councillor Christy Burke:  
 
“That this Council agrees the implementation of the Draft Dublin City Centre Transport 
plan be deferred until such time as there has been disability proofing in compliance 
with DCC’s legally binding obligations under the CRPD.  Furthermore, the body and 
conclusion of the report being noted here tonight show no evidence of DCC‘s 
awareness of their obligations under the CRPD. There is no mention of or reference to 
the legal standing of DPRO’s. To prevent any possible discrimination or future 
unintended consequences of this non-compliance this Council takes this opportunity 
tonight to defer the matter.” 
 
In order to continue the debate on this report, the Lord Mayor at 8.52 p.m. proposed 
an extension of the meeting to 10.15 p.m. to facilitate completion of business.  He also 
sought, with the agreement of the relevant managers that for items 14, 15 & 17, that 
Councillors would email their questions to the Manager. This would provide allow time 
for the discussion on the topical issue to take place.    
 
The Lord Mayor vacated the Chair to Councillor Deirdre Heney at 9 p.m. and returned 
to the chamber at 9.03 p.m. 
 
Following the debate on this report and motion, Councillor Declan Meenagh 
suggested that a meeting be held with the DPRO’s regarding this report within the 
next month.  All members and management were in agreement with this suggestion. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Janet 
Horner that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 92/2024. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
14   Report No. 88/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (J. Flanagan) - 
Quarterly Report of the Traffic Department. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 88/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
15   Report No. 85/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (J. Flanagan) - 
Quarterly Report of the Active Travel Programme Office. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 85/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
16   Report No. 102/2024 of the Executive Manager (D. Kelly) - with reference to Public 
Consultation for the  Dublin Agglomeration Noise Action Plan (2024 - 2028) 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Claire Byrne and seconded by Councillor Donna 
Cooney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 102/2024 and 
hereby approves the contents therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 

 
 
 
17   Report No. 89/2024 of the Assistant Chief Executive (F. d'Arcy) - Social Housing 
Supply and Delivery Monthly Update Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 89/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
18   Report No. 100/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - With Reference to 
Revised Expenditure for 2023 Submitted In Accordance with Section 104 of The Local 
Government Act 2001. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the content of Report No. 100/2024 and 
assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
19   Report No. 87/2024 of the Head of Finance (K. Quinn) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement and EU IMF Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 87/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
20   Report No. 86/2024 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 86/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
21   Report No. 79/2024 of the Corporate Policy Group - Breviate of the meeting held on 
26th January 2024, Lord Mayor Daithí de Róiste, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 79/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
22   Report No. 82/2024 of the Area Committees - Breviates of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of March 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 82/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
23   Report No. 80/2024 of the Joint Policing Area Sub-Committees - Breviates of the Area 
Joint Policing Sub Committee meetings held in February and March 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 80/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
24   Report No. 101/2024 of the Finance Strategic Policy Committee - Breviate of the 
meeting held on 21st March 2024, Cllr. Séamas McGrattan, Chairperson. 
 
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 101/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
25   Report No. 90/2024 of the Housing Strategic Policy Committee - Breviate of the 
meeting held on the 14th February 2024, Councillor Alison Gilliland, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 90/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
26   Report No. 103/2024 of the Housing Strategic Policy Committee - Breviate of the 
meeting held on the 13th March 2024, Councillor Alison Gilliland, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 103/2024. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
27   Topical Issues 
 
The following topical issue was submitted for discussion. 
 
“Dublin response to Gaza Genocide” 
 
It was unanimously agreed by the members to discuss this issue. 
 
 
28   Motions on Notice 
 
As a topical issue was taken for debate, all motions on notice were deferred to the 
next meeting.  
 
 
29   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
The following emergency motion was proposed by Councillors Mícheál Mac Donncha, 
Tom Brabazon, Dearbháil Butler, Daryl Barron, John Lyons, Catherine Stocker, 
Terence Flanagan and Larry O’Toole:  
 
“This City Council calls on all concerned, including Dublin City Council executive, to 
act with urgency to ensure the immediate opening of Belmayne Main Street. The 
opening has been repeatedly promised, delayed, promised and delayed again. Huge 
inconvenience and disruption is being caused to the local community, including local 
businesses, in a large densely populated and still growing area. Further delays cannot 
be tolerated” 
 
It was agreed that this motion be taken without debate.  The motion was put and 
carried.  
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 

 
 

Shared Island Initiative
Presentation to Dublin City Council
8 April 2024

Shared Island initiative -overview
•
Programme for Government - Shared Island chapter: 
•
“Work with all communities and traditions on the island to build consensus 
around a shared future, underpinned by the Good Friday Agreement.”
•
Significantly-enhanced level of ambition for collaborative all-island 
investment cooperation (PfG and National Development Plan 2021-2030).
•
Deepening cooperation and connections across the island.
•
Good Friday Agreement - relationships (N/S and E/W), institutions, principles, 
commitments.
•
Whole of Government approach: 
•
Shared Island unit in D/Taoiseach driving and coordinating; projects and 
programmes delivered by Government Departments and Agencies. 
•
Working through all-island partnerships with NI, UK, Local Authority,  
Education and Civil Society partners.

• Deliver long-standing and new cross-border 
investments
Building a Shared Island 
• 16 events, 3500+ citizens from all communities, 
traditions and regions
• Youth Forum of  80 young people meeting over a 
year to agree vision and values for a Shared Island
Dialogue on a shared future
• Evidence and analysis on economic, social, cultural, 
and political considerations for the island. 
Research programme 
Shared Island initiative 
-elements

Shared Island research programme
•Cross-Border Trade in Services
•Enhancing attractiveness of the Island of Ireland to FDI
•Analysis of Primary Health Care Systems of Ireland and Northern Ireland
•Comparison of Education and Training Systems and outcomes
•Modelling Productivity Levels in Ireland and Northern Ireland
•Coordination of Energy infrastructure and renewable energy supports
•Early Childhood Education and Care, North and South
•Migrant Integration and Experience in Ireland and Northern Ireland
•Student Mobility in Ireland and Northern Ireland
•Social and political attitudes in Ireland and Northern Ireland 
•Contrasting Housing Supply in Ireland and Northern Ireland
ESRI publications to date:
•Gender and Labour market inclusion – Launch 10 April 
Upcoming research:
All reports available at  gov.ie/sharedisland/research

Shared Island Youth Forum
• 80 young people (18-25) from diverse 
backgrounds across the island. 
• Deliberative forum over a year to set out 
their vision and values for a shared future.
• Themes of Sustainability; Opportunity; 
Wellbeing; Equality; and Culture and 
Identity.

• Deliver strategic investment objectives on Shared Island in the 
Programme for Government and revised National Development Plan.
• Allocations by Government to Ministers to take forward projects.
• Working with Executive, UK, Local Authority, Education, Civil Society 
partners.
• Portfolio approach - Government, Executive, UK Government, Local 
Authority, EU funding sources to projects – eg Ulster Canal. 
• Departments operating competitive funding calls for all-island 
programmes
Shared Island Fund

Shared Island Fund –Allocations
A more sustainable island 
• €11m for all-island 
bioeconomy 
demonstrators
• €11m for cross-border 
peatland restoration 
and biosecurity 
initiative
• €15m for sports club 
EV charging point 
installation
A more prosperous island 
• €44.5m for teaching 
building at Ulster 
University Derry
• €20m for Co-Centres
for Research and 
Innovation through 
Science Foundation 
Ireland
• €7.6m collaboration by 
Wild Atlantic Way and 
Causeway Coastal 
Route 
A more connected island
• €3m Shared Island 
Civic Society Fund
• €7.4m for Arts 
investment projects
• €6m Shared Island 
dimension to Creative 
Ireland Programme 
2023-2027

Shared Island -latest announcements
• 20 February announcement by Government
• €800m in total for SI investment priorities
• €600m to A5 upgrade and progressing related N2 and 
Donegal TEN-T schemes
• Hourly frequency rail service Dublin - Belfast
• Contribution to Casement Park redevelopment
• Construction of Narrow Water Bridge
• Shared Island Enterprise scheme
• Cooperation on reducing educational disadvantage
• Renewal of Battle of the Boyne visitor experience

Shared Island Local Authority 
Development funding scheme (€5m)
Shared Island Community Climate 
Action Programme (€3m)
Creative Ireland programme (€6m)
Local Authorities

Shared Island Local Authority Development Funding Scheme
Overview
•
Seed capital grants of up to €250,000 for cross-border Local Authority Partnerships.
•
25 awards to 15 Local Authorities in the South working with 9 councils in NI.
•
Projects are currently being assessed by Departments, consulting with NI counterparts. 
•
Dublin City Council project with Belfast City Council on feasibility of a circular economy 
partnership to jointly develop infrastructure, facilities, institutional frameworks to 
support transition to a green economy and meet climate ambitions. 
Objective
•
Generate well-developed pipeline of cross-border local authority projects. 
Impact
•
Local Authorities cooperating to deliver shared regional development goals. 
•
More strategic cooperation by central and local government on the island.

Shared Island Community Climate Action Programme
Overview
•
€3m for Shared Island strand to Community Climate Action Programme.
•
Projects to include a partner in Northern Ireland (can be a Council).
•
50% of awarded funding for project delivery in Northern Ireland.
•
Minister for Environment launched Strand 1a in January 2024.
•
Administered by Community Climate Action Officers in Councils .
•
Grants of €5,000 to €100,000.
•
Applications currently being assessed by Local Authorities.
Objective
•
Support Local Authorities to step up climate action in partnership with 
communities across the island.
•
Cross-border projects sought on: Valuing Networks for Nature: Just Transition; 
Renewable energy: Flood forecasting; Coastal erosion.
Impact
•
Help to reach climate and energy targets on the island of Ireland.
•
Support collaborative community involvement on climate action.

Shared Island dimension to the Creative Ireland programme
Overview
•
€6 million for a Shared Island dimension to the Government’s Creative Ireland 
Programme 2023-2027. Elements include:
•
Cruinniú na nÓg 2024: Events programmed on an all-island basis.
•
Creative Communities on a Shared Island: €850k to 9 cross-border creative and 
cultural projects led by Local Authorities:
•
Dublin City Council: aRchive an immersive LED light installation at Five 
Lamps Festival. Programme of dialogue between young people and older 
generations in Shankill/East Belfast and Dublin’s North East Inner City.
•
Creative Youth on a Shared Island: Funding of up to €180,000 to at least 3 
projects that nurture collaboration, hope and understanding.
•
Creative Health and Wellbeing in the Community: €350,000 of Shared Island 
funding in 2024 for Local Authority led cross-border arts and health 
partnerships to deliver 5 projects.

Shared Island initiative –2024
Continue to implement Government Shared Island investment 
priorities.
Shared Island Youth Forum statement and continue the Shared 
Island Dialogue series
Progressing the Shared Island research programme to provide 
evidence and analysis on the opportunities, and challenges, 
around deepening cooperation and connections on the island. 

Further Information
gov.ie/sharedisland
sharedisland@taoiseach.gov.ie 

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY, 8th OF 
APRIL 2024 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR JANE HORGAN JONES 
To ask the Chief Executive to clean or paint over the graffiti problem in the lane behind 
Clontarf park.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Public Domain Team will have this graffiti removed as soon as resources allow.  
 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR KELSEY MAY DALY 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the Marrowbone Lane depot 
reduction/consolidation project. Specifically addressing the numbers of staff currently 
working onsite, projected reductions of staff and services over the next year, the 
progress of plans for the open space which will be vacated by the depot operations 
and  
details 
of 
the 
DCC 
official 
with  
responsibility  
for 
developing 
a 
sporting/recreational use for the lands, specifically a full sized pitch for the community 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Marrowbone Lane Depot provides key operational services essential for the 
functioning of the city, and there are no immediate plans to reduce the number of staff 
or services operating from the Depot. 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR KELSEY MAY DALY 
To ask the Chief Executive if there are plans to address the maintenance issues in 
Tyrone Place. Specifically the issues of mould, leaks and structural damage. Is there 
a meantime solution to improve the health and well-being of residents.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
Dublin City Council will engage an independent damp report on any unit within the 
complex and carry out the recommended measures outlined in the report. 
Tenants can request this inspection through the normal channels (telephone, email, 
local representative, area office) and we will arrange for the survey. 
Similarly, any reports of leaks or other structural issues, are dealt with on a case by 
case basis. 
 
Q.4 
COUNCILLOR MICHEAL PIDGEON 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the bike bunker scheme, when a tender 
will likely issue, and how many bunkers are expected in the initial order. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Road Safety and Micromobility Section is currently working on the Bike Bunker 
scheme tender process. Dublin City Council is planning to launch a competitive 
tendering process to select a contractor who will manage the comprehensive bike 
bunker operations, users and assets. After selecting a contractor, the council aims to 
collaborate with the winning tenderer to provide this service throughout the city and 
establish a goal of having 300 bike bunkers (by 2026), dependent on funding. 
The procurement process for this scheme was scheduled to commence in the first 
quarter of 2024, unfortunately this date was missed and this process is planned to kick 
off in April/ May 2024.  
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR MICHAEL PIDGEON 
To ask the Chief Executive how many people are employed in the DCC housing 
section, how many part/full-time vacancies there are, and at what grades the vacancies 
are at. 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently 1026 employees in the Housing and Community Services 
Department and 120 full-time vacancies. 
A number of these vacant posts are in the process of being filled, with further vacancies 
scheduled for advertising over the coming months.   
 
The breakdown of vacancies across the various levels is as follows: 
 
 
Managerial 
 
1 
 
Grade 8 
 
4 
 
Grade 7 
 
15 
 
Grade 6 
 
26 
 
Grade 5 
 
20 
 
Grade 4 
 
3 
 
Grade 3 
 
6 
 
Operational 
 
45 
 
Q.6 
COUNCILLOR MICHEAL PIDGEON 
To ask the Chief Executive the number of beds/places available within homeless family 
hubs across Dublin. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is an approximate capacity of 4,358 beds in Emergency Accommodation for 
families (NGO, hubs & Private Emergency Accommodation) across the 4 Local 
Authorities covered by the Dublin Regional Homeless Executive (DRHE). 
 
Q.7  
COUNCILLOR MICHEAL PIDGEON 
To ask the Chief Executive how many enforcement cases have been opened, 
completed, or are pending against short-term lets since 1st July 2019, and if he will 
give an overview of their current status in tabular form. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Short Term Letting: July 2019 to March 2024 
 
Year 
 
Cases Open    
 
S152 
Warning 
Letters 
 
S154 
Enforcement 
Notices 
 
Cases resolved 
2024 
77 
85 
4 
65 
2023  
302 
370 
35 
259 
2022 
336 
404 
16 
452 
2021 
310 
492 
9 
469 
2020 
572 
650 
10 
398 
2019 
295 
113 
16 
51 
Total 
1892 
2114 
90 
1694 
 
 
Q.8  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive how many rough sleepers beds are available for Dublin 
City . 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Outreach team contact the Freephone / Central Placement Service (CPS) 
throughout the day, should they require accommodation for any rough sleepers that 
they encounter during the course of their work. Beds are then allocated based on 
availability.  
 
When the Freephone closes at 10pm, the Outreach team have a guaranteed allocation 
of 16 beds. Additionally, any beds that have not been used by the Freephone by 10pm, 
will also be made available to the Outreach team.  
 
Should a rough sleeper contact the Freephone / CPS directly themselves requesting 
accommodation throughout the day, they will be allocated a bed, again based on 
assessment and availability. 
 
Q.9 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the section of the path way that has fallen out due to 
the tree roots be reinstated at (Details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry has been created (ref. 11155577) and passed to the Area Inspector who 
will 
carry 
out 
an 
inspection 
and 
arrange 
the 
repair, 
if 
needed.  
 
Q.10  COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive about the traffic congestion on (Details supplied) .That 
the traffic department see if the congestion can be addressed as local residents cannot 
open their windows due to the omissions from trucks cars every day of the week. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The predominant pollutant associated with traffic is Nitrogen Dioxide.  
 
Dublin City Council does not have a permanent Air Quality Monitoring Station in that 
immediate location. 
Indicative Nitrogen Dioxide monitoring can be carried out using diffusion tubes. The 
tubes can be placed in the location for consecutive months and the results obtained 
by laboratory analysis. More information about this can be found by accessing the 
below link.  
https://www.epa.ie/environment-and-you/air/diffusion-tube-results/ 
The Air Quality Monitoring and Noise Control Unit and the EPA commenced a diffusion 
tube survey of streets in the North Inner City area to determine the contribution of traffic 
to air pollution levels in the area. The survey was initiated because of complaints from 
residents of the area about traffic volumes and associated air pollution levels. The 
survey started on 14/01/2024 and must be carried over a one year period to reference 
the results against annual mean limit values cited in the Air Quality Standards 2011. 
The results will be available from 14/01/2025.  
When the survey is completed the results will be discussed with the Traffic Division. 
 
Q.11 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the damaged dish outside (Details supplied) be 
repaired. This Cllr did have a question in on same some months ago .Work was to take 
place but so far no works have taken place. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An enquiry (ref. 11156963) has been created and forwarded to the Area Inspector who 
will assign a crew to the repair of the vehicular dishing outside (Details supplied) 
 
 

Q.12  COUNCILLOR DARCY LONERGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many planning applications there have been for Short 
Term Lets in Dublin City in each year since July 2019, and how many have been 
approved, rejected, or are currently in progress 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Set out below are the details regarding planning applications for Short Term Lets    
received from 2019 to date: 
 
 
Short Term Lettings 2019 - 13.03.2024 
 
DCC  
  
  
  
  
ABP 
  
Year 
Received Granted Refused Current  On Appeal to 
ABP 
Appealed 
and 
Granted 
permission by ABP 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
2019 
15 
2 
13 
  
  
2 
2020 
6 
2 
4 
  
  
2 
2021 
3 
1 
2 
  
  
  
2022 
5 
2 
3 
  
1 
  
2023 
11 
1 
10 
  
3 
  
2024 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Total 
40 
8 
32 
0 
4 
4 
ABP Decisions 
2019 
  
1 
  
  
SHD Application - Permission granted by ABP. 
Q.13  COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive if the parks department could investigate the Japanese 
Miyawaki forestry method for rapidly growing forests to replace trees that are cut down 
or die. 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We have been aware of the Miyawaki Method, developed by the Japanese botanist 
Akira Miyawaki in the 1970s, and which has been promoted by some sources for a 
number of years. However, the planting and husbandry of trees has been practiced 
and proven in Ireland over many decades both in forests and in urban parks.  
 
There is no evidence that planting forestry transplants and whips in extremely dense 
copses has any benefit for the trees, for biodiversity and in fact according to the advice 
of arborists and foresters it is unsustainable in the long term. 
 
While there is an initial impressive growth in height due to the increased competition 
for light, this growth in height is achieved at the expense of the girth of the trees, which 
increases their susceptibility to fail and certainly will not enable them to grow to 
maturity. It is mature trees, which have the most value for carbon sequestration and 
biodiversity. 
 
There are multiple reasons why we are not planting trees in dense copses in excess 
of best arboricultural practice in public parks and we are not aware of any independent 
peer-reviewed evaluations or trials which scientifically confirm the supposed 
advantages of the Miyawaki method. 

As a Parks Services, we plant and support the planting of thousands of trees each year 
by community groups who wish to enhance their locality and contribute to Climate 
Action initiatives. We also provide advice to community groups on biodiversity and 
nature conservation measure suitable for communities. 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive further to the reply issued to Question Number 20 at the 
March City Council meeting if he will respond to the clarifying questions and statements 
now submitted in relation to that Reply and set out below. 
 
Once again, we have GDPR being misapplied by the Council with the result that it is 
facilitating non-compliance with motor tax/vehicle registration requirements. 
 
The Officer confirms that residency i.e., 183 or more days in the State at the relevant 
address is a legal requirement for the issuance of the permit. They also check that the 
vehicle is insured at the address where the person resides.   
 
Effectively, the Council is ignoring the best evidence of residence at the address which 
would be a copy of the Vehicle Registration Certificate which will be issued to any 
purchaser of a car, resident in Ireland or anyone becoming resident in Ireland who is 
legally required to register the vehicle within at least 30 days, sometimes sooner.  
 
The situation could be easily remedied by the conditions for a successful application 
for a parking permit to include a copy of the VRT certificate showing the address. A 
foreign registered vehicle which has not been re-registered will not be able to comply 
with this requirement. 
 
Having the vehicle registered correctly here should be a duty of all State bodies who 
have the ability to assist with compliance. As well as dealing with issues around 
compliance with motor duty and VAT requirements for imported vehicles, it also helps 
to being all vehicles driving on the roads here by residents of Ireland within the  NCT 
process.  If an English or NI vehicle is imported into Ireland and is not registered here, 
it falls outside the vehicle safety checks in Ireland. 
 
I accept that the existing position does not require the production of the correct 
document but it would be interesting to hear why the Council thinks that it could not 
amend the application process to assist with compliance with tax laws and road safety. 
GDPR is not an excuse for inaction when already the Council asks for the insurance 
cert and two other ID documents. The Council is not a private car park operator who 
might have legal constraints. It is the gatekeeper of legal compliance for vehicles 
parking on our public streets." 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin City Council Parking Control Bye Laws 2024, which are approved by 
Council, govern the issuing of Residential Parking Permits.  As previously outlined, 
Dublin City Council must work within the remit of these Bye Laws when determining if 
a person is eligible to obtain a permit based on the criteria, set out in the Bye Laws.  
Dublin City Council is only authorised to collect this data for the specific purpose of 
issuing a permit, we are not authorised to collect data for any other reason.  Any 
change to the requirements set out in the Bye Laws would need to be done as per the 
process set out in Section 36 of the Road Traffic Act 1994 and would ultimately need 
to go back to Council for approval. 
 
The issue of requesting VRT as part of a Residential Parking Permit may be examined 
when the Bye Laws are being reviewed at a later date. 
 

Q.15  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the housing options available to (details 
supplied), mother of two young children, and living in the parents’ home in what is a 
difficult and stressful environment. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing List with an application date of 06/06/2023, the 
applicant holds the following position on this list; 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
2 
709 
D 
2 
414 
E 
2 
831 
 
The applicant has recently been approved for Homeless HAP. 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household.  
 
Q.16 
COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WATTERS 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a stone facade to be installed on the walls 
that surround Drimnagh Castle, on Landsdowne Gate, Dublin 12, as well as the wall 
at the bottom of Slievebloom Park, facing Long Mile Road, Dublin 12.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The walls in question are privately owned structures that the City Council has no role 
in the maintenance or development of. 
 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WATTERS 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the removal of tree stumps on Slievebloom 
Park, adjacent to Drimnagh Castle Primary School. 
The trees were cut roughly three years ago. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks will include these stumps into our next stump removal tender. This work is likely 
to be carried out in the coming months. 
 
Q.18 
COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WATTERS 
To ask the Chief Executive to explore the possibility of opening a tourist information 
office on Long Mile Road, Dublin 12, in close proximity to Drimnagh Castle. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Tourism Information Offices in Dublin and nationally are provided by Fáilte Ireland.  
The majority of tourist information offices for Dublin are city centre locations where 
there is high footfall of visitors seeking information.  The most recent office opened 
beside City Hall and is getting a high level of engagement with visitors to the city.  Each 
office supplies information on a wide range of tourism offering and events and 
information on Drimnagh Castle can be provided through the existing network of offices 

and on line resources on www.visitdublin.ie which is also managed by Fáilte Ireland.  
Information is provided for a wide range of culture and heritage sites in and around the 
city.  Drimnagh Castle is a meticulously restored medieval castle and has its own 
excellent tourist information website www.drimnaghcastle.org while also plays a key 
role in prominently publicised and promoting this city asset.  Other websites Discover 
Ireland contains information for visitors.   
 
Q.19 
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the proposed Padel Centre at Bushy Park 
could he outline the number of tender applications received; the names of those who 
submitted an application and the date on which a decision will be made. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The tender for a Multi-Party Framework Agreement to Manage the Pavilion, Tennis 
Courts and Padel Courts in Bushy Park, Dublin 6 closed for submissions on the 12th 
March 2024.  I am unable to provide the number of tenders submitted or the names of 
those who tendered whilst the tender process is still active.  Tenders received will be 
assessed in the coming weeks and once completed, a Contract Award Notice will be 
published on the E-tenders website when the contract is in place, in line with 
procurement legislation. 
 
Q.20 
COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive does the council have a policy in relation to Tree pruning 
and action plan in relation to nuisance claims from residences where repeated request 
have been made for the council property to encroach on their property.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The policy in relation to public trees overhanging neighbouring properties can be 
consulted 
in 
our 
Dublin 
City 
Tree 
Strategy 
(https://www.dublincity.ie/sites/default/files/media/file-uploads/2018-
08/Dublin_City_Tree_Strategy_2016-2020.pdf). 
Please see below the paragraph in relation to public trees overhanging neighbouring 
properties. 
Council will not prune trees that overhang neighbouring properties unless the trees are 
dangerous or are causing actionable nuisance. The Council has no legal obligation to 
prune overhanging trees unless they are causing direct damage to an adjacent 
property or are imminently dangerous. This reflects the Council’s position as an owner 
of thousands of trees and the resources available. Given that many thousands of 
Council trees overhang boundaries, it is not an effective use of resources to prune 
every overhanging limb. Tree roots in gardens are a natural occurrence and root 
presence is unlikely to be affected by tree pruning. However, situations where a tree 
is genuinely generating root encroachment to an exceptional, severe and 
unreasonable degree are dealt with on a case-by-case basis. 
 
Q.21 
COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the Kilmore Road/ Ardmore 
Junction new light junction upgrades as there is a request that it is priorities 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The TAG Group has previously recommended that additional pedestrian crossings at 
this junction be provided and it has already been included for consideration on a works 
programme for 2024. 
 
The NTA confirmed the funding allocations for 2024 on the 7th of February 2024. 
Funding of €3,750,000 has been made available for installing pedestrian crossings 
across the Dublin Administrative Area.   

The Traffic Section will be meeting with North Central Area Councillors on the 3rd of 
April to gather their views on which other locations they wish to prioritise prior to 
finalising the works programme for 2024. 
 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on a community event to be hosted 
in the Ellen field Park in Whitehall. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Community and Social Development Team, Artane-Whitehall LEA are starting the 
process of planning a family fun day for Ellenfield Park, Whitehall, Dublin 9. It is hoped 
the event will be in Q3 2024. The event will be advertised locally and with all the 
community contacts within the Whitehall, Santry area.  
 
Q.23 
COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive for the number of complaints made in the last 3 years, in 
relation to trip and fall where tree roots had caused a lift in the path to cause uneven 
surfaces, and of these how many request where in for maintenance on the surface in 
the 12 months prior. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Road Maintenance Services records customer services requests on a Transport Asset 
Management System (TAMS). During the three year period from 1st March 2021 to 31st 
March 2024, over 40,000 individual customer service request have been recorded on 
this system, that relate specifically to road maintenance issues. 
 
These service requests include the reporting of potholes on the City’s roads and 
streets, damaged footpaths (either due to tree roots lifting the path or other non-tree 
related issues), damaged street furniture, oil spills, overgrown hedges, utility 
reinstatement related issues, requests for vehicular dishings, collapsed manholes, 
fallen trees, street nameplates etc. 
 
Whilst over 7,000 of these service requests have been recorded for issues concerning 
footpaths for the period in question, the system does not specifically record the number 
of trips and falls that arose as a result of footpath issues and footpath issues that relate 
to tree roots. 
 
Please further note that during the same three year period Road Maintenance Services 
crews repaired and made safe approximately 18,000 defects and hazards on the road 
and footpath network. These included repairs to footpaths that were damaged as a 
result of tree roots. 
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for information on the number and nature of maintenance 
requests from people living in Cromcastle Court over the previous twelve months, how 
long it took to resolve each maintenance request and a statement on the maintenance 
of the common areas of the flat complex, including the bin shoots, grass and play areas 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We are currently de-tenanting people from Cromcastle Court. Emergency requests are 
dealt with within 48 hours and standard requests are dealt with within eight weeks. We 
have a caretaking service which maintains the common areas of the complex. 
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER 
To ask the Chief Executive to engage with housing maintenance to replace the front 
door at (details supplied). This is a tenant of ours whose door is in extremely poor 

condition. She has tried stopgap measures to remedy this but it really needs replacing 
as there is significant draft. Furthermore, to ask housing maintenance to look at the 
work done in her driveway where some potholes were tarmacadam over and work was 
to a very poor standard.  Her contact details are provided. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance have agreed with tenant to replace this hall door.  The door has 
been ordered and it will take approximately 6 weeks for delivery. The driveway falls 
under the tenant’s responsibility.  
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER 
To ask the Chief Executive what measures the council has taken to comply with the 
motion regarding support for the Palestinian BDS Movement voted through this council 
in 2018 and if an ‘Apartheid Audit’ has been completed by the council to assess where 
and how we can support BDS as per the elected members’ wishes. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The legal responsibility for all procurement by the City Council rests with the Chief 
Executive, as against the Elected Members.  In exercising this responsibility, the Chief 
Executive is obliged to comply with statutory national and EU procurement frameworks 
that already provide specified grounds for exclusion.  Dublin City Council is required to 
meet its procurement obligations including the equal treatment of all parties and not 
deliberately restrict the market.  The motion agreed by Elected Members in 2018 would 
have resulted, if implemented, in Dublin City Council being in breach of its procurement 
obligations. 
 
In this context, the Chief Executive will not conduct an audit aimed at establishing 
compliance with the BDS campaign as the campaign is in breach of both national and 
EU procurement frameworks. 
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER  
To ask the Chief Executive to have the planning enforcement section examine the 
development on Killester Avenue East (65-67) and compare the artists impressions 
from the application with the actual height of the building to determine whether these 
are consistent. Local residents believe there is a significant disparity between images 
provided prior to development and the actual result.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Planning Enforcement Section will set up an enforcement file and investigate the 
issue brought up in this question as to whether the building height is planning 
compliant. The Councillor will be informed of the results of the investigation once the 
building height has been measured. 
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR CATHERINE STOCKER 
To ask the Chief Executive to erect signage in the vicinity of the bathing shelters on 
Bull Island to remind people to dispose of food carefully as last year there was an issue 
with rats. Furthermore, to ask the manager to engage with the food outlet on site – 
which is under license with the council I believe - regarding same and engaging with 
their customers to ensure appropriate disposal of food waste.  
 
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Service will liaise with the in-house signage department to come up with 
appropriate signage that might inform the issue which will be erected at appropriate 
locations at the shelters and café.  
 
 
 

Q.29  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a full maintenance inspection of (details supplied) the 
family have no heating, no hot water, water ingress on their balcony, their windows and 
backdoor need replacing. These conditions are intolerable and are having a significant 
detrimental impact upon the family. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will log this for the tenants and all necessary works will be 
carried out.  An inspection will also be carried out on the water ingress on the balcony, 
the windows and backdoor.   
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to examine the level of existing street lighting and public 
lighting in (Details supplied); consider where additional lighting columns can be 
installed; and to indicate a timeframe for the installation of any new lighting columns; 
and if he will make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The following report provides an update on the street lighting and public lighting 
(details supplied.) 
 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that a Community Consultative Forum be 
established as part of the redevelopment of (Details supplied); as Co-Chair of a 
similar forum for the O'Devaney Gardens housing project, such an initiative is 
necessary and would be of benefit to both the City Council and the local community 
and I urge the Chief Executive to agree to this request; and if he will make a statement 
on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The PPP Project Team are due to commence on site in Q4 2024. As part of the 
community engagement for this site, it was agreed that a Community Liaison Officer 
would be appointed for the duration of construction.  
Once the preferred tenderer has been appointed, the PPP Project Team will engage 
with officials in the Central Area to establish a Community Liaison Officer.  
The Area Housing Manager will work with the PPP Project Team to establish the most 
appropriate forum in advance of construction commencing on site. 
 
Q.32 
COUNCILLOR PADDY MCCARTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many metered on-street parking spaces are  there  in 
the city of Dublin in the various categories, Red, Yellow, Green, , Orange, and Blue, 
and those metered only on certain weekend days? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
There are currently a total of 1,082 meters.  They are broken down between the 
following colour zones: 
 
Yellow Zone – 370 Meters 
 
Red Zone – 281 Meters 
 
Orange Zone – 177 Meters 
 
Green Zone – 230 Meters 
 
Blue Zone – 24 Meters 
 
The “white zone” which is paid parking on Sundays from 2pm to 6pm would usually be 
considered the yellow zone on all other days of the week.  The information on 37 of 
these meters updates every Sunday from 2pm – 6pm from yellow zone to white zone.  

The area concerned would be parts of the inner city (included in the map attached) - 
https://www.dublincity.ie/sites/default/files/2023-12/parking-fees-map-2024.pdf  
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR PADDY MCCARTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive what was the annual revenue from metered parking in each 
of the last five financial years 2019, 2020,2021,2022,2023? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A response will issue to the Councillor directly on this. 
 
Q.34 
COUNCILLOR PADDY MCCARTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many residents are in receipt of parking badges (under 
the €50 per annum scheme) entitling them to park without payment at metered spaces 
on specified streets? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently 20,830 permit holders within the Dublin City Council area.  These 
Residential permits once displayed on the residents’ vehicles authorise them to park 
on the road displayed on their permit.  The permit holder can purchase either a 1 year 
or 2 year permit. 
 
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR PADDY MCCARTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many blue permits for disability claimants are in issue 
in Dublin. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement don’t issue these permits, you would need to contact the Irish 
Wheelchair Association to find out the numbers issued. 
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive and Planning Department, in regard to enquirers about the 
historic building, Rathmines Post Office, being removed as a post office for so many 
residents in the areas. See (Details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Rathmines Post Office, formerly the Telephone Exchange is an imposing 1934 Art 
Deco building on Rathmines Road Upper and is a protected structure- RPS no.7247. 
Chapter 11 of the City Development Plan – Built Heritage & Archaeology, includes a 
series of policies and objectives to conserve and enhance our protected structures. 
Dublin City Council does not own this building and as such, has no role in the decision 
of An Post to close the Post Office.    Planning permission is required for any works or 
change of use which would materially affect the character of the protected structure or 
its special interest.  The Conservation Section is available to advise owners of 
protected structures in relation to development and conservation proposals. 
The Planning Authority will assess any future planning application in accordance with 
the provisions of the 2022-2028 City Development Plan and ensure any proposed use 
aligns with the zoning objective and the preservation of the integrity of the protected 
structure. 
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive and Roads Department in regard to the enquirers about 
parking in certain parts of Rathgar Avenue which can be dangerous for children in the 
area. See (details supplied) 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The query regarding the traffic situation at the junction of Rathgar Avenue, Garville 
Avenue, and Garville Avenue Upper is currently being assessed by the TAG area 
engineer. Consideration to include the junction in the future road works program is 
underway. 
 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR JANICE BOYLAN  
To ask the Chief Executive when the traffic lights at the junction of Mayor Street Upper 
and Wapping Street (beside Spencer Dock LUAS stop) will be programmed so that 
concrete bollards can be removed allowing for through traffic from North Wall Quay, 
and from Sheriff Street Upper. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The upgrade works at the junction immediately beside The Spencer Dock Luas stop 
are being undertaken by the developer building the adjacent buildings. Once the 
upgrade works have been completed by the developer DCC will be in a position to 
open the junction. We are currently waiting for the developer to complete the works 
which were originally scheduled for last year. We have written again to the developer’s 
agent asking for an update. 
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that this council advances the refurbishment and 
upgrade of (Details suppled) so that we can consider utilising the community property 
for community purposes such as early years childcare and education, training 
programmes to assist parents of children with neurodiverse needs; dedicated space 
for senior citizens in the area; and that any alternative plans for the site to be shelved; 
and if he would make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council acknowledges the needs reported within the Central Area of 
services for Childcare. This matter is also a focus of the North East Inner City (NEIC) 
Programme Implementation Board which has a broad representation of Central 
Govenment Departments including Department of An Taoiseach and the Department 
of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth. DCC has committed to the 
North East Inner City (NEIC) Programme Implementation Board to review vacant 
properties within the area for consideration as suitable properties for Childcare 
provision. The (details supplied) is one of the buildings currently under consideration.  
Recommendations as to what the future use of this and other Council owned properties 
will be brought to the Active Land Management team chaired by the Chief Executive. 
 
Q.40 
COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Requests for help with serious ASB from residents throughout the inner city appears 
to have increased exponentially over the last number of months? To ask if this is 
reflected in the demands of those responsible for implementing DCCs “Anti-Social 
Behaviour Strategy?” 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Councils Central Estate Management Unit structure will oversee the 
implementation of the ASB Strategy Fostering Safer Communities across the Council, 
provide or arrange the provision of necessary training, collect necessary data on 
activity levels, ensure a consistency of approach to dealing with ASB complaints and 
finally ensure required levels of inter-agency cooperation. The Unit works closely with 
all our Estate Management Teams in the Area Offices on these matters. 
 

Our overall objective is to provide safe and peaceful neighbourhoods for Dublin City 
Council tenants, and their neighbours, to reside and work in. We will aim to prevent 
and reduce incidences of anti-social behaviour (ASB) in affected communities where 
citizens are negatively affected. We will deliver this through strategies that are based 
on Prevention, Partnership, Enforcement, and Continuous Improvement. Below is a 
summary of the commitments that we will adhere to in the delivery of this strategy.   
Dublin City Council’s commitments to prevent and reduce anti-social behaviour are: 
 
 Proactive Estate Management: Prevention & Early Intervention 
 Working In Partnership: Building Key Relationships 
 Consequences for Anti-Social Behaviour which affects the Community   
 Effective Complaints Response: Efficient Investigation and Proportionate Sanctions   
 Continuous Improvement: Investing in the Delivery of our Strategy.   
 
Q.41 
COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Following the Department of Transports recommendations for cost effective yet safe 
alternative zebra crossings (without Belisha beacons) can the Active Travel Unit/Traffic 
Department provide a draft plan of potential suitable locations within D8 that includes 
a schedule of works for their installation please?” 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The DCC Traffic section is currently engaged in a consideration of the recently issued 
guidelines on Zebra Crossings from the DoT. Issues including road safety, suitability 
of location, technical engineering aspects and resource availability need to be 
addressed in advance of a City wide adoption of Zebra Crossings. 
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the Dublin City Council Sports Action Plan 2024-2029 
prioritise the refurbishment of the numerous “pocket pitches” dotted throughout the city 
which will support the vision of “More Active,More Often”?” 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An Outdoor Recreation Officer will be assigned to oversee the assessment of all green 
/ open spaces and parks. The role will involve an assessment of green / open spaces 
and parks within Dublin City the purpose of which will be to investigate the 
opportunities available for physical and recreation activities.  
The goal is that this role and the work undertaken will create opportunities for 
highlighting and empowering activity in these spaces on an ongoing basis. 
 
Q.43 
COUNCILLOR MAIRE DEVINE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the surprisingly successful dog fouling initiative taken 
by Galway LA in stencilling messages to owners on foot paths and fluorescent spray 
painting poo be piloted in the D8 area. 
Please refer to the attachment. 
Galway’s dog poop problem halved after council’s bizarre spray paint campaign | Irish 
Independent 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Dublin City Council are considering introducing a pilot stencilling initiative in the Dublin  
12 area and if successful will roll out to other areas in the city. There are no plans in 
place to spray fluorescent paint on dog poo in any area of Dublin  
 
 
 

Q.44 
COUNCILLOR ALISON GILLILAND 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline progress to date on the upgrading of our public 
lighting system to a more carbon efficient system across the city and in particular to 
indicate any public/private collaborations involved in this upgrade 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A report will issue to the Councillor in advance of the May meeting of the City Council 
 
Q.45 
COUNCILLOR ALISON GILLILAND 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline the approach used by our Planning section to 
assess and adjudicate on planning applications so as to meet the following 
Development Plan Objective QHSN3 (ii) 'To encourage the establishment of 
sustainable residential communities by ensuring a wide variety of housing typologies 
and tenures is provided throughout the city in accordance with the provisions of the 
Housing Need Demand Assessment and any future Regional HNDA'. i.e. how do we 
ensure a balanced tenure mix in the immediate and wider area where the proposed 
residential development is being proposed. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The HNDA prepared to inform the Housing Strategy of the City Development Plan 
clearly demonstrated that there is ample justification for the full implementation of the 
Part V housing provision of the current Planning legislation; and also any expansion of 
the 10% social housing to include 10% additional affordable.  As a result all planning 
applications for the City above the relevant thresholds of 10 units must comply with the 
full extent of Part V as currently allowed for. 
 
Alongside this, the objective is also implemented through the work of Local Area Plans 
and SDRAs; whereby the Council encourages the provision of a greater level of tenure 
mix than currently provided for.  For example in the implementation of the Ballymun 
LAP; the identification of sites for affordable rental and/or purchase or varied types of 
AHBs are actively encouraged to provide a greater mix for the area.  Also part of 
providing this mix is the building of working relationships with the LDA, who can provide 
affordable rental and/or purchase on a mix of public and privately purchased land to 
expand the variety of housing typologies in many of the large regeneration areas.  The 
Council will continue to use the current legislation; its functions as a landowner and 
also by engaging with other key stakeholders working on housing delivery; to ensure 
that the objective continues to be successfully implemented.  
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR LARRY O’TOOLE 
To ask the Chief Executive to make provision for a Moatfield Estate name stone to be 
installed on the grass area at entrance from Tonlegee Road. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Public Domain team will make provision in 2024 for a name stone to be installed 
in this area. 
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR LARRY O’TOOLE 
To ask the Chief Executive to make provision for litter bins installed at grass area along 
Moatfield Park, and at laneway from Moatfield on to Tonlegee Road shops.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services will have the above mentioned locations assessed and 
litter levels monitored there over the coming weeks to see if there is a requirement for 
litter bins there. 
 
 

Q.48  COUNCILLOR LARRY O’TOOLE 
To ask the Chief Executive to make provision for a ‘No litter’ sign to be erected at 
laneway from Moatfield on to Tonlegee Road shops. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Public Domain Team will make provision for a “No Dumping” sign to be erected in 
this laneway in the coming weeks.  
 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR LARRY  O’TOOLE 
To ask the Chief Executive to make provision for speed calming measures/ramps to 
be installed throughout Moatfield estate.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Administration team have been in touch with the Councillor for further information 
and when we receive this (Enquiry Ref: 7038532) will be referred to the Area Engineer 
for assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
 
Q.50  COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the EV  fast charging point pilot, to ask 
how many locations are being piloted, their location, the intended timeline for the pilot, 
the process for assessing the experience after the pilot and DCC's intended timeline 
for all of this and if he will comment on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin Local Authority Electric Vehicle Charging Strategy (DLAEVCS) was 
published in June 2022 to anticipate the demand for services across Dublin City and 
County. Dublin City Council agreed that the ‘Rapid Hub’ (rather than ‘Mixed’) 
technology scenario would be the better model to align with the City’s development, 
transport and climate action objectives. 
 
Based on the ‘Rapid Hub’(*) Medium (Curtailed) Scenario the DLAEVCS anticipates the 
following demand for Public EV charging points in the City by end of 2025;  
 
 
Residential 
65 
 
En-Route 
19 
 
Destination 
280 
 
 
It is expected that the majority of these charge points will be installed and operated by 
private sector investors. 
 
DCC’s role in public EV charging is as a facilitator rather than an operator in the 
establishment and maintenance of a public EV charging network. However, to 
encourage the private sector participation and investment the 4 Dublin Local 
Authorities agreed to run a pilot project to install up to 200 Electric Vehicle charging 
points at ‘easy win’ publicly owned facilities. 
 
DCC identified the following locations as suitable for the pilot project; 
 
1. 
St. Anne’s Park 
 
 
 
North Central Area 
2. 
Clontarf Bus Garage  
 
 
North Central Area 
3. 
Strand Road, Sydney Parade 
 
South East Area 
4. 
Mary’s lane 
 
 
 
 
Central Area 
5. 
Donnybrook (The Crescent)  
 
South East Area 
6. 
Milltown (Strand Terrace) 
 
 
South East Area 
7. 
Ballyfermot Leisure Centre 
 
 
South Central Area 

8. 
Raheny Library 
 
 
 
North Central Area 
9. 
Cabra Parkside Leisure Centre 
 
Central Area 
10. 
Finglas, Wellmount St. 
 
 
North West Area 
11. 
Clonskeagh (Farmer Browns) 
 
South East Area 
12. 
Bushy Park (Rathdown Avenue) 
 
South East Area 
13. 
Cabra Library  
 
 
 
Central Area 
14. 
Walkinstown Library  
 
 
South Central Area 
 
Procurement for the pilot project was managed by Fingal County Council. The 
procurement process is currently underway. A number of submissions have been 
received and are being reviewed. 
 
The DLAs expect that the successful tenderer will be appointed by the end of May, 
2024 and that works will be substantially complete by the end of December 2024. 
 
*Rapid Hub – All public residential charging demands are met by rapid EVCPs. It is 
envisaged that in the short-medium term this would likely be 1 or 2 chargers installed 
together, and in the medium-long term “proper” hubs would be developed (e.g. 6 + 
EVCPs) 
 
Q.51 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline exactly the options to local authority tenants with 
regard to waste disposal and collection, to set out the grounds upon which tenants are 
only allowed use bags for waste collection as opposed to bins and if he will comment 
on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Local Authority Tenants who reside in Dublin City Council flat complexes generally 
have communal bins supplied for their use within the complex and an appropriate 
charge for this service is applied to their monthly rent. 
 
Local authority tenants who are living in single housing have exactly the same options 
and responsibilities as all private rented dwellings in that they are required to make an 
arrangement with a private waste collector of their choice who will provide them with 
the service they require. There are no properties in the city where tenants are only 
allowed use bags and it is the preferred option of the City Council that bins must always 
be used whenever possible because of the problems associated with the presentation 
of waste in bags. Notwithstanding this it must be accepted that in many properties 
throughout the city the option to use a bin is not practical because the properties simply 
do not have off street storage for bins.  
 
In such cases, the street will generally be given a derogation, which permits the 
presentation of waste in bags. Again, the resident, private or City Council tenant must 
make a private arrangement with a waste collector for the supply and collection of their 
waste bags. Currently almost 900 streets around the city have such derogations. 
We also actively encourage the use of the many bottle banks and bring centres located 
across the city to ensure the maximum amount of waste is recycled. Residents also 
have an option to bring their bagged waste to a local Civic Amenity site and dispose of 
it there for an appropriate fee if this suits their specific needs. 
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR DECLAN MEENAGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to publish the full terms of the settlement 
between  Greyhound Household Unlimited Co and Dublin City Council on foot of the 
case taken to the Commercial Division of the High Court in 2023 and if he will comment 
on the matter. 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Legal case in question was struck out on agreement between the parties with no 
Order as to costs when Dublin City Council took the decision not to proceed with the  
Competition. 
 
Q.53 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council Housing Department has had an 
opportunity to review the recently published report “Opportunities and challenges of 
vacant above the shop units for residential use in Ireland” (collaboration between 
Dublin Simon Community and Kathleen Stokes of Dublin City University) and if the 
recommendations therein would be of interest/use to DCC in facilitating over the shop 
planning permissions in accordance with and in compliance with our Development 
Plan. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The report “Opportunities and challenges of vacant above the shop units for residential 
use in Ireland” by Dr. Kathleen Stokes and Michelle Connolly, has been reviewed by 
officials in the Housing & Community Services and Planning & Property Development 
Departments. The report is welcomed and the findings and recommendations will of 
be value in the development of policy in relation to urban commercial vacancy. 
 
The writers of the report have been invited to give a presentation at the next meeting 
of the Planning Strategic Policy Committee in Dublin City Council, This will enable a 
discussion of the recommendations and their implication for planning policy.  
 
Dublin City Council continues to grant permission for proposals for the conversion of 
over the shop units for residential purposes, with over 60 new residential apartments 
granted permission in the past four months.  In the same period 3 notifications of 
intention to avail of the planning exemption for change of use from commercial to 
residential with a potential to provide 9 residential units have been entered on the 
record. 
 
The Planning Department continues to deliver the Living City Initiative. It is 
acknowledged as identified in the report, that there are limitations to this initiative which 
has led to a low uptake of the incentives available.    
 
The Adaptive Reuse Unit in the Housing and Community Services Department, 
established in October 2022, is managing a programme of projects involving the 
acquisition of commercial property and the conversion of these properties to 
apartments for residential use. This programme addresses the complex challenges 
associated with addressing vacancy over the shop as outlined in the DCU/DSC VATSU 
report and is taking advantage of opportunities that are presented by increasing 
commercial vacancy for the creation of new housing solutions. The findings of the 
Adaptive Reuse Unit over the past 18 months, having completed a number of feasibility 
studies on the conversion of commercial property to residential, have been broadly in 
line with the findings of the VATSU report and this unit would agree with most of the 
recommendations that are made in the report. The availability of appropriate funding 
mechanisms for these types of projects is a limiting factor for expansion of the 
programme. 
 
Some of the recommendations made in the report are already being progressed. For 
example:  
Adaptive Reuse projects are being delivered with the support of a multi-disciplinary 
Programme Advisory Group that has been established to include colleagues from a 
range of departments in Dublin City Council including planning, valuers, architects, 

conservation, heritage, quantity surveyors, building control and fire safety. This allows 
projects to be de-risked from a planning and cost perspective.  
 
Representatives from the Adaptive Reuse Unit in the Housing and Community 
Services Department and from the Planning and Property Development Department 
form part of a working group established by the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage that has been tasked with making recommendations for 
promoting the development of vacant commercial property. This group is looking at all 
vacant commercial property including vacancy over active and inactive commercial 
units at ground floor level. A draft report from this working group is due to be presented 
to the Minister for Housing in June of this year.   
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Given that the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage (DOHLGH) 
sets targets for DCC for inspection of dwellings in the private sector, can the Chief 
Executive confirm whether, or not, the subvention/recoupment received form the 
DOHLGH for 2021, 2022 and 2023 covered the cost of the inspections carried out or 
if not, how much does DCC have to pay for this scheme from its own resources. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Inspections are undertaken by Environmental Health Officers to enforce standards in 
private rented properties under the Housing (Standards for Rented Houses) 
Regulation 2019.  These Regulations require landlords of rented properties to ensure 
that the properties meets certain minimum standards.  Funding for inspections paid by 
the DOHLGH is paid at a rate per inspection of a dwelling and per dwelling that is 
compliant or brought into compliance with the standards.  The funding received does 
not cover the full cost of inspections.  The table below sets out the summary outcome 
for each of the three years concerned. 
 
  
Inspections 
Total 
Expenditure 
Total 
Income 
Net Cost to DCC 
Inspections 
2021: 
              
3,663  
 €       1,422,789  
 €   513,200  
 €         909,589  
Inspections 
2022: 
              
6,532  
 €       1,423,709  
 €   815,900  
 €         607,809  
Inspections 
2023: 
              
6,611  
 €       1,460,064  
 €   943,900  
 €         516,164  
 
 
The funding Rate is €100 per inspection and up to the end of March 2023, €50 per 
property that is compliant or brought into compliance with the standards. The €50 rate 
was increased to €100 from 1st April 2023 in recognition of the importance of the 
objective of bringing properties into compliance with the standards, something that 
Dublin City Council had made representations to the Department regarding. 
 
An additional point of note is that targets are set for Dublin City Council based on the 
number of registered tenancies to be inspected, however, subvention is not paid per 
inspection of a registered tenancy, instead, it is paid for each inspection of a dwelling. 
 
Q.55 
COUNCILLOR NAIL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
In relation to the COVID-19 essential works carried out at Belcamp (Traveller 
accommodation) can the Chief Executive confirm the final cost of the works completed 

and to also confirm how much of this has been recouped from the DOHLGH and if 
there are any outstanding amounts to be recouped. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Covid Essential works in the Belcamp area commenced in 2020. Total spent to date 
amounts to €4,777,907.07. To date, the Traveller Accommodation Unit has recouped 
€1,790,343.50 of the overall spend from DOHLGH. Total spend of €331,993.08 was 
deemed to be un-recoupable by DOHLGH. Total spend of €2,647,774.29 relating to 
permanent ESB works remains under review with DOHLGH. 
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING  
To ask the Chief Executive to detail the amount of the Financial Contribution towards 
the St. Patrick’s Festival 2024 (paid by CRES under Manager’s Order 31490 
CRES/0048/2024) and the payment made to the St. Patrick’s Festival (paid by the 
Central Area under Manager’s Order 29664 CA/0021/2024) and could the Chief 
Executive explain the rationale behind the latter payment give that the Festival is a 
citywide event and not confined to the Central Area.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
CRES Response: 
I can confirm the financial contribution towards St. Patrick’s Festival 2024 
(CRES/0048/2024) from CRES is €423,000 to be paid as follows: 
 
50% on signing of Memorandum of Agreement 
 
20% on the launch of the core festival programme 
 
30% post event, on the satisfactory completion of a post event report 
 
In relation to the payment authorised to St. Patricks Festival under Central Area under 
Manager’s Order 29664 CA/0021/2024 this relates to the North East Inner City (NEIC) 
Pageant which took part in St. Patricks Day Parade 2024.  
 
The proposal for the NEIC to take part in the 2024 parade was proposed by the NEIC 
Programme Office, in consultation with the Central Area Community Development 
team.  A funding application was considered and approved by the NEIC Programme 
Implementation Board and Budget Sub Group in January 2024 to contribute €25,000 
to St. Patricks Festival from the NEIC Initiative with match funding of €25,000 from the 
Central Area NEIC budget programme. 
 
St. Patrick’s Festival, Dublin City Council and the North East Inner City Initiative 
partnered to celebrate the North East Inner City and its historic relationship with the 
St. Patrick’s Festival.  
 
A co-production between the three organisations, a first for 2024, included over 200 
participants on March 17th as the pageant celebrated the energy, resilience and talent 
that make up the community of the NEIC, shining a light of positivity over the story and 
power of the NEIC and the Talent, Strength, Hope, Diversity and Joy in this community. 
 
Q.57 
COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he would list the Dublin City Council sponsored 
applications to the Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht Sport and Media 
for consideration under the current round of the Sport Capital Grants scheme which 
closed some months back, also if the projects under consideration or being 
implemented under the Large Scale Sport Infrastructure Fund can be similarly listed 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Sport Capital Grant Applications under the last round which have yet to get approval 
from the Department are: 
 
1. St Catherine’s Cardiac Rehabilitation –gym equipment. 
2. Irishtown Refurbishment of the Athletic Track. 
 
In respect of large scale infrastructural fund, an announcement is due in the first half 
of 2024 with dates, T & C's etc. to be published on department's website as per Dail 
response to item 1226/24. Two applications were made in the last call for applications 
namely: 
1. Dublin City Council is the applicant for the Dalymount Park Redevelopment 
Project. 
 
2. Technological University Dublin as part of the redevelopment of Grangegorman 
intend to design and construct a new Indoor Sports Complex, Dublin City 
Council is the sponsor for this project. 
 
Parks Biodiversity & Landscape Services submitted eight (8) applications under the 
2023 Sports Capital & Equipment Programme operated by the Department of Tourism, 
Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport & Media.  The eight applications are as follows:- 
 
1. Brickfield Park - 7 a side All Weather 
2. Herbert Park - Bowling Green 
3. Kildonan Park – All Weather 
4. Rockfield Park - Tennis Court upgrades 
5. Silloge Golf Course – Drainage Works 
6. Bunting Park -  St. James Gaels - toilets 
7. Willie Pearse Park - Outdoor Gym 
8. Albert College Park - Tennis Ireland – new dome, upgrade to court lighting, 
improved shower/toilet facilities 
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please refer to playground equipment at (details 
supplied) and arrange for repair of same as a matter of urgency and give a timeline 
for same and if not repairable, please say when replacement equipment will be 
provided. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This piece of play equipment does seem to be particularly attractive to groups 
congregating in the playground after dark who overload the trampoline resulting in the 
damage observed and forcing the piece to be taken out of commission.  This item has 
been repaired twice in the last 12 months and a contractor has been lined up to affect 
repairs once again.  It seems that the previous repairs have used up the necessary 
parts that were in stock with the contractor and unfortunately replacements had to be 
ordered to affect this repair causing some considerable delay. If the damage 
experienced continues consideration will have to be given to the removal of this piece 
and its replacement with another item which might not be so vulnerable to damage. 
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
Can the Chief Executive, in relation to trees at (details supplied), say: 
(a) When the work that was begun over a year ago will be completed 
(b) What efforts he plans to make to put right the damage caused by tree to properties 
at details attached 
(c) Why the work, begun over a year ago, has been left to drag on  

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
a) The Parks Service has no record of any communication with this resident nor any 
commitment to remove this tree. 
b) The Parks Service does not carry out repairs to privately owned walls.  If residents 
wish to initiate a claim against the council for repairs contact should be made on 
parks@dublincity.ie requesting a claim form. 
c) The Parks Service has no record of works having being commenced at this 
location. 
 
A visual tree inspection will be arranged in the coming weeks as local schedules allow 
and any works deemed necessary will be listed for inclusion in the prioritised tree care 
programme for the area 2024-25. 
 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to clarify the situation in relation to industrial/business 
units at (details supplied) and say: 
 
A) What is the current zoning of these properties 
B) When were they rezoned and who requested same, was it a management 
recommendation or a request from Councillors/Developers 
C) If he will agree to establish a Local Area Plan to guide future development 
D) If he will set up a Sub-committee of Area Committee to meet occasionally with 
DCC officials, and reps from local residents to discuss/future and provide input to 
them 
E) If the rezoning was done as support for this view that old industrial sites should be 
moved out to the M50 and these areas changed to residential 
F ) If this is a City Council planning idea or a Government strategy 
G) If it is "old thinking" at this stage and if the strategy has been proofed against City 
Council & Government 2030/2050 climate strategy plans which seem to promote the 
creation of work places close to residential locations 
H) If he can point to locations where this policy of rezoning old industrial sites to 
residential can be viewed as achieved or successful 
J) If he will examine and make a statement on the matter 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In response to the question’s nine elements, each are addressed below. 
 
a) The lands are zoned Z10- “to consolidate and facilitate the development of inner city 
and inner suburban sites for mixed uses”.   
b) They were identified as part of the Z6 and Z7 study, on foot of an objective of the 2016 
Development Plan; which took place in 2017-2019.  As part of this study all Z6 and Z7 
lands were reviewed.  Some lands were brought forward for variation in 2020 and 
others were brought forward through the development plan process. 
c) The lands are not identified as one of the 18 locations for a local area plan/village 
improvement plan within the City Development Plan.  Considering the limited size and 
extent of the area in question, the LAP process would not be appropriate. 
d) Any future development of these lands must be progressed though the statutory 
development management process which requires public consultation on any 
development proposal.  None of the lands in question are in Council ownership.  It 
would not be appropriate to set up a sub-committee of the NCAC to address future 
development management proposals or applications. 
e) The zoning of Z10, which has a requirement for a mixed use approach; supports the 
retention of employment uses on the lands by seeking consolidation and densification 
of uses; alongside the development of new residential as appropriate.  All existing uses 
can continue to operate and expand as recognised existing operators, whether they 
are a conforming or non-conforming use.   

f) Supporting sustainable compact growth directly adjacent to existing high quality rail 
based transport station is a national, regional and local planning policy and also a key 
part of our climate response.   
g) The Z10 zoning seeks to create a mixed use environment that provides the opportunity 
for densification of both employment and residential locations.  
h) The Council recently adopted a masterplan for the Jamestown area of Finglas which 
saw a substantial area of land move from industrial zoning in the 2016 Plan to a 
regeneration mixed use zoning by way of variation. New planning applications for these 
lands are anticipated to be lodged over the coming months that will deliver a mix of 
housing, commercial and community uses.  As an as built location, the North Lotts and 
Grand Canal Dock is over 90% complete as a post industrial area that has been 
significantly intensified for commercial and residential purposes from a low density and 
low use industrial area of the city at a highly accessible location. 
i) DCC will continue to actively promote and implement the policies and objectives of the 
City Development Plan, including Z10 sites such as the one identified in the question, 
through the statutory development management processes; to achieve positive 
sustainable regeneration and the delivery of much needed housing in high quality 
accessible locations, in tandem with employment. 
 
Q.61 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive issue a full update regarding the cherry orchard 
investigation into cash payment for protection 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Chief Executive is not in a position to provide an update at this time as the matter 
is with the Department of Housing and the Gardaí. 
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive present a full and frank report regarding the ongoing 
financial and governance issues that are ongoing regarding at Smock alley theatre   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Temple Bar Cultural Trust is currently involved in a legal process with the tenant of the 
building, Smock Alley Theatre CLG regarding the proposed municipal theatre at the 
venue. The TBCT board is being kept informed on developments in this regard and 
this is the appropriate forum given the fiduciary responsibilities of the board relating to 
the activities of the company. However, when this process has concluded a report will 
be brought before the Council and or the SPC. 
 
Q.63 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to give a report on the ongoing governance and financial 
crisis that is continuing at the Peter Mc Verry trust this report to include what 
measures  and safeguards the DRHE have put in place and has a forensic audit been 
initiated by DCC into PMcVT.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
PMVT has ongoing engagement with the DRHE and the Department of Housing in 
relation to financial and governance matters. The DRHE is concerned with ensuring a 
continuity of services to people experiencing homelessness and that none of PMVT’s 
service users are negatively affected during this time.  
 
The AHB Regulatory Authority (AHBRA) and the Charities Regulatory Authority have 
appointed inspectors to carry out investigations into the affairs of PMVT.  
 
 
 

Q.64  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to present a full report into the use of the building design 
yard in temple bar that is now being use by the Dublin theatre festival, this building was 
to have multiple use and multiple occupancy and was also to facilitate Arts companies 
and artists in its envelope, the building would have full occupancy and be arts active 
under the heading festival house. However, it would appear that this building which is 
closed for most of the year is actually excluding Artist and Arts practice and at 
companies. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Temple Bar Cultural Trust (TBCT) intends to carry out a series of fire and life safety 
improvements in 12 East Essex Street (formerly Design Yard). An architect has been 
engaged by TBCT with a view to commencing works in the coming months. There are 
a number of complexities with the building which has limited its ability to achieve full 
potential. Part of the planned refurbishment will involve an upgrade and reconfiguration 
of the front glazed screen, which will allow for enhanced heat retention in the building 
creating a much more usable space in the process. Temple Bar Cultural Trust are 
committed to working with the current tenant of the building to deliver a more visible 
and vibrant cultural building moving forward. 
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline in tabular form the amount of funding Dublin City 
Council allocates youth services in Dublin City and what are the services that receive 
this funding? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply will be issued to the Councillor within two weeks of the Council Meeting. 
 
Q.66 
COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on any contact made with Ramallah and any 
progress made with the Treaty of Friendship. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In December 2023 the Lord Mayor, Daithí de Róiste and Mayor Issa Kassis of 
Ramallah, Palestine formally signed a City to City Friendship Agreement.  International 
Relations are working to establish a programme of engagement that will support the 
City to City Friendship Agreement.   
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive In noting concerns raised by youth services at the recent 
D12 Community Safety Forum, will Dublin City Council consider installing lighting in 
Eamon Ceant Park Crumlin, this would greatly assist night time outreach work with 
'hard to reach' young people?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As of now, there are currently no immediate plans for the installation of lights in Eamon 
Ceant Park. Although discussions have been held regarding the potential installation 
of lighting fixtures in the park, no concrete steps have been taken towards actualizing 
this proposal. Despite the interest and consideration, the decision so far has tended 
towards not proceeding with the installation of lights 
 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive manager to outline in tabular form how many people were 
charged for illegal dumping in Dublin City for the years 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023 & so 
far in 2024, how many fines were issued during this time, how fines were paid during 

this time and how much did DCC spend on removing and discarding illegal dumping 
during the same period?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Year 
Fines 
issued 
Fines 
paid 
Fines 
cancelled 
on appeal 
Prosecutions  
Initiated 
Convictions  
obtained 
 in court 
Out 
of 
Court 
Settlements 
Cost of illegal 
dumping 
removal, fleet, 
disposal, staff 
2020 
763 
330 
127 
169 
7 
15 
€991,403 
2021 
914 
514 
150 
237 
23 
0 
€904,670 
2022 
806 
413 
100 
159 
48 
4 
€997,784 
2023 
1197 
645 
139 
263 
31 
17 
€945,017 
To 
date 
2024 
66 
19 
23 
0 
16 
1 
Q1 2024 not 
available as yet 
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR DANIEL CEITINN 
To ask the Chief Executive if Road resurfacing could be arranged for (Details 
supplied), could DCC also examine installing more water drainage, there are only two 
drains in the entire cul-de-sac and this combined with the uneven road surface is 
leading to a large build-up of surface water and spot flooding during periods of rain. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer will carry out a site visit on (Details supplied). Any extensive 
rutting/pothles will be repaired. The Area Engineer will review the surface water 
drainage in conjunction with our drainage colleagues. 
 
Q.70 
COUNCILLOR DANIEL CEITINN 
To ask the Chief Executive if a speed bump could be installed on Hazelbrook Drive as 
the street is seeing an increase in use as a rat run. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following an assessment it was found that Hazelbrook Drive does not meet the criteria 
for speed ramps. The criteria for the installation of speed ramps are as follows: 
•The 
road 
should 
have 
a 
straight 
run 
of 
approximately 
200 
metres.  
• The 85th percentile speed (speed exceeded by 15% of vehicles) should exceed the 
posted 
speed 
limit.  
• 
Traffic 
volumes 
should 
exceed 
60 
vehicles 
per 
hour.  
• There should be genuine road safety concerns based on accident statistics or 
observed road safety patterns or a written report from an Inspector of the local Garda 
Síochána. As Hazelbrook Drive does not have a straight run of 200m, speed ramps 
are not recommended.  
 
Q.71 
COUNCILLOR DANIEL CEITINN 
To ask the Chief Executive if an update could be provided on the proposed inclusion 
of Melvin Road and Neagh Road on the 2024 Footpath Resurfacing Programme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Melvin Road and Neagh Road are not included on the Roads and Pavements 
Maintenance Programme 2024. The Area Engineer will add Cllr. Ceitinn’s request to a 
list with other pavements seeking resurfacing for consideration in 2025. This list will be 
reassessed should future funding become available in 2024.  
 
 
 

Q.72  COUNCILLOR DANIEL CEITINN 
To ask the Chief Executive if further action could be taken in relation to the compulsory 
purchase of an abandoned property (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A number of sites on the Derelict Sites Register, including the one which is the subject 
of the question, have been identified for potential acquisition and preparations are 
underway to commence the process. 
These acquisitions form part of the Council’s ongoing acquisition strategy, in place 
since 2017, which is a key part of our Active Land Management Initiative to tackle 
dereliction and which has yielded very positive results. All sites entered on the Derelict 
Sites Register can be considered for acquisition and sites do not have to be entered 
on the Register for a particular time before they can be considered for acquisition.  
 
Q.73 
COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide details of the programme of works planned in 
2024 for each administrative area as part of (Details Attached); and if he will make a 
statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
These are the works that the Division has planned to do this year with the budget that 
has been made available (attached). 
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to account for why there is no left turn allowed from North 
Wall Quay onto Samuel Beckett Bridge to facilitate access by North Wall residents to 
the south quays.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the Samuel Beckett Bridge states that 
the purpose of the bridge “is to provide greater levels of accessibility for all transport 
modes within the Inner City, while continuing to restrict thru-traffic from the City 
Centre.” Dublin City Council implemented the ‘No Left Turn’ in accordance with the 
conditions imposed by the planning permission granted by An Bord Pleanála, in order 
to make provision for pedestrians, cyclists and public transport. The bridge was 
intended to facilitate the orbital route traversing the City from North to South and visa-
versa. During the public consultation phase held at the time, traffic noise and traffic 
volume levels would have been a factor considered as part of the EIS for residents 
living in the vicinity of the Bridge. 
 
The Area Engineer therefore does not recommend rescinding the ‘No Left Turn’ from 
Sheriff Street Upper onto Guild Street, because the turning angle at the location is far 
greater than 100⁰ and many motorists would be unable to safely manoeuvre around 
the corner. 
 
Q.75 
COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the plans to open St. Werburg’s Church 
for arts and culture use and if he will comment on the matter 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A Design Team was appointed a year ago and in 2023 and has set about the 
preliminary Design, Issues of alternative access through Castle Street are being 
resolved with assistance from the OPW. A Conservation plan for the cemetery one of 
the most important historical cemeteries nationally has been completed. Part 8 
Panning already in preparation should proceed by summer 2024, Construction 
Procurement in the last Quarter of 2024 with construction to begin in early 2025. 

It is intended that the Church will function as heritage visitor site and as a performing 
Arts venue. The Dublin city Council Culture Company will bring forward plans to 
operate the building when completed. 
 
Q.76 
COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that when NO2 indicative level testing devices 
are installed across the city later this year that one in installed at the junction of North 
King Street and Bolton Street in Dublin 1.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Indicative Nitrogen Dioxide monitoring can be carried out using diffusion tubes. The 
tubes can be placed at site selected locations for consecutive months and the results 
obtained by laboratory analysis. More information about this can be found by accessing 
the below link.  
 
https://www.epa.ie/environment-and-you/air/diffusion-tube-results/ 
 
The tubes must be placed at locations having regard to the site selection criteria in the 
Air Quality Standards 2011. They cannot be placed directly at junctions.  
 
The Air Quality Monitoring and Noise Control Unit and the EPA commenced a diffusion 
tube survey of streets (including North King Street) in the North Inner City area to 
determine the contribution of traffic to air pollution levels in the area. The survey was 
initiated because of complaints from residents of the area about traffic volumes and 
associated air pollution levels. The survey started on 14/01/2024 and must be carried 
over a one year period to reference the results against annual mean limit values cited 
in the Air Quality Standards 2011. The results will be available from 14/01/2025.  
The diffusion tubes in place at North King Street will give an accurate indication of NO2 
levels in this area.   
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR DEBORAH BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding my question submitted in December 2023 which 
remains unanswered, whether the Chief Executive would, as outlined in the 2022-27 
Dublin City Council Play Strategy and provided for under Temporary Minor Street Play 
Orders as per the 2013 DCC Traffic and Transport SPC, prioritise outdoor street play 
for children in Dublin Central by 1. Re-instating the Play Officer role and 2. Forming a 
Street Play Committee made up of local political and community representatives, 
community Gardaí, local area officials and other interested parties such as school 
boards. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks and Landscape Services are committed to working cross departmentally to 
identify and develop Street Play opportunities as outlined in the 2022-27 Dublin City 
Council Play Strategy and provided for under Temporary Minor Street Play Orders as 
per the 2013 DCC Traffic and Transport SPC, prioritising outdoor street play for 
children in Dublin Central.  
 
In addition a dedicated Parks person as Play Officer will work collaboratively with the 
area office and relevant stakeholder interests including other Dublin City Council 
Departments in forming a Street Play Committee for improving ‘street play’ 
opportunities such as  pilot street play initiative/temp road closures. 
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the home adaptation of (details 
supplied) based on medical grounds. 

The person is waiting for an update on the downstairs bedroom and bathroom, he can 
no longer get up the stairs due to bad health. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance received an application for adaptations from the tenant of 
(details supplied). The clerk of works inspected the unit and the tenant was approved 
for works including ramped access, level access shower and a stair lift. 
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive for a follow up on question 96 of the December 2023 
meeting in relation to the cutting of grass verges. 
 
a) Has it been decided how the €650,000 will be spent? 
b) Will there be a change in policy from last year? 
c) Will verges be mapped or done through request? 
d) Did the meeting take place as planned in January? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In 2023 the Park Service collated a list of locations where grass verges were identified 
by residents and Councillors as being in need of maintenance and these were attended 
to in Q3 of 2023. 
In 2024, funding has been allocated to maintain these locations once a fortnight 
throughout the growing season. In addition, we have identified a number of roads with 
wider margins which we have added to our landscape maintenance contract. 
We can add any other locations that are identified in 2024 but there is no reason to 
expect that there will be many more locations. The evidence is that the majority of 
residents in the City are maintaining their grass margin as residents do in every other 
local authority.  
As previously stated, any locations where residents or communities are in need of 
support by the City Council to cut grass margins can be emailed to parks@dublincity.ie.  
 
Q.80 
COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to prioritise the tag decision 7037289 in relation to double 
yellow lines for Ballygall Road West. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The aforementioned service request is currently going through the statutory process. 
The area engineer has requested it to be prioritised, and once the statutory process is 
completed, the traffic officer will be contacted to prioritise the installation of double 
yellow lines on Ballygall Road West. 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update in relation to Dublin City Council’s role 
in deciding the locations of new bus stops for proposed changes with the City Wide 
Bus Connects role out. 
a) Are residents notified if a bus stop is being placed outside their home? 
b) As it goes through the TAG process how do residents raise concerns/objections  
c) Is a map available of new proposed bus stops per LEA? 
d) Is it the area committee roles to note the new locations or can a review be 
requested? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
a) Dublin City Council Bus and Coach Section have asked the NTA to provide an 
answer regarding notification of residents if a bus stop is being placed outside their 
home.  

b) The TAG section has been requested to complete the statutory consultation process 
with An Garda Síochana for the NTA BusConnects measures and to include the 
measures on the Area Agendas for Councillors information purposes. 
c) Dublin City Council Bus and Coach section have asked the NTA to provide a map 
per LEA of proposed new bus stops.  
d)  Queries in relation to the measures should be forwarded to the NTA. 
 
Q.82 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive provide an update on the following (detail supplied - when 
will his back garden be remedied and cleaned up? This is going on far too long I have 
sent in numerous representations, if funding is needed please use discretionary 
funding. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Arrangements were made with our contractor to cutback all the overgrown trees in 16 
but they were unable to gain access to the property/rear garden on two occasions.  
Estate Management is liaising with the tenant and contractor to agree on a date for the 
works to be carried out.  This will be done as a matter of urgency. 
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the update on (details supplied) housing 
application on exceptional social grounds, can you write out to her please so that we 
can progress housing for herself and her family 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
I can find no record of an application to the Exceptional Social Grounds (ESG) Scheme 
from (details supplied). A copy of the ESG application form including information 
about 
the 
Scheme 
can 
be 
obtained 
by 
downloading 
it 
from 
https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/housing/social-work-section or by phoning the 
Social Work Section on 01 2222233. 
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive has the site (details supplied) been check for fire hazards, 
if it is commercial zoning, how can any residents be housed there? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DFB have received two separate applications for a Fire Safety Certificate, which were 
made through the BCMS for the proposed new use of this building to be used for 
residential purposes. DFB are assessing these applications to determine if compliance 
with Building Regulations has been demonstrated and achieved, and through 
engagement with the technical advisor we hope to be in a position to grant this 
application, once it has been finalised with our administrative processes it will be sent 
to the applicant. 
Additionally the Fire Services Act 1981 & 2003 places responsibility on those in control 
of a premises for the fire safety in the premises. 
In this regard, DFB has written to outline these responsibilities, to those in control of 
this building, and to request that a fire safety management plan is prepared and 
submitted to DFB outlining how they will meet their responsibilities. 
DFB will continue to engage with the persons in control of this building going forward. 
 
Exemptions from Planning exist for properties seeking to house IPA’s and those fleeing 
war in Ukraine, there is no requirement to seek an Exemption Certificate, this matter 
is progressed by the Dept. of Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration 
and Youth. The Zoning of land is not a restriction on the use of property for temporary 
accommodation under these Exemptions. 
 

Q.85 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief can the below be dealt with please detail supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The cycle path arrangements referred to above have been in place for over a decade. 
They are due to be upgraded as part of the National Transport Authorities Bus 
Connects proposals for the Swords to City Centre Route. Further information can be 
found at https://swordsscheme.ie/ . 
 
Q.86 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive the following: 
 
People are living longer than ever and many people still have so much skills they want 
to share within their community and City, Can Dublin City Council please look at 
developing a volunteer strategy to harness this potential where people could volunteer 
to do a few hours a week in their local Sports Centre, Library, Park etc. The knowledge 
many people have in the autumn years of life could be invaluable in bridging the 
intergenerational divide. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin City Council Community & Social Development Section works closely with 
the Dublin City Volunteer Centre that hosts the Public Participation Network (PPN).  
One of the main aims of the Dublin City PPN is to provide a mechanism for the sourcing 
of community representatives for Dublin City Council committees and networks such 
as SPCs.  These roles are voluntary and the PPN actively seeks nominations from 
older people in the community who have a diverse range of skills.   
 
In addition, the Dublin Volunteer Centre also connects individuals looking for 
appropriate volunteer roles to organisations looking to work with volunteers.  
As part of this, older volunteers are encouraged to get involved through events such 
as ‘Experience Counts – Volunteering for People 50 +’.  The next session is taking 
place on Thursday 18 April 2024, from 1:30pm to 2:30pm in Kevin’s Street Library.  
This is a free event, booking in advance is not necessary and participants will find out 
about the latest opportunities in this space.  
 
Dublin City Libraries very much appreciates and encourages the engagement by older 
people with our public libraries. However, we do not see the delivery of library services 
as a suitable role for volunteers. 
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive please ensure good estate management procedures are 
agreed before the allocation of the new apartments at Chapelizod Hill Ballyfermot 
Dublin 10 later in the year. I would have some concerns that due to the very high 
density here that it is essential we start the project off well to ensure all new tenants 
can aspire to and have a good life here. Is it our intention to appoint an approved 
housing body to manage this extensive development? If so can we ensure one is 
chosen who has a good track record in running, maintaining and managing such 
schemes. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This development will be managed by Tuath Housing on behalf of DCC, Tuath are 
required under the Service Level Agreement to provide a Tenant Induction training to 
all new tenants covering the following areas, the tenancy agreement – rights and 
responsibilities of tenant and landlord, how to make a complaint, repairs and 
maintenance, tenant participation, harassment, neighbour disputes, rents, paying 
utility bills. Anti-social behaviour will be managed by both Tuath Housing and the local 

Area Housing staff in line with the DCC anti-social behaviour policy. Tuath Housing 
has many years’ experience in managing schemes for Dublin City Council, along with 
the development and management of their own housing stock. DCC Housing 
management work closely with Tuath Housing in terms of management and 
maintenance of both new and existing housing schemes under their remit. All efforts 
will be made to ensure this new scheme is managed to the highest of standards for 
both tenants and the wider community.  
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive to please give an update of the schedule that will have to 
happen in order to deliver the new long awaited library for the people of Drimnagh / 
Crumlin at the Ard Scoile Enna Site at Crumlin Road, indicative time span, financing 
of the project and when the proposal will go to construction / expected completion. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Indicative Timespan: 
 
Stage 
Timeframe 
Note 
Part 
8 
Planning 
Permission  
5 months, ending 
September 2024 
City Architects intend to lodge the Part 8 
planning application by the end of April. 
Without objections, planning would be 
granted by the end of September 2024. 
Detailed 
Design 
& 
Tender Documentation    
12-16 
months: 
January 2026 
We anticipate that the detailed design and 
preparation of tender documentation could 
take a further 12-16 months, to include a 
consultant procurement process for a 
Design Team (3 months). Subject to grant 
of fire safety certificate and disabled 
access certificates.  
Tender 
Action/Evaluation/Award 
3 
months: 
May 
2026 
Subject 
to 
availability 
of 
suitable 
framework to tender works to.  
Construction       
 
10-14 months: July 
2027 
Indicative construction programme of 9 
months, subject to preferred tenderers 
availability to start on site and lead in times 
for materials. 
 
Funding for this project is included in the current DCC CRES Capital Programme. 
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON  
To ask the Chief Executive Can the Planning Department please look at the following 
(details supplied)  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The relevant planning application number is (details supplied). The compliance 
submission was received in relation to Condition no. 2 on the 19th February 2024 and 
the submission was considered to be in compliance with said condition. This 
submission was dealt with expeditiously by the Transportation Planning Division within 
the statutory time period, with a decision issuing on the 2nd April 2024. 
 
Q.90 
COUNCILLOR PATRICIA ROE  
To ask the Chief Executive to direct Planning Enforcement and the Chief Fire Officer 
to carry out an inspection of the site at Beaumont Road, Beaumont, Dublin 9, formally 
known as Beaumont Drive-In,  

a) To ascertain if the recent fire has caused the building to become a hazard for people 
who can currently access the site, and if the owner should be directed to demolish 
what remains of the building. 
 b) If the site could be properly secured with hoarding to prevent the persistent and 
serious dumping with is taking place at the site. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
DFB is aware that there is deliberate setting of fires at this site. The site consists of 
two derelict buildings on the site with heras fencing surrounding it. The Fire Services 
act 1981 & 2003 places responsibility on the owner of a Building for the fire safety in 
their building. 
DFB wrote to the owner of the site (Urban Life) on 07/03/24 requesting that they act to 
prevent the deliberate setting of fires with the potential for fire spread to adjoining 
properties. 
They responded via email on 13/03/2024 and confirmed that they would demolish the 
buildings and remove combustible material from the site. They also made the point 
that hard hoarding would afford privacy to individuals seeking to set fires. They 
committed to re-inforce the existing heras fencing. 
DFB were informed that work to remove asbestos on the site was to start immediately, 
in March 2024, and it was considered it could take 2 weeks. The rest of the work to 
demolish the buildings and secure the site should take a further 2 weeks. 
DFB will continue to monitor this site 
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR PATRICIA ROE 
To ask the Chief Executive if traffic lights can be installed at the junction of Ardmore 
Drive and Kilmore Road, Artane, Dublin 5. Residents of Admore/Montrose estate 
report severe difficulty in exiting from Ardmore Drive onto Kilmore Road.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The TAG Group has previously recommended that additional pedestrian crossings at 
this junction be provided and it has already been included for consideration on a works 
programme for 2024. 
 
The NTA confirmed the funding allocations for 2024 on the 7th of February 2024. 
Funding of €3,750,000 has been made available for installing pedestrian crossings 
across the Dublin Administrative Area.   
 
The Traffic Section will be meeting with North Central Area Councillors on 3rd of April 
2024 to gather their views on which other locations they wish to prioritise prior to 
finalising the works programme for 2024. 
 
Q.92 
COUNCILLOR PATRICIA ROE 
To ask the Chief Executive to direct the North Central Area management team to 
provide councillors with a Periodic Statement of Account in relation to the Discretionary 
Fund to provide a detailed overview of the financial activities throughout the year 
including allocations, disbursements and transfers.  This will provide the transparency 
to ensure that the funds are being directed towards the intended purpose and highlight 
areas where most allocations are being made.  Currently a statement of account is 
provided at the outset of the financial year when decisions on annual funding of 
projects are being made, with ‘indicative’ costs only provided for under the various sub-
heads but no Statement of Account is ever provided at the end of the financial year 
showing the expenditure and /or carry-over of unspent monies into the following year’s 
fund. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area office is liasing with the Councillor in regards to this request.  

 
 
 
Q.93 
COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive does Dublin city council owns the laneway that starts 
between (details supplied) and if so could dcc arrange to have the lane cleared of 
dumped rubbish. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will arrange for the lane to be cleared of rubbish. 
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update to when the overcrowding extension will be 
built for (Details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Tenant (details supplied) is currently number 68 for an overcrowding extension. 
At present we are currently working through 41 medical priority extensions.  
 
Q.95 
COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive when will the residential parking scheme begin on (Details 
Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
(Details Supplied) is on a Bus Connects Route funded by the National Transport 
Authority (NTA). It was agreed between the NTA and the residents of the road that 
regulated parking would be provided outside their homes. However, the NTA is still 
awaiting a decision from An Bord Pleanála regarding the next steps on this matter.  
Dublin City Council has contacted the NTA for an update, and the Area Engineer is 
awaiting a reply.  Once a reply has been received, the Area Engineer will inform the 
Councillor.   
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR SEAMAS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to contact (Details supplied) to discuss the installation of 
a drive-in for his garden). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The proprietor of (Details supplied) will need to apply to Dublin City Council for 
planning permission to remove the property’s front wall and construct a driveway within 
their front garden. They will also need to consult with Road Maintenance Services 
(roadmaintenance@dublincity.ie) in relation to the provision of a vehicular dishing in the 
existing footpath, outside of their property. Full details in relation to the provision of 
vehicular dishings, including associated costs, are available on Dublin City Council’s 
website.” 
As such planning permission is required for the driveway rather than the vehicular 
dishing in the footpath 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR ALISON GILLILAND 
To ask the Chief Executive to indicate the timeline for the completion of the signalised 
pedestrian system on the Coolock flyover? I’m conscious this is being led by TII and 
involves Fingal CC but many are frustrated at the drip feed progress of the 
infrastructure the at is being put in.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Works are still ongoing but the pedestrian crossing at the Coolock Flyover is expected 
to be operational at the end of quarter two this year.  

 
 
 
Q.98 
COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WATTERS 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can arrange to repair and re-erect/ reinstall removed 
gate at (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Repairs have been completed. 
 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive for Dublin City council to address the following (details 
supplied). 
 
The audit should consider: 
1.      The placement of Double Yellow Lines throughout the Estate, especially on 
corners. Due to illegal parking near corners, there are a number of blind spots for 
residents and through traffic which create dangerous situations. A total audit of where 
Double Yellows are necessary should be carried out and implemented; 
 
2.      The ad-hoc approach to dished footpaths for access to driveways. Footpaths 
throughout the Estate are grossly uneven and difficult to walk on for old people, people 
with mobility issues and people pushing buggies. DCC needs to standardize the 
dishing of footpaths throughout the Estate for access to driveways and ensure there is 
sufficient room on the footpaths for people walking by foot; and 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
(1) It is not current Dublin City Council policy to provide parking restrictions, such as 
double yellow lines, where restrictions are already covered under legislation. Under 
Road Traffic (Traffic and Parking) Regulations 1997 section 36:2:c “A vehicle shall not 
be parked - within 5 metres of a road junction;” 
 
Instances of illegal or obstructive parking should be referred to Dublin Street Parking 
Services, DSPS (email info@dsps.ie or tel. no. 01 602 2500) or an Garda Síochána 
for enforcement. 
 
If residents still feel parking is an issue, they may wish to apply for a pay and 
display/permit parking scheme (https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/parking-dublin-
city-centre/start-parking-scheme). 
 
(2) Dublin City Council manage vehicular dishing’s through an application process. 
Residents must make an application for a vehicular dishing and further details on the 
process are available on the Dublin City Council website: 
https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/transportation/road-maintenance-services/modify-
footpath-allow-vehicular-access 
On successfully applying for a vehicular access the dishing is constructed to Road 
Maintenance Services Construction Standards. 
 
If there are footpaths within Bulfin estate that you would like to focus on, then these 
could be looked at for possible inclusion in our 2025 minor works program     depending 
on condition and available funding.  
 
Q.100 COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm how much in derelict sites levies are owed and 
how much have been paid to DCC by owners of the following sites: Rialto Cinema, 
Dolphins Barn and 47-50 Dolphins Barn Street. Can the Chief Executive comment on 

DCC’s efforts to engage with the owners of these sites and current state of play with 
regard to bringing them back into use? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
355-361 South Circular Road, D8 – Rialto Cinema and 47-50 Dolphins Barn Street, D8 
 
The Derelict Site Levy is 7% of market value. Outstanding levies attract interest at the 
rate of 1.25% per month. Outstanding levies including interest automatically become 
a charge on the land and will remain a charge on the land until all outstanding levies 
have been paid. In all cases the levies have been outstanding since entry on the 
Derelict Sites Register. Attempts to get the owner to render the properties non-derelict 
have been unsuccessful.  
Levies demands, first and final, have issued, in these cases in 2022, 2023 and 2024 
and remain outstanding. The Outstanding Derelict Sites Levies at 2nd April, 2024 are 
as follows; 
D.S.No 
Location 
Entered on the 
Derelict 
Sites 
Register 
Amounts 
outstanding 
928 
355-361 South Circular Road, D8 – 
Rialto Cinema 
06.01.2021 
€836,062.50 
1518 
Dolphins Barn Street, 43, D8 
25.05.2021 
€47,775.00 
1122 
Dolphins Barn Street, 44, D8 
25.05.2021 
€71,662.50 
1123 
Dolphins Barn Street, 45, D8 
25.05.2021 
€62,107.50 
1124 
Dolphins Barn Street, 46, D8 
25.05.2021 
€74,051.25 
1125 
Dolphins Barn Street, 47, D8 
25.05.2021 
€93,161.25 
1126 
Dolphins Barn Street, 48/48a 
25.05.2021 
€83,606.25 
1127 
Dolphins Barn Street, 49, D8 
25.05.2021 
€62,107.50 
1128 
Dolphins Barn Street, 50, D8 
25.05.2021 
€76,440.00 
 
 
 
 
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on Dublin City Council plans for 
improvements to the disused informal carpark space at Goldenbridge Terrace, near 
the canal in Bulfin Estate.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A landscape architect firm have finished working on first draft of concept design for the 
Goldenbridge Terrace gravelled space.  These concept plans have now been reviewed 
by internal Dublin City Council Departments, including South Central Area Office, 
Parks and Landscape Services, Drainage and Roads, with feedback given to the 
landscape architects and the draft plan is currently being revised.   
 
Once design plans are agreed, the next stage includes finalising plans for presentation 
and public display (expected May/June 2024). Once feedback is received and 
considered then detailed design, bill of qualities for landscaping elements and planting 
schedules will be prepared.   
 

It is expected that contractors should be on site for 6 to 8 weeks, in the second half of 
2024. 
 
Q.102  COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive to report on any plans to install a pedestrian crossing at 
the Hole in the Wall on Blackhorse Avenue and to install two speed bumps one either 
side of same at this dangerous location? A very popular spot, at all times, there needs 
to be speed reduction and pedestrian safety features added as a matter of urgency. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Currently there are no plans for a pedestrian crossing at the Hole in the Wall Pub as 
there is no suitable location to provide a controlled crossing. Blackhorse Avenue has 
currently 21 No. speed ramps along its entire length, including at the approach to the 
Hole in the Wall area. Roads where there is no traffic calming are considered priority 
over roads currently traffic calmed.    
 
Q.103 COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive to report on when the residents of Connaught Street, 
Phibsborough, can hope to see the road surface replaced? Temporary pothole repairs 
were recently carried out, but the entire length needs attention. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Road Maintenance Services will inspect the road and will add it to a list to be 
considered for future works programmes based on the road conditions. Please note 
that we prioritise the worse conditions due to the long list and budget limitation.  
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR EIMER MCCORMACK 
To ask the Chief Executive to report on why the speed bumps were removed at Quarry 
Road, Cabra, Dublin 7, and at what cost please? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The speed ramps were removed as they were not located within 8m of a road traffic 
junction and within 5m of a public light stand. 
 
The Area Engineer is assessing the inclusion of further traffic calming measures for 
Quarry Road in 2024. 
 
Q.105 COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive outline if any traffic calming measures are currently being 
considered for (details supplied) particularly around the green due to the speed of 
vehicles. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently 5 No. speed cushions and one raised table on (details supplied). 
According to Traffic Management Guidelines, it is recommended on bus and 
emergency service routes that speed cushions rather than ramps are provided to 
facilitate emergency vehicles and the safety of bus passengers. This allows the buses 
and emergency vehicles to straddle the cushions and proceed unhindered without 
damage to the vehicle. Therefore additional traffic calming is not recommended on 
Tolka Estate. 
 
Q.106  COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive outline if the cause of persistent flooding/pooling of water 
at the junction of Shanliss Way and Santry Avenue as it is a recurring problem 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

We will liaise with our colleagues in the Drainage Dept. to arrange for gullies at this 
location to be jetted which should resolve this issue. 
 
Q.107  COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline if the traffic lights at the junction of (Details 
supplied) have been reviewed as there has been complaints that the sequencing is 
unsafe for pedestrians. Are any further changes being considered? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A review of the operation of the current traffic signals at the junction of (details 
supplied) will be carried out and a response issued once the review has been 
completed  
 
Q.108  COUNCILLOR BRIEGE MACOSCAR 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider the installation of extra lighting at the entrance 
to (details supplied) as the walk from the N2 to the estate is quite dark for bus users 
and pedestrians. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A lighting assessment will be carried out at the entrance to (details supplied) to 
determine whether or not additional lighting may be needed at this location. 
 
Q.109  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive is there an update on the bike bunker scheme? Residents 
have been emailing to request a bike bunker for their street as they would like to have 
secure bicycle parking. I understand that the tender process for bike bunkers was due 
to conclude at the end of Q1 2024. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Road Safety and Micromobility Section is currently working on the Bike Bunker 
scheme tender process. Dublin City Council is planning to launch a competitive 
tendering process to select a contractor who will manage the comprehensive bike 
bunker operations, users and assets. After selecting a contractor, the council aims to 
collaborate with the winning tenderer to provide this service throughout the city and 
establish a goal of having 300 bike bunkers (by 2026), dependent on funding. 
The procurement process for this scheme was scheduled to commence in the first 
quarter of 2024, unfortunately this date was missed and this process is planned to kick 
off in April/ May 2024.  
 
Q.110  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive Could Dublin City Council please clarify the legislation 
around footpath parking and how it is enforced. Recent changes to enforcement have 
caused significant distress to local residents who without notice have had the terms of 
how they use the public realm changed.  
Clarity is needed on footpath parking. I get frequent emails from residents who 
previously parked with two wheels on the path to allow for road users to pass as well 
as leaving enough space for footpath users to pass and are now being clamped. 
Forcing them to park on the road is impacting on traffic and congestion, limiting parking 
spaces and increasing damage to parked cars. What is the current strategy for 
managing this issue? This is a divisive issue and leadership on this would be very 
welcome.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Section 36 (i) of The Road Traffic (Traffic and Parking) Regulations, 1997, outlines that 
parking on a footpath is illegal.  Dublin City Council have to consider the needs of 
pedestrians and wheelchair users to be able to safely navigate the footpath.  DSPS, 

our enforcement contractor, carry out enforcement for footpath parking where vehicles 
have encroached onto the footpath making it unsafe for pedestrians and forcing them 
out onto the road to get past the vehicle.  DSPS also must respond to complaints 
received from the public in relation to footpath parking.  The onus is always on the 
motorist to ensure they park legally to guarantee that they are not enforced. 
 
Q.111  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive could a children at play sign be installed at Grosvenor Park, 
Leinster Road please? Residents have raised this as an issue that was agreed 
previously and hasn’t been fulfilled by DCC. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The South East area engineer has conducted an assessment of Grosvenor Park, 
Leinster Road for Children Crossing (W 142) road sign. Following the assessment, the 
Traffic Advisory Group recommends installing a Children Crossing (W 142) road sign 
at the entrance to Grosvenor Park. A request will be forwarded to the Councils Signage 
Team for installation in the coming weeks. 
 
Proposed location of a Children Crossing (W 142) road sign at the entrance to 
Grosvenor Park. 
 
Q.112  COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the light poles at (details supplied) be painted due to 
bad condition they are in with rust.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The poles on (details supplied) are ESB Network poles and the painting of those 
poles is a matter for ESB. Only the lights, brackets and fuse units on those poles belong 
to DCC. This request will be forwarded onto ESB for their consideration. 
 
Q.113  COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the footpath at (details supplied) be repaired. 
Developers who were accessing an adjacent site damaged the path and put tarmac in 
to fix a number of years ago but the site is now developed and the footpath needs to 
be reinstated. The lip of the shore ud also coming up 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The footpaths on (details supplied), have been examined and there is no indication 
of a damaged footpath. If possible can Councillor O’Rourke provide further details on 
the location of the issue referred to and Road Maintenance Services will arrange for a 
further investigation. 

 
Q.114  COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive that the light poles at (details supplied) be painted. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
There is a combination of ESB Wooden poles and ESB Steel poles on (details 
supplied). These poles are ESB Network poles and the painting of them is a matter 
for ESB Networks. Only the street lights, brackets and fuse units on those poles belong 
to DCC.  
This painting request will be forwarded onto ESB for their consideration. If they agree 
to painting it will only be the ESB steel poles that they would paint. 
 
Q.115  COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding my previous requests for the junction at (details 
supplied) to be improved that, A) the junction be redesigned with safety measures to 
be examined due to how unsafe the junction is. B) To report on Fingal’s liaison and 
plan with Dublin City Council to improve the junction, what the plan is and what the 
timeline is for the improvements?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The junction of (details supplied) is part of the National Transport Authority funded 
Blanchardstown to City Centre Core Bus Corridor Scheme, with designed 
improvements planned for the junction as part of this scheme. The boundaries of 
Dublin City Council, Fingal County Council and Office of Public Works are located at 
this junction. In advance of the Bus Connects Scheme being constructed, Dublin City 
Council and Fingal County Council have been liaising on a regular basis to discuss the 
provision of temporary traffic measures to improve the safe operation of the junction.  
Dublin City Council will be liaising with Fingal County Council again in the near future.  
 
Q.116  COUNCILLOR CAROLINE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive can the pot holes on Shanliss Road please be repaired 
urgently.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Could house address details please be provided to pinpoint locations of potholes. We 
will then arrange for these locations to be inspected and arrange repairs as necessary. 
 
Q.117 COUNCILLOR CAROLINE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive can the damage Road on St. Pappins Green be replaced 
as soon as possible  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
St. Pappins Green carriageway will be put forward for consideration for inclusion in our 
future Carriageway Resurfacing Programmes. In the interim, if house address details 
could be provided to pinpoint specific area of concern, these will be inspected and local 
repairs arranged as necessary. 
 
Q.118  COUNCILLOR CAROLINE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive can the paths on Shanliss Avenue please be 
replaced/repaired urgently. I’ve requested this over the last number of years. There 
has been many falls by older persons on this path.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The footpaths on Shanliss Avenue will be put forward for consideration for inclusion in 
our future Footway Reconstruction Programmes. In the interim, if house address 
details could be provided to pinpoint specific area of concern, these will be inspected 
and local repairs arranged as necessary. 

 
 
 
Q.119  COUNCILLOR CAROLINE CONROY 
To ask the Chief Executive can safety measures be put in place outside lady of 
Victories school urgently as this is a very dangerous junction. As cars park along the 
stretch to the school, cyclists are pushed out into the traffic, children can’t being seen 
if crossing and residents can’t get out of their own homes on that stretch of road.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Our Lady of Victories has applied for a School Zone and is on the School Zone waiting 
list. At the moment the team only has funding to progress School Zone applications as 
part of the Safe Routes to School Round 2 list, funded by the National Transport 
Authority, and is not in a position to progress applications outside of this list. The team 
hopes to be in a position to progress works on the waiting list subject to securing 
alternative funding.  
 
Q.120  COUNCILLOR TERENCE FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond the following regarding traffic lights (details 
supplied) and if he will make a statement on the matter 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The TAG Group has previously recommended that additional pedestrian crossings at 
this junction be provided and it has already been included for consideration on a works 
programme for 2024. 
 
The NTA confirmed the funding allocations for 2024 on the 7th of February 2024. 
Funding of €3,750,000 has been made available for installing pedestrian crossings 
across the Dublin Administrative Area.   
 
The Traffic Section will be meeting with North Central Area Councillors on the 3rd of 
April 2024 to gather their views on which other locations they wish to prioritise prior to 
finalising the works programme for 2024. 
 
Q.121  COUNCILLOR TERENCE FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to respond to the following correspondence regarding traffic 
calming (Details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Based on previous investigations, it was noted that (Details Supplied)has several 
features that contribute to traffic calming, as outlined below: 
- 
(Details Supplied) is short in length and is currently traffic calmed with two 
speed ramps placed at appropriate distances for optimum traffic calming. At 
the junction with (Details Supplied), traffic is calmed by a raised table (large 
ramp). 
- 
The 30 km/h Slow Zone signage covers Hazelwood Drive, signalling the 
reduced speed limit and designating the area as a Home Zone/Slow Zone. This 
alerts drivers that the road is residential and to be cautious of children. The 
signs are prominently displayed at the entrances from Kilmore Road and Ardlea 
Road. 
- 
There is a 30km/h road marking at the entrance of Chanel Rd from Brookville 
Park, accompanied by additional 30 km/h Slow Zone signage when entering 
from Malahide Road. 
- 
 

Instances of erratic driving/speeding should be referred to the Gardaí as a matter for 
enforcement. Transport Advisory Group will raise the Councillor’s concern with the 
Gardaí at the next TAG Meeting. 
Also the residents can apply for a Neighbourhood Traffic Scheme which can be found 
on the DCC website: https://citizenhub.dublincity.ie/en/service/Traffic_Request 
Q.122  COUNCILLOR TERENCE FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update regarding meetings with ((Details 
Supplied)) and if he will make a statement regarding the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The lands at (Details Supplied) are not on the DCC/LDA led Delivery Programme, 
these lands were not acquired from Dublin City Council. The LDA have a Stakeholder 
Engagement Strategy which will apply for this development, as part of that 
engagement process the Area Committee Members, local residents and all other 
stakeholders will be informed as this development progresses.  
 
Q.123  COUNCILLOR TERENCE FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update regarding (Details supplied) and if he will 
make a statement on the matter. 
A) What work has happened on this LAP since January of this year? 
B) What is happening with DCC empty units in the estate. What are the plans for them 
over the short term, medium and long term etc? 
C) Has a meeting took place with the traders to ensure that the plan retains a 
community space where the market can continue to trade in? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A workshop was held with the Central Area and North West Area Committees on the 
12th of March to input into the LAP, the drafting of which has now commenced. Ongoing 
engagement will continue with elected members with further workshops planned post 
local elections. Consultation continues with public and private stakeholders including 
landowners. 
 
Background and supporting research and analysis is being carried out with respect to 
economic viability, population and demographics, and community infrastructure needs.  
Following a procurement process, consultants have now been appointed and are 
completing technical surveys and statutory assessments on behalf of DCC related to 
flood risk and surface water management, Appropriate Assessment and Strategic 
Environmental Assessment.  
 
DCC interests at Slaney Road and Bannow Road Depots will be assessed in the 
context of their future potential to contribute to the overall regeneration of the LAP 
lands in the medium to long term. Shorter term uses are governed by the existing Z6 
employment and Z1 residential zonings until such time as a local area plan is in place. 
 
A meeting was undertaken with representatives of the Honest 2 Goodness Market on 
the 25th of January to discuss the process for preparing the LAP and potential 
opportunities to incorporate market uses in the area. 
 
Q.124  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive to organise a further review and assessment of the signal 
timings at the upgraded Grace Park Road/Collins Avenue junction as local residents 
tell me that there is much great traffic build-up on Collins Avenue since this junction 
was upgraded. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Dublin City Council policy priorities Active and Sustainable Travel modes across the 
city. In line with this policy, in 2023 two extra pedestrian crossings has been added to 
the site and the site now runs an all pedestrian phase.  
The above measures have slightly reduced the green time available to vehicles each 
cycle of the traffic signals (Traffic signal cycle is the time whereby all approaches and 
the pedestrian crossings are serviced before cycle restarts)  
The traffic signals at the junction are controlled by City Council's Urban Traffic 
Management System, SCATS. SCATS is an adaptive traffic control system that 
automatically alters signal timings, in real time, based on traffic demand taken from on 
street vehicle detectors.  
 
In addition, traffic in the city is monitored 24 hours a day, 365 days a year by the City 
Council's Traffic Control Centre, and amendments are made in SCATS in response to 
incidents and problems / congestion as they arise. 
The ITS section will continue to monitor the junction operation and amend traffic signal 
timings and sequences as required, where there is scope to do so. 
 
Q.125  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive confirm if the Dublin City Council Traffic Department have 
considered the installation of a pedestrian phase for crossing Collins Avenue within 
the traffic light installation at the Collinswood entrance and provide a detailed report 
on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The TAG Group has previously recommended that additional pedestrian crossings at 
this junction be provided and it has already been included for consideration on a works 
programme for 2024. 
 
The NTA confirmed the funding allocations for 2024 on the 7th of February 2024. 
Funding of €3,750,000 has been made available for installing pedestrian crossings 
across the Dublin Administrative Area.   
 
The Traffic Section will be meeting with North Central Area Councillors on the 3rd of 
April 2024 to gather their views on which other locations they wish to prioritise prior to 
finalising the works programme for 2024. 
 
Q.126  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm the status/position of the following applicant 
(details supplied) on the Dublin City Council housing list and confirm their application 
reference number. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Older Persons Transfer Housing List, with an application 
date of 23/01/2019, the applicant holds the following position on this list; 
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
1 
31 
 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
 
Q.127  COUNCILLOR NAOISE O’MUIRI 

To ask the Chief Executive provide a detailed update on the installation of the new 
playground at McAuley Park. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parks Service has consulted with local residents and has fed recommendations 
back to the designers.  Revised layout drawings have been circulated to the residents.  
Once agreement is reached contracts will be signed with the suppliers and a timeframe 
for delivery will be fixed. 
 
Q.128  COUNCILLOR JANICE BOYLAND 
To ask the Chief Executive for a full update on the plans to increase the caretaking 
staff in Dublin’s north inner city. The staff are doing the best job they can and I want 
that noted however I can see clearly that they are severely understaffed.  
A. What is the plan to replace staff?  
B. When will the power washing van that’s off the road be finally fixed?  
C. How many staff have we currently in these roles?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council agree with the Councillors comments that the caretaking service is 
a vital part of maintenance. Our Senior Executive Officer, recently employed in this 
role, is currently carrying out a full review of the service, its structure and resources. 
When complete this will be made available to the members. 
 
Q.129  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide a list of all road resurfacing plans 
for the South East Inner City for 2024.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Roads Engineer is finalising a list of roads to be resurfaced in 2024. It is anticipated 
that this list will be made available to Cllr. Byrne for the May Area Council Meeting. 
 
Q.130  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive can please provide a list of all footpath resurfacing plans 
for the South East Inner City for 2024.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Roads Engineer is finalising a list of pavements to be resurfaced in 2024. It is 
anticipated that this list will be made available to Cllr. Byrne for the May Area Council 
Meeting. 
 
Q.131  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to please outline if planning permission is required for 
mobile digital advertising screens at sporting and other events, do the promoters pay 
an advertising fee for these mobile units, if so how much is that fee and who is it paid 
to, and if planning permission is not required how are these units allowed to operate 
during large events in the city. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Class 16 and 16A of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) 
provide a broad suite of exemptions for advertising associated with both sporting and 
non-sporting events. Such advertising signs are considered to be fleeting and 
temporary in nature and do not require a fee to be paid.  
 
Q.132  COUNCILLOR CLAIRE BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide an update on the expansion of the 
Bike Bunkers Scheme, has the tender for an operator been issued; if not when will the 

tender be published; when is it anticipated the new scheme likely to be up and running; 
what funding is in place for city wider roll out and has Dublin City Council applied for 
further funding from the NTA for the scheme. 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Road Safety and Micromobility Section is currently working on the Bike Bunker 
scheme tender process. Dublin City Council is planning to launch a competitive 
tendering process to select a contractor who will manage the comprehensive bike 
bunker operations, users and assets. After selecting a contractor, the council aims to 
collaborate with the winning tenderer to provide this service throughout the city and 
establish a goal of having 300 bike bunkers (by 2026), dependent on funding. 
The procurement process for this scheme was scheduled to commence in the first 
quarter of 2024, unfortunately this date was missed and this process is planned to kick 
off in April/ May 2024.  
Funding from the NTA was not secured and therefore DCC will fund this scheme. 
 
Q.133  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the number of complaints made by people 
living in emergency accommodation in each year 2017-2023, the nature of the 
complaint, the outcome, the name and address of each accommodation unit where the 
complaint arose from and a statement from the DRHE on the inspection regime in 
place and what measures can be taken to ensure the standard of the temporary 
emergency accommodation in Dublin improves. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As of 2023, a complaints report detailing the complaints received by the DRHE is 
published on a quarterly basis on the DRHE website and can be viewed at 
https://www.homelessdublin.ie/info/publications  
The complaints for 2022 have been attached to this response. Prior to 2022, 
complaints were dealt with on a departmental basis, so responses were not recorded 
centrally. 
There are Quality Standards Frameworks in both NGO and PEA accommodation 
which monitor the standards of all emergency accommodation and make targeted 
improvements where necessary.  There is also an independent Inspectorate that 
complete cyclical inspections on all NGO & PEA services.  In addition to this, the DRHE 
standards and facilities teams complete unannounced site visits on a monthly basis 
across all Emergency Accommodation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
