Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 13 April 2026 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
 
  
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 13 April 2026 i Seomra na Comhairle, Halla na 
Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an tArdmheara 
Ray McAdam sa chathaoir 
 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Ammar Ali 
Daryl Barron 
Racheal Batten 
Emma Blain 
Janice Boylan 
Kevin Breen 
Noelle Brown 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Danny Byrne 
Lesley Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
David Coffey 
Anthony Connaghan 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Ray Cunningham 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Daniel Ennis 
Cian Farrell 
Alison Field 
Declan Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
Deirdre Heney 
Jesslyn Henry 
Rory Hogan 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Feljin Jose 
Leslie Kane 
Kourtney Kenny 
Patrick Kinsella 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Aoibheann Mahon 
Ray McAdam 
Séamas McGrattan 
Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
Paddy Monahan 
Carolyn Moore 
Edel Moran 
Darragh Moriarty 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Colm O'Rourke 
Gavin Pepper 
Michael Pidgeon 
Gayle Ralph 
Punam Rane 
Conor Reddy 
Nial Ring 
Supriya Singh 
Karl Stanley 
Malachy Steenson 
John Stephens 
Philip Sutcliffe 
Ciarán Ó Meachair 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Celina Barrett 
Aidan Blighe 
Lorraine Brogan 
Dermot Collins 
Enda Currid 
Rory Flannery 
Anthony Flynn 
Samantha Gill 
Dennis Keeley 
Natalie Leonard 
Chris Manzira 
Mick Mulhern 
Ronan O'Byrne 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Richard Shakespeare 
Brendan O’Brien 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
In memorium 
A minutes silence was observed for Ronnie Delany, a proud Freeman of the City of 
Dublin and one of the greatest figures in Irish sporting history.  His wife of 64 years, 
Joan, was also remembered who passed away two days after Ronnies funeral.  
Sympathies were also extended to former Lord Mayor and City Councillor Caroline 
Conroy and her family on the passing of her beloved mother, Mary Conroy.  
The Lord Mayor also wished to mark the tragic death of Johnny Santos, 27 year old 
Brazilian student, who lost his life following a collision at the junction of Middle Abbey 
Street and O’Connell Street.  
Lord Mayor Awards 2026 
The Lord Mayor reminded Councillors that the closing date for nominations for the 
Lord Mayor Awards is Friday 17th April at 5 p.m.  These awards are about recognising 
the very best of Dublin through the people who show the very best of Dublin with 877 
nominations received to date.  The Awards Ceremony will take place on Saturday 13th 
June 2026. 
Freedom of the City of Dublin  
The Lord Mayor confirmed that the ceremony for the conferral of the Freedom of the 
City on Brenda Fricker will take place on the 28th May 2026 in the Mansion House.  In 
accordance with Brenda’s wishes, it will be a small and intimate occasion, with no 
more than 60 guests in attendance. Due to the limited number of members being 
invited, the Lord Mayor will liaise further with Group Leaders as arrangements are 
finalised. 
City Centre Blockades 
The Lord Mayor addressed the serious disruption caused in the city because of the 
fuel protests and its impacts on commuters, workers, families, businesses and public 
services. Acknowledging the democratic right to protest, Dublin must always remain 
open, accessible and functioning for all who live in it, work in it and rely on it every day 
and he welcomed the restoration of normal movement across the city urging the 
further engagement and proper dialogue take place.  
Camden Yard 
The Lord Mayor advised members that Dublin City Council has now completed the 
sale of Camden Yard, marking an important step forward in unlocking the future 
potential of the Wood Quay lands.  
The City Architects department will shortly begin a series of workshop consultations 
with elected members focusing on shaping our approach to the housing delivery at 
Wood Quay including the potential to retrofit existing structures as well as to build on 
the desktop analysis previously shared at the Mansion House briefing.  Invitations will 
issue shortly.  
 

 
Variation No. 11 to the City Development Plan 
Members were advised that the Planning Department have published proposed 
variation No. 11 to Dublin City Development Plan 2022 to 2028, following the Special 
City Council meeting that took place on March 19th last.  
The Lord Mayor reminded members that the closing date for submissions is 4.30 p.m. 
on Tuesday 28th April and to encourage anyone with an interest to engage with the 
process before that deadline.  
Emergency Motion 
The Lord Mayor confirmed that 4 emergency motions were lodged before the deadline 
this morning and following review the Emergency Motion submitted by Councillor Ray 
Cunningham was accepted.  This motion would be taken at 9.10 p.m. and all other 
emergency motions submitted would be referred to the relevant Strategic Policy 
Committees for further discussion and debate.  
  
 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Declan Flanagan and seconded by Councillor Christy 
Burke that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the 
questions lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the 
questions lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and 
Answers are set out in Appendix A to these minutes. 
 
11 - 80 
 
3 
  Correspondence was received from the following Local Authorities; Westmeath 
County Council, Clare County Council, Longford County Council 
 
• 
Westmeath County Council 
• 
Clare County Council 
• 
Longford County Council 
 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Declan Flanagan and seconded by Councillor Conor 
Reddy that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence listed. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
4 
  To confirm the minutes of the City Council Meeting held on 2nd March 2026 and 
Special Council meeting held on 19th March 2026 
 
The minutes of the City Council meeting held on the 2nd March 2026 and Special 
Council meeting held on the 19th March 2026 having been printed, certified by the 
Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken as read, were signed by 
the Lord Mayor. 
 
 
 
5 
  Vacancies   
 
 
 
(a)   One vacancy on the Dublin North East Regional Health Forum following the 
resignation of Councillor John Stephens. 
 
 
 

 
Councillor John Lyons expressed his interest in the seat but sought further 
information on the committee in terms of amount of meetings that are held. It 
was agreed that this vacancy would be deferred to the May Council Meeting.  
The motion was put and carried unanimously. 
 
 
(b)   One Social Democrat vacancy on the Economic Development and Enterprise 
Strategic Policy Committee following the resignation of Councillor Cian Farrell.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by 
Councillor Janice Boylan that Councillor Jesslyn Henry be 
appointed to the Economic Development and Enterprise 
Strategic Policy Committee.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
(c)   One People Before Profit vacancy on the Housing and Social Inclusion 
Strategic Policy Committee following the resignation of Councillor Hazel de 
Nortúin  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by 
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam that Councillor Conor 
Reddy be appointed to the Housing and Social Inclusion 
Strategic Policy Committee. The motion was put and carried.  
  
 
 
(d)   One People Before Profit vacancy on the Community, Gaeilge, Sport, Arts and 
Culture  Strategic Policy Committee following the resignation of Councillor 
Conor Reddy  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor 
Cat O’Driscoll that Councillor Hazel De Nortúin be appointed to the 
Community, Gaeilge, Sport, Arts and Culture Strategic Policy Committee.  
The motion was put and carried 
 
 
 
(e)   Ministerial nomination to the Board of Beaumont Hospital (North Central Area)  
 
The Lord Mayor called upon Councillor Daryl Barron to make a 
nomination regarding this vacancy.  This was objected to by 
Councillor John Lyons who advised members that there had 
been no discussion with members of the North Central Area 
Committee regarding the nomination of a Councillor for this 
vacancy citing the lack of transparency and democracy.  It was 
proposed by Councillor John Lyons that this vacancy be 
deferred to May Council Meeting to allow a discussion with 
members of the North Central Area take place. Councillor Kevin 
Breen seconded this request.  The Lord Mayor clarified that 
there is no requirement for this to go through the area 
committee, further confirming that any nominee must be a 
member of the North Central Area.  
 
Councillor John Lyons questioned the contribution made by 
previous members of this Board over recent years. It was 
proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron that Councillor Racheal 
Batten be appointed to the Board of Beaumont Hospital. 
Councillor John Lyons objected to this and sought clarification 
on who was a member of this committee previously.  Councillor 
Daryl Barron clarified that he was a member of this board from 
81 - 82 

 
2019 until 2023 and stated that comments made by Councillor 
Lyons were spurious and tarnishing his name. He asked for 
Councillor Lyons to withdraw his comments.  Councillor Lyons 
refused to withdraw his comments, stating that he was not 
referring to Councillor Barron.   
 
Deferral of the vacancy was put to a vote and fell.  A copy of 
this vote can be found in Appendix B to these minutes.  
 
There were two nominations put forward for the position – 
Councillor John Lyons and Councillor Racheal Batten. Prior to 
the vote, Councillor Lyons sought clarification that the other 
nominee was not previously a member of this board to which 
she confirmed she was not.  A roll call vote was taken.  
Councillor Racheal Batten was appointed to the Board of 
Beaumont Hospital.  A copy of the vote can be found attached 
to these minutes in Appendix C.  
  
 
(f)   One vacancy on the Board of the Ringsend Toll Bridge Designated Activity 
Company following the resignation of Councillor Christy Burke (Central Area)  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by 
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam that this vacancy be 
deferred to May Council meeting.  The motion was put and 
carried.   
  
 
 
6 
  Report No. 75/2026 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) in compliance with the 
provisions of Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) 
and in Part 8 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) and in 
compliance with the provisions of the Local Government Act 2001: Provision of 171 
Residential Units at site located in Cherry Orchard, Dublin 10. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daithí Doolan  and seconded by Councillor Mannix 
Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 75/2026 and hereby 
approves the contents as set out therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
7 
  Report No. 74/2026 of the Executive Manager (B. Kelly) - With reference to a 
proposed Extinguishment of the Public Right of Way  over road and footpath at St 
Anne’s Court, All Saints Park, Raheny Dublin 5 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Donna Conney and seconded by Councillor Daryl 
Barron, that we, the Lord Mayor and Members of Dublin City Council, being the Roads 
Authority for the City of Dublin and being of the opinion that the public right of way 
over the section of road and footpath at St Anne’s Court, All Saints Park, Raheny, 
Dublin 5 as shown on the attached drawing number SM-2025-1223 is no longer 
required for public use, extinguish the public right of way in accordance with Section 
73 of the Roads Act 1993.  The motion was put and carried.  
  
 
 
 
8 
  Report No. 78/2026 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Capital Programme 
2026-2028 
 
Enda Currid, Executive Manager introduced the report and provided a 
short presentation.  A copy of this presentation can be found in 
Appendix D attached to these minutes. A lengthy discussion ensued 
83 - 94 

 
around the implementation of the capital programme.  
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded 
by Councillor Séamas McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the 
contents of report no. 78/2026. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
9 
  Report No. 85/2026 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - With reference to the 
Revised Expenditure for 2025 submitted in accordance with Section 104 Local 
Government Act 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Councillor Conor Reddy 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 85/2026 and assents to the 
proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
10   Disposal of Fee Simple and Freehold Interest:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 69/2026 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - With 
reference to the disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and 
Tenant (Ground Rents) (No. 2) Act, 1978.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Donal Barron and seconded by Councillor 
Aoibheann Mahon that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
69/2026 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 80/2026 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - With reference 
to the proposed disposal of the Council’s Fee Simple interest in the property 
known as 55 Prussia Street, City Arms Hotel, Dublin 7.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Donal Barron and seconded by Councillor 
Aoibheann Mahon that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
80/2026 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 81/2026 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - With reference 
to the proposed disposal of the Council’s Fee Simple interest in the property 
known as 96-97 Capel Street, Dublin 1.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor 
Aoibheann Mahon, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
81/2026 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and 
carried.  
 
 
 
(d)   Report No. 82/2026 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - With reference 
to the proposed disposal of the Council’s Fee Simple interest in a site at 209A 
Windmill Road, Crumlin,  Dublin 12.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor 
Aoibheann Mahon, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
82/2026 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and 
carried.  
 
 
 
(e)   Report No. 84/2026 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - With reference 
to the disposal of the Council's Fee Simple and a right of way in a laneway to 
the rear of 47-53 Keeper Road, Crumlin, Dublin 12.  
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor 
Aoibheann Mahon, that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
84/2026 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put and 
carried.  
 
 
11   Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 83/2026 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - With reference 
to the proposed grant of a new lease for a plot of land to the rear of St. 
Laurence O’Toole Recreation Centre, Dublin 1 to the North Wall Community 
Development Project CLG.  
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Janice Boylan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
83/2026 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put 
and carried.  
 
 
 
12   Disposal of Property:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 86/2026 of the Executive Manager (D. O`Connor) - With reference 
to the disposal of a plot of land to the rear of 34 Kilmore Drive, Artane, Dublin 
5.  
It was proposed by Councillor Jesslyn Henry and seconded by Councillor 
Daryl Barron that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
86/2026 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put 
and carried.  
  
 
 
(b)   Report No. 87/2026 of the Executive Manager (D. O'Connor) - With reference 
to the disposal of a plot of land to the rear of 14 Brian Boru Street, Clontarf, 
Dublin 3  
It was proposed by Councillor Jesslyn Henry and seconded by Councillor 
Daryl Barron that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
87/2026 and assents to the proposal outlined therein.  The motion was put 
and carried.  
  
 
 
13   Report No. 76/2026 of the Assistant Chief Executive (C. Barrett) - Quarterly Report of 
the Active Travel Programme Office 
 
Report No. 76/2026 on the agenda was started but not finished and will carry forward 
to the next council meeting.  
  
 
 
14   Report No. 77/2026 of the Assistant Chief Executive (C. Barrett) - Quarterly Report of 
the Traffic Department 
 
Report No. 77/2026 on the agenda was not reached and will carry 
forward to the next Council meeting.  
 
 
 
15   Report No. 66/2026 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Housing Supply 
and Delivery Monthly Update Report 
 
Report No. 66/2026 on the agenda was not reached and will carry 
forward to the next Council meeting.  
 
 
 
 

 
16   Report No. 67/2026 of the Head of Finance (R. Flannery)- Monthly Local Fund 
Statement and Reports as submitted under the EU/IMF Framework 
 
Report No. 67/2026 on the agenda was not reached and will carry forward to the next 
Council meeting.  
 
 
 
17   Report No. 68/2026 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report 
 
Report No. 68/2026 on the agenda was not reached and will carry 
forward to the next Council meeting.  
 
 
 
18   Report No. 65/2026 of the Area Committees - Minutes of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of  February 2026 
 
The Lord Mayor advised members of a motion that was unanimously adopted by the 
South East Area Committee calling on the Lord Mayor to make an apology - the text of 
the Motion is outlined below.  The Lord Mayor wished to acknowledge the concern 
and upset caused to members of Dublin’s Jewish community, to local residents in the 
Rathgar area and to the wider public arising from the flawed process and 
administrative failures surrounding the proposed renaming of Herzog Park.  Those 
failures were accepted by the Chief Executive of the City Council at the time.  While 
apologies have been offered in other instances, it is right that an apology is also 
clearly extended here to the Jewish community of Dublin and to all those affected by 
this controversy.  
The motion listed in the minutes of meeting held on the 9th February 2026 can be 
found below: 
 
Motion 11 from Councillor Mannix Flynn 
This meeting of the south east area of DDC call on the Lord Mayor of Dublin Ray 
McAdam to offer an apology to the Jewish community of Dublin for the flawed manner 
and the administrative failures that happened regarding the process surrounding 
the agreed motion to change the name of Hertzog Park. These administrative errors 
and failures were accepted by Dublin City Council administration and executive and 
an apology was offered to the elected representatives but no such apology was 
offered to the Jewish community and indeed to the people of Dublin who are impacted 
by this controversy, an apology was given to the family and community regarding the 
changing of the name of Diamond Park that’s same apology should’ve also included 
the residence of Rathgar and the Jewish community of Dublin. 
Order: Agreed 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Conor Reddy 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 65/2026. The motion was put 
and carried. 
 
 
 
19   Report No. 52/2026 of the Finance Strategic Policy Committee - Minutes of the 
meeting held on the 15th January 2026, Councillor Séamas McGrattan, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Conor Reddy 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 52/2026. The motion was put 
and carried. 
 
  
 

 
 
 
20   Report No. 62/2026 of the Community, Gaeilge, Sports, Arts & Culture Strategic Policy 
Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on the 2nd December 2025, Councillor 
Darragh Moriarty, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Conor Reddy 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 62/2026. The motion was put 
and carried. 
 
 
 
21   Report No. 63/2026 of the Economic Development and Enterprise Strategic Policy 
Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on the 2nd December 2025, Councillor 
Racheal Batten, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Conor Reddy 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 63/2026. The motion was put 
and carried. 
  
 
 
22   Report No. 64/2026 of the Planning and Urban Regeneration Strategic Policy 
Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on the 25th November 2025, Councillor Cian 
Farrell, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Conor Reddy 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 64/2026. The motion was put 
and carried. 
  
 
 
23   Report No. 79/2026 of the Housing and Social Inclusion Strategic Policy Committee - 
Minutes of the meeting held on 12th January 2026, Councillor Deirdre Heney, 
Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Conor Reddy 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 79/2026. The motion was put 
and carried. 
 
 
 
24   Report No. 71/2026 of the Corporate Policy Group - Minutes of the meeting held on 
5th December 2025, Lord Mayor Ray McAdam, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Conor Reddy 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 71/2026. The motion was put 
and carried. 
  
 
 
25   Report No. 72/2026 of the Protocol Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on the 
9th February 2026, Councillor Deirdre Heney , Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Conor Reddy 
that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 72/2026. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
26   Report No. 73/2026 of the Protocol Committee - Minutes of the meeting held on the 
19th February 2026, Councillor Deirdre Heney , Chairperson 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Conor Reddy 
that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 73/2026. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
 
 

 
27   Topical Issues 
 
The Topical Issue submitted for debate “Blockades on Dublin City Streets” was 
withdrawn.  
 
 
 
28   Motions on Notice 
 
Standing Orders were suspended to allow debate continue on Item No. 8 Report No. 
85/2026 of the Chief Executive - Capital Programme 2026-2028. 
 
 
 
29   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
Emergency Motion No. 1  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray Cunningham and seconded by Councillor Janet 
Horner that  Dublin City Council will require all Heavy Goods Vehicles applying for a 
vehicle permit in 2027 to have a minimum one-star Direct Vision Standard rating; a 
minimum two-star rating in 2028; a minimum three-star rating in 2029; a minimum 
four-star rating in 2030; a minimum five-star rating from 2031 onwards. The star rating 
to be calculated using the same system used for Heavy Goods Vehicles in London. 
 
The motion was put and carried.  It was agreed to refer this motion to the Mobility and 
Public Realm Strategic Policy Committee for further discussion.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
  

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY 13th APRIL 
2026 
 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide the average response time of Dublin Fire Brigade 
ambulances and paramedics for clinical status 1 ECHO and clinical status 1 DELTA 
by end of 2023, 2024, 2025, in tabular form; and if he will make a statement on the 
matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Ambulance response times are affected by a number of issues. The main influences 
are Capacity versus Demand, the ability of the National Ambulance Service to provide 
assistance and delays at Emergency Departments for ambulance crews handing over 
patients into their care. As our population is ageing and growing the demand on 
ambulance services are increasing. An increase demand on ambulance services also 
means an increase demands on Emergency Departments services. 
 
There has been year on year increase in the demand for ambulance services in Dublin 
and in the rest of the country. Dublin Fire Brigade works closely with and are dependent 
on the assistance of our colleagues in the National Ambulance Service in managing 
the demand for emergency ambulance services in Dublin.  
 
Echo (Purple) calls are calls for immediately life-threatening incidents, respiratory or 
cardiac arrest. Echo calls account for 1-2% of all calls. Delta (Red) calls are calls for 
life threatening incidents. Delta calls account for 42% of all calls (in 2025). 
 
Of the different acuity levels of ambulance calls Echo though to Omega, Echo calls are 
the one acuity level where response times are known to have a direct influence to 
patient outcome.   
 
In addition to an emergency ambulance, Dublin Fire Brigade responds a fire appliance 
to Echo incidents. This is for speed of response and the need for additional Paramedics 
to manage a respiratory or cardiac arrest.  
 
 
Echo Ambulance in 
attendance 
in 
18min59secs 
% 
Delta Ambulance in 
attendance 
in 
18min59secs 
% 
2023 
79 
 
35 
2024 
80 
 
37 
2025 
82 
 
35 
 
 
Echo 
Paramedic 
response 
in 
7min59secs 
% 
Delta 
Paramedic 
response 
in 
7min59secs 
% 
2023 
56 
2023 
12 
2024 
55 
2024 
10 
2025 
57 
2025 
11 
 
 
 

Q.2 
COUNCILLOR DARRAGH MORIARTY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a breakdown of the number of 3 and 4 bed 
homes allocated by DCC broken down by allocation area (Area J, K, L etc.) during the 
2020-2025 period 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Years
Property Size Area J  Area K   Area L   Grand Total
2020
3 Bed
47
32
6
85
4 Bed
6
2
8
Total 2020
53
34
6
93
2021
3 Bed
37
23
39
99
4 Bed
1
3
4
Total 2021
38
23
42
103
2022
3 Bed
35
12
20
67
4 Bed
2
2
1
5
Total 2022
37
14
21
72
2023
3 Bed
41
34
20
95
4 Bed
4
1
1
6
Total 2023
45
35
21
101
2024
3 Bed
64
29
32
125
4 Bed
5
3
2
10
Total 2024
69
32
34
137
2025
3 Bed
56
16
8
80
4 Bed
4
4
Total 2025
60
16
8
84
Grand Total
302
154
132
588
 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, noting the reply to Question number 82 at the March City 
Council meeting to ask the Chief Executive to detail where any Government 
Department directs how any of the LPT collected in Dublin City Council is to be spent, 
how much funding was directly allocated prior to LPT being introduced and the net 
available to Dublin City Council in 2024 and 2025 after all LPT incomes collected in 
the Dublin City Council area were so predetermined by Government Departments  and 
to detail how much LPT Dublin City Council itself paid in LPT in those years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The LPT allocations (post variation) for Dublin City Council was €82.4m in Y2024 and 
€85.75m in Y2025.  The allocation of self-funding of the LPT is determined by a circular 
issued by the Department of Housing Local Government and Heritage annually. In 
Y2024 this stood at €54.5m and €57.6m for Y2025. 
 

 
 
The self-funding is split between revenue & capital elements.  The revenue element is 
split between Housing & Roads.  The capital element is solely for Housing. 
 
For Housing Revenue, it funds services such as AHB Leasing, Long Term Leasing and 
the Loan Subsidy Scheme.  For Roads Revenue it has been directed to fund the Roads 
Maintenance Programme since the introduction of the LPT in Y2024.  For Housing 
Capital, it has been used to fund Construction and Refurbishment. 
 
In Y2024 Dublin City Council paid €1.9m in LPT and €1.7m in 2025. 
 
Q.4  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to ask Dublin port management details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Public Art Officer will carry out an inspection of the statue referred to and 
incorporate cleaning into any maintenance required. 
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive details supplied.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services carried out cleaning at details supplied on 12th March.  
 
Q.6  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
           To ask the Chief Executive details supplied.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The roadworks operations are being carried out Uisce Éireann. Therefore, the issue 
raised in the above question regarding the traffic management is the responsibility of 
Uisce Éireann and their contractor GMC Utilities Group Limited to address and 
implement while these works are being carried out. We will raise this with Uisce 
Éireann for their direct attention and action.   
 
LPT Allocted
96,970,371
100,900,493
LAF -15%
14,545,556
-       
15,135,074
-       
LPT Allocation (post Variation)
82,424,815
85,765,419
Self Funding
Housing Revenue
28,775,845
31,821,690
Roads Revenue
5,780,600
5,780,600
Housing Capital
20,000,000
54,556,445
20,000,000
57,602,290
Discretionary LPT
27,868,370
28,163,129
Total LPT Allocation 
82,424,815
85,765,419
Y2025
Y2024
Analysis of LPT Allocation - From Appendix 2 in Budget Book

Q.7 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update if any on details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Response will issue directly to Councillor. 
 
Q.8 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if a mobile app for Citizen Hub can be created to provide a 
more user-friendly platform for citizens to report issues etc. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Citizen Hub is a fully responsive web application designed to work on all devices via a 
standard web browser. The development of native mobile applications would result in 
significant additional cost and ongoing maintenance, without delivering functionality 
beyond what is already available through the existing web platform. At present, there 
is no plan to develop a dedicated mobile app for Citizen Hub. 
Our focus remains on expanding the range of services available on Citizen Hub and 
on continuously enhancing the overall user experience for all citizens. The majority of 
online forms include a user experience rating mechanism which allows users to provide 
feedback that is used to help improve the overall user journey.  
 
Q.9  
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what follow up was carried out after a commitment was 
made at a previous Council meeting about providing casual trading locations within 
parks for mobile coffee/food vendors even on a trial basis? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Concessions within parks are facilitated by way of public tender and only offered where 
there is sufficient footfall and therefore a good prospect of supporting a local enterprise. 
However, the best chance of a business taking up such an offer in a park where the 
footfall is marginal from a commercial perspective would be if DCC provides the 
container/cabin unit which means the operator would have minimal capital costs. If the 
councillor has a particular park in mind, we will consider tendering for coffee/food 
vendors. 
 
 
Q.10 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on any malicious incidents/criminal damage to 
Council owned property and to provide details of any follow up, prosecutions etc. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The is a lot of illegally dumped waste i.e. separate from the domestic waste collection, 
being removed from our flat complexes on a regular basis by the Caretaking Service.   
 
The total volume for 2025 is 4,756 tonnes.  The total disposal cost for illegally dumped 
waste was €359,882 in 2025.  The disposal of this bulky waste is now operating under 
a new Framework and so in 2026 may cost more. 
 
We do not record incidents of vandalism on reactive maintenance and repairs works. 
Anecdotally it would be our view that this is not an issue in occupied homes. It is our 
view that this is a more common, and more recent occurrence on void / vacant homes. 
We have only just recently started recording incidents of vandalism on vacant or void 
properties. In total 15 units have been damaged since late 2025.   
 
In relation to graffiti, the instances within housing complexes are in low nos. with both 
northside and southside crews reporting single digits in 2025.   

 
It is not possible to provide accurate information on malicious /criminal damage to 
Waste Management Property such as Litter Bins as this information is not recorded 
in this manner. Litter bins reported as damaged are not classified by a cause or 
suspected cause of that damage. The damage could simply be as a result of normal 
wear and tear or accidents etc. 
 
All Graffiti would be considered malicious/criminal damage and since the Citizen Hub 
system went live for the reporting of Graffiti on 11/10/2022 we have received a total of 
3,793 reports of Graffiti from the public to date all of which would have to be removed 
at a cost. 
Similarly illegal dumping would be considered as a criminal act and since the option to 
report this activity went live on our Citizen hub on 26/10/2022 the Council has received 
a total of 44,367 reports of illegal dumping to date. Over this same period we issued 
4692 litter fines in relation to offences committed. 
The costs for the removal of both illegally dumped materials and the removal of graffiti 
would run into many millions of euros. 
It is not possible to provide accurate figures for these costs over the same period of 
time at present but if the Councillor is interested, we can attempt to gather this 
information and provide it at a later date. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Sadly, over the years, there have been malicious incidents in relation to City Council 
owned property and equipment. Any incident is investigated by Local Management 
together with the Health and Safety Officer. Safety of staff is paramount in these 
circumstances. Post investigation, it is decided if the Gardai are notified.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We have installed a number of BoxUp units in the following parks in the city: - 
 
Eamonn Ceannt Park 
Mount Bernard Park 
Ringsend Park 
Walkinstown Park 
 
These solar powered units comprise lockers that store sports equipment. The 
equipment can then be borrowed by users who have downloaded the BoxUp app on 
their phone for free. The unit in Mount Bernard Park had all 6 locker door removed 
which led to it being unusable for a number of months last year. It has now been 
repaired.  The unit in Walkinstown Park has had wooden side panels removed however 
it is still usable.  
 
Public Domain regularly responds to requests to remove graffiti in public areas. We do 
not get any reports identifying those responsible for the damage. Area Office priority is 
to remove the marks as promptly as possible.  
 
There were 929 Sq metres of Graffiti removed from DCC assets in the South East Area 
from 1st Jan 2026 to date.  
No perpetrators were identified for any of these defacements, and no prosecutions 
were initiated. 
 
Property Management have had one incident where bolt cutters were used to break 
into the old School House building on School Street, Dublin 8.  The site was then 
illegally occupied by squatters.  The Gardai were called and the squatters were 
removed from the building and criminal charges were brought against them. 

 
Q.11  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for a details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Housing Department will investigate this matter, and an inspection will be carried 
out within a week and the housing team will follow up on the issues outlined by the 
Councillor.  
 
Q.12  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he would prepare a response to the issues submitted with 
this question relating to Solar Panels in an Architectural Conservation Area. Details 
supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
All the houses on details supplied are included in the Record of Protected Structures. 
The area is not an Architectural Conservation Area but is zoned Z2 in the DCC 
Development Plan 2022-2028 which aims to protect the amenities of residential 
Conservation Areas. 
 
Exempted development 
Planning permission is not necessarily required to install solar panels on the roofs of 
Protected Structures. Owners of Protected Structures can seek a declaration under 
Section 5 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 from their local authority to clarify 
if specific proposed solar works are exempted development. 
 
DCC Conservation Section will approve the installation of solar panels as being 
exempted development if the installation does not materially affect the character of the 
Protected Structure as long as the installation is not visible from the public realm and 
that sufficient information in relation to their installation is provided for review by the 
Conservation Section. 
 
Planning Permission, however, will be required, if the installation, particularly on a 
front-facing roof, alters the character of the Protected Structure or is visible from the 
public realm. 
 
It is anticipated that the new Exempted Development Regulations will address the 
issue of solar panels on protected structures, and we await their publication this year. 
 
Q.13 
COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if road markings and lines on Weavers Square could be 
repainted. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The location will be inspected in the coming days. Any requirement repainting of the 
road markings and lines will be initiated with-in 30 working days of the Council Meeting 
of the 13th of April 2026. 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the number of units which have been retrofitted in the past 
five years up to B2 standards, broken down by area and dwelling type. 
 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Regeneration Response: 

Project 
Area 
Status 
Number of 
Units 
Dwelling 
Type 
BER 
27 
Ballybough 
House, 
Dublin 1 
Central 
Completed 
2022 
1 
Flat 
A3 
Constitution 
Hill, Phase 
1, Dublin 7 
Central 
Commenced 
onsite 
August 2025 
23 
Flat 
Min. B2 
A pilot study was undertaken by Dublin City Council’s City Architects Division to 
amalgamate two flats on the ground floor of Ballybough House to provide a three 
bedroom four-person home.  
DCC are currently onsite at ConstitutionHill Phase 1. This project is a mix of deep 
retrofit, extension of existing housing block and new build. The existing housing block 
consisted of 30 flats, and these will be amalgamated to provide for 23 new homes. 
They are due for delivery in mid-2027   
 
Housing Maintenance reply: 
925 housing units have been retrofitted in the past five years up to B2 standards 
under the Energy Efficiency Retrofitting Programme, breakdown as follows: 
Area: 
North West 
Area 
North Central 
Area 
Central 
Area 
South Central 
Area 
South East  
Area 
374No. 
45No. 
77No. 
295No. 
134No. 
 
Dwelling Type: 
End Of Terrace 
Mid Terrace 
336No. 
589No. 
 
251 units were retrofitted in the Voids Section up to and above a B2 standards under 
the Energy Efficiency Retrofitting Programme, breakdown as follows: 
Row Labels 
Central 
North 
Central 
North 
West 
South 
Central 
South 
East 
Grand 
Total 
Apartment 
6 
2 
4 
5 
4 
21 
House 
19 
77 
101 
30 
3 
230 
Grand Total 
25 
79 
105 
35 
7 
251 
 
 
Q.15  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what the policy is in relation to the replacement of wrought 
iron lampposts with new ones? I would like an explanation of the general policy of 
preserving older lampposts. Specifically, there is a wrought iron one on Elizabeth 
Street that was replaced with a modern LED one causing two issues: getting rid of a 
heritage feature of the street and being too bright for a small street. Is it possible to 
restore the older lamppost here and to reduce the luminosity of the LED bulb so that it 
doesn't create such a "security light" effect? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
From reviewing the photos provided the older column is still in situ and has not been 
replaced. 
The older column is, what is called, a standard housing pole and is not heritage in 
nature. The old bracket, that the lantern mounted onto, had a small decorative element 

to it in the form of a scroll. This scroll bracket was corroded and was replaced with a 
more standard type of straight outreach bracket along with a replacement LED lantern. 
A number of these scroll brackets on Elizabeth Street have already been replaced, as 
needed, with the standard straight outreach brackets. 
The scroll brackets, while slightly decorative, are not considered to be of heritage value 
as the existing columns and lanterns are standard. 
Regarding the new LED lantern, this was installed to replace an existing lantern that 
was end of life. This old type of lantern is no longer available to procure so it was spot 
replaced with the LED lantern. The luminosity of the replacement lantern will be 
assessed and replaced with a lower luminosity lantern if required. 
 
Q.16  COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the following lighting issues, some of 
which are outstanding for several months: 
PBL639996550 
PLC0000036749  
PLE0000036751 
PBL792284449 
PBL804492228 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The status of repairs against each reference number above is summarised below. 
 
PLC0000036749;  
Public Lighting repairs have been carried out  
However, the ESB supply needs to be reconnected,  
and ESB has been requested to attend to this as soon as possible. 
 
PLE0000036751;  
It has been repaired and should be operating normally now. CLOSED 
 
PBL792284449;  
It has been repaired and should be operating normally now. CLOSED 
  
PBL804492228;  
It has been repaired and should be operating normally now. CLOSED 
 
PBL 639996550;  
Parking/access issues have prevented repairs from being carried out on this light. 
It is being re-scheduled for repair outside normal working hours.   
 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the number of car parking spaces that are taken into 
account in applying Commercial Rates at details supplied and if he is satisfied that 
the correct application of such rates is being applied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Tailte Éireann is the statutory body with responsibility for the valuation of properties. 
Dublin City Council must levy Rates based on the valuation set by Tailte Éireann. Tailte 
Éireann valued the address details supplied and there were 94 car parking spaces 
considered as part of the overall valuation. Tailte Éireann noted that the property at 
details supplied was valued based on the entirety of the site and not just on its 
individual component parts.  
 
Q.18  COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 

 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the drainage gully problems in the lane 
between Moeran Road and Percy French Road. The emergency drainage team 
inspected the gullies here in February and were able to divert water but not fix the 
underlying problem. Has the further investigation and assessment, that they said was 
necessary, taken place? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Thank you for your correspondence regarding the gully problem between Moeran 
Road and Percy French Road. 
 
Dublin City Council’s Environmental Waters Office is responsible for the operation and 
maintenance of the surface water sewer network. The Maintenance Unit attended 
above location on 10th and 11th February and partially cleared a blockage caused by 
unauthorised discharge of concrete into the gully. The Construction Unit will carry out 
a gully exchange in Q2 2026 to resolve the issue. 
 
If you have a further query or wish to make direct contact with team for this or a similar 
issue, please email cqsurfacewater@dublincity.ie and we will respond accordingly. 
 
Q.19  COUNCILLOR JANICE BOYLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive, why when we normally have 3 choke cars to service all of 
Dublin. How long more it will take for two of these to be repaired and how long exactly 
are we awaiting delivery of the parts. Currently we have only one choke car in operation 
for the entire Dublin area. And after the heavy rain we have been inundated with calls. 
What is keeping the other 3 choke cars that have been ordered, no clear timeline and 
I am told maybe this year. This is not good enough, we are running a service that can't 
possibly manage the amount of call outs with one choke car. I am also concerned that 
when they arrive they will be delayed further due to needing the hoses attached etc. I 
am requesting that the chief executive takes this very seriously and gets me a clear 
and speedier timeline for when the choke car service will be fully operational again. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance has three new vehicles on order for the Choke Car service under 
the new Corporate Fleet Management Contract.  It is estimated that these will be 
delivered and operational before the end of Q2.  The three new vehicles and machinery 
will considerably increase reliability thereby reducing the amount of time the vehicles 
are out of service. 
 
In the meantime, all three Choke Cars are currently in operation.  There is a heavy 
demand for the service, but this can be met when all three are operational.  In the event 
of breakdown or malfunction it can take anything from one day to two weeks depending 
on availability of parts.   The service will be kept under review and a case will be made 
for an additional vehicle if considered necessary. 
 
Q.20  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the financial and other contribution of the Council towards 
the Liffey Swim and the Half Marathon and what conditions are attached to that 
sponsorship? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This information is based on events that took place in 2025. Negotiations for 2026 are 
still ongoing. 
  
Half Marathon: 

• 
€45,000 contributed from Dublin City Council’s annual budget 
• 
Dublin City Council identified as an official partner with logo featured 
prominently in all branding, infrastructure and social media posts. 
• 
Dublin City Council must be satisfied that the race route occurs within the 
Dublin City Council functional area and must be consulted in writing if the 
organiser wishes to change the race route. 
• 
100 crowd control barrier covers with DCC logo to be displayed prominently 
along the route.  
• 
An allocation of tickets for Dublin City Council, Dublin City Council Community 
Groups and North East Inner City groups.  
• 
Access to the control room on the day.  
• 
Speaking opportunity for the Lord Mayor.  
Liffey Swim:  
• 
€10,000 given as sponsorship from DCC 
• 
Event title to be “Dublin City Liffey Swim, Proudly Supported by Dublin City 
Council 
• 
DCC logo prominently featured across all print and online media 
• 
50 crowd control barrier covers to be displayed prominently along the route. 
Q.21  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide a timeline as to when the audit will 
take place for details supplied. Residents are deeply concerned for safety as the 
situation remains very problematic. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The request for traffic calming measures at details supplied has been added to the 
list along with other locations in the North Central Area and will be re-assessed at the 
end of the year for potential inclusion in the 2027 Minor Works Programme.  
  
The minor works list for 2026 is already at capacity for Works that can be carried out 
in the year.  In the meantime, any issues relating to speeding, illegal parking or driver 
behaviour should be reported directly to An Garda Síochána for enforcement.  
  
Regarding long term commuter parking, the appropriate measure to deal is the 
introduction of a Pay & Display and Permit Parking Scheme.  
 
If residents would like to apply for a Pay & Display and Permit Parking Scheme, details 
of the criteria can be found on the DCC website:   
  
https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/parking-dublin-city-centre/start-parking-scheme  
 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a breakdown of the total expenditure over the 
past five years on (a) insurance payouts and claims arising from trips, slips, and falls 
in public areas, and (b) pavement and footpath inspection, maintenance, and repair 
works. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Law Department Response: 
(a) I set out below a breakdown of the total expenditure over the past five years on (a) 
insurance payouts and claims arising from trips, slips and falls in public areas.  My 
colleagues in the Environmental & Transportation Department will provide the 

information regarding pavement and footpath inspection, maintenance and repair 
works. 
 
TOTAL EXPENDITURE OVER PAST 5 YEARS RE TRIPS, SLIPS AND FALLS. 
  
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
2025 
Footpath 
& 
Slip/Trip 
€ 
5,313,212 
€ 
7,000,050 
€ 
6,030,929 
€ 
7,548,842 
€ 6,343,690 
 
 
 
Environment & Transport Response: 
(b) The total expenditure by Road Maintenance Services on inspection, maintenance 
and repair works over the last five years (2020 to 2025) is broken-down as follows: 
Year 
     Expenditure 
2025 
         €23,380,416  
2024 
         €26,863,665  
2023 
         €26,126,686  
2022 
         €17,246,547  
2021 
         €17,794,910  
2020 
         €11,536,180  
Total  
       €122,948,404  
 
Q.23  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive who represented Dublin City Council at this Round Table 
event regarding Congestion in Dublin, if any Councillors were invited to attend and if 
not - why not? Details supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council was represented by Richard Shakespeare, Chief Executive, Celina 
Barrett, Assistant Chief Executive, Transport and Public Realm and Brendan O’Brien, 
Head of Technical Services.  No Councillors were invited and other than the Minister, 
Dara O’Brien, there were no political representatives in attendance.  The Round Table 
event was a meeting of officials to examine what operational measures could be taken 
to improve congestion in Dublin.  No matters of Policy were discussed or agreed. 
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive could they install clear signage in Oscar Square indicating 
the leash requirements and off-leash times to help ensure compliance and public 
safety? Under the current byelaws, dogs in Oscar Square must be leashed outside 
designated off-leash hours. However, there is currently no signage to inform dog 
owners of these requirements. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please see below location of signage which lists the requirements. 
 

 
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council has considered whether the planning 
permission for The Eight Building in Newmarket Square, which included provision for 
a community market and artist studios, is being fully implemented; and if the Council 
can confirm what measures, if any, are in place or planned to ensure that the original 
planning intent for the market space is protected and delivered to the community. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Planning permission for The Eight Building (Reg. Ref. 3321/17, as amended by 
3672/19 and 3747/20) includes explicit conditions requiring the provision and retention 
of both the indoor market space and the artist studios. Condition 4(a) and 4(c) state 
that no change of use may occur without a prior grant of planning permission. 
Two separate applications seeking to change the approved indoor market to retail use 
were refused by An Coimisiún Pleanála (Refs. 3017/22 and 4346/24) on the basis that 
the proposed use would undermine the SDRA objective for a vibrant, mixed-use 
quarter. No further applications have been submitted to date. 
Should evidence arise that the market space or artist studios are not being provided 
or are operating contrary to the permitted use, the matter should be brought to the 
attention of Planning Enforcement for investigation and appropriate enforcement 
action where non-compliance is confirmed. The existing planning conditions remain in 
force and provide the mechanism to ensure that the original planning intent for these 
community-focused uses is protected and delivered. 
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR SÉAMAS MCGRATTAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Response will issue directly to Councillor. 
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR SÉAMAS MCGRATTAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to create a database of all playgrounds or play areas in the 
City on the Councils website, with relevant info on opening times etc. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Council is currently updating its website and the playgrounds will be listed as 
 part of this update. Playgrounds in parks are subject to park opening hours.  
 

Q.28  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the proposed redevelopment of East Timor 
Park/Liffey Gaels Park and is DCC still committed to marking the life of Tom Hyland, 
details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Under the Council’s policy on commemorations & naming, in order to be 
commemorated a person must have died twenty years previously or have reached the 
centenary of their birth. As the late Tom Hyland (1952-2024) does not meet this 
criterion, an amendment to the plaque cannot be considered. 
 
There is no provision in the City Council Capital programme for East Timor Park 
however improvements can be carried out in the annual Parks Works Programme if 
there is a programme of work agreed. The undersigned should be contacted to discuss 
any proposals. 
 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive when will the astro be reinstated in Cherry Orchard Park, 
the only astro pitch in Cherry Orchard was removed in December and the decision was 
to be reviewed in the New Year. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks, Biodiversity and Landscape Services are in Pre-Part 8 planning for the Cherry 
Orchard Park Renewal. The upgrading of an existing astro pitch is proposed as part of 
the plan. We are currently working on a programme for the delivery of the park renewal 
in phases that we will share with the Area Committee when available. 
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to carry out repairs or resurface Tyrconnell Rd, Inchicore.     
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Thank you for your correspondence, in response to your query, Road Maintenance 
has inspected the road surface on Tyrconnell Road and in general the condition does 
not warrant a complete overlay. However, there are some locations that require 
attention and two of these will be added to our works list for repair along with pothole 
repairs and some further locations passed to the relevant utility companies to carry out 
their permanent reinstatements. 
 
I can also report that earlier this month the speed cushions outside the Oblate Church 
were resurfaced. At tender stage, the inbound footpaths between this church and 
No.18 are being proposed for 2026 footpath contract due to commence in the 
summertime. I have been informed that Active Travel have plans for an upgrade in 
2028 to Tyrconnell Road.  
                                                                                                                                                                            
Q.31  COUNCILLOR DAITHÍ DOOLAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, following the recent announcement by the Department of 
Housing about funding for acquisitions, can DCC management clarify if DCC will be 
reestablishing the Tenant in Situ Scheme, what is the TIS budget for 2026? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following the Department of Housing’s announcement and the publication of Circular 
Housing 07/2026, Dublin City Council can confirm that Tenant In Situ acquisitions will 
continue in 2026, but only as a strict last resort measure to prevent homelessness.  
A TIS purchase can only proceed where a HAP or RAS household has a valid Notice 
of Termination, the property has been in receipt of HAP or RAS for at least 2 years, 

and all other options have been exhausted, and there are minimal refurbishment 
works required to the property. Each case must be certified as a genuine 
homelessness-prevention intervention. 
TIS acquisitions must be funded from DCC’s overall allocation under the Social 
Housing Second-Hand Acquisitions Programme, for Dublin City Council which is 
€110.7 million.  
Funding for TIS will be managed within this budget allocation and assessed on a 
case by case basis. 
 
Q.32  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, that the path outside details supplied can be repaired as 
per attached photo. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An Enquiry (ref. 11195416) has been created in relation to the above request for a 
footpath repair outside details supplied. Road Maintenance Services will expediate a 
repair to the footpath over the next 2 months. 
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR JANICE BOYLAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, to immediately address the issues regarding the broken 
toilets and showers in Fairview Park. These facilities haven't been in operation for 
nearly two years. This is highly unacceptable and needs to be rectified immediately. 
These pitches are used all the time, and these facilities should be operational. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There has been a problem recently with a water pump which failed, and a replacement 
has been ordered.  The pump supplier has been contacted again to expedite delivery. 
I am surprised to hear that there have been issues here going back two years. If the 
club in question would like to contact me directly, I will arrange to meet them and review 
the issues raised.    
 
Q.34  COUNCILLOR JANICE BOYLAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, to provide an update as to when the redevelopment of the 
playground in Courtney Place will be delivered. This community has done tremendous 
work advocating what their needs are. This playground redevelopment was promised 
to them and has still not been delivered yet. I will need an exact timeline of delivery in 
my response. Please do not provide me with information that I already know regarding 
engineer reports etc. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance can confirm that the redevelopment of the playground is 
scheduled to begin in Q3 2026.  Housing Maintenance recognises and appreciates the 
hard work and cooperation of the residents in Courtney Place. 
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR JANICE BOYLAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, for an update on the provision of the installation of the 
pencils and traffic management plan for Cowper Street outside of St. Gabriels National 
School. As far as I am aware this was to be implemented and hasn't been. Is there a 
reason? What is the timeline? This road is very dangerous and very narrow with the 
way cars park all the way along both sides of the road. Was a decision to not go ahead 
made and I am just not aware of it? I would like a full run down if possible. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks, Biodiversity and Landscape Services received a tender for the construction of 
a Green School Zone on Cowper Street as per the plan shared in November 2025. 

Pending a funding review, it is anticipated that construction will take place during the 
school holidays of this Summer, 2026. 
 
This project brings together the Greening Stoneybatter programme and the Safe 
Routes to School initiative to deliver a Green School Zone with key design objectives 
to: 
• 
Improve safety on Cowper Street so that active travel (cycling, walking, 
wheeling, and scooting) to and from school is encouraged. 
• 
Enhance the green environment to support better neighbourhood air 
quality. 
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR JANET HORNER 
To ask the Chief Executive what progress has been made regarding the empty site at 
Ryder's Row that has been earmarked for housing, whether AHBs have been 
approached and when plans will be brought forward for the site? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The current position is that the site at Ryders Row, which was developed in early 2023, 
remain as a meanwhile use green lung in its urban setting, as it provides a wildlife 
habitat, continues to enhance natural systems, while improving the overall health and 
vista for local communities, urban dwellers and visitors alike.  Dublin City Council are 
still assessing options for the future use of this site.  
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can ensure an illegal short-term rental is investigated 
Details Supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Planning Enforcement Section will open an enforcement file and initiate an 
investigation into the matters raised by the Councillor. Once an inspection has taken 
place, the Councillor will be updated as to whether or not enforcement action is 
warranted. 
      
Q.38  COUNCILLOR SÉAMAS MCGRATTAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what affects has the war in Iran had on the Councils budget. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Iran War is a recent geo-political event and the impact is, to date, evident in the 
gas, fuel and electricity markets. Below in the OGP market update on these costs. We 
will continue to monitor costs and their impact on an on-going basis. 
 
LA METERED Electricity contract Position 
The Electricity contract commenced on 1st January 2026 and will expire on 31st 
December 2028. 
The agreed contract strategy with up-to-date hedging positions taken is set out 
below; 
• 
March 26 – 50% Hedged 
• 
April – October 26 – 25% hedged 
• 
November 26 – April 27 – 0% hedged 
• 
May 27 to December 28 – 25% hedged 
Unmetered/Public Lighting electricity contract Position 
The Electricity contract commenced on 1st November 2024 and will expire on 31st 
October 2027. 

The agreed contract strategy with up-to-date hedging positions taken is set out 
below; 
• 
March 26 – 75% Hedged 
• 
April – October 26 – 25% hedged 
• 
November 26 – April 27 – 0% hedged 
• 
May to September 27 – 25% hedged 
• 
October 27 – 50% hedged 
Natural Gas Position (CGLASS contract: Central Government, Local 
Authorities & Security Services contract)  
The Natural Gas contract commenced on 1st October 2024 and will expire on 30th 
September 2027. 
The agreed contract strategy with up-to-date hedging positions taken is set out 
below; 
SBU & MBU Year 2 (1st Oct 25 to 30th Sept 26) – 100% Fixed 
FVT (Tariff Group 3) – March 100% Fixed 
DM (Tariff Group 4) 
• 
March 26 – 100% hedged (fixed) 
• 
April 26 – October 26 – 25% hedged 
• 
November 26 – April 27 – 0% hedged 
• 
May to September 27 – 25% hedged 
• 
62% of the Natural Gas contract is hedged for Year 2 therefore the risk is 
mitigated.   
 
If it’s a short-term conflict, less than a month, as March is 50% hedged for the metered 
Electricity, and 75% for the unmetered portfolio the risk is mitigated.  With the Natural 
Gas, there is 100% hedged for March, therefore no further exposure. 
If the conflict is greater than a month and is heading for 3 to 6 months, 62% of the 
Natural Gas contract is hedged for Year 2 therefore the risk is mitigated.  With the open 
positions, as with the last energy crisis, it may be the case that we opt to close positions 
closer to the point of delivery.   
With Electricity in open positions, we can opt to place these on the supplier settlement, 
as with the last energy crisis, getting us closer to the point of delivery.   
As outlined in the OGP strategy document for the Natural Gas and Electricity contracts, 
“depending on the market conditions, the OGP may need to hedge volume in 25% 
tranches* over a number of weeks or months rather than 100% volume in one 
transaction”. 
We will monitor the markets and where the market has softened, we will execute a 
hedge to avail of better pricing. We have ‘triggers to trade’ in place, which notify us 
when the market has dropped to a level where we can trade. 
Engagement between the US & Iran, could correct the market quickly, however there 
is unlikely to be significant correction until the Strait of Hormuz reopens. 
As any increases will not been seen in bills until the middle of May, we will wait before 
informing of the increases.  If a hedge is taken prior to month end, we will keep you 
informed.  The alternative is we will remain on the spot/day ahead rates until the market 
provides an opportunity to hedge. 
If you require anything further in the meantime, please don’t hesitate to get in touch 
with the OGP.  
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR SÉAMAS MCGRATTAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive has recent heavy rain resulted in an increase in expenditure 
on road maintenance and can this money be recouped from the Department? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

The heavy has resulted in a deterioration in the condition of the road network and 
emergency repairs have been carried out on serious defects. Based on the 
experience of previous severe weather events, the Department will provide the Local 
Authority sector with the opportunity to recoup funds under specific criteria. 
Q.40  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a comprehensive analysis of the energy-efficient 
retrofitting program for 2024 and 2025, specifically addressing the following: 
 
A. For both 2024 (359 units retrofitted at a cost of €15,070,877) and 2025 (318 units 
retrofitted at a cost of €13,219,835), provide a statistical breakdown including, the 
average, highest, and lowest cost per dwelling,  categorisation of units by dwelling 
type (e.g., detached house, terraced house, apartment/flat) and size (1, 2, 3 or 4 
bedroom units) and a summary of the nature of works (e.g., heat pumps, insulation, 
window/door replacement) and how these works contributed to the total cost per 
dwelling. 
 
B. Detail the formal criteria and selection process used to identify which specific 
dwellings are selected for retrofitting each year. Is this selection driven by Building 
Energy Rating (BER) assessments, housing conditions, geographic concentration, 
or other strategic factors? 
 
C. Please confirm what percentage of the total expenditure is fully recoupable from 
the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage and also provide a 
breakdown of the specific administrative costs incurred by Dublin City Council to 
manage and deliver this program and confirm whether these administrative costs 
are also subject to full recoupment by the Department. 
 
D. Can the Chief Executive confirm if DCC has undertaken any post-retrofit analysis 
or monitoring exercise to quantify the actual annual energy savings (in Euro and/or 
Kilowatt-hours) for each dwelling type? If so, please provide the average projected 
annual saving per unit, and if not, can the Chief Executive explain how the Council 
verifies the long-term effectiveness and value of this investment for the tenant? 
 
E. At a macro level, and in light of the ESRI's finding that actual energy consumption 
remains relatively flat regardless of BER rating (due to the rebound effect), how is 
the Council ensuring that these multi-million euro investments are resulting in lower 
bills for residents rather than simply higher indoor temperatures? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
2024: 
- Average cost per dwelling: €41,980.16 
- Highest cost per dwelling: €83,212.53 
- Lowest cost per dwelling: €4,492.33 
-Dwelling type: 1No. Detached house, 10 No. SC flats, 143 No. end of terrace, 205 
No. mid terraced. 
- Size (1, 2, 3 or 4 bedroom units): We do not record this information, it is not a 
requirement of the programme. 
 
- Summary of the nature of works: 206 No. heat pumps, 352 No. external wall 
insulation, 60 No. cavity wall insulation (7No. CWI only), 308 No. window/door 
replacement, 242 No. attic insulation works, 97 No. flat roof insulation. 
 
- How these works contributed to the total cost per dwelling.: €3,912,180.43 heat 
pumps, €7,397,569.69 external wall insulation, €72,553.74 cavity wall insulation, 

€2,822,513.90 window/door replacement, €262,112.36 attic insulation works, 
€588,648.46 
flat 
roof 
insulation. 
 
2025: 
- Average cost per dwelling: €41,737.87 
- Highest cost per dwelling: €75,791.90 
- Lowest cost per dwelling: €1,212.18 
- Dwelling type: 104No. end of terrace, 212No. mid terraced. 
- Size (1, 2, 3 or 4 bedroom units): We do not record this information, it is not a 
requirement of the programme. 
 
- Summary of the nature of works: 190No. heat pumps, 310No. external wall insulation, 
92No. cavity wall insulation (5No. CWI only), 285No. window/door replacement, 
221No. attic insulation works, 64No. flat roof insulation. 
 
- How these works contributed to the total cost per dwelling.: €3,620,775 heat pumps, 
€6,315,948 external wall insulation, €34,427.96 cavity wall insulation, €2,520,334 
window/door replacement, €278,036.40 attic insulation works, €380,370.30 flat roof 
insulation. 
 
Selection is based on multiple factors including Building Energy Rating (BER), 
geographic location and other factors such as eligibility for inclusion as decided by the 
Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage. Due to the volume of 
properties involved, which is 12,000 houses approximately, it is a roll out programme 
and areas/estates must be targeted in their entirety from both an operational and 
magnitude/economies of scale perspective. The programme has proved hugely 
successful to date and will run for a number of years, subject to continued 
Departmental funding support, until it reaches its conclusion. DCC endeavour to 
spread the works across all local electoral areas in an equal and fair manner where 
possible each year, the level and scale of works in each area is determined by our 
Departmental allocation received for the programme on an annual basis, the properties 
are selected that adhere to the requirements for eligibility and inclusion as detailed by 
the annual departmental circular. 
 
C1: In the years 2024 & 2025 the circular from the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage stated, “no funding will be available from the Department for 
each LA that will exceed the maximum average cost per home for the scheme in each 
county of €34,000 per unit”. Current administrative costs incurred by Dublin City 
Council to manage and deliver this program are covered by the Department. 
 
Dublin City Council enacts the Energy Efficiency Retrofit Programme (EERP) as 
managed and designed by the Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage. The EERP is the national programme for the retrofitting and upgrading of 
local authority residential housing stock. Each year the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage issues a circular with the requirements and rules of the 
programme, which DCC adheres to. Currently there is no provision or requirement in 
the EERP for post retrofit monitoring as described. CODEMA, the Dublin Energy 
Agency, annually reviews and estimates the energy and cost savings related to the 
DCC EERP. 
 
Dublin City Council enacts the Energy Efficiency Retrofit Programme (EERP) as 
managed and designed by the Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage. The EERP is the national programme for the retrofitting and upgrading of 
local authority residential housing stock. Each year the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage issues a circular with the requirements and rules of the 

programme, which DCC adheres to. CODEMA, the Dublin Energy Agency, annually 
reviews and estimates the energy and cost savings related to the DCC EERP. 
 
Q.41  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive, in light of the recent Economic and Social Research 
Institute (ESRI) report, 'A review of residential heat decarbonisation in Ireland' 
(published March 10, 2026), which reveals that BER upgrades are failing to deliver the 
predicted carbon emission reductions, can the Chief Executive confirm the following: 
 
That DCC has noted the findings of this report, specifically regarding the discrepancy 
between theoretical BER models projected/expected energy consumption and actual 
energy consumption? 
 
B. Given that Dublin City Council’s retrofitting budget represents a significant capital 
investment (€15m in 2024 and over €13m in 2025), should DCC consider changing 
course from deep retrofitting towards more direct, data-driven decarbonisation method, 
such as fuel switching or smart thermal storage, as recommended by the ESRI? 
 
C. Should DCC consider moving away from BER targets in favour of measuring actual 
energy billing data to justify future expenditure on the retrofitting programmes for our 
social housing stock? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has noted the findings of this report, specifically regarding the 
discrepancy between theoretical BER models projected/expected energy consumption 
and actual energy consumption? 
 
Dublin City Council enacts the Energy Efficiency Retrofit Programme (EERP) as 
managed and designed by the Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage. The EERP is the national programme for the retrofitting and upgrading of 
local authority residential housing stock. Each year the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage issues a circular with the requirements and rules of the 
programme, which DCC adheres to. CODEMA, the Dublin Energy Agency, annually 
reviews and estimates the energy and cost savings related to the DCC EERP. 
 
B. Dublin City Council enacts the Energy Efficiency Retrofit Programme (EERP) as 
managed and designed by the Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage. The EERP is the national programme for the retrofitting and upgrading of 
local authority residential housing stock. Each year the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage issues a circular with the requirements and rules of the 
programme, which DCC adheres to. CODEMA, the Dublin Energy Agency, annually 
reviews and estimates the energy and cost savings related to the DCC EERP. 
 
C. Dublin City Council enacts the Energy Efficiency Retrofit Programme (EERP) as 
managed and designed by the Department of Housing, Local Government and 
Heritage. The EERP is the national programme for the retrofitting and upgrading of 
local authority residential housing stock. Each year the Department of Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage issues a circular with the requirements and rules of the 
programme, which DCC adheres to. CODEMA, the Dublin Energy Agency, annually 
reviews and estimates the energy and cost savings related to the DCC EERP. 
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, following the successful conclusion of the 2026 St. 
Patrick’s Day festivities, I am requesting a detailed report and response regarding 
Dublin City Council’s (DCC) total actual contribution and our role in the festival's 

governance, particularly in relation to the parade which attracts nearly half a million 
people onto the streets of the city. 
The recent Waste Management report highlights that 450 staff were deployed for 
cleaning operations, with additional night crews of 50 staff and the placement of over 
100 litter barrels.  
Beyond the direct grant of over €300,000 (please provide actual amount) can the Chief 
Executive provide a comprehensive breakdown of the additional direct and indirect 
costs borne by the Council, including, staff overtime costs for Waste Management and 
the DCC Events Team, operational costs for the Dublin Fire Brigade’s participation and 
safety presence and other costs associated with the event. (For example, the recent 
Waste Management report highlights that 450 staff were deployed for cleaning 
operations, with additional night crews of 50 staff and the placement of over 100 litter 
barrels).  
In addition, can the Chief Executive provide the Council’s latest data on the projected 
economic impact for the city businesses and any tourist satisfaction metrics for the 
2026 festival collated by Fáilte Ireland? 
Finally, in light of the highly inappropriate 'Epstein Files' float appearing in parades 
elsewhere this year, which caused significant public distress, can the Chief Executive 
comment on concerns about the lack of direct DCC oversight on our own parade's 
content, specifically answering the following: 
 
A. Why does Dublin City Council not currently have Councillor representation on the 
St. Patrick’s Festival Committee to ensure parade themes align with the Council’s 
values and public policy? 
 
B. What vetting processes are currently in place to prevent inappropriate or offensive 
floats from entering the Dublin parade, and does DCC have a formal veto or 
approval role in the selection of bands, floats, and themes? 
 
C. Given the scale of DCC’s financial and logistical underwriting of this event, does 
the Executive agree that the Council should move from being a supporter to a 
partner role with a direct say in the artistic and thematic direction of the parade in 
future? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY:  
As the response requires input from multiple departments, a consolidated response 
will be issued directly to the Councillor 
 
Q.43  QUESTION WITHDRAWN 
 
 
Q.44  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what plans have DCC for providing suitable community 
development on the Shanowen lands going forward? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Variation No. 11 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022 – 2028 proposes to vary 
the plan to give effect to the First Revision of the National Planning Framework, April 
2025, and to incorporate the housing growth requirements set out in in the Ministerial 
Guidelines - National Planning Framework NPF Implementation: Housing Growth 
Requirements, Guidelines for Planning Authorities, 2025. 
 
Variation No. 11 includes amendments to the Core Strategy, changing of land use 
objectives on specific sites, amending some of the Strategic Development and 
Regeneration Areas and identifies Santry Key Urban Village as a long-term plan area.  

All to provide for additional housing capacity in the city and to meet updated housing 
growth requirements. 
 
One of the proposals in Variation No. 11 is to change the zoning objective of lands (c. 
4.3ha) at Shanowen Road from: Z6 Employment/Enterprise to Z1 Sustainable 
Residential Neighbourhoods.  This change in zoning will enable the development of 
residential development, potentially supported by other uses considered to be 
‘permissible’ or ‘open for consideration’ under the Z1 zoning objective such as 
childcare facilities, local shops and community facilities.   
 
If these lands were varied to accommodate residential development any proposals 
would be subject to all the relevant policies and objectives of the City Development 
Plan including those for sustainable development and community infrastructure.  
 
Written observations or submissions regarding the Proposed Variation are invited from 
members of the public and all other interested parties from Tuesday 31st March 2026 
up to 4.30 pm, on Tuesday 28th April 2026 and may be made:  
 
Online at link URL: https://consult.dublincity.ie/ 
Or 
by post to the following address: 
Administrative Officer,  
Proposed Variation No. 11, Planning and Property Development Department,  
Block 4, Floor 3, Dublin City Council, Civic Offices, Wood Quay, Dublin 8. 
 
Q.45  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what’s the update on Santry having a local area plan 
devised. Can a community centre and employment hub be earmarked for the 
Shanowen lands site? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Variation No. 11 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022 – 2028 proposes to vary 
the plan to give effect to the First Revision of the National Planning Framework, April 
2025, and to incorporate the housing growth requirements set out in in the Ministerial 
Guidelines - National Planning Framework NPF Implementation: Housing Growth 
Requirements, Guidelines for Planning Authorities, 2025. 
 
Variation No. 11 includes amendments to the Core Strategy, changing of land use 
objectives on specific sites, amending some of the Strategic Development and 
Regeneration Areas and identifies Santry Key Urban Village as a long-term plan area.  
All to provide for additional housing capacity in the city and to meet updated housing 
growth requirements. 
 
One of the proposals in Variation No. 11 is to change the zoning objective of lands (c. 
4.3ha) at Shanowen Road from: Z6 Employment/Enterprise to Z1 Sustainable 
Residential Neighbourhoods.  This change in zoning will enable the development of 
residential development, potentially supported by other uses considered to be 
‘permissible’ or ‘open for consideration’ under the Z1 zoning objective such as 
childcare facilities, local shops and community facilities.   
 
If these lands were varied to accommodate residential development any proposals 
would be subject to all the relevant policies and objectives of the City Development 
Plan including those for sustainable development and community infrastructure.  
 

Written observations or submissions regarding the Proposed Variation are invited from 
members of the public and all other interested parties from Tuesday 31st March 2026 
up to 4.30 pm, on Tuesday 28th April 2026 and may be made:  
 
Online at link URL: https://consult.dublincity.ie/ 
Or 
by post to the following address: 
Administrative Officer,  
Proposed Variation No. 11, Planning and Property Development Department,  
Block 4, Floor 3, Dublin City Council, Civic Offices, Wood Quay, Dublin 8. 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive can the end of details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services carried out cleaning at the above-mentioned location on 
27th March 2026, both the footpaths and road were serviced at this time.  
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what plans has the council to tackle and improve the flow 
of traffic on the Oscar Traynor Road? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Oscar Traynor Road is continually monitored by the Traffic Control Centre and 
ITS staff through CCTV and our SCATS traffic management system. We investigate 
all requests and reports from members of the public and our traffic maintenance 
contractor attends faults as appropriate. The ITS section reviews the operation of the 
traffic signals along this route and makes adjustments where possible to optimise the 
efficiency of the route and the M50 interchange. We also refer you to our previous 
response (Q49 NWAC November 2025). 
 
Q.48 
COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive can a camera be installed on details supplied to monitor 
the speed at which motorists are travelling at. If required after the results have been 
viewed can a speed ramp be installed? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Iona Road is included on the Minor Works programme which provides physical traffic 
measures to improve safety on the road.  A raised table is due to be constructed at the 
school warden crossing, located at the junction of Iona Road with Crawford Avenue. 
Therefore, no additional traffic calming measures are recommended at this time.  
 
Q.49    COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
To ask the Chief Executive if the path along the canal on the northeast of Blackhorse 
Bridge (behind Jamestown Road) is in the charge of the council, and are there plans 
to improve the path?  

 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The footpath connecting Tyrconnell Road to Jamestown Court is within folio DN4021 
which is owned by Dublin City Council (DCC), therefore DCC is legally liable for this 
area. Road Maintenance has inspected the footpath surface which is in good condition 
and following a meeting with the Parks Division the grass verge will be altered to assist 
the flow of water away from the footpath. There have also been discussions with DCC 
Drainage to investigate the possible installation of a gully. 
 
SQ.50  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, how many people in the last 12 months have been housed 
from the housing list Transfer Hap. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
481 households were housed, who were tenants of a Hap between the period 1st of 
April 2025 until 31st March 2026. 
 
 
Q.51  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, how many current HAP tenants are on a notice to quit. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are 260 Dublin City Council HAP tenants that were served with a Notice of 
Termination. 
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, how much longer details supplied will be waiting for a 
new kitchen. His kitchen was destroyed when a fire broke out in his next-door 
neighbours this issue has been logged numerous times and still no information to when 
this will be done provided. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance assigned these works to a contractor in February 2026. Works 
have not been progressed in line with the timelines that had been agreed with the 
contactor. The matter has now been expedited; the tenant will be contacted in the 
coming days to schedule an appointment for works.  
 
Q.53  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 

 
To ask the Chief Executive to investigate and advise on solutions to the ongoing 
surface water accumulation at the pedestrian crossing opposite O’Briens Off-Licence 
in Sandymount Village. 
 
It appears that a design flaw has created a basin-like depression where water collects 
and does not drain adequately. This presents a significant safety concern, as 
pedestrians are often unable to use the crossing during wet weather. I would 
appreciate details of any planned remedial works or design interventions to address 
this issue. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The area road maintenance engineer will arrange for a site visit to assess the issues 
raised. Based on the results a decision will be made on the best course of action to 
take regarding the aforementioned location 
 
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider introducing enhanced traffic-calming measures 
on Tritonville Road, particularly between Irishtown Garda Station and Sandymount 
Road. While this is a 30 km/h zone, there appears to be limited driver awareness or 
compliance. Measures such as additional 30 km/h road markings along the 
carriageway and the installation of a digital speed display sign could help reinforce the 
speed limit and improve road safety. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following a site assessment, the Transport Advisory Group (TAG) Area Engineer has 
reviewed the request for additional traffic calming measures on Tritonville Road. 
 
The section of Tritonville Road between the roundabout at Claremont Road and the 
junction with Sandymount Road is approximately 450m in length and currently contains 
five speed ramps, on-street parking, multiple vehicular accesses, three T-junctions, 
and a 3.5 tonne weight restriction. The section between Sandymount Road and 
Irishtown Road is approximately 200m in length and includes on-street parking, 
multiple vehicular entrances, a bus stop, and two pedestrian crossing points. This 
section does not meet the criteria for the installation of speed ramps. 
 
In the interim, the Area Engineer will arrange for a speed survey to further assess 
vehicle speeds and determine if any additional traffic calming measures are warranted. 
Instances of dangerous or illegal driving should be referred to An Garda Síochána for 
enforcement. 
 
Q.55  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange urgent repairs to a damaged section of roadway 
on Sandymount Road details supplied, which currently poses a serious hazard to 
cyclists. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Road Maintenance Engineer will arrange for any road defects to be repaired 
on Sandymount Road once a road maintenance crew are available. 
 
Enq. Ref.11195816 
 
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to have the condition of the road surface on Raglan Road 
assessed, with a view to including it in the council’s resurfacing programme. In the 

interim, I request that remedial works be carried out to repair the numerous potholes 
currently affecting the road surface. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The area engineer presented the 2026 Road Resurfacing Programme of Works at the 
March Area Committee Meeting which did not include Raglan Road. 
 
The aforementioned road has been added to a list of roads requiring/requesting 
resurfacing. If further funding is made available this year this list will be reassessed. 
 
The Area Road Maintenance Engineer will arrange for any road defects to be repaired 
once a road maintenance crew are available. 
 
Ref. Enq. 11195828 
 
Q.57  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if the new signage for details supplied could be expedited.  
The current sign is weather beaten and difficult to read.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The replacement of the existing details supplied nameplate is included in our 2026 
Nameplate Contract as it involves work at height. The contract is currently being 
prepared for tender with procurement and award processes to follow. Nameplate at 
height installation works are expected to take place towards the end of 2026. 
 
The only way to expediate this would be if confirmation was received from the owners 
of details supplied that they were agreeable to have a low level nameplate installed 
on their garden wall or on a stand beside their garden wall.  
 
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the inspection with a view to repair of the 
pathway at details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The footpath at details supplied will be inspected. Any repairs deemed necessary 
will be added to our Works List. 
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive how many tenants have applied for consideration under 
the Hardship Clause of the Differential Rent Scheme since January of this year and to 
outline whether this clause also applies to HAP and RAS tenants whose contributions 
(collected by the council) are based on the Rent Scheme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Since the 1st January 2026 there have been two referrals from Executive Housing 
Officers for tenants seeking support under the Hardship Clause and there have been 
eight enquiries received directly from tenants, one of which was a HAP tenant, as a 
result of the upcoming changes to the Differential Rent Scheme. 
 
Of the above, the two tenants who were referred for consideration under the Hardship 
Clause were successful in obtaining support.  
 

Of the eight remaining enquiries received, one required a full update of their rent 
assessment as their income details had changed and on review their weekly rent 
charge was reduced so they did not pursue their Hardship enquiry.  
 
The enquiry received from the HAP tenant was forwarded to the HAP Section as they 
deal directly with all HAP tenants. HAP tenants seeking consideration under their 
Hardship Clause should contact haprent@dublincity.ie to apply.  
 
One tenant has been advised to contact their local MABS office as it is felt that they 
would benefit more by receiving a Debt Relief Notice. The remaining five enquiries are 
currently under review.  
 
Under the upcoming changes to the Differential Rent Scheme, the Hardship Clause 
has been expanded to include additional supports from tenants. Tenants can email 
hardshipqueries@dublincity.ie for further information.  
 
An application form will be made available to tenants on request which will require the 
tenant to provide a full breakdown of their weekly income and outgoings, along with 
any additional expenses e.g. medical. Supporting documentation may also be 
requested to support a tenant’s application i.e. hospital Consultant report, Social 
Worker report, etc.  
 
RAS tenants can be considered under the Hardship Clause and should contact 
hardshipqueries@dublincity.ie for further information. 
 
Tenants can also contact their Executive Housing Officer to request a referral or their 
Social Worker if they are linked in with Dublin City Council’s Welfare Team.  
 
Tenants who have any general queries in relation to the upcoming changes to the 
Differential Rent Scheme should contact rents@dublincity.ie or phone 01 222 2211 for 
more information. 
 
Following the implementation of the New Rent Scheme the HAP section have received 
18 requests for review of their differential rent under a Hardship clause. The HAP 
amendments team are currently assessing these tenancies in line with affordability 
guidelines as set out by the Department of Housing and to ensure tenancy sustainment 
is achieved. 
 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report on demand for Traveller-Specific. 
Accommodation in each of the 5 administrative areas and to comment on whether this 
recorded demand is likely to account for real world demand (e.g. does it consider 
needs of those living in overcrowded situations on DCC-manged sites, without live 
applications for social housing support) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A Reply will be issued to the Councillor within two weeks of the City Council Meeting. 
 
Q.61  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive how the Council plans to address the high level of vacant 
posts in Local Area Offices, particularly in the NW area. Reference should be made to 
motions passed at the NW Area Committee and previous monthly meetings in relation 
to staffing of offices and operational roles (e.g. NWAC motion by Cllrs Reddy, 
Connaghan and Kane, 2025; City Council motion by Cllr Connaghan) 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Strategic workforce planning is a continuous and adaptive process that ensures the 
City Council’s staffing capacity aligns with organisational priorities and future service 
delivery requirements. In line with the organisation’s Strategic Workforce Planning 
Framework, The Human Resources Department maintains ongoing engagement with 
senior management to identify priority roles to be filled. 
A number of vacancies across the area structure have been filled through recent 
recruitment campaigns, strengthening operational capacity and addressing key skill 
requirements. Further planned recruitment campaigns are scheduled to ensure that 
remaining critical posts are filled in a timely manner. 
Through this structured and proactive approach, HR will continue to support the local 
area offices in building workforce capability to meet both current and emerging 
demands. 
Recruitment campaigns are planned for Project Estate Officer, Public Domain Officer 
and Environmental Liaison Officer in the coming weeks. 
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will outline what funding is available for renovations of 
properties acquired by Compulsory Purchase and what other barriers might be 
deterring compulsory purchase of long term vacant and derelict residential units 
outside the City Centre core. 
  
Note: 
• 
DCC acquired just one house by Compulsory Purchase in 2025 at St Assams 
Park, Raheny. 
• 
19 and 21 Connaught Street were acquired by CPO in 2019 and remain derelict 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Reply: 
To bring vacant or derelict homes back into use as social or affordable homes, DCC 
can apply for social or affordable housing funding from DHLGH. Where funding is 
sought we must be able to demonstrate Value for Money. For some properties in DCC 
the cost to bring these houses back into use can be extensive and therefore. For 
example the estimated cost to fully refurbish 19 and 21 Connaught street is over 
€1.5m. We are not able to access this level of social or affordable housing funding for 
these homes. We do need to explore other options that will successfully return these, 
and other similar homes, back into use as a home. 
 
Planning Reply: 
The Derelict Sites legislation does not deal with vacant property and therefore 
cannot be used to tackle vacancy. It should be noted that a vacant property is 
not necessarily derelict by virtue of it being vacant.  
Redevelopment of these sites are constrained by funding, legal complexities and rising 
construction costs. 
 
URDF Call 3 
This round of Government funding is intended to act as a dedicated revolving 
fund within each local authority to address the financial barrier and risk faced by 
local authorities in seeking to tackle long term vacant and derelict buildings and 
sites. Dublin City Council was allocated €10million under URDF Call 3 to acquire 
properties, dispose of or put them forward to the open market. The fund is 
available to cover the acquisition costs of a property or site and also any civil or 
design works which may be required to de-risk or improve the site/building to 
make it more attractive for reuse, development by others or onward sale. The 
intention is that the fund would be replenished from the proceeds received from 
the end use/user, thereby allowing the local authority to put in place a rolling 

programme to tackle long term vacancy and dereliction without recourse to 
borrowing and the associated financial risk. Any properties that are identified for 
possible onward sale/development will require the approval of the elected 
members through Section 183s. 
The Council is currently considering bringing some properties to the open market 
however not all of them will fall under the URDF 3 Programme having been acquired 
prior to the date set down in the criteria. 
 
Q.63  COUNCILLOR CIARAN Ó MEACHAIR 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if the footpath and parking area outside details supplied 
can be cleaned. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REPLY: 
Waste Management Services will arrange for the above-mentioned location to be 
serviced at the earliest opportunity. The South Circular Road is included in the daily 
cleaning schedule, however parked vehicles often restrict access for the road sweeper. 
The team responsible for this area will continue to monitor the situation, and once the 
roadway is clear, a sweeper will be deployed to carry out the necessary servicing. 
 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR CIARÁN Ó MEACHAIR 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if the double yellow lines at Hammond Place, Dublin 8 can 
be repainted. This has been requested by residents already details supplied. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The location will be inspected in the coming days. Any requirement for the repainting 
of the DYL’s will be initiated with-in 30 working days of the Council Meeting of the 13th 
of April 2026.  
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to please look into the following housing application details 
supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Transfer List with a medical priority with an application 
date of 13/02/2026, and holds the following position(s) on the waiting list –  
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
J 
2 
13 
J 
3 
20 
K 
2 
30 
K 
3 
40 
 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 
number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list. 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
The applicant should be advised to keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being 

advertised that may be of interest to her and to ensure she makes an application for 
same. 
 
Q.66  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to please arrange that I be furnished with the following 
details supplied.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
139 Rossmore Road is being managed by the Area Office, an abandonment notice 
has been issued, this will allow Housing Maintenance to resume works in May.  
Please see table below for all units in the Ballyfermot / Cherry Orchard Area. 
Type 
Address 
Beds 
Status  
Estimated 
date of 
completion  
House 
ROSSMORE ROAD 
2 
Abandonment Notice 
issued  
  
House 
BALLYFERMOT DRIVE 
2 
Awaiting vacant 
possession  
  
House 
BALLYNEETY ROAD 
2 
Awaiting vacant 
possession  
  
House 
BARNEVILLE PARK 
2 
Awaiting vacant 
possession  
  
House 
CHERRY ORCHARD 
AVENUE 
3 
Awaiting vacant 
possession  
  
House 
CHERRY ORCHARD 
AVENUE 
3 
Awaiting vacant 
possession  
  
House 
CHERRY ORCHARD 
AVENUE 
3 
Awaiting vacant 
possession  
  
House 
CHERRY ORCHARD 
DRIVE 
3 
Awaiting vacant 
possession  
  
house 
CROFTWOOD DRIVE  
3 
Awaiting vacant 
possession  
  
House 
CROFTWOOD 
GARDENS 
3 
Awaiting vacant 
possession  
  
House 
CROFTWOOD 
GARDENS 
3 
Awaiting vacant 
possession  
  
House 
CROFTWOOD GROVE 
3 
Awaiting vacant 
possession  
  
House 
DRUMFINN ROAD 
3 
Awaiting vacant 
possession  
  
Senior 
Citizens 
FATHER KITT COURT 
1 
Awaiting vacant 
possession  
  
House 
KYLEMORE DRIVE 
2 
Awaiting vacant 
possession  
  
House 
RAHEEN PARK 
3 
Awaiting vacant 
possession  
  
House 
O'DWYER ROAD 
3 
Legal Issue  
17/03/2026 
House 
BLACKDITCH ROAD 
2 
Works under 
Contractor 
31/01/2026 
House 
CARNA ROAD 
2 
Works under 
Contractor 
20/07/2026 
Apartment 
CEDARBROOK PLACE 
1 
Works under 
Contractor 
  

Apartment 
CEDARBROOK WAY 
3 
Works under 
Contractor 
06/05/2026 
Senior 
Citizens 
CLADDAGH COURT 
1 
Works under 
Contractor 
08/06/2026 
Senior 
Citizens 
CLADDAGH COURT 
1 
Works under 
Contractor 
08/06/2026 
House 
COLEPARK ROAD 
2 
Works under 
Contractor 
15/07/2026 
House 
CREMONA ROAD 
3 
Works under 
Contractor 
  
House 
CROFTWOOD 
GARDENS 
3 
Works under 
Contractor 
08/06/2026 
House 
CROFTWOOD 
GARDENS 
3 
Works under 
Contractor 
20/07/2026 
House 
CROFTWOOD GREEN 
3 
Works under 
Contractor 
03/06/2026 
House 
CROFTWOOD PARK 
3 
Works under 
Contractor 
08/06/2026 
Senior 
Citizens 
FATHER KITT COURT 
1 
Works under 
Contractor 
08/06/2026 
Senior 
Citizens 
FATHER KITT COURT 
1 
Works under 
Contractor 
20/04/2026 
House 
LE FANU DRIVE 
4 
Works under 
Contractor 
  
House 
LOUGH CONN ROAD 
2 
Works under 
Contractor 
10/04/2026 
House 
LOUGH CONN ROAD 
2 
Works under 
Contractor 
16/06/2026 
House 
ROSSMORE AVENUE 
1 
Works under 
Contractor 
02/06/2026 
House 
ROSSMORE ROAD 
2 
Works under 
Contractor 
02/06/2026 
Senior 
Citizens 
FATHER LEMASS 
COURT 
1 
works under Depot 
  
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to please give me an update on the following housing 
application details supplied.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing List with an application date of 12/11/2024, and 
holds the following position(s) on the waiting list –  
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
J 
2 
422 
J 
3 
260 
 
The applicant’s interest in Stonemount has been noted on his housing file.  
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 

number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list. 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
The applicant should be advised to keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being 
advertised that may be of interest to him and to ensure he makes an application for 
same. 
 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the following housing application of details 
supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing List with an application date of 18/07/2017, and 
holds the following position(s) on the waiting list –  
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
J 
2 
115 
J 
3 
86 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 
number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list. 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
The applicant should be advised to keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being 
advertised that may be of interest to her and to ensure she makes an application for 
same. 
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the number of outstanding "taking in charge" 
issues in each of the five administrative areas of Dublin City, a status update on each 
one, and a timeline for each one's resolution. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply will issue to the Councillor in the next two weeks. 
 
Q.70  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the management of the council's Vacant 
Sites Register and Derelict Sites Register: how many staff are engaged in the 
inspection and investigation of vacant and derelict properties and sites in Dublin City, 
how many inspections were conducted in each of the last three years (2023-2025), 
how many active open files are there on each register and how long does it take from 
inspection of a property/site to its addition to the vacant and derelict registers. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Vacant Sites Register (VSR) 
There are currently 33 sites entered on Dublin City Council’s Vacant Sites Register. 
 
The Vacant Sites Levy has been superseded by the Residential Zoned Land Tax 
(RZLT), introduced under the Finance Act 2021. Responsibility for the administration 

of the RZLT now rests with the Revenue Commissioners. Any outstanding Vacant Sites 
Levy liabilities remain as a charge on the land concerned. 
 
The last site was entered on the Vacant Sites Register in 2022 under the Urban 
Housing and Urban Regeneration provisions. As the RZLT replaced the Vacant Sites 
Levy, no inspections for the purpose of adding sites to the Vacant Sites Register were 
carried out between 2023 and 2025. 
 
During the period when the Vacant Sites Register was actively maintained, the Active 
Land Management Unit had access to one inspector who undertook inspections 
related to vacant sites. 
 
As no new sites have been added since 2022, there are no active open inspection files 
relating to the Vacant Sites Register. 
 
Derelict Sites Register (DSR) 
 
The Derelict Sites Team has recently expanded from 1.5 inspectors to 4.5 inspectors, 
significantly increasing inspection and enforcement capacity. 
 
There are currently 129 sites entered on the Derelict Sites Register, with 891 active 
open files under investigation or enforcement. 
 
Between 1 January 2023 and 31 March 2026, when the team was resourced at 1.5 
inspectors, the following activity was recorded: 
• 
2,615 site inspections 
• 
133 sites added to the Derelict Sites Register 
• 
48 sites removed from the Register following remedial works 
 
Each inspector carries out both site inspections and the associated administrative and 
statutory processes, including engagement with owners, identification of necessary 
remedial works, implementation of procedures under the Derelict Sites Act, service of 
statutory notices, and ultimately inclusion on the Register where warranted. 
 
The time taken from initial inspection to inclusion on the Derelict Sites Register varies 
depending on a number of factors, including: 
• 
ownership and title complexity, 
• 
level of engagement by owners, 
• 
legal or planning issues, 
• 
and whether remedial works are undertaken. 
 
Where ownership and responsibility are clear and no works are undertaken, the typical 
process is as follows: 
• 
an initial inspection followed by issue of a Section 10 letter, allowing two weeks for 
a response; 
• 
if no satisfactory response or commitment is received, a Section 8(2) notice issues, 
allowing four weeks for representations; 
• 
where matters remain unresolved, a Section 8(7) Notice of Intention to Include on 
the Derelict Sites Register is issued. 
 
Where owners engage and carry out works, follow-up inspections are undertaken and 
progression to inclusion on the Register may be avoided. 
 
 
Q.71 
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 

To ask the Chief Executive for a report on this year's Capital Budget process, including 
information on submissions of proposed capital projects discussed to date and a 
breakdown of the proposals by administrative area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Capital Programme will be presented to the April Council Meeting.  Report 
78/2026 was issued as part of the April agenda. 
 
Q.72 
COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the new much needed eco toilets in St Annes 
Park on pitch 17 and the new changing room is due to go in. Is it possible to place Eco 
toilets on the Watermill Roadside of the park, this area has no toilet facilities 
whatsoever.  If there is a budget issue, can we please use the changing room budget 
from pitch 17 to place much needed eco toilets on the Watermill Road side of the park.  
As soon as more funding comes available then continue with the changing room plans 
on pitch 17.  Raheny United, Raheny Gaa and Naomh Barrog all have pitches on the 
Watermill Roadside of St Annes Park with no toilet facilities as you are aware St Annes 
Park is very big.  Toilets are essentially needed this side of the park.  Please see the 
map below to see the distance. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Consideration will be given to provision for an eco toilet at the Watermill side of  
St Annes park in the 2026 Parks Works Programme. An update on this will be provided 
to the next Area Committee meeting.   
 
Q.73    COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to several bins being removed in St Annes Park 
due to illegal dumping.  This illegal dumping issue is still ongoing, plus now there are 
less bins for dog walkers to dispose of their dogs waste bags.  I am wondering if we 
can look at an alternative for dog waste, like underground bins. There are residents 
living beside several entrances in St Annes Park. The dog waste bags are becoming 
a health and safety issue for residents and everyone entering and exiting the park and 
for children who play in the area. These underground bins could be placed in many 
parks that have had to have bins removed due to illegal dumping. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
One bin was recently removed from St Annes Park because it was the subject of 
dumping of domestic waste and ultimately it was set on fire. There are now 27 bins in 
the park. This number increases to the equivalent of 38 bins on weekends, using barrel 
bins. The walking distances between litter bins are reasonable to permit people to carry 
their litter to them before continuing their walk.  
 
There are no plans to install additional litter bins in the park, including any underground 
bins.  
 
Q.74    COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive, further to Q. 44 of 2nd March 2026, whether DCC is 
working on measures to mitigate flood risk during weather events that do not involve 
closure of the coastal cycle path in Clontarf. Or are temporary closures of the coastal 
cycle path part of the long-term solution in this regard? If alternative measures are 
being investigated that will allow the cycle route to stay open can they please be 
detailed in your response? If the closure of the cycle route is to be part of the ongoing 
solution in the medium to long-term, can the Chief Executive set out how people on 
bicycles should proceed when the route is closed? In circumstances where, per the 
response to Q. 44 of 2nd March 2026, a temporary on-road segregated cycle route 

cannot be installed at such times could a permanent, segregated, on-road alternative 
cycle route be installed on Clontarf sea front at those points at which it is intended to 
close the existing coastal cycle route during weather events? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Further to Q. 44 of 2 March 2026, and thank you for your continued engagement 
regarding flood risk and the coastal cycle route in Clontarf. 
 
Dublin City Council’s Environmental Waters Office, in consultation with the Active 
Travel Office, is currently progressing work towards a permanent coastal flood defence 
scheme for Clontarf, which will include the provision of cycling facilities that are more 
resilient to coastal flooding. It is anticipated that a consultant to undertake the design 
of this scheme will be appointed towards the end of 2026. 
 
In the interim period, and in the interest of public safety, it may be necessary to 
temporarily close the coastal cycle path during severe weather or storm surge events, 
where overtopping or wave action presents a risk to users. These temporary closures 
are considered a short- to medium-term safety measure rather than a desired long-
term solution. It is also important to recognise that such closures occur infrequently 
and typically coincide with weather warnings, during which there are inherent public 
safety considerations for all road users. 
 
It should also be noted that, even during these short-duration temporary closures, an 
alternative route is available via the adjacent road network. While this does not provide 
a segregated cycling facility, it offers a viable alternative during adverse weather 
events.  
 
As part of the forthcoming flood defence design process, the Council will investigate 
alternatives that will allow the cycle route to remain operational during adverse 
weather, including the potential use of existing road space along the Clontarf seafront 
to facilitate a permanent, segregated on-road cycle route where appropriate. Any such 
proposals would be subject to detailed design, safety assessment, and public 
consultation. 
 
If you have any further queries or wish to engage directly with the team in relation to 
this matter or similar issues, please contact cqsurfacewater@dublincity.ie, and we will 
respond accordingly. 
 
Q.75    COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to give an update on the strategy for the development of 
community facilities on council-owned lands at Belmayne and how this is progressing. 
In doing so can the Chief Executive also outline how plans for sports facilities north of 
Belmayne are progressing and say when work on the playground in Belmayne Park 
will begin and be completed? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Response: 
In relation to Belmayne Park, the playground contractor has informed the council that 
the playground equipment has been ordered, and it is expected to arrive in the country 
in May. Once the contractor is in possession of said equipment, he will be able to 
provide a more specific update for the installation of the equipment. 
 
The City Council is currently undertaking a Social and Community Audit Report for 
Belmayne and Clongriffin. The report will audit existing facilities, current and future 
population, take account of community and stakeholder engagement, identify gaps in 

provision and make recommendation for future provision of facilities in Belmayne and 
Clongriffin. The report will set out the blueprint for the future provision of community 
facilities in Belmayne. It is expected that the report will be presented to Members in Q3 
2026.  
 
The City Council acquired land in 2025 with Fingal County Council at St. Doolagh’s 
Balgriffin to develop a sports hub. The vision is to provide sports facilities to local 
communities and to sports clubs who require facilities that can no longer be 
accommodated within the city boundary. The lands purchased are in agricultural use 
and we are currently undertaking a range of detailed site surveys and analysis which 
will take about 12 months to complete. The outcome of the surveys and analysis will 
then be used to inform a draft masterplan which will then be presented to Members in 
Fingal and City Council for stakeholder consultation and further development. 
 
 
Q.76    COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if Housing Maintenance will inspect a property detail 
supplied with a view to addressing draughts from the rear door and a window sill in 
the kitchen; and if an inspection of the insulation at the rear of the house can be 
undertaken. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance have been dealing extensively with the tenant of 9 Clanmoyle 
Road over the recent months and years.  The tenant reported that the house was not 
holding heat and was draughty in locations. Housing Maintenance carried out a site 
inspection, and the following was noted 'house is insulated and seals around the 
windows look good, so if there is air leakage I would suggest an air pressure test to be 
carried out. This would identify air leakage and show air changes per hour.' The 
recommended testing was carried out and proposed works were agreed with the 
tenant.  Housing Maintenance met with Ms. Monaghan in her home to discuss same. 
The recommended works were carried out over three days in January 2026. 
 
Housing Maintenance have completed and inspected the above-mentioned repair 
requests.  We are satisfied that we have complied with recommendations that fall 
within Dublin City Councils responsibility, and we do not intend to carry out any further 
draught proofing work at No. 9 Clanmoyle at this time. 
 
Any new maintenance request can be logged by contacting Housing Maintenance 
Tel. 01 2222191 during office hours or e-mail maintenance@dublincity.ie. 
Q.77    COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to have an inspection carried out on the Central Heating / 
Hot Water System in the Cromcastle Court Complex. There has been constant 
interruptions in recent months to the supply of Heating and Hot Water for the remaining 
Residents in these blocks causing problems in the cold weather, also causing leaking 
and noisy pipes in the units. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance are aware of and working on reported issues in Block 1, 
Cromcastle Court Complex. The heating has now been fixed, and the hot water is 
working however not for the max load during the day. Housing Maintenance are 
currently on-site making changes to meet max load. 
 
Q.78    COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to have a visit organized to the house details supplied.  

The resident in this house is asking to see if something can be done to prevent the 
views from the Balcony directly behind their House in the Glin Older Persons 
Development? the resident claims the view from the Balcony is looking into their 
children’s bedrooms and also into their kitchen. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Office are investigating this issue and will issue a reply directly to the 
councillor as soon as possible. 
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
 
To ask the Chief Executive how many Tenant in Situ applications have been received 
by Dublin City Council in 2026, and how many purchase requests from 2025 remain 
outstanding? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Below table set out detail of TIS acquisitions proposed since 2026, and their current 
status.    
 
2026 (Working figures updated on the last day of every month) 
  
Total applications received 2026 
66 
Applications currently in progress 
No: 
Initial Eligibility Assessment - Central Placement Services 
5 
Awaiting acquisition engagement  
4 
Building Inspector 
5 
Valuers 
7 
Conveyancing 
3 
Sale Agreed 
  
Applications not progressed 
No: 
Unsuccessful at stage one (Prevention assessment & Eligibility) 
19 
Unsuccessful at Building Inspector Stage 
9 
Not progressed as offered alternative housing option 
3 
Total 
66 
 
There are 20 TIS acquisitions at conveyancing stage, that commenced in 2025    
 
Q.80  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
 
To ask the Chief Executive when we can expect the planned Pedestrian Crossing’s for 
the North Central Area for 2026? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
At present, the following pedestrian crossings are at detailed design stage with 
intention to go to tender Q3, Q4 this year: 
 
• 
Copeland Avenue / Howth Road 
• 
Howth Road 
• 
Tonlegee Rd 
• 
Castle Avenue / Howth Road. 
 
The following zebra crossings are under review. Note not all may proceed if they do 
not meet the speed and volume requirements. Surveys are currently underway. 
• 
Edenmore Park 
 
• 
Carndonagh Lawn / St. Donagh’s Road 
 

• 
Seafield Road West  
• 
Harmonstown Road  
• 
Greencastle Road 
 
• 
Lorcan Avenue 
 
• 
Blunden Drive. 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a full breakdown of what unit sizes for the Oscar Traynor 
Woods will be available in each phase. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The below is a breakdown of unit types and tenures for each phase of Oscar Traynor 
Woods: 
 
Phase 1A – 64 Units (Completion Q2 2026) 
Phase 1A delivers 64 units, comprising 16 Affordable Purchase, 24 Social, and 24 
Cost Rental units. The unit mix includes 12 two-bed houses, 42 three-bed houses, and 
4 four-bed houses, together with 4 one-bed triplex units and 2 studio apartments. 
Phase 1B – 197 Units (Completion Q1 2026 – Q1 2027) 
Phase 1B provides 197 units in total, consisting of 33 Affordable Purchase, 84 Social, 
and 80 Cost Rental units. The mix includes 30 two-bed houses, 103 three-bed houses, 
and 10 four-bed houses, alongside 12 one-bed duplexes, 24 two-bed duplexes, 12 
three-bed duplexes, 4 triplex units, and 2 studio units. 
Phase 1C – 114 Units (Completion Q3 2026) 
Phase 1C delivers 114 units, made up of 24 Affordable Purchase, 42 Social, and 48 
Cost Rental units. Unit types include 16 two-bed houses and 23 three-bed houses, 
together with 15 one-bed duplex units, 30 two-bed duplex units, 15 three-bed duplex 
units, and 13 triplex units and 2 studio apartments. 
Phase 2.1 – 162 Units (Completion Q4 2026) 
Phase 2.1 comprises 162 units, all delivered as Social housing. The sub-phase 
includes 38 one-bed apartments, 88 two-bed apartments, 30 three-bed apartments, 
and 6 studio apartments. 
Phase 2.2 – 158 Units (Completion Q3 2027) 
Phase 2.2 delivers 158 units; all provided as Cost Rental housing. The unit mix 
consists of 33 one-bed apartments, 89 two-bed apartments, 29 three-bed apartments, 
and 7 studio apartments. 
Phase 2.3 – 95 Units (Completion Q2 2028) 
Phase 2.3 comprises 95 units, all delivered as Affordable housing. The mix includes 
28 one-bed apartments, 48 two-bed apartments, and 19 three-bed apartments. 
Phase 2.4 – 60 Units (Completion Q2 2027) 
Phase 2.4 provides 60 units, delivered as 30 Cost Rental and 30 Social housing. This 
includes 12 one-bed duplex units, 40 two-bed duplex units, and 8 three-bed duplex 
units. 
 
Q.82  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive to have the yellow box at details supplied repainted? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The location will be inspected in the coming days. Any requirement for the repainting 
of the yellow box will be initiated with-in 30 working days of the Council Meeting of 
the 13th of April 2026. 
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 

To ask the Chief Executive to engage with An Post to provide clarity on the proposed 
relocation of postal counter services in Rathmines from the existing post office 
premises to a nearby retail unit, and to outline: 
 
      •     The rationale behind this proposed change and whether it aligns with previous 
commitments made to provide a modern, purpose-fitted post office facility in the area; 
      •     What assessment has been undertaken regarding the suitability, capacity, 
accessibility, and public safety implications of the proposed retail location; 
      •     Whether alternative options have been explored to retain a dedicated post 
office facility in Rathmines. 
      •     The future plans for the existing post office building, including whether it will 
remain in use or be left vacant for an extended period. 
 
This question is raised in light of significant concern among local residents regarding 
the potential loss of a key community service and the need to ensure that postal 
services in Rathmines remain accessible, fit-for-purpose, and reflective of the needs 
of the local population. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Manager will write to An Post in relation to the first three questions from the 
Councillor. 
 
In relation the future plans it was agreed with the Elected Representatives from the 
South East that An Post and DCC would explore possible ‘Meanwhile’ uses for the 
retail part of the building when An Post moves to the new location in June. 
 
In this respect a number of site visits have taken place involving City Architects and 
the Conservation Office which will advise of possible uses bearing in mind existing 
planning restrictions whilst also being cognisant of existing heritage features. 
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline in detail the scope, frequency, and effectiveness 
of its current gully cleaning and drainage maintenance programme across the city, 
particularly in light of ongoing concerns raised by residents in multiple locations? 
 
Specifically, can the Council confirm: 
• 
The scheduled frequency of gully cleaning in areas such as Moyne 
Road/Dunville Avenue, Leinster Road, Lower Rathmines Road (including the 
gully at No. 62), Castlewood Avenue, Liffey Street, Georges Street, and 
Aungier Street. 
• 
The criteria used to prioritise gullies for maintenance or replacement where 
they are persistently blocked or non-functional. 
• 
Whether there is a system in place to identify gullies that are repeatedly 
reported as defective, and how these are escalated for remedial works. 
• 
How many gullies citywide are currently recorded as non-operational or 
requiring repair. 
• 
What measures are being taken to improve the consistency and 
responsiveness of the programme, particularly during periods of heavy rainfall 
when surface water issues are most acute. 
 
In addition, could the Council advise what steps are being taken to ensure that long-
standing issues—such as gullies that have remained non-functional for extended 
periods—are systematically addressed rather than repeatedly cleared without lasting 
resolution. 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s Environmental Waters Office operates an ongoing citywide 
programme for the inspection, cleaning, maintenance and upgrading of road drainage 
gullies, which is a key component of the Council’s surface water management and 
flood risk response, particularly during periods of intense rainfall. 
 
Gully maintenance is undertaken on a planned, risk-based basis, supported by 
reactive interventions in response to service requests and severe weather events. The 
programme is structured around three defined maintenance schedules: 
Schedule 1 – General Programme 
This applies to the majority of the road network where no specific risk factors are 
identified. Gullies are cleaned on a 12 to 18-month cycle, subject to operational 
priorities. Liffey Street, Georges Street and Aungier Street are on this schedule. 
Schedule 2 – Rotational Area Programme 
This programme applies to locations where conditions increase the likelihood of 
blockage, including; Areas with on-street parking, high levels of pedestrian activity, 
and streets with deciduous trees. Gullies are cleaned on a rotational basis every 3 to 
4 months. Moyne Road/Dunville Avenue, Leinster Road, Lower Rathmines Road and 
Castlewood Avenue. 
Schedule 3 – Priority Programme 
This enhanced schedule applies to locations prone to surface water ponding during 
intense rainfall and gully repairs or upgrades are planned or under investigation. 
Gullies are inspected and cleaned at a frequency of every 4 to 6 weeks.  
The categorisation of locations within these schedules is reviewed on an ongoing 
basis, informed by service requests, inspection findings, staff observations, and 
operational experience during rainfall events. 
In addition to the above, we operate a targeted gully repair and upgrade programme 
based on information gathered during the above maintenance and from 
correspondence from stakeholders. This work includes repair or replacement of 
damaged or collapsed gullies and their connections to the sewer, sewer pipeline 
repairs, and manhole repairs and construction. Priority for this work is assessed with 
public safety considerations, risk of property flooding, impact on critical infrastructure, 
severity and frequency of reported issues and the hydraulic performance of the gully 
and its connection. 
If you have a further query or wish to make direct contact with team for this or a 
similar issue, please email cqsurfacewater@dublincity.ie and we will respond 
accordingly. 
 
Q.85  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a comprehensive list of all Active Travel plans 
and schemes within Dublin City Council’s administrative area that are funded through 
the National Transport Authority’s Active Travel Investment Programme, including 
those completed, currently in progress, or at design/public consultation stage, and for 
each scheme outline: 
• 
 The project name and location 
• 
 The current status of the scheme 

• 
 The level of funding allocated or associated NTA reference (where             
available) 
• 
The consultancy firm(s) or external contractors engaged in the design 
and/or delivery of the scheme 
• 
The key milestones and anticipated timelines for completion 
 
This information is requested to provide clarity on the scope of Active Travel 
investment across the city and the external parties involved in delivering these projects 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The full list of projects can be accessed on the Dublin City Council website. Our website 
pages contain details of all the Active Travel Network projects. This website maybe 
navigated to from the main Dublin City Council home page via the “Travel and 
Transport” page. This can be accessed via the link below: 
 
https://www.dublincity.ie/travel-and-transport/active-travel/active-travel-
schemes/active-travel-schemes-masterlist. 
 
 In addition, you can view the entire Active Travel Network map via the following link 
 
 “view our map of all past and future schemes”.  
 
This map gives the route and location of each project on the network as well as key 
milestones. Users of the map can click on any of the project routes to get information 
on stages, and status of the individual projects with corresponding timeframes. To 
illustrate this please see the extracted map snapshot on the next page. 
 
 
The latest update on projects that are currently active is provided in Report no. 76/2026 
- Quarterly Report of the Active Travel Programme Office – Q1 2026, submitted for 
inclusion with the agenda of this full Council meeting 13th April 2026.  
 
The level of funding is detailed in the National Transport Authority’s (NTA) Capital 
Grant Allocations 2026: Active Tavel Investment Grants published earlier this year by 
the NTA. A copy of these grant allocations is attached to this reply and is available at 
this link on the NTAs website: 
 
https://www.nationaltransport.ie/publications/active-travel-investment-grants-2026-
allocations/. 

 
The design consultants engaged on the projects are: Roughan O’Donovan & Scannell 
Emerson Associates via the NTA’s Active Travel Support Office (ATSO), Arup 
Consulting Engineers, Jacobs Consulting Engineers, DBFL Consulting Engineers, 
Atkins Consulting Engineers. 
 
The construction contractors that have been or are currently engaged on the projects 
are; Cairn Construction, Circet Networks, Clonmel Enterprises, Jons Civil Engineering. 
 
The delivery of the Dublin City Active Travel Network is funded by the National 
Transport Authority and other organisations such as Uisce Eireann, ESB Networks and 
the Office of Public Works.  
 
Q.86  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline whether applicants with life-limiting or serious 
medical conditions can be prioritised within the Housing Adaptation Grant scheme, and 
if so, what criteria and processes are in place to fast-track such applications, including 
any guidelines used to assess medical urgency, the typical timelines involved, and the 
supports available to ensure that vulnerable applicants receive timely decisions and 
assistance? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Housing Adaptation Grants for Older People and People with a Disability Section 
administers three Housing Grants Schemes designed to provide assistance to people 
making adaptations to their privately owned homes to meet their medical needs and to 
older people in inadequate housing conditions carrying out essential repairs to their 
owner-occupied homes. These measures enable people to stay in their own 
communities and prevent or delay their placement in residential care thereby reducing 
social segregation, assisting their carer’s and strengthening families.   
 
The three Housing Grants are as follows: - 
 
1) Housing Adaptation Scheme. 
2) Mobility Aids Scheme. 
3) Housing Aid for Older People. 
 
The priority applications are determined by either or both the Doctor’s certificate and 
the Occupational Therapist report. Currently, the average waiting time for an 
Inspection of a Grant is dependent on the nature of the Grant that is applied for.  Priority 
applications are dealt within 1 – 3 weeks, and other cases, depending on the priority 
can take up to 4 – 6 weeks.   
 
Priority cases: 
• 
Terminally ill or primarily dependent on family or a carer 
• 
Adaptions to the home would support a person leaving hospital/residential care 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if the provision of clean water supply was included as a 
condition of the planning permission granted for the residential development at details 
supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Additional information has been requested of the Councillor in order to respond to this 
enquiry.  Once the additional information is received, a response will issue to the 
councillor within two days. 

 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to release a full report regarding a property that was 
purchased by Dublin City Council from the criminal asset bureau on the 4th of 
November 2020. The property is situated on 219 Kildare Road Crumlin.   Why has this 
property remained vacant? What is the intention of Dublin city Council in relation to 
this property?   
 
Since it has been vacant this property is a site of fear and intimidation in the local 
community. It is outrageous and an insult that this property that was purchased by 
Dublin city Council has lay vacant while we have unfortunate people living on our 
streets.  This report to include:  the purchase price for this house. The evaluation report 
that was done on this house and what is the intention of Dublin city council regarding 
this property. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council, through both our Area Offices and our Maintenance Section have 
tried on a number of occasions to refurbish the property and to consider alternative 
uses for the building. 
 
Unfortunately each time that we have tried to begin works on site our contractors have 
been approached and intimidated. The Health and Safety of all DCC employees and 
contractors is paramount. We cannot take these threats lightly. 
 
Our Area office approached the Community about changing the status of the property 
into a community type hub, however this was also met with resistance.  
 
At this time there is no clear programme for when this property will be returned to use, 
however, the Council will continue to engage with the local community to find a 
solution. 
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report as to the catastrophic failure to manage 
street drinking in and around Drury Street/Castle market, South William Street, Fade 
Street area of Dublin over the Patrick’s Day and other days. This report to include what 
Dublin city council intends to do regarding the safety of the street and to stop unlawful 
street drinking.  What fines, if any, has Dublin City Council issued regarding individuals 
unlawfully street drinking in the past four years? What is the policing plan and the public 
plan for the street which is semi pedestrianised?  What public campaigns are Dublin 
City Council intending to initiate regarding unlawful street drinking which leads the 
gross antisocial behaviour and unsafeness in many areas and impacts negatively on 
both the residential community and indeed the business community.   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A working group comprising Dublin City Council, An Garda Síochána, and 
representatives from local businesses and the resident community was established in 
2025 to address ongoing concerns and drive meaningful improvements on Drury 
Street and surrounds.   The most recent meeting of this Working Group took place on 
26th March 2026 to examine the promotion and appropriate use of the street. 
 
The working group reached agreement on the following actions to improve safety, 
amenity, and the overall use of the street: 
 
• Signage relating to alcohol consumption to be procured and installed on Drury 
Street. 

• Dublin City Council’s Environment & Transportation (E&T) Department to carry out 
a physical intervention on the street, including the removal of existing bollards and 
the trial installation of seating and trees. 
• An increased Garda presence to be deployed on Drury Street and surrounding 
streets, commencing 28 March 2026. 
• Fines under Dublin City Council (Prohibition of Intoxicating Liquor on Roads and in 
Public Places) Bye-Laws,2008 are enforced by An Garda Síochána. 
 
The City Co-ordination Office have been engaging with businesses and retailers on 
Drury Street since this meeting. 
Q.90  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report as to what Dublin city council intends 
to do long-term with the Pigeon house hotel in Irish town Ringsend.  Recently the 
Southeast area received a request to rent this property for a number of years. to a 
private company.  With the population in this area increasing with a huge demand on 
resources and amenities in the area this substantial property and a prime location need 
to be developed as a community resource and not simply rented out ad hoc to various 
private groups. This report includes whether this property was offered to artists as an 
art dwelling, possible Studios or theatre space?   
And why wasn’t this property advertised as available for rent in the past number of 
years?   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Pigeon House Hotel, the former Power Station and the adjoining site were 
previously advertised for proposed disposal. This process subsequently became the 
subject of protracted legal proceedings. Accordingly, it was not considered 
appropriate to advertise the property as available for rent during that period. 
 
Notwithstanding the above, an existing tenant has remained in situ under licence since 
1 July 2018. This arrangement provides a steady revenue stream and also ensures an 
on-site presence and passive security, which has helped to deter anti-social behaviour 
at the location. 
 
In addition, the surrounding site and part of the hotel building are periodically made 
available on a short-term letting/licence basis to film productions. This provides a 
further source of revenue and is managed through the Filming/Events function of 
CCLAS, in liaison with Property Management. 
 
The site is also used for major emergency planning and training exercises by the 
Defence Forces, An Garda Síochána (including the ARU) and Dublin Fire Brigade. The 
site has proved invaluable for these purposes, given the scale required to 
accommodate large exercises and the level of privacy needed to conduct them safely 
and effectively. 
 
It should also be noted that the site is heavily industrialised and is not currently well 
served by public transport, footpaths or other supporting infrastructure. The old Power 
Station is a Protected Structure; it is not considered safe to enter and access to this 
part of the site is therefore restricted. In addition, parts of the site have been earmarked 
and reserved for key infrastructure delivery, which will limit access to certain areas. 
 
The Council will keep the longer-term use of the property under review, particularly in 
the context of further development in the surrounding area which may provide a better-
serviced and less isolated venue. The Council will also liaise with the Arts Officer 

regarding potential uses and any available funding options that could support the 
development of the building as a community-based resource and amenity. 
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report regarding the recent request by RTÉ 
Nationwide program to film on Henrietta Street was declined. This report to include 
how many film companies have filmed on the street in the past two years?  What fees 
have Dublin city council been paid for such filming? What objections, if any, have taken 
place by local residents to filming on Henrietta Street? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
• 
A filming permit was not declined to RTE.  An application was received and 
processed, and on-going discussions have taken place with RTE’s Janet 
Frawley to commence filming. 
• 
There have been three film permits issued on Henrietta St in the last 24 months. 
• 
The fees were €1076.25, €307.50 and €1250. 
 
There are on-going objections to filming on Henrietta St on a case-by-case basis.  
 
Q.92  LORD MAYOR COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to examine details supplied with a view to identifying what 
additional traffic calming or road safety measures may possibly be introduced, given 
the growing number of young people now residing there; and if he will make a 
statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The area engineer does not recommend any additional traffic calming on details 
supplied. The road is traffic calmed with the presence of on-street parking and, due 
to the fact that details supplied is on a bus route, 4 No. speed cushions, appropriately 
spaced to offer optimum traffic calming.  There are Slow/Home Zone signs at the 
entrance to the road and 30kph roundels painted on the road to highlight to motorists 
that the speed limit is 30kph. The traffic calming measures already provided on the 
road are appropriate in promoting motorists to keep their speed to 30kph or below.  
  
It is a matter for An Garda Síochána to enforce on speeding motorists.  The 
Transport Advisory Group will highlight details supplied to An Garda Síochána at the 
next TAG meeting.  
  
Q.93  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive why medical priority details supplied was refused in this 
case, despite a recommendation from the applicant’s doctor and supporting evidence 
from an occupational therapist, and if the decision will be reviewed as a matter of 
urgency and provide me an update on this particular case. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Housing List with an application date of 13/08/2020, and 
holds the following positions on the waiting list –  
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
2 
190 
E 
2 
261 

H  
2 
109 
The applicant can appeal the recent decision of not being awarded the medical priority 
by submitting an appeal in writing to Housing Allocations with any additional supporting 
documentation. 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 
number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list. 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
The applicant should be advised to keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being 
advertised that may be of interest to her and to ensure she makes an application for 
same. 
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to All Saints Park, is it possible to place some 
flower beds like in Edenmore Park.  These could be placed on the wades roadside of 
the All Saints park.  There is an amazing big green space there. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Numerous works have been carried out at All Saints Park recently, including crown-
raising of trees and the removal of ivy off railings.  
 
Consideration will be given as to how interest and colour can be added to the park in 
question, and to how any planting could be maintained in a sustainable way in the 
context of available resources. 
 
Q.95  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the upcoming concerts in St Annes Park.  
Several elderly residents live on Wades Ave and have issues parking outside their own 
homes when these concerts are on. Would it be possible to provide cones on Wades 
Ave. So, concert participants cannot park there. The residents very much welcome the 
concerts but they can end up being prisoners in their own homes or have no parking 
on their return journeys. Also, in relation to all Clubs in the area can the music 
promotors start engaging now with the clubs on pitch availability around the concerts 
times as last year this was a major issue at the last minute. The decision was just 
thrown at the clubs. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY:  
Traffic management for the concerts outside of the park is managed by An Garda 
Siochana who agree the details with local residents associations.  
Pitches are available subject to the usual weather restrictions on non-concert days 
and are available until around lunchtime on concert days.  Soon after this time Garda 
traffic and parking restrictions come into force.  If any of the clubs have any specific 
questions about pitch availability at this stage, they can be directed to 
Parkpitches@dublincity.ie or the undersigned.  
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to clarify the current policy and operational framework for 
CCTV in public spaces, including: 
1. Which cameras are publicly versus privately operated, and who has responsibility 
for their maintenance and monitoring.  
 

2. How long recordings are stored, and under what circumstances footage can be 
accessed by the public or community groups.  
 
3. What measures are in place to ensure CCTV deployment effectively enhances 
public safety while respecting privacy.  
 
4. Whether a publicly accessible map or list of CCTV locations and operators can be 
made available to improve transparency and community awareness. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Response will issue directly to Councillor. 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a detailed report on the current and projected 
use of the Wood Quay Civic Offices, including: The actual daily staff occupancy levels 
for each day of the week. If this data is not currently available, why not, and what is 
the estimated occupancy? Whether the City Manager will commit to publishing a 
monitored occupancy report over a four-week period following the Easter break. The 
maximum designed occupancy capacity of the existing Wood Quay complex compared 
with the proposed new office development. How these figures demonstrate the 
necessity (or otherwise) for a new civic office complex. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Current staff occupancy levels at Wood Quay 
Based on building access data from the Chubb security system, the average daily 
staff attendance levels in the Civic Offices, Wood Quay, are approximately: 
• 
Monday: 1,120 
• 
Tuesday: 1,136 
• 
Wednesday: 1,140 
• 
Thursday: 1,076 
• 
Friday: 864 
 
There are approximately 1,917 desk spaces within the Wood Quay Civic Offices 
complex. 
This data reflects average daily building access rather than desk-level occupancy. 
The system records entry and exit for security purposes and does not distinguish 
between short-duration visits, shared desk use, meetings, training, site work, or staff 
who may attend multiple locations during the working day. As such, it provides an 
indicative view of attendance rather than a precise measure of workspace utilisation. 
 
Availability of monitored occupancy reporting 
The Civic Offices do not operate a desk management or workspace occupancy 
system. In the absence of such infrastructure, the Council cannot generate a reliable 
desk-level or utilisation report of the type typically associated with modern office 
developments. While headline access data is available for operational purposes, it is 
limited in scope and is not suitable for publication as a definitive or comprehensive 
occupancy report. 
 
Designed capacity and comparison with proposed development 
The Wood Quay complex was designed and constructed over a number of phases in 
the 1980s and 1990s. While it can physically accommodate significant staff numbers, 

it does not align with modern standards for workspace efficiency, accessibility, energy 
performance, building services, or ICT-enabled flexible working. 
Any proposed new civic office development would be designed to contemporary 
public-sector workplace standards, providing significantly improved environmental 
performance, accessibility, flexible space, and operational efficiency when compared 
with the existing buildings. 
 
Occupancy levels and the wider accommodation question 
Occupancy figures alone do not determine the suitability or long-term viability of the 
Civic Offices. The assessment of future accommodation requirements is based on a 
broader range of factors, including building condition, compliance with climate and 
energy obligations, health and safety standards, accessibility, operational efficiency, 
and the cost and risk associated with major refurbishment or retrofit works. 
Any decisions relating to the future of the Wood Quay Civic Offices and the 
development of alternative accommodation will continue to be subject to detailed 
appraisal, business case development, and the appropriate statutory and governance 
approval processes, including consideration by the elected members. 
 
Q.98  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline the full financial implications of the proposed 
redevelopment of the Wood Quay site, including: The estimated cost of demolishing 
the existing Wood Quay complex and how this demolition will be financed. The 
proposed funding model for the new office development. The estimated market value 
of the Wood Quay site: (a) in its current state (b) as a cleared site post-demolition 
Whether the site will be offered for public sale, and if not, the rationale. The estimated 
financial impact on the Council if the site were transferred to the State at a nominal or 
reduced cost (e.g. for cultural use such as a national institution). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Wood Quay site currently has a massing study completed. A full consultation 
with the Elected Members will commence post the purchase of the site in Kevin 
Street. This will inform all of the financials for the site.  
 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a comparative and environmental assessment 
of the proposed development, including: The estimated construction cost per public 
housing unit, and whether private units will effectively subsidise public housing 
delivery. A comparison of the cost of delivering equivalent public housing elsewhere in 
the city, particularly outside the central core. An assessment of the cost and feasibility 
of compulsory purchase (CPO) of long-term derelict or underutilised sites (e.g. 
Benburb Street, Infirmary Road, East Wall Road locations) to deliver similar housing 
numbers. The estimated carbon footprint associated with: (a) demolition of the existing 
Wood Quay complex (b) construction of the proposed new offices and housing. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The ARUP assessment does not include a separate quantified carbon figure for 
demolition of the existing Wood Quay complex. 
The assessment indicates that construction of: 
• 
the proposed new offices would result in approximately 655 kg of carbon 
emissions per square metre (40,000 tonnes), and 
• 
the proposed new housing would result in approximately 600 kg of carbon 
emissions per square metre (24,000 tonnes). 

These figures are high-level estimates, provided to inform early consideration of 
options. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing: 
The Council is committed to delivering housing at scale across the City. As part of this, 
DCC is currently carrying out a housing assessment of all land owned by DCC that is 
appropriately zoned for housing to identify what extra lands could accommodate 
homes.  
Funding to deliver social and affordable homes is provided to DCC from DHLGH. Fo 
DCC to access this funding we must demonstrate that new homes achieve Value for 
Money. This includes a comparison with the cost of other new build housing schemes 
across the City. This is necessary to ensure we can secure the necessary funding and 
that any new social and affordable home is Value for Money.  Based on an initial, high 
level, assessment DCC are satisfied that the delivery of new homes would align with 
these Value for Money requirements. However, a significant amount of work is required 
to prepare a proposal for the Wood Quay site, including engagement with the Cllrs and 
public consultation.  
In response to the request for information on embodied carbon emissions, the following 
estimates are provided: 
• 
The carbon associated with demolition of Wood Quay is not calculated as part 
of the carbon assessment at this stage. It should be noted that the embodied 
carbon associated with demolition is limited to emissions from demolition 
activities such as transport of materials and fuel use. It does not include the 
embodied carbon originally contained within the existing building materials, as 
this carbon has already been expended at the time of the building’s original 
construction and is therefore not counted.  
 
• 
Camden Yard Development: The total embodied carbon for the proposed DCC 
offices at the Camden Yard development is estimated at approximately 28,453 
tCO₂e (the overall office is 39,539 tCO₂e  with 11,086 tCO₂e related to surplus 
office space not required for Dublin City Council) and 13,342 tCO₂e for the 299 
residential units.  
 
Please note the following: These values are estimated for comparison purposes based 
on public information (LETI) and recent similar type of projects assessed in Ireland. 
These are not a product of a detailed analysis based on accurate material quantities 
specific for the options assessed. The figures shown correspond to upfront embodied 
carbon which are the emissions from the materials production and construction phases 
(A1-A5) of the lifecycle before the building begins to be used. 
 
Q.100  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update and timelines on houses details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The cost of bringing these homes back into use is high. We are assessing options for 
where funding may come from. It will be challenging to fund the full renovation of these 
homes from social and affordable housing funding. If this is not possible then the 
Council will have to consider other means to bring these homes back into use. At this 
stage there is no timeline for when these homes will be brought back into use.   
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the planning for details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

A warning letter was sent to the owner of the premises concerned relating to the 
alleged building works and associated possible changes of use of the premises. An 
updated inspection is due to be carried out within the next two weeks, following which 
it will be determined whether any breaches of planning have occurred. The Councillor 
will be updated following this inspection of any proposed course of action in this matter. 
Q.102  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a timeline when the lights on details supplied 
will be repaired. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Response will issue directly to Councillor. 
 
Q.103  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report on the funding for History on your 
Doorstep for the last two years and the allocation for 2026. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The costs for History on Your Doorstep for 2024 and 2025: 
2024 – €21,407 
2024 – €28,007 
 
No allocation has been made for publication of History on Your Doorstep in 2026. 
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to report on how many abandoned vehicles were removed 
in 2024 and 2025, broken down by administrative area, and to explain the timeline of 
the process from the vehicle being reported as abandoned. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Year 
2024 
2025 
Total Abandonment Investgations 
1334 
1426 
Total Removed 
92 
110 
 
 
 
North Central 
325 
359 
Central 
318 
356 
South East 
312 
322 
South Central 
277 
215 
North West 
102 
174 
 
Information on citizenhub does not give a breakdown of removed per committee, the 
total removed is from my own database. 
 
The attached is an extract from citizenhub advising the relevant terms of reference 
for investigations. In practice citezenhub notes an average conclusion time of under 
17 days for both years. 
 
Q.105  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline the allocation of 2025 and 2026 funds for 
Carriageway and Footpath Works for each administrative area including the 
breakdown for carriageways v footpaths and methodology of deciding which roads are 
selected. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

The allocation of funds for 2025 and 2026 for Carriageway and Footpath Works for 
each administrative area is set out in the table below 
 Administrative 
Area  
Carriageway 
2025 
Footpath 
2025 
Carriageway 
2026 
Footpath 
2026 
South Central 
€1,415,497.00 692,075.00 €2,289,490.00 €512,532.00 
South East 
€2,650,636.00  €235,364.00 €3,056,181.00  €283,965.00 
Central 
€1,734,960 
€377,734 
€1,585,000 
€600,000 
North Central  
€1,400,440 
€839,080 
€1,530,000 
€970,000 
North  West 
 
€891,780 
€454,471 
€1,151,525 
€538,557 
 
The methodology for assessing roads for inclusion in the Annual Works Programme 
considers the following parameters:  
 Condition rating (visual survey and machine survey) 
• 
Skid resistance of the road 
• 
Volume and type of traffic using the road 
• 
Traffic impact number 
• 
Strategic importance of the road 
• 
Defects 
• 
Collision history 
• 
Customer and Elected Representative requests 
• 
Third party claims 
• 
Repairs 
The annual maintenance works programme is a rolling programme which currently 
only addresses approximately 1% of the City’s roads each year.  It is recognised that 
there are considerably more roads that need work than are currently in the 2026 
programme or the 2025 programme, however, given the available budget the roads 
must be prioritised on the basis of their condition and safety.   
 
Q.106  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to review the road safety measures on Hollybank Road D9 
and to consider a 'stop' or 'yield' sign at the junction with Iona Crescent and to replace 
the 'yield' sign at the Crawford Ave junction with a 'stop' sign to slow down drivers. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The junction of Hollybank Road with Iona Crescent has been included on the Minor 
Works programme which will upgrade the junction, including providing an uncontrolled 
pedestrian crossing. Therefore, no additional measures are recommended at the 
Hollybank Road / Iona Crescent junction at this time.  
The Area Engineer recommends repainting the yield road marking at the junction of 
Hollybank Road with Crawford Avenue.  
 
Q.107  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive when the new parking enforcement contract will be 
awarded. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

The Supplemental Request for Tender has been published on E-Tenders since the 1st 
of December 2025, the extended deadline for tender submission is the 7th of February 
2026.  
An assessment of tender submissions is ongoing; the contract will be awarded once 
this has been completed and all statutory timelines have been observed. 
As the current contract will expire on the 31st of July 2026, the new contract will be 
active from the 1st of August 2026.  
 
Q.108  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the taking in charge of the Royal Canal 
Park and Rathborne area in Dublin 15. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Castlethorne are actively engaged in works on the site and significant progress has 
been made in this regard. 
Discussions are still ongoing with Ballymore Homes to progress remediation works 
required to bring the areas concerned to taking in charge standard. 
 
Q.109  COUNCILLOR PAT DUNNE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for our Waste Management Section to replace 
the litter bin that was removed beside the bus stop adjacent to details supplied litter 
bin at this location was removed some weeks ago. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The litter bin at the above mentioned location was removed as it had been damaged 
beyond repair. Arrangements have been put in place for the installation of a 
replacement bin, which will be completed at the earliest opportunity. 
 
Q.110  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he is considering submitting an application for Town 
Centre First / Regeneration Funding (formerly URDF) for Finglas Village to help deal 
with dereliction and public domain improvements. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The Finglas Village Improvement Scheme will bring significant upgrades to traffic 
 
flow, increased access for cyclists and pedestrians, and enhancements to the public 
 
realm in the village. Its ultimate aims are to improve pedestrian, cycling and public 
 
transport facilities for Finglas Village through the provisions of new cycleways, 
 
improve intermodal transfer facilities and enhance links to the proposed Finglas Luas 
 
stop. This is being funded on a 50/50 basis by the NTA and DCC and is scheduled to 
 
begin construction in July 2026. 
 
In addition to this, DCC has previously carried out a high-level review of Finglas 
 
village in September 2021 and recommended a number of changes. While the 
 
Village Improvement Scheme will deliver some of these, it was also noted that 
 
external developments, such as Luas Finglas, will provide an opportunity for more.  I 
 
will direct the Area Office to keep elected members informed as this is rolled out and 
 
to engage with the project team to ensure that the project brings benefits to the   
 
community at large.  
 
Q.111  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if he is considering a capital fund investment for the 
regeneration of Finglas Village. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

 
The Finglas Village Improvement Scheme represents a significant capital investment 
 
in 
Finglas 
Village and as 
previously 
noted, 
incorporates public 
 
realm enhancements for the area, as well as streamlining traffic flow and 
 
increasing connectivity with other parts of the city by integrating with the wider Active 
 
Travel network.    
 
In addition, Dublin City Council previously undertook a high-level review of Finglas 
 
Village in September 2021, which identified and recommended a number of strategic 
 
changes. While the Village Improvement Scheme will facilitate the delivery of some 
 
of these recommendations, it is also the case that external initiatives, including the 
 
Luas Finglas project, present further opportunities to support and enhance future 
 
development. The Area Office will continue to engage with and liaise closely with the 
 
project team throughout the implementation of the project and will ensure that elected 
 
members are kept fully informed of progress, with a view to securing positive and 
 
sustainable outcomes for the wider Finglas community. 
 
Q.112  COUNCILLOR DANNY BYRNE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for a timeline for the removal of the barriers at Mount Street. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The fencing that remains in and around the International Protection offices on Mount 
Street was erected by the OPW on behalf of the International Protection Office. 
Dublin City Council removed its fencing in 2025.  
Following engagement with the IPO they have advised that they are working towards 
the removal of the fencing and the installation of new planter boxes commencing 
20th April with a date for the final removal and installation expected shortly thereafter. 
 
Q.113  COUNCILLOR DANNY BYRNE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to urgently review the maintenance at Smock Alley Court. 
Residents report a very poor level of upkeep. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance Caretaking and Grounds Maintenance Service carried out a 
recent deep clean of the Smock Ally Court Complex on foot of recent contacts from 
residents. The area will continue to be monitored as part of the overall service provided 
by the Caretaking team. 
 
A Caretaking Team Leader spoke with a resident recently to explain the works 
provided by the team as some of the works highlighted / raised were beyond the scope 
of Housing Maintenance services. 
 
Housing Maintenance will link in with the Local Area Office with a view to ensuring that 
the needs of tenants living in the complex are being met insofar as possible within the 
remit of the services provided by Dublin City Council. 
 
Q.114  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for: 1. A list of sites entered into the Derelict Sites Register 
since 1 February 2026 including the date of entry and the value of each site 2. A list of 
sites removed from the Derelict Sites Register since 1 February 2026 3. A list of sites 
that have been re-evaluated since 1 February 2026 including the date of valuation and 
the new value of each site 4. A list of sites for which initial valuations have been 
received since 1 February 2026 including the date of valuation and the value of each 
site 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
1. Sites Added to DSR from 1/2/2026 

DS1650, Everton Avenue, Cabra East added to DSR 11/2/2026. Awaiting valuation 
DS1693, Mourne Road, Crumlin, Dublin 12 added to DSR 30/3/2026. Awaiting 
valuation. 
 
2. Sites removed from DSR from 1/2/2026 
DS1330, Eugene Street, Dublin 8 removed from DSR 4/2/2026 
DS1464, Saul Road, Crumlin, Dublin 23, removed from DSR 4/2/2026 
DS1564, North Circular Road, Dublin 7, removed from DSR 25/2/2026 
 
3. Sites re-evaluated since 1/2/2026 
DS884 Greenmount Industrial Estate, Unit 4 re-valued 11/2/2026 @ €XX 
 
4. Sites with initial valuations received from 1/2/2026 
DS2172 Dorset Street Upper, 78, Dublin 1 valued 20/3/2026 @ €XX 
DS864 Templemore Avenue, Site to the rear of Highfield Road, Dublin 6 valued 
18/2/2025. S.22 Notice returned. Re-issued 9/3/2026 
 
Q.115  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive, for a comprehensive progress report on the proposed all-
weather football facility for the Artane / Whitehall LEA located on the Glin Road in 
Coolock and to request a timeline for consultation, planning and construction. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council have appointed Sports Labs to provide pitch expertise on the 
project. They have commenced preliminary design work which will include several 
surveys and site investigations. Once this initial design is complete, engagement will 
take place with the various stakeholders. It is expected that the Part 8 will be lodged 
in Q3 2026. 
 
Q.116  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline the process for anti-social behaviour in our 
tenancies and to detail how many tenants in the North Central Area have been 
removed from properties for breaching of anti-social rules. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is very conscious of the problems caused by Anti-Social Behaviour 
and the effect that such behaviour can have on persons living, working in, or within the 
vicinity of local authority dwellings and housing estates. For this reason, Dublin City 
Council addresses and investigates all complaints of Anti - Social Behaviour in, or 
within the vicinity of, its dwelling by taking measures to prevent and abate such 
behaviour. 
The mechanism with which Dublin City Council investigates all anti-social behaviour 
complaints is described within our anti-social behaviour strategy, ‘Fostering Safer 
Neighbourhoods 2022 – 2027’. Initial complaints are thoroughly investigated in the 
local area offices before escalation to the Serious Anti-Social Behaviour Unit for further 
action, if warranted. The first step of Dublin City Council’s Anti- Social Behaviour Policy 
initially involves the issuing of a Tenancy Warning under Section 7 (Anti-Social 
Behaviour) and Section 9 (Breach of Tenancy). In serious cases, Dublin City Council 
can seek an Exclusion Order to remove the individual causing the behaviour as 
opposed to taking action against the whole family. The final step in the legal process 
involves a Possession Order. A Possession Order maybe sought if the issuing of the 
Tenancy Warning fails to abate the serious anti-social behaviour in question.  
There was 1 anti-social behaviour eviction in 2025 and 1 anti-social behaviour eviction 
in 2026 to date within the North Central Area. 
 

Q.117  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive for a comprehensive progress report on the expansion of 
the all-weather football facility located in the Stardust Memorial Park, Dublin 17 and a 
timeline for the completion of the works. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following interruptions to the works due to sustained high rainfall, the contractor was 
forced off-site.  
 
Carpet laying and lighting installation works are due to recommence in mid-April. 
Works are expected to last 3 weeks.  
 
The ESB have previously advised they are not able to provide the necessary mini pillar 
to power the lights until later in the summer.  The facility will be available without 
working lights from the middle of May, and the full facility with lights will be available 
for the dark months of next winter. 
 
Q.118  COUNCILLOR JESSLYN HENRY 
To ask the Chief Executive for a breakdown in tabular form of the Housing waiting lists 
for Area B i.e. Allocation, Transfer, Homeless, Welfare etc and to include how many 
from these lists have been housed in the past three months.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
BAND 1 HOUSING
Area B   
BAND 1 TRANSER LIST
Area B   
Care Leaver Priority
30
Surrendering Larger priority
36
Traveller Priority
50
Transfer HAP Band 1
1671
Housing Medical Priority
82
Transfer HAP Band 1 Older Person
9
Housing Medical Priority older person
4
Transfer Medical priority 
111
Welfare Priority
12
Transfer Medical priority older person
14
Welfare Priority older person
2
Transfer Welfare priority
63
Homeless Priority
11
Transfer Welfare priority older person
1
Homeless Priority older person
7
Band 1 Transfer List Grand Total
1905
Band 1 Grand Total
198
BAND 2 TRANSFER LIST
Area B   
BAND 2 HOUSING
Area B   
Band 2 Transfer List
634
Band 2 Housing List
2489
Band 2 Transfer List older person
77
Band 2 Housing List older person
34
Band 2 Transfer List Grand Total
711
Band 2 Grand Total
2523
BAND 3 TRANSFER LIST
Area B   
BAND 3 HOUSING
Area B   
Band 3 Transfer List
2122
Band 3 Housing List
1529
Band 3 Transfer List older person
132
Band 3 Housing List older person
141
Band 3 Transfer List Grand Total
2254
Band 3 Grand Total
1670
TRANSFER LIST TOTAL
4870
HOUSING LIST TOTAL
4391
 

 
There have been 164 properties allocated in Area B in the first 3 months of this year.  
The Housing Allocations Quarterly report is currently being finalised, this will be issued 
to all Councillor in the coming weeks.  This will outline the lettings in each housing 
area. 
 
Q.119  COUNCILLOR KARL STANLEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report on the staffing and activity levels of the 
hardship function within DCC's housing dept in the 12 months to Apil 2026, including 
a. 
the number of full-time equivalent (FTE) staff assigned to process and manage 
hardship claims from DCC tenants 
b. 
the number of hardship claims received  
c. 
the number of hardship claims approved vs denied 
d. 
the total quantum of rent receipts deferred for payment under the hardship 
scheme 
e. 
the total quantum of rent receipts ""written off"" under the hardship scheme 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s Differential Rent Scheme 2026 came into effect on 6 April 2026. 
The scheme provides for income-based rent assessments, with a Hardship Clause 
available to support tenants experiencing exceptional circumstances. 
 
Tenants of Dublin City Council housing may contact hardshipqueries@dublincity.ie for 
further information regarding the Hardship Clause. HAP tenants should contact to the 
HAP Section by emailing haprent@dublincity.ie. 
 
The reporting of Hardship applications and claims commenced on 6 April 2026. Staff 
have been assigned for this function and workforce plan is under review within the 
rents section. To support the information requested under this council question; since 
January 1st 2026: 
 
• 
Two tenants were referred by Executive Housing Officers (Arrears Officers) for 
consideration under the Hardship Clause. These cases were successful in 
obtaining support under the Hardship Clause. 
• 
Eight enquiries were received directly from tenants, one of which related to a HAP 
tenancy. 
• 
One tenant required a full review of their rent assessment due to a change in 
income. Following this review, the tenant’s weekly rent charge was reduced, and 
the Hardship enquiry was not pursued. 
• 
One tenant was advised to contact their local MABS office, as it was considered 
that a Debt Relief Notice may be more appropriate in their circumstances. 
• 
The remaining five enquiries are currently under review. 
• 
The enquiry received from the HAP tenant was forwarded to the HAP Section, as 
all HAP-related matters are dealt with directly by that service.  
• 
The HAP section have received 18 requests for review of their differential rent 
under a Hardship clause. The HAP amendments team are currently assessing 
these tenancies in line with affordability guidelines as set out by the Department of 
Housing and to ensure tenancy sustainment is achieved. 
 
 
An application form will be provided to tenants upon Hardship referral/request. 
Applicants will be required to submit a full breakdown of weekly income and outgoings, 
along with details of any additional expenses, such as medical costs. Supporting 

documentation may also be requested, including consultant reports, social worker 
reports, or other relevant evidence. 
 
Tenants may also request a referral through their Executive Housing Officer or via their 
Social Worker, where they are linked with Dublin City Council’s Welfare Team. 
For general queries relating to changes to the Differential Rent Scheme, tenants 
should contact rents@dublincity.ie or phone 01 222 2211. 
 
Q.120  COUNCILLOR KARL STANLEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to release the full ARUP report relating to the embodied 
carbon assessment for the construction of Camden Yard and the redevelopment of 
Wood Quay. I have seen the report, and it is clear there is no commercially sensitive 
information in it. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The carbon assessment report recently presented to elected members will be made 
available as agreed. 
 
Q.121  COUNCILLOR KARL STANLEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report detailing DCC's due diligence done 
relating to archaeological risks of further development of the Wood Quay site. 
Specifically, report is to outline any engagement or correspondence with 
archaeological experts (either within DCC or external) to assess legal risks relating to 
breaking ground on the archaeologically significant Wood Quay site again. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Chief Executive recognises the archaeological significance of the Wood Quay site 
and the importance of ensuring that any future consideration of its redevelopment fully 
reflects statutory obligations and heritage protections. 
 
At this stage, no redevelopment proposal for the Wood Quay site has been brought 
forward and no decisions have been made regarding refurbishment, demolition or 
further construction. As a result, no site-specific archaeological due diligence or risk 
assessment relating to redevelopment has yet been undertaken. 
 
Any future consideration of redevelopment at Wood Quay would require a 
comprehensive programme of assessment and would be subject to all applicable 
planning and heritage legislation.  
 
These matters would form part of a structured process with Elected Members before 
any proposal could be advanced. 
 
As previously outlined, the future of the Wood Quay site will be considered through the 
Council’s established governance processes, with full engagement with Elected 
Members at the appropriate stages, and no action will be taken that would pre-empt 
those processes. 
 
Q.122  COUNCILLOR KARL STANLEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a tabular report on location and installation date 
of all filtered permeability schemes introduced in the DCC area from 2016 to date. 
Report to include location of filter and date of installation (to the nearest quarter). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A list of filtered permeability schemes will be prepared and issued to the councillor 
 

Q.123  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to take measures at the pedestrian crossing at details 
supplied to improve driver awareness and enforcement, as residents have reported 
that drivers often continue through red lights and that many do not appear to see the 
crossing. The positioning of signage partially obscures the traffic light on the left-hand 
side for drivers approaching from the south of the crossing as shown. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Motorists driving through a red light or not heeding traffic signals or signage at a 
pedestrian crossing is a matter of enforcement by An Garda Síochána.  
 
A service request (7051150) has been created and the Area Engineer will assess the 
positioning of the signage with regards to motorists’ visibility of the pedestrian lights.  
 
Q.124  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to consider the installation of bins and anti-dog waste 
signage at details supplied as there is a persistent issue of dog waste not being 
picked up at this location, where there are a number of schools including a school for 
visually impaired children who would be particularly affected by this when navigating 
the footpath. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Arrangements are in place to install anti-dog fouling signage on details supplied. In 
addition, the Waste Management Inspector will review the existing litter bin provision 
in the area to assess whether an additional bin is required. If this is deemed 
necessary the bin will be installed as soon as possible.  
 
Q.125  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
 
To ask the Chief Executive for an assessment of maintenance works needed at the 
remaining public green space at details supplied, and for these works to be carried 
out as soon as possible. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An assessment to determine whether maintenance works are needed at the open 
space that was taken in charge by the council at details supplied will be conducted in 
the coming weeks, and any necessary works will be carried out in due course.  
 
Q.126  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NÍ MHUIRÍ 
To ask the Chief Executive if the Council would be open to engaging with Rockfield 
Wellness and Artane Tidy Towns regarding the possibility of establishing a community 
garden at the rear of the Rockfield Tennis pavilion. The space is surrounded by a 
railing, which would make it an ideal space to add a small garden with raised beds to 
grow fruit and vegetables. The pavilion is currently occupied by Rockfield Tennis Club 
and Council staff store equipment on the side where the groups are interested in 
creating a garden. The groups are happy to submit a formal proposal. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Council and the local community have made plans to establish a community 
orchard in the park, not far from the location in question. 
 
This location serves as a secure car park for council vehicles. It is considered that a 
community garden would compromise this arrangement however we can meet with 
the group to consider their ideas. 
 
Q.127  COUNCILLOR MARY CALLAGHAN 

 
To ask the Chief Executive for the 55+ Housing List waiting lists and 55+ Transfer List 
by Area and by band. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Older Persons Housing List
Area B   Area D   Area E  Area H   Area J  Area K   Area L   Area M  Area N  Area P   Grand Total
Housing Medical Priority older person
4
4
9
7
5
4
3
3
7
2
48
Welfare Priority older person
2
1
1
1
1
1
7
Homeless Priority older person
7
1
4
4
5
2
4
2
1
30
Band 2 Housing List older person
34
9
35
23
23
25
18
28
30
5
230
Band 3 Housing List older person
141
13
112
50
47
46
45
48
68
12
582
Older Persons Transfer List
Area B   Area D   Area E  Area H   Area J  Area K   Area L   Area M  Area N  Area P   Grand Total
Transfer HAP Band 1 Older Person
9
9
6
7
4
2
5
8
2
52
Transfer Medical priority older person
14
10
28
24
7
11
25
14
10
4
147
Transfer Welfare priority older person
1
2
1
4
1
3
1
2
1
16
Band 2 Transfer List older person
77
8
55
38
19
28
15
41
32
8
321
Band 3 Transfer List older person
132
42
163
87
81
56
103
88
72
21
845
 
 
Q.128  COUNCILLOR MARY CALLAGHAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the rates of RZLT it has paid to date and a list of lands it 
has paid the dept on. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Residential Zoned Land Tax (RZLT) is an annual tax applied to land that is zoned 
for residential or mixed use.  Its objective is to increase housing supply by encouraging 
landowners to develop or activate serviced land that is currently idle. The tax is 
charged at a rate of 3% of the land’s market value each year.  
 
The tax became payable from 1 February 2025. Dublin City Council has paid 
€3,204,193.50 to the Revenue Commissioners in relation to 37 DCC-owned sites that 
appear on the RZLT map and are liable for the tax. 
 
Q.129  COUNCILLOR MARY CALLAGHAN 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the number of tenant in situ acquisitions made, by area, in 
2024, 2025 and to date in 2026 in tabular form. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Tenant in Situ (TIS) Acquisitions by Area and Year 
Year 
Central 
North 
Central 
North 
West 
South 
Central 
South 
East 
Total TIS 
2023 
23 
75 
73 
48 
9 
228 
2024 
26 
72 
77 
63 
14 
252 

2025 
7 
27 
23 
17 
3 
77 
2026  
(to date) 
1 
1 
1 
 
 
3 
 
Q.130  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise on progress of recruitment of lifeguards, for the 
coming season, and specifically say when we will have lifeguards recruited for 
Dollymount Beach. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Human Resources have recently advertised for these temporary posts and recruitment 
will take place as soon as the interview process is completed.  
 
Q.131  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, in relation to the agreed proposal for a municipal dog 
shelter, to advise on progress to date and say when the City Council will have our own 
municipal dog shelter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Animal Welfare and Control Services Unit have engaged with our colleagues in the 
City Architects Office to investigate the potential of a site in North County Dublin. This 
parcel of land, although located in Fingal County Council’s Administrative area, is 
owned by Diblin City Council.   
 
Following a number of site visits to the existing Shelters and third-party providers, initial 
draft plans have been submitted to the Animal Welfare Unit for discussion based on 
the available site information.  
 
Next steps will include gathering estimates of costs for design, structural and building 
works.  
 
Q.132  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the protection of the barrier that Bull Island 
provides for the homes and business on the Clontarf seafront, to say what action is 
planned to address the two most recent major breaches of the island at the northern 
end of the island and if he will make a detailed statement on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This issue will be discussed with the Flood Protection Office and a separate response 
issued to the Councillor.   
 
Q.133  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, in relation to the provision of promised eco toilets for Bull 
Island to give an update of progress of same and say  
(a)  When we will have the said eco toilets 
(b) When the public will have access to the toilets in Red Stables, St. Anne’s Park 
and explain the reasons behind the delays in the provision of both (a) and (b) above. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Eco toilets are in place off the Causeway Road on North Bull Island and serviced daily.  
 
A replacement block of toilets on North Bull Wall is being considered and an up date 
on the provision of these will be given to the Area Committee shortly. 

 
The toilets in the car park at the Red Stables have been awaiting a final sign off by the 
contractor. It is understood that this is imminent and they should be open in the next 
couple of weeks at which time the temporary toilets will be removed.    
 
Q.134  COUNCILLOR DARYL BARRON 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if they will install a light on details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Public lighting is installed along footpaths that cross open spaces only if the paths are 
part of a recognised commuter route connecting residential areas to transport links. In 
this context, the bus stop for details supplied is served by a lighted footpath at details 
supplied location. Therefore, there are no plans to install additional lighting to the paths 
at details supplied location.  
 
Q.135  COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive if he is aware of any instance where an Approved Housing 
Body has privately sold land which Dublin City Council had disposed of to the AHB? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
When DCC disposes of land to an Approved Housing Body, there is a restriction on 
the title documents which precludes that land from being used for anything other than 
social or affordable housing. Therefor if an AHB requested to dispose of that 
land/properties it would have to be to another AHB or transferred back to DCC. 
 
The Housing Department is not aware of any instance where land formally owned by 
the DCC has been sold by an AHB in a private capacity.  
 
Where an AHB purchases land itself directly from the private market or has been 
donated land and then receives state funding to develop that land for social or 
affordable housing the AHB is restricted by the terms and conditions of the state 
funding granted as to what this land can be used for.  
 
Where an AHB has acquired land privately and it has not accessed state funding to 
developed out the land for social/affordable housing purposes ie; site remains vacant. 
The AHB may after notifying the AHB Regulator and the Local Authority sell the land.   
 
   
AHB’s can with the permission of the Local Authority and the Approved Housing Body 
Regulator transfer assets (social housing units) to another Approved Housing Body 
this is in general to ensure that the units remain in use as social housing.     
 
Q.136  COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a list of Retention Applications for unauthorised 
developments, including the Planning Reference Number, in the Dublin Central area 
since 2018? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Reply will be issued directly to Cllr. 
 
Q.137  COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on Planning Enforcement file details 
supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

An Enforcement Notice will be served shortly in respect of the container. The Councillor 
will be informed of the details of the notice once served. The issue of the access door 
into the laneway remains under investigation. A warning letter was served on the owner 
of the premises relating to this matter. A response to this letter is expected in the 
coming weeks. Dublin City Council will consider this response and determine whether 
any further action is possible relating to this aspect of our investigations relating to the 
premises. 
 
Q.138  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive to prioritise the installation of more litter bins around the 
inner streets of Stoneybatter, particularly along Oxmantown Road and the adjoining 
streets. This is an issue I have consistently raised but have not seen any action on to 
date. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Waste Management Inspector for the Stoneybatter area will review the litter bin 
allocation to determine if there is a requirement for additional bins.  
If it is deemed necessary to install additional bins this will be carried out as soon 
possible. Suitable sites are generally those with higher footfall or activity levels, such 
as near commercial or takeaway premises, bus stops or similar public use points.  
 
Q.139  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to review and strengthen School Zone measures around 
St Gabriel’s National School, Cowper Street, Stoneybatter, D7, given the increasing 
traffic volumes, the ongoing redevelopment at O’Devaney Gardens, and the proposed 
bus corridor on Prussia Street, all of which are set to impact local traffic patterns. What 
further safety interventions can be introduced for the protection of students at opening 
and closing times. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks, Biodiversity and Landscape Services received a tender for the construction of 
a Green School Zone on Cowper Street as per the plan shared in November 2025. 
Pending a funding review, it is anticipated that construction will take place during the 
school holidays of this Summer, 2026. 
 
This project brings together the Greening Stoneybatter programme and the Safe 
Routes to School initiative to deliver a Green School Zone with key design objectives 
to: 
• 
Improve safety on Cowper Street so that active travel (cycling, walking, 
wheeling, and scooting) to and from school is encouraged. 
• 
Enhance the green environment to support better neighbourhood air 
quality. 
 
Q.140  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for an extension of the school traffic warden 
service to cover the 1.30pm finish for junior and senior infants at St Gabriel’s National 
School, as well as to provide an additional warden at the Aughrim Street / Cowper 
Street junction for all school opening and closing times. Given parental concerns and 
the significant increase in traffic, could an assessment be carried out as soon as 
possible and an update provided on the process and likely timeframe for securing 
these additional warden supports. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The school warden service is provided for unaccompanied children, over the age of 8, 
crossing to and from school, usually from 2nd class up. School children in the junior 

side of primary school cannot leave school premises unaccompanied, and therefore 
we would not supply a school warden at this time.  
 
A request for a school warden to assist children crossing at the junction of Aughrim 
Street and Cowper Street junction will be assessed and referred to the Traffic Advisory 
Group for examination. The Councillor will be informed of the recommendation in due 
course. 
 
Q.141  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to engage with street traders in the city centre - particularly 
those with stalls on O’Connell Street and Liffey Street - with a view to supporting 
improvements to their stalls and providing new, upgraded stalls and equipment. These 
stalls and people are the very fabric of Dublin City, with many run by multigenerational 
street traders. Upgrading their facilities would not only support the traders themselves 
but would also greatly enhance the streetscape and atmosphere of the city. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Co-ordination Office has been engaging with traders across the city and have 
successfully installed a trading kiosk on Cole’s Lane, marking the final component of 
the recent improvement works carried out in this area. This initiative forms part of the 
wider project to enhance the lane’s functionality and public appeal. The stall will offer 
valuable insights into how trading activity can be supported in this location, helping us 
assess potential for more permanent solutions in future. While it has performed well in 
that location, it may not be suitable for wider deployment. We are now developing a 
new prototype, which we intend to install at an alternative site to evaluate its 
performance in a different environment. 
 
Q.142  COUNCILLOR CAROLYN MOORE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive what it means for the biodiversity objectives set out in the 
Dublin City Development Plan that Dublin City Fire Brigade has deemed that green 
wall installations do not comply with the provisions of Part B the Second Schedule to 
the Building Regulation 1997-2024.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin Fire Brigade, DFB has concerns regarding the use of Green wall systems in 
buildings. 
Our role in considering applications for a fire safety certificate is to determine if 
compliance with the Building Regulations Part B has been achieved. 
 
Technical Guidance document B 2024 offers guidance to achieving prima facie 
compliance with the Building Regulations Part B. Designers and applicants use 
TGDB 2024 as a method of demonstrating prima facie compliance with Building 
Regulations, compliance must be demonstrated as part of fire safety certificate 
applications as is required by the Building Control Regulations.  
 
There is specifically no mention in TGDB 2024 in relation to Green Wall systems and 
how they can achieve compliance with the Building Regulations.  Therefore, it is 
incumbent on designers to demonstrate compliance using other methods. This is 
challenging with emerging research and evidence of the risk inherent in the design, 
the installation, ongoing maintenance and sustainability of Green Wall systems from 
a fire safety perspective. 
 
The issues detailed below are being considered and applied on a case-by-case basis 
in assessing compliance with Building Regulations of Fire Safety Certificate 
applications.  

 
International research by the University of Greenwich on the Fire Safety Risks of 
External Living Walls and Implications for Regulatory Guidance in England has 
raised a number of concerns detail below for reference. 
 
Supporting information ;- 
 
- 
The use of combustible materials such as plants, growth media, plastics for 
the modules (e.g. polypropylene) and backing layers is a concern. The 
integration of these materials into a composite Living Wall system may 
increase fire spread and severity. 
- 
Such systems create air pockets and gaps which may hinder or exacerbate 
fire spread. 
- 
Concerns also arise where Living Walls abut windows or wall penetrations – 
fire can spread from within to the Living Wall and from the Living wall to the 
interior. 
- 
An example – On particular fire retarded (FR) polypropylene (PP) currently 
used in Living Walls (i.e. achieved a Class B Surface Spread of Flame rating) 
however when investigated by the University of Greenwich it was found; 
o it has a higher Heat of Combustion and greater mass/ m2 that the 
Grenfell ACM Core (Polyethylene) 
o The specific FR PP Living Wall represents 34% more fire load per m2 
than Grenfell ACM 
- 
Moisture levels within the growing medium and irrigation network can greatly 
influence flammability and fire spread. 
- 
Lack of maintenance e.g. neglected accumulation of dry matter and litter can 
affect flammability and fire spread. 
- 
Environmental Factors – Wind can dry plant and can support fire spread, 
climate change – weather patterns – increased periods of drought and 
increases in wind velocity. 
- 
BS 8414 Full Scale Test addresses many shortcomings of current test 
methods considering the scale of the test facility and larger ignition source 
associated with Green Walls and Living Walls. 
- 
The current reaction to fire testing methodology, using the Single Burn Item 
(SBI) Test (EN 19823) for living walls is inappropriate. Reaction to fire testing 
regime is designed for conventional building façade systems. 
- 
Regulatory Guidance and Best Practice documents are deemed to be 
outdated an inappropriate for such systems. 
 
Examples of Living Wall Fire Incidents:  
 
- 
Beer Graden Fire Sydney 2012 
- 
Mandarin Oriental Hotel Fire London 2018  
- 
Block of Flats Ealing, London 2018  
 
Greenwich Uni research link 
 
PowerPoint Presentation 
 
 
Interesting article attached also; 
 
Green wall systems marketed with questionable fire safety claims 
 
Cross Report 

 
Fire safety concern over green walls | CROSS 
 
Parks Reply: 
Any changes to the building regulations on issues which are referenced in the City 
Biodiversity Action Plan will also be amended in the review of the BAP which is 
currently underway.  
 
Green walls or living walls are self-sustaining vertical gardens that are attached to the 
exterior or interior of a building. Where possible, larger schemes shall consider the use 
of green walls to improve the environment, absorb and filter stormwater, reduce 
pollution, mitigate any potential heat island effect and decrease carbon emissions. 
Policy GI5 of Dublin City Council Development Plan that the installation of living green 
walls should be fully encouraged throughout the city of Dublin.   
Policy CA9 of the City Development Plan states;  
Climate Adaptation Actions in the Built Environment Development proposals must 
demonstrate sustainable, climate adaptation, circular design principles for new 
buildings / services / site. The council will promote and support development which is 
resilient to climate change. This would include:  
a. measures such as green roofs and green walls to reduce internal overheating and 
the urban heat island effect.  
b. ensuring the efficient use of natural resources (including water) and making the most 
of natural systems both within and around buildings.  
c. minimising pollution by reducing surface water runoff through increasing permeable 
surfaces and use of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS);  
d. reducing flood risk, damage to property from extreme events– residential, public and 
commercial.  
e. reducing risks from temperature extremes and extreme weather events to critical 
infrastructure such as roads, communication networks, the water/drainage network, 
and energy supply.  
f. promoting, developing and protecting biodiversity, novel urban ecosystems and 
green infrastructure. 
Green walls are considered as part of a wider suits of green infrastructure in the city 
environment that offer SuDs, biodiversity, amenity value as nature base solutions.  
 
Q.143  COUNCILLOR CAROLYN MOORE 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to clarify if this is now the stated position of DCC and DFB 
in relation to green walls, or is this to be considered on a case-by-case basis? Can the 
Chief Executive further clarify by what alternative means developers can be required 
to achieve a net biodiversity gain and a softening of hard landscaping if green walls 
are not compliant with building regulations and planning applications proposing green 
walls have to be amended? And finally, if green wall installations are incompatible with 
building regulations, does it require amending either the City Development Plan or the 
building regulations to correct this anomaly? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin Fire Brigade, DFB has concerns regarding the use of Green wall systems in 
buildings. 
Our role in considering applications for a fire safety certificate is to determine if 
compliance with the Building Regulations Part B has been achieved. 
 
Technical Guidance document B 2024 offers guidance to achieving prima facie 
compliance with the Building Regulations Part B. Designers and applicants use TGDB 
2024 as a method of demonstrating prima facie compliance with Building Regulations, 

compliance must be demonstrated as part of fire safety certificate applications as is 
required by the Building Control Regulations.  
 
There is specifically no mention in TGDB 2024 in relation to Green Wall systems and 
how they can achieve compliance with the Building Regulations.  Therefore, it is 
incumbent on designers to demonstrate compliance using other methods. This is 
challenging with emerging research and evidence of the risk inherent in the design, 
the installation, ongoing maintenance and sustainability of Green Wall systems from a 
fire safety perspective. 
 
The issues detailed below are being considered and applied on a case-by-case basis 
in assessing compliance with Building Regulations of Fire Safety Certificate 
applications.  
 
International research by the University of Greenwich on the Fire Safety Risks of 
External Living Walls and Implications for Regulatory Guidance in England has raised 
a number of concerns detail below for reference. 
 
Supporting information ;- 
 
- 
The use of combustible materials such as plants, growth media, plastics for the 
modules (e.g. polypropylene) and backing layers is a concern. The integration 
of these materials into a composite Living Wall system may increase fire spread 
and severity. 
- 
Such systems create air pockets and gaps which may hinder or exacerbate fire 
spread. 
- 
Concerns also arise where Living Walls abut windows or wall penetrations – 
fire can spread from within to the Living Wall and from the Living wall to the 
interior. 
- 
An example – On particular fire retarded (FR) polypropylene (PP) currently 
used in Living Walls (i.e. achieved a Class B Surface Spread of Flame rating) 
however when investigated by the University of Greenwich it was found; 
o it has a higher Heat of Combustion and greater mass/ m2 that the 
Grenfell ACM Core (Polyethylene) 
o The specific FR PP Living Wall represents 34% more fire load per m2 
than Grenfell ACM 
- 
Moisture levels within the growing medium and irrigation network can greatly 
influence flammability and fire spread. 
- 
Lack of maintenance e.g. neglected accumulation of dry matter and litter can 
affect flammability and fire spread. 
- 
Environmental Factors – Wind can dry plant and can support fire spread, 
climate change – weather patterns – increased periods of drought and 
increases in wind velocity. 
- 
BS 8414 Full Scale Test addresses many shortcomings of current test 
methods considering the scale of the test facility and larger ignition source 
associated with Green Walls and Living Walls. 
- 
The current reaction to fire testing methodology, using the Single Burn Item 
(SBI) Test (EN 19823) for living walls is inappropriate. Reaction to fire testing 
regime is designed for conventional building façade systems. 
- 
Regulatory Guidance and Best Practice documents are deemed to be outdated 
an inappropriate for such systems. 
 
Examples of Living Wall Fire Incidents:  
 
- 
Beer Graden Fire Sydney 2012 

- 
Mandarin Oriental Hotel Fire London 2018  
- 
Block of Flats Ealing, London 2018  
 
Greenwich Uni research link 
 
PowerPoint Presentation 
 
 
Interesting article attached also; 
 
Green wall systems marketed with questionable fire safety claims 
 
Cross Report 
 
Fire safety concern over green walls | CROSS 
 
Policy CA9 of the City Development Plan states;  
Climate Adaptation Actions in the Built Environment Development proposals must 
demonstrate sustainable, climate adaptation, circular design principles for new 
buildings / services / site. The council will promote and support development which is 
resilient to climate change. This would include:  
a. measures such as green roofs and green walls to reduce internal overheating and 
the urban heat island effect.  
b. ensuring the efficient use of natural resources (including water) and making the most 
of natural systems both within and around buildings.  
c. minimising pollution by reducing surface water runoff through increasing permeable 
surfaces and use of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS);  
d. reducing flood risk, damage to property from extreme events– residential, public and 
commercial.  
e. reducing risks from temperature extremes and extreme weather events to critical 
infrastructure such as roads, communication networks, the water/drainage network, 
and energy supply.  
f. promoting, developing and protecting biodiversity, novel urban ecosystems and 
green infrastructure. 
Green walls are only one possible element of green infrastructure in the city 
environment that offer SuDs, biodiversity, amenity value as nature base solutions. 
Therefore, there is no requirement to amend the City Development Plan if Green Walls 
are not provided.  
 
Q.144  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide information on the current maintenance, 
cleaning, and upgrading programme for gullies across the city, particularly in light of 
recent heavy downpours where some gullies appear to be operating below standard; 
and further outline the metrics used to assess the performance of the gully system, as 
well as the criteria and process by which gully repairs and upgrades are prioritised and 
approved? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s Environmental Waters Office operates an ongoing citywide 
programme for the inspection, cleaning, maintenance and upgrading of road drainage 
gullies, which is a key component of the Council’s surface water management and 
flood risk response, particularly during periods of intense rainfall. 
 

Gully maintenance is undertaken on a planned, risk-based basis, supported by 
reactive interventions in response to service requests and severe weather events. The 
programme is structured around three defined maintenance schedules: 
Schedule 1 – General Programme 
This applies to the majority of the road network where no specific risk factors are 
identified. Gullies are cleaned on a 12 to 18-month cycle, subject to operational 
priorities. 
Schedule 2 – Rotational Area Programme 
This programme applies to locations where conditions increase the likelihood of 
blockage, including; Areas with on-street parking, high levels of pedestrian activity, 
and streets with deciduous trees. Gullies are cleaned on a rotational basis every 3 to 
4 months. 
Schedule 3 – Priority Programme 
This enhanced schedule applies to locations prone to surface water ponding during 
intense rainfall and gully repairs or upgrades are planned or under investigation. 
Gullies are inspected and cleaned at a frequency of every 4 to 6 weeks.  
The categorisation of locations within these schedules is reviewed on an ongoing 
basis, informed by service requests, inspection findings, staff observations, and 
operational experience during rainfall events. 
In addition to the above, we operate a targeted gully repair and upgrade programme 
based on information gathered during the above maintenance and from 
correspondence from stakeholders. This work includes repair or replacement of 
damaged or collapsed gullies and their connections to the sewer, sewer pipeline 
repairs, and manhole repairs and construction. Priority for this work is assessed with 
public safety considerations, risk of property flooding, impact on critical infrastructure, 
severity and frequency of reported issues and the hydraulic performance of the gully 
and its connection. 
If you have a further query or wish to make direct contact with team for this or a 
similar issue, please email cqsurfacewater@dublincity.ie and we will respond 
accordingly. 
 
Q.145  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
 
To ask the Chief Executive the roadway at Auburn Villas Rathgar is in a terrible 
condition, can it be prioritised for road re-surfacing? 
The footpath was re done, which is great but at the time residents were assured that 
the road would be also sorted out but it never happened, can this be looked at as a 
matter of urgency please?   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The area engineer presented the 2026 Road Resurfacing Programme of Works at the 
March Area Committee Meeting which did not include Auburn Villas 
 
The aforementioned road has been added to a list of roads requiring/requesting 
resurfacing. If further funding is made available this year this list will be reassessed. 
 
The Area Road Maintenance Engineer will arrange for any road defects to be repaired 
once a road maintenance crew are available. 
 

Ref. Enq. 11196147 
 
Q.146  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, Fairfield Park is a lovely little park on Highfield Road but it 
is not in good condition at the moment and is in need of some TLC? 
Can it be inspected and some work done on it please? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We will arrange for an inspection of Fairfield Park and assess its current condition. 
Following this, we will review what works and improvements can be carried out to 
enhance the park. 
 
Fairfield Park is a small but valued local open space, primarily enjoyed by residents in 
the surrounding area. While it is not intended as a destination to attract visitors from 
further afield, it plays an important role for the local community, and we are committed 
to maintaining it as a pleasant and welcoming environment for those who use it 
regularly. 
 
Q.147  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
 
To ask the Chief Executive, there is a lovely walk from along the Dodder from the 
Orwell Road bridge to the Dartry Pitch but it has a number of bushes and branches 
over-flowing onto it, could we have them trimmed back please? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks will investigate the ownership and responsibility for this section of the riverside 
pathway. Once identified, we will determine the necessary actions and clarify who is 
responsible for its ongoing maintenance. 
 
Q.148  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA  
 
Response will issue directly to Councillor. 
 
Q.149  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please provide a response from the relevant 
department to details supplied.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Transfer List with a Medical Priority with an application 
date of 01/11/2024, and holds the following positions on the waiting list –  
 
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
M 
3 
15 
M 
4 
3 
 
If an applicant changes their area of choice, it may impact applicants already down for 
that area if they hold a longer waiting time or priority status, this may change an 
applicant’s position on list.  
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 
number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list. 

 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
The applicant should be advised to keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being 
advertised that may be of interest to her and to ensure she makes an application for 
same. 
 
Q.150  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update as to where the development for St. 
Andrews Court is. When will the development start demolition and when will we see 
works on site. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The St. Andrew’s Court redevelopment proposal consists of the demolition of the 
existing flat block, which has 14 vacant units, and the construction of a new housing 
block providing 33 new social homes. The new development will consist of 12 one-
bed, 16 two-bed and 5 three-bedroom homes.  
  
The initial project tender assessment is now complete, and we are currently preparing 
a project funding request to the Department of Housing, Local Government & Heritage. 
Subject to receiving a positive funding response from the Department, we hope to 
appoint a contractor and commence works on site in summer 2026.  
 
Q.151  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please provide when we will see the process moving 
forward for the detenanting of Pearse House smaller blocks.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has now received project and funding approval from the 
Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage for the regeneration of 
Pearse House Phase 1. 
Phase 1 includes Blocks L, M, N and P, comprising a total of 78 flats. The approved 
project involves a major renewal works programme, delivering a comprehensive 
upgrade of all existing flats, stairwells, roofs, and communal areas, as well as 
improvements to the surrounding precinct. 
 
To carry out these works, decanting of the flats will be required. The project team are 
currently finalising design development and agreeing timelines ahead of commencing 
a tender competition to appoint a contractor to the project. Consultation with residents 
is due to commence shortly and timelines in terms of decanting and work programmes 
will be part of this consultation process. Decanting will be led out by the Local Housing 
Manager and his team. 
 
Q.152  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please provide details of how many properties have 
been allocated in Area M and L for the year of 2025 on the basis of bed size and time 
on the list.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Lettings for 2025 Area L & Area M 
 

Dwelling Size Area L   Area M  
Bedsit
8
8
1 Bed
188
51
2 Bed
99
27
3 Bed
8
7
4 Bed
Grand Total
303
93
 
 
 

                                    Appendix B                                                                                    
 
RECORD OF DIVISION AT COUNCIL MEETING ON 13th April 2026 
Deferral of Vacancy -Ministerial Nomination of the Board of Beaumont Hospital  
 
FOR: 
 
29 
 
 
 
 
ABSTAIN: 
  
AGAINST:  
27 
 
 
 
 
ABSENT: 
  
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
 
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
Councillor Ammar Ali 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Feljin Jose 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daryl Barron 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Leslie Kane 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Racheal Batten 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Kourtney Kenny 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Emma Blain 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Patrick Kinsella 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Janice Boylan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Dermot Lacey 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Kevin Breen 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor John Lyons 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Noelle Brown 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Aoibheann Mahon 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Christy Burke 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Micheál MacDonncha 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Claire Byrne 
 
 
 
 
Lord Mayor Ray McAdam 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Danny Byrne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Séamas McGrattan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Lesley Byrne 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Paddy Monahan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Mary Callaghan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Carolyn Moore 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Hazel Chu 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Edel Moran 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor David Coffey 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Darragh Moriarty 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Anthony Connaghan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Fiona Connelly  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Cat O’Driscoll 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Keith Connolly 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ciarán Ó Meachair 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Donna Cooney  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Colm O’Rourke 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ray Cunningham 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Gavin Pepper 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Hazel de Nortúin 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Cieran Perry 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Daithí Doolan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Michael Pigeon 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Pat Dunne 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Gayle Ralph 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daniel Ennis 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Punam Rane 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Cian Farrell  
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Conor Reddy 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Alison Field  
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Nial Ring 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Declan Flanagan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Aisling Silke  
 
 
 
 
Councillor Mannix Flynn 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Supriya Singh 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Deirdre Heney 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Karl Stanley 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Jesslyn Henry 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Malachy Steenson 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Rory Hogan 
 
√ 
 
 
Deputy Lord Mayor John Stephens 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Janet Horner 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Philip Sutcliffe 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Vincent Jackson 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

APPENDIX  C 
 
 
Record of Voting at Meeting of Council held on 13th April 2026 to appoint a member to Board of Beaumont Hospital 
 
CANDIDATE 1 NAME –  Cllr Racheal Batten 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOTAL VOTES :  32 
 
CANDIDATE 2 NAME –  Cllr John Lyons  
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOTAL VOTES :  28 
 
CANDIDATE 3 NAME – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOTAL VOTES : 
 
CANDIDATE 4 NAME – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOTAL VOTES: 
 
CANDIDATE 5 NAME -  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOTAL VOTES : 
  
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
Cllr Racheal 
Batten 
Cllr John Lyons 
 
 
 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
 
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
Cllr Racheal 
Batten 
Cllr John Lyons  
 
 
 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
Councillor Ammar Ali 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Feljin Jose 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Daryl Barron 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Leslie Kane 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Racheal Batten 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Kourtney Kenny 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Emma Blain 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Patrick Kinsella 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Janice Boylan 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Dermot Lacey 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Kevin Breen 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor John Lyons 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Noelle Brown 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Aoibheann Mahon 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Christy Burke 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Micheál 
MacDonncha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Claire Byrne 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lord Mayor Councillor Ray 
McAdam 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Danny Byrne 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Séamas McGrattan 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Lesley Byrne 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Paddy Monahan 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Mary Callaghan 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Carolyn Moore 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Hazel Chu 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Edel Moran 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor David Coffey 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Darragh Moriarty 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Anthony Connaghan 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Fiona Connelly  
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Cat O’Driscoll 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Keith Connolly 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Ciarán Ó Meachair 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Donna Cooney  
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Colm O’Rourke 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Ray Cunningham 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Gavin Pepper 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Hazel de Nortúin 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Cieran Perry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Daithí Doolan 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Michael Pigeon 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Pat Dunne 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Gayle Ralph 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Daniel Ennis 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Punam Rane 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Cian Farrell  
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Conor Reddy 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Alison Field  
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Nial Ring 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Declan Flanagan 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Aisling Silke  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Mannix Flynn 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Supriya Singh 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Deirdre Heney 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Karl Stanley 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Jesslyn Henry 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Malachy Steenson 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Rory Hogan 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deputy Lord Mayor John 
Stephens 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Janet Horner 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Philip Sutcliffe  
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Vincent Jackson 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Capital Programme 
2026-2028
Summary Overview

Key Tables
• Total Capital Expenditure
• Proposed Funding
• Committed & Non-Committed
• Capital Income by Department
• Other Income Sources Breakdown

Total Capital Expenditure 2026-2028
Programme
Expected 
Expenditure 2026
Expected 
Expenditure 2027
Expected 
Expenditure 2028
Total Expected 
Expenditure 
2026-2028
%
Housing and Building 
702,718,196
1,001,125,176
1,009,562,682
2,713,406,054 
69.9%
Road Transportation and Safety 
86,671,550
134,671,435
190,561,283
411,904,268 
10.6%
Culture, Recreation & Amenity
138,509,859
141,811,345
115,526,174
395,847,378
10.2%
Miscellaneous Services
119,985,320
11,854,391
6,530,000
138,369,711 
3.6%
Development Incentives and Controls
51,552,885
40,970,409
20,835,433
113,358,727 
2.9%
Environmental Protection
28,285,221
20,730,481
16,283,333
65,299,035 
1.7%
Surface Water Drainage & Flood Relief Works
17,074,019
8,892,520
15,228,250
41,194,789 
1.1%
Total
1,144,797,050
1,360,055,757
1,374,527,155
3,879,379,962
100.00%
%
29.5
35.1
35.4
100.0

Proposed Funding 2026-2028
Funding Breakdown
Amount
€
%
Grants
2,882,851,956 
74.3%
Other Income *
467,949,634 
12.1%
Loan Borrowings
237,266,227 
6.1%
Levies
235,968,703 
6.1%
Development Income
55,343,442 
1.4%
Total
3,879,379,962 
100.0%

Other Income Sources Breakdown
Other Income Sources Breakdown
Description
Amount
€
%
Other Sources
182,966,098 
39.1%
Rev/Cap
169,918,671 
36.3%
Capital Reserves
57,703,865 
12.3%
Tom Clarke Bridge Tolls
40,311,000 
8.6%
Car Park/Rental/Surplus on Parking Meter
9,550,000 
2.0%
Housing Internal Capital Receipts
7,500,000 
1.6%
Total
467,949,634 
100.0%

Committed & Non-Committed Projects
Committed Projects
Total Funding 2026-2028
Programme
Expected 
Expenditure 2026-
2028
Loans
Grants
Other Income
Levies
Development 
Capital
Expected Funding 
2026-2028
Housing and Building
1,969,665,625
117,890,000
1,648,770,570
180,455,231
14,580,000
7,969,824
1,969,665,625
Road Transportation and Safety
151,238,436
0
54,646,354
54,511,218
42,080,864
0
151,238,436
Miscellaneous Services
115,993,320
0
2,745,115
109,003,443
0
4,244,762
115,993,320
Development Incentives and Controls
91,576,544
24,534,249
31,697,110
15,383,557
13,961,628
6,000,000
91,576,544
Culture, Recreation & Amenity
76,653,300
0
24,064,905
15,285,479
35,802,916
1,500,000
76,653,300
Environmental Protection
11,901,888
8,758,234
2,800,000
343,654
0
0
11,901,888
Surface Water Drainage & Flood Relief Works
8,302,850
0
6,315,000
0
1,987,850
0
8,302,850
Total
2,425,331,963
151,182,483
1,771,039,054
374,982,582
108,413,258
19,714,586
2,425,331,963
%
6.2
73.0
15.5
4.5
0.8
100.0
Non-Committed Projects
Total Funding 2026-2028
Programme
Expected 
Expenditure 2026-
2028
Loans
Grants
Other Income
Levies
Development 
Capital
Expected Funding 
2026-2028
Housing and Building
743,740,429
0
719,862,783
16,801,619
4,161,300
2,914,727
743,740,429
Culture, Recreation & Amenity
319,194,078
81,083,744
119,396,582
31,471,941
62,080,633
25,161,178
319,194,078
Road Transportation and Safety
260,665,832
0
225,776,400
4,810,000
30,079,432
0
260,665,832
Environmental Protection
53,397,147
5,000,000
31,678,574
16,494,999
0
223,574
53,397,147
Surface Water Drainage & Flood Relief Works
32,891,939
0
11,177,718
350,000
21,364,221
0
32,891,939
Miscellaneous Services
22,376,391
0
0
17,247,648
3,109,861
2,018,882
22,376,391
Development Incentives and Controls
21,782,183
0
3,920,845
5,790,845
6,759,998
5,310,495
21,782,183
TOTAL
1,454,047,999
86,083,744
1,111,812,902
92,967,052
127,555,445
35,628,856
1,454,047,999
%
5.9
76.5
6.4
8.8
2.5
100.0
Combined Total
3,879,379,962
237,266,227
2,882,851,956
467,949,634
235,968,703
55,343,442
3,879,379,962

Capital Income by Department
Total Income 2026-2028
Programme
Loans
Grants
Other Income
Levies
Development 
Capital
Total
Housing and Building
117,890,000
2,368,633,353
197,256,850
18,741,300
10,884,551
2,713,406,054
Road Transportation and Safety
0
280,422,754
59,321,218
72,160,296
0
411,904,268
Culture, Recreation & Amenity
81,083,744
143,461,487
46,757,420
97,883,549
26,661,178
395,847,378
Miscellaneous Services
0
2,745,115
126,251,091
3,109,861
6,263,644
138,369,711
Development Incentives and Controls
24,534,249
35,617,955
21,174,402
20,721,626
11,310,495
113,358,727
Environmental Protection
13,758,234
34,478,574
16,838,653
0
223,574
65,299,035
Surface Water Drainage & Flood Relief Works
0
17,492,718
350,000
23,352,071
0
41,194,789
Total
237,266,227
2,882,851,956
467,949,634
235,968,703
55,343,442
3,879,379,962
%
6.1
74.3
12.1
6.1
1.4
100.0

Other Key Points
• Loan Borrowings
• Flagship Projects
• Capital Spending by Area

Loan Borrowings Table
Expendtiture Requiring Borrowing
Project Name
Total 
€m
2026
€m
2027
€m
2028
€m
Fire Station - Alfie Byrne 
5.0 
-
2.5 
2.5 
Dublin Fire Brigade Logistics
8.8 
8.8 
-
-
Fruit and Vegetable Market
24.5 
15.5 
8.9 
-
Dalymount Park Stadium
32.0 
-
22.8 
9.3 
New Dublin Central Library and Hugh Lane 
Gallery
49.1 
9.5 
25.6 
14.0 
Total Expenditure
119.4 
33.8 
59.8 
25.7 
Cost Rental Expenditure Requiring Borrowing
Project Name
Total 
€m
2026
€m
2027
€m
2028
€m
Emmet Road Cost Rental
117.9 
18.8 
90.1 
9.0 
Total
237.3 
52.6 
149.9 
34.7 

List of Flagship Projects
+ Project Page – Camden Yard Development
+ Parnell Square Cultural Quarter
+ Dalymount Park Redevelopment
+ Fruit and Vegetable Market
+ Public Lighting Upgrade Project
+ Grow College Green

Capital Spending by Area
All Projects
Total Funding by Area 2026-2028
Area
Expected 
Expenditure 2026
Expected 
Expenditure 2027
Expected 
Expenditure 2028
Expected 
Expenditure 2026-
2028
%
Citywide
474,521,666
450,545,860
495,214,642
1,420,282,168
37%
South Central Area
177,592,625
287,460,822
194,590,086
659,643,533
17%
Central Area
146,144,675
210,238,132
176,090,972
532,473,779
14%
North West Area
106,587,317
140,137,246
200,056,888
446,781,451
12%
North Central Area
82,243,914
185,235,219
152,945,507
420,424,640
11%
South East Area
155,012,320
84,588,478
153,929,060
393,529,858
10%
Docklands
2,694,533
1,850,000
1,700,000
6,244,533
0%
Total
1,144,797,050
1,360,055,757
1,374,527,155
3,879,379,962
Excluding Housing
Total Funding by Area 2026-2028
Area
Expected 
Expenditure 2026
Expected 
Expenditure 2027
Expected 
Expenditure 2028
Expected 
Expenditure 2026-
2028
%
South East Area
145,331,501
56,388,478
127,343,205
329,063,184
28%
Citywide
90,033,255
81,052,661
93,868,216
264,954,132
23%
Central Area
76,415,352
102,327,130
53,343,348
232,085,830
20%
North Central Area
65,316,866
71,322,550
58,325,923
194,965,339
17%
South Central Area
45,570,197
39,690,866
26,659,281
111,920,344
10%
North West Area
16,717,150
6,298,896
3,724,500
26,740,546
2%
Docklands
2,694,533
1,850,000
1,700,000
6,244,533
1%
Total
442,078,854
358,930,581
364,964,473
1,165,973,908

© Dublin City Council 2026 – All rights reserved
Thank You
