Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 6 January 2025 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
 
  
 
Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 6ú Eanáir 2025 i Seomra na Comhairle, Halla 
na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an 
tArdmheara Emma Blain sa chathaoir 
 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Ammar Ali 
Daryl Barron 
Racheal Batten 
Emma Blain 
Janice Boylan 
Kevin Breen 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Danny Byrne 
Lesley Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
David Coffey 
Anthony Connaghan 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Ray Cunningham 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Tara Deacy 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Daniel Ennis 
Cian Farrell 
Alison Field 
Declan Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
Deirdre Heney 
Jesslyn Henry 
Rory Hogan 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Feljin Jose 
Leslie Kane 
Kourtney Kenny 
Patrick Kinsella 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Aoibheann Mahon 
Ray McAdam 
Séamas McGrattan 
Ciaran Meachair 
Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
Paddy Monahan 
Carolyn Moore 
Edel Moran 
Darragh Moriarty 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Colm O'Rourke 
Gavin Pepper 
Cieran Perry 
Michael Pidgeon 
Gayle Ralph 
Punam Rane 
Conor Reddy 
Nial Ring 
Patricia Roe 
Aishling Silke 
Supriya Singh 
Malachy Steenson 
John Stephens 
Philip Sutcliffe 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Prajwal K. Annibabu 
Lorraine Brogan 
John Flanagan 
Anthony Flynn 
Yvonne Kelly 
Natalie Leonard 
Victor Leonov 
Mick Mulhern 
Brendan O'Brien 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Richard Shakespeare 
 
  
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
The Lord Mayor welcomed members and wished all a happy new year.  
  
Donation Statements 
 

 
The Lord Mayor reminded members that their Annual Donation Statements are due by 
the 31st January 2025 and to return them to Natalie Leonard.  
  
Provision of on-street food services 
A number of requests for emergency motions were received from members across 
different parties regarding the proposed changes in the provision of on street food 
services. Although these requests did not meet the threshold for consideration as 
emergency motions, given the recent media coverage and the concerns raised therein 
and amongst members, the Lord Mayor agreed that this issue merited discussion at 
the meeting. She invited management to present a report to members at the meeting 
and opened the floor to discussion using the group system. 
 
 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Colm O’Rourke 
that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the questions 
lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the  questions 
lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and Answers are set 
out in Appendix A to these minutes. 
 
9 - 45 
 
3 
  Correspondence was received from the following Local Authorities; 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence listed. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
4 
  To confirm the minutes of the Statutory Budget Meeting held on 25th November 2024 
and the Monthly City Council Meeting held on 2nd December 2024. 
 
The minutes of the Statutory Budget meeting held on the 25th November 2024 and the 
Monthly City Council Meeting held on the 2nd December 2024 having been 
printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken 
as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor. 
 
 
 
5 
  Vacancies:   
 
 
 
(a)   The appointment of seven Members to the City Centre Review Group  
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Daniel Ennis that the following councillors be appointed as member of the City 
Centre Review Group.  The motion was put and carried.  
  
1.     Councillor Nial Ring 
2.     Councillor Kourtney Kenny 
3.     Councillor Daniel Ennis 
4.     Councillor Dermot Lacey 
5.     Councillor Rory Hogan 
6.     Councillor Claire Byrne 
7.     Councillor Ray McAdam 
 
 
 
6 
  To fill one Fianna Fáil vacancy on the Economic Development and Enterprise 
Strategic Policy Committee following the election of Tom Brabazon to Dáil Éireann. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and Seconded by Councillor Ray McAdam 
that Councillor Racheal Batten be appointed to the Economic Development and 
Enterprise Strategic Policy Committee.  The motion was put and carried.  
 

 
 
 
(a)   To fill one Fianna Fáil vacancy on the Planning and Urban Regeneration 
Strategic Policy Committee following the resignation of Councillor Racheal 
Batten.  
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Councillor Aoibheann Mahon be appointed to the Planning and 
Urban Regeneration Strategic Policy Committee.  The motion was put and 
carried.  
 
 
 
(b)   To fill one Fianna Fáil vacancy on the Housing and Social Inclusion Strategic 
Policy Committee following the resignation of Councillor Racheal Batten  
It was requested by Councillor Daryl Barron that this vacancy be deferred to 
the February Council Meeting.  
 
 
 
(c)   To fill one Non- Party vacancy on the Climate Action and Urban Resilience 
Strategic Policy Committee following the election of Barry Heneghan to Dáil 
Éireann.  
It was proposed by Councillor Cieran Perry and seconded by Councillor John 
Lyons that Councillor Kevin Breen be appointed to the Climate Action and 
Resilience Strategic Policy Committee.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
(d)   To fill one vacancy on the Dublin City Council Audit Committee following the 
election of Naoise Ó Muirí to Dáil Éireann.  
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Clodagh Ní Mhuirí that Councillor David Coffey be appointed to the Dublin City 
Council Audit Committee.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
(e)   To appoint from Fianna Fáil a Chairperson of the Economic Development and 
Enterprise Strategic Policy Committee following the election of Tom Brabazon 
to Dáil Éireann.  
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Councillor John 
Stephens that Councillor Racheal Batten be appointed as Chairperson to the 
Economic Development and Enterprise Strategic Policy Committee.  The 
motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
7 
  Report No. 02/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (A. Flynn) - Arts Grants 2025 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Deputy Lord Mayor 
Donna Cooney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.02/2025 and 
hereby approves the Arts Funding awards as set out therein.  The motion was put and 
carried.  
 
 
 
8 
  Report No. 03/2025 of the Chairperson of the Audit Committee - Audit Committee 
Charter and Annual Work Programme 2025. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jacson and seconded by Councillor Séamas 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 03/2025. 
 
 
 
9 
  Report No. 04/2025 of the Chairperson of the Audit Committee - With reference to the 
consideration by the Audit Committee of the Audited Annual Financial Statement 
(AFS) for 2023 and the Local Government Auditor's report on the Accounts of Dublin 
City Council for 2023. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jacson and seconded by Councillor Séamas 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 04/2025. The 
motion was put and carried.  
 

 
  
 
 
10   Report No. 27/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Local Government 
Auditor Report 2023 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jacson and seconded by Councillor Séamas 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 27/2025. The 
motion was put and carried.  
  
 
 
 
11   Report No. 26/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Annual Financial 
Statements for 2023 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Séamas 
McGrattan that Dublin City notes Report No 26/2025 and adopts the Annual Financial 
Statement  2023 as outlined therein.  The motion was put and carried.  
  
 
 
 
12   Report No. 25/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (E. Quinlivan) - Draft Digital 
Transformation Strategy 2025 - 2030. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor John 
Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 25/2025. The 
motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
13   Reports of the Chief Executive, in compliance with the provisions of Section 179 of 
the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) and Part 8 of the Planning 
and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) and in compliance with the 
provisions of the Local Government Act 2001:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 16/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Proposal for the 
refurbishment, alteration and extension of the former Isolation Hospital, 
Infirmary Road, Dublin 7 (Protected Structure).  
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Janice Boylan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
16/2025 and hereby approves the contents therein.  The motion was put and 
carried.  
  
 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 23/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Proposal for the 
construction of 167 apartments and duplex units at the Dublin City Fire Brigade 
Maintenance Depot and Mechanical Division, Stanley Street, Grangegorman 
Lower, Dublin 7.  
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Deputy Lord 
Mayor Donna Cooney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No. 16/2025 and hereby approves the contents therein.  The motion was put 
and carried.  
  
 
 
 
14   Disposal of Fee Simple and Freehold Interest:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 05/2025 of the Executive Manager (F. D'Arcy) - With reference to 
the disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and Tenant (Ground 
Rents) (No. 2) Act, 1978.  
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
John Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
 

 
05/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
(b)   Report No. 20/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (M. Igoe) - Disposal of 
the fee simple in a laneway at Stable Lane, Sackville Place, Dublin 1 to D1 
Collection Limited.  
It was proposed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by 
Councillor Janet Horner that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No. 20/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion 
was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
(c)   Report No. 24/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (M. Igoe) - The disposal 
of the fee simple in 3 Car Park Spaces at the Clarion Quay Development to the 
Clarion Quay Management Company.  
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and Councillor John Stephens that 
Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 24/2025 and hereby 
assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and carried. 
  
Lord Mayor vacated the Chair to Councillor Ray McAdam at 8.14 p.m. and 
returned to the chamber at 8.16 p.m. 
  
  
 
 
 
15   Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 18/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (M. Igoe) - Grant of a 3 
year licence for a cafe at Johnstown Park, Dublin 11 to the Tram Cafe Limited.  
It was proposed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by 
Councillor Vincent Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of 
Report No. 18/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The 
motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
(b)   Report No 21/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (M. Igoe) - With 
reference to the proposed granting of a Short Term Business Letting for use of 
offices  6 & 7 in the Portacabin at the rear of the Reco Building, Ballymun, 
Dublin 9, to The Aisling Project Limited  
It was proposed by Councillor Keith Connolly and seconded by Councillor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 21/2025 
and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
  
 
 
 
16   Disposal of Property:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 17/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive (M. Igoe) - Transfer of 
plot to the rear of 60 Dolmen Court, Ballymun, Dublin 11, including the over-
archway portion of the dwelling.  
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor 
Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
17/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
(b)   Report No 19/2025 of the A/Assistant Chief Executive  (M. Igoe) - Disposal of  

 
plot to the rear of 15 Beaumont Road, Dublin 9  
It was proposed by Councillor Conor Reddy and seconded by Councillor Gavin 
Pepper that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 19/2025 and 
hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was put and 
carried. 
  
 
 
17   Report No. 13/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (J. Flanagan) - 
Quarterly Report of the Active Travel Programme Office. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Deputy Lord Mayor 
Donna Cooney that that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 13/2025.  
The  motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
18   Report No. 14/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer (J. Flanagan) - 
Quarterly Report of the Traffic Department 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Daryl Barron and seconded by Deputy Lord Mayor 
Donna Cooney that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No 14/2025.  The 
motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
19   Report No. 09/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) - Social Housing 
Supply and Delivery Monthly Update Report 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Conor Reddy 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 09/2025. The motion was put 
and carried. 
  
 
 
 
20   Report No.10/2025 of the A/Head of Finance (V. Leonov) - Monthly Local Fund 
Statement & EU IMF Report. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamus McGrattan and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 10/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
21   Report No. 15/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report 
 
It was proposed by Deputy Lord Mayor Donna Cooney and seconded by Councillor 
Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 15/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
22   Report No. 06/2025 of the Area Committees - Breviates of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of December 2024. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor John 
Stephens that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 06/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
23   Report No. 07/2025 of the Planning and Urban Form Strategic Policy Committee - 
Breviate of the meeting held on the 16th April 2024, Councillor Ray McAdam, 
Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor Daithí 
Doolan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 07/2025. The motion 
 

 
was put and carried. 
 
 
24   Report No. 08/2025 of the Finance Strategic Policy Committee - Breviate of the 
meeting held on 21st November 2024, Cllr. Seamas McGrattan, Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas McGrattan and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 08/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
25   Report No. 11/2025 of the Mobility and Public Realm Strategic Policy Committee - 
Breviate of the meeting held on the 4th December 2024, Councillor Janet Horner, 
Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Keith 
Connolly that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 11/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
  
 
 
 
26   Report No. 12/2025 of the Protocol Committee - Breviate of the meeting held on the 
21st November  2024, Councillor Ray McAdam , Chairperson. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor John 
Stephens that Dublin City Council adopts the contents of Report No. 12/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
27   Topical Issues 
 
The following Topical Issues was proposed for debate: 
“Closure of the Israeli Embassy in Dublin” 
  
In accordance with Standing Orders the topical issue was put to a vote but did not 
receive the requisite two thirds support to be debated. Full details of the vote can be 
found in Appendix B to these minutes.  
  
 
46 
 
28   Motions on Notice 
 
Members agreed to suspend Standing orders and further agreed to not take motions 
to enable debate of the Social Housing Supply and Delivery Monthly update report. 
Members also agreed to extend the meeting @ 9.15 p.m. until 9.45 p.m. 
  
  
 
 
 
29   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
No emergency motions were taken for debate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 

 
 

QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY 6th 
JANUARY 2025 
 
Q.1  
QUESTION WITHDRAWN 
 
 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the housing file (details supplied) and for 
her interest in securing one of the new homes to be delivered at Oscar Traynor 
Woods to be noted and considered. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the transfer list with a welfare priority and an application date 
of 02/09/2021, the applicant holds the following positions on the list; 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
3 
18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list and currently there 
are applicants on the waiting list of longer standing who have to be considered as 
suitable vacancies arise. It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an 
offer for any applicant. The number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in 
the length of time applicants could expect to be on the waiting list.  
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household. If a number of applicants apply for the same property on a Choice 
Based Lettings competition, the final offer will be made to the applicant with the highest 
position on list. I have noted the applicant’s interest in the new development on Oscar 
Traynor Road.  
 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for an urgent maintenance inspection of (details supplied), 
it has serious ventilation and mould issues which are even more concerning due to the 
recent arrival of a baby boy. The front door also needs replacing. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will arrange a survey of the above property to determine what 
remedial works are required. 
 
Q.4 
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive how much Dublin City Council paid in Local Property Tax 
in the years 2020-2024 inclusive? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The table below details the payments made by Dublin City Council to the Revenue 
Commissioners for the Local Property Tax for the years 2020-2024 inclusive. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive when the traffic team will be in place to address the ongoing 
serious traffic issues at (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Traffic Advisory Group (TAG) Area Engineers will assess possible traffic measures 
to help reduce speeds and rat running once the construction in the East Wall Area has 
been completed and the construction traffic has subsided. The TAG section will work 
with colleagues in other units within DCC Traffic to implement improvement measures. 
 
Q.6 
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive if a date as to when the small section of double yellow lines 
be placed alongside (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Our traffic Officer has confirmed that the double yellow Lines should be installed next 
week weather permitting. 
 
Q.7  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council would address the defective front hall 
door lock at (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above repair was logged with Housing Maintenance on 12/12/2024. Housing 
Maintenance to call to the property and assess the reported defect. 
 
Q.8  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive given the amount of cars and vans parked on pathways in 
Marino on any given day of the week be addressed. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parking Enforcement Section will request that DSPS continue to patrol this area 
and enforce any and all illegal parking in the area. 
 
Q.9 
COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
To ask the Chief Executive about the possibility of putting Mulberry Cottages in 
Chapelizod up for auction. The cottages are derelict and were acquired by the council 
several years ago under a compulsory purchase order. However, since then the 
council has not been able to restore them to use. Other properties in the village have 
been restored by private owners. Can Mulberry Cottages be sold, to help address the 
problem of dereliction and vacancy in Chapelizod Village? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Year
€ Amount
2020
1,567,268
2021
1,600,067
2022
1,646,196
2023
1,661,687
2024
1,872,321

Housing Maintenance met the residents of Mulberry Cottages week ending 08/12/24 
and discussed the findings of the Structural Report.  The report outlined the level & 
gravitas of dereliction. Housing Maintenance highlighted the difficulties in refurbing the 
Dublin City Council owned properties – access, location of site office/compound, 
practicalities of deliveries, parking, Architectural Conservation Area (ACA), proximity 
to school entrance and local agreements/disagreements re: neighbours and 
access/parking.  A broad outline plan was discussed with the residents, with the 
immediate action to clear the ‘communal’ grounds to the rear of the properties, knock 
the poor condition extensions, and steel up the rear access to deter unwanted 
visitors.  Once these works are carried the housing team will consider what options are 
open to the council to bring this back into use. 
 
Q.10  COUNCILLOR RAY CUNNINGHAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a list of council-owned properties in Dublin 12 
that are currently vacant and not designated for housing. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
It will take some time to assess which Council owned properties, if any, are vacant and 
a reply will be sent directly to the Councillor as soon as possible. 
 
Q.11 
COUNCILLOR AMMAR ALI 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report regarding an update on completion and opening 
of Donore Community Centre, why is there further delays in its opening? This 
community facility is vital for the residents of Dublin 8, and we need it to be fully 
restored and back in use as soon as possible. I urge DCC to please prioritise the 
reopening of this important resource for our community. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As with any major refurbishment, Dublin City Council must ensure that the facility, 
when it re-opens, meets current building regulations. Since the Design Team was 
engaged, a number of relevant issues have been identified including the following: 
 
• 
Submission of updated Fire Certificate and DAC 
• 
Meeting Dublin City Council’s targets and objectives around the decarbonisation of 
public buildings  
• 
Updated Building Regulations regarding ventilation 
 
Unfortunately the above issues have led to an elongated design process and 
subsequent amendment to the programme. By ensuring all these regulations are met 
now and the relevant works are completed as part of the refurbishment contract, it will 
ensure the lifespan of the building is extended and should not have to close for 
refurbishment work in the foreseeable future. 
 
The reinstatement of Donore Avenue Youth and Community Centre remains the 
highest priority to Dublin City Council and we will continue with any and all efforts to 
efficiently progress the implementation of the programme, particularly once the main 
contractor is appointed. Dublin City Council and the appointed Design Team are 
committed to issuing the tender documents to the relevant framework in February 2025 
with the building expected to open in Summer 2026. 
 
Dublin City Council and the Design Team are committed to keeping all other 
stakeholders informed of progress. Please note information and updates will always 
be issued via Dublin City Council’s South Central Area Office.  
 

 
Q.12  COUNCILLOR AMAR ALI 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the Old Inchicore Library, any updates on 
its restoration and future plans for its use that can benefit our local community. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Externally, the restoration project of the former Inchicore Library presents challenging 
universal access issues. These issues are significant in terms of the overall project. 
They add complexity and cost to this building restoration. All the relevant universal 
access issues have now been identified and resolved.  
 
Internally, we have been assessing the condition of the walls and the former library 
bookshelves. We are currently, removing one unit of the existing shelving to inspect 
the walls and will use this opportunity to undetake a condition survey of the library 
shelving and provide costings for its restoration.  
 
We are also reviewing proposals for the day to day management of the building and 
are committed to returning this building to community use for the benefit of the local 
neighbourhood.  
 
Q.13  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the inspection and repair to the footpath at 
(details supplied) There have been several incidents at this location. Recently an 
elderly man broke his hip. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The footpath at (details supplied) will be inspected. Any defects deemed to require 
repairs will be added to our Works List. 
Enq. Ref. 11170626 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the entrance to Johnstown Park via Ballygall 
Road East to be made more accessible similar to the entrance at Glasanaon Road. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The matter will be investigated and a full reply will be issued to the Councillor as soon 
as is practicable. 
 
Q.15  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for an inspection of the tree and footpath at 
(Details supplied) where the resident reports issues with the pavement there. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The footpath at (details supplied) will be inspected. Any defects deemed to require 
repairs will be added to our Works List. 
Enq. Ref. 11170622 
 
 
 
 
 
Q.16 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the footpaths on Valley Park Road to be 
inspected with a view to resurfacing as there are several trip hazards along here. The 
part between 28 and 40 is particularly bad. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

The footpath at 28 to 40 Valley Park Road will be inspected. Any defects deemed to 
require repairs will be added to our Works List. 
Enq. Ref. 11170628 
 
 
 
 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive about the parking at the intersection at Middle Third and 
the Orchard in Killester, there are cars constantly parked on the yellow lines.  It is very 
dangerous with cars trying to leave Orchard Ave. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parking Enforcement Section will request that DSPS continue to patrol this area 
and enforce any and all illegal parking in the area. 
 
Q.18 
COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive for extra bins to be placed around the take-away shops on 
Harmonstown Road, especially outside the chip shop takeaway, as the laneway is very 
littered. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services examined this request and deemed there to be sufficient 
bins in this area. 
 
Q.19 
COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to finish off replacing the rest of the broken paths in 
Ennafort, Raheny in next year’s budget. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Annual Program for 2025 has not been finalised yet, but the additional footpaths 
in the Ennafort Estate have been added to the list of locations to be considered. 
 
Q.20 
COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to replace the broken paths in the Harmonstown/ Artane 
area.  The residents have been waiting years for this, I hope they are included in next 
year’s Budget. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Annual Program for 2025 has not been finalised yet, but the paths in the 
Harmonstown area has been added to the list of locations to be considered. 
 
Q.21 
COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to liaise with Traffic Department to urgently address the 
hazardous traffic situation at Briarfield Villas, Greendale Road, facing Coláiste 
Dhúlaigh - Kilbarrack Campus and St. Michael's House Special Needs School, by 
implementing double yellow lines and no parking signage? Given that over 70 vehicles, 
including taxis and cars, arrive daily to drop off and pick up children attending Abacas 
Special School, the congestion caused by cars parked on both sides of the road 
creates a dangerous and obstructive environment for families and residents. Will the 
Chief Executive commit to prioritising this issue and taking immediate action to ensure 
the safety of all road users in this area? Pictures attached with this email) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In order to address the traffic situation on Briarfield Road, outside Abacas Special 
School, the Transport Advisory Group, make the following recommendations; 
 
 

 
Photo 1 attached with e-mail: 
 
It is Dublin City Council’s policy not to install prohibitory measures such as Double 
Yellow Lines when the prohibition is already provided for in law; Road Traffic (Traffic 
and Parking) Regulations, 1997, Article 36, (1),(2),(c) - within 5 meters of a road 
junction. 
 
 
Photo 2 attached with e-mail: 
 
It is illegal to park opposite a continuous centre line: Road Traffic (Traffic and Parking) 
Regulations, 1997, Article 36,(1),(2),(d) - prohibited to park where RRM001 
[continuous centre line] has been provided. 
 
It is illegal for a motorist to park at School Entrances - Road Traffic (Traffic and Parking) 
Regulations, 1997, Article 41,(1),(2) – prohibition at a school entrance has been 
provided. 
 
 
Photo 3 attached with e-mail: 
 
 
 
There is a School Zone installed outside Abacus Special School.  School Zones have 
been provided outside schools to help facilitate the safety of pedestrians and those 
accessing the school.  It is the responsibility of the public, parents and staff to respect 
the School Zone.     
 
In order to clear the section of road of parked vehicles, between the school and the 
roundabout, the Transport Advisory Group recommends the extension of the 
continuous centre line from the roundabout at Briarsfield Road, Foxfield Green and 
Thornville Road, until the beginning of the School Zone markings.  This will help 
increase visibility on the road and pedestrian safety. 
 
Any instances of illegal parking should be reported to Dublin Street Parking Services 
(www.dsps.ie), Dublin City Council’s parking enforcement contractors, or to An Garda 
Síochána. 
 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a comprehensive update on the status of the 
proposed community centre in the Belmayne area. Additionally, given the significant 
population growth and the new developments underway in the Balgriffin/Clongriffin 
area, can the Chief Executive outline the plans for amenities in the Donaghmede area, 
including community centres, sports facilities, and other necessary infrastructure. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A cross-department team has been established in the City Council to review current 
development at Clongriffin and Belmayne and consider the development options of the 
Council owned lands at Belmayne. Councillors will be updated on progress made by 
this team in early 2025.  
 
 
Q.23 
COUNCILLOR SUPRIYA SINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the vacant commercial units in 
Clongriffin? Reportedly, despite an agreement between Dublin City Council and the 
National Valuations Office to value these empty units for proper rate charges, many of 
the ground-floor retail units have remained vacant for over a decade. What is causing 
the delay in implementing the proper rates, and what steps are being taken to address 
this issue, particularly given the area's lack of basic amenities. 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A reply will be issued to the councillor within 2 weeks of the council meeting  
 
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR SUPRIYASINGH 
To ask the Chief Executive to clarify the reasons for the delay in taking in charge 
Marsfield Avenue road? Residents have raised ongoing concerns about the hazardous 
conditions, particularly during the morning rush when drivers speed to drop off 
passengers at the station, and again in the evening when people are picked up. This 
constant traffic flow creates a dangerous environment for both pedestrians and 
residents. Given the repeated safety concerns from the community, what specific steps 
are being taken to address this issue? It is becoming increasingly frustrating for 
residents, as waiting for basic improvements due to delays in the Taking in Charge 
process is no longer acceptable. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Discussions are ongoing with the developer regarding works that are required in the 
Clongriffin area to bring it to taking in charge standard. A response will issue to the 
Councillor as soon as possible.  
 
 
 
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a detailed report on the repair works required and the 
timeline involved in re-opening the Coolock Swimming Pool at North side Shopping 
Centre, a key community asset, albeit with ongoing reduced hours for the general 
public, so it vital that we ensure it is re-opened as soon as possible. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We are meeting tomorrow Tuesday 7th January on site with our Senior Engineer and 
Health & Safety Officer. The extent of the damage requires immediate Inspection and 
a report will be forthcoming.  
We understand that the swimming pool is a vital community resource, providing 
recreational, fitness, and swimming Lessons. We are working diligently to assess the 
scope of the necessary repairs and to determine a timeline for reopening. Updates will 
be shared with all stakeholders, user groups and members of the community as soon 
as they become available 
Should you have any questions or require additional details, please do not hesitate to 
contact me directly. 
Thank you for your attention to this matter. I look forward to your support in ensuring 
the swift restoration of this essential facility. 
 
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR JOHN LYONS 
To ask the Chief Executive for a report on the allocation of (details supplied), a 
pensioner with poor health: he was not afforded a viewing of the property before 
accepting it, the apartment was completely unfurnished when he moved in and the 
floors were in poor condition. He had to spend a significant amount of money making 
his new home habitable and he is now seeking some financial assistance to be 
retrospectively provided to him. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
(Details Supplied) was nominated by Dublin City Council for the tenancy at (Details 
Supplied) which is managed by CORE, a Housing Advisor from CORE has confirmed 
that the property was shown to  prior to signing. At the time of viewing the apartment, 
(Details Supplied) was informed that it wasn’t ready for him to move in as there were 

outstanding works to be completed prior to him moving in. He was also informed that 
there would be no white goods or flooring provided. Upon signing for the tenancy, the 
Housing Advisor provided (Details Supplied) with a letter to bring to his Community 
Welfare Officer with a view to obtaining the additional needs payment to cover the cost 
of the necessary items required.  
(Details Supplied) may wish to link in with his Community Welfare Officer with regards 
to seeking costs for the works retrospectively.  
 
 
 
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive is there any progress on the implementation of a Yellow 
Box on the Navan Road at the entrance to St. Vincent’s? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer recommends that the existing Yellow Box on Navan Road, at the 
southern entrance to St. Vincent's at Aura De Paul swimming pool, be extended. The 
dimensions of the Yellow Box to be increased to 6 metres x 6 metres. 
 
Q.28  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive could the Environmental Study on the Martin Savage Park 
be carried out with immediate effect as this is causing a major delay to the Martin 
Savage Project 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The matter will be investigated and a full reply will be issued to the Councillor as 
soon as is practicable. 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive to improve the poor lighting from Broombridge to the 
Pelletstown. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We are waiting for clarification from the Cllr of the area requested, once we receive it 
we will issue a reply. 
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive could a Traffic Calming Measure be implemented on 
Ashington Rise as residents are very concerned about the speed at which motorists 
are travelling along this stretch of road? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Ashington Rise is a cul-de-sac and is naturally traffic calmed with on-street 
parking.  On-Street parking reduces the available carriageway width and 
increases driver caution, which in turn reduces motorists’ speed.  
Also, Ashington Rise is located within a Home/Slow Zone area; the associated 
signage has been installed at the entry points to the self-contained housing 
area where a Home/Slow Zone is being created. All roads within the 
Home/Slow Zone area have a speed limit of 30km/h.  The Home/Slow Zone 
signage alerts motorists to the fact that it is a residential area and to expect the 
presence of children.  
Given that Ashington Rise is a cul-de-sac and it is not a thoroughfare, it 
suggests that the motorists who are speeding in the area are either residents, 
visitors or deliveries.  Therefore, this is a matter for An Garda Síochána to 
impose penalties on speeding. 

 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive with regards to question 17 on the 2nd of December, as 
unfortunately the Chief Executive does not appear to have the powers required to 
break the vicious circle vis the Environmental Health Officers involvement in this matter 
and that as I will need to take further advice in this matter, am I to presume that this 
matter will be expedited, given the duration of confusion, when I revert on foot of receipt 
of said advice? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Principal Environmental Health Officer has contacted Councillor Pepper directly 
requesting address details for the private rented property referred to.  Once received, 
any records in relation to the property can be reviewed and all necessary investigation 
and enforcement action pursued 
 
Q.32 
COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive is there any plans to establish DCC sponsored boxing 
clubs, these are especially necessary for young people, one specifically needed in the 
Whitehall area where there is strong community support for the establishment of same. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Set out below is the background on the work carried out by Dublin City Sport & 
Wellbeing Partnership (DCSWP) and specifically the work carried out by DCSWP’s 
Irish Athletic Boxing Association (IABA) Boxing Development Officers working with 
Dublin city communities.  The response also outlines the support Dublin City Council 
(DCC) provides to local sports clubs via the Club Support Small Grant Scheme which 
is administered by DCSWP.  
 
Background: 
 
The purpose of Dublin City Sport & Wellbeing Partnership is to provide opportunities 
for everyone in our communities to partake in sport & physical activity programmes 
regardless of age, gender, background or ability.  
 
The role of the Partnership is to deliver programmes and services that support the 
over-arching goals set out in the Dublin City Council Sports Plan 2024 - 2029 (adopted 
in May 2024)  and previous to this, STRIDE 2017 - 2020 (strategy remained in place 
until the new plan was adopted).  The Sports Partnership has 24 Sport Officers working 
across the five electoral areas. In addition 25 Co-funded Officers deliver the following 
sports specific programmes on a citywide and electoral basis: 
 
➢ Athletics (Athletics Ireland)  
➢ Boxing (IABA) 
➢ Cricket (Cricket Leinster) 
➢ Football (FAI) 
➢ Rowing (Rowing Ireland) 
➢ Rugby (Leinster Rugby) 
➢ Swimming (Swim Ireland)  
 
Members of the public can find more information on how to get involved in programmes 
via the DCSWP Virtual Hub where contact details of all local Sport and Co-funded 
Officers are available.  
 
DCSWP Staff and Sports Officers 
 

 
The Sports Partnership works closely with numerous organisations, group and 
services in the delivery of its programmes and initiatives.  
 
 
DCSWP and Co-funded Officers plan and deliver programmes aimed at key target 
groups.  Target groups are informed by national legislation including the National 
Sports Policy 2018-2027 
  
 DCSWP Key target groups/core programmes include: 
➢ Youth At Risk (10-24 years) 
➢ Older Adults (age 55+ years)  
➢ Adult Groups (18+ years) 
➢ New Communities 
➢ Minority Groups e.g.: Travelling Community/Roma Groups/Muslim Groups 
➢ Individuals with physical, intellectual and sensory disabilities 
➢ Underactive Communities 
➢ School (Primary & Secondary Level) 
The monthly area committee report outlines details of all upcoming/ongoing flagship, 
core and co-funded DCSWP programmes.  
 
 
DCSWP Boxing Development Officers 
 
Five IABA Boxing in the Community Development Officers work in each of DCC’s 
administrative areas. The IABA’s main focus in on the delivery of the primary and 
secondary school Startbox programme, the description of which is set out in the 
DCC/DCSWP Heads of Agreement: 
 
The Startbox Initiative, a partnership between the IABA and Dublin City Sport & 
Wellbeing Partnership, represents an ideal way for young people (10 – 17 years) to 
first engage with amateur boxing, Ireland’s most successful Olympic sport. It is 
delivered by our 5 dedicated IABA/DCSWP Development Officers via local schools 
(primary & TY level) in communities across the Dublin City area. Approximately 2,000 
young people take part each year. 
 
The Programme is structured into Bronze (non-contact), Silver and Gold phases. The 
first phase focuses on general strength & fitness, method and technique. The Silver 
Programme consists of higher intensity sessions & limited contact and the Gold phase 
takes it to another level (combination of first two levels and progression to contact). 
 
Although initially targeted at 10-17 year olds the programme has expanded at different 
stages in certain areas (including North Central Area) to include younger age groups. 
 
The Startbox programme concludes with showcase finals which are held in May/June 
and November/December each year.  In addition the Boxing Development Officers 
work with local youth services to deliver the Olympic Education programme during the 
summer school break.   
 
Note: Currently there is a Boxing Development Officer vacancy in the North Central 
Area (NCA) following a resignation and internal staffing changes. The NCA was 
informed of this in November 2024 in separate correspondence and in the monthly 
report.  DCSWP has been advised by the IABA that the process of filling this vacancy 

will commence in January 2025.  Contact details for IABA Officers/representatives are 
at the bottom of the report for councillors’ information 
 
Club Support Small Grant Scheme 
 
In terms of supporting sports clubs, DCSWP provides financial support through the 
Club Support Small Grant Scheme (prior to 2024 this was named the Sport for Young 
People Small Grant Scheme). The scheme is provided by Sport Ireland and Dublin 
City Council and DCSWP has responsibility for its administration.The scope of the 
grant was expanded for 2024 to target clubs affiliated to a National Governing Body in 
the DCC administrative area with participants of all ages. Grants range from €500 - 
€1,000. The amount awarded is based on the information entered on the application 
and assessed against the criteria outlined in the additional information booklets 
provided to clubs.  
 
A list of clubs who have been awarded a grant in 2024 is due to be provided to each 
of the area committees in the February 2025 as part of the DCSWP monthly area 
update (following the payment process which concluded in December 2024). Boxing 
clubs can be highlighted in the North Central Area for the councillor’s information.   
 
It is envisaged that DCSWP will also expand its support of clubs in 2025 in areas such 
as Training and Governance. For example in November 2024, DCSWP facilitated a 
Club Committee Information evening in the National Handball Centre, Sackville 
Avenue, Dublin 3.  The seminar was entitled ‘Key Committee Skills - Roles and 
Responsibilities in Running a Successful Sports Club’. There was a very positive 
response to the workshop and further sessions are in the planning stages for 2025.  
 
DCSWP Contact Details: 
 
Name: 
Role: 
Email: 
Phone:  
Colin 
Sharkey 
Acting 
DCSWP 
Manager 
Colin.sharkey@dublincity.ie 
 
087 187 4200 
DCSWP 
Palace 
St. 
Office 
N/A 
sports@dublincity.ie 
 
01 222 7852 
 
 
 
IABA DCSWP Boxing Development Officer Contact Details: 
 
Name: 
Area: 
Contact 
Michael Carruth 
South East/Citywide Supervisor 
087 753 9555 
Noel Burke 
South Central Area 
086 326 5777 
Paul Quinn 
Central  
087 674 8928 
Oisín Fagan 
North West 
087 981 8322 
 
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to resolve the issue of flooding at (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The locus will be investigated and appropriate remedial action listed for inclusion in the 
Parks Works Programme for the area 2025. 
 

Q.34 
COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive to remove the cigarette box at (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Cabra/Glasnevin Area Office will remove the box as soon as possible and add the 
pole to the list for painting. 
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure that two properties along (Details supplied) 
owned by the Council that are in a state of total disrepair, what action is planned by 
the Housing Department to clean them up, remove all dumped material and ensure 
they are in a condition to be allocated to those on our housing list; and if he will make 
a statement on the matter. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance can confirm that both properties are currently tenanted. Housing 
Maintenance will liaise with the Central Area, Estate Management team regarding 
reports of dumped material, to ensure removal of same. 
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he has had any approaches from any of the Parties likely 
to form the next Government to ascertain the needs of Dublin City as they prepare a 
Programme for Government. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Informal discussions took place after the General Election. 
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will initiate a serious programme to cull the excessive 
and growing problem of rats in the City. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The HSE are responsible for Public Health and pest control, however, Waste 
Management plans to remove the derogation that permits the presentation of waste 
in plastic bags, this should assist in reducing food sources for rodents. The Foul 
Drainage system which is a source of rodents is the responsibility of Irish Water. 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the construction of new dressing rooms 
in Brickfield Park, Drimnagh. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The plans for new dressing rooms in Brickfield Park are progressing. The pre part 8 
package is expected to be circulated internally early in the New Year. The area 
committee will be updated in advance of this process commencing.  
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to organise for work to be carried out on the gardens at 
(details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance have no record of the above complaint at (Details Supplied). 
Housing Maintenance will now arrange an assessment of the garden and any 
necessary works will be arranged. 
 

Q.40 
COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive can he confirm if Dublin is meeting its recycling target for 
2025 and can he also confirm how much waste has been generated, collected, 
recycled, land filled and incinerated for the years 2014-2024. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
EU Recycling Targets are set at a national level, and reported on nationally by the 
Environmental Protection Agency from a variety of sources. This data is not analysed 
or produced at a regional or administrative boundary level. Per a report released 
recently by the EPA, based on 2022 data, the national level of recycling has stagnated 
at 41% for approximately 10 years. Please see attached the Highlight Summary of said 
report, and Municipal Waste Treatment_Chart which charts the move away from landfill 
to recovery and thermal treatment from 2001 to 2021. 
 
 
Q.41 
COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if there is a formal process for compensation to property 
owners for damage caused to garden walls and other privately owned structures by 
the growth of council-owned tree roots on footpaths. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In the case of damage caused to a garden wall by tree roots the resident must make 
a formal claim of property damage against the council’s insurer.  On receipt of such a 
request to parks@dublincity.ie a form will be sent out to the resident to verify the exact 
location, extent of damage etc. This will be independently assessed and if valid an 
offer is made based on whether tree roots are fully or partially to blame for the 
damage.  The resident then engages their own contractor to carry out the necessary 
repairs.   
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive whether an impact assessment was conducted on the 
provision of late-night public transport services (Luas, DART, and Bus) over the 
Christmas period. If so, would the Executive consider sharing this data with 
Councillors? The availability of late-night public transport during weekends and festive 
periods significantly enhances the accessibility of the night-time economy for both 
consumers and employees in the sector. Expanding such services to more periods 
throughout the year would help reduce financial burdens and carbon emissions within 
the sector. Data from this impact assessment would be invaluable in supporting the 
advocacy and progression of policies to extend late-night public transport services. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The NTA has requested that correspondence received by DCC regarding the Network 
Redesign is sent directly by the Cllr to the NTA for response.  
Councillor queries should be sent to oireachtasliaison@nationaltransport.ie 
 
Q.43 
COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if Dublin City Council currently provides fire alarms free of 
charge to residents. If not, would he consider introducing a scheme to provide fire 
alarms to households free of charge, to enhance fire safety in the community?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance currently provides smoke alarms free of charge to tenants. In 
addition, Housing Maintenance provides a carbon monoxide alarm to tenants when a 
new boiler is installed in a dwelling, to further enhance safety. 
 

Q.44 
COUNCILLOR RORY HOGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive if consideration has been given to the possibility of 
providing free parking to all people over the age of 70 not in possession of the disability 
blue badges; and if he can outline his views on such considerations.   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parking Enforcement Section are tasked with providing an enforcement service 
for all illegal parking as per the Dublin City Council Parking Control Bye-laws 2024. 
The issue of providing free parking to all persons over 70 years of age would be outside 
the remit of this Section.  
 
Q.45 
COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full report regarding the monies received from 
the NTA over the past number of years for active travel projects and other such 
initiatives.   This report to include, a full breakdown of all costs and allocations of 
monies, full rationale for all budgets.  Who initiates these programs of works?   Is it the 
NTA or Dublin City Council Planning department, Traffic department? How much 
monies have been allocated to staff wages and salaries?  Who is in charge of the 
overall budget?  Who has sign off on the budget and financial controls? Is there any 
report on these budgets?  Have the city counsellors been informed or have they any 
say on what programs of work are initiated?  How are budgets and monies negotiated 
from the NTA? Who initiates these negotiations?  At a recent meeting of the South 
East area the NTA refused to supply me with this information even though they have 
given out the monies to Dublin City Council.  Can the City Council supply me with this 
information in the interest of transparency and openness and accountability? There 
are very serious sums of public money here.  In the meantime, I have yet to see any 
transparency around these monies and any of our documentation or accounts perhaps 
I am missing something.  
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Active Travel Projects within Dublin City Council are funded by the Department of 
Transport through the National Transport Authority’s Active Travel Programme. 
Funding is allocated on an annual basis and applications for funding on individual 
projects are made in compliance with the National Transport Authority’s Project 
Approval Guidelines.  
 
The overall funding originally allocated to Dublin City Council in Active Travel 
Investment Grants was €59,850,000 in 2023 and €54,100,000 in 2024. 
 
The funding allocated was for projects managed by The Active Travel Programme 
Office, the DCC Traffic Department and the DCC Roads Design Section within the 
overall DCC Environment and Transportation Department, under the remit of the 
Assistant Chief Executive and City Engineer.. 
 
As part of the overall funding, €3,749,859.01 was claimed from the NTA in relation to 
Active Travel staff costs in 2023 and €3,095,327.24 in 2024. This funding covers the 
staff, office accommodation and equipment costs for the DCC Active Travel 
Programme Office. This is fully funded by the National Transport Authority under their 
Active Travel Investment Programme. It is therefore outside of Dublin City Council’s 
own Revenue budget. 
 
A full breakdown of funding allocations in Active Travel Investment Grants for the years 
2023 and 2024 along with a complete breakdown of funding claimed from the National 
Transport Authority for those years is appended to this report. 

 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive in light of the recent scandalous revelations regarding 
governance at the Fr. Peter McVerry Trust issue a full public statement regarding 
Dublin City Council and Dublin Regional Homeless Executives own investigations and 
what they have uncovered.   Further, with the possibility of the Fr. Peter McVerry Trust 
going the way of other such charitable organisations who have been found to be in 
gross breach of governance, what contingency plans has Dublin City Council in place 
in the event of the Fr Peter McVerry Trust having to wind down its operations as a 
company and transfer its assets because of its gross breach of trust? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The DRHE initiated a review in 2023 to examine areas of concern within PMVT. The 
DHLGH established an Oversight Group, of which DRHE is a member, to ensure 
continuity of services in emergency accommodation or supported housing with PMVT. 
That work will continue until there is confidence in the organisation’s compliance with 
financial and governance requirements.  
PMVT has ongoing engagement with the DRHE and the Department of Housing in 
relation to financial and governance matters.Regulatory oversight of the bodies is 
provided by the Charities’ Regulator and the Approved Housing Body Regulator 
(AHBRA). 
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to reissue all reports given to me regarding (details 
supplied). Can the CEO resupply me with the answers to all the questions I asked in 
the past number of years regarding these properties at Buckingham Street.  Also, can 
the CEO issue a report as to what progress has been made regarding the future use 
of these properties? Also, are all the legal claims due diligence and governance 
completed regarding these properties and their ownership? Including rights of way and 
trespass. Has (details supplied) been given any financial redress or compensation 
from DCC regarding the takeover by DCC of these properties?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A search for reports and answers to questions issued to the Councillor found Council 
Question response Q.42 from November 2020 which is attached.  
Dublin City Council has not acquired the site/property at Buckingham Street and as 
such no financial redress or compensation applies.  
Q.48  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to give a full breakdown of the entire fleet of vehicles used 
by Dublin City Council? This breakdown to include age of vehicles, road worthiness of 
vehicles, full record of breakdown of vehicles. This report also to include, the Dublin 
fire brigade and ambulance fleet and EV vehicles. 
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
See report attached 
 
Dublin City Council operates a fleet of 839 road & municipal vehicles and 128 items 
of other plant (such as grass care machinery). 
Just over 600 vehicles, or 72% of the vehicle fleet – almost all of the light commercial 
fleet (GVW <=3,500 kg) – has been procured on various lease/short term hire 
arrangements.  

DCC have a number of lease hire providers and the maintenance records for these 
vehicles must be obtained from these suppliers. 
Approximately 28% of DCC’s vehicle fleet is owned outright – typically heavier and 
more bespoke vehicles. 
Much of the light commercial fleet (GVW <=3,500 kg) is to be renewed in the coming 
year as current lease hire terms are expiring. 
The systems and methods by which the vehicle records are maintained are currently 
being updated. 
Fleet Management Services will endeavour to have a more comprehensive response 
in the New Year. 
 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive where there is a parking protected cycle lane, to install a 
physical barrier (e.g. bollards or a raised ramp) on the outside of the buffer zone 
between the cycle lane and the parking spots. Examples of places where this is 
required are Fitzwilliam Street and Griffith Avenue but this applies to all parking 
protected cycle lanes. The purpose of the buffer zone is so that doors opening from 
parked cars do not dangerously encroach on the cycle lane. However, due to the fact 
that there is no physical impediment stopping them from doing so, drivers more often 
than not park their car partially or wholly in the buffer zone, rendering it ineffective and 
useless. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Protected Cycle Lanes are installed in compliance with both the Cycle Design 
Manual and the Design Manual for Urban Streets, neither of which call for the 
installation of bollards or ramps as proposed 
 
 
Q.50  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to remove the flashing yellow light for cars from pedestrian 
crossings. This light should remain red for this period. The flashing yellow light for cars 
at pedestrian crossings encourages drivers to proceed and puts pedestrians at risk. It 
is anti-active travel and creates anxiety and risk for pedestrians. If the flashing yellow 
light for cars at pedestrian crossings is not to be removed can the Chief Executive 
please explain the purpose of this light and why it should be retained? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As outlined previously, these type of pedestrian signals are commonly used within the 
UK and Ireland and are provided for in the Irish Traffic Signs Manual Chapter 9 as 
follows: 
Pelican Crossings are crossings which control both vehicular and pedestrian traffic by 
light signals. They differ from conventional signalised pedestrian crossings by 
incorporating a Two-Aspect Pedestrian Signal that displays a flashing green figure 
simultaneously with a red signal then flashing amber signal to vehicles, the flashing 
amber signal to vehicles overlapping the red to pedestrians. The two aspect pedestrian 
signal shall only be used at Pelican and Toucan Crossings.  
Please refer to our previous response (Q24: Cllr Paddy Monahan, NCAC 09.12.24) for 
a detailed description of the operation of the pelican crossing sequence. Motorists are 
legally obliged to halt on a flashing amber signal if there are still pedestrians on the 
crossing and failure to do so is a Roads Traffic offence and a matter for An Garda 
Síochána. 
As junctions and pedestrian crossings are upgraded under Bus Connects and Active 
Travel programmes, the operational use of these pelican crossings can be evaluated 
at specific locations. Should upgrade to standard pedestrian crossing be 
recommended, budget for such upgrades should also be provided for under these 

programmes. In the meantime we will continue to assess the safety timings on pelican 
crossings and ensure they operate to enhance pedestrian and cyclists safety. 
 
Q.51 
COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to have visible countdown timers installed at 
pedestrian crossings for pedestrians awaiting the green man. With respect to previous 
statements on this issue, if there are exceptional cases where this is not feasible so 
be it but such timers should be installed as widely as possible throughout Dublin. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As outlined previously, these pedestrian countdown timers do not work well with the 
adaptive operation of Dublin City’s SCATS traffic management system. 
The adaptive nature of the system allows traffic phases across the city to be either 
slightly lengthened to service approaching public transport or shortened should a gap 
in traffic permit the running of other phases or a pedestrian crossing earlier than 
anticipated. Countdown timers prevent this as once a count has begun the remaining 
time cannot be altered.  
A countdown timer would also reduce the effectiveness of manual intervention by our 
traffic control room operators to mitigate delays to traffic and public transport. Please 
refer to our previous response for further detail on the reasons why countdown timers 
are not compatible with our adaptive traffic management system (Q16: Cllr Paddy 
Monahan, CC, 02.12.24). 
We will, however, continue to work towards reducing pedestrian wait times in so far as 
is possible across the city. 
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to install zebra crossings at intersections to indicate that a 
pedestrian continuing to walk straight has priority over a car turning. Without such 
visible markings drivers will continue to wrongly assume priority and cause pedestrians 
to wait for a break in traffic at which point they may attempt to cross - always at risk of 
another turning car. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Junctions are assessed on a case-by-case basis to gauge the requirement for 
additional pedestrian facilities, which are installed across the city as resources allow. 
While pedestrian facilities such as zebra crossings give pedestrians priority, where 
these have not been provided, pedestrians must yield to vehicular traffic already on 
the junction and cross only when safe to do so. If the Councillor has any specific 
locations in mind these can be assessed for additional pedestrian facilities. 
 
Q.53 
COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive about parking plans (details Supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The request to extend the hours of Pay and Display and Permit Parking on (details 
supplied) was recommended by the Transport Advisory Group on December 17th, 
2024, following a ballot of the residents in favour of extending the hours to Monday to 
Sunday, 07:00 – 24:00. 
 
The recommendation is due for noting at the Central Area Committee meeting of 14th 
January, 2025 and will then be sent to An Gardai for approval and subsequent issuing 
of a Managers Order. It would be expected to issue the Managers Order to the Traffic 
Officer for implementation in February 2025. 
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 

To ask the Chief Executive about litter problems (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Litter Enforcement Manager will instruct the litter wardens for the area to visit 
(details supplied) and the surrounding parades to investigate a sample of any illegal 
dumping present. If any evidence is obtained in the investigation, fixed penalty notices 
of €150 will be issued under the Litter Pollution Acts 1997-2009. The Litter Wardens 
will need to be present to witness any littering offence and have the assistance of An 
Garda Siochana to request names and address in order to issue fines to offenders. 
Properties who store their wheeled bins on the public footpath will be written to 
detailing their responsibilities under the Bye-Laws for the Storage, Presentation and 
Segregation of Household and Commercial Waste 2018 when storing and presenting 
their waste containers. If the City Council is made aware of the properties allegedly 
dumping their rubbish, letters will be sent to the owners requesting they take action to 
make sure their tenants have a waste collection service in place. Fixed penalty notices 
can be issued should the owners not provide proof that a waste collection service is in 
place at their property.  
 
Q.55 
COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive is there a way to support residents installing driveways 
without damaging trees? There are a few residents that have been in touch with 
refused planning permission for driveways. The permission has been declined 
because of street trees that are close but not blocking the entrance. Is there a way to 
facilitate both the off-street parking and maintaining the trees?  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Transportation Planning Division Response:  
Transportation Planning Division assesses applications for new or widened vehicular 
entrances in the vicinity of street trees in accordance with Appendix 5 Section 4.3.2 of 
the Dublin City Development Plan and in consultation with the Parks, Biodiversity and 
Landscape Services Department. While the proposed entrance may be acceptable 
from a traffic safety point of view, the physical works associated with the provision of 
the entrance including the associated dishing may damage the tree and the tree root 
zone. Appendix 5 Section 4.3.2 ‘Impact on Street Trees’ states that in all cases, the 
proposed vehicular entrance shall not interfere with any street trees. Proposals to 
provide a new entrance or widen an existing vehicular entrance that would result in the 
removal of, or damage to, a street tree will not generally be permitted. 
The planning application referred to was refused by Dublin City council due to the 
impact on an existing street tree and was also refused by An Bord Pleanala on appeal 
for the same reason. (DCC ref: 4824/22 and ABP ref: 315163 refer). 
 
Parks, Biodiversity and Landscape Services Department Response: 
 
Parks, Biodiversity and Landscape Services assesses applications for vehicular 
entrances in proximity to public street trees in accordance with the Dublin City 
Development Plan Volume 2, Appendix 5 Section 4.3.2 and associated Figure 1. 
Applications that achieve the required clearances are the current way of achieving off-
street parking. 
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR FIONA CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive when are the communication boards being installed in 
Eamonn Ceannt Park, Brickfield Park and Pearse Park? These boards are vital for 
children and families who need them and will make a huge difference. D12 Autism 

Support Group are doing fantastic work in the community to support families and these 
communication boards are very important. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
All the above mentioned parks received communication boards earlier this year (late 
summer/early autumn). There has unfortunately been a high incidence of vandalism 
which has resulted in their removal. A review of locations will be carried out early in 
the New Year and a replacement programme carried out where necessary. It is likely 
that signage that is more robust than was originally installed is required and to this end 
may entail a delay in delivering alternatives. 
 
Q.57 
COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline how the Council is supporting residents on 
terraced streets to charge electric vehicles locally at affordable rates 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Dublin LA’s have appointed E-Power to install public EV chargers across the City 
and County. E-Power were the successful tenderer from the public procurement 
procedure. Dublin City Council has agreed that the Fast Charging hub model of 
providing public EV charging offers the best alignment with DCC’s Climate Action, 
Transport and Development Plans. 
DCC have identified an initial 13 locations that are suitable for installation under phase 
one of the pilot, and additional sites are being assessed for feasibility. 
The Public Chargers will be operated and maintained by E-Power. The cost per kWh 
will be set by the market and DCC will not have any influence over this. 
DCC are also supporting all residents of the city by developing mobility hubs which 
include, Cargo Bikes, E-bikes, E-Scooters and Car Clubs (including electric cars). 
Mobility hubs offer flexibility and affordability to residents who wish to transition away 
from the burden of car ownership to more sustainable transport solutions.  
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the interim road safety measures 
proposed for the Ashtown Gate junction. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council, Fingal County Council and the OPW met recently and have agreed 
on an interim traffic calming solution for the Ashtown Gate junction. This consists of 
bollards, road markings and uncontrolled pedestrian crossings. This interim solution 
will be installed in late January 2025/ early February 2025. 
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for the number of bicycle parking stands installed in the city 
in 2022, 2023, 2024 and how many are planned for installation in 2025 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The breakdown of cycle parking installed by City Centre Projects is as follows; 
 
2022 – 108 no. stands / 216 spaces 
2023 – 116 no. stands / 232 spaces 
2024 – 19 no. stands / 38 spaces 
2025 - City Centre Projects will assess cycle parking as requests are received and 
install were appropriate, subject to available funding. 
 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for the update on the rollout of Bike Bunkers in the city. 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The first stage of procurement was completed in Q4 2024 and was progressed to stage 
two. This process began on 02.12.2024 and will close on 20.01.2025. It is hoped that 
this stage and all subsequent stages of this process will progress smoothly and that 
the contract will be awarded before end of Q1 2025. 
 
Q.61 
COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive can a report be done to show how many claims have been 
put in through DCC insurance from contractors called out to carry repairs on DCC 
tenant’s homes? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The information requested is not readily available in the format requested. Housing 
Maintenance will compile the information and send directly to the Councillor as soon 
as possible. 
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive can a statue of Sinead o Connor be put up in the city? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Under the Council’s policy on commemorations & naming, in order to be 
commemorated a person must have died twenty years previously or have reached the 
centenary of their birth. As the late Sinéad O’Connor (1966-2023) does not meet this 
criterion, the erection of a statue in her honour cannot be considered until 2043 at the 
earliest. 
 
Q.63 
COUNCILLOR LESLIIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive what is the current protocol regarding DCC tenants who 
are paying rent on their property, but not actually living in the property and leaving it 
vacant.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
If there are concerns that a Council property with an active rent account is not being 
lived in, then the local Area Office would be asked to investigate to establish whether 
or not the tenant(s) are still residing at the property.  
If the tenant(s) are not residing at the property, without prior approval, this would be a 
breach of their tenancy agreement and a tenancy warning under section 9 of the 
Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2014 would be liable to be issued. 
Should the matter remain unresolved, the Council could apply to the courts for a 
possession order under section 12 of the above act. 
 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline the role and responsibilities of the Vacant Homes 
Officer and in particular his/her role in identifying, assessing and reporting of long-term 
vacant residential properties. Could the Chief Executive also outline the criteria and 
decision making process whereby a property can be deemed long-term vacant home. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The role of the Vacant Homes Officer is to help the City Council reduce the level of 
Long term vacancy rates in the City and to achieve its targets as per the City Council’s 
Housing Action Plan contained within the Current City Development Plan (2022-2028).  

To help achieve these targets and in line with the Housing for All and Rebuilding Ireland 
Government Initiatives the Housing Department in partnership with the Department Of 
Housing Local Government and Heritage administer the following schemes which are 
targeted at helping Dublin City Council achieve this objective. 
• 
Croi Conaithe Scheme. 
• 
Buy and Renew Scheme. 
• 
Repair and Lease Scheme.   
Once a property has been reported to the City Council as being potentially vacant then 
the Vacant Property Unit will record same property and initiate an internal process for 
confirming if same property is long term vacant. 
 To summarise the above process the City Council undertakes the following task as 
regards the property in question: 
• 
Desktop Survey. 
• 
Site Inspection. 
• 
Title Research. 
• 
Issue correspondences to Owner.  
• 
Monitor file. 
The City Council will issue correspondence(s) to the owner of any identified long term 
vacant property requesting them to return it to use in a timely manner. 
Any failure to do so may result in the City Council invoking its legislative powers to 
have same property returned to use. 
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive to explain how anybody with no access to the Internet was 
informed of the pre-design public consultation for the College Green/Dame Street 
public realm project recently announced. Also, could the Chief Executive also explain 
how non-internet users could make submissions? Finally, to ask the Chief Executive if 
those involved in this project have been made aware of the fact that a significant 
number of members of the public do not have access to the internet and to take 
necessary steps to ensure their inclusion in the process 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The non-statutory pre-design public consultation process was advertised through two 
press releases, which received coverage in both national and local media. The second 
press release provided information on how individuals without internet access, or those 
preferring non-digital methods of participation, could engage with the process. These 
individuals were invited to contact the College Green Dame Street Public Realm 
Project Team by post or telephone to request a printed copy of the consultation 
questionnaire. 
 
The College Green Dame Street Public Realm Project Team acknowledges the 
importance of including individuals without internet access or those who favour non-
digital engagement methods. The team is currently reviewing the consultation process 
to identify opportunities to enhance future engagement and ensure greater inclusivity 
for this group. 
 
Q.66 
COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive to detail what Planning Permission/requirements were 
necessary in order to allow the opening of the Medically Supervised Injection facility at 
Merchant’s Quay Ireland’s Riverbank Centre. In particular, can the Chief Executive 
detail any and all conditions in the Permission designed to protect residents, retailers 
and schoolchildren in the surrounding streets from any drug/user related exposure.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Planning Permission was granted by An Bord Pleanála on the 21st December 2022 
under Register Reference 4121/18 (ABP Ref PL29S.312618) for the provision of a 
Medically Supervised Injecting Facility (MSIF) at existing vacant basement level and 
associated works.  
Conditions required to be completed prior to the commencement of development 
included:  
6: Details of the materials, colours and textures of all the external finishes to the 
proposed development shall be submitted to, and agreed in writing with, the 
planning authority prior to commencement of development. 
Submission received and was deemed to be in compliance on 12th August 2024. There 
were no other pre-commencement conditions required to be complied with.  
Other conditions in relation to the operation of the facility included the following:  
 
2)  The use of the premises as a Medically Supervised Injecting Facility shall cease 
on or before the expiration of a temporary period of 18 months from the date of first 
operation, unless before the end of that period, permission for the continuance of 
the use beyond that date shall have been authorised by way of a separate grant of 
permission. 
3) The Night Café facility shall not operate within the subject building, unless as 
otherwise granted by way of a separate application for permission. 
4) Notwithstanding the exempted development provisions of the Planning and 
Development Regulations, 2001, and any statutory provision amending or 
replacing them, the use of the basement level of the proposed development shall 
be restricted to a Medically Supervised Injecting Facility (as specified in the 
documentation lodged with the application and appeal), unless otherwise 
authorised by a prior grant of planning permission. 
5) The development shall be managed and operated in accordance with the 
measures outlined in the Public Realm and Community Engagement Plan (June 
2019) and the Operations Plan (June 2019), as submitted to the planning authority 
on the 28th day of June, 2019. 
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update regarding the feasibility study for Housing at 
the Community Training Centre on St. Laurence Place  East as well as details of the 
funding application with DHLGH. Also, to ask the Chief Executive to detail the other 
uses being considered for this building which was alluded to in the Housing Delivery 
Report (Adaptive Reuse). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Adaptive Reuse Unit in the Housing Department appointed an architectural firm in 
July 2023 to complete a feasibility study on the building to include an assessment of 
design options for conversion of the building to apartments, and preparation of a 
condition report and cost estimate for the preferred design option. A report on the 
feasibility study outcome was presented to Local Area Councillors in September 2023. 
A funding application was submitted to the DHLGH in December 2023 and a response 
was received February 2024. The response requested further information including 
additional opening up works, site surveys, investigations and reports.  
Local Area Management have also been engaging with the NEIC task force regarding 
the building's possible use for childcare. The Area Office is awaiting an update and 

anticipates being in a position to provide additional guidance on the subject in the 
upcoming year. 
As this option for the building is being advanced, no further action has been taken by 
the Adaptive Reuse Unit in relation to the funding application.  
Fiona Craven 
Programme Manager, Adaptive Reuse Unit 
 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive can Dublin City Council please let me know what if anything 
we can do to help house the following person (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council do not offer an option wherein they will accept a contribution for a 
person to be housed in one of their tenancies. The Financial Contribution Scheme is a 
scheme that is offered for persons who own their own property, wishing to downsize 
to an older person’s accommodation, however, in accordance with the Scheme of 
Lettings, Dublin City Council have to purchase the property of the applicant.  
(Details Supplied) may wish to look at the option of Mortgage to Rent, she should 
contact her mortgage lender who may be able to advise her further in respect of her 
eligibility in this regard.  
 
Q.69  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to please look at (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Parking Enforcement Section will request that DSPS continue to patrol this area 
and enforce any and all illegal parking in the area. 
 
Q.70 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive that Dublin City Council supports the continuation of 
community services at the Our Lady Hall Mourne Road Drimnagh Dublin 12. I have 
met the committee who do a wonderful job voluntary but they are finding it possible to 
meet insurance, utility and various running costs. This group needs to be helped to 
enable the full opportunities this the only fully community building has available to the 
local community. The centre needs various upgrades but they have nowhere to turn to 
get bathrooms, kitchens upgraded. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Minister Humphreys and Minister O’Brien announced the Local Enhancement 
Programme (LEP) for 2025 on Thursday 7 November 2024 with a total of €7 million 
available nationally (€6 million available for capital costs and €1 million available for 
energy and running costs). Dublin City’s allocation is €656,750 (€562,929 for capital 
costs and €93,821 for energy and running costs).  
 
The current scheme is designed to ensure local priorities are identified, met and that 
community facilities are improved / enhanced with a particular focus on small capital 
works and purchase of equipment for community use.  
 
The capital funding may be used but is not limited to improved access for persons with 
a disability, enhancing community participation for disadvantaged and marginalised 
groups, and improving energy efficiency of community facilities to reduce ongoing 
costs. The funding will be available to a diverse range of community group’s including 

but not limited to Men’s and Women’s sheds/ groups, community centres, parish halls 
and local voluntary groups.  
 
DRCD have stipulated that the grant must close for applications by the 7 March 2025 
with LCDC approvals returned no later than Friday 28 March 2025.  The Dublin City 
LEP fund will be opened for applications late January 2025.   
 
Q.71 
COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive to look at the repainting of all public lampposts in the 
Ballyfermot area and indeed Drimnagh, Inchicore, Bluebell and Walkinstown. DCC and 
ESB have not re-painted the lamp standards in over 30 years and they are looking 
worst for wear. I have asked this question previously and was asked to identify specific 
lamp standards however all in our ownership and indeed the ESB need attention. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The districts listed above cover a very large area.  
DCC will look at the above locations and identify a number of lamposts for painting on 
a year by year basis in these areas within the context of annual funds available for 
painting. Lamp standards have been painted in these areas over the past few years 
including some lampposts on Goldenbridge Avenue, Luby Road, Bulfin Road, 
Tyrconnell  Road, Drumfinn Avenue among others. The areas listed above will be 
forwarded to the ESB for their consideration. 
 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the proposed Development on the Former 
Chivers Factory site on Coolock Drive, Donnybrook, Dublin 17. Local residents have 
reported recent activity on the site and have requested the update. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The site had a previous permission SHD ABP-304346-19, for the development of the 
3.8ha site, for the construction of 495 no. Build to Rent apartments, creche, 803 sq.m 
commercial floor space(412 sq.m gym,34 sq.m café & 357 sq.m creche) with a building 
height of 4 to 10 storeys, 12,843 sq.m of communal amenity space and 396 no. 
basement and surface car parking spaces and associated site works. The Final Grant 
was issued on 13 August 2019. 
 
No further permission has been applied for on this site and the Planning Authority is 
not aware of recent site activity.   
 
 
 
Q.73 
COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to have the requested pavement repairs completed outside 
(details supplied). There is a hole in the footpath caused by Heavy Machinery during 
adaptation works which was covered with Plywood temporarily last May but the 
remedial works have not been carried out, the resident is wheelchair bound and cannot 
access or egress from the residence unaided as a result. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
An enquiry (Ref. no. 11170852) has been created, regarding this defect. This has been 
forwarded to the RMS Area Inspector for repair. 
 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 

To ask the Chief Executive to have the “Dishing” of the Foothpaths in the Ayrfield 
Estate inspected with a view to reducing the Gap between the pavement and the road 
surface , in particular outside (details supplied) and on the adjacent corner . 
The resident here is wheelchair bound and finds the distance from the bottom of the 
“Dish “ to the road surface too big to safely use unaided for access and egress while 
trying to go out of the estate to the Shops or the Churchyard access for the local Bus 
Route. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An inquiry (Reference No. 11170854) has been created and an Inspector has been 
dispatched to conduct a survey and assess the required alterations to improve the 
accessibility of the footpath. 
 
Q.75 
COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNELLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to examine the possibility of installing double yellow lines 
at (Details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following an assessment, the area engineer found that the carriageway on Ballygall 
Road East at this location is wide enough to accommodate two-sided parking. On-
street parking acts as a passive traffic calming measure and is generally encouraged 
where possible.  
There is sufficient room for vehicles to egress from the driveway at this location and 
drivers must wait until safe to proceed before doing so.  
 
Removal of parking at this location could contribute towards an increase in speeds on 
Ballygall Road East and as such no changes are recommended at this time. 
 
Q.76 
COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the repair of the badly damaged and sunken 
roadway at (details supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The carriageway at Glasnevin Avenue will be inspected. Any defects deemed to 
require repairs will be added to our Works List. 
Enq. Ref. 11170850 
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the implementation of the E spine 
and F spine of the bus connects programme. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The NTA has requested that correspondence received by DCC regarding the Network 
Redesign is sent directly by the Cllr to the NTA for response.  
Councillor queries should be sent to oireachtasliaison@nationaltransport.ie 
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the all-weather project for (details 
supplied) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The matter will be investigated and a full reply will be issued to the Councillor as soon 
as is practicable. 
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 

To ask the Chief Executive for all litter to be removed from the Oscar Traynor road 
including piles of leaves near Cadburys factory. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services had the above mentioned location cleaned in mid-
December 2024. 
 
Q.80 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive can he make contact with (details supplied) who has been 
approved on exceptional social grounds and is in urgent needing of housing? (Details 
supplied) had a meeting with Gillian Corcoran previously and is waiting a long time. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A Housing Advisor made contact and spoke with her in respect of her housing file and 
the options available to her.  
 
Details Supplied is on the Transfer List with a welfare priority, with an application date 
of 12/03/2024, and holds the following positions on the list; 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
3 
34 
E 
3 
42 
 
It is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 
number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list.  
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
If there are no properties available at present, nothing will be advertised. Applicants 
can only apply for properties in their chosen areas that meet the size requirement of 
their household. If a number of applicants apply for the same property on a Choice 
Based Lettings competition, the final offer will be made to the applicant with the highest 
position on list. 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise if there are any plans to upgrade any libraries in 
the City next year. What libraries have been upgraded in the last 3 years? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Upgrades 2022 – 2024: 
 
Ballymun Library: the Adult library has been painted in full with new study areas 
added and new shelving and other furniture. 
Ballyfermot Library has had an internal re-design, the inclusion of a new young adult 
area and other internal improvements and features including a ‘living wall’. 
Cabra Library has had two new universally accessible public toilets added, as well as 
internal paining and work to the glazed roof. A new fibre radio link has been installed 
to provide improved public access to digital services.  
Charleville Mall Library has had new universally accessible public toilet added, as 
well as internal painting and remodelling of office and reception desk, plus the addition 
of front door automation. 
Central Library, Ilac Centre was fully re-designed with new rooflight windows, 
shelving, flooring, furniture etc. 
Dolphin’s Barn Library has had work done to the rear garden to make a new public 
outdoor space. 

Finglas Library: a new library opened in 2023 on the Seamus Ennis Road, a re-
purposed building with front garden landscaping, approximately 500 sq metres of 
public space, all fully accessible. 
Drumcondra Library had extensive works done to improve drainage and sewage 
systems. A My Open Library system has been installed, providing additional hours of 
service for the public from 8 a.m. to 10 p.m. 365 days a year. 
Pearse Street Library has had improvements to lighting and the addition of a new 
public ‘living room’ on the ground floor, to allow for study, relaxation, printing for the 
public. The Reading Room on the first floor was re-designed to provide more study 
spaces for local students. 
Pembroke Library: a My Open Library system has been installed, providing additional 
hours of service for the public from 8 a.m. to 10 p.m. 365 days a year. New flooring 
was fitted throughout the ground floor. 
Raheny Library has been extensively refurbished with new windows, flooring, ceiling, 
lighting, furniture, garden landscaping and the addition of My Open Library system, 
providing additional hours of service for the public from 8 a.m. to 10 p.m. 365 days a 
year. A new fibre connection was installed to provide improved public access to digital 
services. 
Rathmines Library has had a re-design and re-fit of furniture to the Junior Library, 
including painting and new shelving, desk etc. A new fibre connection was installed to 
provide improved public access to digital services. 
Ringsend Library was fitted with new flooring throughout the public area. 
Terenure Library has had an overhaul of the HVAC system and the installation of a 
new boiler. 
Walkinstown Library was fitted with new furniture and re-painted internally 
throughout the public spaces. A new sensory garden was added for the public. New 
external lighting has been installed, as well as a My Open Library system, providing 
additional hours of service for the public from 8 a.m. to 10 p.m. 365 days a year. 
 Plans in 2025: 
Plans for the new City Library on Parnell Square will continue, as well as detailed 
design for the new Drimnagh Library on Crumlin Road, the redevelopment of Ringsend 
and Terenure Libraries and future plans for new libraries in Fairview Park and on 
Emmett Road, Inchicore. These plans all form part of the DCL Capital Programme. 
Dublin City Libraries carries out an annual programme of re-painting and general 
maintenance, as well as updating of furniture, according to budget allocation each 
year. Plans for 2025 are subject to change, depending on needs arising. The following 
are planned: 
Charleville Mall Library: DCL is working with DCC Architects on a tender for the 
replacement of the roof to reinstate the original slated construction  and to re-design 
the internal lighting and ceiling. 
Inchicore Library at Richmond Barracks will be increased in size with more services 
added. 
Terenure Library: A new building is planned on the site of the existing library and the 
Part 8 process will be initiated for this in early 2025 with construction to begin the 
following year. 
 
 
Q.82 
COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive can he advise how many waste management personnel 
are working in the various local offices throughout the city. Can a breakdown be 
provided of same please? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are a total of 549 staff personnel currently working in waste management 
throughout the city. The bulk of these staff (515) are operational staff located in various 

cleansing depots across the city and carrying out a variety of cleansing tasks. The 
administrative section of the department is based in Eblana House, Marrowbone Lane 
with a current staff compliment of 34. 
 
 
Operational staff work a variety of shift patterns depending on location and assigned 
duties.  
 
 
Operational Base 
Staff 
Numbers 
North City Operations Depot 
169 
Davitt Road Cleansing Depot 
98 
O'Rahilly 
Parade 
Cleansing 
Depot 
66 
Bow Lane Cleansing Depot 
82 
Sweeney's Terrace Cleansing 
Depot 
13 
Alderborough 
Parade 
Cleansing Depot 
28 
Bring Centres ( Various) Staff 
27 
Dominic Street 
7 
Litter Wardens 
13 
Inspectors 
12 
Eblana 
House 
Marrowbone 
Lane ( Admin) 
34 
Totals 
549 
 
 
 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please arrange for maintenance to fix and replace if 
necessary the door of (details supplied) as the tenant is extremely unwell. The tenant 
also has no hot water in their taps which may mean there boiler is due to be replaced 
or serviced.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above repairs have now been logged.  The tenant will be contacted to arrange a 
suitable time for a maintenance call out. 
The most direct way for tenants to log maintenance requests is to contact Housing 
Maintenance 
Tel. 
01 
2222191 
during 
office 
hours 
or 
e-mail 
maintenance@dublincity.ie. 
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please arrange for maintenance to replace (details 
supplied) hall door.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance will arrange an inspection of the hall door to determine if it is in 
need of replacement. 
 
Q.85 
COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive carry out a survey on Pine Road, Sean Moore Road, 
Ringsend, Dublin 4? The lights at Pine Road need to be assessed as it is getting 
significantly harder for the residents to be able to leave their estate with the influx of 
traffic.  

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are plans in place for this area and changes to layouts are planned to some 
junctions along Sean Moore Road including Pine Road. This is going to be turned into 
a full signalised junction which will assist residents leave their estate. These designs 
and plans are current with E&T – Road Design team. 
 
Q.86 
COUNCILLOR KOURTNEY KENNY 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the relevant members of Dublin City Council, 
to survey and revisit City Quay National School application for a safe school zone? 
Since their initial application in 2019 there has been 4 hotels built, this has led to more 
dangerous driving and the road essentially being used as a rat run for taxi’s.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The School Zone team is currently resourced to deliver front of school safety 
interventions to schools on the Safe Routes to School programme, which is funded by 
the National Transport Authority. Each year DCC is allocated a number of schools to 
progress front of school safety interventions through this programme.  
 
As City Quay National School is not on our current list of schools for these treatments, 
the team is not currently in a position to progress School Zone works at this location. 
However, I have forwarded the request to the Traffic Advisory Group so hopefully they 
may be in a position to implement some measures.     
 
Whilst physical hard measures can help improve the situation at schools they are only 
one of many solutions to the traffic challenges that school communities face and we 
are keen to manage expectations in terms of their impact. Ultimately there is a need to 
reduce the number of cars causing congestion which creates the unsafe environment 
for children. Some softer measures to help reducing the number of students being 
driven to school, such as Park and Strides, walking busses and cycling busses, could 
also help to improve the situation. We encourage school communities to work with the 
parents and children in developing and trying out these solutions. If schools would like 
more information on these initiatives or support with getting them started, please email 
sustainablemobility@dublincity.ie   
 
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please refer to road at location as per (details 
supplied) and say if he can repair same. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Annual Program for 2025 has not been finalised yet, but Abbeyfield has been 
added to the list of locations to be considered. 
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please refer to road at location (details supplied) and 
say if he will carry out the necessary repairs/resurfacing as requested by local resident. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Section of carriageway in the vicinity Annual Program for 2025 has not been 
finalised yet, but Gracepark Road has been added to the list of locations to be 
considered. 
Grace Park Road has been referred to Uisce Éireann for permanent reinstatement of 
their trial holes. These reinstatements will be carried out when Operation Open City 

is over after Christmas, enabling the grant of roadworks to Uisce Éireann to carry out 
the works. 
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR DEIDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to please investigate (details supplied). 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Since 2014 the foul and combined sewers are now in the charge of Uisce 
Eireann.  DCC is only responsible for the surface water drainage network since that 
date. 
On 13th September 2023 Uisce Eireann (previously known as Irish Water) took over 
the direct control of all foul and combined sewage matters in accordance with the 
Government’s ‘Framework for Future Delivery of Water Services’.   
Accordingly, questions/requests relating to foul sewerage should now be made directly 
to Uisce Eireann.  Questions/requests relating to surface water drainage only should 
continue to be made to DCC. 
Uisce Eireann provides a dedicated service for Local and Elected Representatives 
nationwide to ensure efficient and effective triage and resolution to any queries that 
they may have.  Uisce Eireann’s Local Representative Support Desk (LRSD) is open 
Monday to Friday (excluding Bank Holidays), between the hours of 09:00 to 17:30.   
The LRSD can be contacted either by telephone (0818 178 178) or by email at 
localrepsupport@water.ie.  Uisce Eireann’s LRSD team receive prioritised support 
from across the Uisce Eireann business and have direct relationships with the Regional 
Engineers so that information from the ground can be gathered and fed back where 
necessary.  
 
Uisce Eireann Contact details for Oireachtas Members 
• 
Dedicated Direct Line 0818 578 578 
• 
Email: oireachtasmembers@water.ie  
• 
Lines are open from 9am-5.30pm, Mon-Fri 
• 
Uisce Eireann Contact details for Councillors 
• 
Dedicated Direct Line for Councillors 0818 178 178 
• 
Email: localrepsupport@water.ie   
• 
Lines are open from 9am-5.30pm, Mon-Fri 
 
 
Q.90 
COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
To ask the Chief Executive  to please refer to junction at location (details supplied) 
and say if he can at this stage, introduce a right turn filter as set out in (details 
supplied) and can he also say, why my previous requests to install a right turn filter at 
this location were not actioned. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This request (Enquiry Ref: 7043730) will be referred to the Area Engineer for 
assessment and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration.  
The Councillor will then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport 
Advisory Group.  
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to review the road layout at the entrance to Grace Park 
Wood, Drumcondra. When entering the estate by car from the south the removal of 
the filter lane is causing issues and there is an additional issue at low light as reflectors 
on recently installed bollards bounce light, impacting line of sight and potentially hiding 
oncoming cyclists. 

 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This location will be inspected and a report prepared for a future Council Meeting. 
 
Q.92 
COUNCILLOR CAT O’DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a progress report on the implementation of the 
5% Cultural/Community Space in large developments since its introduction. How many 
planning applications met the criteria, is the toolkit being used and are there examples 
of community or cultural groups engaged in design stages 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A response is currently being compiled and will be issued directly to the Councillor by 
20th January 2025. 
 
Q.93 
COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline any protocols that exist to rename public parks 
and roads when there are public calls for renaming and to ask for specific comment on 
the petition to rename Herzog Park, "Hind Rajab Park", a petition that has over 2700 
signatures at time of submission of this question. Herzog Park honours Chaim Herzog, 
who joined the Haganah paramilitary in 1935, a force that was active in the ethnic 
cleansing of Palestine before and during the 1948 Nakba - this included massacres at 
Deir Yassin, Tantura, Lydda and Ramle. Chaim went on to become a Major-General 
in the Occupation Forces and the President of "israel" from 1983-93.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Council has a formal policy governing commemorative naming and renaming. See  
https://www.dublincity.ie/residential/arts-and-events/decade-
commemorations/commemorations-commemorative-naming  
 
Under the policy, proposals for naming and renaming are considered by the 
Commemorations & Naming Committee. The committee has been reconstituted by the 
SPC and will meet in January. 
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide details on the number of residential units owned 
and leased by Dublin City Council in the apartment complexes at Santry Cross (The 
Maieston, The Hampton, Turnpike, Linnbhla) and to provide a detailed update on 
maintenance at the complex, including an account of communication with the 
management company and other stakeholders.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
According to data on hand, Dublin City own 170 properties at the Hampton, one unit 
at Turnpike, and none at Linnbla. The Mayeston development falls under Fingal County 
Councils area of responsibility.   
 
Q.95 
COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a detailed note on the Council's approach to 
ethical procurement and investment with specific reference to investment and 
procurement from companies who trade in or with "Israel". This account should 
specifically address calls for compliance with the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions 
(BDS) campaign and previous motions passed by Councillors to limit trade and 
investment with "Israel", the "defence industry" and other unethical partners 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 

Dublin City Council must comply with statutory national and EU procurement 
frameworks that already provide specified grounds for exclusion.  Dublin City Council 
is required to meet its procurement obligations including the equal treatment of all 
parties and not deliberately restrict the market.   
Exclusionary grounds are set out in Article 57 of the Public Procurement Directives 
and have been outlined in a number of responses to questions to the Chief Executive. 
These exclusionary grounds are included in all procurement documents issued to 
suppliers to declare that they meet with their obligations under Article 57. 
Unless a supplier falls within the reasons for exclusion from a public procurement 
under these directives, Dublin City Council cannot disqualify them from participating in 
an open competitive procedure under the principles of public procurement or take 
measures in breach of these principles to exclude them from being awarded a contract. 
As outlined in the comments and observations of Motion 13, Dublin City Council 
Meeting, 12th February 2024, Dublin City Council can only apply sanctions mandated 
by the European Union. Dublin City Council cannot arbitrarily apply sanctions of their 
own volition. 
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR CONOR REDDY 
To ask the Chief Executive arranges for CCTV and other measures (chute on bins, 
outreach) to be introduced at the clothes bank on Shangan Road where clothes are 
routinely pulled out of the clothes bank and illegal dumping follows. Waste 
Management refused to remove the bins despite unanimous support of local 
councillors. While councillors await further discussion with Waste Management, 
preventative measures could provide some improvement for local residents.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services acknowledge the concerns raised by elected members 
in relation to illegal dumping and abuse of the bring bank facilities on Shangan Road, 
and the added pressures these behaviours place on Waste Management Services. 
Unfortunately these conditions persist at many of our bring bank facilities across the 
city. In recent years, illegal dumping, scavenging of clothes and discarding of unwanted 
items in the surrounding areas has risen to almost unmanageable levels at many 
locations across the city.  
Within the last three years, textile banks have been removed from a number of 
locations in the North West Area – Ballymun Library, Coultry Green/Park, and Finglas 
Fire Station. While clothes can be deposited at our Recycling Centre in Ballymun, 
unfortunately not everyone is able to attend this service during operational hours so 
we must continue to provide an alternative means for presenting clothes for recycling, 
which at present is the provision of on-street clothes banks. It is simply not feasible to 
remove any more on-street facilities from the North West Area. 
Due to recent legislative changes, the use of CCTV for the purposes of litter prevention 
at Dublin City Council’s bring bank sites is not currently permitted. The installation of 
CCTV cameras for this purpose at any site now requires preparation of a draft DPIA 
and Business Plan for the deployment of a CCTV Scheme which must then be 
approved by an Oversight Board, before it can be approved by the Chief Executive. 
The Litter Prevention Officer has just completed work on a trial scheme, Phase 1, 
which has now been approved and will soon be implemented. Phase 2 will include 
Bring Bank Sites across the city. There are currently 78 such sites, the preparation of 
the necessary documentation for which is a huge amount of work. Unfortunately, I do 
not have a timeline for when the reintroduction of a new CCTV Scheme at Bring Bank 
sites is likely to begin. 
Waste Management Services is happy to work with the Ballymun Area Office to explore 
potential interventions at the Shangan Road facility. 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 

To ask the Chief Executive if he would consider the proposal by community members 
in North Wall to paint, repair and upgrade the Sheriff Street Lifting Bridge on Upper 
Sheriff Street, Dublin 1. It’s a terrible eyesore and is not in line with the recent 
enhancements and improvements to the public realm in that area, and in particular - 
the renovations to the Royal Canal Walkaway 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Road Design Division will examine the community member’s proposal. However, 
specialist contractor may be required to carry out these works. 
 
Q.98 
COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive is there is any plans for the Cottage on the Royal Canal, 
on Charleville Mall at Newcomen Bridge and would he consider supporting an initiative 
involving Adventure & Water Sports - Kayaking and Mountain Biking, using the existing 
Cottage and surrounding area as a base for such activities.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Royal Canal is under the responsibility of Waterways Ireland.  However, an Open 
Water Sports Strategy is also in development, which focuses on current and future 
programmes along with needed facilities required to enable users to become more 
physically active recreationally or within the environment of organised sport on open 
water.    
 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive he could investigate the reports that residents of Sean 
O’Casey Avenue, Summerhill have made in relation to the instillation of the wooden 
windows and council’s persistence on their installation. Residents have complained 
about their unsuitability and in particular, their ability to retain heat 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is not aware of the reports referred to in this question. 
 
Dublin City Council’s joinery workshop produces timber framed windows for a number 
of our properties across the city. U values are the resistance to heat loss through the 
material of a property. In general window panes have the highest U values of all 
materials in a house. This means that they are the coldest part of a room. The frame 
that the window sits in is generally either, PVC, Timber or less common Aluminium. 
These frames have a much lower U value that the windows themselves.  The U values 
of these materials don’t differ greatly however PVC tend to have the lowest value of 
around 1.6 and timber is around 1.9. The lower the value the more heat retains.  Dublin 
City Council has its own joinery workshop that produces timber framed windows.  The 
difference between timber framed windows and PVC is minimal in the overall context 
of heat retention to a building 
 
Q.100 COUNCILLOR DANIEL ENNIS 
To ask the Chief Executive if lighting and electricity points could be installed in Liberty 
Park, Dublin 1 as a matter of urgency. Emergency services, when called upon to 
provide assistance, were in fact, fatally hampered by the lack of adequate lighting.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services will conduct a thorough review of the current lighting situation, including 
the previous complaints and their justifications. This assessment will also consider the 
safety and security needs of the park users, including emergency responders. A 
lighting study will be carried out in the park to assess the needs of all stakeholders – 
residents, park users and emergency services. Following the assessment, options will 

be proposed for improving lighting in the park while minimising any potential 
disturbances to nearby residents 
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive for details in relation to large projects were we have worked 
with other Council’s for the delivery of services in the past 12 months? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In terms of planning policy, Dublin City Council continues to collaborate with South 
Dublin County Council on the City Edge Project, which aims to provide a framework 
for the urban regeneration of the Naas Road, Ballymount, and Park West areas in 
Dublin. This initiative seeks to create a new urban quarter with the potential for 40,000 
new homes and 75,000 jobs. Within Dublin City Council’s administrative area, work is 
progressing on the development of a masterplan for the first phase of regeneration. 
Engagement with key internal and external stakeholders is planned for 2025. This 
masterplan will undergo non-statutory public consultation before a statutory variation 
to the Dublin City Development Plan 2022–2028 is pursued to rezone the land for 
residential-led urban regeneration. 
 
Dublin City Council is appointed as Lead Authority by Department of Housing, Local 
Government & Heritage for five National Public Social Housing Public Private 
Partnership bundles. The PPP Housing Project Manager works with ten Local 
Authorities to deliver new social homes for Dublin City Council and the participating 
Local Authorities. A full list of the Local Authorities in each bundle can be accessed 
here www.ndfa.ie/projects  
 
 
The Housing Department have engaged with Belfast City Council and Mayo County 
Council on approaches to addressing vacant and derelict property in the past 12 
months. The South East Area Office has also engaged with Waterford City and County 
Council on this topic and has arranged further collaboration for 2025.  
 
 
A number of key junctions in DLR and FCC are connected to the DCC traffic 
management system. SCATS and DCC staff, programme and monitor the operations 
of these junctions on behalf of the relevant local councils. As part of this work DCC 
contractor install new traffic signals at Snugborough and the Coolock interchange for 
FCC this year.  
 
The Roadworks Control Unit is a licence and permit based office for the control and 
management of roadworks and commercial activates within the DCC administrative 
only and we are not a project based office.    
 
The DCC Active Travel Programme Office works in conjunction with other councils on 
a variety of active travel projects including; 
 
• 
DCC’ Dodder Greenway Scheme – South Dublin County Council 
• 
DCC’s Cabra to Blanchardstown Scheme – Fingal County Council 
• 
DCC’s Chesterfield Avenue Scheme – Fingal County Council 
• 
SDCC’s Whitehall Road to Kimmage Road Junction Scheme – South Dublin 
County Council 
 

Q.102  COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive if and when DCC has used the public procurement 
framework of approved bodies to make works more efficient.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As there are many public procurement frameworks at national, regional and local level, 
can the Councillor be more specific about the framework in question. This will help 
determine the appropriate department/section within Dublin City Council the question 
should be referred to for response.  
 
 
 
 
 
Q.103 COUNCILLOR RACHEAL BATTEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline what if any action is been taken to ensure posts 
are not acting for long periods of time. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Council completed over 100 recruitment campaigns in 2024.  Notwithstanding 
the significant level of recruitment, the City Council is operating in a very competitive 
labour market.  We are competing with private sector organisations and with other 
public sector employers in an environment where there is near full-employment, skills 
shortages in key areas, high rates of employee turnover and cost of living pressures 
on pay.   
There are ongoing difficulties in recruiting for some positions.  These difficulties are 
especially acute in respect of positions in certain skill areas, in particular construction 
related professions, finance and IT. 
There is a requirement to fill some posts through local acting arrangements pending 
the filling of the post on a permanent basis through competition, or where there are 
absences for a temporary period.   This is a normal part of workforce management and 
is managed and monitored by the Human Resources Department. 
The Human Resources Department engages with local management in relation to the 
filling of vacancies through the Council’s Workforce Planning process, in the context 
of annual service delivery plans and budgetary requirements. 
 
 
 
 
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a list of all allocations awarded to organisations 
located within (Details Attached) under the Community Recognition Fund; and if he 
will make a statement on the matter.  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Community Recognition Fund 2023 
The Community Recognition Fund (CRF) was first announced in January 2023 by the 
Department of Rural and Community Development (DRCD) to support the development of 
community infrastructure and facilities.  The €50M fund was allocated across local authorities 
in recognition of communities welcoming new arrivals from Ukraine and other countries.  In 
the first CRF round Dublin City Council received €2,392,127 which supported 28 projects.   
 
The following projects located in the North Inner City were awarded funding under the 
2023 scheme: 
• 
Afterschool Education and Support, Sheriff St,Dublin 1  
 
€140,000 
• 
Belvedere Youth Club, Buckingham Street Dublin 1 
 
 
€5,000 
• 
Bradog,  Dominick Place, Dublin 1  
 
 
 
 
€15,000 
• 
Caspr Childcare Centre, Portland Square Dublin 1 
 
 
€125,000 

• 
East Wall Greening Strategy, Russell Ave, Dublin 3   
 
 
€100,000 
• 
East Wall Playground, Dublin 3  
 
 
 
 
€60,000 
• 
St Mary’s Youth Club, Strangford Rd, East Wall, Dublin 3   
 
€125,000 
• 
Aughrim Street Sports Centre, Aughrim Street, Dublin 7  
 
€70,000   
• 
St. Lawrence O’Toole Recreation Centre - Sherriff St, Dublin 1  
€160,000 
• 
East Wall Recreation Centre- Russell Street, Dublin 3 
 
 
€50,000 
• 
Larkin Unemployed Centre, North Strand Road, Dublin 3 
 
€5,100 
• 
Lourdes Youth and Community Services James Joyce Street, Dublin 1 
€28,400  
• 
National College of Ireland, Mayor Square, Dublin 1. 
 
 
€150,000 
• 
East Wall Bessborough FC, Caledon Road East Wall Dublin 3 
 
€20,000 
• 
Lourdes Parish Hall, Sean McDermott St. Dublin 1. 
 
 
€770,000 
 
Community Recognition Fund 2024 
Dublin City Council was awarded an additional €2,140,584 from the national €50m 
fund in March 2024. Unlike the 2023 scheme where there was no minimum level of 
funding, the minimum level of funding for an individual capital project is €50,000.  
Expressions of interest were sought for capital projects costing between €50K and 
€500K. Currently a number of assessed proposals to the value of €870K are with 
DRCD for final approval.  In November 2024, the 2025 call for expressions of interest 
was issued with funding of €1.169M available.  The closing date for submissions was 
Wednesday 18 December 2024 at 12pm noon. 
 
Q.105 COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline the actions that have been undertaken to date 
with regards the potential to CPO (Details Attached); what steps need to be taken, 
including through to An Bord Pleanala for these lands to be CPO’ed and if the Housing 
Department could examine their potential for public housing; and if he will make a 
statement on the matter.  
 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Derelict sites have an active file on the site to the rear of 17-19 Arbour Hill, Dublin 7 
(Which we believe is also known as Chicken Lane, off Arbour Hill, Dublin 7). A Section 
10 letter issued to the owners in September 2024, regarding the condition of the site 
and what their plans were for it. A reply was received from an architect on behalf of the 
owner regarding plans for the site. We have written again to the owners architect for 
further information regarding their reply. 
For a derelict site to be acquired compulsorily under the Derelict Sites Act 1990, it 
needs to be entered on the Derelict Sites Register, once entered potential sites for 
use by the Council are considered for acquisition compulsorily. Derelict Sites liaise 
with the Housing Department and various other departments/sections within the 
Council regarding such sites. 
A Local Authority can use any derelict site acquired by them for any purpose 
connected with their functions. Compulsory acquisition pursuant to Derelict Sites 
legislation is a more straightforward process than acquisition by way of CPO 
pursuant to the Housing Act, 1966. 
Section 14 of the Derelict Sites Act empowers a Local Authority to acquire by 
agreement or compulsorily any derelict site situated within their functional area. 
Objections to a compulsory acquisition can lead to the file being sent to An Bord 
Pleanála where the Council then seek consent to the acquisition.  

We will keep the Councillor updated on our progress. 
 
 
Q.106  COUNCILLOR RAY MCADAM 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm that Dublin City Council will seek to CPO the lands at 
(Details Attached); and if he will make a statement 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council holds the title to the majority of the site in question.  There is one 
remaining property (No. 18B) and the Council has been engaging with the owners 
regarding the acquisition. 
The City Valuer is making renewed efforts to acquire the fee simple by agreement. If 
this proves unsuccessful, DCC will consider proceeding with CPO of the remainder of 
the site. 
 
 

Appendix B 
Topical Issue 
RECORD OF DIVISION AT 06TH JANUARY 2025 COUNCIL MEETING  
 
FOR: 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTAIN: 
  
AGAINST: 
   
53 
 
 
 
ABSENT: 
  
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
 
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
Councillor Ammar Ali 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Feljin Jose 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daryl Barron 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Leslie Kane 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Racheal Batten 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Kourtney Kenny 
 
√ 
 
 
Lord Mayor Emma Blain 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Patrick Kinsella 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Janice Boylan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Dermot Lacey 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Kevin Breen 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor John Lyons 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Christy Burke 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Aoibheann Mahon 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Claire Byrne 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Micheál MacDonncha 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Danny Byrne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ray McAdam 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Lesley Byrne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Séamas McGrattan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Mary Callaghan 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Paddy Monahan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Hazel Chu 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Carolyn Moore 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor David Coffey 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Edel Moran 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Anthony Connaghan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Darragh Moriarty 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Fiona Connelly  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Keith Connolly 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Cat O’Driscoll 
 
√ 
 
 
Deputy Lord Mayor Donna Cooney  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ciarán Ó Meachair 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Ray Cunningham 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Colm O’Rourke 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Tara Deacy 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Gavin Pepper 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Hazel de Nortúin 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Cieran Perry 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Daithí Doolan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Michael Pigeon 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Pat Dunne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Gayle Ralph 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daniel Ennis 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Punam Rane 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Cian Farrell  
 
 
 
 
Councillor Conor Reddy 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Alison Field  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Nial Ring 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Declan Flanagan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Patricia Roe 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Mannix Flynn 
 
 
 
 
Councillor Aisling Silke  
 
 
 
 
Councillor Deirdre Heney 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Supriya Singh 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Jesslyn Henry 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Malachy Steenson 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Rory Hogan 
 
 
 
 
Councillor John Stephens 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Janet Horner 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Philip Sutcliffe  
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Vincent Jackson 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
