Monthly City Council Meeting Monday 1 December 2025 
 
 
COMHAIRLE CATHRACH BHAILE ÁTHA CLIATH 
 
 
 Miontuairiscí Chruinniú Míosúil a tionóladh ar 1st December 2025 i Seomra na Comhairle, Halla 
na Cathrach, Sráid An Dáma agus ar físchomhdháil cianda ag 6.15 i.n,i láthair an tArdmheara 
Ray McAdam sa chathaoir 
 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Comhairleoir: 
Ammar Ali 
Daryl Barron 
Racheal Batten 
Emma Blain 
Janice Boylan 
Kevin Breen 
Noelle Brown 
Christy Burke 
Claire Byrne 
Danny Byrne 
Lesley Byrne 
Mary Callaghan 
Hazel Chu 
David Coffey 
Anthony Connaghan 
Fiona Connelly 
Keith Connolly 
Donna Cooney 
Ray Cunningham 
Hazel de Nortúin 
Daithí Doolan 
Pat Dunne 
Daniel Ennis 
Cian Farrell 
Alison Field 
Declan Flanagan 
Mannix Flynn 
Deirdre Heney 
Jesslyn Henry 
Rory Hogan 
Janet Horner 
Vincent Jackson 
Feljin Jose 
Leslie Kane 
Kourtney Kenny 
Patrick Kinsella 
Dermot Lacey 
John Lyons 
Micheál MacDonncha 
Aoibheann Mahon 
Ray McAdam 
Séamas McGrattan 
Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
Paddy Monahan 
Carolyn Moore 
Darragh Moriarty 
Cat O'Driscoll 
Colm O'Rourke 
Gavin Pepper 
Cieran Perry 
Michael Pidgeon 
Gayle Ralph 
Punam Rane 
Conor Reddy 
Nial Ring 
Supriya Singh 
Karl Stanley 
Malachy Steenson 
John Stephens 
Philip Sutcliffe 
Ciarán Ó Meachair 
 
 
 
Oifigigh 
 
 
Aidan Blighe 
Lorraine Brogan 
Dermot Collins 
Frank d'Arcy 
Ruth Dowling 
Emer Uí Fhátharta 
Rory Flannery 
Anthony Flynn 
Dennis Keeley 
Yvonne Kelly 
Natalie Leonard 
Ronan O'Byrne 
Eileen Quinlivan 
Richard Shakespeare 
 
  
1 
  Lord Mayor's Business 
 
The Lord Mayor welcomed members to the December Council meeting and referred to 
Standing Order 15 in which the time provided for Lord Mayor's Business is stated, 
seeking members approval to extend Lord Mayor's Business in order to discuss the 
proposed withdrawal of Report No. 277/2025 & Report No. 278/2025.  This was 
unanimously agreed.  
 

 
 
The Lord Mayor asked the Chief Executive, Richard Shakespeare, to make a brief 
statement. The Chief Executive proceeded to read into the record his press statement 
regarding the withdrawal of the reports that had been issued on Sunday, 30th 
November. A copy of this statement can be found in Appendix A of these minutes.  
The Chief Executive also addressed and clarified the issues raised in point 2 of the 
Emergency Motion below.    
 
The Lord Mayor proceeded to open the floor to Group Leaders to discuss the matter.  
 
In answering questions raised the Chief Executive wished to put on record his apology 
to the Wheelock family for the systemic failure on the Council's part which he hopes 
can be rectified through Dublin City Council's Protocol Committee.  
 
The Lord Mayor then proceeded to allow Councillor Cieran Perry move the following 
Emergency Motion:  
 
Emergency Motion No. 2  in the name of the Independent Group and others 
Cllr Cieran Perry, Cllr Nial Ring, Cllr Conor Reddy, Cllr Daithi Doolan, Cllr 
Mícheál Mac Donncha, Cllr Ciarán Ó Meachair  
The members of Dublin City Council note that the Local Government Act 2001 
explicitly establishes local authorities as independent corporate bodies, with the 
elected Council being the primary oversight body for the performance of all reserved 
and executive functions, including placename changes. 
   
Furthermore, the members are aware of the issuance, yesterday, by An Taoiseach, 
Mr. Micheál Martin, of a public statement demanding the withdrawal of the proposal to 
rename Herzog Park, thereby seeking to exert direct influence on a democratic 
function properly reserved to the elected members of Dublin City Council.  
 
An Taoiseach, in the course of his unprecedented intervention, stated that the 
proposal "will without any doubt be seen as antisemitic," thereby unjustly casting 
aspersions on the integrity, principle, and ethical motivations of those Councillors who 
support the motion purely on the grounds of political solidarity with the Palestinian 
people.   
 
In light of the foregoing, we, the Members of Dublin City Council; 
1. Categorically condemn the unprecedented interference by An Taoiseach in the 
democratic process and reserved functions of Dublin City Council, viewing such action 
as a breach of the operational independence guaranteed to local authorities under the 
Local Government Act 2001. 
 
2. Direct that the Chief Executive  provides, as a matter of urgent priority, a 
comprehensive report to us, detailing the nature, extent, and timing of all contact 
(whether verbal, written, or electronic) between An Taoiseach, his office, any other 
Government department and the Chief Executive or any other official of Dublin City 
Council regarding the function of denaming/renaming Herzog Park. 
 
3. Further we unequivocally condemn the highly inflammatory and politically motivated 
implication by An Taoiseach that any member supporting the motion to change the 
park's name is in any way motivated by or promoting antisemitism, and affirm the our 
right to conduct legitimate debate and vote on matters of international justice and 
human rights without fear of such baseless accusation. 

 
 
4. Reaffirm our commitment to proceed with all our reserved functions, including the 
consideration of this placename change proposal and, while absolutely recognising 
and appreciating the huge contribution of the Jewish Community to our city, we 
reaffirm our intention to propose the denaming of  Herzog Park in accordance with the 
correct statutory procedures. 
 
The Lord Mayor then opened the floor to debate on the motion.  
 
The Lord Mayor in speaking to the Wheelock family as Lord Mayor and first citizen 
wished to sincerely apologise for the hurt and the disappointment caused by the 
proposed withdrawal of the report renaming Diamond Park.  The Lord Mayor offered 
to meet with the Wheelock family along with Councillor Reddy, Councillor Ennis, 
Councillor Ralph, and other members from the North Inner City to see what alternative 
ways the memory of Terence can be commemorated while the issues under the 
legislation are resolved.  
 
Following clarification of questions raised, the Lord Mayor confirmed that he would 
write to the Taoiseach regarding all matters raised, a copy of which will be circulated 
to members.   
 
It was then proposed by the Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by 
Councillor Dermot Lacey that Report No. 277/2025 and Report No. 278/2025 be 
withdrawn and remitted to the Commemorations and Naming Committee. 
 
The motion was put to a vote and carried.  A copy of the vote can be found in 
Appendix B attached to these minutes.    
 
The Lord Mayor proceeded to address the points raised in the Emergency Motion. The 
motion as amended was proposed by Councillor Cieran Perry on behalf of the 
Independent Group, was put and carried. Members of the Fine Gael Group, Fianna 
Fáil Group, Councillor Dermot Lacey and Councillor Michael Pidgeon requested that 
their objection to the motion be noted.  A copy of the amendment to the motion can be 
found in Appendix C attached to these minutes.  
 
 
 
 
2 
  Ceisteanna fé Bhuan Ordú Úimhir 18 
 
It was moved by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Cat 
O'Driscoll that Dublin City Council approves the Dublin Chief Executive answering the 
questions lodged. The motion having been put and carried, written answers to the  
questions lodged for the City Council meeting were issued. The Questions and 
Answers are set out in Appendix D to these minutes. 
 
 
 
3 
  Correspondence was received from the following Local Authorities; 
 
• 
Tipperary County Council  
• 
Clare County Council 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Dermot Lacey and seconded by Lord Mayor Councillor 
Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of all correspondence listed. 
The motion was put and carried. 
 
Councillor Dermot Lacey requested that correspondence received from Clare County 
Council should go to the Finance SPC.  
 
 
 

 
4 
  To confirm the minutes of the City Council Meeting held on 3rd November 2025 
 
The minutes of the City Council meeting held on 3rd November 2025 having been 
printed, certified by the Meetings Administrator, circulated to the Members and taken 
as read, were signed by the Lord Mayor. 
 
 
 
5 
  To fill one vacancy on the City of Dublin Education and Training Board following the 
resignation of Councillor Feljin Jose 
 
It was agreed that this vacancy be deferred to the January 2026 Council meeting.  
 
 
 
6 
  Report No. 293/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Annual Service 
Delivery Plan 2026 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Lord Mayor Councillor 
Ray McAdam that in accordance with Section 134A of the Local Government Act 
2001, as amended, the Annual Service Delivery Plan 2026 as recommended by the 
Chief Executive is hereby adopted. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
7 
  Report 277/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (E. Quinlivan) - Proposed Renaming 
of Herzog Park, Rathgar, Dublin 6 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Dermot Lacey that Report No. 277/2025 be remitted to the Commemoration and 
Naming Committee.  The motion was put and carried.   
 
 
 
8 
  Report No. 278/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (E. Quinlivan) - Proposed 
renaming of Diamond Park, Dublin 1 to the "Terence Wheelock Memorial Park'. 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Dermot Lacey that Report No. 278/2025 be remitted to the Commemoration and 
Naming Committee.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
9 
  Report No. 276/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) in compliance with the 
provisions of Section 179 of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended) 
and in Part 8 of the Planning and Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) and in 
compliance with the provisions of the Local Government Act 2001: Proposed 
Residential Development at Bannow Road, Cabra West, Dublin 7 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll  and seconded by Councillor Séamas 
McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 276/2025 and 
hereby approves the contents as set out therein. The motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
10   Report No. 269/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - With reference to 
Proposed Variation (No. 6) of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028: Lands at 
One Royal Canal House, Royal Canal Park, Pelletstown, Dublin 15 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Cat O'Driscoll that the Members of the authority having considered the proposed 
variation and the Chief Executive’s Report No. 269/2025, and the issues raised, the 
proper planning and sustainable development of the City, the statutory obligations of 
the local authority and the relevant policies or objectives of the Government or of any 
Minister of the Government; the City Council resolves that Variation No. 6 of the 
Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028 is hereby made and that the necessary 
notices of the making of Variation No. 6 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-
2028 be published. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 

 
11   Report No. 270/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - With reference to 
Proposed Variation (No. 7) of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028: Lands at 
16 - 23 Bow Lane West, Dublin 8. 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Cat O'Driscoll that  The Members of the authority having considered the proposed 
variation and the Chief Executive’s Report No. 270/2025, and the issues raised, the 
proper planning and sustainable development of the City, the statutory obligations of 
the local authority and the relevant policies or objectives of the Government or of any 
Minister of the Government; the City Council resolves that Variation No. 7 of the 
Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028 is hereby made and that the necessary 
notices of the making of Variation No. 7 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-
2028 be published.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
12   Report No. 271/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - With reference to 
Proposed Variation (No. 8) of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022 – 2028: 
Designation of Iveagh Gardens and Environs, Crumlin, Dublin 12 as an Architectural 
Conservation Area 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Cat O'Driscoll that The Members of the authority having considered the proposed 
variation and the Chief Executive’s Report No. 271/2025, and the issues raised, the 
proper planning and sustainable development of the City, the statutory obligations of 
the local authority and the relevant policies or objectives of the Government or of any 
Minister of the Government; the City Council resolves that Variation No. 8 of the 
Dublin City Development Plan 2022-2028 is hereby made and that the necessary 
notices of the making of Variation No. 8 of the Dublin City Development Plan 2022-
2028 be published.  The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
13   Report No. 290/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) Notification of proposed 
Variation No. 10 (Kylemore Masterplan) to the Dublin City Development Plan 2022 -
2028 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Ammar Ali 
That Dublin City Council notes the initiation of the Variation (No.10) of the Dublin City 
Development Plan 2022 – 2028 as outlined in Report No. 290/2025.  The motion was 
put and carried.  
 
The Lord Mayor vacated the Chair to Councillor Colm O'Rourke at 7.53 p.m. and 
returned to the chamber at 8.09 p.m. 
 
 
 
14   Report No. 292/2025 of the Executive Manager (B. Kelly) - With reference to the 
Extinguishment of the Public Right of Way over a laneway between 36-38 Kilbarron 
Avenue and 35-37 Kilbarron Park, Dublin 5 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Jesslyn Henry and seconded by councillor Anthony 
Connaghan that we, the Lord Mayor and Members of Dublin City Council, being the 
Roads Authority for that the City of Dublin and being of the opinion that the Public 
Right of Way over the laneway between 36 - 38 Kilbarron Avenue, and 35 – 37 
Kilbarron Park, Dublin 5 as shown on the attached Drawing No SM-2025-0791 is no 
longer required for public use, extinguish the public right of way in accordance with 
Section 73 of the Roads Act 1993. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
15   Disposal of Fee Simple and Freehold Interest:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 272/2025 of the Executive Manager (F. D'Arcy) - With reference to 
the disposal of the Fee Simple Interest under the Landlord and Tenant (Ground 
Rents) (No. 2) Act, 1978.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Councillor 
Michael Pidgeon that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 
272/2025 and hereby assents to the proposal set out therein. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
16   Granting of Licenses and Leases:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 279/2025 of the Executive Manager (D.O`Connor) - With reference 
to the Grant of a 5 year lease at Unit 3, Reuben Plaza, F2 Centre, Herberton 
D8 to Ango`s Cafe Ltd.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Michael Pidgeon and seconded by Councillor 
Ammar Ali  That Dublin City Council notes the contents of this Report 
No.279/2025 and assents to the proposal therein. The motion was put and 
carried.  
  
 
 
(b)   Report No. 280/2025 of the Executive Manager (D. O`Connor) - With reference 
to the proposed grant of 10 year lease at Unit 7C Mary Aikenhead House, 
James Street, Dublin 8 to Ali Awais t/a Mr. Fade Brothers.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Councillor 
Ammar Ali  that Dublin City Council notes the contents of this Report 
No.280/2025 and assents to the proposal therein. The motion was put and 
carried.  
  
 
 
(c)   Report No. 282/2025 of the Executive Manager (D.O`Connor) - With reference 
to Grant of a two-year licence for use of lands at St. Michans Street as Building 
Compound for Fruit & Vegetable Markets Redevelopment 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by 
Councillor Séamas McGrattan that Dublin City Council notes the contents of 
Report No.282/2025 and assents to the proposal therein. The motion was put 
and carried.  
 
 
 
(d)   Report No. 283/2025 of the Executive Manager (D.O`Connor) - With reference 
to Grant of a 10 year lease at 119 Townsend Street, Dublin 2  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Councillor 
Noelle Brown that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No.283/2025 and assents to the proposal therein. The motion was put and 
carried.   
 
 
 
(e)   Report No. 286/2025 of the Executive Manager (D.O`Connor) - With reference 
to the proposed grant of a further 10-year lease at No 3. Capel St to Mei Lin 
Hair Salon  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cat O'Driscoll and seconded by Lord Mayor 
Councillor Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No.286/2025 and assents to the proposal therein. The motion was put and 
carried.   
 
 

 
(f)   Report No. 287/2025 of the Executive Manager (D.O`Connor) - With reference 
to proposed grant of a 5-year licence at site known as Pearse Park Community 
Garden, Crumlin, Dublin 12 to the Trustees of Pearse Park Community Garden  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Pat Dunne and seconded by Lord Mayor Ray 
McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No.287/2025 
and assents to the proposal therein. The motion was put and carried.  
 
 
 
(g)   Report No. 288/2025 of the Executive Manager (D.O`Connor) - With reference 
to grant of a further 8-year lease of part of premises known as OLV Building, 
Cathedral View Court, Dublin 8 to RADE CLG  
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by 
Councillor Dermot Lacey that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report 
No.288/2025 and assents to the proposal therein. The motion was put and 
carried.   
 
 
 
17   Disposal of Property:   
 
 
 
(a)   Report No. 281/2025 of the Executive Manager (D.O`Connor) - With reference 
to Disposal of a site at Kildonan Park, Finglas, Dublin 11 to ESB.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor Anthony Connaghan and seconded by Lord 
Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of 
Report No.281/2025 and assents to the proposal therein. The motion was put 
and carried.   
 
 
 
18   Report No. 275/2025 of the Assistant Chief Executive (M. Mulhern) -Housing Supply 
and Delivery Monthly Update Report 
 
It was proposed by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam and seconded by Councillor 
Mannix Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 275/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
19   Report No. 291/2025 of the Head of Finance (R. Flannery)- Monthly Local Fund 
Statement. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Séamas McGrattan and seconded by Councillor Vincent 
Jackson that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 291/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
The Lord Mayor advised of a correction to the report on page 282 that should read 
€124.1 million and not €24.1 million.  
 
 
 
20   Report No. 284/2025 of the Chief Executive (R. Shakespeare) - Monthly Management 
Report 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Mannix Flynn and seconded by Lord Mayor Councillor 
Ray McAdam that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 284/2025. The 
motion was put and carried. 
 
 
 
21   Report No. 274/2025 of the Area Committees - Minutes of Area Committee meetings 
held in the month of October 2025. 
 
 
 

 
It was proposed by Councillor Vincent Jackson and seconded by Councillor Mannix 
Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 274/2025. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
22   Report No. 289/2025 of the Finance SPC - Minutes of the Meeting held on 18th 
September 2025, Councillor Kourtney Kenny, Acting Chairperson 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Kourtney Kenny and seconded by Councillor Mannix 
Flynn that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 289/2025. The motion 
was put and carried. 
 
 
 
23   Report No. 285/2025 of the Planning and Urban Regeneration SPC - Minutes of the 
meeting held on 30th September 2025, Councillor Cian Farrell, Chairperson 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Cian Farrell and seconded by Councillor Mannix Flynn 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 285/2025. The motion was 
put and carried. 
  
 
 
24   Report No. 294/2025 of the Mobility and Public Realm Strategic Policy Committee - 
Minutes of the meeting held on 3rd September 2025, Councillor Janet Horner, 
Chairperson 
 
It was proposed by Councillor Janet Horner and seconded by Councillor Mannix Flynn 
that Dublin City Council notes the contents of Report No. 294/2025. The motion was 
put and carried. 
 
 
 
25   Topical Issues 
 
No topical issues were submitted for consideration. 
 
 
 
26   Motions on Notice 
 
Motion in the name of Councillor Keith Connolly and seconded by the Lord 
Mayor       
 That Dublin City Council will employ community wardens similar to Cork City Council 
who will have dual role for parking enforcement, litter and dog fouling. 
 The motion was put and carried.  
 The Chief Executive Richard Shakespeare agreed to return to council when 
management have had an opportunity to review the motion and see can some 
functions be co-ordinated.  
  
Motion in the name of Councillor Ciarán Ó Meachair and seconded by 
Councillor Ammar Ali 
This council acknowledges that The Liberties is an area in danger of losing the very 
characteristics that make it unique. Hotels, Student Accommodation, Build-to-Rent, 
Co-living and Short-Term Rentals are over concentrated in a dense area. This has 
resulted in transient populations and unaffordability for local families and businesses. 
The Liberties has many proud and longstanding cultural practises, from weaving and 
textile production to the markets and traders. Dublin City Council calls for The Culture 
of The Liberties to be recognised and included on the UNESCO Intangible Cultural 
Heritage List, to hold and protect the characteristics and memories of our city’s 
 

 
working-class traditions, in addition to our industrial, historical and social heritage. 
Dublin City Council will also write to The Department of Housing, Local Government 
and Heritage to seek their support in applying to UNESCO for this designation. 
 
The motion was put and carried.  
 
Motion in the name of Councillor Lesley Byrne has been deferred to the next 
council meeting.  
 
 
 
 
      
Motion in the name of Councillor Feljin Jose has been deferred to the next 
meeting 
Motion in the name of Councillor Jesslyn Henry and seconded by Cllr Noelle 
Brown  
                             
To ask this Council and DCC to write to the Minister for Housing seeking clarification 
and a directive to be issued to all Councils and County Council in relation to Mother 
and Baby Homes redress payments being viewed as assessable income in housing 
supports applications. 
While social welfare means tests, often exclude one off compensation payments, 
there is no published guidance in relation to housing supports and one-off payments to 
survivors of Mother and Baby Homes as part of the redress scheme. This lack of 
clarity is causing stress and confusion for survivors accessing housing supports 
through city councils and county councils. 
The motion was put and carried.  The Lord Mayor will agree to write to the minister 
and a copy of this letter will be circulated to members.  
Councillor Cat O’Driscoll and seconded by Lord Mayor Councillor Ray McAdam 
 That this council supports the goals of the annual Make Way Day and will develop a 
comprehensive strategy to address the scourge of footpath blockages and hazards 
across the city. 
“Make Way Day” is a campaign that brings the disability and wider community 
together to consider the needs of people with disabilities in the public spaces we all 
share. Every September the campaign by the Disability Federation of Ireland 
highlights the obstacles impeding the movement of disabled people year-round. 
The 2024 Your Dublin Your Voice survey results show that on a regular basis blocked 
footpaths impact the majority of respondents who are people caring for babies and 
toddlers. 75% of toddler/baby caregivers reported ‘’vehicles parked on the footpath’’ 
as the obstacle most often encountered. The safety audits completed by the DCC 
Women’s Committee regularly reported cracked footpaths as a hazard, mainly caused 
by heavy vehicles parking on them.   
 
The motion was put and carried.  
  
 
27   Emergency Motion(s) 
 
Emergency Motion No. 1 in the name of Cllr Gavin Pepper 
To call for the proposed rent increase to be immediately scrapped. 
Families and individuals across Dublin are facing severe financial pressures due to the 
ongoing cost of living crisis, including rising costs for food, energy, and essential 
household expenses.  
 

 
A rent increase at this time would place further, unacceptable strain on tenants 
already struggling to make ends meet. 
 
I therefore request that the Chief Executive take urgent action to withdraw the 
proposed rent increase and implement measures to protect tenants, ensuring that 
rents remain fair and affordable for all residents. 
 
This motion was taken under item 18. Report No. 275/2025 - Housing Supply and 
Delivery Monthly Update Report.  
  
Frank D'Arcy, Executive Manager confirmed the process that had been gone  through 
with the Budget Consultative Group, including the various briefing sessions held with 
Councillors to ensure their feedback and input to the new scheme particularly around 
protecting the most vulnerable tenants.  He also confirmed that the introduction of this 
new scheme is an executive function.  
 
 
 
 
Correct. 
 
 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
__________________________ 
LORD MAYOR 
MEETINGS ADMINISTRATOR 
  

Statement from Richard Shakespeare, Chief Executive, Dublin City Council 
Published on 30th November 2025 
The Commemorations and Naming Committee of Dublin City Council has proposed 
the renaming of Diamond Park, Dublin 1 and Herzog Park, Dublin 6. 
The authority to change a placename is contained within Part 18 of the Local 
Government Act 2001. The process involves the adoption by resolution of a proposal 
to substitute a new placename by the elected members, the holding of a public 
consultation and a secret ballot of qualified electors should a proposal be approved. 
While the provisions of the Act were commenced in 2019, the regulations required to 
govern the process for a secret ballot are not yet in place.  The Report to the elected 
members does not take account of the correct statutory procedure and is missing 
information for a valid resolution to be adopted. Therefore, in the circumstances I am 
proposing to withdraw the report from the Agenda with a recommendation that the 
matter be referred back to the Commemorations and Naming Committee for 
consideration of the statutory procedure. On behalf of the Executive of the City 
Council, I wish to apologise for this administrative oversight. A detailed review of the 
administrative mis-steps will now be undertaken and a report furnished to the Lord 
Mayor and Councillors. 
ENDS 
 

Appendix B 
Vote to withdraw Report No. 277/2025 & Report No. 278/2025 and remit both reports to the  
Commemoration and Naming Committee 
RECORD OF DIVISION AT COUNCIL MEETING ON 1ST DECEMBER 2025 
 
 
FOR: 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
ABSTAIN:   
  
AGAINST:  
25 
 
 
 
 
ABSENT: 
1  
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
 
 
 
 
COUNCILLORS 
FOR 
AGAINST 
ABSTAIN 
ABSENT 
Councillor Ammar Ali 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Feljin Jose 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Daryl Barron 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Leslie Kane 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Racheal Batten 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Kourtney Kenny 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Emma Blain 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Patrick Kinsella 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Janice Boylan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Dermot Lacey 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Kevin Breen 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor John Lyons 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Noelle Brown 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Aoibheann Mahon 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Christy Burke 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Micheál MacDonncha 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Claire Byrne 
√ 
 
 
 
Lord Mayor Ray McAdam 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Danny Byrne 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Séamas McGrattan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Lesley Byrne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Paddy Monahan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Mary Callaghan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Carolyn Moore 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Hazel Chu 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Edel Moran 
 
 
 
 
Councillor David Coffey 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Darragh Moriarty 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Anthony Connaghan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Clodagh Ní Mhuirí 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Fiona Connelly  
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Cat O’Driscoll 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Keith Connolly 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Ciarán Ó Meachair 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Donna Cooney  
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Colm O’Rourke 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Ray Cunningham 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Gavin Pepper 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Hazel de Nortúin 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Cieran Perry 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Daithí Doolan 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Michael Pigeon 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Pat Dunne 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Gayle Ralph 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Daniel Ennis 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Punam Rane 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Cian Farrell  
 
 
√ 
 
Councillor Conor Reddy 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Alison Field  
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Nial Ring 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Declan Flanagan 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Aisling Silke  
 
 
 
 
Councillor Mannix Flynn 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Supriya Singh 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Deirdre Heney 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Karl Stanley 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Jesslyn Henry 
 
√ 
 
 
Councillor Malachy Steenson 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Rory Hogan 
√ 
 
 
 
Deputy Lord Mayor John Stephens 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Janet Horner 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Philip Sutcliffe 
√ 
 
 
 
Councillor Vincent Jackson 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



QUESTIONS LODGED PURSUANT TO STANDING ORDER NO.18 FOR REPLY AT THE 
MONTHLY MEETING OF DUBLIN CITY COUNCIL TO BE HELD ON MONDAY 1st 
DECEMBER 2025 
 
Q.1  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive as to when a new kitchen be fitted at details supplied. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance can confirm that a new kitchen will be installed in January 2026. 
The tenant will be contacted in advance to arrange a suitable date/time for works to be 
carried out.  
 
Q.2  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive when retrofit works will be completed at details supplied. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council units at details supplied were upgraded with wall insulation in 2014, 
however no. 51 was not a Council dwelling at that time. The property is now listed for 
survey by an Inspector in the coming weeks to ascertain if it is eligible for inclusion on 
the Energy Efficiency Retrofit programme in the future. 
 
Q.3  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive for update on the on-going anti-social behaviour at details 
supplied. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An Garda Síochána have recently commenced daily patrols within the housing 
complex as part of a coordinated approach to enhancing safety. In partnership, the 
Dublin City Council Housing Team remains actively engaged in enforcing estate 
management responsibilities and promptly addresses reported breaches to uphold 
community standards. 
 
Q.4  
COUNCILLOR CHRISTY BURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive to remove the leaves from details supplied as they are 
blocking shores 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services will ensure that the above mentioned location is included 
as often as possible in our leaves clearing programme over the autumn and winter 
months. 
 
Q.5  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
To ask the Chief Executive to advise on how this resident can best deal with these 
problems of water, drains and rats and about the costs issue details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Environmental Protection Division of Dublin City Council has responsibility for 
operating and maintaining the surface water sewer network. There isn’t a surface water 
sewer on details supplied however there is a combined sewer operated and maintained 
by Uisce Eireann, their contact details are 1800 278 278. I am aware that the HSE 
have a pest control team who investigate and treat premises free of charge, their 
contact details are 1800 211 774. 
I have inserted a Notice to Householders document in this response. The notice 
contains details on the difference between shared private side drains and public 

sewers, unfortunately the issue described above is a private one and Dublin City 
Council do not maintain this private drain. If you have a further query or wish to make 
direct contact with the team for this or a similar issue, please email 
cqsurfacewater@dublincity.ie and we will respond accordingly. 
 
Q.6  
COUNCILLOR DERMOT LACEY 
           To ask the Chief Executive if he could issue a response to the questions regarding 
public infrastructure in the Ringsend area as per details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
Response will issue directly to Councillor Lacey 
 
Q.7 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a report on the costs to DCC to dispose of the 
‘Fast Gas’ cannisters and how much it has cost thus far on a yearly basis which are a 
blight on the city at present. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
In 2025 Dublin City Councils waste management section have spent €60,000.00 on 
the disposal of fast gas cannisters. We have no figures on previous years. 
 
Q.8 
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure we have sufficient stock of spare litter bins to 
replace out of commission or in need of repair bins immediately instead of using plastic 
bags to cover said bins which is very unsightly. Can the Chief Executive Officer provide 
details of what spare stock we have currently. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management can confirm there is sufficient bin stock to maintain bin servicing    
needs. Bags are placed over damaged bins as a temporary measure whilst those bins 
await repairs. 
 
Q.9  
COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive how many tenancy terminations have occurred due to anti-
social behavior or other breaches of tenancy in the last 5 years per area. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The list below are the Evictions carried out by the Dublin City Sheriff on foot of court 
orders granted to Dublin City Council by the District Court for the last five years. 
 
2025 = 17. 
2024 = 26. 
2023 = 8. 
2022 = 2. 
2021 = 3. 
 
Total = 56 Evictions. 
The following is a breakdown of these evictions. 
Rent Arrears   
   
36 
Anti-social Behaviour   
9 
Breach of Tenancy  
     
1 
Illegal Occupiers  
        
10 
                                    
56 
 

There are also five anti-social behaviour evictions included, which are carried out by 
the Gardai under Section 20 of the Housing Miscellaneous Provisions Act 1997. 
 
Q.10 
COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the clearance of fallen leaves from 
footpaths, roads, and public spaces across the South East Area. 
Could the Chief Executive outline: 
1.The current schedule and frequency of leaf clearance operations; 
2.The criteria used to prioritise locations such as schools, parks, and high-footfall 
areas; and 
3. Any additional resources or measures being deployed to address slippery surfaces 
and blocked drains during the peak leaf-fall season 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The leaf clearance schedule for the 6am shift is a daily one in the South East Area with 
all available staff and machinery being utilised when possible. All leaf removal work is 
always subject to our available resources on any given day.  
 
During leaf fall season this is an ongoing issue in every area and requires continuous 
assessments and inspections to identify priority areas. The prioritising process is on 
the basis of high footfall areas, schools, shop fronts etc. followed by all other areas ie. 
estates etc. As part of this process, inspections area carried out to areas as needed. 
 
The roads work on the same prioritising process with high traffic areas first (whenever 
possible) and then Estates etc.  
 
Waste Management Section are constantly in contact with Drainage Section in regards 
to dovetailing with their schedule of gully clearing as required. 
 
Currently, there is an additional fourth Road Sweeper operating  in the South East Area 
to assist with leaf removal as required. 
 
Q.11  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide details on the quantification of on-street car and 
motor vehicle parking spaces within the Dublin City Council area. 
Specifically, can the Chief Executive outline: 
1.What counts or estimates the Council currently holds of on-street parking spaces 
(both paid and unpaid); 
2.The geographical breakdown of these counts or estimates — by town, suburb, 
neighbourhood, or other relevant divisions; and 
3.The dates when such counts or estimates were last conducted for each area 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
1. DCC currently cannot provide an accurate count of the paid and unpaid parking spaces 
in the Dublin City area. There would have been approximately 25,000-30,000 parking 
spaces in the city when last estimated, many years ago. 
 
Schemes like Active Travel, Dublin Bus Network Redesign, City Centre Transport 
Projects, Safe Routes to school, On Street Cycle Parking, Greening Strategy have 
meant that parking spaces have been removed over the last 5 years. Furthermore, Pay 
and Display schemes have been introduced in this timeframe. 
 
2. At this time DCC cannot provide a geographical breakdown of this estimate 
 

3. DCC does not have a definitive date on when these estimates were made. Parking 
Enforcement will be carrying out a survey of all paid parking spaces in the city in 2026. 
Unpaid parking spaces will not be counted in residential areas, however as per as per 
the Dublin City Development Plan Chapter 8 (SMTO23) “It is an objective of Dublin 
City Council: To progressively eliminate all ‘free’ on-street parking, both within the 
canals and in adjacent areas where there is evidence of ‘all day’ commuter parking, 
through the imposition of appropriate parking controls, including resident permit 
parking, pay and display parking, or by the provision of new cycle parking, public realm 
or greening.” 
 
Q.12 
COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to outline what audit or oversight processes are currently 
in place to ensure that all Council-run community centres registered as charities are in 
full compliance with the Charities Act 2009 and the Charities Governance Code, 
particularly Section 5.5, which relates to term limits for charity trustees, in the interest 
of promoting good governance and accountability. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As DCC community centres are run and owned by Dublin City Council, they are not 
registered charities and therefore are not required to comply with the Charities Act 
2009 and the Charities Governance Code. 
 
Q.13  COUNCILLOR PUNAM RANE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide the current average processing time for Housing 
Assistance Payment (HAP) applications within Dublin City Council, and to indicate 
whether there has been any change or improvement in processing times over the past 
12 months. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The processing time for HAP applications has significantly reduced over the last 12 
months and I can confirm that the current processing time is 3-4 weeks. The 
processing time is dependent on how promptly the correct paperwork is provided to 
the HAP section. 
 
Q.14  COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive where it is proposed to allocate the €76,595 contribution 
towards public services which was noted as a condition for the development of the 
Vicar Street Hotel 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Sub-section (1) of Section 48 of the Planning & Development Act, 2000, as amended, 
enables a Planning Authority, when granting planning permission under Section 34 of 
the Act, to attach conditions requiring the payment of a contribution in respect of public 
infrastructure and facilities benefiting the development in the administrative area of the 
Planning Authority. This relates to public infrastructure and facilities that are provided, 
or that it is intended will be provided, by or on behalf of the Local Authority (regardless 
of other sources of funding. Subsection (2) of Section 48 requires that the basis for the 
determination of a   contribution under subsection (1) shall be set out in a development 
contribution scheme made under this section. The current Dublin City Council Section 
48 Development Contribution Scheme 2023 – 2026 was adopted by the Elected 
Members at the March 2023 meeting of the City Council. Development contributions 
are not allocated to specific projects associated with the area in which the development 
is situated but are used to part fund the citywide capital works program agreed by the 
City Council. A commencement notice in respect of the above development has not 
yet been submitted. 

Q.15  COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive for assistance regarding a water leak issue details supplied. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Environmental Protection Division of Dublin City Council has responsibility for 
operating and maintaining the surface water sewer network. Staff from the 
Environmental Protection Division investigated this issue and can confirm the public 
surface water sewer is functioning without issue on Details Supplied.  
During the investigation, our staff entered the above property where they observed a 
gutter downpipe discharging into private side drain on private property. It was outlined 
to them that during rainfall, the private side drain does not adequately drain surface 
water. 
To resolve the issue, we suggest that a private Contractor is engaged by the property 
manager to clean the private side drain. 
If you have a further query or wish to make direct contact with the team for this or a 
similar issue, please email cqsurfacewater@dublincity.ie and we will respond 
accordingly. 
 
Q.16  COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if the South Circular Road can be considered to be given 
a 30 km/h speed limit under the forthcoming review into speed limits in Dublin City. 
Could it also be indicated which roads in the South-West Inner-City are under 
consideration to be designated with ah 30 km/h speed limit. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is currently undertaking a citywide review of all speed limits in 
accordance with the updated Speed Limit Guidelines 2025. These guidelines require 
that roads be assessed using a consistent, evidence-based approach, including the 
consideration of self-enforcing lower-speed environments. 
Every street and road above 30 kph will be assessed during this process. Once the 
review is complete and a draft proposal will be compiled, the recommendations will be 
brought before the Mobility & Public Realm SPC and the Area Committee Meetings for 
consideration.  
 
Q.17  COUNCILLOR CIARAN O MEACHAIR 
To ask the Chief Executive if a planter could be installed at the bottom of Vauxhall 
Avenue at the junction with Cork Street. Additionally, could signage be erected to note 
‘no vehicular access’. Vaxuhall Avenue is a public walkway; however, it is now 
commonly being used as a Loading Bay without permission 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Loading and unloading on Vauxhall Avenue via Cork Street cannot legally be 
performed for the following reasons: 
The bus lane on Cork Street inbound (north-east bound) has a "24-hour operation." 
This means it's prohibited for vehicles other than buses or taxis to enter the bus lane 
at all times. 
Furthermore, driving on the footpath is illegal as per the Road Traffic Act and instances 
of dangerous driving such as this should be reported to An Garda Síochána for 
enforcement. 
 
Q.18  COUNCILLOR EDEL MORAN 
           To ask the Chief Executive to have the Drains/ Gullies cleaned once again between 
Lorcan Avenue and Lorcan Grove and further investigation is carried out. These were 
reported cleaned on 07/04/2025 and again in July this year but the ongoing issues with 
overflowing when there is rainfall have returned, including the presence of oil/ grease 

emerging through the Gullies. The resident in details supplied, supplied photos and 
has said this issue has been occurring for years with no solution 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council’s Environmental Protection Division can report that surface water 
infrastructure at the above locations which is under the remit of this office is in 
working order. The surface was inspected and cleaned on October 26th. It appears 
that this may be a result of a watermain leak. Uisce Eireann has been contacted to 
investigate this issue. 
This office can be contacted at cqsurfacewater@dublincity.ie if you have a further 
query or  wish to make direct contact with team for this or a similar issue and we will 
respond accordingly. 
 
Q.19  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive can we arrange a report on the speed issue on Ardcollum 
Ave. I have raised this on multiple occasions, and I would like if a walk about can be 
arranged as well as to see a report on the speed and parking on the road. It is an 
accident waiting to happen 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement have received one request for enforcement at this location since 
January 2025. The area was found to be all clear on inspection. The area has been 
patrolled on several occasions since that date and was found to be all clear also. This 
is a residential area with very little or no parking restrictions. The main enforcements 
available would be footpath/grass verge/median parking or obstructing access. This 
request (Enquiry Ref: 7049157) will be referred to the Area Engineer for assessment 
and report to the Transport Advisory Group for their consideration. The Councillor will 
then be informed of the final recommendations of the Transport Advisory Group 
 
Q.20  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive, to have details supplied resurfaced. There are three deep 
potholes along the road and feel the road should be prioritised for resurfacing 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Details supplied will be considered for inclusion in 2026’s works programme 
 
Q.21  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
           To ask the Chief Executive, to ensure that the playground in Kilmore is replaced as 
soon as possible. It was very sad to see the arson attack which took place recently. If 
we have some idea of timeline for when this can be repaired 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The damage has been assessed by the supplier and repairs ordered.  However, due 
to the lead-in times for delivery of parts and the contractors busy schedule repairs will 
not be affected until Q1 2026.  In the meantime, the damaged area will be made safe 
to allow the rest of the playground made available to the community. 
 
Q.22  COUNCILLOR AOIBHEANN MAHON 
To ask the Chief Executive if the implementation of pay and display at details attached 
can be brought in any sooner than March 2026?” 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The implementation date for details supplied is the 23rd March 2026. Residents will be 
able to apply for permits from this date. 
 

Q.23  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide copies, or links to copies, of the following reports 
in respect of biodiversity in Clontarf commissioned by Dublin City Council details 
supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Given the volume of information requested and the fact that a number of these studies 
and reports are 20 years old and may have been superseded it will take some time to 
confirm if copies are available from archives.  Contact will be made with the requesting 
Councillor in due course. 
 
Q.24  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive: 
• 
How many streetlamps there are in Dublin City Council’s administrative area, 
• 
How many streetlamps have been replaced with modern LED lamps to date, 
• 
What plan Dublin City Council has to replace the remaining lamps. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are approximately 47,200 streetlights in Dublin City Council’s administrative 
area. Of these 18,600 have been replaced with modern LED streetlights to date. 
The remaining streetlights will be upgraded to LED streetlights under Dublin City 
Council’s Public Lighting Upgrade Project, that has been up and running since early 
2023. 
 
Q.25  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive how many fixed penalty notices have been issued to 
hauliers for driving illegally on Richmond Road given that a weight limit is in place, but 
residents regularly report HGVs driving on the road in breach of the limit 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parking Enforcement and their contractors Dublin Street Parking Services would not 
issue Fixed Penalty Notices for any vehicles driving on a public thoroughfare that may 
exceed a weight limit for that road. This would fall outside of Parking Enforcements 
remit. There have been no FPN’s issued to hauliers for parking on Richmond Road for 
breaches of weight limits since the start of 2025. 
 
Q.26  COUNCILLOR CLODAGH NI MHUIRI 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on Dublin City Council’s acquisition of the 
site known as ‘The Square’ off Richmond Road and the Council’s plans for same. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Acquisition of this site was proposed to regularise parking in the area.  The Council’s 
Law Agent and the vendor’s solicitors are currently reviewing contract documents and 
completion of paperwork is imminent. 
 
Q.27  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can have the road surface on Ontario Terrace, 
Ranelagh, reviewed and added to the list of roads to be resurfaced 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer will carry out a visit to the aforementioned location if the entire road 
needs resurfacing it will be added to a list of roads for potential inclusion on the 2026 
carriageway resurfacing programme. In the meantime, The Area Engineer will arrange 
for repairs to be carried out on Ontario Terrace. 

Q.28  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he can have the road surface on Sandymount Road 
reviewed and added to the list of roads to be resurfaced. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Area Engineer will carry out a visit to the aforementioned location if the entire road 
needs resurfacing it will be added to a list of roads for potential inclusion on the 2026 
carriageway resurfacing programme. 
In the meantime, The Area Engineer will arrange for repairs to be carried out on 
Sandymount Road. 
 
Q.29  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he could arrange for the repainting of the double yellow 
lines on The Crescent, Donnybrook Road, and if the enforcement of waste regulations 
- particularly regarding the presentation and storage of bins - can be ensured. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The location will be inspected in the coming days. Any requirement for the repainting 
of the DYL’s will be carried out within 30 working days of the Council Meeting of the 1st 
of December 2025. 
A litter warden will continue to make regular patrols in this area to ensure compliance 
with Waste Management Bye-Laws. 
 
Q.30  COUNCILLOR DAVID COFFEY 
To Ask the Chief Executive if lighting could be installed in the underpass along the 
Dodder River in Milltown details supplied, and if some of the undergrowth at the tunnel 
entrances could be cleared. This would improve visibility, enhance safety during dark 
winter evenings, and help deter inappropriate loitering around the underpass. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A response will issue directly to Councillor Coffey. 
 
Q.31  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on actions being taken to address 
ongoing public safety, anti-social behaviour, and environmental concerns of details 
supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Waste Management Services cleanses this area on a weekly basis and respond to 
Citizenhub requests within 24 hours. All abandoned vehicles are fully investigated 
according to established procedures. Any vehicle deemed to be abandoned are 
removed. 
 
Q.32  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to install a playground in Marino for the children in the 
community.  Marino has never had a playground.   A local playground would provide a 
much-needed space for children to play, socialize and stay active while having fun. It 
would save families having to travel to playgrounds in the surrounding areas.  There 
are many greens within Marino, and also there is the location at the Casino, I would 
be grateful if these areas could be looked into for a playground. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are no current proposals to consider the provision of such a facility in Marino.  
As the majority of Marino is within the catchment of the playground at Fairview Park it 
is not considered an area of deficit of play facilities in the Parks Strategy.  The priority 

for the playground programme into the medium term is to upgrade existing facilities up 
to modern standard of accessibility and inclusivity and address areas of deficit. 
 
Q.33  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to review the 1941 war bombing monument on the North 
Strand, 28 people lost their lives in the 1941 bombings.  There is a memorial park with 
a monument within it on the North Strand, but for those who perished in these 
bombings their names were never inscribed on this. We need to reach out to their 
families on this and see how is best to move forward. They deserve their memory to 
be remembered on this monument. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The park is not a DCC park it belongs to the Marino College of Further Education also 
known as Cathal Brugha FET, they may know who installed the stone. 
 
Q.34  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to install storyboards in all Dublin City Council playgrounds. 
These help make play spaces more accessible and welcoming for all children, 
including those with communication difficulties.  Many children with additional needs 
have difficulties communicating, some are non-verbal. This would be a game changer 
for parents, but mostly for children with additional needs. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Service is committed to improving accessibility for all in its playgrounds including 
the provision of storyboards. Parks Services install new communication boards in 
playground upgrades and will carry out an audit of play facilities to identify the 
playgrounds that require such a board. They will be ordered as part of the 2026 
Playground Improvement Programme.  
 
With regard to communication boards, these have been installed in playgrounds 
across the city. Unfortunately, several boards have been subject to removal or 
vandalism and required replacement. 
Parks Services remains committed to maintaining these important resources and is 
actively exploring measures to improve their security and durability. 
 
Q.35  COUNCILLOR ALISON FIELD 
To ask the Chief Executive to replace the footpath outside details supplied this footpath 
is very cracked in places with large weeds growing constantly, sometimes over a foot 
high. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An Enquiry (ref.11187433) has been created for details supplied. 
An Area Inspector will carry out an inspection of the locus and assign a crew to carry 
out the necessary repairs. 
 
Q.36  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive, to look at housing application put in by details supplied. 
She is awaiting medical priority for a two bed so that she can move into bariatric bed 
and start to use more of her medical equipment. She currently has no space and there 
is also little or no space for her wife 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on the Transfer List and holds a medical priority with an 
application date of 15/04/2025 and holds the following positions on the waiting list -  
 

Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
D 
1 
8 
E 
1 
28 
 
The current medical application regarding the applicant’s request to be considered for 
a two bed property is with the Chief Medical Officer, upon a decision being made the 
applicant will be contacted direct.  
 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 
number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list. 
 
Dublin City Council are increasing the number of units that are being allocated through 
the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. 
The applicant should be advised to keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being 
advertised that may be of interest to her and to ensure she makes an application for 
same. 
 
Q.37  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive, for a report on how many roof maintenance requests are 
in for Dublin North West. A lot of residents have been on to me regarding damage to 
roofs, resulting in leaks and they all are going on some time. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Housing Maintenance, Ballymun Area Depot logged a total of 331 roof repair requests 
to date this year for properties in the Ballymun, Beaumont, Finglas, Santry and 
Whitehall area. 
 
All repair requests are assessed by Housing Maintenance, categorised and completed 
within timeframes set out in Dublin City Council Tenant Handbook. 
 
Q.38  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive, for a report on how many people are currently on the 
transfer list for overcrowding in Dublin North West. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The total number of people on Band 2 of the Transfer list for Area D and E which Dublin 
Northwest would be, is 640 
 
Q.39  COUNCILLOR LESLIE KANE 
To ask the Chief Executive, for any update regarding the site where the Ballymun 
Shopping centre was 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council and the Land Development Agency are in advanced discussions 
regarding the delivery of a residential led development on the western side (rear) of 
the former Ballymun shopping centre site; identified as Site 1 in the Ballymun Local 
Area Plan. The City Valuers Office and the LDA are presently finalising the details of 
the commercial terms and the Memorandum of Agreement. 
 
Q.40  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to investigate the efficacy of the flashing amber light for 
cars at pedestrian crossings. What purpose does the flashing light for cars serve and 

does the Chief Executive feel drivers understand this function? Is the flashing amber 
light safe for pedestrians in circumstances where many drivers think it gives them 
priority and permission to proceed? Has Dublin City Council study or measured the 
effectiveness of the flashing amber light for cars at pedestrian crossings and driver 
understanding of and adherence to the rules in this regard? Does the flashing amber 
light for cars support the goal of active travel or is it of any benefit to pedestrians? 
Would the Chief Executive consider removing the flashing amber light function and 
replacing it with a significantly longer green man for pedestrians and red light for 
vehicles? As a starting point, and as a specific example, the Chief Executive could 
inspect the pedestrian lights at the Artane roundabout on the Malahide Road. However, 
this is a small sample as there are many such pedestrian lights in the Dublin City 
Council area. Equally, there are many pedestrian lights that do not function in this way. 
Can the Chief Executive explain why some do and some do not? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A Pelican (Pedestrian Light Controlled Crossing) is a legal 2 aspect crossing provided 
under the Traffic Signs Manual (TSM) Chapter 9 Traffic Signals. This type of signal is 
relatively common throughout the country and there are a number of these crossings 
in the Dublin City Council area.  
The operation, in general, is as follows: 
• 
When the pedestrian pushes the pedestrian push button unit this places a demand 
for the pedestrian phase. 
• 
After a certain length of time the vehicle phase closes to Red with a minimum of 2s 
(sometimes more) before the pedestrian green man signal goes solid green. 
• 
The pedestrian green man stays solid green for a minimum of 6s as per TSM Ch 
9. 
• 
After 6s, the pedestrian displays a flashing green man signal. The duration of the 
flashing green man signal is calculated based on the width of the crossing and, 
similar to the amber man of a standard 3 aspect pedestrian, is calculated to allow 
the pedestrian to complete crossing the road based on a DCC Walking speed 
standard of 1 m/s. Please note that this is higher than national standards. 
• 
During the first 2s of the pedestrian signal showing flashing green the vehicle signal 
stays on red. Following this period the vehicle signal displays flashing amber which 
continues for the remainder of the duration of the flashing green period for 
pedestrians and 2s thereafter before changing to a solid green signal for vehicles. 
During this 2s and the subsequent vehicle green and intergreen the pedestrian 
aspect displays a red man signal. 
• 
Pedestrians should not commence crossing during a flashing green man and 
vehicles should not proceed during a flashing amber until pedestrians have 
completed crossing. 
• 
Vehicles must not proceed through a red or a flashing amber (if a pedestrian is on 
the crossing). This type of poor driver behaviour is a matter for An Garda Siochana 
enforcement. 
Regarding the operation of the traffic signals at the Artane Roundabout we reiterate 
our response given to Mot 7b (2) Cllr P. Monahan NCAC 17/02/25: ‘At the Artane 
Roundabout the type of pedestrian crossing in use are known as ‘Pelican Crossings’. 
These type of pedestrian signals are commonly used within the UK and Ireland and 
are provided for in the Irish Traffic Signs Manual Chapter 9. At these crossings, 
motorists have a 3 aspect signal (Red, Amber, Green) while pedestrians have a two 
aspect signal (Red, Green/Flashing Green). Motorists are legally obliged to halt on a 
flashing amber signal if there are still pedestrians on the crossing and failure to do so 
is a Roads Traffic offence and a matter for An Garda Siochana. Following on from a 
councillor question in December we have reviewed the operation of the pelicans 

crossings and the timing interval with pedestrian flashing green and the motorist red 
signal has been increased at these sites to enhance pedestrian safety, as it will allow 
extra timing for pedestrians to clear the crossings before vehicles are displayed a 
flashing amber signal. Currently there are no plans to change the operation of these 
signals as the Artane Roundabout will be upgraded as part of the upcoming Clongriffin 
to City Centre Bus Connects scheme when a full upgrade of these signals will occur.’. 
This junction was attended by ITS and Traffic Officers late 2024 and signal 
timings/operation, signal heads and visibility confirmed. We are satisfied that the 
junction is performing as designed and we continue to monitor its operation.  
Regarding changing  the operation from the current operation to a standard pedestrian 
signal operation, it is our understanding that the Bus Connects Clongriffin CBC is a 
priority scheme for the National Transport Authority (NTA) and whilst detailed design 
has yet to take place, we understand that the junction / roundabout in question is due 
a full upgrade resulting in the removal of the roundabout and the construction of a fully 
signalised junction.  
This means that any works undertaken now would ultimately be quickly aborted as the 
junction is completely rebuilt under the imminent CBC scheme. 
We will, however, in the meantime, continue to monitor the operation of the traffic 
signals at this location and ensure operation is optimised and safe for all road users 
 
Q.41  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive whether Dublin City Council can support schools in making 
their space and amenities available to local communities outside school hours and at 
weekends. In many areas publicly accessible spaces and amenities are few and far 
between due to private developer-led Government policies. Some of the few taxpayer-
funded buildings in many areas are schools. However, school communities and 
employees (most obviously school principals) are already stretched to the limit serving 
the school-going population, implementing the curriculum and looking after the day-to-
day running of schools. Schools need assistance and support in making their facilities 
available – what can DCC offer in this regard 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Under the adopted Dublin City Council Sports Plan, one of the actions for the Sports 
& Recreation Section is to explore and incentivise schools and other institutions to 
share and/or extend access to their sports facilities to local communities. As work on 
the plan develops updates will be provided to the newly formed Sport Plan 
Implementation Sub-SPC 
 
Q.42  COUNCILLOR PADDY MONAHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive how the success of school zones is measured. Can the 
Chief Executive explain the rationale for on-road pencil bollards in some school zones 
and on-path in others? Can the Chief Executive explain how on-path bollards are 
supposed to function and how they deter parking in an area (if that is their purpose) 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The success of school zones is measured by the improvement in the safety at the front 
of the school. 
The location of bollard placement is based on observations by local authority engineers 
and the Green Schools Safe Routes to School Infrastructure Officer at school drop off 
and collection times. These visits allow the team to assess what behaviours are most 
dangerous and need to be discouraged, e.g. if parents are parking on footpaths, 
bollards will be suggested for that footpath 
 
 

Q.43  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
           To ask the Chief Executive that the tree that was removed from outside details supplied 
be replaced as a matter of urgency, adjoining residents tell me the old tree was dead 
and removed a few weeks ago as it didn`t take growth after being planted in January 
this year. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A tree has been selected for the site to replace the removed tree. Tree planting is 
expected to be carried out in early 2026. 
 
Q.44  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chef Executive to please give me a breakdown on details supplied. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Response will issue to Councillor Jackson 
Q.45  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive that all the trees in the Cleggan Ave, Park and Road area 
of Ballyfermot Dublin 10 be looked at with the intention of crowning them, the current 
situation is that the trees are all over the place with little or no shape to them due to 
lack of pruning 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The trees growing at the above location are growing in less-than-ideal conditions, such 
as under overhead services, and in inadequately sized tree pits.  
 
The restrictive growing conditions have affected the appearance and the development 
of the trees. They will be inspected by Parks Services tree inspector in the next week 
or two and any issues will be addressed through the tree care programme early 2026  
 
Q.46  COUNCILLOR VINCENT JACKSON 
To ask the Chief Executive that footpath at the back of Ballyfermot Civic Centre onto 
Drumfinn Ave be looked at with a view to replacing same, the current condition with 
broken tree pits, uneven surfaces is a major accident waiting to happen and with the 
huge footfall along this road with the People’s Park and Civic Centre 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following on from the footpath scheme in 2025 at Drumfinn Park I will include this 
section of footpath on Drumfinn Avenue that you have suggested and I will attempt to 
also replace the footpaths on Gurteen Avenue as part of our minor works scheme 
going out to tender in early 2026.  
I noted that the speed ramps outside Details supplied are also in need of resurfacing 
and they will go out under a separate contract in 2026. I will also ask the Area 
Inspector, Ken Fitzgerald, to visit Drumfinn Avenue and schedule localise repairs to 
the concrete carriageway by direct labour due to failures in the surface. 
 
Q.47  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive, if employees of DCC and DFB continue to receive a full 
wage if they have received a custodial sentence? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The City Council does not comment on individual employees. Should such a situation 
arise, the City Council’s position will be determined by full consideration of all relevant 
facts and law.  
 

Q.48 
COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive what clamping companies have contracts from DCC, what 
areas do they cover, how much are the contracts worth and when will they up for review 
or renewal 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The current clamping provider used by Parking Enforcement is Dublin Street Parking 
Services. They cover all enforcement on Dublin City’s public roads. 
The current contract is worth €5,239,712 annually. 
The contract will expire on the 31st July 2026. Parking Enforcement are currently going 
through a procurement process to award a new contract before that date 
 
Q.49  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive, Labre Park has waited 25 years for regeneration, there 
has been numerous setbacks and delays, has the Minister for Housing confirmed 
funding is available for the regeneration and can the manager outline a timeframe for 
the regeneration to take place 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
We are pleased to confirm that a stage 2 funding application for the regeneration of 
Labre Park was submitted to the DHLGH Traveller Accommodation Support Unit on 
13/11/25. This submission concluded a lengthy peer review process in which the 
submission was reviewed and revised to adequately reflect design requirements and 
abnormal works associated with remediation of contaminated ground and flood 
prevention measures. Extensive engagement was held between DCC’s Quantity 
Surveying Department and Cluid/Design Team to ensure that all aspects were 
adequately included in the cost plan and that costs reflect current market rates for this 
type of project.  
 
During the peer review process, Cluid informed senior management that they would 
not be able to progress the project under CAS funding model but would support DCC 
up to planning. 
It is now intended that the project will be delivered by direct delivery. A review of options 
to engage a project delivery design team is underway. This includes a review of 
available frameworks and initial discussions regarding novation of the existing design 
team. 
It is expected that the part 8 planning process will commence on receipt of funding 
approval in Q1 2026. Following grant of planning permission detailed design work will 
progress to enable the procurement of a contractor with a view to being on site in Q3 
2027 
Local traveller advocacy groups and the chair of the project board have been kept 
informed of the changes in delivery model and status of funding application 
 
Q.50  COUNCILLOR DAITHI DOOLAN 
To ask the Chief Executive how much illegal waste, in tonnes, was collected in 2024 
and so far in 2025, how much spent on the collection and disposal of that waste, and 
how much was collected in fines for the same period 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The table below details the costs for the collection of illegal dumping in 2024 and in 
2025. The 2025 figure is up to the end of 3rd Quarter (September 30Th). Please note 
however that these amounts are likely to be only a fraction of the actual costs for the 
collection and disposal of illegal dumping that Dublin City Council incurs. They relate 
to specific operational crews who deal exclusively with illegal dumping so they can be 
costed as such.  

They do not however include all the illegal dumping that is routinely collected by other 
operational staff during the normal course of their daily duties while on hand carts or 
when emptying litter bins which frequently have illegal dumping placed beside them. 
This illegal dumping cannot be separated from the general waste collected during the 
normal course of the day and as such cannot be costed directly as illegal dumping.  
 
Tonnes 
Cost for collection and 
disposal 
2024 
2,134.80 
€140,239.56 
2025 
1,732.27 
€125,749.14 
TOTAL 
3,867.07 
€265,988.70 
 
The number of fines issued and paid under Section 3 (Illegal Dumping) of the Litter 
Pollutions Acts 1997-2009 are as follows on an area basis. 
Year 
Central 
Fines 
Issued 
Central 
Fines 
Paid 
North 
Central 
Fines 
Issued 
North 
Central 
Fines 
Paid 
North 
West 
Fines 
Issued 
North 
West 
Fines 
Paid 
South 
Central 
Fines 
Issued 
South 
Central 
Fines 
Paid 
South 
East 
Area 
Fines 
Issued 
South 
East 
Area 
Fines 
Paid 
2024 
91 
52 
19 
9 
7 
3 
169 
100 
108 
59 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
2025 
272 
97 
4 
4 
1 
1 
100 
33 
70 
13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q.51  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
           To ask the Chief Executive to provide a breakdown of funding that was allocated to 
each boxing club in the DCC area given by DCC or any other state bodies 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Background 
Dublin City Council (DCC) provides opportunities for people in DCC communities to 
participate in sport and physical activity through the work of the Dublin City Sport & 
Wellbeing Partnership (DCSWP).  Sports programmes, events and initiatives are 
aimed at key target groups and are planned and delivered to support participation 
regardless of age, gender, socio-economic status or ability.   
DCSWP has 23 Sport Officers working across Dublin city’s five electoral areas and 25 
Co-funded Officers from the following National Governing Bodies: 
➢ Athletics Ireland 
➢ Irish Athletics Boxing Association (IABA)  
➢ Cricket Ireland 
➢ Football Association of Ireland (FAI) 
➢ Leinster Rugby 
➢ Rowing Ireland  
➢ Swim Ireland 
Officers work in partnership with community groups, local and national organisations, 
clubs and schools in the delivery of sports programmes and initiatives. 

Irish Athletic Boxing Association (IABA) DCC/DCSWP Partnership 
The role of Boxing Development Officer role is to promote, deliver and co-ordinate the 
implementation of integrated boxing programmes with a view to developing interest 
and promoting the sport of boxing, mainly to young people from disadvantaged 
backgrounds who would not typically have the opportunity to participate in the sport.   
Other target groups include people with disabilities (physical, intellectual and sensory, 
ethnic minorities and teenage girls. 
The IABA Boxing in the Community Development Officer currently implements 
programmes designed to: 
 
 Increase and promote participation in boxing in disadvantaged areas 
 Develop and educate young people with emerging talent. 
 Educate participants in the Olympic history of boxing and other sports. 
DCSWP has five IABA Boxing Development Officers operating in each DCC electoral 
area:   
 
Administrative Area 
Named DCC/IABA Officer  
Central  
Paul Quinn  
South East 
Michael Carruth  
North West 
Oisin Fagan 
South Central 
Noel Burke 
North Central 
Vacant since 01/08/24 
 
 
Boxing Development Officers primarily focus on the delivery of the primary and 
secondary school (Transition Year) Startbox programme, which is an ideal way for 
young people to first engage with amateur boxing.   
During the summer months IABA Officers focus on the delivery of the Aviva Stadium 
and Olympic Education Programmes which are delivered in partnership with local 
youth services. 
In 2024 the combined number of participants in DCC’s Boxing Development 
programmes was in excess of 9,000 
 
Dublin City Council IABA Funding 
Dublin City Council contributes €141,500 towards the Boxing officers pay broken down 
as follows,  
Dublin City Sport & Wellbeing Partnership: €66,500  
Area Offices: €75,000 (€15,000 per Area)   
A further €15,000 budget is provided by DCSWP towards programme costs e.g. 
Equipment, additional coaches etc. 
A list of planned programmes is forwarded to the Area Offices each month for inclusion 
in the Area Committee report. 
Note: €69,235.72 comes from the City of Dublin Youth Service board UBU scheme. 
 
Club Support Small Grant Scheme Background 
Once a year Dublin City Council (DCC) provides a grant for sports clubs affiliated to a 
National Governing Body in the Dublin City Council Administrative Area. The grant is 
available to sports clubs that have participants of any age and are aiming to 
increase participation in sport and physical activity throughout Dublin City. The grant 
allocation is provided by Sport Ireland (through the National Local Sports Partnership 
Programme) and Dublin City Councill Grants range between €500 - €1,000. The 

scheme is administered by DCC’s Sports Partnership, the Dublin City Sport & 
Wellbeing Partnership. 
 
The grant application process is communicated across a number of platforms to ensure 
clubs are notified in good time:   
Club applicants are also directed to the DCC website, the DCSWP Virtual Hub and the 
DCSWP administrative team for advice and guidance on the application process.  
The grant seeks to alleviate or cover costs that a club/organisation may incur when 
seeking to increase participation.   
Examples include:  
o Training & coaching courses 
o Purchase of equipment 
o Administrative expenses 
o Community Club open day 
Applications for the funding of competitions/one-off events, foreign travel and high- 
performance competitors are not considered.  
Club Support Small Grant Scheme 2025 
In 2025, the scheme was advertised in early May and closed for applications on 23 
May.  203 clubs were deemed eligible for assessment.  
 
Decisions were reached following an assessment of each application by the Dublin 
City Sport & Wellbeing Partnership administrative/grants team and Sport Officers from 
each of the five electoral areas.   Each application was assessed in the context of the 
criteria of the scheme and based on the information provided by the club in the 
application form.   
It was agreed that there would be a three-tiered approach to the allocation of funding 
with clubs receiving a maximum award of €1000, a medium award of €750 and a 
minimum award of €500.   
A list of club applicants and the amount awarded was provided to councillors in each 
electoral area in late October 2025.  
149 clubs have since been notified of the award decision and 30 applications are 
currently under review.  
 
Boxing Club Support 
18 Boxing clubs in the DCC area were awarded funding under the scheme in 2025. 
Please see below a list of successful clubs and the amount awarded below/attached.   
 
Name of club 
 Amount 
Awarded 
Avona Boxing Club  
750.00 
Ballymun Boxing Club 
1,000.00 
Broadstone Amateur Boxing Club (previously Phibsboro Boxing 
Club)  
750.00 
Cabra Boxing Club  
750.00 
Camac Boxing Club  
1,000.00 

Cherry Orchard Boxing Club 
1,000.00 
CIE Boxing Club 
500.00 
Darndale Boxing Club 
1,000.00 
DCU Athletic Boxing Club 
1,000.00 
Drimnagh Amateur Boxing Club 
750.00 
Edenmore Boxing Club.  
750.00 
Glasnevin Boxing Club 
1,000.00 
Mount Tallant Boxing club 
750.00 
O'Rourke’s ABC 
500.00 
Santry Boxing Club  
750.00 
Smithfield Boxing Club 
750.00 
St Catherine’s Boxing Club 
1,000.00 
St Matthew’s Boxing Club Ltd 
750.00 
 Total Amount Funded: 
14,750.00 
 
Q.52  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
           To ask the Chief Executive why DCC are not purchasing houses with tenants in SITU 
and renovating same houses up to the point of compliance with the minimum standards 
regulations 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is required to carry out inspections on all properties proposed for 
purchase under the tenant in situ scheme, where our Inspector determines that 
significant repairs are required to a tenant in situ property DCC cannot proceed with 
the acquisition.  
DCC has been advised by the DHLG&H that we cannot access funding to carry out 
refurbishment works to tenant in situ properties 
 
Q.53  COUNCILLOR GAVIN PEPPER 
To ask the Chief Executive regarding individuals who have been on the housing list for 
over 10 to 15 years but were removed because their earnings exceeded the income 
threshold. If those same individuals now apply for affordable housing and their income 
does not exceed the threshold, what options are available to them? 
 Many of these people are still not earning enough to qualify for affordable housing, so 
what happens in their case? 
 Additionally, for those who do meet the threshold for affordable housing but, for 
whatever reason, do not receive an allocation — perhaps because they didn’t make 
the final list — what options do they have? 
            These are the people who seem to be completely left out of the system 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
As per The Housing Means Policy 2011, the income threshold is the basic measure of 
whether a household is eligible for social housing support. The income of all persons 
aged 18 years and over included in a social housing application shall be assessed for 

the purposes of determining whether an applicant’s household meets the income 
requirements. Any household whose income exceeds the income thresholds as set by 
the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage, will not be eligible for 
social housing.  
Some other housing supports that Dublin City Council can offer are: 
 
TO RENT 
For those on middle incomes: 
• 
Cost Rental Housing. Long-term, secure rented housing aimed at those who 
have a net household income of €66,000 or below. Rents 25% below market. 
Available homes are advertised on https://affordablehomes.ie/rent/   
 
TO BUY 
• 
Local Authority Home Loan. The Local Authority Home Loan is available for 
those who are unable to obtain sufficient funding from commercial banks to 
purchase a home. Aimed at those earning €85,000 gross or below (couples) 
€70,000 gross (single). The loan can be used for new and second-hand 
properties, or to self-build. The maximum loan is €324,000. 
 
• 
Affordable Purchase Scheme. There is no general income limit for affordable 
purchase housing however each scheme will have different income limits 
depending on the cost and location of the homes. In general, the income limit 
for an affordable dwelling is 85.5% of the market value of the property divided 
by 4. Available homes are advertised on https://affordablehomes.ie/buy/   
 
Q.54  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
Can the Chief Executive confirm whether details supplied, recently convicted rapist, is 
still employed by Dublin City Council details supplied?  Is this man on full salary, or on 
suspension? Also, what efforts have been made to remove the vile obnoxious tweets 
that came from this details supplied onto social media?  Can Dublin City Council make 
a statement that all efforts are being made to make sure that the public are safe and 
that Dublin City Council is making all efforts to disaffect as this conviction of this details 
supplied has undermined public confidence. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
It is not appropriate for the City Council to comment on any individual employment 
matter 
 
Q.55  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
            To ask the Chief Executive to issue a full comprehensive statement around the 
revaluation of properties under the control of the Peter McVerry Trust. This report to 
include were these properties part of the Dublin City Council Dublin Regional 
Homeless executive suite of emergency accommodation paid for by the State and the 
local authority and Dublin regional Homeless executive.  Can the CEO confirm whether 
he has any confidence whatsoever in this organisation, Peter Mc Verry trust, bearing 
in mind the lack of public trust that is now very much in evidence regarding this 
organisation and its financial governance  
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
All properties proposed for transfer from PMVT to DCC have been valued by DCC City 
Valuers office. Upon completion of the transfer these properties will be added to the 
DCC asset register at the DCC current valuation rate.  
The majority of these properties are unencumbered residential properties and will 
remain in use as social housing.  

An additional four multi-unit properties are currently under consideration by DCC for 
transfer. One of these properties was originally acquired for use as emergency 
accommodation the remaining three were purchased for use as social housing under 
the CAS (Capital Assistance Scheme).  
There is a robust monitoring of NGO spend by the DRHE and as part of its assurance 
process, the DRHE appointed an appropriate professional body to complete a high 
level review of the financial controls for a sample of services provided with funding in 
2023 and it has been agreed that in 2025 there will be a full of year 2024. This is with 
a view to ensuring compliance with the SLA, in a regulated environment, supported by 
organisational financial controls 
 
Q.56  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to give a progress report as to what initiatives have been 
taken to create a valentine’s quarter in and around the Whitefriars area of Dublin.  This 
is an international recognition brand given the amount of activity on Valentine's Day. It 
will be highly appropriate that this area of City Centre Dublin be developed along these 
lines. A motion was passed at the Southeast area regarding this matter, yet nothing 
has happened to assist the local community and the local businesses in this initiative.  
The area covers a wide stretch including George’s Street, Fade Street, York Street, St 
Stephens Green, Grafton Street, Camden St to name but a few 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The question of establishing a Valentine Quarter in and around the Whitefriar 
Street/Grafton Street/York Street general area was examined in some detail in 2016. 
At that time, the South East Area Office and City Architects initiated a number of 
meetings between the Whitefriars Street Church / Carmelite Community Centre and 
Fáilte Ireland to investigate the tourism potential of the church and its relics. Fáilte 
Ireland subsequently engaged a consultant to work with them in developing a number 
of proposals. 
While the relics of St. Valentine are the most famous in the church, at that time, the 
priests were anxious that other saints were not overshadowed by his relics and wish 
to exercise some control over what a new tourist attraction may convey. The 
Whitefriars Street Church already provides special services to celebrate the feast of 
St. Valentine. However, they were unclear as to the direction of development and a 
masterplan for the lands in their ownership. 
As the key stakeholder to initiate this project, the Carmelite Community would need to 
be consulted again about any new plans for a St. Valentine’s district and be favourable 
disposed to an implementation plan before engaging third parties.  It should also be 
noted that a number of the sites earmarked for intervention have since been developed 
which will impact the viability of the plan.  
The concept of Dublin as a City of Love / Romance was then discussed at the Arts and 
Culture Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) in November 2016. The SPC stated, “As 
this is more of a marketing exercise it was agreed to refer this motion to the Working 
Group that deal with tourism”  
Notwithstanding the above, if key local stakeholders were keen to revisit this issue, the 
South East Area Office would facilitate exploratory discussions 
 
Q.57  COUNCILLOR MANNIX FLYNN 
To ask the Chief Executive to issue a report as to what Dublin city Council intend to do 
about the proliferation of flags in and around the city centre that are the cause of 
concern for certain people.  Are Dublin city Council intending to remove these flags? 
Are these flags that are on are on local authority property poles in breach of any 
bylaws. This report to include how many complaints Dublin city Council has received 
to date regarding these flags and the contentious issue they present 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council has engaged with stakeholders and reviewed the factors and risks 
associated with the ongoing issue of flags on public lighting poles. Following this, the 
Council has concluded that removing such flags at this time would be 
counterproductive.  
This is not to say that no action is contemplated; instead, DCC will focus on taking a 
positive and proactive approach, working with local communities and other civic 
partners to promote a deeper understanding of the flag, its history, meaning and core 
message of inclusion, equality and respect for all.  
It should be noted that where flags or other items placed on public lighting poles are 
deemed a hazard or pose a risk to public safety, they will be removed in the normal 
course of Council operations.  
The data requested by the member has not been collated at this time. Dublin City 
Council receives an extremely high volume of correspondence from the public 
concerning a wide variety of issues, and great emphasis is placed on responding to 
these queries in a timely and effective manner 
 
Q.58  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive, to address severe disruption caused by traffic on Mount 
Pleasant Avenue Lower in Dublin 6 details supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY 
Response from ITS re request for right turn filter 
 
There is not sufficient time available to create an additional phase and split the Parnell 
Road and Grove Road movements and then redistribute time without adversely 
affecting the main line traffic and movements on Harold’s Cross Road and Clanbrassil 
Street. Given that it is the policy of DCC to prioritise public transport, it has been 
necessary to maintain the green time on those roads to the benefit of public transport 
services on this road. 
 
The Traffic Advisory Group (TAG) does not recommend the introduction of 
immediate traffic interventions on Mount Pleasant Avenue Lower. Based on the 
preliminary assessment of the measures raised including a cul-de-sac, a one-way 
system, and the installation of additional speed ramps it is found that these 
interventions are not warranted at this time. However, the Area Engineer will liaise with 
the Active Travel Team regarding any future proposals for the junction of Mount 
Pleasant Avenue Lower and Canal Road. A speed survey will also be arranged on 
Mount Pleasant Avenue Lower to assess existing traffic conditions. 
 
The introduction of a cul-de-sac is not recommended due to the following: 
 
• 
Traffic would be displaced onto surrounding streets, increasing congestion on 
adjacent routes. 
• 
Residents, service vehicles and deliveries would face longer and less direct 
access. 
• 
Emergency services would have fewer route options, which may delay 
response times. 
 
The introduction of a one-way-system is not recommended; one-way systems are 
typically considered in locations where significant congestion arises from two-way 
traffic. However, they are generally discouraged due to a number of associated 
drawbacks, including: 
 

• 
Increased vehicle speeds, as the absence of opposing traffic can lead to faster 
driving. 
• 
Potential delays for emergency services, whose access routes may be 
impacted. 
• 
Traffic displacement, where vehicles are redirected to adjacent streets, 
transferring the problem rather than solving it. 
• 
Limited relief during peak hours, as residents may avoid morning congestion 
only to experience higher traffic volumes and speeds during the evening rush. 
• 
Inconvenience for local residents, who may face longer or more circuitous 
routes. 
Speed ramps are not recommended the roads of Mount Pleasant Avenue Lower and 
Upper already has 9 speed ramps.  
 
Q.59  COUNCILLOR NOELLE BROWN 
To ask the Chief Executive, to assist with ongoing issues with the pedestrian crossing 
at the junction at Harold's Cross bridge. The crossing is consistently blocked by cars, 
particularly in the mornings, with cars blocking or driving through the crossing during 
the whole of the pedestrian light cycle 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The TAG Area Engineer will liaise with An Garda Síochána (AGS) to address the 
ongoing issue of vehicles blocking the pedestrian crossing at the junction at Harold’s 
Cross Bridge. In addition, the Council’s line marking crew will be scheduled to paint 
the markings in the at the pedestrian crossing and at the inbound and outbound 
approaches to it. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The TAG Area Engineer will liaise with An Garda Síochána (AGS) to address the 
ongoing issue of vehicles blocking the pedestrian crossing at the junction at Harold’s 
Cross Bridge. In addition, the Council’s line marking crew will be scheduled to paint 
the markings in the at the pedestrian crossing and at the inbound and outbound 
approaches to it. 
 
Q.60  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive can the details supplied be followed up on please. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The development on the Swords Rd adjacent to the Details supplied is a private 
redevelopment and is not planned for use as social housing. Therefor there will be no 
allocations from the DCC waiting lists.   
Hartfield Place on the Swords Road is an Oaklee Housing project currently under 
construction, the housing units here will be advertised on Choice Based Lettings on 
completion in early 2027. 
Dublin City Council does not operate a scheme to facilitate private homeowners to 
downsize into social housing.   
 
Q.61  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on details supplied 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on Band 3 of the Housing List with an application date of 
10/09/2025, the applicant’s main application is with South Dublin County Council and 
holds the following positions on the waiting list -  
 

Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
J 
1 
786 
K 
1 
943 
 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 
number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list. Dublin City Council are increasing the number of 
units that are being allocated through the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such 
vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. The applicant should be advised to 
keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being advertised that may be of interest to 
him and to ensure he makes an application for same. 
 
Q.62  COUNCILLOR DECLAN FLANAGAN 
To ask the Chief Executive can bins be installed at details supplied. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are 2 bins in the centre of the park and a third at the playground.  There are also 
street bins including a dog waste bin at the entrances to the park on details supplied, 
further street bins are located at the northern entrance and at the church less than 50m 
from the southern entrance details supplied. There are no proposals to install additional 
bins at this time.  With 8 bins within the park and at or near each entrance there should 
be no reason for waste to be dumped irresponsibly within the park. Staff based in the 
park service the bins within the park and pick litter on a daily basis and the park is 
usually beautifully presented and litter free.  The street bins are serviced by Waste 
Management Services.  Parks Services does not provide dedicated dog waste bins 
rather the maxim of any waste in any bin applies at his time.   
 
Q.63  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for the repair of the badly uplifted pathway at 
details supplied as soon as possible. Due to the pathway rising at this location a 
number of serious falls have taken place 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This defect on the footpath at details supplied will be added to our Works List. Repairs 
works will be scheduled when a crew is available in the area. 
Enq. Ref.11187578 
Q.64  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
            To ask the Chief Executive in relation to neighbourwood watch schemes what 
involvement does Dublin City Council have in relation to providing the neighbourhood 
watch signs; erecting the signs and other involvement by the local authority. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Transport Advisory Group do not install “An Garda Síochána Neighbourhood 
Watch” signage. This signage is not in the Traffic Signs Manual and as such cannot 
be recommended by the area engineer 
 
Q.65  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
To ask the Chief Executive if he will arrange for the full inspection of the trees at details 
supplied complaints are received on an annual basis about the trees being overgrown 
at this location with very little maintenance and pruning, the ESB carrying out their own 
works has also led to some obscure crowning of the trees. 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services have the details supplied area listed for full tree survey next year.  Any 
recommendations from this report will inform the Tree Care programme for the area 
26/27. 
 
Q.66  COUNCILLOR KEITH CONNOLLY 
            To ask the Chief Executive Dublin City Councils plans for applying for the Community 
Sports Investment Fund (formerly Sports Capital) in the Dublin Northwest area. To list 
the clubs involved and the prospective project 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Sport Grants are applied for on an annual basis. With regard to the Dublin Northwest 
area, Parks Services have secured capital sport grant funding for the all-weather pitch 
in Kildonan Park and drainage work carried out to Silloge Golf Course.  
 
Q.67  COUNCILLOR PA\TRICK KINSELLA 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure funding will be made available for the already 
approved signalised pedestrian crossing at the junction of Church Avenue and 
Rathmines Road Upper 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The junction of Church Avenue and Rathmines Road Upper is not included in the 
current Consultant Package for Pedestrian Crossings in Dublin City. However, the 
location will be considered for inclusion in the 2026/2027 Programme. The Councillor 
will be updated on any progress 
 
Q.68  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
To ask the Chief Executive to investigate Ovoca road and the possibility of traffic 
calming measures. People are using the road as a cut through at speed and it’s posing 
a danger to children at play and residents 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following a site assessment, additional traffic-calming measures on Ovoca Road are 
not recommended at this time. The road already benefits from multiple passive and 
physical traffic-calming features, including: 
 
• 
On-street parking on both sides, narrowing the carriageway 
 
• 
On-street bicycle parking at both ends of the road 
 
• 
Naturally reduced speeds due to the narrow road width 
 
• 
Two T-junctions located mid-road, which interrupt vehicle flow 
 
• 
A speed table at the Ovoca Road / Curzon Street junction 
 
• 
A speed ramp on Emorville Avenue, reducing vehicle speeds entering 
Ovoca Road 
 
• 
30km/h road marking roundels at both ends of the road. 
 
Driving above the legal speed limit is an enforcement matter for An Garda Síochána, 
and any concerns regarding speeding should be reported to the local Garda station. 
 

Q.69  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
To ask the Chief Executive for clarity on the traffic calming measures at Terenure park. 
Residents are concerned that spaces will be lost, noting the very tight parking for us in 
the area and volume of door-to-door drop-offs for teenagers being delivered straight to 
their school entrance.  It has become a very busy street twice a day and limiting space 
on the road will certainly add to the congestion during these times. A major issue for 
child safety is drivers taking the illegal left turn on to Terenure park as a rat run to skip 
the crossroads and recommended that this be considered as a more important 
measure for safety. Typically, the offending driver feels compelled to accelerate 
aggressively to get away with it or make the most of the manoeuvre 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The issue of drivers ignoring of both the No Left, No Right and the no-entry road signs 
at Terenure Road West / Terenure Park junction falls under the jurisdiction of An Garda 
Síochána. The junction has all necessary signage and road markings to clearly indicate 
the no-entry restriction.   
The Transport Advisory Group (TAG) area engineer will raise this matter with An Garda 
Síochána for enforcement for the upcoming monthly TAG meeting. 
In future instances, non-compliant vehicles or speeding issues should be reported 
directly to the Gardaí to facilitate timely enforcement.   
 
Q.70  COUNCILLOR PATRICK KINSELLA 
To ask the Chief Executive can we please erect ‘Slow Children at Play’ signs put up 
around Eaton Square, and can the bin inside the Square please be moved from the 
central play area to the main gate as this would allow the children play football 
etc…unimpeded 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following a site assessment, the Traffic Advisory Group (TAG) does not recommend 
the installation of additional signage in the area. The following signage is already in 
place and provides adequate warning: 
 
• 
“30 km/h Slow Zone” signage at the junction of Eaton Road and Terenure Road 
North 
 
• 
“Children Crossing” signage at the junction of Ashdale Road and Eaton Square 
 
• 
“School Ahead” signage on the south side of Eaton Square at the junction of 
Terenure Park and Eaton Road. 
 
Additional signage is not recommended, as an over-proliferation of signs can reduce 
overall effectiveness and lead to visual clutter. 
The Area Engineer will liaise with the lining and signing team to ensure that any road 
markings or signs requiring maintenance or renewal are addressed. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Parks Services will look at the location of this bin within the park to see if it requires 
relocating. 
 
Q.71  COUNCILLOR ANTHONY CONNAGHAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to arrange for an inspection of the footpaths at 
Cardiffsbridge Road between numbers 80 and 114 with a view to re-surfacing. There 
are a lot of elderly residents here and the footpaths need to be upgraded immediately. 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The footpath at 80 to 114 Cardiffsbridge Road will be inspected. Any defects deemed 
to require repairs will be added to our works list. Repair works will be scheduled when 
a crew is available in the area. 
 
Q.72  COUNCILLOR COLM O’ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide a summary of the main challenges currently 
delaying the taken-in-charge process for Rathborne and Royal Canal Park in 
Pelletstown, including the current status of key measures, particularly: 
 
A) Progress on the installation of a lollipop person/school crossing supervisor at 
Pelletstown Educate Together National School. 
B) Outstanding works affecting footpaths, roads, street lighting, and traffic 
management, including confirmation of whether the lights are fully under Council 
management. 
C) Status of the boathouse, has it been taken in charge? 
D) Any partial taken-in-charge opportunities or interim measures being implemented 
to improve safety and accessibility while the estates are not fully taken in charge. 
E) Confirmation that Dublin City Council is liaising with management companies and 
developers in the area to ensure roads and footpaths are gritted during winter months. 
F) Expected timelines for completion of outstanding works and full taken-in-charge, 
including any obstacles to meeting these timelines. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Over the last number of month notable progress has been made in addressing a 
number of legacy issues relevant to the taking-in-charge process for Rathborne and 
Royal Canal Park in Pelletstown. A cross-departmental group, focussed on 
progressing the taking in charge of identified assets, is being led by a single point of 
contact who, on behalf of Dublin City Council is actively engaging with both developers, 
Castlethorn and Ballymore. The engagement has been productive, with all parties 
keen to put in place the necessary arrangements that will facilitate the taking in charge 
process. This engagement however is still on-going, and it is anticipated that, in coming 
weeks, specific areas of action will be communicated to the Elected Members and the 
residents of Rathborne and Royal Canal Park.  
 
Q.73  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive to include the section of the South Circular Road between 
Rialto Village and the junction with the Chapelizod Bypass in the new 30km/h zones 
as part of the city-wide speed limit reforms, given the high residential density, heavy 
pedestrian activity, and frequent cyclist and public transport use, and the associated 
safety concerns with the current 50km/h limit? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council is currently undertaking a citywide review of all speed limits in 
accordance with the updated Speed Limit Guidelines 2025. These guidelines require 
that roads be assessed using a consistent, evidence-based approach, including the 
consideration of self-enforcing lower-speed environments. 
Every street and road above 30 kph will be assessed during this process. Once the 
review is complete and a draft proposal will be compiled, the recommendations will be 
brought before the Mobility & Public Realm SPC and the Area Committee Meetings for 
consideration.  

 
Q.74  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive has the council developed a critical incident plan for 
managing future protests directed at IPAS residents to ensure such protests are 
addressed before they become more permanent features, and if so, can this plan be 
shared, and if not, could the Council outline its intentions regarding the development 
of such a plan 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The remit for the accommodation of applicants seeking international protection lies 
with the Department of Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth (DCEDIY). 
The handling of anti-social behaviour and protests towards IPAS residents is the 
responsibility of An Garda Síochána, who ensure that any arising threats are properly 
managed 
 
Q.75  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive to investigate details supplied long outstanding invoices 
issued to DCC in respect of recycling services provided by Sunflower Recycling and, 
if and when confirmed as payable, to make relevant payment to this community project 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Response will issue directly to Councillor. 
 
Q.76  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
           To ask the Chief Executive to provide details of “Investment Earnings” included in 
miscellaneous services, additional income analysis in the annual budget, and to further 
comment as to the outcome versus budget of amount for 2025 (€4,000,000 v 
€2,000,000) and the amount budgeted for 2026 of €2,500,000, which does not reflect 
the revised outcome for 2025 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
During 2025, Dublin City Council had a significant level of cash on investment and this 
contributed to high investment earnings. As part of Budget 2026, a review was done 
on expected cash levels throughout the year and it’s expected that as we increased 
spend on Capital projects funded by levies and Dublin City Council income, it was 
deemed that €2.5m was prudent estimate of potential earning. This reflects an increase 
of 25% on the base Y2025 budget. Any additional income earned during 2026 will be 
incorporated into the revised Y2026 budget. 
 
 
Q.77  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive to confirm whether, or not, the service Sunflower Recycling 
were providing is still being provided in civic offices and other offices by another 
provider and, if so, how were Sunflower Recycling not invited to tender? If not, how is 
wastepaper and cardboard being disposed of? In addition, Sunflower were advised 
that the collection boxes they provided were being removed from DCC offices and they 
were not given an opportunity to remove them themselves. This disposal of Sunflower 
Recycling property has resulted in a substantial write off which DCC should 
compensate them for immediately, unless of course, Sunflower Recycling can resume 
the service to DCC 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Following the introduction of the Finance Department’s Procure To Pay system in 
January 2024, Waste Management Services were unable to find any records of a 
contract between Dublin City Council and Sunflower Recycling for the collection of 

paper and cardboard and were unable to approve of the payment of any further 
invoices to Sunflower Recycling for the collection of materials from Eblana House. As 
the collection of dry recyclables is included in the Council’s pre-existing contract for 
the Collection of Refuse from Dublin City Council Non-Domestic Properties (May 
2023), it was unnecessary to tender for a separate contract specifically for the 
collection of paper and cardboard.  
There are still a number of boxes in Eblana House awaiting collection by Sunflower as 
was requested when Sunflower were initially contacted regarding the situation. 
 
Q.78  COUNCILLOR NIAL RING 
To ask the Chief Executive to provide details of the contract for the cleaning and 
maintenance of the temporary toilet unit at Saint Stephen’s Green which, although 
owned by waste management, is being carried out by a private contractor? Can the 
Chief Executive also comment on why waste management are not in a position to clean 
and maintain the unit themselves 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Waste Management section do not clean, service or maintain any toilet facilities 
within the City Council and St. Stephens Green are no exception.  
The Stephens Green toilets were installed on a temporary basis during Covid and 
serviced, maintained and cleaned by a private contractor throughout this period. 
Although these toilets have now been purchased by Dublin City Council, they still 
require servicing, maintenance and security services.   This facility is currently 
contracted out on that basis with the appointed company One Plus Security providing 
all services. 
 
Q.79  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive why Context Studio’s report based on the co-design of 
consultation processes with Disabled Persons’ (Representative) Organisations, 
worked on by DPROs, and Councillors, remains unpublished and a date when it will 
be published 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Context Studio’s documents based on the co-design of consultation processes with 
Disabled Persons’ (Representative) Organisations, worked on by DPROs, and 
Councillors has informed and formed the basis for the organisation’s draft corporate 
implementation which is currently being developed.  
These documents are unpublished as the corporate implementation process of which 
this report forms the basis of is in development. This process requires significant cross 
functional work within the City Council Executive to provide ways to establish and 
embed essential processes and procedures to ensure that comprehensive guidelines 
are is in place for Council teams engaging in consultation with Disabled Persons’ 
(Representative) Organisations.  
This work is ongoing and is supported by Context Studios. Further engagement with 
DPRO’s will take place in advance of any publication of further documents.  
 
Q.80  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive to implement double yellow lines on the corner details 
supplied due to safety concerns during busy periods. 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The prohibitory road markings are already in place at the junction of details supplied 
in the form of a continuous white line at the existing traffic lights/pedestrian crossing.  
No additional road markings are recommended. Please note that placing cones during 
events is not within the remit of the Transport Advisory Group. 

Under The Road Traffic (Traffic & Parking) Regulations, Section 36 paragraph (2); a 
vehicle shall not be parked: 
 
( c ) within 5 metres of a road junction; 
( d ) on a section of roadway with less than 3 traffic lanes and where traffic sign number 
RRM 001 [continuous white line] has been provided; 
 
( h ) within 15 metres (on the approach side) or 5 metres (on the side other than the 
approach side) of a section of roadway where any of the following traffic signs have 
been provided— 
 
(i) traffic sign number RPC 001 [Pedestrian Crossing]; 
 
(ii) traffic sign number RPC 002 [Pedestrian Crossing Complex]; or 
 
(iii) traffic sign numbers RTS 00I, RTS 002, RTS 003 or RTS 004 [traffic lights]; 
 
( i ) on a footway, a grass margin or a median strip; 
 
Any instances of illegal parking should be reported to the Gardaí or Dublin Street 
Parking Services (Phone no. 01 602 2500; e-mail info@dsps.ie), for enforcement 
under the law. 
 
Q.81  COUNCILLOR KEVIN BREEN 
To ask the Chief Executive if the trees can be trimmed on details supplied 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
A small number of the trees in this road have been fully assessed recently and were 
found to be in an acceptable condition with no works required or recommended.  The 
trees are Fastigiate Hornbeam which were extensively planted in certain areas across 
the city where space was considered to be at a premium because these specimens 
are narrow and upright when young.  Unfortunately, they do suffer from what has been 
described as ‘middle-aged spread’.  Also, their dense twiggy upright crowns are 
impossible to prune conventionally.  A trial of pollarding these specimens at a small 
number of sample locations around the city including a nearby location in Clontarf has 
been arranged.  The response of these trees to this very aggressive pruning work is 
not certain at this time.  If successful, consideration will be given to rolling the practice 
out to other similarly planted areas on a phased and prioritised basis over the coming 
years.  In the meantime if there are any trees of particular concern further assessments 
can be arranged. 
 
Q.82  COUNCILLOR LESLEY BYRNE 
To ask the Chief Executive is there an average reply time for queries to Citizens’ Hub 
in the last year?  Is this broken down by Department? 
Do they have an oversight of the amount of queries that go unanswered? 
Could this data be provided please in a report on the effectiveness of Citizens’ Hub 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Citizen Hub manages a wide range of services, from routine service requests to more 
complex issues requiring input from several departments. As a result, response and 
closure times can vary depending on the nature of each case. 
The following statistics summarize all cases opened through the Citizen Hub portal 
during the year 2025. The data is organized under relevant themes and departmental 

sections. It excludes grant-related online processes and the Casual Trading process, 
as these involve multiple dependencies and internal deadlines. 
The table provides: 
• 
Number of cases in 2025 
• 
Number of cases still open 
• 
Average time taken to close cases per department (weighted by closed cases) 
• 
Total cases per section/department 
 
This information is intended to support performance analysis, identify areas with high 
case volumes or backlogs, and highlight processes requiring operational 
improvements. 
Department/Section 
Number of cases 
in 2025 
Cases status 
’open’ 
Average days to 
close 
Housing 
12464 
4099 
62.7 
Transportation 
12473 
3983 
29.7 
Planning 
215 
61 
21.4 
Parks 
3245 
1590 
17.4 
Other 
596 
8 
12.1 
Customer Service 
2514 
74 
10.7 
Environmental 
Pollution 
1903 
245 
6.3 
Waste 
41140 
1174 
5.2 
Total 
74550 
 
 
 
Note: “Other” refers to a grouping of processes such as Technical Support, Casual 
Trading License, and Ordering an Electoral Map. 
Q.83  COUNCILLOR COLM O ROURKE 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on the activation of a housing reference 
details supplied and what steps can be taken to expedite its activation. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The following documentation remains outstanding in respect of the above applicants 
housing file -  
 
- 
Employment Details Summary 2023 and 2024 
- 
Proof of address 
- 
Proof of local connection 
 
Upon receipt of same the application can be fully assessed.  
 
Q.84  COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 
Can the Chief Executive provide details on the following? 
  
a)     The number of litter fines issued per administrative area over the last 5 years.   
b)     The number of litter fines paid per administrative area over the last 5 years.   
  
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The number of fines issued and paid under Section 3 (Illegal Dumping) of the Litter 
Pollutions Acts 1997-2009 are as follows: 

 
Year Central 
Fines 
Issued 
Central 
Fines 
Paid 
North 
Central 
Fines 
Issued 
North 
Central 
Fines 
Paid 
Nort  
West  
Fines  
Issued 
North 
West 
Fines 
Paid 
South  
Central 
Fines  
Issued 
South 
Central 
Fines 
Paid 
South  
East 
Fines  
Issued 
South 
East 
Fines 
Paid 
2021 193 
 
93 
147 
94 
118 
76 
334 
143 
122 
75 
2022 197 
 
125 
181 
101 
23 
21 
240 
123 
165 
98 
2023 331 
 
188 
119 
63 
8 
5 
357 
159 
382 
249 
2024 91 
 
52 
19 
9 
7 
3 
169 
100 
108 
59 
2025 272 
97 
4 
4 
1 
1 
100 
33 
70 
13 
 
 
 
Q.85  COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 
Can the Chief Executive provide details on the following? 
  
a)      The number of dog dirt fines issued per administrative area over the last 5 years.   
b)     The number of dog dirt fines paid per administrative area over the last 5 years.   
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
 
The issuing of dog fines can be extremely problematic at times often requiring the 
assistance of An Garda Síochána in attendance and this is not always possible. 
Targeted dog fining days with a Garda presence on site for short periods have been 
organised in the past with very little return or gain for the effort.  
Consequently, the anti-dog fouling policy initiatives primarily involves rolling out 
preventative measure such as footpath stencilling, signage and other audio-visual 
measures the goal of which is to raise public awareness of the impact of dog fouling 
along with encouraging more compliant behaviour from the public. In addition, Waste 
Management have invested significantly in street washing vehicles across the city to 
counter this activity. 
The number of fines issued under Section 22 (Dog Fouling) of the Litter Pollutions Acts 
1997 – 2009 over the last 5 years are as follows: 
 
Year 
Central 
N. 
Central 
N. West 
S. 
Central 
S. East 
Total 
2021 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2022 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2023 
0 
4 
2 
0 
0 
6 
2024 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2025 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
 
A total of 2 fines were paid. 
 
Q.86  COUNCILLOR CIERAN PERRY 
           To ask the Chief Executive to confirm the number of house swaps between tenants in 
the last 5 years 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Please find below figures as requested in respect of completed inter-transfers –  

 
Year 
Inter Transfers completed 
2021 
16 
2022 
13 
2023 
5 
2024 
11 
2025 
18 
 
 
Q.87 
COUNCILLOR KARL STANLEY 
            To ask the Chief Executive to issue a report on the council’s plans to alleviate the 
drainage issues along the bicycle path along East Wall Road. Due to the camber of 
the road the new bicycle lane fills with water after heavy rainfall rendering it impassable 
on a bicycle 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The East Coast Trail Phase One Active Travel Scheme extends from Alfie Byrne Road 
at the East Point Business Park down to East Wall Road (for a portion) where it runs 
as far as St. Joseph’s school.  The Project was completed in the Summer of 2024 and 
there are no plans for further works within phase one.  
There has been some damage to the new Cycleway occasioned by the provision of 
services to the Apartments and the Moxy Hotel which the Developer is obliged to 
reinstate. Within the area damaged there is a drainage gully, the connection to which 
may have been damaged.  The Active Travel Programme Office has made 
arrangements to get the gully inspected and repaired as necessary 
 
Q.88  COUNCILLOR KARL STANLEY 
           To ask the Chief Executive to report on The Player’s Lounge in Fairview. This has been 
vacant and partly derelict since 2011. It is not on the derelict sites register. It was 
granted planning permission in 2021 but since then there has been no activity on site. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Derelict Sites have an active file on this property and continue to monitor the site.  The 
most recent inspection was 17th October and identified some overgrowth, paintwork 
and damage to the facade which is in need of attention.  We have written to the owners 
and requested they attend to these matters and will arrange to carry out a follow-up 
inspection. 
Previous engagement with the owners indicates that there are works ongoing to the 
interior and the works to the façade will be the last phase of works.   We will request 
an updated schedule/timeline for these proposed works and continue to monitor the 
site. 
 
Q.89  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
           To ask the Chief Executive in relation to footpaths at details supplied, if he can say 
when same will be reinstated as the condition of same if really poor, and in many 
instances, hazardous, due to the multiple occasions public utilities and City Council 
have dug up footpaths over the years. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
An Enquiry (ref. 11187546) has been created for the above request to have the 
footpaths repaired at details supplied. This estate will be considered when drafting the 
2026 annual works programme. 
 
 

Q.90  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
           To ask the Chief Executive in relation to the yellow box at details supplied, if he can 
arrange for the reinstatement of same as the yellow box has virtually disappeared and 
local residents are unable to exit from same 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The location will be inspected in the coming days. Any requirement for reinstatement 
will be carried out within 30 working day of the Council Meeting of the 1st, December 
2025. 
 
Q.91  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
            To ask the Chief Executive to address the housing concerns of my constituent as per 
details supplied and say what assistance he can provide and if he can advise my 
constituent on choices for her and her family. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The above applicant is on Band 2 of the Transfer List with an application date of 
26/08/2020 and holds the following positions on the waiting list -  
 
Area 
Bedsize 
Position 
B 
2 
107 
E 
2 
133 
H 
2 
102 
 
All properties to be let through Housing Allocations will be let in accordance with the 
Scheme of Lettings.  Dublin City Council allocates properties based on time on the list, 
it is not possible to indicate accurately the prospect of an offer for any applicant. The 
number of vacancies arising will be a determining factor in the length of time applicants 
could expect to be on the waiting list. Dublin City Council are increasing the number of 
units that are being allocated through the Choice Based Letting Scheme, such 
vacancies are advertised on the DCC website. The applicant should be advised to 
keep an eye on the Choice Based Lettings being advertised that may be of interest to 
her and to ensure she makes an application for same 
 
Q.92  COUNCILLOR DEIRDRE HENEY 
           To ask the Chief Executive to refer to response to my June North Central Area 
Committee question details supplied in which it is stated that the area of footpath in 
question is not in the Charge of the City Council. Please see below, correspondence 
between Iarnród Éireann and my constituent which clearly states that this area of 
footpath is the responsibility of the City Council as it is a public footpath (which 
traverses the railway bridge).  Can the Chief Executive re-visit the issue and confirm 
that he will arrange to have the necessary repairs carried out 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Environment and Transport Dept. in Dublin City Council maintain that the bridge in 
question is the responsibility of CIE. 
 
Q.93  COUNCILLOR SEAMUS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to review the policy of fining vehicles for parking with two 
wheels on the path in residential areas as forcing cars to park fully on the road is having 
a major impact on traffic on affected roads. 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Council is aware that residents of streets that are narrow have difficulties parking 
and have no option but to park on footpaths to avoid blocking the roadway. However, 
it is illegal to park on a footpath and if the Council receives complaints from road users 
that they cannot access the footpath, we are obliged to take action on these 
complaints.  
 
Q.94  COUNCILLOR SEAMUS MCGRATTAN 
           To ask the Chief Executive to address the ongoing issues with security and access in 
the Prospect Hill apartment complex 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The Housing Department will make contact with the management company and with 
Clúid Housing regarding these issues outlined and report back to Cllr McGrattan with 
an update 
 
Q.95  COUNCILLOR SEAMUS MCGRATTAN 
To ask the Chief Executive to ensure gullies on the New Cabra Road are cleared on a 
regular basis to prevent road flooding as seen in recent weeks. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY:  
The Environmental Protection Division of Dublin City Council has responsibility for 
operating and maintaining the surface water sewer network. Gullies on New Cabra 
Road are cleaned regularly as per our gully cleaning schedule. During Storm Claudia, 
some surface water ponding occurred on New Cabra Road, we are investigating these 
locations and aim to have any necessary repairs carried out in Q1 2026. If you have a 
further query or wish to make direct contact with team for this or a similar issue, please 
email cqsurfacewater@dublincity.ie and we will respond accordingly. 
 
Q.96  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive details supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Response will issue directly to Councillor Ralph 
 
Q.97  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
         To ask the Chief Executive details supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Response will issue directly to Councillor Ralph 
 
Q.98  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
          To ask the Chief Executive to fix the footpath at details supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The footpath in the question will be inspected, and any necessary repair will be 
arranged. (ref. 11187536) 
Q.99  COUNCILLOR GAYLE RALPH 
To ask the Chief Executive about tree and sign at details supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The nameplate for details supplied, located at the side of the details supplied, has been 
delivered to the North City Operations Depot, and its installation is scheduled by 7 
December 2025 by one of the Road Maintenance crews. 

This tree was included in the Tree Care Programme for the area ’25/26.  The appointed 
contractor has until August ‘26 to complete all the work included in this tender 
 
 
Q.100  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive can he provide an explanation as to why 2 cars are being 
targeted on details supplied by Enforcement when 99 per cent of residents park on the 
footpath and have done so for the last number of years. They understand that this is 
illegal but have no other option. What can be done to assist these residents? 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
On review of our records, we can find no evidence of targeted enforcement of two 
specific vehicles on details supplied. There have been several enforcements of 
different registered vehicles in the last six months.  
The Council is aware that residents of streets that are narrow have difficulties parking 
and have no option but to park on footpaths to avoid blocking the roadway. However, 
it is illegal to park on a footpath and if the Council receives complaints from road users 
that they cannot access the footpath, we are obliged to take action on these 
complaints.  
 
Q.101  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide a detailed account as to who owns 
the property at details supplied and what exactly is it being used for. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
This is not a DCC Housing Property. 
The property at details supplied is not being considered for the provision of emergency 
accommodation with the DRHE. 
Q.102  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive what the planning status of details supplied. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The most recent planning application for this property was in 1999 - this was a private 
domestic application. 
 
Q.103  COUNCILLOR JOHN STEPHENS 
To ask the Chief Executive can he please provide an explanation as to how approval 
for 10-20 % of Social Housing was subsequently altered to 100% without public 
consultation. details supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There is no requirement under planning legislation for any public consultation in 
respect of a change in tenure for any residential scheme. DCC Housing Department 
supports AHBs in the development and acquisition of social housing schemes on the 
basis of the local area housing waiting list numbers. Currently there are 5061 
households on the transfer and housing waiting lists in Area E 
 
Q.104  COUNCILLOR CAT O DRISCOLL 
          To ask the Chief Executive to outline the guidelines applicable to the use of Artificial 
Intelligence by Council departments and to consider restrictions on using AI to 
generate art. 
 
 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Dublin City Council established an GenAI lab in Dec 2024 to support the organisation 
in how we implement AI corporately. This was a co- investment with the ADAPT 
Research Ireland Centre in partnership with Trinity College Dublin and TU Dublin. This 
supports a proactive approach to exploring the use of AI technologies and in particular 
Generative AI (Gen AI) tools. 
To support the work of the Gen AI Lab, DCC has established a high-level AI 
Governance Group to oversee the responsible use of AI across departments focusing 
on four key aspects: governance, education and training, exploring proof of concepts 
and engaging with industry to better understand AI solutions through a pre-market 
consultation process. AI working and technical groups have also recently been formed 
with 
representatives 
from 
departments 
including 
Corporate 
Services 
and 
Transformation, HR, Digital Services, Data, Smart Cities, Information Systems and the 
Law department. 
We have engaged with staff directly through workshops to better understand any 
concerns or potential uses of AI to support staff in their day-to-day roles. Through the 
Gen AI Lab, we have co-designed guidelines for staff that are aligned with both sectoral 
and national guidelines for the use of AI in public sector which I have attached for 
reference. 
As part of the Academy of the Near Future, DCC’s Smart City Education Programme 
in partnership with Connect Research Centre in Trinity College Dublin, we have co-
designed an awareness building module for staff - Expl[AI]n AI. Over 400 staff have 
completed the module either through in person workshops or online through DCC’s e-
learning platform Totara and we hope to roll it out to a much wider audience next year. 
In the new year we will look to develop a formal AI policy and AI strategy for the 
organisation and have reviewed best practice guidance from other EU cities. We will 
also explore other training opportunities to increase AI awareness and better 
understand what AI solutions are available on the market and how this type of evolving 
technology can support council staff to continue to deliver high quality services across 
the city. 
With regards to current guidelines on using AI to generate art, many industries 
including designers are now using AI tools and technologies as part of their service or 
product delivery. 
Our staff guidance highlights the importance of referencing and citing where AI has 
been used to generate content and we would advise all staff to inform suppliers or 
potential suppliers to do the same. 
 
Q.105  COUNCILLOR CAT O DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive for an update on adaptive works for details supplied 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
According to the submitted Occupational Therapist Report, the width of the stairs at 
narrowest point is 730 mm and due to constricted space, it is not feasible to install a 
stair lift within the property. 
We have received a Housing Adaptation Grant for Older People Application Form and 
supporting documentation.  As part of this supporting documentation, we received a 
quote for the adaptation works at details supplied.  We have requested Architects full 
plans and specifications for the proposed extension, and also the Architect’s 
Declaration for the proposed extension.  Please ensure that the Architect has 
professional indemnity insurance cover.    
VAT of 13.5% can be claimed back from Revenue when the extension is completed. 
The occupants are entitled to a Grant, however, we require the architects plans and 
specifications for the proposed extension before a letter of approval can be forwarded. 
 
 

Q.106  COUNCILLOR CAT O DRISCOLL 
To ask the Chief Executive to prioritise the repair/renewal of the footpaths on 
Drumcliffe Road, Cabra, particularly around the green area which is an important 
amenity for the many older residents in the area. 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Drumcliffe Road will be considered for inclusion in 2026’s footpath works programme.  
 
Q.107  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
          To ask the Chief Executive for the number of sites on the vacant sites register and the 
total amount owed to the Council in vacant sites levies 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
There are currently 33 sites on Dublin City Councils Vacant Sites Register. Currently 
there are levies in the amount of €20,915,475 owing to Dublin City Council.  The 
Vacant Sites Unit raises demands for payment annually and reminders for payment 
are also issued.   
The Vacant Sites Levy has now been replaced with a new Residential Zoned Land Tax 
(RZLT) which was introduced in the Finance Act 2021. The administration of the 
RZLT is undertaken by the Revenue Commissioners. Any outstanding vacant sites 
levy charges will be registered as a charge on the land. 
 
Q.108  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
To ask the Chief Executive for the estimated number of: 
1. Residential parking permits issued on each permit parking street 
2. Parking spaces on each permit parking street 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
1. There are currently 22,240 permits issued for permit parking in Dublin City. Each 
scheme would be individual to each street and the amount of permits that would be 
issued would depend on how many properties are eligible for permits under the Parking 
Control Byelaws 2024. 
2. DCC currently cannot provide an accurate count of the paid and unpaid parking spaces 
in the Dublin City area. There would have been approximately 25,000-30,000 parking 
spaces in the city when last estimated, many years ago. 
 
Schemes like Active Travel, Dublin Bus Network Redesign, City Centre Transport 
Projects, Safe Routes to school, On Street Cycle Parking, Greening Strategy have 
meant that parking spaces have been removed over the last 5 years. Furthermore, 
Pay and Display schemes have been introduced in this timeframe. Parking 
Enforcement will be carrying out a survey of all paid parking spaces in the city in 2026. 
 
Q.109  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
           To ask the Chief Executive for an estimated start date and opening date for the Liffey 
Vale House and Gardens project 
 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
The design team is currently finalising the tender package. Updates will be made to 
the Area Committee in due course. 
 
Q.110  COUNCILLOR FELJIN JOSE 
          To ask the Chief Executive to provide an update on the Public Lighting Upgrade Project 
including estimated start date, progress so far, estimated finish date, planned works 
for 2026 and the strategy for choosing or prioritising luminaires for upgrade 
 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S REPLY: 
Works on site on the Public Lighting Upgrade Project commenced in May 2023 and to 
date around 8000 lights have been upgraded to LED street lights since that date.  
As part of this work around 4000 lights mounted on ESB Network poles were upgraded 
to LED streetlights along with another 4000 streetlights on DCC lighting columns with 
this work largely having been carried out in residential areas.  
In the city centre area around 130 high value heritage columns (plus around another 
400 high value heritage luminaire upgrades on lights adjacent to the 130 high value 
heritage columns) were installed to bring more uniformity and consistency to the street 
scape considerably improving the public realm. Areas where high value heritage 
columns were installed include the North and South quays such as Ushers Quay, 
Victoria Quay, Parkgate Street, Belvedere Road etc. Currently concrete columns 
around the city are being replaced and over 600 have been installed to date. Areas 
where concrete columns have been replaced include Belvedere Road, Infirmary Road, 
Greencastle Road etc.  
In 2026 the plan is to replace the remaining concrete columns along with upgrading 
another 4000 streetlights on ESB poles to LED streetlights. 
The Public Lighting Upgrade Project is being delivered by a series of call-off contracts 
under a Single Party Framework Agreement. The estimated finish date is 2031. 
The strategy has been to tackle the ‘low hanging fruit’ first and focus on those 
streetlights that have no structural and electrical issues. These lights are generally 
located in residential areas. Then, as the project has been progressing, the 
replacement of concrete columns was programmed in. These concrete columns are 
end of life with significant safety issues and, as a consequence, needed to be 
programmed in early in the project.  
The nature and variance of DCC lighting assets and infrastructure has meant that it 
hasn’t been possible to go in a wipe out an area at a time so the focus has been on 
asset type where the works required are largely similar, e.g. concrete columns are an 
asset type. 
