 
LONGFORD MUNICIPAL DISTRICT 
 
Please note meeting will be held in the Council Chamber, Aras an Chontae and via 
Microsoft Teams 
 
 
15 July 2026 
 
 
To:   Each Member of Longford Municipal District.  
 
 
Dear Member, 
 
You are requested to attend a Meeting of Longford Municipal District to be held in the Council 
Chamber, Aras an Chontae and via Microsoft Teams on Wednesday, 22 July 2026 at 4pm to 
transact business, as set out on the agenda hereunder. 
 
Yours sincerely, 
 
__________________________ 
Lorraine McKee 
Meetings Administrator 
 
AGENDA 
 
 
 
Prayer before meeting. 
 
Presentation – Backstage Youth Theatre 
 
 
1.   
Confirmation of Minutes: 
 
(i) 
Longford Municipal District Meeting held on 27 May 2026  – enclosed 

(ii) 
Longford Municipal District Committee Meeting held on 27 May 2026 – 
enclosed 
(iii) 
Longford Municipal District Committee Meeting held on 24 June 2026 – 
enclosed.  
(iv) 
Longford Municipal District Meeting held on 24 June 2026 – enclosed.  
 
 
2. 
Matters arising from Minutes. 
 
3. 
Declaration of Interest by Members 
4. 
Engineers Report – enclosed 
5.          Correspondence from Courts Services 
6.  
Notice of Motions 
 
Councillor Kevin Hussey 
(i) 
Permanent 24-Hour Taxi Rank 
That Longford County Council carries out a review of the current taxi rank 
arrangements on Ballymahon Street with a view to establishing a permanent 24-
hour taxi rank in one designated location, to improve road safety, accessibility and 
the efficient operation of taxi services within Longford Town. 
(ii) 
Raised Zebra Crossing, Park Road 
That Longford County Council assesses the existing zebra crossing on Park Road, 
opposite the former Steele’s premises, with a view to replacing it with a raised 
zebra crossing to improve pedestrian safety and assist with traffic calming in this 
increasingly busy area. 
(iii) 
Wave of Light 
That Longford County Council approves the lighting of the Council Offices in pink 
and blue on 15th October 2026, subject to the approval of the Corporate Policy 
Group (CPG), in support of the ‘Wave of Light’ ceremony taking place at the 
Memorial Garden, Great Water Street, Longford, to mark International Pregnancy 
and Infant Loss Remembrance Day and to remember all babies lost through 
miscarriage, stillbirth and neonatal death. 
Councillor Uruemu Adejinmi  
I call on the Minister for Public Expenditure, Infrastructure, Public Service Reform and 
Digitalisation and the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage to 
urgently increase the State subsidy available for local authority affordable housing 
schemes in light of escalating construction and development costs which are driving 
up house prices and reducing affordability for working individuals and families. 
The Council further calls on Government to provide additional capital funding to 
reduce the financial burden placed on Longford County Council through its equity 
contribution to affordable housing projects, ensuring that affordable homes remain 

genuinely affordable and that future housing developments are not jeopardised by 
funding shortfalls. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
