  
Minutes of Meeting of Longford County Council 
held in the Council Chamber and via Microsoft Teams on  
Wednesday, 11 March 2026 at 4pm 
__________________________________________________________________ 
PRESIDING:                                Councillor Garry Murtagh  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT:   
Councillors Niall Gannon, Peggy Nolan, Gerry Hagan, Padraig 
McNamara, Colin Dalton, Uruemu Adejinmi, Mick Cahill, Pat 
O’Toole, David Cassidy, Turlough McGovern, Mark Casey, 
Kevin Hussey, Martin Monaghan, Sean Mimnagh 
 
               
IN ATTENDANCE:                  
 Mr. Paddy Mahon, Chief Executive  
                                                      Mr. John Brannigan, Director of Services 
 Ms. Barbara Heslin, Director of Services  
 
 
 
 
 Ms. Samantha Healy, Director of Service 
                                                      Ms. Martina Needham, County Librarian 
                                                      Ms. Fema Flanagan, Financial Management Accountant 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Richard Smith, Senior Executive Officer 
                                                      Ms. Louise Connaughton, Clerical Officer  
 
 
 
 
 Ms. Louise Kiernan, Senior Planner 
                                                                                                             
 
 
 
                                  
 
 
 
 
  
APOLOGIES:  
                            Councillor Paul Ross 
                                                      Councillor Martin Skelly 
                                                      Councillor Seamus Butler 
                                                      Mr. John McKeon, Director of Finance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
MEETINGS 
ADMINISTRATOR:                     Ms. Lorraine McKee 
 
 
1. ADOPTION OF MINUTES  
 
On the proposal of Councillor Uruemu Adejinmi, seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole 
the minutes of the monthly meeting of Longford County Council held on 11 February 
2026, as circulated, were confirmed, and adopted.  

2. MATTERS ARISING FROM MINUTES  
None 
 
3. DECLARATION OF INTEREST BY MEMBERS  
None 
 
4. MANAGEMENT REPORT  
The Elected Members noted the management report.  
 
On the proposal of Councillor Mark Casey seconded by Councillor Turlough 
McGovern, it was agreed to write to Minister for Climate, Energy and the 
Environment and Minister for Transport, Darragh O’Brien, requesting the 
Government to alleviate carbon tax and reduce taxes on petrol, diesel and home 
heating oil.  
 
5. TO NOTE CE AND DELEGATION ORDERS 
Noted 
 
6. TO NOTE ADOPTED MINUTES OF CORPORATE POLICY GROUP MEETING HELD ON 
14 JANUARY 2026  
Noted 
 
7. TO NOTE ADOPTED MINUTES OF CORPORATE POLICY GROUP MEETING HELD ON 9 
APRIL 2025 
Noted 
 
8.  SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT  
 
(i) 
To note the Minutes of the Social Development Strategic Policy Committee 
Meeting held on 20 October 2025  
Noted 
 
(ii) 
Longford County Council Scheme of Priority for Affordable Dwelling 
Purchase Arrangements, Cúirt an Easpaig, Ballinalee Road, Co. Longford 
On the proposal of Councillor Pat O’Toole seconded by Councillor Padraig 
McNamara the amending of the wording in the legislation in Longford County 
Council Scheme of Priority for Affordable Dwelling Purchase Arrangements, 
Cúirt an Easpaig, Ballinalee Road, Longford, was approved.  
 
9. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  
 
(i) 
Cathaoirleach Awards 2026  
The Cathaoirleach Awards will take place on Wednesday, 10 June 2026.  
 
(ii) 
Annual Service Delivery Plan 2026  

On the proposal of Councillor Mick Cahill seconded by Councillor Uruemu Adejinmi 
the Annual Service Delivery Plan 2026 was approved.  
 
(iii) 
To note the Minutes of the Economic, Enterprise & Rural Development 
Strategic Policy Committee meeting held on 22 October 2025 
Noted  
  
(iv) 
Revised Terms of Reference for the County Tourism Committee  
On the proposal of Councillor Mark Casey seconded by Councillor Kevin Hussey, 
the revised Terms of Reference for the County Tourism Committee was 
approved.  
 
(v) 
Updated Memorandum of Understanding between Longford County Council 
and Longford County Tourism CLG.  
On the proposal of Councillor Pat O’Toole seconded by Councillor Padraig 
McNamara, the updated Memorandum of Understanding between Longford 
County Council and Longford County Tourism CLG was approved.  
 
(vi) 
Small Rate Payer Support Scheme 
On the proposal of Councillor Uruemu Adejinmi seconded by Councillor Peggy 
Nolan, the Small Rate Payer Support Scheme was approved. 
 
(vii) 
Business Incentive Scheme  
On the proposal of Uruemu Adejinmi seconded by Councillor Padraig McNamara, 
the Business Incentive Scheme was approved.  
 
(viii) 
Shop Front Enhancement Scheme 
On the proposal of Councillor Uruemu Adejinmi seconded by Councillor Turlough 
McGovern, the Shop Front Enhancement Scheme was approved.  
 
(ix) 
Dreamspace Update  
County Librarian, Martina Needham, gave a presentation to the Elected Members 
updating them on Dreamspace and answered questions raised by the Members.  
The presentation included the following: 
➢ Award winning Longford Microsoft Dreamspace Showcase 2026 
➢ School participation from 2023-2026 
➢ Funding  
➢ Other STEAM projects and initiatives 
 
The Members unanimously thanked Martina Needham, Danny Lynch, Christine Collins 
and all the team in IT for the work carried out on this event throughout the year and 
they are looking forward to the event this year.  
Dreamspace 2026 is taking place on Tuesday, 24 March 2026 in Edgeworthstown.  
 
 
10. PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT 
(i) 
To Note Planning Applications Received 

Noted. 
 
(ii) 
To note the Minutes of the Physical Development Strategic Policy Committee 
Meeting held on 21 October 2025  
Noted 
 
(iii) 
NPF Implementation Housing Growth Requirements – Correspondence from 
Ministers  
Director of Services Barbara Heslin spoke to the Members regarding 
correspondence received from Minister James Browne and Minister John 
Cummins under the Planning and Development Act (2000) (as amended) in 
July 2025.  All local authorities were requested to commence the process of 
revising and varying development plans as quickly as possible, to ensure that 
the new housing growth requirements are incorporated.  
 
In December 2025, the Council approved the Chief Executive report on the 
NPF Implementation: Housing Growth Requirements.  This report concluded 
that no variation to the County Development Plan was required as there was 
adequate zoned lands to meet the housing targets set by the Department.  
These targets had not changed from the current plan.  The Elected Members 
agreed that no variation to the County Development Plan was required and 
this was communicated to the OPR and Department. 
 
However, following the most recent correspondence, Longford County 
Council is now proposing to vary the County Development Plan by activating 
land that is currently zoned for strategic residential reserve.  The Forward 
Planning team have worked in the proposed changes to the text with a view 
to amending the strategic residential reserve objective.  Activating these 
lands will be subject to the principles of infrastructure led compact growth as 
well as environmental considerations that underpin the County Development 
Plan. 
 
The proposed amendments will go to Public Consultation on the Friday, 20 
March for 4 weeks. Following public consultation, submissions will be 
considered, and amendments made accordingly. The variation will go to the 
CPG for consideration and recommendation before consideration and 
approval at a full Council meeting.  A report will also be prepared and 
published on the Council’s website. 
 
(iv) 
Notice of Motions  
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor Turlough 
McGovern seconded by Councillor Mark Casey 
Following on from the recent Road Safety Authority (RSA) Ireland review 
regarding the regulation of tractor (Category W) driving, considering the 

introduction of a mandatory, formal driving test and training programme for 
learner permit holders.  
I call on Longford County Council to write to the Minister seeking a training 
facility to be located in a central location like Granard Mart in County Longford. 
To support young people with proper training and instruction to improve road 
safety, as the current rules allow 16-year-olds to operate large tractors with 
only a learner permit. This is absolutely necessary to continue supporting the 
farming industry as a whole.  
 
Response: 
Action 146 in Ireland’s Government Road Safety 2021-2030 states that the 
Road Safety Authority (RSA) consider the introduction of a mandatory training 
programme and a driving test for new category W only learner permit 
applicants.  
Longford County Council has reached out to the RSA. The RSA has confirmed 
that it is currently evaluating the curriculum and education provided to learner 
drivers. While there is presently no requirement for a Category W test 
applicant to complete Essential Driver Training (EDT), the RSA has indicated 
that this may be considered in the future.  
The RSA facilitate Tractor training at all test centres and conducts tractor tests 
at alternative locations outside the test centres at the customer’s request. The 
RSA does not provide driver training directly, it trains and oversees RSA 
approved driving instructors who deliver this training nationwide.  
Longford County Council will write to the Minister for Transport, Darragh 
O’Brien, Minister of State with responsibility for Road Safety, Séan Canney, and 
Minister of State with responsibility for Rural Transport, Jerry Buttimer.  
The Council will request that consideration be given to locating a tractor 
training facility in Granard, Co. Longford if the RSA introduces a mandatory 
training programme as part of Phase 2 Action Plan of the Government’s Road 
Safety Strategy which runs from 2025 to 2027.  
Information regarding steps to becoming a work vehicle of tractor driver is 
available on the RSA website.  
A number of private operators and farming organisations provide tractor 
training courses.   
 
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor Turlough 
McGovern seconded by Councillor Uruemu Adejinmi  
I call on Longford County Council to make a presentation on their 
Environmental Enforcement Performance to-date. With farmers livelihoods 
and health under ever increasing pressure from external forces such as 
Mercosur and internal issues such as Derogation/Nitrates, consideration, 
compassion and support must be provided to farmers at this time.  
 
Response:  

Longford County Council (LCC) recognises the significant pressures currently 
facing the farming community and remains committed to understanding its 
environmental responsibilities in a fair, courteous, and professional manner, 
in line with the Council’s Customer Services Charter.  
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has developed the National 
Agricultural Inspection Programme (NAIP) to help maintain and improve 
natural water quality in Ireland by ensuring a consistent approach to the 
enforcement of the Good Agricultural Practice for Protection of Waters 
(including S.I 588 of 2025).  
It is important to note that GAP inspections by local authorities form a core 
element of the regulatory enforcement framework required to demonstrate 
compliance with Ireland’s obligations under the EU Nitrates Directive, and to 
support the retention of the nitrates derogation.  
The Water Action Plan 2024 (River Basin Management Plan) sets a national 
target of 4,500 inspections per annum, which is delivered through NAIP on a 
risk-based basis.  
For 2025, the EPA instructed Longford County Council to undertake initial (first 
time) GAP inspections on a minimum of 77 farms in its functional area between 
1 January 2025 and 31 December 2025. Longford County Council conducted 
78.  
For 2026, the EPA has instructed Longford County Council to: 
• Undertake initial (first time) GAP inspections on a minimum of 77 farms 
in its functional area between 1 January 2026 and 31 December 2026.  
• Compile inspection reports and record findings for all initial and follow-
up GAP inspections, and report results to the EPA.  
• Retain a copy of all farm inspection reports on file and report all results 
to the EPA in the format specified.  
• Follow up on issues or non-compliance identified during inspections.  
• Cross report where appropriate to the Department of Agriculture, 
Food, and the Marine.  
When undertaking inspections on farms, the EPA expects Longford County 
Council to: 
• Fully enforce the requirements of the GAP Regulations.  
• Implement dissuasive sanctions and/or prosecutions as may be 
appropriate.  
• Use the EPA approved ‘Farm Inspection Form’ provided by the EPA or 
an electronic equivalent.  
• The inspection shall be undertaken having full regard to the following 
priorities: 
➢ National Enforcement Priorities (NEPs) for Agriculture 
➢ NAIP Guidance and Training Handbook  

➢ Farm and Landscape measures for Agriculture (FLAG) MAP and 
associated waterbodies list 
➢ Pollution Impact Potential (PIP-N & PIP-P) Maps 
All NAIP inspection are notified in writing, a minimum of 48 hours’ notice, and 
flexibility applied where circumstances allow. Where remedial works are 
required, reasonableness and regard to individual circumstances are applied 
in all cases.  
Local Irish Farming Association (IFA) representatives were consulted in relation 
to the inspection process and notification arrangements.  
Inspections are carried out on a risk-based assessment only, focusing on areas 
where agriculture has been deemed by the EPA as the ‘significant pressure’, 
and in areas affecting ‘high status water bodies’. 
Longford County Council’s inspection programme is also supported by a range 
of complementary initiatives, including sheep worrying campaigns, the 
development and promotion of GAP guidance material, engaging with local 
Teagasc representatives for improved cooperation, attendance at the 
Longford Agricultural Show, and the delivery of Knowledge Transfer (KT) Talks.  
These KT Talks are established presentations by the Environment Section of 
Longford County Council on farming legislation, good practice, water quality, 
and on the inspection process. To date, over 100 local farmers have attended 
sessions in Dromard, Granard, Bunlahy, Ardagh and Kilcogy.  
The Environment Section continue to be available to meet with farming 
groups. 
 
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor Mick Cahill 
seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole 
I call on Longford County Council to provide an update on the current status of 
progress on the N4 Mullingar to Roosky project covering, consultant’s, 
community, landowner engagement and environmental constraints, and also 
how the recent allocation of six million euro supports the project.  
Response: 
The N4 Mullingar to Longford (Roosky) Scheme is currently progressing well 
through Phase 3 (Design and Environmental Evaluation) of the TII Project 
Management Guidelines.  
The Scheme has recently received an allocation for 2026 of €6m. This €6m 
funding will primarily be utilised to continue to fund consultant’s fees, ground 
investigation works, topographical works and environmental surveys along the 
extent of the N4 corridor.  

Public Liaison Officers that are appointed specifically to the scheme are 
continuing to liaise with the respective landowners in relation to the ongoing 
investigation and survey works. Environmental surveys are ongoing to identify 
any environmental constraints on the site to ensure mitigation measures are 
in place prior to completion of the Phase 3 process.  
As the Scheme progresses through Phase 3 and the design becomes fixed, 
further community engagement shall take place to inform the general public 
of the latest design iteration for the Scheme. The general public is welcome to 
contact the Project Team if they have any specific queries in relation to the 
Scheme. Contact details for the Project Team can be found on the project 
website.   
Cathaoirleach Garry Murtagh asked that the TII be invited to provide a progress 
report on the project at a future Council Meeting.  This was agreed by the 
Members. 
 
11. FINANCE, INNOVATION AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(i) 
To note the Minutes of the Governance Strategic Policy Committee Meeting 
held on 21 October 2025  
Noted 
 
(ii) 
Members County Wide Fund 2025-2029  
Financial Management Accountant, Fema Flanagan provided an update to 
the Members on the Members County Wide Fund 2025-2029 and answered 
questions raised by the Members.  
Applications are open from 1 March 2026 and will close on 31 March 2026. 
The application forms are available on the Elected Members Extranet, and 
each application is required to be sponsored by an Elected Member. 
Applications will be reviewed at the April Corporate Policy Group meeting.  
 
(iii) 
Capital Budget 2026-2028  
Financial Management Accountant, Fema Flanagan made a detailed 
presentation to the Members on the Capital Budget 2026-2028 and answered 
questions raised by the Members.  
The presentation included the following: 
➢ 3 Year Investment Programme 2026-2028  
➢ Budgeted Capital Expenditure 2026-2028  
➢ Overall Expenditure Acceleration  
➢ Sources of Funding  
On the proposal of Councillor Mick Cahill seconded by Councillor Peggy 
Nolan, the Capital Budget 2026-2028 was approved.  
 

12. GENERAL  
Notice of Motions 
 
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor David Cassidy and 
seconded by Councillor Kevin Hussey 
I call upon Longford County Council to write to the Minister for Children, Disability & 
Equality, Norma Foley TD and Minister of State Emer Higgins TD to strongly advocate 
for an emergency payment to be made to disabled people to alleviate the shortfall 
from cuts to disability funding in Budget 2026, as a mechanism to bridge the gap 
until an annual Cost of Disability payment (which the government has committed to 
implement) in 2027 is put in place to address the extra expenses faced by disabled 
people.  
 
Response: 
It was agreed that Longford County Council would write to the Minister for Children, 
Disability & Equality, Norma Foley TD and Minister of State Emer Higgins TD and the 
Notice of Motion will be circulated to all Local Authorities.  
 
 
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor Garry Murtagh 
seconded by Councillor Gerry Hagan                                                         
I call on Longford County Council to write to the Minister of State with responsibility 
for the Department of Health with special responsibility for older people Kieran 
O’Donnell in relation to insufficient support through the HSE for Home Help. People 
are stressed out and in direr straights with the lack of support on arriving home from 
hospital. People are being discharged from hospital with the necessary paperwork 
completed for Health Care Package to arrive home to find inadequate supports 
available.  
Local Health nurses and HSE staff are at breaking point. The reality is the private 
agencies in rural Ireland that are meant to support HSE/Home Help staff are not 
available. Private agencies in rural Ireland are not fit for purpose, minimum wage 
and lack of sufficient subsidies to cover the ever-rising costs of fuel is leaving it 
impossible for these agencies to retain staff. The HSE must do more in terms of 
active recruitment to increase Home Help staff, a core support to secure the future 
of home care for the elderly.  
Furthermore, serious consideration must be given to a fully funded care and repair 
scheme to support elderly people that have insufficient supports and resources, to 
have the simplest tasks completed in the home like installing grab rails, changing a 
light bulb, mowing the lawn, to you and me simple everyday tasks yet difficult tasks 
for the more vulnerable in our society. We in Longford County Council would fully 
support a Care & Repair pilot scheme rolled out in Longford.  
 
Response: 

Longford County Council agreed to write to the Minister of State with responsibility 
for the Department of Health with special responsibility for older people Kieran 
O’Donnell in this regard. 
 
13. CORRESPONDENCE  
 
(I) 
Correspondence from Sligo County Council 
Noted 
(II) 
Correspondence from Clare County Council 
Noted 
(III) 
Motion passed at meeting of Wicklow County Council  
Noted 
(IV) 
Motion from Wexford County Council 
Noted 
(V) 
Correspondence from Galway County Council  
Noted  
(VI) 
Correspondence from Sorca Clarke TD 
Noted  
(VII) 
Motion from Wexford County Council  
Noted 
(VIII) Correspondence from Minister Robert Troy  
Noted 
(IX) 
NPF Implementation Housing Growth Requirements – Correspondence from 
Ministers  
Noted 
(X) 
Correspondence from HSE  
Noted 
(XI) 
Correspondence from LWETB 
Noted 
(XII) 
Correspondence from Leitrim County Council  
Noted 
 
14. TRAINING FOR APPROVAL  
On the proposal of Councillor Mick Cahill seconded by Councillor Gerry Hagan, the 
training circulated was approved.  
 
15. VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
The Elected Members unanimously paid tribute to Joan McKeon, mother of Director 
of Finance John McKeon, on her recent passing. The Elected Members extended 
their condolences to the family and friends of the deceased RIP.  
 
16. DATE AND TIME OF NEXT MEETING  
The next meeting of Longford County Council will take place on Wednesday, 8 April 
2026 at 4pm in the Council Chamber. 

 
Confirmed and adopted at Meeting of Longford County Council held on 8 April 2026. 
 
 
