  
Minutes of Meeting of Longford County Council 
held in the Council Chamber and via Microsoft Teams on  
Wednesday, 13 May 2026 at 4pm 
__________________________________________________________________ 
PRESIDING:                                Councillor Garry Murtagh  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT:   
Councillors Seamus Butler, Paul Ross, Niall Gannon, Gerry 
Hagan, Padraig McNamara, Colin Dalton, Uruemu Adejinmi, 
Pat O’Toole, David Cassidy, Turlough McGovern, Kevin Hussey, 
Martin Monaghan, Sean Mimnagh and Martin Skelly  
 
               
IN ATTENDANCE:                  
 Mr. Paddy Mahon, Chief Executive  
                                                      Mr. John Brannigan, Director of Services 
                                                      Mr. John McKeon, Director of Finance 
 Ms. Barbara Heslin, Director of Services  
 
 
 
 
 Ms. Samantha Healy, Director of Services 
 Mr. David Barden, Administrative Officer  
 Mr. Ciaran Murphy, Senior Executive Officer  
 Ms. Fema Flanagan, Financial Management Accountant  
 Ms. Aoife Kavanagh, Project Accountant 
 
 
                           Ms. Louise Connaughton, Clerical Officer  
 
                                                                                                    
 
 
 
                                  
 
 
 
 
  
APOLOGIES:  
                            Councillor Mick Cahill  
 
 Councillor Peggy Nolan 
 Councillor Mark Casey 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
MEETINGS 
ADMINISTRATOR:                     Ms. Lorraine McKee 
 
 
 
 
 
1. ADOPTION OF MINUTES  
 

On the proposal of Councillor Turlough McGovern seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole 
the minutes of the monthly meeting of Longford County Council held on 8 April 2026, 
as circulated, were confirmed, and adopted.  
On the proposal of Councillor Turlough McGovern, seconded by Councillor Paul Ross 
the minutes of the committee meeting of Longford County Council held on 8 April 
2026, as circulated, were confirmed and adopted. 
2. MATTERS ARISING FROM MINUTES  
None 
 
3. DECLARATION OF INTEREST BY MEMBERS  
None 
 
4. MANAGEMENT REPORT  
Councillor Paul Ross requested that Longford County Council write to Transport for 
Ireland seeking greater flexibility for Local Link services to allow passengers to be 
dropped off at their homes where the bus route passes their residence, rather than 
only at designated bus stops. 
 
Councillor Seamus Butler raised concerns regarding the shortage of car parking 
spaces at the Council Offices. Chief Executive Paddy Mahon advised that this matter 
would be investigated. 
 
 
5. TO NOTE CE AND DELEGATION ORDERS 
Noted 
 
6. TO NOTE ADOPTED MINUTES OF CORPORATE POLICY GROUP MEETING HELD ON 
11 MARCH 2026  
Noted 
 
7. PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT 
(i) 
To note planning applications received 
Noted  
 
(ii) 
Draft Review of Development Contribution Scheme 2023-2027  
Director of Services Barbara Heslin made a presentation to the Members on 
the review of the Development Contribution Scheme.  
She outlined the following: 
➢ A review of the current Development Contribution Scheme has been 
completed. 
➢ The purpose of the review and the updated document is to provide clarity for 
developers and stakeholders. 

➢ While there is no difference from the adopted scheme or contributions, the 
document clarifies the difference between exemptions and reductions and 
the process being introduced by Longford County Council. 
➢ New procedures are being introduced which will require developers to apply 
for both exemptions from and reductions during the planning process and in 
advance of the commencement of the project. 
➢ The review provides for the development of a Supplementary Development 
Contribution Scheme. 
➢ The review clarifies that reductions and exemptions do not apply to Special 
Development Contributions or Supplementary Development Contribution 
Schemes. 
➢  
➢ While the new documents reflect the Planning & Development Act 2000 (as 
amended), they will be updated as soon as the relevant sections of the 
Planning and Development Act are enacted. 
➢ The updated documents will be made available on the Council’s website. 
➢ Both the Physical Development and Social Development SPCs considered the 
documentation and recommended them for consideration and adoption by 
the Council. 
 
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Turlough 
McGovern the Review of the Updated Development Contribution Scheme 2023-
2027 was approved.  
 
(iii) 
Draft Part V Procedures and Section 97 Procedures  
Director of Service Barbara Heslin provided an update to the Members on the 
Part V Procedures and Section 97 Procedures and Application Form.  
The update included the following: 
➢ The focus of Longford County Council will be on mixed tenure developments 
providing a mix of private, social and affordable housing.  This will be 
reflected in the new Housing Strategy being developed by the Council. 
➢ The new procedures formalise Longford County Council’s approach to Part V 
and was jointly prepared by the Planning and Housing sections. 
➢ Longford County Council’s preferred approach is the delivery of social 
housing on site to promote social integration.   
➢ The new documents provide clarity for developers and other stakeholders 
and ensure fairness, transparency, consistency and openness in decision 
making.   
➢ The new procedures require the applicant/developer to consult and engage 
with the Housing and Planning sections throughout the process.   
➢ An outline of the information required at each stage in the process is outlined 
in the new procedures. 
➢ A legally binding Part V agreement must be concluded before 
commencement of the development. 
➢ Where exemptions apply under Section 97, applicants must formally apply 
for a Section 97 Certificate prior to applying for planning permission and 

submit a Statutory Declaration as outlined in the Section 97 Explanatory 
Memorandum. 
➢ While the new documents reflect the Planning & Development Act 2000 (as 
amended), they will be updated as soon as the Part 7 Chapter 2 of the 
Planning and Development Act is enacted. 
➢ The updated procedures will be made available on the Council’s website. 
➢ Both the Physical Development and Social Development SPCs considered the 
documentation and recommended them for consideration and adoption by 
the Council. 
 
On the proposal of Councillor Pat O’Toole seconded by Councillor Paul Ross the 
New Part V Procedures and Section 97 Procedures were approved. 
 
(iv) 
Update on Supplementary Development Contribution Scheme 
Director of Service Barbara Heslin provided an update to the Members on the 
Supplementary Development Contribution Scheme.   
The update included the following: 
 
➢ The Supplementary Development Contribution Scheme relates to the 
development of a strategically important distributor road in 
Abbeycartron to activate and unlock residential, commercial and 
industrial lands in the area. 
➢ All relevant sections in Longford County Council have been involved in 
the development of the scheme. 
➢ Developers who benefit from the provision of this strategic 
infrastructure will be conditioned through the planning process to pay 
a Supplementary Development Contribution under the scheme. 
➢ Funding has been received from the Department of Transport which 
will assist in completion of a traffic count study. 
➢ Longford County Council Housing Department has engaged with the 
Housing Activation Office regarding a possible application under Call 2 
for funding towards the project.  Work has already commenced on 
collating the application for funding. 
➢ The Council must demonstrate how it will provide matched funding 
from the project, hence the need for this scheme. 
➢ A draft scheme has been prepared reflecting the provisions of the 
Planning and Development Act 2024. 
➢ The provision of this strategic infrastructure will be dependent on the 
funding available from Government and the successful 
implementation of the Supplementary Development Contribution 
Scheme. 
➢ Both the Physical Development and Social Development SPCs have 
been informed about the development of the scheme. 
 
The members welcomed the proposed approach to the delivery of the distributor road and 
the development of the Supplementary Development Contribution Scheme. 

Chief Executive Paddy Mahon thanked Barbara and her team for their work involved in the 
formulation of the Supplementary Contributory Scheme.  
 
8.  FINANCE, INNOVATION, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND EMERGENCY SERVICES 
(i) 
County Wide Fund Applications 2026  
Noted 
 
(ii) 
To approve the raising of a loan of €3,450,000 Housing Loan applications, as 
authorised by the Housing Acts 
On the proposal of Councillor Seamus Butler seconded by Councillor Pat 
O’Toole, the raising of a loan of €3,450,000 from the Housing Finance agency 
to finance Housing Loan applications, as authorised by the Housing Acts was 
approved.  
 
(iii) 
Consideration of Annual Financial Statement for Year ended 31 December 
2025 
Director of Services John McKeon made a detailed presentation to the 
Elected Members on the Annual Financial Statement for Year ended 31 
December 2025.  
The presentation included the following:  
➢ Revenue Account Outturn – Last 5 Years  
➢ Income, Expenditure & Reserves Tracking 2021-2025 (Before 
Transfers) 
➢ Financial Standing at end of 2025  
➢ Expenditure V Budget 2025 by Programme Group  
➢ Income V Budget 2025 by Programme Group  
➢ Income Collection  
➢ Analysis of Expenditure 
➢ Analysis of Expenditure – Decrease of €2.5m YOY  
➢ Analysis of Income from Grants & Subsidies  
➢ Analysis of Income from Goods & Subsidies  
➢ Over/Under Expenditure 2025  
➢ 2025 Key Financial Takeaways for Longford County Council  
➢ Financial Performances over last decade – Expenditure  
➢ Financial Performances over last decade – Income  
➢ Financial Performances over last decade – Balance Sheet  
➢ 1. The Longford Model  
➢ 2. The Longford Strategy  
➢ 3. The Longford Future Fund (in progress) 
 
The members noted the presentation.  
 
(iv) 
Consideration of Approval of Additional Expenditure under S103(7) of the 
Local Government Act 2001 
On the proposal of Councillor Gerry Hagan seconded by Councillor Kevin 

Hussey the additional expenditure under S103(7) of the Local Government 
Act 2001 was approved.  
 
9. SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT  
(i) 
Section 183 – 49 Teffia Park 
On the proposal of Councillor Seamus Butler seconded by Councillor Gerry 
Hagan, Section 183 - 49 Teffia Park was approved.  
 
(ii) 
LECP Implementation Plan 2024/25 
Administrative Officer David Barden made a presentation to the Elected 
Members on the Local Economic and Community Plan 2023-2029 and the 
Implementation Plan Progress Update 2024/2025.  
The presentation included the following:  
➢ What is the LECP? 
➢ The Vision  
➢ 6 High Level Goals  
➢ Implementation Plan  
➢ Structure of the Advisory Steering Group 
➢ Progress Update  
➢ 2026-2027 Implementation Plan  
➢ 2028-2029 Implementation Plan  
➢ Recommendation  
 
On the proposal of Councillor Seamus Butler seconded by Councillor Sean 
Mimnagh, the LECP Implementation Plan Review 2024/25 and LECP 
Implementation Plan 2026/27 was approved.  
 
(iii) 
Approval to the appointment of Mr. Brendan Flanagan, nominee of 
Longford County Tourism Committee as a member of Longford Local 
Community Development Committee (LCDC) 
On the proposal of Councillor Gerry Hagan seconded by Councillor Seamus 
Butler, Mr. Brendan Flanagan was appointed as a Member of Longford Local 
Community Development Committee.  
 
(iv) 
Community Grant Support Scheme Intercultural Applications 2026  
On the proposal of Councillor Niall Gannon seconded by Councillor Kevin 
Hussey, the community grant support scheme intercultural applications 2026 
were approved.  
 
(v) 
Notice of Motions 
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor Kevin Hussey 
and seconded by Councillor Martin Monaghan 
I call on Longford County Council to examine the feasibility of introducing a 
tenant-led improvement scheme for social housing, whereby tenants may 
undertake approved upgrades to windows and doors at their own expense, 
subject to prior agreement with the local authority and recoup the cost 
through an agreed rent offset over a defined period.  

 
Response: 
There is currently no national policy or statutory framework that supports a 
tenant led improvement scheme for local authority owned housing, whereby 
tenants would fund works and recoup costs through a rent offset. 
 
National housing policy places the legal responsibility for the maintenance and 
upgrade of local authority dwellings with the housing authority as owner and 
landlord to ensure that tenants have a safe and healthy environment to live in. 
 
Longford County Council Housing Department is currently progressing a 
Housing Stock – Quality and Asset Improvement Programme (currently called 
the Planned Maintenance programme) which will target the replacement of 
windows and doors.  The programme is being developed for roll out on a 
county wide basis and will support a more proactive, planned approach to 
maintenance.  It will also ensure that works are prioritised and delivered in a 
fair, and equitable manner across the housing stock. 
 
 
10. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
(i) 
Date of AGM of the Council  
On the proposal of Councillor Kevin Hussey seconded by Councillor Turlough 
McGovern the AGM of the Council will take place on Friday, 19 June 2026 at 
4pm.  
 
(ii) 
Notice of Motions  
 
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor Sean Mimnagh 
and Peggy Nolan and seconded by Councillor Seamus Butler 
(i) 
We call on Longford County Council to write to the relevant Ministers, 
Fáilte Ireland, and the City and County Management Association to 
implement an extension scheme to retain the Just Transition Tourism 
Activators, who continue to support over 80 projects and their County 
Tourism Officers, for a further period of 3-5 years to ensure the 
sustainable development of tourism and the delivery of long-term 
economic benefits to transitioning communities.  
 
Response:  
Longford County Council agreed to write in this regard.  
 
(ii) 
We further call on Longford County Council to write to all local 
authorities within the Just Transition Territory, and nationally, to 
support this motion in recognition of the critical importance of 
continuity in delivering a successful Just Transition.  

Response:  
Longford County Council agreed to write in this regard.  
 
11. GENERAL  
Notice of Motions 
 
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor Gerry Hagan and 
seconded by Councillor Martin Monaghan  
I call on Longford County Council to make contact with the Minister for Justice to call 
for standardisation of Garda Vetting. Currently volunteers in all sporting 
organisations are required to get Garda vetted for each sporting body they are 
involved in.  
 
Response:  
Longford County Council agreed to write to the Minister for Justice Jim O’Callaghan 
in this regard.  
 
12. CORRESPONDENCE  
 
(I) 
Resolution – Carlow County Council 
Noted 
 
(II) 
Resolution – Roscommon County Council  
Noted 
 
13. TRAINING FOR APPROVAL  
On the proposal of Councillor Gerry Hagan seconded by Councillor Kevin Hussey, the 
training circulated was approved.  
 
14. DATE AND TIME OF NEXT MEETING  
The next meeting of Longford County Council will take place on Wednesday, 10 June 
2026 at 3.30pm in the Council Chamber.  
 
 
Confirmed and adopted at Meeting of Longford County Council held on 10 June 2026. 
 
