  
Minutes of Meeting of Longford County Council 
held in the Council Chamber and via Microsoft Teams on  
Wednesday, 10 June 2026 at 3:30pm 
__________________________________________________________________ 
PRESIDING:                                Councillor Garry Murtagh  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT:   
Councillors Seamus Butler, Paul Ross, Niall Gannon, Gerry 
Hagan, Padraig McNamara, Colin Dalton, Uruemu Adejinmi, 
Pat O’Toole, David Cassidy, Turlough McGovern, Kevin Hussey, 
Martin Monaghan, Sean Mimnagh, Peggy Nolan, Mark Casey 
and Martin Skelly  
 
               
IN ATTENDANCE:                  
 Mr. Paddy Mahon, Chief Executive  
                                                      Mr. John Brannigan, Director of Services 
                                                      Mr. John McKeon, Director of Finance 
 Ms. Barbara Heslin, Director of Services  
 
 
 
 
 Ms. Samantha Healy, Director of Services 
 Ms. Grainne Harte, Senior Executive Engineer 
 Mr. Peter Brady, Senior Executive Engineer 
 Mr. David Coppiner, Senior Executive Engineer  
 Ms. Claire Reehill, Administrative Officer  
 Mr. Gary Brady, Climate Action Officer 
 Mr. Con Diffley, Senior Executive Engineer 
 Mr. David Tubridy, Senior Engineer 
 Ms. Martina McGrath, Senior Executive Officer  
Ms. Louise Kiernan, Senior Planner 
 
 
                           Ms. Louise Connaughton, Clerical Officer  
                                                             
 
 
 
 
                                                       
 
 
 
  
APOLOGIES:  
                            Councillor Mick Cahill  
 
 
 
MEETINGS 
ADMINISTRATOR:                     Ms. Lorraine McKee 
 
 
 
 

Presentation of the N4 
Shane Gill, Westmeath National Roads Office and John Holmes, Roughan & O’Donovan 
AECOM made a presentation to the Members on the N4 Mullingar to Longford (Roosky) 
Phase 3.   
The presentation included the following: 
➢ Project Overview 
➢ Project Location  
➢ Need for the Scheme  
➢ Need for the Scheme – Policy Context  
➢ Need for the Scheme – Safety  
➢ Project Progression  
➢ Design Development – Phase 3 Preliminary Design  
• Cross Section  
• Junction Strategy  
• Active Travel  
• Complementary Measures  
➢ Next Steps 
 
They answered questions raised by the Elected Members.  These included: 
• Design of road 
• Timeline for construction and completion 
• Ballinalee Road underpass and risk of anti social behaviour 
• Inclusion of Active Travel and any impact on delivery timelines 
• Future of existing N4 
• Budget and funding for the scheme 
 
The Elected Members thanked Shane and John for their detailed presentation and for 
attending the meeting.   In conclusion. they emphasised the importance of the delivery of 
this strategic infrastructure for the region and for the economic development of County 
Longford. 
 
1. ADOPTION OF MINUTES  
 
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole the 
minutes of the special meeting of Longford County Council held on 5 May 2026, as 
circulated, were confirmed, and adopted.  
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross, seconded by Councillor Kevin Hussey the 
minutes of the monthly meeting of Longford County Council held on 13 May 2026, as 
circulated, were confirmed and adopted. 
2. MATTERS ARISING FROM MINUTES  
None 
 
3. DECLARATION OF INTEREST BY MEMBERS  
None 

 
4. MANAGEMENT REPORT  
Noted 
 
5. TO NOTE CE AND DELEGATION ORDERS 
Noted 
 
6. TO NOTE ADOPTED MINUTES OF CORPORATE POLICY GROUP MEETING HELD ON 8 
APRIL 2026  
Noted 
 
7. TO NOTE ADOPTED MINUTES OF CORPORATE POLICY GROUP MEETING HELD ON 
14 APRIL 2026  
Noted  
 
8. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  
(i) 
To note the minutes of the Economic, Enterprise and Rural Development 
SPC meeting held on 18 February 2026 
Noted  
 
(ii) 
Annual Report Statement on Internal Controls and Governance Statement 
On the proposal of Councillor Gerry Hagan seconded by Councillor Pat 
O’Toole the Annual Report Statement on Internal Controls and Governance 
Statement was approved.  
  
(iii) 
Notice of Motion 
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor Mark Casey 
seconded by Councillor Turlough McGovern 
I call on Longford County Council not to administer any paperwork in relation 
to the Vacant Above the Shop Grant. 
 
Response:  
In response to the Notice of Motion, it should be noted that the Vacant Above 
the Shop Grant is a national scheme introduced by the Department of Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage under the Government's Housing for All 
strategy and the Town Centre First Policy. Local authorities are required to 
administer the scheme in accordance with the terms, conditions and 
operational guidelines issued by the Department. 
The primary objective of the scheme is to bring long-term vacant and 
underutilised properties back into residential use, increase housing supply, 
support town centre regeneration, and encourage sustainable development 
by making better use of existing building stock. The scheme specifically seeks 
to reactivate vacant space above commercial premises, helping to increase 
residential occupancy within town centres and support the vitality and viability 
of main streets. . Importantly, the scheme is designed to support residential 

use above active commercial premises and does not seek to replace the 
commercial function of town centres. The retention of commercial activity at 
ground-floor level is a fundamental aspect of the scheme and helps ensure that 
our town centres remain vibrant places for business, employment and 
community activity.  
Longford County Council's role is to assess and administer applications in 
accordance with the Department's guidelines and eligibility criteria. Where an 
application meets the requirements of the scheme, the Council does not have 
the statutory discretion to refuse participation in the administration of the 
grant. However, the Council does have a responsibility to carefully assess and 
evaluate each individual proposal to ensure that the proposed development is 
consistent with relevant planning considerations, local development 
objectives, regeneration strategies and the broader objectives of the Council 
for the sustainable development of our towns and villages. Applicants may also 
avail of grant support for professional expertise, Expert Advise Grant, to assist 
in preparing proposals that comply with planning requirements, building 
regulations and the policy objectives of Longford County Council. 
To date, the Council has received three applications under the scheme. Each 
application will be assessed carefully on its own merits and progressed in 
accordance with the national scheme criteria. It will also ensure that the 
delivery of additional residential accommodation complements the continued 
commercial vitality and functionality of our town centres while aligning with 
the Council's adopted policies and objectives for town centre regeneration, 
housing delivery and sustainable development. 
 
There was a counter proposal proposed by Councillor Seamus Butler 
seconded by Councillor Paul Ross against this motion requesting Longford 
County Council not to administer any paperwork in relation to the Vacant 
Above the Shop Grant.  
 
A roll call vote was taken from the members present on the motion proposed 
by Councillor Mark Casey and seconded by Councillor Turlough McGovern. 
 
Results of vote as follows: 
Yes  
  
2 votes 
No  
 
14 votes 
Abstain  
1 vote 
Based on a majority vote of fourteen votes against this Notice of Motion, 
Longford County Council will not be supporting this motion.  
 
 
 
 

The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor Paul Ross 
seconded by Councillor Peggy Nolan 
I call on Longford County Council to offer an invitation to the British Embassy 
to invite King Charles to visit County Longford on his upcoming state visit to 
Ireland to explore our culture and heritage links to the United Kingdom 
 
There was a counter proposal proposed by Councillor Mark Casey seconded 
by Councillor David Cassidy against this motion requesting Longford County 
Council to write to the British Embassy inviting King Charles to visit County 
Longford on his upcoming state visit to Ireland to explore our culture and 
heritage links to the United Kingdom.  
 
A roll call vote was taken from the members present on the motion proposed 
by Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Peggy Nolan. 
 
Results of vote as follows: 
Yes  
  
7 votes 
No  
 
6 votes 
Abstain  
4 vote 
Based on a majority vote of seven votes in favour of this Notice of Motion, 
Longford County Council will write to the British Embassy to invite King 
Charles to visit County Longford on his upcoming state visit to Ireland.  
 
 
9. PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT 
(i) 
To note planning applications received 
Noted  
 
(ii) 
Climate Action Plan Progress Report 2025  
Noted  
 
(iii) 
N55 Pavement Scheme – Westmeath / Longford Section 85 Agreement  
Director of Services Barbara Heslin informed the members that Westmeath are 
the lead authority for the contract which is currently at tender stage. The single 
contract will cover the two separate pavement works meaning that there will 
be one works period and one period of disruption.  Longford County Council 
will supervise the works carried out in Longford.  The works are projected to 
commence in mid to late July and will last approximately 7 weeks.  Road 
closures will be required, and diversions will be put in place.  
 
Senior Executive Engineer, Con Diffley addressed questions raised by the 
Elected Members. Barbara Heslin informed the members that the Ballymahon 
MD members will be kept up to date on the road closures, works schedule and 
progress on the project.  
 

On the proposal of Councillor Pat O’Toole seconded by Councillor Gerry 
Hagan the N55 Pavement Scheme – Westmeath / Longford Section 85 
Agreement was approved.  
 
(iv) 
CE Report on Submissions Received – Proposed Variation no. 1 of the 
Longford County Development Plan 2021-2027  
Senior Planner Louise Kiernan made a presentation to the Members on the CE 
Report on Submissions Received – Proposed Variation no.1 of the Longford 
County Development Plan 2021-2027. The purpose of the variation is to 
activate lands currently zoned Strategic Residential Reserve.  The variation 
went out to public consultation on 20 March 2026.  By the deadline of 17 April 
2026, 13 submissions/observations were received.  The Chief Executive Report 
provides an outline of each of the submissions, a response to the issues raised 
and a recommendation from the Chief Executive. 
 
Louise answered questions raised by the Elected Members. During the 
discussion, the Members emphasised the need for more private and 
affordable housing to be delivered in the county.  They said that Longford has 
the highest percentage of social housing per capita in the country.  They also 
highlighted concerns over housing density requirements.  
 
The presentation included the following:  
➢ Background and reason for proposed variation  
➢ Proposed Variation – LCDP 2021-2027 
➢ Public Consultation  
➢ CE Report and Associated Documents 
➢ OPR Submissions  
➢ Chief Executive Response  
➢ Other Submissions  
➢ Current Action  
 
Director of Services, Barbara Heslin thanked the team in Forward Planning for 
their work in bring the variation to the Members. 
 
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Seamus 
Butler it was agreed to make the proposed variation, including final AA 
determination and SEA determination.  
 
(v) 
Environment Section Enforcement Policy  
Councillor Turlough McGovern as Chair of the Physical Development SPC, 
introduced the policy at the meeting. He thanked the team in Environment 
for all their work in developing the policy which provides guidance and clarity 
for stakeholders and Longford County Council employees. It will ensure that 
enforcement action is carried out in a consistent, transparent, and 
proportionate manner.  
 

On the proposal of Councillor Turlough McGovern seconded by Councillor 
Mark Casey the Environment Section Enforcement Policy was approved. 
 
(vi) 
To note the minutes of the Physical Development SPC meeting held on 16 
February 2026  
Noted 
 
10.  FINANCE, INNOVATION, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND EMERGENCY SERVICES 
(i) 
To note the Minutes of the Governance SPC meeting held on 18 February 
2026 
Noted  
 
11. SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT  
(i) 
Section 183 – Disposal of Lands, Higginstown, Granard, Co. Longford 
On the proposal of Councillor Padraig McNamara seconded by Councillor 
Kevin Hussey, Section 183 – Disposal of Lands, Higginstown, Granard was 
approved.  
 
(ii) 
To note the minutes of the Social Development SPC meeting held on 16 
February 2026  
Noted  
 
(iii) 
Notice of Motions 
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor Kevin Hussey 
and seconded by Councillor Martin Monaghan 
I call on Longford County Council to review its Differential Rent Scheme, 
including the absence of a maximum rent cap and the 22.5% assessment rate, 
and prepares a comparative report against other local authorities with options 
for introducing a fair maximum weekly rent cap and/or reducing the 
percentage rate applied to assessable income. 
  
Response: 
Longford County Council operates a Differential Rent Scheme adopted in 
November 2023 which is aligned with legal requirements and departmental 
circulars. 
Rents are calculated based on a proportion of assessable household income 
which reflects a household’s ability to pay. 
This provides an income-based rent model that supports both affordability 
for tenants and operational sustainability for Longford County Council. 
The current scheme applies an assessment rate of 22.5%, with no maximum 
weekly rent cap, and includes standard provisions in respect of income 
assessment and disregards e.g. child benefit 

There is variation across County Councils in relation to assessment rates, rent 
caps and scheme structures, with Longford positioned towards the upper end 
of the national range in terms of assessment rate and without a rent cap. 
It is considered appropriate that the matter be referred to the Social 
Development Strategic Policy Committee for further examination 
 
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor Uruemu 
Adejinmi and seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole 
I call on Longford County Council to write to the Department of Social 
Protection and the Department of Housing seeking an urgent review and 
upward revision of Rent Supplement and Housing Assistance Payment (HAP) 
limits to ensure they reflect current rental market prices across County 
Longford. 
This Council recognises that while rent assessments for Local Authority housing 
tenants have been revised in response to rising housing costs, many low-
income individuals and families dependent on private rental accommodation 
continue to face significant hardship due to housing support limits that no 
longer reflect market realities. 
The growing disparity between actual rents and available housing supports is 
placing vulnerable households at increased risk of housing insecurity and 
homelessness. Housing supports must be responsive to current economic 
conditions and provide fair and realistic assistance to those most in need. 
Access to safe, secure, and affordable housing is fundamental to the wellbeing 
and stability of individuals, families, and communities across County Longford. 
Response: 
This Council recognises that while rent assessments for Local Authority housing 
tenants have been revised in response to rising housing costs, many low-
income individuals and family’s dependent on private rental accommodation 
continue to face significant hardship due to housing support limits that no 
longer reflect market realities. 
The growing disparity between actual rents and available housing supports is 
placing vulnerable households at increased risk of housing insecurity and 
homelessness. Housing supports must be responsive to current economic 
conditions and provide fair and realistic assistance to those most in need. 
Access to safe, secure, and affordable housing is fundamental to the wellbeing 
and stability of individuals, families, and communities across County Longford. 
Longford County Council will write to the Department of Social Protection and 
the Department of Housing seeking an urgent review and upward revision of 
Rent Supplement and Housing Assistance Payment (HAP) limits to reflect 
current rental market prices across County Longford. 

12. GENERAL  
Notice of Motions 
 
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor Mark Casey and 
seconded by Councillor Turlough McGovern 
I call on Longford County Council to call on the Government to abolish the Universal 
Social Charge in the interest of supporting working families.  
 
Response:  
Longford County Council agreed to write to the Minister for Finance regarding this 
Notice of Motion.  
 
13. CORRESPONDENCE  
 
(I) 
Correspondence from Minister Canney  
Noted 
 
(II) 
Correspondence from Clare County Council  
Noted 
 
(III) 
Correspondence from RSA  
Noted 
 
(IV) 
Correspondence from Waterford County Council  
Noted 
 
(V) 
Correspondence from Failte Ireland  
Noted 
 
(VI) 
Correspondence from Minister Burke 
Noted  
 
(VII) 
Correspondence from Galway County Council  
Noted  
 
14. TRAINING FOR APPROVAL  
On the proposal of Councillor Uruemu Adejinmi seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole 
the training circulated was approved.  
 
15. DATE AND TIME OF NEXT MEETING  
The next meeting of Longford County Council will take place on Friday 19 June 2026 
at 4pm in the Council Chamber.  
 

Confirmed and adopted at Meeting of Longford County Council held on 8 July 2026. 
 
