  
Minutes of Meeting of Longford County Council 
held in the Council Chamber and via Microsoft Teams on  
Wednesday, 11 February 2026 at 4pm 
__________________________________________________________________ 
PRESIDING:                                Councillor Garry Murtagh  
 
MEMBERS PRESENT:   
Councillors Paul Ross, Niall Gannon, Peggy Nolan, Gerry Hagan, 
Padraig McNamara, Martin Skelly, Colin Dalton, Seamus 
Butler, Uruemu Adejinmi, Mick Cahill, Pat O’Toole, David 
Cassidy, Turlough McGovern, Mark Casey, Kevin Hussey, 
Martin Monaghan.  
 
               
IN ATTENDANCE:                  
 Mr. Paddy Mahon, Chief Executive  
                                                      Mr. John Brannigan, Director of Services 
 Ms. Barbara Heslin, Director of Services  
 
 
 
 
 Mr. John McKeon, Director of Finance 
 
 
 
 
 Ms. Samantha Healy, Director of Service 
                                                      Ms. Mary Gouldsbury, Senior Executive Officer  
                                                      Ms. Breege Cronin, Senior Staff Officer  
                                                      Ms. Edel Hackett, Clerical Officer 
                                                      Mr. Mark Noble, Outdoor Recreation Officer  
                                                      Ms. Sarah Mulligan, Sports Partnership Co-ordinator 
                                                      Ms. Louise Connaughton, Clerical Officer  
                                                                                                             
 
 
 
                                  
 
 
 
 
  
APOLOGIES:  
                            Councillor Sean Mimnagh 
                                                      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
MEETINGS 
ADMINISTRATOR:                     Ms. Lorraine McKee 
 
On the proposal of Councillor Uruemu Adejinmi seconded by Councillor Peggy Nolan, it was 
agreed to suspend standing orders for fifteen minutes in light of recent events in Longford 
town.  
 

The Cathaoirleach and the Elected Members expressed their deep concerns regarding the 
criminal activities in their county town.  
 
On the proposal of Councillor Peggy Nolan seconded by Councillor Niall Gannon, it was 
agreed that Longford County Council would write to the Minister for Justice, Home Affairs 
and Migration, Jim O’Callaghan and to the Garda Commissioner, Justin Kelly, inviting them 
to a meeting with the Elected Members of Longford County Council.  
 
1. ADOPTION OF MINUTES  
 
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross, seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole the 
minutes of the monthly meeting of Longford County Council held on 14 January 2026, 
as circulated, were confirmed, and adopted.  
2. MATTERS ARISING FROM MINUTES  
None 
 
 
3. DECLARATION OF INTEREST BY MEMBERS  
None 
 
4. MANAGEMENT REPORT  
The Elected Members noted the management report.  
 
5. TO NOTE CE AND DELEGATION ORDERS 
Noted 
 
6. TO NOTE ADOPTED MINUTES OF CORPORATE POLICY GROUP MEETING HELD ON 3 
DECEMBER 2025 
Noted 
 
7.  SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT  
 
(i) 
Section 183 – 55 College Park, Longford 
On the proposal of Councillor Uruemu Adejinmi seconded by Councillor Pat 
O’Toole Section 183 – 55 College Park, Longford was approved.  
 
(ii) 
Longford County Outdoor Recreation Plan 
On the proposal of Councillor Uruemu Adejinmi seconded by Councillor Pat 
O’Toole, Longford County Outdoor Recreation Plan 2025-2030 was approved.  
 
(iii) 
Cúirt an Easpaig  
Director of Services, Samantha Healy gave a detailed presentation to the 
Elected Members updating them on the Affordable Housing Scheme and 
answered any questions raised.  
The presentation included the following:  
➢ Affordable Housing – Cúirt an Easpaig – Site Plan  

➢ Affordable Housing Update  
➢ Affordable Housing – Next Steps  
➢ Affordable Housing – Pricing  
➢ Steps to your Affordable Home  
➢ Affordable Housing – Contact 
 
The Members unanimously welcomed the launch of the Affordable Housing 
Scheme in Longford. Director of Services Samantha Healy thanked her team 
for getting the project off the ground. Samantha confirmed that the 
estimated delivery time for the affordable housing scheme was Q2 2027.  
 
(iv) 
Notice of Motions  
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor Pat O’Toole and 
seconded by Councillor Uruemu Adejinmi  
I call on Longford County Council to write to the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage to increase the income thresholds for social 
housing applicants and for applicants for the Housing Assistance Payments 
scheme.  
 
Response:  
Longford County Council agreed to write to the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage in this regard.  
 
 
8. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  
 
(i) 
Appointment of Councillor Uruemu Adejinmi to the Governance SPC for Year  
3-5  
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Uruemu Adejinmi was appointed to the Governance SPC for Year 3-5.  
 
(ii) 
Appointment of Councillor Mick Cahill to the Physical Development SPC for 
Year 3-5  
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Mick Cahill was appointed to the Physical Development SPC for Year 3-
5.  
 
(iii) 
Appointment of Chairpersons, Year 3 to Strategic Policy Committee 2024-2029  
Social Development SPC – Padraig McNamara  
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Padraig McNamara was appointed Chairperson of the Social 
Development SPC for Year 3.  
 
Physical Development SPC – Turlough McGovern  
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Turlough McGovern was appointed Chairperson of the Physical 
Development SPC for Year 3.  

 
Governance SPC – Uruemu Adejinmi  
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Uruemu Adejinmi was appointed Chairperson of the Governance SPC 
for Year 3.  
 
Economic, Enterprise & Rural Development SPC – Mark Casey  
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Mark Casey was appointed Chairperson of the Economic, Enterprise & 
Rural Development SPC for Year 3.  
 
 
(iv) 
Appointment of Councillor Gerry Hagan to the Social Development SPC for Year 
4-5  
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Gerry Hagan was appointed to the Social Development SPC for Year 4-
5.  
 
(v) 
Appointment of Councillor Sean Mimnagh to the Governance SPC for Year 4-5 
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Sean Mimnagh was appointed to the Governance SPC for Year 4-5.  
 
(vi) 
Appointment of Chairpersons, Year 4 to Strategic Policy Committee 2024-2029  
Social Development SPC – Gerry Hagan 
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Gerry Hagan was appointed Chairperson of the Social Development 
SPC for Year 4.  
 
Physical Development SPC – Peggy Nolan 
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Peggy Nolan was appointed Chairperson of the Physical Development 
SPC for Year 4.  
 
Governance SPC – Sean Mimnagh  
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Sean Mimnagh was appointed Chairperson of the Governance SPC for 
Year 4.  
 
Economic, Enterprise & Rural Development SPC – Mark Casey  
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Mark Casey was appointed Chairperson of the Economic, Enterprise & 
Rural Development SPC for Year 4.  
 
(vii) 
Appointment of Councillor Niall Gannon to the Social Development SPC for 
Year 5  
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Niall Gannon was appointed to the Social Development SPC for Year 5.  

(viii) 
Appointment of Councillor Padraig McNamara to the Economic, Enterprise & 
Rural Development SPC for Year 5  
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Padraig McNamara was appointed to the Economic, Enterprise & Rural 
Development SPC for Year 5.  
 
(ix) 
Appointment of Chairpersons, Year 5 to Strategic Policy Committee 2024-2029  
Social Development SPC – Niall Gannon  
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Niall Gannon was appointed Chairperson of the Social Development 
SPC for Year 5.  
Physical Development SPC – Turlough McGovern  
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Turlough McGovern was appointed Chairperson of the Physical 
Development SPC for Year 5.  
 
Governance SPC – David Cassidy  
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor David Cassidy was appointed Chairperson of the Governance SPC for 
Year 5.  
 
Economic, Enterprise & Rural Development SPC – Mark Casey  
On the proposal of Councillor Paul Ross seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole, 
Councillor Mark Casey was appointed Chairperson of the Economic, Enterprise & 
Rural Development SPC for Year 5.  
 
The Cathaoirleach declared the nominees and Chairpersons be appointed to the 
Strategic Policy Committees. 
 
9. PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT 
(i) 
To Note Planning Applications Received 
Noted. 
 
(ii) 
Notice of Motions  
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor Uruemu 
Adejinmi seconded by Councillor Kevin Hussey  
I call on Longford County Council to undertake a full review of all road line 
markings across County Longford and to progress a programme of refresh 
works where required, ensuring that all local and regional roads meet a safe, 
visible and consistent standard.  
Faded or missing markings significantly increase the risk of accidents, 
particularly in low-light and adverse weather conditions. Clear and consistent 
line markings are a proven, low-cost road-safety measure, especially for young 
and newly licensed drivers who rely on strong visual guidance.  
Enhanced markings will also improve safety for pedestrians, cyclists and the 
wider community, in line with national road-safety objectives.  

 
Response:  
It is acknowledged that Road Markings are essential for Traffic Safety providing 
clear visual instructions and warnings to drivers.  
 
Municipal District employees arrange for road line markings to be maintained 
and replaced as and when resources and funding allows. Road markings are 
also replaced and refreshed on roads improved or maintained through the 
Annual Roads Programme. However, this task is just one of many tasks 
assigned to Municipal District Staff and priority is given to the funded 
programmes of work in the Annual Roads Programme.  
 
However, if Members become aware of road line markings that is a significant 
issue or danger, they can bring them to the attention of the relevant Municipal 
District team who will endeavour to resolve them as soon as resources allow.  
 
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor Seamus Butler 
seconded by Councillor Uruemu Adejinmi 
I call on Longford County Council to only install high speed public EV Chargers 
in the future and consider same in any private planning applications intended 
for public use.  
 
Response:  
Longford County Council’s Climate Action section has reviewed the Notice of 
Motion and agrees that public chargers should not be installed with a rating 
below 7kW. They have also provided the following advice.  
 
Chargers in the 7-22kW range are suitable for longer stays or overnight use. 
They work well for locations such as guesthouses, hotels, workplaces, 
neighbourhood charging hubs, and train stations.  
 
Chargers in the 50-70kW range are appropriate for destination charging, 
where drivers want to top up their vehicle during short activities such as 
shopping.  
 
Chargers of 100kW and above are best suited for enroute charging along 
national roads. 
However, it is important to note the following:  
1. Many electric vehicles cannot accept very high charging rates (e.g., 100kW 
or more) and will only charge at the maximum rate their onboard system 
allows, regardless of the charger’s rating.  
2. Higher powered chargers are significantly more expensive to install, 
operate, and maintain.  

3. Chargers of 50kW and above require three phase electricity, and the 
necessary power supply is not available in all locations.  
In summary, EV chargers should be sized according to the expected usage 
pattern. A one size fits all requirement would not be appropriate.  
Longford County Council Development Management section has taken note of 
this request and will align EV planning conditions to state that EV chargers 
installed on sites are high speed EV Chargers going forward.  
 
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor David Cassidy 
seconded by Councillor Pat O’Toole  
I call upon Longford County Council going forward, to add all TFI local link bus 
routes in the county in their full entirety to be included on the Winter 
Maintenance Program for gritting in icy conditions.  
 
Response:  
Longford County Council’s Winter Maintenance Programme for 2025/2026 is 
already in place and operating.  
 
As confirmed at the recent Granard Municipal District meeting, Longford 
County Council is currently salting in excess of 23% of the road network in the 
County and does not have the capacity to take on any additional salting works.  
 
The objective of the Winter Maintenance Programme is to provide so far as is 
reasonably practical for the safe movement of road users on the National 
Roads and other strategic routes identified, during adverse weather 
conditions. As it not feasible to treat all public thoroughfares, it is necessary to 
create a schedule of route prioritisation. Routes are designed a priority rating 
of between 1 and 3 based upon the road classification, the traffic volume 
carried, public transport usage etc and the importance of the route on a 
national, regional, or local level.  
 
This request can be considered for the 2026/2027 Winter Maintenance 
Programme but only if additional resources and funding are made available by 
the Elected Members as part of the 2027 budgetary process.  
 
10. GENERAL 
(i) 
Notice of Motions  
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor Paul Ross 
seconded by Councillor Niall Gannon  
I call on Longford County Council to support the establishment of a post 
primary Gaelscoil in Edgeworthstown as it is the only large town in the 
county without a second level education facility.  

 
Response:  
Longford County Council agreed to write to the CEO of Longford Westmeath 
Education and Training Board (LWETB) with a view to progressing this Notice 
of Motion.  
 
The following Notice of Motion was proposed by Councillor David Cassidy 
seconded by Councillor Kevin Hussey 
I call upon Longford County Council to write to the Minister for Health 
Jennifer Carroll MacNeill, the Health Service Executive (HSE) and all 
Oireachtas members in the constituency of Longford/Westmeath to demand 
provision of at least 5 additional Palliative care beds in St.Josephs Care 
Centre, Longford.  
 
Response:  
Longford County Council agreed to write to the Minister for Health Jennifer 
Carroll MacNeill, the Health Service Executive (HSE) and all Oireachtas 
members in the constituency of Longford/Westmeath.  
 
11. CORRESPONDENCE 
 
(I) 
Correspondence from Sligo County Council 
Noted 
(II) 
Correspondence from Tipperary County Council 
Noted 
(III) 
Correspondence from Offaly County Council  
Noted 
(IV) 
Correspondence from Minister of State John Cummins 
Noted 
 
12. TRAINING FOR APPROVAL  
None 
13. VOTES OF SYMPATHY 
None 
                                                                                                                                                                                    
14. DATE AND TIME OF NEXT MEETING  
The next meeting of Longford County Council will take place on Wednesday, 11 March 
2026 at 4pm in the Council Chamber.  
 
Confirmed and adopted at Meeting of Longford County Council held on 11 March 2026. 
 
