1 
 
Comhairle Contae Fhine Gall 
Fingal County Council 
 
 
Minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday, 10th March, 2025 in the 
Council Chamber - County Hall, Swords, at 5.00 pm 
 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
Councillors: 
 
Councillors: 
Boland, Cathal 
Boland, Mark 
 
 
Burtchaell, John 
 
 
 
 
Butler, Darragh 
 
 
 
  
Carbone-Mangan, Eimear  
 
 
Corkery, Luke 
 
 
 
 
Dennison, Kieran 
Dockrell, Eoghan 
 
 
Donnelly, Angela 
 
 
Guerin, Jimmy 
Haughey, Cathal 
 
Healy, David 
Humphreys, James  
 
Johnston, Corina 
 
 
 
Kitt, Tom 
 
 
 
 
 
Leddy, Ted 
Maguire, Grainne 
 
 
 
 
 
McCamley, Mary 
McDonagh, Brian 
Mulligan, Dean 
Murphy, Tony 
Mulville, Paul 
Newman, Joe 
O’Brien, Eoghan 
O’Leary, Tom 
Onwumereh, JK 
Quinlan, Patrick 
Quinn, Malachy 
Redwood, Helen 
Ryan, Brendan 
Sheehan, Gerard 
Shovlin, Siobhan 
Smyth, John 
Tormey, Aoibhinn 
Troy, Ellen 
Walsh, John 
Apologies for inability to attend were received for Councillors Tania Doyle, Breda 
Hanaphy, Darren Jack Kelly,  
 
The Mayor, Councillor Brian McDonagh, presided. 
 
OFFICIALS PRESENT 
AnnMarie Farrelly (Chief Executive); Mary Egan (Director of Services/People, 
Corporate & Digital Services); John Quinlivan (Director of Services/Economic, 
Enterprise, Tourism and Cultural Development); Oliver Hunt (Head of Finance); 
Matthew McAleese (Director of Services Planning and Strategic Infrastructure); 

2 
 
Paul Carroll (Director of Housing Services and Community Development); Mary T 
Daly (Director of Services/Operations); David Storey (Director of 
Services/Environment, Climate Action, Active Travel & Sports); Fionnuala May, 
(County Architect); Ciara O hAodha (Senior Executive Officer); Patricia Cadogan, 
(Senior Planner). 
 
 
  
F/85/25 
   (Agenda Item No ) 
ANNOUNCEMENT 
 
The Mayor, Councillor B. McDonagh, at the start of the meeting, reminded 
Members that Standing Orders would apply to all aspects of the meeting. 
  
The Mayor, Councillor B. McDonagh informed the Members that a number of 
emergency motions had been received and were ruled out of order.   
  
F/86/25 
   (Agenda Item No ) 
CONDOLENCES 
 
The Mayor, Councillor B. McDonagh on behalf of the Members expressed their 
condolences to the family of Mr Davy Byrne the first County Manager of Fingal, 
who passed away recently.   
  
It was agreed to hold a minute’s silence.  
  
  
  
F/87/25 
   (Agenda Item No 1) 
Confirmation and Re-Affirmation of Minutes of Council Meeting held on 
Monday 10th February 2025 
 
Minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday 10th February 2025 
which had been circulated were considered.   
  
It was PROPOSED by Councillor K. Dennison, seconded by Councillor B. 
McDonagh and RESOLVED –  
  
“That the minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday 10th February 
2025 be ADOPTED.” 
  
  

3 
 
F/88/25 
   (Agenda Item No 2) 
Filling of casual vacancy on Fingal County Council following the election of 
Ruth Coppinger to the 34th Dáil in November 2024 
 
The report by the Chief Executive, setting out the required procedures, which 
had been circulated was READ. 
  
The nomination of Helen Redwood to fill the casual vacancy was proposed by 
Councillor J. Burtchaell and seconded by Councillor D. Mulligan and AGREED.  
  
In accordance with Section 19 of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended, 
Helen Redwood was co-opted as a Member of Fingal County Council. 
  
  
F/89/25 
   (Agenda Item No 3) 
Filling of casual vacancy to Fingal County Council following the resignation 
of Councillor Kevin Humphreys 
 
The report by the Chief Executive, setting out the required procedures, which 
had been circulated was READ. 
  
The nomination of Mark Boland to fill the casual vacancy was proposed by 
Councillor B. Ryan and seconded by Councillor J. Walsh and AGREED.  
  
In accordance with Section 19 of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended, 
Mark Boland was co-opted as a Member of Fingal County Council. 
  
Councillor H. Redwood and Councillor M. Boland entered the Chamber and 
spoke to the Chamber on their appointments to Fingal County Council.  
  
  
  
F/90/25 
   (Agenda Item No 4) 
Nominations 
 
a 
Appointment of one Member to the Climate Action, Biodiversity, 
Environment Strategic Policy Committee following the election of 
Ruth Coppinger to the 34th Dáil in November 2024  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED. 
  

4 
 
It was proposed by Councillor J. Burtchaell and seconded by Councillor B. 
McDonagh and AGREED: 
  
“That Councillor Helen Redwood be appointed as a member of the Climate 
Action, Biodiversity, Environment Strategic Policy Committee”. 
  
  
b 
Appointment of one Member to the Regional Health Forum Dublin 
North East following the election of Ruth Coppinger to the 34th Dáil 
in November 2024  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor P. Quinlan, seconded by Councillor C. Boland: 
  
“That Councillor Patrick Quinlan be appointed as a member to the Regional 
Health Forum Dublin North East.” 
  
It was then proposed by Councillor B. McDonagh, seconded by Councillor J. 
Humphreys: 
  
“That Councillor John Walsh be appointed as a member to the Regional Health 
Forum Dublin North East.” 
  
Councillor J. Walsh withdrew his nomination. 
  
It was then proposed by Councillor A. Tormey, seconded by Councillor J. Walsh: 
  
“That Councillor Tom O’Leary be appointed as a member to the Regional Health 
Forum Dublin North East.” 
  
The Mayor, then instructed that a roll call vote be taken and on a division the 
voting resulted as follows: 
  
FOR COUNCILLOR O’LEARY:      30        THIRTY 
  
FOR COUNCILLOR QUINLAN:    0         ZERO 
  
ABSTAIN:                                          2          TWO 
  
  

5 
 
FOR COUNCILLOR O’LEARY:      Councillors Cathal Boland, Darragh Butler, 
Eimear Carbone-Mangan, Luke Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Eoghan Dockrell, 
Angela Donnelly, Jimmy Guerin, Cathal Haughey, David Healy, James Humphreys, 
Corina Johnston, Tom Kitt, Ted Leddy, Grainne Maguire, Brian Mc Donagh, Mary 
McCamley, Dean Mulligan, Paul Mulville, Tony Murphy, Eoghan O'Brien, Tom 
O'Leary, JK Onwumereh, Malachy Quinn, Brendan Ryan, Siobhan Shovlin, John 
Smyth, Aoibhinn Tormey, Ellen Troy, John Walsh. 
  
  
ABSTAIN:                  Councillors   Patrick Quinlan, Gerard Sheehan.           
  
The Mayor then DECLARED Councillor Tom O’Leary to be appointed as a 
member of the Regional Health Forum Dublin North East. 
  
                                                             
c 
Appointment of one Member to the Joint Fingal and South Dublin 
Liffey Valley Special Amenity Area Order (SAAO) Management 
Committee following the election of Ruth Coppinger to the 34th Dáil 
in November 2024  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor J. Burtchaell and seconded by Councillor D. 
Mulligan and AGREED: 
  
“That Councillor Helen Redwood be appointed as a member of the Joint Fingal 
and South Dublin Liffey Valley Special Amenity Area Order (SAAO) Management 
Committee”. 
  
  
d 
Appointment of one Member to the Local Traveller Accommodation 
Consultative Committee (LTACC) following the election of Ruth 
Coppinger to the 34th Dáil in November 2024  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor J. Burtchaell and seconded by Councillor D. 
Mulligan and AGREED: 
  

6 
 
“That Councillor Helen Redwood be appointed as a member of the Local 
Traveller Accommodation Consultative Committee (LTACC)”. 
  
  
e 
Appointment of one Member to the Housing Strategic Policy 
Committee (SPC) following the appointment of Councillor Brendan 
Ryan to the Chair of the Housing SPC  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor B. Ryan and seconded by Councillor J. Walsh and 
AGREED: 
  
“That Councillor Mark Boland be appointed as a member of the Housing 
Strategic Policy Committee (SPC)”. 
  
  
f 
Appointment of one Member to the Fingal Coastal Liaison Group 
following the resignation of Councillor Kevin Humphreys  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor J. Walsh and seconded by Councillor C. Johnston 
and AGREED: 
  
“That Councillor Mark Boland be appointed as a member of the Fingal Coastal 
Liaison Group”. 
  
  
g 
Appointment of one Member to the North Dublin Regional Drug and 
Alcohol Task Force following the resignation of Councillor Kevin 
Humphreys  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor J. Walsh and seconded by Councillor J. Humphreys 
and AGREED: 
  

7 
 
“That Councillor Mark Boland be appointed as a member of the North Dublin 
Regional Drug and Alcohol Task Force”. 
  
  
h 
Appointment of one Member to the Lusk Town Team following the 
election of Robert O'Donoghue to the 34th Dáil in November 2024  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor J. Humphreys and seconded by Councillor J. Walsh 
and AGREED: 
  
“That Councillor Mark Boland be appointed as a member of the Lusk Town 
Team”. 
  
   
F/91/25 
   (Agenda Item No ) 
QUESTIONS 
 
It was proposed by Councillor B. McDonagh, seconded by Councillor J. Walsh and 
RESOLVED: 
  
“That in accordance with Standing Order No. 51, Questions numbered 5 to 22 be 
ADOPTED.” 
  
  
F/92/25 
   (Agenda Item No 5) 
Councillor E. Dockrell - Annual Spend on Recreation and Amenity 
  
F/93/25 
   (Agenda Item No 6) 
Councillor E. Dockrell - The use of AI (Artificial Intelligence) 
  
F/94/25 
   (Agenda Item No 7) 
Councillor D. Butler - Fingal Greener Community Awards 
  
F/95/25 
   (Agenda Item No 8) 
Councillor J. Humphreys - Extreme Weather Events 
  
F/96/25 
   (Agenda Item No 9) 
Councillor J. Humphreys - Speed Limits 
  

8 
 
F/97/25 
   (Agenda Item No 10) 
Councillor J. Burtchaell - Affordable Housing Purchase Scheme in Páirc na 
Bláthanna, Hayestown, Rush 
  
F/98/25 
   (Agenda Item No 11) 
Councillor J. Hopkins - Sports Facility Audit 
  
F/99/25 
   (Agenda Item No 12) 
Councillor G. Sheehan - Signage on Public Litter Bins 
  
F/100/25 
   (Agenda Item No 13) 
Councillor L. Corkery - Bus Stop Improvements 
  
F/101/25 
   (Agenda Item No 14) 
Councillor A. Donnelly - Subsidised Access to Active Travel for Fingal's 
Retired Population 
  
F/102/25 
   (Agenda Item No 15) 
Councillor J. Smyth - Universal Design Rates of Current Housing Stock 
  
F/103/25 
   (Agenda Item No 16) 
Councillor B. Hanaphy - Tenant in-situ Scheme 
  
F/104/25 
   (Agenda Item No 17) 
Councillor C. Boland - Engagement with Organisations and Clubs 
  
F/105/25 
   (Agenda Item No 18) 
Councillor M. Quinn - Tenant in-situ Scheme 2025 
  
F/106/25 
   (Agenda Item No 19) 
Councillor C. Johnston - Planning Enforcement Complaints 
  
F/107/25 
   (Agenda Item No 20) 
Councillor C.  Johnston - Litter Fines 
  
F/108/25 
   (Agenda Item No 21) 
Councillor J. Walsh - Inactive Planning Permissions 
  
F/109/25 
   (Agenda Item No 22) 
Councillor P. Mulville - New Health Service Executive (HSE) Primary Care 
Centres 
  

9 
 
F/110/25 
   (Agenda Item No 23) 
Report of Committees 
 
a 
Report of Organisation, Procedures and Finance Committee (OP&F) 
meeting held on Monday 10th February 2025  
 
The reports by the Organisation, Procedure and Finance (OP&F) Committee 
Meeting dated Monday 10th February 2025 which had been circulated 
were CONSIDERED and NOTED. 
  
b 
Report of Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk/Swords Services B Area Committee 
Meeting held on Thursday 13th February 2025  
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.  It was proposed by Councillor M. Quinn, seconded by Councillor 
B. Ryan, and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of 
Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk/Swords Services (B) Meeting held on Thursday 13th 
February 2025, are hereby ADOPTED.” 
  
c 
Report of Blanchardstown/Mulhuddart/Castleknock-Ongar Services 
A Area Committee Meeting held on Thursday 27th February 2025  
 
  
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
  
A Draft Proposed Amendment to the Road Traffic (Special Speed Limits) (County 
of Fingal) Bye-Laws 2020 – Porterstown Road, Castleknock, Dublin 15 was 
CONSIDERED. 
  
 It was proposed by Councillor S. Shovlin, seconded by Councillor K. Dennison, 
and AGREED that the resolution was APPROVED.   
  
Resolution: 
Fingal County Council, in exercise with the powers conferred on it by Section 9 of 
the Road Traffic Act 2004 (No. 44 of 2004), as amended by Section 6 of the Road 
Traffic Act 2010 (No. 25 of 2010), and Section 2 of the Road Traffic Act 2016 (No. 
21 of 2016) and following consultation with An Garda Síochána, makes the 
following Special Speed Limit Bye-Law 2025:  

10 
 
Reduction of Speed Limit from 60kmph to 50kmph at Porterstown Road, 
Castleknock, Dublin 15. 
d 
Report of Corporate Policy Group (CPG) Meeting held on Monday 3rd 
March 2025  
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.  It was proposed by Councillor B. McDonagh, seconded by 
Councillor K. Dennison and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the recommendations contained in the report from Corporate Policy 
Group Meeting held on Monday 3rd March 2025, be APPROVED.” 
  
  
e 
Report of Howth/Malahide Services B Area Committee Meeting held 
on Wednesday 5th March 2025  
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.  It was proposed by Councillor E. O’Brien, seconded by Councillor 
A. Tormey, and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of 
Howth/Malahide Services B Area Committee Meeting held on Wednesday 5th 
March 2025, are hereby ADOPTED.” 
  
  
f 
Report of Blanchardstown/Mulhuddart/Castleknock-Ongar Services 
B Area Committee Meeting held on Thursday 6th March 2025  
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.  It was proposed by Councillor J. Walsh, seconded by Councillor E. 
Carbone-Mangan and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of 
Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Services B meeting held on 
Thursday 6th March 2025, are hereby ADOPTED.” 
   
F/111/25 
   (Agenda Item No 24) 
Financial Matters 
 
a 
Annual Report of the Audit Committee 2024 (inc. Audit Committee 
Annual Work Programme 2025)  

11 
 
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, 
was CONSIDERED.  
  
It was proposed by Councillor B. McDonagh, seconded by Councillor J. 
Humphreys and AGREED. 
  
b 
Audit Committee Charter 2025  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, 
was CONSIDERED.  
  
It was proposed by Councillor C. Boland, seconded by Councillor J. Humphreys 
and AGREED. 
   
F/112/25 
   (Agenda Item No 25) 
Financial assistance to Approved Housing Bodies under the Capital 
Assistance Scheme (CAS) - call for CAS 2017 to provide units of living 
accommodation in the Fingal area 
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED. 
It was proposed by Councillor B. McDonagh, seconded by Councillor J. Guerin 
and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the recommendations contained in the report be ADOPTED.” 
  
  
F/113/25 
   (Agenda Item No 26) 
Declarations of Roads 
 
It was noted there was no business under this item. 
  
F/114/25 
   (Agenda Item No 27) 
Proposed Disposals 
 
a 
Notice of Proposed disposal of land at the side of No. 36A Yellow 
Walls Road, Malahide, Co. Dublin to Colm de Burca and Judith de 
Burca  
 

12 
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor E. O’Brien and seconded by 
Councillor A. Tormey and RESOLVED: 
  
“That lands to the side of No. 36A Yellow Walls Road, Malahide, Co. Dublin, as 
referred to in the Notice under S183 of the Local Government Act 2001 as 
amended and dated 19th February 2025, be disposed of to Colm de Burca and 
Judith de Burca in accordance with the terms specified therein.” 
  
b 
Notice of Proposed disposal of land at Powerstown, Tyrellstown, 
Dublin 15 to Apurva Charity  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.  
  
The Mayor informed the Members a motion has been received. 
  
The motion, in the name of Councillor E. Troy was proposed by Councillor E. Troy 
and seconded by Councillor G. Sheehan. 
  
“That this Notice of disposal of land at Powerstown to Apurva Charity be 
deferred today.” 
  
Following discussion; the Mayor Councillor B. McDonagh, instructed that a roll 
call vote be taken and on a division the voting resulted as follows:  
  
FOR:               4          FOUR 
AGAINST:     28        TWENTY EIGHT 
ABSTAIN:      4          FOUR 
  
FOR:          Councillors Ted Leddy, Joe Newman, Gerard Sheehan, Ellen 
Troy.                  
  
AGAINST:     Councillors Cathal Boland , Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, Darragh 
Butler, Eimear Carbone-Mangan, Luke Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Eoghan 
Dockrell, Angela Donnelly, David Healy, James Humphreys, Corina Johnston, Tom 
Kitt, Brian Mc Donagh, Mary McCamley, Dean Mulligan, Paul Mulville, Eoghan 
O'Brien, Tom O'Leary, JK Onwumereh, Patrick Quinlan, Malachy Quinn, Helen 
Redwood, Brendan Ryan, Siobhan Shovlin, John Smyth, Aoibhinn Tormey, John 
Walsh.                         
  

13 
 
ABSTAIN:      Councillors Jimmy Guerin, Cathal Haughey, Grainne Maguire, Tony 
Murphy.                 
  
The Mayor then DECLARED the motion FELL. 
  
The Mayor Councillor B. McDonagh, then instructed that a roll call vote be taken 
on the disposal of the land and on a division the voting resulted as follows:  
  
FOR:               28        TWENTY EIGHT 
AGAINST:     1          ONE 
ABSTAIN:      5          FIVE 
  
FOR:               Councillors Cathal Boland, Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, Darragh 
Butler, Eimear Carbone-Mangan, Luke Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Eoghan 
Dockrell, Angela Donnelly, Jimmy Guerin, Cathal Haughey, David Healy, James 
Humphreys, Tom Kitt, Brian Mc Donagh, Mary McCamley, Dean Mulligan, Paul 
Mulville, Joe Newman, Eoghan O'Brien, Tom O'Leary, Malachy Quinn, Helen 
Redwood, Brendan Ryan, Siobhan Shovlin, John Smyth, Aoibhinn Tormey, John 
Walsh.             
  
AGAINST:     Councillor Patrick Quinlan.           
  
ABSTAIN:      Councillors Ted Leddy, Grainne Maguire, Tony Murphy, Gerard 
Sheehan, Ellen Troy.                         
  
The Mayor then DECLARED the disposal of land PASSED. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor K. Dennison and seconded by Councillor J. Walsh 
and RESOLVED: 
  
“That lands to the rear of Powerstown, Tyrellstown, Dublin 15, as referred to in 
the Notice under S183 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended and dated 
12th February 2025, be disposed of to Apurva Charity in accordance with the 
terms specified therein.” 
   
F/115/25 
   (Agenda Item No 27c) 
Proposed Disposal of Fee Simple Interest of Dwellings 
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED. 
It was proposed by Councillor J. Guerin and seconded by Councillor E. O’Brien 
and RESOLVED: 
  

14 
 
“That the Fee Simple Interest referred to in the attached report be disposed of in 
accordance with the terms specified therein. 
  
  
F/116/25 
   (Agenda Item No 28) 
Extension of Duration of Dublin Airport Local Area Plan 2020 
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
A presentation was given to the Members by Patricia Cadogan, A/Senior Planner, 
Planning & Strategic Infrastructure Department. 
  
During the course of the discussion, the Mayor informed the Members a Motion 
was received and this was ruled out of order. 
  
Following discussion; it was proposed by Councillor J. Guerin, seconded by 
Councillor K. Dennison, and RESOLVED that – 
  
“That the Members, having regard to the provisions of Section 19(1)(e)(i) of the 
Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended), and having considered and 
agreed with reasoning/rationale in the Chief Executive’s Report under Section 
19(1)(e)(ii) of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended), AGREE to 
defer the sending of a notice under section 20(3)(a)(i) and publishing of a notice 
under section 20(3)(a)(ii) for a period not exceeding 5 years and thereby approve 
the extension of the life of the Dublin Airport Local Area Plan 2020, for a further 
period of 5 years.” 
  
  
  
  
  
  
F/117/25 
   (Agenda Item No 29) 
Report Pursuant to Part XI of the Planning & Development Act 2000 and 
Part VIII of the Local Government Planning & Development Regulations 
2001 (as amended) for proposed development of 32 No. Residential 
Dwellings and all associated site works at Park Road, Kenure, Rush, Co. 
Dublin 
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
  
It was proposed by Councillor B. McDonagh, seconded by Councillor T. O’Leary, 
and AGREED. 

15 
 
  
  
F/118/25 
   (Agenda Item No 30) 
Report pursuant to Part XI of the Planning & Development Act 2000 and 
Part VIII of the Local Government Planning & Development Regulations 
2001 (as amended) for proposed development of 34 no. residential 
dwellings and all associated site works at Woodside, Swords, Co. Dublin 
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
  
Following discussion, it was proposed by Councillor B. McDonagh, seconded by 
Councillor M. McCamley, and AGREED. 
  
  
F/119/25 
   (Agenda Item No 31) 
Streetscape Funding Grants 
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor B. McDonagh, seconded by Councillor E. O’Brien 
and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the award of Streetscape Funding Grants as set out in the foregoing report 
is hereby APPROVED.” 
  
  
F/120/25 
   (Agenda Item No 32) 
Chief Executive's Report 
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED. 
  
The Mayor advised the Members that four motions have been received.  The 
Mayor also advised the Members that motions must detail the page number of 
the Chief Executives report of which the motion relates to. 
  
Following discussion by the members on items on the CE Report; it was AGREED 
to extend the meeting to 20.20 to deal with the business of the meeting. It was 
agreed to deal with the four motions received on CE Report; in order of which 
they were received. 
  
Motion One 
The following motion, in the name of Councillor J. Burtchaell was proposed by 
Councillor J. Burtchaell and seconded by Councillor H. Redwood: 

16 
 
  
“Being cognisant that Notices of Termination from private rented 
accommodation represent the largest factor in people facing homelessness, that 
this council calls on the Housing team to engage with the DRHE and Threshold to 
determine what exact measures are undertaken to validate a Notice of 
Termination (NoT) in the context of a number of NoTs being validated by 
Threshold where the landlord in question was not registered with the Residential 
Tenancies Board as is legally required and one case where a NoT was validated 
and a subsequent RTB determination order granted to a party who was not the 
legal owner of the rental property where the tenants resided.” 
  
Following discussion, the motion was AGREED. 
  
Motion Two 
The following motion, in the names of Councillors M. Quinn, Councillor J. Smyth, 
Councillor A. Donnelly and Councillor B. Hanaphy; was proposed by Councillor 
M. Quinn and seconded by Councillor A. Donnelly: 
  
“That this Council calls on Minister for Housing, James Browne to reverse the 
recent changes to the Tenant-In-Situ scheme. He has reduced funding and cut 
targets for the scheme, single people and couples without children will be 
excluded, rental properties must be at least two years in the social housing 
support system, councils will not be allowed to reclaim refurbishment costs and 
the Department has also removed the ability of Council to acquire more than the 
target that will be set.” 
  
Following discussion, the motion was AGREED. 
  
  
Motion Three 
The following motion, in the name of Councillor J. Guerin, was proposed by 
Councillor J. Guerin and seconded by Councillor D. Butler: 
  
“In light of recent developments and the current housing crisis  the Members of 
FCC fully support our executive in the initiatives currently been undertaken to 
deliver housing for all our citizens and we call on all members of this Council to 
reiterate their support for our largest project currently underway at 
Ballymastone and express our disappointment at the lodging of a Judicial Review 
today to delay the much needed commencement of phase 2 of this project.” 
  
During discussion, Councillor J. Guerin submitted an amended motion to read: 
  

17 
 
“In light of recent developments and the current housing crisis the Members of 
FCC fully support our executive in the initiatives currently been undertaken to 
deliver housing for all our citizens and we call on all members of this Council to 
reiterate their support for our largest project currently underway at 
Ballymastone.” 
  
The amended motion was proposed by Councillor J. Guerin and seconded by 
Councillor D. Butler and AGREED.   
  
It was AGREED to extend the meeting to 20.40 to deal with this item. 
  
The Mayor informed the Members a further amendment to the amended 
motion was received. 
  
The following amended motion was proposed by Councillor C. Johnston and 
seconded by Councillor J. Walsh: 
  
“In light of recent developments and the current housing crisis  the Members of 
FCC fully support our executive in the initiatives currently been undertaken to 
deliver housing for all our citizens and we call on all members of this Council to 
reiterate their support for our largest project currently underway at 
Ballymastone.  And to ensure that all objectives in the Donabate Local Area Plan 
are delivered upon as set out in following strategic objective 2.2 Provide a 
framework for a growing population with phased development of new housing 
delivered in tandem with supporting community and physical infrastructure." 
  
  
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
  
The Mayor, called for a 3minute recess. 
  
The Mayor instructed that a roll call vote be taken on the amended motion 
proposed by Councillor C. Johnston and seconded by Councillor J. Walsh and on 
a division the voting resulted as follows:  
  
FOR:               18        EIGHTEEN 
AGAINST:     13        THIRTEEN 
ABSTAIN:      3          THREE 
  
FOR:               Councillors Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, Luke Corkery, Eoghan 
Dockrell, Angela Donnelly, David Healy, James Humphreys, Corina Johnston, 
Brian Mc Donagh, Mary McCamley, Dean Mulligan, Paul Mulville, Malachy Quinn, 

18 
 
Helen Redwood, Brendan Ryan, John Smyth, Aoibhinn Tormey, John 
Walsh.                 
  
AGAINST:     Councillors Darragh Butler, Eimear Carbone-Mangan, Kieran 
Dennison, Jimmy Guerin, Cathal Haughey, Tom Kitt, Ted Leddy, Grainne Maguire, 
Tony Murphy, Joe Newman, JK Onwumereh, Gerard Sheehan, Ellen 
Troy.                    
  
ABSTAIN:      Councillors Tom O'Leary, Patrick Quinlan, Siobhan Shovlin. 
  
The Mayor DECLARED the vote PASSED.  The amended motion was taken to the 
floor. 
  
Following discussion; it was AGREED to extend the meeting by 10 minutes to 
conclude this item. 
  
Following discussion and agreement with members, it was AGREED to extend 
the meeting to conclude a vote on this item. 
  
The Mayor, instructed that a roll call vote be taken on the amended motion 
proposed by Councillor C. Johnston and seconded by Councillor J. Walsh and on 
a division the voting resulted as follows:  
  
FOR:               28        TWENTY EIGHT 
AGAINST:     0          ZERO 
ABSTAIN:      3          THREE 
  
FOR:               Councillors Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, Darragh Butler, Eimear 
Carbone-Mangan, Luke Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Eoghan Dockrell, Angela 
Donnelly, Jimmy Guerin, Cathal Haughey, James Humphreys, Tom Kitt, Ted 
Leddy, Grainne Maguire, Brian Mc Donagh, Mary McCamley, Dean Mulligan, Paul 
Mulville, Tony Murphy, Joe Newman, Tom O'Leary, Malachy Quinn, Helen 
Redwood, Brendan Ryan, Siobhan Shovlin, John Smyth, Aoibhinn Tormey, John 
Walsh.           
  
ABSTAIN:      Councillors Patrick Quinlan, Gerard Sheehan, Ellen Troy.     
  
The Mayor DECLARED the amended motion PASSED.          
  
The Chief Executive’s report was NOTED. 
 
 

19 
 
The Meeting concluded at 20.56. 
 
 
 
MAYOR  
DATE  
 
