1 
 
Comhairle Contae Fhine Gall 
Fingal County Council 
 
 
Minutes of the Annual Budget Meeting held on Tuesday, 3rd December, 2024 in 
the Council Chamber - County Hall, Swords, at 2.00 pm 
 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
Councillors: 
Councillors: 
Boland, Cathal 
Butler, Darragh 
Carbone-Mangan Eimear 
Corkery, Luke 
Dennison, Kieran 
Dockrell, Eoghan 
Donnelly, Angela 
Guerin, Jimmy 
Hanaphy, Breda 
Haughey, Cathal 
Healy, David 
Humphreys, James 
Johnston, Corina 
Kelly, Darren Jack 
Kitt, Tom 
Leddy, Ted 
Maguire, Grainne 
 
McCamley, Mary 
McDonagh, Brian 
Mulville, Paul 
Murphy, Tony  
Newman, Joe 
O’Brien, Eoghan 
O’Leary, Tom 
Onwumereh, JK 
Quinn, Malachy 
Ryan, Brendan 
Shovlin, Siobhan 
Tormey, Aoibhinn 
Walsh, John 
 
 
 
Apologies for inability to attend were received for Councillors John Burtchaell, 
Gerard Sheehan, Ellen Troy.   
 
The Mayor, Councillor Brian McDonagh, presided. 
 
 
OFFICIALS PRESENT 
 
AnnMarie Farrelly (Chief Executive); Mary Egan (Director of Services, People, 
Corporate & Digital); Mary T Daly (Director of Services, Operations); Oliver Hunt 
(Head of Finance); Paul Carroll (Director of Services, Housing and Community 
Development); Matthew McAleese (Director of Services, Planning and Strategic 

2 
 
Infrastructure); John Quinlivan, (Director of Services, Economic, Enterprise, 
Tourism & Cultural Development), Sinead Murphy, (Senior Engineer), John Daly, 
(Senior Engineer), Nikki Halleran (A/Senior Executive Officer) & Gerard Reardon, 
(Principal Sports Officer). 
 
  
F/472/24 
   (Agenda Item No 1) 
Draft Annual Budget for Financial Year Ending 31st December 2025 
 
The Draft Annual Budget for Financial Year ending 31st December 2025 which 
had been circulated was CONSIDERED. 
  
The Mayor, Councillor B. McDonagh gave a brief introduction and outlined the 
proposed format for the meeting, whereby an address would first be given by 
the Chief Executive followed by an overall presentation on the Budget by the 
Head of Finance, Mr. Oliver Hunt.  Each Division would then be examined 
individually, and Members would be afforded an opportunity to pose questions 
at the end of the presentations.   
  
The Mayor, advised that the Members were required by law to consider and 
note each Division and votes would be taken on the various motions. 
  
Councillor J. Guerin declared he had a conflict of interest on Division C and 
would not partake if a vote was required.   
  
The Chief Executive then introduced the Budget for the Council on behalf of the 
Executive.  The Chief Executive said that the Executive was committed to 
improving and enhancing the services provided to match the growing needs of 
the County. 
  
Mr. Oliver Hunt, Head of Finance, also thanked his colleagues in Fingal County 
Council and his team in the Finance Department for their work in the 
compilation of this Budget. 
  
Mr. Hunt then gave the following presentation to the meeting: 
  

3 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  

4 
 
 
 
  

5 
 
 
  
 

6 
 
 
 
  

7 
 
 
 
 
  
Mr. Paul Carroll, Director of Services, Housing & Community Development, gave 
a detailed report on the main provisions contained in the Annual Budget for 
Division A – Housing and Building, under the following headings: 
  
  

8 
 
 
 
  
 
  

9 
 
 
 

10 
 
 
 

11 
 
 
 

12 
 
 
 
  
  
The Council then NOTED the provisions made in the Annual Budget for Division 
A – Housing and Building. 
  
  
  
  
  
DIVISION B – ROAD TRANSPORTATION AND SAFETY 
  
Ms. Mary T. Daly, Director of Services, Operations, and Ms Sinead Murphy, 
Senior Engineer, Environment, Climate Action, Active Travel & Sports, gave a 

13 
 
detailed report on the provisions contained in the Annual Budget for Division B – 
Road Transportation and Safety under the following headings: 
  
  
 
  
  
 

14 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  

15 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
  

16 
 
 
  
 

17 
 
 
 
  

18 
 
 
 
  

19 
 
 
 
  
  
The Council then NOTED the provisions made in the Annual Budget for Division 
B – Road Transportation and Safety. 
  
  
  
  
  
DIVISION C – WATER SERVICES 
  
Ms. Mary T. Daly, Director of Services, gave a detailed report on the provisions 
contained in the Annual Budget for Division C – Water Services, under the 
following headings: 

20 
 
  
 
  
 
  

21 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  

22 
 
 
 
  
  
The Council then NOTED the provisions made in the Annual Budget for Division 
C – Water Services. 
  
  
DIVISION D – DEVELOPMENT MANAGEMENT 
  
Mr. Matthew McAleese, Director, Planning & Strategic Infrastructure, Mr. John 
Quinlivan, Director, Economic, Enterprise, Tourism and Cultural 
Development, Mr. Paul Carroll, Director of Services, Housing & Community 
Development, gave a detailed report on the main provisions contained in the 
Annual Budget for Division D – Development Management, under the following 
headings: 
  
  

23 
 
 
  
 
  

24 
 
 
 

25 
 
 
 

26 
 
 
  
 
  

27 
 
 
  
 

28 
 
 
 
The Council then NOTED the provisions made in the Annual Budget for Division 
D – Development Management. 
  
  
DIVISION E – ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES  
  
Mr. John Daly, Senior Engineer, Environment, Climate Action, Active Travel & 
Sports, Mr. Oliver Hunt, Head of Finance and Ms. Mary T. Daly, Director, 
Operations, gave a detailed report on the main provisions contained in the 
Annual Budget for Division E – Environmental Services under the following 
headings: 
  

29 
 
 
 
  
 
  

30 
 
 
 
  

31 
 
 
  
 
  

32 
 
 
 

33 
 
 
 

34 
 
 
  
 
  
  

35 
 
 
 
  

36 
 
 
  
 

37 
 
 
 
  
  

38 
 
 
  
  
  
  
The Council then NOTED the provisions made in the Annual Budget for Division 
E – Environmental Services. 
  
  
DIVISION F – RECREATION & AMENITY 
  
Ms. Mary T. Daly, Director, Operations, Mr. John Quinlivan, Director, Economic, 
Enterprise, Tourism & Cultural Development, Mr. Paul Carroll, Director, Housing 
& Community Development, and Mr. Gerard Reardon, Principal Sports Officer, 
Environment, Climate Action, Active Travel & Sports, gave a detailed report on 
the main provisions contained in the Annual Budget for Division F – Recreation & 
Amenity under the following headings: 
  

39 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  

40 
 
 
  
 

41 
 
 
  
 

42 
 
 
 

43 
 
 
  
 
  
  

44 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  

45 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  

46 
 
 
  
 
  
  

47 
 
 
  
 

48 
 
 
 

49 
 
 
 

50 
 
 
 
  
  

51 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
  

52 
 
 
 
  

53 
 
 
 
  

54 
 
 
  
  
 
  

55 
 
 
  
 
  

56 
 
 
  
  
  
The Council then NOTED the provisions made in the Annual Budget for Division 
F – Recreation and Amenity Services. 
  
  
  
DIVISION G – AGRICULTURE, FOOD & THE MARINE 
  
Ms. Mary T. Daly, Director, Operations and Mr. John Daly, Senior Engineer, 
Environment, Climate Action, Active Travel & Sports, gave a detailed report on 
the main provisions contained in the Annual Budget for Division G – Agriculture, 
Food and Marine under the following headings: 
  

57 
 
 
  
 

58 
 
 
 
  

59 
 
 
  
 
  

60 
 
 
  
  
  
The Council then NOTED the provisions made in the Annual Budget for Division 
G – Agriculture, Food and The Marine. 
  
  
DIVISION H – MISCELLANEOUS SERVICES 
  
Ms. Mary Egan, Director, People, Corporate & Digital Services, and Mr. Oliver 
Hunt, Head of Finance gave a detailed report on the main provisions contained 
in the Annual Budget for Division H – Miscellaneous Services under the following 
headings: 
 
 

61 
 
  
 
  
 
  

62 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  

63 
 
 
  
 

64 
 
 
  
 
  

65 
 
 
 

66 
 
 
  
  
  
  
The Council then NOTED the provisions made in the Annual Budget for Division 
H – Miscellaneous Services. 
  
  
The Mayor, Councillor B. McDonagh advised the Members that five motions 
were received and that all motions were ruled out of order. 
  
The Mayor, then invited the Members to indicate if they wished to ask 
questions.  The Members asked questions on several aspects of the provisions 
made in the Annual Budget, which were responded to by the Executive. 
  
  
BUDGET – MOTION 1 
  
The following Motion was read into the record of the meeting by the Mayor, 
Councillor B. McDonagh.  It was proposed by Councillor B. McDonagh, seconded 
by Councillor K. Dennison and AGREED: 
  
“That the County Council adopts for the Financial Year ending 31 December 
2025, the Annual Budget set out in Tables A to F.” 
  
BUDGET – MOTION 2 
  

67 
 
The following Motion was read into the record of the meeting by the Mayor, 
Councillor B. McDonagh.  It was proposed by Councillor B. McDonagh, seconded 
by Councillor J. Walsh and AGREED: 
  
“That the County Council determines in accordance with the budget as adopted 
the rate as set out in Table A to be the Annual Rate on Valuation to be levied for 
the Financial Year ending 31 December in 2025 for the purposes set out in Table 
A”. 
  
  
BUDGET – MOTION 3 
  
The following Motion was read into the record of the meeting by the Mayor, 
Councillor B. McDonagh. It was proposed by Councillor B. McDonagh, seconded 
by Councillor J. Newman and AGREED: 
  
“That the County Council approves of the transfer to the Capital Account of the 
sums provided for various Capital purposes in the Annual Budget for 2025 as 
adopted” 
  
  
  
BUDGET – MOTION 4 
  
The following Motion was read into the record of the meeting by the Mayor, 
Councillor B. McDonagh.  It was proposed by Councillor B. McDonagh, seconded 
by Councillor M. McCamley and AGREED: 
  
“That Fingal County Council makes a scheme for the abatement of rates in 
respect of vacant properties in accordance with the provisions of Section 9 of the 
Local Government Rates and Other Matters Act 2019, as amended. 
Such a scheme in respect of vacant property will provide for an abatement of 0% 
of rates due to Fingal County Council by a liable person for the financial year 
ending 31 December 2025” 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  

68 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
The Meeting concluded at 4.11pm. 
 
 
 
MAYOR  
DATE  
 
