1
Comhairle Contae Fhine Gall
Fingal County Council
Minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday, 11th March, 2024 in the 
Council Chamber - County Hall, Swords, at 5.00 pm
MEMBERS PRESENT
Councillors:
Councillors:
Boland, Cathal
Mahony, Howard
Butler, Darragh
Manton, Brigid
Carey, Ian
McCamley, Mary
Conroy, Pamela
McDonagh, Brian
Dennehy, Brian
Mulligan, Dean
Dennison, Kieran
Mulville, Paul
Graves, Ann
Murphy, Tony
Griffin, Michelle
Newman, Joe
Guerin, Jimmy
O’Brien, Eoghan
Hanaphy, Breda
O’Donoghue, Robert
Healy, David
O’Leary, Tom
Henchy, Adrian
Onwumereh, JK
Hopkins, Joan
O’Reilly, Steve
Humphreys, James
Power, Karen
Kitt, Tom
Ryan, Brendan
Lavin, Anthony
Shovlin, Siobhan
Tormey, Aoibhinn
Walsh, John
Apologies for inability to attend were received for Councillors John Burtchaell, 
Angela Donnelly, Tania Doyle and Grainne Maguire.  
The Mayor, Councillor Adrian Henchy presided.
OFFICIALS PRESENT
AnnMarie Farrelly (Chief Executive); Mary Egan (Director of Services/People,
Corporate & Digital); John Quinlivan (Director of Services/Economic,
Enterprise, Tourism and Cultural Development); David Storey (Director of
Services/Environment, Climate Action, Active Travel & Sports); Mary T Daly 
(Director of Services/Operations); Oliver Hunt (Head of Finance); Paul Carroll

2
(Director of Housing Services and Community Development); Matthew McAleese 
(Director of Services Planning and Strategic Infrastructure); Nikki Halleran 
(A/Senior Executive Officer), Declan Power (Senior Executive Officer), Pat Boyle, 
(Senior Architect), Kevin Halpenny (Senior Parks and Landscape Officer), Roisin 
Burke (Senior Planner).
F/83/24
   (Agenda Item No )
ANNOUNCEMENT
At the start of the meeting, the Mayor, Councillor. A. Henchy reminded Members 
that Standing Orders would apply to all aspects of the meeting.
 
The Mayor and Members expressed their deepest condolences to Councillor 
Ann Graves on the recent passing of her husband, Councillor Tony Murphy on 
the recent passing of his father and Mary Egan, Director of Services on the 
recent passing of her father.
 
F/84/24
   (Agenda Item No 1)
Confirmation and Re-Affirmation of Minutes of Council Meeting held on 
Monday 12th February 2024
Minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday 12th February 2024 
which had been circulated were considered.  
 
It was PROPOSED by Councillor K. Dennison, seconded by Councillor H. Mahony 
and RESOLVED – 
 
“That the minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday 12th February 
2024 be ADOPTED.”
 
 
F/85/24
   (Agenda Item No 2)
Nominations
a
Appointment of one Member to The Audit Committee following the 
resignation of Councillor Punam Rane 

3
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.
 
It was proposed by Councillor K. Dennison, seconded by Councillor A. Lavin and 
AGREED:
 
“That Councillor T. O’Leary be appointed to the Audit Committee.”
 
b
Nomination of one Member to Membership of Beaumont Hospital 
Board following the resignation of Councillor Punam Rane 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.
 
It was proposed by Councillor K. Dennison, seconded by Councillor A. Lavin and 
AGREED:
 
“That Councillor T. O’Leary be appointed to the Beaumont Hospital Board.”
 
 
F/86/24
   (Agenda Item No )
QUESTIONS
It was proposed by Councillor J. Humphries, seconded by Councillor T. Kitt and 
RESOLVED:
 
“That in accordance with Standing Order No. 51, Questions numbered 3 to 13 be 
ADOPTED.”
 
 
F/87/24
   (Agenda Item No 3)
Councillor J. Hopkins - Staffing for Biodiversity Plan
F/88/24
   (Agenda Item No 4)
Councillor E. O'Brien - Breakdown of the funding model used for the 
construction of the Rivervalley all-weather pitch and flood lights
F/89/24
   (Agenda Item No 5)
Councillor J. Humphreys - Sports and Recreation Facilities in Fingal
F/90/24
   (Agenda Item No 6)
Councillor S. O'Reilly - Grants available for residents living along the flight 
path of Dublin Airport

4
F/91/24
   (Agenda Item No 7)
Councillor T. O'Leary - Swimming Pool Feasibility Study
F/92/24
   (Agenda Item No 8)
Councillor C.  Boland -  PFAS Chemicals on daa Lands
F/93/24
   (Agenda Item No 9)
Councillor H. Mahony - Procedure for the disposal of deceased animals on 
Fingal Property
F/94/24
   (Agenda Item No 10)
Councillor P. Mulville - Broadband exclusivity agreements in new build 
estates
F/95/24
   (Agenda Item No 11)
Councillor B. Dennehy - Criteria used to inform / notify the general public 
of permission granted to film crews for use of public property
F/96/24
   (Agenda Item No 12)
Councillor B. Dennehy - Fingal's Vacant Site Register
F/97/24
   (Agenda Item No 13)
Councillor B. Ryan - Identification and Mapping of all drains in the County
F/98/24
   (Agenda Item No 14)
Report of Committees
a
Report of Organisation, Procedures & Finance Committee Meeting 
held on Monday 12th February 2024 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED 
and AGREED.  
 
b
Report of Corporate Policy Group Meeting held on Monday 4th March 
2024 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor E. O’Brien, seconded by Councillor T. O’Leary and 
RESOLVED:
 

5
“That the recommendations contained in the report from Corporate Policy 
Group Meeting held on Monday 4th March 2024, be APPROVED.”
 
 
c
Report of Blanchardstown/Mulhuddart/Castleknock-Ongar Services 
B Area Committee Meeting held on Thursday 7th March 2024 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor H. Mahony, seconded by Councillor K. Dennison 
and RESOLVED:
 
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of 
Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Services B meeting held on 
Thursday 7th March 2024, are hereby ADOPTED.”
 
 
F/99/24
   (Agenda Item No 15)
Financial Matters
It was noted there was no business on this item.
 
F/100/24
   (Agenda Item No 16)
Proposed Disposal of Properties
a
Notice of proposed disposal of land at Damastown Industrial Estate, 
Damastown, Dublin 15 to Glenbeigh Records Management Limited 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor M. McCamley and seconded by 
Councillor S. O’Reilly and RESOLVED:
 
“That lands at Damastown Industrial Estate, Damastown, Dublin 15, as referred 
to in the Notice under S183 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended and 
dated 28th February 2024, be disposed of to Glenbeigh Records Management 
Limited, in accordance with the terms specified therein.”
 
 
b
Notice of proposed disposal of land adjacent to Oatlands Gate Lodge, 
Porterstown Road, Dublin 15 to Mr. Peter Cawley 

6
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor K. Dennison and seconded by 
Councillor T. Kitt and RESOLVED:
 
“That lands adjacent to Oatlands Gate Lodge, Porterstown Road, Dublin 15, as 
referred to in the Notice under S183 of the Local Government Act 2001 as 
amended and dated 28th February 2024, be disposed of to Mr. Peter Cawley, in 
accordance with the terms specified therein.”
 
 
F/101/24
   (Agenda Item No 17)
Declarations of Roads
It was noted there was no business on this item.
 
F/102/24
   (Agenda Item No 18)
Audit Committee
a
Audit Committee Annual Report 2023 
The attached report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, 
was CONSIDERED. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor M.McCamley, seconded by Councillor K. Dennison 
and AGREED.
b
Audit Committee Charter 2024 
The attached report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, 
was CONSIDERED. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor M.McCamley, seconded by Councillor K. Dennison 
and AGREED.
 
c
Audit Committee Annual Work Programme 2024 
The attached report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, 
was CONSIDERED. 
 
It was proposed by Councillor M.McCamley, seconded by Councillor K. Dennison 
and AGREED.
 

7
F/103/24
   (Agenda Item No 19)
(PARTXI/007/23) Report pursuant to Part XI of the Planning & Development 
Act 2000 (as amended) and Part VIII of the Local Government Planning & 
Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) for development of proposed 
Baldoyle Community Sports Centre and all associated site works on a site 
of approximately 0.575 ha at the former 'Coast' Estate Marketing Suite,  
located along the south of Red Arches Road, The Coast, Baldoyle 
Racecourse Park, Stapolin, Baldoyle, Dublin 13.
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.  A presentation was provided to the Members by Pat Boyle, 
Senior Architect, Architects Department.
 
The Mayor, Councillor. A. Henchy advised the Members that one motion had 
been received.   
 
The following motion was proposed by Councillor D. Healy and seconded by 
Councillor K. Power:
 
“That, given that the provision of 161 car parking spaces plus overflow parking 
area approved in the Racecourse Park permission was explicitly to provide for 
both the park and the "future community centre" and was deemed sufficient 
(ABP permission 311315) the proposal be varied by removing 26 of the 28 
additional car parking spaces proposed, leaving the two disabled parking 
spaces.”
 
Following discussion, the Mayor instructed that a roll call vote be taken and on a 
division the voting resulted as follows:
 
 
FOR:            6        SIX
 
AGAINST:    23      TWENTY THREE
 
ABSTAIN:        1        ONE
 
FOR:                           Councillors Griffin, Michelle; Carey, Ian; Power, Karen; Healy, 
David; Conroy, Pamela; Humphreys, James
 
AGAINST:                  Councillors Henchy, Adrian; Hopkins, Joan; Mulville, Paul; 
Mulligan, Dean; Hanaphy, Breda; Graves, Ann; Maguire, Grainne; O’Brien, 
Eoghan; Kitt, Tom; Manton, Brigid; Ryan, Brendan; McCamley, Mary; Tormey, 

8
Aoibhinn; O’Leary, Tom; Lavin, Anthony; Newman, Joe; Guerin, Jimmy; Boland, 
Cathal; Butler, Darragh; Onwumereh, JK; O’Donoghue, Robert; Dennison, Kieran; 
O’Reilly, Steve.
 
ABSTAIN:
Councillor Murphy, Tony.
 
Councillor T. Murphy informed the Mayor that an error was made while casting 
his vote.
The Mayor declared the vote as VOID and instructed that a roll call vote be taken 
again and on a division the voting resulted as follows:
 
FOR:            6        SIX
 
AGAINST:    23      TWENTY THREE
 
ABSTAIN:        0        ZERO
 
FOR:                           Councillors Griffin, Michelle; Carey, Ian; Power, Karen; Healy, 
David; Conroy, Pamela; Humphreys, James
 
 
AGAINST:                  Councillors Henchy, Adrian; Hopkins, Joan; Mulville, Paul; 
Mulligan, Dean; Hanaphy, Breda; Graves, Ann; Murphy, Tony; O’Brien, Eoghan; 
Kitt, Tom; Manton, Brigid; Ryan, Brendan; McCamley, Mary; Tormey, Aoibhinn; 
O’Leary, Tom; Lavin, Anthony; Newman, Joe; Guerin, Jimmy; Boland, Cathal; 
Butler, Darragh; Onwumereh, JK; O’Donoghue, Robert; Dennison, Kieran; O’Reilly, 
Steve.
 
 
The Mayor then DECLARED the Motion LOST.
 
 
Following discussion, it was proposed by Councillor D. Healy, seconded by 
Councillor E. O’Brien and RESOLVED:
 
“That Fingal County Council hereby resolves, pursuant to Part XI of the Planning 
& Development Act 2000 (as amended) and Part VIII of the Local Government 
Planning & Development Regulations 2001 (as amended), that the development 
of proposed Baldoyle Community Sports Centre and all associated site works on 
a site of approximately 0.575 ha at the former 'Coast' Estate Marketing Suite,  
located along the south of Red Arches Road, The Coast, Baldoyle Racecourse 

9
Park, Stapolin, Baldoyle, Dublin 13. be proceeded with as set out in the foregoing 
report.”
 
 
 
F/104/24
   (Agenda Item No 20)
Part 8 of the PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 2001 (as 
amended). Proposed Development of a Car & Bicycle Parking Facility at 
Bremore Castle, Balbriggan, Co Dublin
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED. A presentation was provided to the Members by Kevin Halpenny, 
Senior Parks And Landscape Officer, Planning And Strategic Infrastructure 
Department. 
 
Following discussion, it was proposed by Councillor T. Murphy, seconded by 
Councillor T. O’Leary, and AGREED.
 
 
F/105/24
   (Agenda Item No 21)
Donabate Framework Plan
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.  A presentation was provided to the Members by Roisin Burke, 
Senior Planner, Planning and Strategic Infrastructure.
 
The Mayor, Councillor. A. Henchy advised the Members that one motion had 
been received.   
 
The following motion was proposed by Councillor P. Mulville and seconded by 
Councillor R. O’Donoghue:
 
“That the following text be inserted at the end of ACM recommendation (14), 
Page 54,  “and commits to identify an appropriate site for the provision of same” 
so that the second action point will read:
 
“The Donabate Framework Plan supports the provision of a Multi-functional Arts, 
Community and Youth Facility for Donabate and commits to identify an 
appropriate site for the provision of same.”

10
 
Following discussion, Councillor P. Mulville ACCEPTED the Chief Executives 
report that this wording can not be included. 
 
Following further discussion, it was proposed by Councillor A. Henchy, seconded 
by Councillor P. Mulville and AGREED.
F/106/24
   (Agenda Item No 22)
Festival and Events Funding Scheme and What's on in Events Presentation
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.  A presentation was provided to the Members by Declan Power, 
Senior Executive Officer, Economic Enterprise, Tourism & Cultural Development.
 
Following discussion, it was proposed by Councillor A. Henchy, seconded by 
Councillor J. Walsh and AGREED.
 
F/107/24
   (Agenda Item No 23)
Chief Executive's Report
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.  
Following discussion the report was NOTED.
F/108/24
   (Agenda Item No 24)
Mayor's Business - Councillor A. Henchy
The Mayor, Councillor. A. Henchy advised the Members that he and several 
Members were invited to New York to promote Tourism in Fingal and will be 
attending after St. Patricks Day events. 
 
 
a
Councillor A. Henchy - Fingal Public Relations Campaign on Housing 
The motion, in the name of Councillor A. Henchy was proposed by Councillor A. 
Henchy and seconded by Councillor E. O’Brien.
 
Following a discussion, the report was ACCEPTED.
 

11
F/109/24
   (Agenda Item No 25)
Conference Report
a
2024 National Planning Conference will take place on 18th and 19th 
April in the Theatre Royal and Tower Hotel, Waterford City 
The notice which had been circulated was NOTED.
 
b
The Suck Valley Way Conference is being held in Hannon's Hotel,  
Roscommon on 13th and 14th March - theme "The Rise of Loneliness 
on the Emerald Isle - How community development and planning 
may be the remedy" 
The notice which had been circulated was NOTED.
 
F/110/24
   (Agenda Item No 26)
Correspondence
a
Letter from Sligo County Council dated 6th February 2024 - 
Resolution - Provision of Additional Bus Services from Dublin Airport 
to Sligo at night 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED.
 
b
Letter from Cork County Council dated 8th February 2024 - 
Resolution - Hospitality rated be reverted to 9% 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED.
 
c
Letter from Cork County Council dated 8th February 2024 - 
Resolution - VAT rate for pub reduced down from 23% to 17% 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED.
 
d
Letter from Louth County Council dated 19th February 2024 - 
Resolution - Joint Policing Committees - Local Community Safety 
Partnership 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED.
 
F/111/24
   (Agenda Item No 27)
Departmental/Ministerial Correspondence

12
It was noted there was no business on this item.
 
 
MOTIONS
F/112/24
   (Agenda Item No 28)
Councillor C. Boland - Planning Breaches in respect of daa Lands
The motion, in the name of Councillor C. Boland was proposed by Councillor C. 
Boland and seconded by Councillor D. Healy.
 
It was AGREED to extend the meeting to conclude item 28.
 
Following a discussion, the report was ACCEPTED.
 
 
 
 
F/113/24
   (Agenda Item No 36)
Councillor S. O'Reilly -  Introducing a litter fine to users who dispose of 
disposable vapes
The report on the motion in the name of Councillor S. O’Reilly was ACCEPTED.
 
F/114/24
   (Agenda Item No 37)
Councillor P. Mulville - Childcare/Crèche facilities in the Fingal 
Administrative Area
The report on the motion in the name of Councillor P. Mulville was ACCEPTED.
 
The Meeting concluded at 20.03.
MAYOR
DATE
