1 
 
Comhairle Contae Fhine Gall 
Fingal County Council 
 
 
Minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday, 11th November, 2024 
in the Council Chamber - County Hall, Swords, at 5.00 pm 
 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
Councillors: 
Councillors: 
Boland, Cathal 
 
 
 
Maguire, Grainne 
Burtchaell, John 
 
 
 
McCamley, Mary 
Butler, Darragh 
 
 
 
McDonagh, Brian 
Carbone-Mangan, Eimear  
 
Mulligan, Dean 
Coppinger, Ruth 
 
 
 
Mulville, Paul 
 
 
Corkery, Luke 
 
 
 
Newman, Joe 
Dennison, Kieran  
 
 
O’Brien, Eoghan 
Dockrell, Eoghan 
 
 
 
O’ Leary, Tom 
 
 
Donnelly, Angela 
 
 
 
Onwumereh, JK 
Graves, Ann  
 
 
 
Quinlan, Patrick 
 
Guerin, Jimmy 
 
 
 
Quinn, Malachy 
Hanaphy, Breda 
 
 
 
Ryan, Brendan 
Haughey, Cathal 
 
 
 
Sheehan, Gerard 
 
Hopkins, Joan 
 
 
 
Shovlin, Siobhan 
Humphreys, James  
 
 
Tormey, Aoibhinn 
Johnston, Corina 
 
 
 
Troy, Ellen 
Kelly, Darren Jack  
 
 
 
Kitt, Tom 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Leddy, Ted  
 
Apologies for inability to attend were received for Councillors Tania Doyle, 
Robert O’Donoghue, John Walsh. 
 
The Mayor, Councillor B. McDonagh presided. 
 
OFFICIALS PRESENT 
 
 AnnMarie Farrelly (Chief Executive); Mary Egan (Director of Services/People, 
Corporate & Digital); John Quinlivan (Director of Services/Economic, 
Enterprise, Tourism and Cultural Development); Mary T Daly (Director of 
Services/Operations); Oliver Hunt (Head of Finance); David Storey (Director of 

2 
 
Services/Environment, Climate Action, Active Travel & Sports); Matthew 
McAleese (Director of Services Planning and Strategic Infrastructure); Paul Carroll 
(Director of Housing Services and Community Development); Liam Burke (Senior 
Executive Officer), Aoife Sheridan (Senior Executive Officer), Nikki Halleran 
(A/Senior Executive Officer). 
 
ANNOUNCEMENT 
 
The Mayor, Councillor. B. McDonagh, at the start of the meeting reminded 
Members that Standing Orders would apply to all aspects of the meeting. 
 
F/436/24 
   (Agenda Item No 1) 
Confirmation and Re-Affirmation of Minutes of Council Meeting held on 
Monday 14th October 2024 
 
Minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday  14th October 2024 
which had been circulated were considered.   
  
It was PROPOSED by Councillor B. McDonagh, seconded by Councillor M. 
McCamley and RESOLVED –  
  
“That the minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday  14th October 
2024 be ADOPTED.” 
  
  
F/437/24 
   (Agenda Item No ) 
QUESTIONS 
 
It was proposed by Councillor A. Tormey, seconded by Councillor M. McCamley 
and RESOLVED: 
  
“That in accordance with Standing Order No. 51, Questions numbered 2 to 20 be 
ADOPTED.” 
  
  
F/438/24 
   (Agenda Item No 2) 
Councillor C. Boland - Disruptive Council Tenants 
  
F/439/24 
   (Agenda Item No 3) 
Councillor P. Mulville - Consent Process for Operation Department works at 
Council Heritage Properties 
  
F/440/24 
   (Agenda Item No 4) 

3 
 
Councillor D. Mulligan - Direct Contact Number for Urgent Housing and 
Homelessness-Related Queries 
  
F/441/24 
   (Agenda Item No 5) 
Councillor J. Newman - Removing Trees from Parks 
  
F/442/24 
   (Agenda Item No 6) 
Councillor T. Doyle - Housing Loan Qualifying Criteria 
  
F/443/24 
   (Agenda Item No 7) 
Councillor P. Quinlan - Social Housing List 
  
F/444/24 
   (Agenda Item No 8) 
Councillor D. Butler - Enforcement Action regarding Dublin Airport 
  
F/445/24 
   (Agenda Item No 9) 
Councillor M. Quinn - Private Rental Inspections 
  
F/446/24 
   (Agenda Item No 10) 
Councillor D. Healy - Installation of Photovoltaic Solar Panels on Council-
owned Land and Buildings 
  
F/447/24 
   (Agenda Item No 11) 
Councillor B. Ryan - Empty Nesters Scheme 
  
F/448/24 
   (Agenda Item No 12) 
Councillor B. Ryan - Barriers to the Delivery of Housing Plans 
  
F/449/24 
   (Agenda Item No 13) 
Councillor C. Johnston - Electric Vehicle Charging Points 
  
F/450/24 
   (Agenda Item No 14) 
Councillor E. Dockrell - Broadmeadow Greenway Project 
  
F/451/24 
   (Agenda Item No 15) 
Councillor A. Graves - Protected Buildings 
  
F/452/24 
   (Agenda Item No 16) 
Councillor J. Walsh - Voids in Fingal 
  
F/453/24 
   (Agenda Item No 17) 
Councillor J. Humphreys - Dog Washing Stations 

4 
 
  
F/454/24 
   (Agenda Item No 18) 
Councillor J. Humphreys - Multi-storey Car Parks 
  
F/455/24 
   (Agenda Item No 19) 
Councillor J. Hopkins - Vacant and Derelict Homes Register 
  
F/456/24 
   (Agenda Item No 20) 
Councillor J. Hopkins - Collection of Bonfire Material 
  
F/457/24 
   (Agenda Item No 21) 
Report of Committees 
 
a 
Report of Corporate Policy Group Meeting held on Monday 4th 
November 2024  
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED. 
  
The Mayor called for a report on the recent judgment in relation to the lands at 
ALSAA.  
  
The Chief Executive read the following report into the record: 
“Following the recent judgment of the High Court in daa plc v Fingal County 
Council [2024] IEHC 589, delivered on the 17th October 2024, which 
quashed the zoning decision of Fingal County Council in relation to the 
ALSAA lands, on the basis that irrelevant, non-planning considerations had 
been taken into account, the Council must now decide whether it wants to 
apply for leave to appeal against the said judgment.  The lands are now 
effectively unzoned and any future zoning will require a decision of the 
Council. 
I do not recommend that leave to appeal be sought. An appeal for these 
purposes comprises an application for leave to appeal to the Court of 
Appeal, and if necessary, an application for leave to appeal to the Supreme 
Court. 
In the event that the Elected Members vote in favour of the said 
application(s) for leave to appeal, pursuant to s.153(2) of the Local 
Government Act 2001 (as amended), the Chief Executive shall continue to 
have the express authorisation of the Elected Members to apply for leave 
to appeal and if granted, to so appeal the said judgement and to do all 
things necessary for such purposes. 

5 
 
Having regard to the findings of the court above, it is proposed that leave 
to appeal is not sought.” 
  
The following motion was proposed by Councillor A. Graves and seconded by 
Councillor M. Quinn: 
  
“That this Council appeals, pursuant to s153(2) of the local Government Act 2001, 
the recent judgement of the High Court in daa plc vs FCC (2024) IEHC 589, 
quashing the zoning decision of FCC in relation to ALSAA lands.” 
  
The following amendment was proposed by Councillor A. Graves and seconded 
by Councillor M. Quinn: 
  
“That this Council appeals the recent judgement of the High Court in daa plc vs 
FCC (2024) IEHC 589, quashing the zoning decision of FCC in relation to ALSAA 
lands.” 
  
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
  
The Mayor called for a suspension of standing orders for a 3minute recess. 
  
The Mayor then instructed that a roll call vote be taken on the amended motion 
and on a division the voting resulted as follows: 
  
FOR:               9          NINE 
AGAINST:     26        TWENTY-SIX 
ABSTAIN:      1          ONE 
  
FOR: Councillors John Burtchaell, Ruth Coppinger, Angela Donnelly, Ann Graves, 
Jimmy Guerin, Breda Hanaphy, Dean Mulligan, Joe Newman, Malachy 
Quinn.                  
  
AGAINST: Councillors Cathal Boland, Darragh Butler, Eimear Carbone-Mangan, 
Luke Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Eoghan Dockrell, Cathal Haughey, David Healy, 
Joan Hopkins, James Humphreys, Corina Johnston, Darren Jack Kelly, Tom Kitt, 
Ted Leddy, Grainne Maguire, Brian Mc Donagh, Mary McCamley, Paul Mulville, 
Eoghan O'Brien, Tom O'Leary, JK Onwumereh, Brendan Ryan, Gerard Sheehan, 
Siobhan Shovlin, Aoibhinn Tormey, Ellen Troy.                
  
ABSTAIN: Councillor Patrick Quinlan.                

6 
 
  
The Mayor then declared the amended motion LOST.                      
  
It was AGREED that the appeal is not sought. 
 
b 
Report of Howth/Malahide (Services B) Area Committee Meeting held 
on Wednesday 6th November 2024  
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.  It was proposed by Councillor A. Tormey, seconded by Councillor 
D. Healy and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of Howth 
Malahide Services (B) meeting held on 6th November 2024 are hereby 
ADOPTED.” 
  
c 
Report of Blanchardstown/Mulhuddart/Castleknock-Ongar (Services 
B) Area Committee Meeting held on Thursday 7th November 2024  
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.  It was proposed by Councillor K. Dennison, seconded by 
Councillor M. McCamley and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of 
Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Services B meeting held on 
Thursday 7th November 2024, are hereby ADOPTED.” 
   
F/458/24 
   (Agenda Item No 22) 
Financial Matters 
 
a 
Authorisation of the Overdraft Accommodation 2025  
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED. 
It was proposed by Councillor B. McDonagh, seconded by Councillor JK. 
Onwumereh and AGREED:  
  
“That the Council approve, subject to the sanction of the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage, the securing of Overdraft Accommodation on 
the Council’s Revenue Account to a limit of €25m for the period 1st January 2025 
to 31st December 2025.” 
   
F/459/24 
   (Agenda Item No 23) 

7 
 
Proposed Disposal of Properties 
 
a 
Notice of Proposed Disposal of land including the Grant of a Right of 
Way and the Grant of a Wayleave to the rear of Whitestown Avenue, 
Dublin 15 to Gas Networks Ireland  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor M. McCamley and seconded by 
Councillor K. Dennison and RESOLVED: 
  
“That lands including the grant of a right of way and the grant of a wayleave to 
the rear of Whitestown Avenue, Dublin 15, as referred to in the Notice under 
S183 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended and dated 1st November 
2024, be disposed of to Gas Networks Ireland, in accordance with the terms 
specified therein.” 
  
  
b 
Notice of Proposed Disposal of Land at Mooretown, Swords, Co. 
Dublin to Glenveagh Homes Limited  
 
It was AGREED to defer this item to the December meeting. 
c 
Notice of Proposed Grant of Wayleave at Church Fields, Mulhuddart, 
Dublin 15 to Uisce Éireann  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor K. Dennison and seconded by 
Councillor M. McCamley and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the grant of wayleave at Church Fields, Mulhuddart, Dublin 15 as referred 
to in the Notice under S183 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended and 
dated 1st November 2024, be granted to Uisce Éireann, in accordance with the 
terms specified therein.” 
  
  
d 
Proposed Disposal of Fee Simple Interest of Dwellings  
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED. 
It was proposed by Councillor E. O’Brien and seconded by Councillor K. Dennison 
and RESOLVED: 
  

8 
 
“That the Fee Simple Interest referred to in the attached report be disposed of in 
accordance with the terms specified therein. 
 
F/460/24 
   (Agenda Item No 24) 
Declarations of Roads 
 
a 
Willan's Estate, Ongar, Dublin 15  
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor K. Dennison, seconded by Councillor A. Donnelly, 
and RESOLVED: 
  
 “That the roads referred to in the attached report be, and are hereby declared 
to be, public roads.” 
  
b 
Lily's Estate, Dublin 15  
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor K. Dennison, seconded by Councillor A. Donnelly, 
and RESOLVED: 
  
 “That the roads referred to in the attached report be, and are hereby declared 
to be, public roads.” 
   
F/461/24 
   (Agenda Item No 25) 
Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) Membership 2024 -2029 
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated 
was CONSIDERED.  
  
The Mayor informed the members a motion was received and has been ruled 
out of order. 
  
Following discussion, it was proposed by Councillor B. McDonagh seconded by 
Councillor E. O’Brien and AGREED the Membership to the seven Strategic Policy 
Committees as set out in the foregoing report. 
  
  
  
F/462/24 
   (Agenda Item No 26) 
Draft Traveller Accommodation Programme 2025 - 2029 

9 
 
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
A presentation was given to the Members by Liam Burke, Senior Executive 
Officer, Housing Department. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor J. Guerin, seconded by Councillor B. McDonagh 
and RESOLVED that- 
  
“That the Traveller Accommodation Programme 2025 – 2029 is 
hereby ADOPTED.” 
  
  
F/463/24 
   (Agenda Item No 27) 
Fingal Skills Strategy 2024-2029 
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
A presentation was given to the Members by Lorcan Blake, Grant Thornton and 
Aoife Sheridan, Senior Executive Officer, Economic, Enterprise, Tourism and 
Cultural Development. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor B. McDonagh, seconded by Councillor K. Dennison 
and RESOLVED that- 
  
“That the ‘Future Fingal: Fingal Skills Strategy 2024 – 2029’ be hereby ADPOTED.” 
  
F/464/24 
   (Agenda Item No 28) 
Chief Executive's Report 
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.   
  
The Chief Executive congratulated and expressed her thanks to Ms Helen O’Neill, 
Law Agent who recently retired in October 2024.  The Members were informed 
that Elaine McDonald has been appointed as interim law agent. 
  
The Mayor advised the Members that a motion has been received. 
  
The following motion was proposed by Councillor J. Guerin and seconded by 
Councillor J. Newman: 
  
“The recent judgement against Fingal County Council cited commentary of 
eleven member as one of the reasons for the ruling going against the Council.  

10 
 
This is because the court felt some contributions went beyond planning 
rationale. 
  
So as to avoid this in the future the members call upon the CE to ensure that all 
reports and documents in the next Development plan are prepared and 
presented to the members in one lot prior to the commencement of the plan so 
that these can be considered in the round by the members who can prepare 
properly as opposed to being forced to make contributions on documents that 
they have only received, in some cases, hours before meetings. 
  
This will afford the members in Fingal the same opportunities as enjoyed by our 
colleagues in other local authorities.” 
  
  
Following discussions, Councillor J. Guerin withdrew the motion. 
  
The Chief Executive’s report was NOTED. 
  
F/465/24 
   (Agenda Item No 29) 
Mayor's Business - Councillor B. McDonagh 
 
a 
Councillor B. McDonagh - Mayors for Peace  
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor B. McDonagh was proposed by Councillor 
B. McDonagh and seconded by Councillor M. McCamley. 
  
The motion was AGREED. 
  
b 
Councillor B. McDonagh - Domestic Violence Refuge Across Fingal  
 
It was AGREED to take Item 29b and Item 34 concurrently. 
  
The motion, in the name of Councillor B. McDonagh was proposed by Councillor 
B. McDonagh and seconded by Councillor M. McCamley. 
  
Following discussions, the motion was AGREED. 
   
F/466/24 
   (Agenda Item No 34) 
Councillor R. Coppinger - Domestic Violence Refuge Accommodation in 
Fingal 
 

11 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor R. Coppinger was proposed by Councillor 
R. Coppinger and seconded by Councillor J. Hopkins. 
  
Following discussions, the motion was AGREED. 
  
  
F/467/24 
   (Agenda Item No 30) 
Conference Report 
 
It was noted there was no business. 
  
F/468/24 
   (Agenda Item No 31) 
Correspondence 
 
a 
Letter dated 10th October 2024 from Donegal County Council Re - 
Extradition Procedures  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
b 
Letter dated 10th October 2024 from Donegal County Council Re - 
Hedge Cutting  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
c 
Email dated 14th October 2024 from Westmeath County Council Re 
Minister for Education - SPHE Classes  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
d 
Letter dated 15th October 204 from Roscommon County Council Re - 
Minister E. Ryan - School Transport  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
e 
Letter dated 15th October 2024 from Roscommon County Council - Re 
- Min. McConalogue Roadside Trees  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
   
F/469/24 
   (Agenda Item No 32) 
Departmental/Ministerial Correspondence 
 

12 
 
a 
Emailed dated 4th October 2024 from Minister of State, Sports Office 
Re Item 47 - Cllr T. O'Leary - Increase Funds for Fingal Sport and 
Community Facilities Via Sports Lotto Funds  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
MOTIONS - STATUTORY FUNCTIONS 
 
F/470/24 
   (Agenda Item No 33) 
Councillor D. Healy - Conditions aimed at preventing Multiple Apartment 
Units being sold to a Single Buyer 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor D. Healy was proposed by Councillor D. 
Healy and seconded by Councillor B. McDonagh. 
  
It was AGREED by the members to extend the meeting to conclude Item 33. 
  
Following discussion, the Mayor then instructed that a roll call vote be taken and 
on a division the voting resulted as follows: 
  
FOR:               34        THIRTY-FOUR 
AGAINST:     0          ZERO 
ABSTAIN:      0          ZERO 
  
FOR: Councillors Cathal Boland, John Burtchaell, Darragh Butler, Eimear 
Carbone-Mangan, Ruth Coppinger, Luke Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Angela 
Donnelly, Ann Graves, Jimmy Guerin, Breda Hanaphy, Cathal Haughey, David 
Healy, Joan Hopkins, James Humphreys, Corina Johnston, Darren Jack Kelly, Tom 
Kitt, Ted Leddy, Grainne Maguire, Brian Mc Donagh, Mary McCamley, Dean 
Mulligan, Paul Mulville, Joe Newman, Eoghan O'Brien, JK Onwumereh, Patrick 
Quinlan, Malachy Quinn, Brendan Ryan, Gerard Sheehan, Siobhan Shovlin, 
Aoibhinn Tormey, Ellen Troy.                         
  
The Mayor then declared the motion PASSED. 
  
F/471/24 
   (Agenda Item No 50) 
Councillor A. Donnelly - Water supply Issues - Uisce Éireann 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor A. Donnelly was proposed by Councillor A. 
Donnelly and seconded by Councillor B. McDonagh. 
  
The report was ACCEPTED. 
  

13 
 
 
 
 
The Meeting concluded at 8.00pm. 
 
 
 
MAYOR  
DATE  
 
