1 
 
Comhairle Contae Fhine Gall 
Fingal County Council 
 
 
Minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday, 12th January, 2026 in 
the Council Chamber - County Hall, Swords, at 5.00 pm 
 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
Councillors: 
Councillors: 
Boland, Cathal 
Boland, Mark 
 
 
Burtchaell, John 
Butler, Darragh 
 
 
 
  
Carbone-Mangan, Eimear  
Corkery, Luke 
 
 
Dennison, Kieran 
Dockrell, Eoghan 
Donnelly, Angela 
 
 
Guerin, Jimmy 
Hanaphy, Breda 
Haughey, Cathal 
 
Healy, David 
Hopkins, Joan 
Humphreys, James  
 
Johnston, Corina 
 
 
 
Kitt, Tom 
 
 
 
 
 
Leddy, Ted  
 
 
Maguire, Grainne 
McDonagh, Brian 
Mulligan, Dean 
Mulville, Paul 
Murphy, Tony 
Newman, Joe 
O’Brien, Eoghan 
O’Leary, Tom 
Onwumereh, JK 
Quinlan, Patrick 
Quinn, Malachy 
Ryan, Brendan 
Sheehan, Gerard 
Shovlin, Siobhan 
Smyth, John 
Troy, Ellen 
Walsh, John 
 
 
Apologies for inability to attend were received for Councillors Tania Doyle, 
Darren Jack Kelly, Mary McCamley, Helen Redwood and Aoibhinn Tormey.    
 
The Mayor, Councillor Tom O’Leary presided. 
 
OFFICIALS PRESENT 
AnnMarie Farrelly (Chief Executive); Oliver Hunt (Head of Finance); David Storey 
(Director of Services/Environment, Climate Action, Active Travel & Sports); 
Matthew McAleese (Director of Services /Infrastructure and Transport); Roisin 
Burke (Director of Services / Planning and Development); Paul Carroll (Director of 
Services /Housing Services); Mary Egan (Director of Services/People, Corporate & 

2 
 
Digital Services); John Quinlivan (Director of Services/Economic, Community and 
Cultural Development); Mary T. Daly (Director of Services/ Operations), Ciara O 
hAodha 
(Senior 
Executive 
Officer); 
Emily 
Crawley 
(Sports 
Programme 
Administrative Manager). 
 
  
  
F/1/26    (Agenda Item No ) 
ANNOUNCEMENT 
 
The Mayor, Councillor T. O’Leary, at the start of the meeting, reminded Members 
that Standing Orders would apply to all aspects of the meeting. 
  
The Mayor, welcomed and congratulated Ms Roisin Burke on her appointment 
as Director of Services to Planning and Development Department. 
  
F/2/26    (Agenda Item No 1) 
Confirmation and Re-Affirmation of Minutes of Council Meeting held on 
Monday 8th December 2025 
 
Minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday 8th December 2025 
which had been circulated were considered.   
  
It was PROPOSED by Councillor JK. Onwumereh seconded by Councillor K. 
Dennison and RESOLVED –  
  
“That the minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday 8th December 
2025 be ADOPTED.” 
  
  
F/3/26    (Agenda Item No 2) 
Nominations 
 
a 
Appointment of one Member to the Climate Action, Biodiversity, 
Environment Strategic Policy Committee  
 
It was AGREED to defer this item. 
b 
Appointment of one Member to the Eastern and Midland Regional 
Assembly (EMRA)  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED. 

3 
 
  
It was proposed by Councillor E. Dockrell and seconded by Councillor D. Butler 
and AGREED: 
  
“That Councillor Kieran Dennison be appointed as a member to the Eastern and 
Midland Regional Assembly (EMRA).” 
  
c 
Appointment of one Member to the Regional Health Forum  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor E. Dockrell and seconded by Councillor K. 
Dennison and AGREED: 
  
“That Councillor Luke Corkery be appointed as a member to the Regional Health 
Forum.” 
  
  
d 
Appointment of one Member to the Local Committee Development 
Committee (LCDC)  
 
It was AGREED to defer this item. 
 
F/4/26    (Agenda Item No ) 
QUESTIONS 
 
It was proposed by Councillor T. O’Leary, seconded by Councillor J. Walsh and 
RESOLVED: 
  
“That in accordance with Standing Order No. 51, Questions numbered 3 to 12 be 
ADOPTED.” 
  
  
F/5/26    (Agenda Item No 3) 
Councillor P. Quinlan - Update on the number of Social Homes Allocated in 
the last 20 years 
  
F/6/26    (Agenda Item No 4) 
Councillor JK Onwumereh - Update on the Need to Rezone Land for 
Residential Purposes in Fingal 
  
F/7/26    (Agenda Item No 5) 

4 
 
Councillor JK Onwumereh - Audit on Running Tracks in Fingal 
  
F/8/26    (Agenda Item No 6) 
Councillor D. Butler - Differential Rent Scheme 
  
F/9/26    (Agenda Item No 7) 
Councillor S. Shovlin - Securing New Bus Stops close to New Housing 
Developments 
  
F/10/26 
   (Agenda Item No 8) 
Councillor P. Mulville - Historic Landfills 
  
F/11/26 
   (Agenda Item No 9) 
Councillor A. Donnelly - Ethical Procurement Policy 
  
F/12/26 
   (Agenda Item No 10) 
Councillor J. Smyth - Private Rental Inspections 
  
F/13/26 
   (Agenda Item No 11) 
Councillor M. Quinn - Support for tenants who find themselves homeless 
following an Enforcement Notice 
  
F/14/26 
   (Agenda Item No 12) 
Councillor J. Humphreys - Flavours of Fingal 
  
F/15/26 
   (Agenda Item No 13) 
Report of Committees 
 
a 
Annual Chairpersons' Reports of the Strategic Policy Committee (SPC) 
Meetings held in 2025  
 
The reports by the Strategic Policy Committee Chairpersons which had been 
circulated were CONSIDERED and NOTED. 
  
b 
Report of Organisation, Procedures & Finance (OP&F) Committee 
which was held on Monday 8th December 2025  
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.  It was proposed by Councillor T. O’Leary, seconded by Councillor 
E. O’Brien, and RESOLVED: 
  

5 
 
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of 
Organisation, Procedure and Finance Committee (OP&F) Meeting held on 
Monday 8th December 2025, are hereby ADOPTED.” 
   
F/16/26 
   (Agenda Item No 13c) 
Report of Corporate Policy Group (CPG) Meeting which was held on 
Wednesday 7th January 2026 
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.  It was proposed by Councillor T. O’Leary, seconded by Councillor 
E. O’Brien, and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of Corporate 
Policy Group (CPG) Meeting held on Wednesday 7th January 2026, are hereby 
ADOPTED.” 
  
  
F/17/26 
   (Agenda Item No 14) 
Financial Matters 
 
It was NOTED that there was no business under this item. 
  
  
F/18/26 
   (Agenda Item No 15) 
Proposed Disposal of Properties 
 
a 
Notice of proposed lease of land at Parkvale, Baldoyle, Dublin 
13 to Baldoyle Boxing Club, Parkvale, Baldoyle, Dublin 13  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor D. Healy and seconded by 
Councillor B. McDonagh and RESOLVED: 
  
“That land at Parkvale, Baldoyle, Dublin 13, as referred to in the Notice under 
S183 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended and dated 12th December 
2025, be leased to Baldoyle Boxing Club, Parkvale, Baldoyle, Dublin 13in 
accordance with the terms specified therein.” 
  
 
 
  

6 
 
F/19/26 
   (Agenda Item No 16) 
Declarations of Roads 
 
It was NOTED that there was no business under this item. 
  
  
F/20/26 
   (Agenda Item No 17) 
Draft Fingal County Council Parking Control Bye-Laws 2026 
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED. A presentation was given to the Members by Mary T Daly, 
Director of Services, Operation Department. 
  
During the course of the discussion, the Mayor informed the members a 
number of motions were submitted.   
  
The following motion, was proposed by Councillor D. Healy and seconded by 
Councillor B. McDonagh: 
  
“That the Parking Bye-Laws be amended to allow for the issue of resident 
parking permits to residents of apartment buildings.” 
  
Following discussions, the Mayor, called for a 3 minute recess. 
  
On recommencement of the meeting, Councillor D. Healy withdrew his motion. 
  
Following discussion on resident permits for apartment it was AGREED to bring 
back as a headed item in March on the process which is required to make 
changes to the Bye-Laws. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor T. O’Leary, seconded by Councillor K. Dennison, 
and RESOLVED that –  
  
“That pursuant to Section 101 of the Road Traffic Act 1961, as amended by 
Section 6 of the Road Traffic Act 1968 and Section 36 of the Road Traffic Act, 
1994 (No. 7 of 1994), and having consulted with the Commissioner of An Garda 
Síochána, Fingal County Council hereby make the Parking Control Bye-Laws 2026 
and Fingal County Council Parking Control Bye-Laws 2020 are hereby revoked.”  
  
  
  
  

7 
 
F/21/26 
   (Agenda Item No 18) 
Draft Fingal County Council Strategic Policy Committees (SPC) Annual 
Policy Programme 2026 
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.  Following discussion, it was proposed by Councillor T. O’Leary, 
seconded by Councillor K. Dennison and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the Strategic Policy Committee Annual Policy Programme 2026 is 
hereby ADOPTED.” 
  
  
F/22/26 
   (Agenda Item No 19) 
Sports Equipment and Activity Grants 
 
A presentation was given to the Members by Emily Crawley, Sports Programme 
Administrative Manager, Sports Section. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor T. O’Leary, seconded by Councillor G. Maguire and 
AGREED. 
  
F/23/26 
   (Agenda Item No 20) 
Chief Executive's Report 
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED. 
  
The Mayor, informed the members a motion had been received by Councillor J. 
Humphreys and has been ruled out of order.  
  
It was agreed to amend the date in the report for the Skerries Active Travel Plan. 
  
The Chief Executives report was NOTED. 
  
  
F/24/26 
   (Agenda Item No 21) 
Mayor's Business - Councillor T. O'Leary 
 
a 
Councillor T. O'Leary - Civic Reception for Mr Pat Reen, Prosper Fingal  
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor T. O’Leary was proposed by Councillor T. 
O’Leary and seconded by Councillor E. O’Brien. 
  

8 
 
The motion was AGREED. 
  
b 
Councillor T. O'Leary - Civic Reception Balbriggan Cricket Club All-
Ireland Champions  
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor T. O’Leary was proposed by Councillor T. 
O’Leary and seconded by Councillor G. Maguire. 
  
The motion was AGREED. 
   
F/25/26 
   (Agenda Item No 22) 
Conference Report 
 
a 
Local Authorities Members' Association (LAMA) Spring Conference, 
28th and 29th January 2026, The Connacht Hotel, Old Dublin Road, 
Galway  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
   
F/26/26 
   (Agenda Item No 23) 
Correspondence 
 
a 
Letter dated 27th November 2025 from Limerick City and County 
Council Re - National Commemoration to mark the 150th 
Anniversary of the Catalpa Expedition  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
b 
Letter dated 2nd December 2025 from Longford County Council Re - 
Blister Packs of Medication  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
c 
Email dated 8th December 2025 from Chief Superintendent, DMR 
West Divisional Office - Re Item 38 Increasing number of incidents 
involving Scramblers and Scooters December 2024 Meeting  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
d 
Letter dated 9th December 2025 from Clare County Council Re - 
Vaginal Estrogen Gels and Creams  
 

9 
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
e 
Letter dated 9th December 2025 from Clare County Council Re - 
Ireland's declining economic competitiveness  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
f 
Letter dated 9th December 2025 from Clare County Council Re - 
Review of Local Government funding, powers and democratic 
structure  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
g 
Letter dated 10th December 2025 from Carlow County Council Re - 
Reform - Contest Future Presidential Elections  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
h 
Email received 19th December 2025 from Mr Jim Meade, Iarnród 
Éireann Re - Item 36 - Cllr J. Walsh - Accessibility at Train Stations 
January 2025 Council Meeting  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
   
F/27/26 
   (Agenda Item No 24) 
Departmental/Ministerial Correspondence 
 
a 
Email received 8th December 2025 from the office of the Minister of 
the Department of Justice Re - Item 38 Increasing Number of 
incidents involving Scrambler and Scooters December 2024 Council 
Meeting  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
MOTIONS - STATUTORY FUNCTIONS 
 
 
F/28/26 
   (Agenda Item No 25) 
Councillor C. Haughey - Oversight Report into Electoral Registers 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor C. Haughey was proposed by Councillor C. 
Haughey and seconded by Councillor E. O’Brien. 
  

10 
 
Following discussion the report was ACCEPTED. 
  
 
  
F/29/26 
   (Agenda Item No 26) 
Councillor P. Mulville - Biodiversity Budget for 2025 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor P. Mulville was proposed by Councillor J. 
Hopkins and seconded by Councillor P. Mulville. 
  
Following discussion the report was ACCEPTED. 
  
  
F/30/26 
   (Agenda Item No 27) 
Councillor D. Mulligan - Taken-in-Charge Process 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor D. Mulligan was proposed by Councillor D. 
Mulligan and seconded by Councillor J. Burtchaell. 
  
Following a discussion, the report was ACCEPTED. 
  
  
F/31/26 
   (Agenda Item No 28) 
Councillor M. McCamley - Sunscreen Dispensers 
 
It was AGREED to take Item 28 and Item 29 concurrently.  
  
The motion, in the name of Councillor M. McCamley was proposed by Councillor 
J. Walsh and seconded by Councillor M. Boland. 
  
Following a discussion, the report was ACCEPTED. 
  
  
F/32/26 
   (Agenda Item No 29) 
Councillor S. Shovlin - Pilot Project for Sunscreen Dispensers 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor S. Shovlin was proposed by Councillor S. 
Shovlin and seconded by Councillor K. Dennison. 
  
Following a discussion, the report was ACCEPTED. 
  
 

11 
 
 
 
  
F/33/26 
   (Agenda Item No 30) 
Councillor M. Quinn - Signage at Skateparks 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor M. Quinn was proposed by Councillor M. 
Quinn and seconded by Councillor A. Donnelly. 
  
Following a discussion, the report was ACCEPTED. 
  
 
  
F/34/26 
   (Agenda Item No 31) 
Councillor A. Donnelly - Funding for Energy Efficiency Retrofitting 
Programme 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor A. Donnelly was proposed by Councillor A. 
Donnelly and seconded by Councillor B. Hanaphy. 
  
Following a discussion, the motion was AGREED. 
  
  
  
F/35/26 
   (Agenda Item No 32) 
Councillor D. Healy - 30km/h Speed Limit 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor D. Healy was proposed by Councillor D. 
Healy and seconded by Councillor J. Walsh. 
  
Following a discussion, the motion was AGREED. 
  
  
  
F/36/26 
   (Agenda Item No 33) 
Councillor L. Corkery - Parking Regulations Near Schools 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor L. Corkery was proposed by Councillor L. 
Corkery and seconded by Councillor T. O’Leary. 
  
Following a discussion, the report was ACCEPTED. 
  

12 
 
  
 
 
  
F/37/26 
   (Agenda Item No 34) 
Councillor D.J. Kelly - Installation of CCTV Cameras 
 
It was AGREED to defer this item. 
 
  
F/38/26 
   (Agenda Item No 35) 
Councillor J. Walsh - Pet ownership in Social and Affordable Housing 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor J. Walsh was proposed by Councillor J. 
Walsh and seconded by Councillor M. Boland. 
  
Following a discussion, the motion was AGREED. 
  
  
F/39/26 
   (Agenda Item No 36) 
Councillor B. Hanaphy - Garda Vetting Procedure for Housing Applicants 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor B. Hanaphy was proposed by Councillor B. 
Hanaphy and seconded by Councillor A. Donnelly. 
  
Following a discussion, the report was ACCEPTED. 
  
  
F/40/26 
   (Agenda Item No 37) 
Councillor M. Boland - Crèche or Childcare Facilities in all Part 8 Housing 
Developments 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor M. Boland was proposed by Councillor M. 
Boland and seconded by Councillor J. Walsh. 
  
Following initial discussions, it was AGREED to extend the meeting to conclude 
this item. 
  
Following discussions, the Mayor informed the members an amended motion 
was received. 
  

13 
 
The amended motion was proposed by Councillor M. Boland and seconded by 
Councillor J. Walsh: 
  
“That the Chief Executive takes into consideration that all Part 8 housing 
developments where a crèche or childcare facility is proposed, it shall be a 
condition of the planning permission that the developer must ensure the facility 
is fully operational and a qualified operator is secured.” 
  
The amended motion was AGREED. 
  
  
 
 
 
The Meeting concluded at 20.12. 
 
 
 
MAYOR  
DATE  
 
