1 
 
Comhairle Contae Fhine Gall 
Fingal County Council 
 
 
Minutes of the Annual County Council Meeting held on Friday, 13th June, 2025 in 
the Council Chamber - County Hall, Swords, at 4.00 pm 
 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
Councillors: 
Councillors: 
Boland, Cathal 
Boland, Mark 
 
 
Burtchaell, John 
Butler, Darragh 
 
 
 
  
Carbone-Mangan, Eimear  
 
 
Corkery, Luke 
 
 
 
 
Dennison, Kieran 
Dockrell, Eoghan 
Donnelly, Angela 
 
 
Guerin, Jimmy 
Hanaphy, Breda 
Haughey, Cathal 
 
Healy, David 
Hopkins, Joan 
 
Johnston, Corina 
 
Kelly Darren Jack 
 
 
Kitt, Tom 
 
 
 
 
 
Leddy, Ted 
Maguire, Grainne 
 
 
 
 
McCamley, Mary 
McDonagh, Brian 
Mulligan, Dean 
Mulville, Paul 
Murphy, Tony 
Newman, Joe 
O’Brien, Eoghan 
O’Leary, Tom 
Onwumereh, JK 
Quinlan, Patrick 
Quinn, Malachy 
Ryan, Brendan 
Sheehan, Gerard 
Shovlin, Siobhan 
Smyth, John 
Tormey, Aoibhinn 
Walsh, John 
Apologies for inability to attend were received for Councillor Tania Doyle, 
Councillor James Humphreys, Councillor Helen Redwood and Councillor Ellen 
Troy.  
 
The Mayor, Councillor Brian McDonagh, presided. 
 
OFFICIALS PRESENT 
AnnMarie Farrelly (Chief Executive); Mary Egan (Director of Services/People, 
Corporate & Digital Services); John Quinlivan (Director of Services/Economic, 

2 
 
Enterprise, Tourism and Cultural Development); Oliver Hunt (Head of Finance); 
Paul Carroll (Director of Services /Housing Services and Community 
Development); Mary T Daly (Director of Services/Operations); David Storey 
(Director of Services/Environment, Climate Action, Active Travel & Sports); 
Fionnuala May (County Architect); Ciara O hAodha (Senior Executive Officer). 
 
  
 
  
F/289/25 
   (Agenda Item No ) 
Address of Outgoing Mayor 
 
The Mayor thanked the Chief Executive and her staff for their co-operation and 
dedication to the public and the Elected Members throughout the past year. He 
also thanked Deputy Mayor Councillor JK Onwumereh for all his support 
throughout the year and further thanked his fellow Councillors.  The Mayor 
thanked his wife Aoife and son Tadgh who attended a number of events during 
the year. 
  
Several Members then complimented the outgoing Mayor and Deputy Mayor on 
the manner in which they carried out the role of Mayor/ Deputy Mayor of Fingal 
throughout the past year. 
  
  
F/290/25 
   (Agenda Item No 1) 
Election of Mayor 
 
The Mayor then asked for nominations for the election of the Mayor. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor A. Tormey, seconded by Councillor L. Corkery: 
  
“That Councillor Tom O’Leary be elected Mayor.” 
  
It was then proposed by Councillor B. Hanaphy, seconded by Councillor D. 
Mulligan: 
  
“That Councillor Angela Donnelly be elected Mayor.” 
  
 
 
 

3 
 
The Mayor then instructed that a roll call vote be taken and on a division the 
voting resulted as follows: 
  
Councillor O’Leary:               21       TWENTY-ONE 
  
Councillor Donnelly:             14    FOURTEEN    
  
Abstain:                                     1      ONE 
  
  
Cllr. O’Leary:             Councillors Cathal Boland, Darragh Butler, Eimear Carbone-
Mangan, Luke Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Eoghan Dockrell, Jimmy Guerin, Cathal 
Haughey, David Healy, Darren Jack Kelly, Tom Kitt, Ted Leddy, Grainne Maguire, 
Tony Murphy, Joe Newman, Eoghan O'Brien, Tom O'Leary, JK Onwumereh, 
Gerard Sheehan, Siobhan Shovlin, Aoibhinn Tormey.                         
  
Cllr. Donnelly:       Councillors Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, Angela Donnelly, 
Breda Hanaphy, Joan Hopkins, Corina Johnston, Brian McDonagh, Mary 
McCamley, Dean Mulligan, Paul Mulville, Malachy Quinn, Brendan Ryan, John 
Smyth, John Walsh. 
  
Abstain:                Councillor Patrick Quinlan.  
  
The Mayor then DECLARED Councillor Tom O’Leary elected Mayor. 
  
Councillor O’Leary took the chair and was presented with the chain of office by 
the outgoing Mayor, Councillor Brian McDonagh. 
  
                         
  
F/291/25 
   (Agenda Item No ) 
Address by the Mayor of Fingal, Tom O'Leary 
 
The Mayor congratulated the outgoing Mayor and Deputy Mayor on their 
previous year’s work. The Mayor also thanked his family, friends and colleagues 
for their support over the years.   
  
 
 
 
 
  

4 
 
F/292/25 
   (Agenda Item No 2) 
Election of Deputy Mayor 
 
The Mayor, Councillor O’Leary, then asked for nominations for the position of 
Deputy Mayor. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor J. Guerin, seconded by Councillor E. O’Brien: 
  
“That Councillor Grainne Maguire be elected Deputy Mayor.” 
  
It was then proposed by Councillor P. Mulville, seconded by Councillor B. 
McDonagh: 
  
“That Councillor Joan Hopkins be elected Deputy Mayor.” 
  
The Mayor then instructed that a roll call vote be taken and on a division the 
voting resulted as follows: 
  
Councillor Maguire:               20       TWENTY 
  
Councillor Hopkins:               15    FIFTEEN         
  
Abstain:                                     1      ONE 
  
Cllr. Maguire:        Councillors Cathal Boland , Darragh Butler, Eimear Carbone-
Mangan, Luke Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Eoghan Dockrell, Jimmy Guerin, Cathal 
Haughey, Darren Jack Kelly, Tom Kitt, Ted Leddy, Grainne Maguire, Tony Murphy, 
Joe Newman, Eoghan O'Brien, Tom O'Leary, JK Onwumereh, Gerard Sheehan, 
Siobhan Shovlin, Aoibhinn Tormey.                  
Cllr. Hopkins:        Councillors Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, Angela Donnelly, 
Breda Hanaphy, David Healy, Joan Hopkins, Corina Johnston, Mary McCamley, 
Brian McDonagh, Dean Mulligan, Paul Mulville, Malachy Quinn, Brendan Ryan, 
John Smyth, John Walsh. 
  
Abstain:                Councillor Patrick Quinlan.  
  
The Mayor then DECLARED Councillor Grainne Maguire elected Deputy Mayor. 
  
The Mayor presented Councillor Maguire with the chain of office. 
  
Councillor Maguire thanked the Members and accepted the position of Deputy 
Mayor. 

5 
 
         
 
F/293/25 
   (Agenda Item No 3) 
Election of Area Committee Chairpersons 
 
a 
Election of Cathaoirleach of Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk/Swords Area 
Committee  
 
The Mayor, Councillor O’Leary, then asked for nominations for the position of 
Area Cathaoirleach of Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk /Swords Area Committee. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor A. Tormey, seconded by Councillor E. Dockrell:   
  
“That Councillor Luke Corkery be elected as Area Cathaoirleach of 
Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk /Swords Area Committee.” 
  
It was then proposed by Councillor P. Mulville, seconded by Councillor C. 
Johnston:   
  
“That Councillor D. Mulligan be elected as Area Cathaoirleach of 
Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk /Swords Area Committee.” 
  
The Mayor then instructed that a roll call vote be taken and on a division the 
voting resulted as follows: 
  
Councillor Corkery:           19      NINETEEN 
  
Councillor Mulligan:        16      SIXTEEN 
  
Abstain:                          
1        ONE 
  
Cllr. Corkery:                   Councillors Darragh Butler, Eimear Carbone-Mangan, 
Luke Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Eoghan Dockrell, Jimmy Guerin, Cathal Haughey, 
Darren Jack Kelly, Tom Kitt, Ted Leddy, Grainne Maguire, Tony Murphy, Joe 
Newman, Eoghan O'Brien, Tom O'Leary, JK Onwumereh, Gerard Sheehan, 
Siobhan Shovlin, Aoibhinn Tormey.                      
  
  
Cllr. Mulligan:        Councillors Cathal Boland , Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, 
Angela Donnelly, Breda Hanaphy, David Healy, Joan Hopkins, Corina Johnston, 
Mary McCamley, Brian McDonagh, Dean Mulligan, Paul Mulville, Malachy Quinn, 
Brendan Ryan, John Smyth, John Walsh.                                   
  

6 
 
Abstain:                Councillor Patrick Quinlan. 
  
The Mayor DECLARED Councillor Luke Corkery to be elected as Area 
Cathaoirleach of Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk /Swords Area Committee. 
  
b 
Election of Cathaoirleach of Blanchardstown-
Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Area Committee  
 
The Mayor, Councillor O’Leary, then asked for nominations for the position of 
Area Cathaoirleach of Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Area 
Committee. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor T. Kitt, seconded by Councillor JK. Onwumereh:   
  
“That Councillor Eimear Carbone-Mangan be elected as Area Cathaoirleach of 
Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Area Committee.” 
  
It was then proposed by Councillor D. Mulligan, seconded by Councillor A. 
Donnelly:   
  
“That Councillor John Burtchaell be elected as Area Cathaoirleach of 
Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Area Committee.” 
  
The Mayor then instructed that a roll call vote be taken and on a division the 
voting resulted as follows: 
  
Councillor Carbone-Mangan:    20      TWENTY         
  
Councillor Burtchaell:               15     FIFTEEN 
  
Abstain:                                    
1        ONE 
  
  
  
Cllr. Carbone-Mangan:    Councillors Cathal Boland , Darragh Butler, Eimear 
Carbone-Mangan, Luke Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Eoghan Dockrell, Jimmy 
Guerin, Cathal Haughey, Darren Jack Kelly, Tom Kitt, Ted Leddy, Grainne 
Maguire, Tony Murphy, Joe Newman, Eoghan O'Brien, Tom O'Leary, JK 
Onwumereh, Gerard Sheehan, Siobhan Shovlin, Aoibhinn Tormey.             
  
Cllr. Burtchaell:                   Councillors Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, Angela 
Donnelly, Breda Hanaphy, David Healy, Joan Hopkins, Corina Johnston, Mary 

7 
 
McCamley, Brian McDonagh, Dean Mulligan, Paul Mulville, Malachy Quinn, 
Brendan Ryan, John Smyth, John Walsh.          
  
Abstain:                          Councillor Patrick Quinlan. 
  
The Mayor DECLARED Councillor Eimear Carbone-Mangan to be elected as Area 
Cathaoirleach of Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Area 
Committee. 
  
  
c 
Election of Cathaoirleach of Howth/Malahide Area Committee  
 
The Mayor, Councillor O’Leary, then asked for nominations for the position of 
Area Cathaoirleach of Howth/Malahide Area Committee. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor E. O’Brien, seconded by Councillor E. Carbone-
Mangan: 
  
“That Councillor Cathal Haughey be elected as Area Cathaoirleach of Howth/ 
Malahide Area Committee.” 
  
It was then proposed by Councillor D. Healy, seconded by Councillor D. 
Mulligan:   
  
“That Councillor Joan Hopkins be elected as Area Cathaoirleach of Howth/ 
Malahide Area Committee.” 
  
The Mayor then instructed that a roll call vote be taken and on a division the 
voting resulted as follows: 
  
Councillor Haughey:        20      TWENTY 
  
Councillor Hopkins:         15      FIFTEEN 
  
Abstain:                          1       ONE 
  
  
Cllr. Haughey:       Councillors Cathal Boland , Darragh Butler, Eimear Carbone-
Mangan, Luke Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Eoghan Dockrell, Jimmy Guerin, Cathal 
Haughey, Darren Jack Kelly, Tom Kitt, Ted Leddy, Grainne Maguire, Tony Murphy, 
Joe Newman, Eoghan O'Brien, Tom O'Leary, JK Onwumereh, Gerard Sheehan, 
Siobhan Shovlin, Aoibhinn Tormey. 

8 
 
  
Cllr. Hopkins:        Councillors Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, Angela Donnelly, 
Breda Hanaphy, David Healy, Joan Hopkins, Corina Johnston, Mary McCamley, 
Brian McDonagh, Dean Mulligan, Paul Mulville, Malachy Quinn, Brendan Ryan, 
John Smyth, John Walsh. 
  
Abstain:                Councillor Patrick Quinlan. 
  
The Mayor DECLARED Councillor Cathal Haughey as Area Cathaoirleach of the 
Howth/Malahide Area Committee. 
  
  
 
The Meeting concluded at 17.05. 
 
 
 
MAYOR  
DATE  
 
