1 
 
Comhairle Contae Fhine Gall 
Fingal County Council 
 
 
Minutes of the County Council Special Meeting held on Friday, 12th September, 
2025 in the Council Chamber - County Hall, Swords, and remotely via MS Teams 
at 5.00 pm 
 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
Councillors: 
Councillors: 
 
Boland, Cathal 
Boland, Mark 
 
 
Burtchaell, John 
Butler, Darragh 
 
 
 
  
Carbone-Mangan, Eimear 
Corkery, Luke 
 
 
 
Dennison, Kieran 
Dockrell, Eoghan 
 
 
Guerin, Jimmy 
Hanaphy, Breda 
 
Hopkins, Joan 
Humphreys, James  
 
 
Kelly Darren Jack 
 
 
 
Leddy, Ted 
Maguire, Grainne 
McCamley, Mary 
 
 
 
McDonagh, Brian 
Mulligan, Dean 
Mulville, Paul 
Newman, Joe 
O’Brien, Eoghan 
O’Leary, Tom 
Onwumereh, JK 
Quinlan, Patrick 
Quinn, Malachy 
Redwood, Helen 
Ryan, Brendan 
Sheehan, Gerard 
Shovlin, Siobhan 
Smyth, John 
Troy, Ellen 
Walsh, John 
Apologies for inability to attend were received for Councillor Angela Donnelly, 
Councillor Tania Doyle, Councillor Corina Johnston, Councillor Aoibhinn Tormey. 
 
The Mayor, Councillor Tom O’Leary presided. 
 
 
OFFICIALS PRESENT 
AnnMarie Farrelly (Chief Executive); Mary Egan (Director of Services/People, 
Corporate & Digital Services); Ciara O hAodha (Senior Executive Officer). 
  
 

2 
 
  
F/397/25 
   (Agenda Item No 1) 
Opening by Mayor 
 
The Mayor, Councillor T. O’Leary, at the start of the meeting, reminded Members 
that Standing Orders would apply to all aspects of the meeting, and the purpose 
of the Special Meeting is for the consideration of the nomination of one named 
person to be a candidate at the Presidential Election, due to be held on Friday 
24th October 2025. 
  
The Mayor, informed the Members that two potential nominees would address 
the Council today Mr Gareth Sheridan and Ms Maria Steen and detailed the 
procedure for the special meeting. 
  
  
  
  
F/398/25 
   (Agenda Item No 2) 
Address by Prospective Nominees 
 
The Mayor then invited Mr. Gareth Sheridan to address the meeting for a period 
of ten minutes. Following Mr. Sheridan’s address, the Mayor called on Ms. Maria 
Steen to address the meeting for a period of ten minutes. 
  
  
F/399/25 
   (Agenda Item No 3) 
Questions and Answers 
 
Both potential nominees were present in the Chamber as several Members 
posed questions to the potential nominees. 
  
The prospective nominees responded to these questions for a period of ten 
minutes each. It was AGREED to give the nominees an additional ten minutes to 
respond and conclude.  
  
It was also AGREED to extend the meeting to conclude the items on the Agenda. 
  
  
F/400/25 
   (Agenda Item No 4) 
Vote to Identify Nominee 
 

3 
 
The Mayor then asked for a proposer and seconder for each of the prospective 
nominees. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor J. Newman, seconded by Councillor G. Maguire:  
  
“That Gareth Sheridan be included in the vote of Fingal County Council to 
identify a nominee as a candidate at the Presidential Election due to be held on 
Friday 24th October 2025.” 
  
It was proposed by Councillor G. Sheehan, seconded by Councillor E.  Troy: 
  
“That Maria Steen be included in the vote of Fingal County Council to identify a 
nominee as a candidate at the Presidential Election due to be held on Friday 
24th October 2025.” 
  
The Mayor then called for a roll call vote to be taken and on a division the voting 
resulted as follows: 
  
FOR MR. GARETH SHERIDAN:    7                   
FOR MS. MARIA STEEEN:            4         
ABSTAIN:                                   18 
  
FOR MR. GARETH SHERIDAN: Councillors, Kieran Dennison, Jimmy Guerin, 
Darren Jack Kelly, Grainne Maguire, Brian McDonagh, Dean Mulligan, Joe 
Newman. 
  
FOR MS. MARIA STEEEN: Councillors, Cathal Boland, Eimear Carbone-Mangan, 
Gerard Sheehan, Ellen Troy. 
  
ABSTAIN: Councillors, Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, Darragh Butler, Luke 
Corkery, Eoghan Dockrell, Breda Hanaphy, Joan Hopkins, James Humphreys, Ted 
Leddy, Paul Mulville, Tom O’Leary, Patrick Quinlan, Malachy Quinn, Helen 
Redwood, Brendan Ryan, Siobhan Shovlin, John Smyth, John Walsh.    
  
Ms Ciara OhAodha, Meetings Administrator, read the division of the voting result 
into the record. 
  
The Mayor then declared that following the preceding vote, a resolution be put 
to the Members of Fingal County Council to consider the nomination of Mr. 
Gareth Sheridan as a candidate at the Presidential Election due to be held on 
Friday 24th October 2025. 
  

4 
 
  
F/401/25 
   (Agenda Item No 5) 
Consideration of Resolution to Nominate the Agreed Nominee 
 
The resolution was proposed by Councillor J. Newman and seconded by 
Councillor DJ. Kelly. 
  
“Fingal County Council hereby resolves to nominate Gareth Sheridan to be a 
candidate at the Presidential Election due to be held on Friday 24th October 
2025.” 
  
The Mayor then called for a roll call vote on the resolution and on a division the 
voting resulted as follows: 
  
FOR:               7 
AGAINST:  
18 
ABSTAIN:  
5 
  
FOR:  Councillors, Cathal Boland, Jimmy Guerin, Darren Jack Kelly, Grainne 
Maguire, Joe Newman, Gerard Sheehan, Ellen Troy. 
  
AGAINST: Councillors, Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, Luke Corkery, Kieran 
Dennison, Eoghan Dockrell, Breda Hanaphy, Joan Hopkins, James Humphreys, 
Ted Leddy, Brian McDonagh, Paul Mulville, Tom O’Leary, Malachy Quinn, Helen 
Redwood, Brendan Ryan, Siobhan Shovlin, John Smyth, John Walsh.  
  
ABSTAIN: Councillors, Darragh Butler, Eimear Carbone-Mangan, Dean Mulligan, 
JK Onwumereh, Patrick Quinlan 
  
The Mayor then declared the resolution was NOT PASSED. 
  
 
 
The Meeting concluded at 19.20. 
 
 
 
MAYOR  
DATE  
 
