1 
 
Comhairle Contae Fhine Gall 
Fingal County Council 
 
 
Minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday, 9th March, 2026 in the 
Council Chamber - County Hall, Swords, at 5.00 pm 
 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
Councillors: 
Councillors: 
Boland, Cathal 
Boland, Mark 
 
 
Burtchaell, John 
Butler, Darragh 
 
 
 
  
Carbone-Mangan, Eimear  
Corkery, Luke 
 
 
Dennison, Kieran 
Dockrell, Eoghan 
Donnelly, Angela 
Doyle, Tania  
 
Guerin, Jimmy 
Hanaphy, Breda 
Haughey, Cathal 
 
Hopkins, Joan 
Humphreys, James  
 
Johnston, Corina 
Kelly, Darren Jack  
 
 
Kitt, Tom 
 
 
 
 
 
Leddy, Ted  
 
 
Maguire, Grainne 
McCamley, Mary 
McDonagh, Brian 
Mulligan, Dean 
Mulville, Paul 
Murphy, Tony 
Newman, Joe 
O’Brien, Eoghan 
O’Leary, Tom 
Quinlan, Patrick 
Quinn, Malachy 
Ryan, Brendan 
Sheehan, Gerard 
Shovlin, Siobhan 
Smyth, John 
Tormey, Aoibhinn 
Troy, Ellen 
Walsh, John 
 
 
Apologies for inability to attend were received for Councillors David Healy, JK 
Onwumereh and Helen Redwood.    
 
The Mayor, Councillor Tom O’Leary presided. 
 
OFFICIALS PRESENT 
Oliver 
Hunt 
(Director 
of 
Finance); 
David 
Storey 
(Director 
of 
Services/Environment, Climate Action, Active Travel & Sports); Matthew 
McAleese (Director of Services /Infrastructure and Transport); Roisin Burke 
(Director of Services / Planning and Development); Mary Egan (Director of 

2 
 
Services/People, Corporate & Digital Services); John Quinlivan (Director of 
Services/Economic, Community and Cultural Development); Mary T. Daly 
(Director of Services/ Operations), Fionnuala May, (County Architect); Aoife 
Lawler (Senior Executive Officer); Ciara O hAodha (Senior Executive Officer). 
 
  
 
  
F/100/26 
   (Agenda Item No ) 
ANNOUNCEMENT 
 
The Mayor, Councillor T. O’Leary, at the start of the meeting, reminded Members 
that Standing Orders would apply to all aspects of the meeting. 
  
The Mayor informed the Members that the Chief Executive and Paul Carroll, 
Director of Housing were away on official business and were not available for 
the meeting this evening, he also informed the Members no emergency motions 
were received. 
  
The Mayor thanked Mary T Daly, Director of Operations for her 40 years’ service 
to Local Government and wished her well in her retirement.   
  
The Members expressed their thanks and gratitude to Mary T Daly for her 
service and dedication over the years.   
  
Councillor Gerard Sheehan welcomed Councillor Darren Jack Kelly as a member 
of Aontú.  
  
  
  
  
F/101/26 
   (Agenda Item No 1) 
Confirmation and Re-Affirmation of Minutes of Council Meeting held on 
Monday 9th February 2026 
 
Minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday 9th February 2026 which 
had been circulated were considered.   
  
It was PROPOSED by Councillor J. Newman seconded by Councillor E. Carbone-
Mangan and RESOLVED –  
  

3 
 
“That the minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday 9th February 
2026 be ADOPTED.” 
  
  
F/102/26 
   (Agenda Item No 2) 
Nominations 
 
a 
Appointment of one Member to the Naming and Commemorative 
Committee  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor A. Tormey and seconded by Councillor L. Corkery: 
  
“That Councillor Kieran Dennison be appointed as a member to the Naming and 
Commemorative Committee.” 
  
  
It was then proposed by Councillor J. Walsh and seconded by Councillor B. 
McDonagh: 
  
“That Councillor Mary McCamley be appointed as a member to the Naming and 
Commemorative Committee.” 
  
Following discussion, Councillor Kieran Dennison withdrew his nomination. 
  
The Mayor DECLARED Councillor Mary McCamley be appointed as a member to 
the Naming and Commemorative Committee. 
  
  
b 
Appointment of one Member to the Public Realm 
Transportation/Mobility Management Strategic Policy Committee  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor D. Butler and seconded by Councillor P. Mulville 
and AGREED: 
  
“That Councillor Dean Mulligan be appointed as a member to the Public Realm 
Transportation/Mobility Management Strategic Policy Committee.” 

4 
 
  
   
F/103/26 
   (Agenda Item No ) 
QUESTIONS 
 
It was proposed by Councillor T. O’Leary, seconded by Councillor J. Humphreys 
and RESOLVED: 
  
“That in accordance with Standing Order No. 51, Questions numbered 3 to 17 be 
ADOPTED.” 
  
  
F/104/26 
   (Agenda Item No 3) 
Councillor P. Quinlan - Performance Related Payments 
  
F/105/26 
   (Agenda Item No 4) 
Councillor M. Quinn - Childcare Providers in Fingal Community Centres 
  
F/106/26 
   (Agenda Item No 5) 
Councillor P. Mulville - Illegal Parking on Footpaths 
  
F/107/26 
   (Agenda Item No 6) 
Councillor E. O'Brien - Youth Football Programme Delivery in Fingal 
  
F/108/26 
   (Agenda Item No 7) 
Councillor E. O'Brien - Budgetary Impact of the recent FAI decision to 
withdraw co-funding for the Role of Development Officers 
  
F/109/26 
   (Agenda Item No 8) 
Councillor M. Boland - Strategic Oversight Process for Estates Awaiting 
Taking-in-Charge 
  
F/110/26 
   (Agenda Item No 9) 
Councillor C. Haughey - Mobile Sauna Scheme 
  
F/111/26 
   (Agenda Item No 10) 
Councillor D. Butler - Social Media Accounts and Number of Followers 
  
F/112/26 
   (Agenda Item No 11) 
Councillor D. Healy - Built-up and Urban Area Speed Limits 
  
F/113/26 
   (Agenda Item No 12) 

5 
 
Councillor D. Healy - Beach and Dune Management 
  
F/114/26 
   (Agenda Item No 13) 
Councillor B. Ryan - Claims made by Members of the Public against the 
Council 
  
F/115/26 
   (Agenda Item No 14) 
Councillor B. Ryan - Demand for Four-Bedroom Homes 
  
F/116/26 
   (Agenda Item No 15) 
Councillor J. Smyth - Tendering for Playground Upgrades and Inspections 
  
F/117/26 
   (Agenda Item No 16) 
Councillor E. Troy - Vacant Council Homes 
  
F/118/26 
   (Agenda Item No 17) 
Councillor J. Humphreys - Deposit Return Scheme 
  
F/119/26 
   (Agenda Item No 18) 
Report of Committees 
 
a 
Report of Organisation, Procedures & Finance Committee (OP&F) 
Meeting held on Monday 9th February 2026  
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.  It was proposed by Councillor T. O’Leary, seconded by Councillor 
J. Guerin, and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of 
Organisation, Procedure and Finance Committee (OP&F) Meeting held on 
Monday 9th February 2026, are hereby ADOPTED.” 
  
b 
Report of Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk/Swords Services B Area Committee 
Meeting held on Thursday 12th February 2026  
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.  It was proposed by Councillor T. O’Leary, seconded by Councillor 
M. Boland, and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of 
Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk/Swords Area Committee Meeting held on Thursday 12th 
February 2026, are hereby ADOPTED.” 

6 
 
  
c 
Report of Howth/Malahide Services B Area Committee Meeting held 
on Wednesday 4th March 2026  
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.  It was proposed by Councillor E. O’Brien, seconded by Councillor 
B. McDonagh, and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of 
Howth/Malahide Services B Area Committee Meeting held on Wednesday 4th 
March 2026, are hereby ADOPTED.” 
  
d 
Report of Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Services 
B Area Committee Meeting held on Thursday 5th March 2026  
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.  It was proposed by Councillor T. Leddy, seconded by Councillor J. 
Walsh, and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of 
Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Services B Area Committee 
Meeting held on Thursday 5th March 2026, are hereby ADOPTED.” 
  
   
F/120/26 
   (Agenda Item No 19) 
Financial Matters 
  
F/121/26 
   (Agenda Item No 19a) 
Annual Report of the Audit Committee 2025 (inc. Audit Committee Annual 
Work Programme 2026) 
 
The report which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED. 
  
The report was NOTED. 
  
  
F/122/26 
   (Agenda Item No 20) 
Proposed Disposal of Properties 
 
a 
Notice of proposed disposal of land and grant of 
wayleave at Crowcastle Green, Swords, Co. Dublin to ESB Networks, 
St. Margaret’s Road, Finglas, Dublin 11  

7 
 
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor E. O’Brien and seconded by 
Councillor T. O’Leary and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the land and grant of wayleave at Crowcastle Green, Swords, Co. Dublin, as 
referred to in the Notice under S183 of the Local Government Act 2001 as 
amended and dated 29th January 2026, be disposed and granted to ESB 
Networks, St. Margaret’s Road, Finglas, Dublin 11, in accordance with the terms 
specified therein.” 
  
b 
Notice of proposed disposal of land and grant of wayleave at North 
Street, Swords, Co. Dublin to ESB Networks, St. Margaret’s Road, 
Finglas, Dublin 11  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor J. Guerin and seconded by 
Councillor J. Newman and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the land and grant of wayleave at North Street, Swords, Co. Dublin, as 
referred to in the Notice under S183 of the Local Government Act 2001 as 
amended and dated 29th January 2026, be disposed and granted to ESB 
Networks, St. Margaret’s Road, Finglas, Dublin 11, in accordance with the terms 
specified therein.” 
  
c 
Notice of Proposed grant of non-exclusive right of way at 
Thomondtown, Lusk, Co. Dublin to Donal Butterly and Ann Marie 
Butterly, Coldwinters, Lusk, Co. Dublin  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor T. O’Leary and seconded by 
Councillor M. Boland and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the grant of non-exclusive right of way at Thomondtown, Lusk, Co. Dublin, 
as referred to in the Notice under S183 of the Local Government Act 2001 as 
amended and dated 6th February 2026, be granted to Donal Butterly and Ann 
Marie Butterly, Coldwinters, Lusk, Co. Dublin in accordance with the terms 
specified therein.” 
   
F/123/26 
   (Agenda Item No 20d) 

8 
 
Proposed Disposal of Fee Simple Interest of Dwellings 
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED. 
It was proposed by Councillor T. O’Leary and seconded by Councillor J. Newman 
and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the Fee Simple Interest referred to in the attached report be disposed of in 
accordance with the terms specified therein.” 
  
  
F/124/26 
   (Agenda Item No 21) 
Declarations of Roads 
 
It was NOTED that there was no business under this item. 
  
  
F/125/26 
   (Agenda Item No 22) 
Part XI of the Planning & Development Act 2000 and Part VIII of the Local 
Government Planning & Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) for 
the Proposed Construction of a 13-unit Crisis Accommodation with 
associated staff and support accommodation at 30 Clonard Street, 
Balbriggan (PARTXI/008/25) 
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor D. Mulligan, seconded by Councillor M. Quinn, 
and AGREED 
  
F/126/26 
   (Agenda Item No 23) 
Fingal Road Safety Plan 2025/2027 
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED. 
  
The report was NOTED. 
  
F/127/26 
   (Agenda Item No 24) 
Draft Fingal Local Community Development Committee (LCDC) Annual 
Report 2025 
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
  
Following discussion, it was agreed to arrange a briefing with the Members.  

9 
 
  
The report was NOTED. 
  
  
F/128/26 
   (Agenda Item No 25) 
Chief Executive's Report 
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED. 
  
Following discussion, the Chief Executives report was NOTED. 
  
  
F/129/26 
   (Agenda Item No 26) 
Mayor's Business - Councillor T. O'Leary 
 
It was NOTED that there was no business under this item. 
  
  
F/130/26 
   (Agenda Item No 27) 
Conference Report 
 
a 
Irish Planning Institute (IPI) Annual Conference 2026, Raddison Blu, 
Athlone on Thursday 16th and 17th April 2026  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
b 
AILG Ending Violence Against Women and Girls - Cross border Shared 
Seminar - 24th and 25th March, Slieve Russell Hotel, Co Cavan  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
   
F/131/26 
   (Agenda Item No 28) 
Correspondence 
 
a 
Letter dated 10th February 2026 from Clare County Council Re - Irish 
Beekeepers' Association  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
b 
Letter dated 10th February 2026 from Wexford County Council Re - 
Outlawing the use of Anonymous Social Media Accounts  
 

10 
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
c 
Letter dated 12th February 2026 from Galway City Council Meeting 
Re - Failure of National Road Safety Leadership  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
d 
Letter dated 17th February 2026 from Wexford County Council Re - 
Insurance Cover for Residential and Commercial Insurers due to 
Flooding Risk Zones  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
e 
Letter dated 18th February 2026 from Westmeath County Council Re 
- Request to Review Income Thresholds for Social Housing and HAP  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
   
F/132/26 
   (Agenda Item No 29) 
Departmental/Ministerial Correspondence 
 
a 
Letter dated 3rd February from the office of the Minister for Housing 
Re - Item 31 - Cllr A. Donnelly - Funding for Energy Efficiency 
Retrofitting Programme 12th January 2026 Council Meeting  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
MOTIONS - STATUTORY FUNCTIONS 
 
F/133/26 
   (Agenda Item No 30) 
Councillor C. Haughey - "Chatty Bench" Signage on existing benches in each 
Local Electoral Area 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor C. Haughey was proposed by Councillor C. 
Haughey and seconded by Councillor E. Carbone-Mangan. 
  
Following a discussion, the report was NOTED.   
  
  
  
F/134/26 
   (Agenda Item No 31) 
Councillor JK Onwumereh - Audit on the Status/Condition of Fingal's Roads 
 

11 
 
It was agreed to DEFER this item. 
  
F/135/26 
   (Agenda Item No 32) 
Councillor P. Quinlan - Housing Supports 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor P. Quinlan was proposed by Councillor P. 
Quinlan,  as there was no seconder to the motion, the motion fell. 
  
  
  
F/136/26 
   (Agenda Item No 33) 
Councillor M. Quinn - Social Housing Acquisition Funding 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor M. Quinn was proposed by Councillor M. 
Quinn and seconded by Councillor J. Smyth. 
  
Following a discussion, the motion was AGREED.   
  
  
  
F/137/26 
   (Agenda Item No 34) 
Councillor C. Johnston - Provision of Not-for-Profit Community Childcare 
Facilities 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor C. Johnston was proposed by Councillor C. 
Johnston and seconded by Councillor J. Walsh. 
  
During discussion, Councillor C. Johnston clarified the motion was to 
“recommend” only. 
  
The motion was AGREED.   
  
  
  
F/138/26 
   (Agenda Item No 35) 
Councillor M. Boland - Crèche or Childcare Facility Delivery 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor M. Boland was proposed by Councillor M. 
Boland and seconded by Councillor J. Walsh. 
  
The Mayor informed the members an amended motion was received. 
  

12 
 
The amended motion was proposed by Councillor M. Boland and seconded by 
Councillor J. Walsh. 
  
Remove ‘operational, with an operator secured…’’ after ‘delivered and…’ and 
replace with ‘available for an operator’, so amended motion reads as follows: 
  
“That the Chief Executive resolves that in all private residential developments, 
where a crèche or childcare facility is proposed or required as part of the 
permission, it shall be a condition of planning that the developer must ensure 
the facility is fully delivered and available for an operator, this requirement shall 
be incorporated into planning conditions and enforced consistently to ensure 
that childcare infrastructure is delivered alongside new homes and is not 
deferred, left vacant or omitted post-construction.” 
  
Following discussion, the Mayor informed the members an additional amended 
motion was received. 
  
The additional amended motion was proposed by Councillor M. Boland and 
seconded by Councillor J. Walsh. 
  
Replace the word “resolves” with “ensures”, so amended motion reads as 
follows: 
  
“That the Chief Executive ensures that in all private residential developments, 
where a crèche or childcare facility is proposed or required as part of the 
permission, it shall be a condition of planning that the developer must ensure 
the facility is fully delivered and available for an operator, this requirement shall 
be incorporated into planning conditions and enforced consistently to ensure 
that childcare infrastructure is delivered alongside new homes and is not 
deferred, left vacant or omitted post-construction.” 
  
  
The additional amended motion was AGREED.   
  
  
F/139/26 
   (Agenda Item No 36) 
Councillor E. Troy - Dangerous Vehicles in this Council's Parks and Open 
Spaces 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor E. Troy was proposed by Councillor E. Troy 
and seconded by Councillor G. Sheehan. 
  

13 
 
Following a discussion, the motion was AGREED.   
  
  
F/140/26 
   (Agenda Item No 37) 
Councillor J. Walsh - Compulsory Sale of Derelict Properties 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor J. Walsh was proposed by Councillor J. 
Walsh and seconded by Councillor M. McCamley. 
  
It was AGREED to extend the meeting to conclude Item 38. 
  
Councillor P. Quinlan requested that it be recorded in the minutes that he does 
not support this motion. 
  
Following a discussion, the motion was AGREED.   
  
  
F/141/26 
   (Agenda Item No 38) 
Councillor D. Butler - Fingal Super Sports Hall 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor D. Butler was proposed by Councillor D. 
Butler and seconded by Councillor E. O’Brien. 
  
Following a discussion, the motion was AGREED.   
  
 
 
 
The Meeting concluded at 20.01. 
 
 
 
MAYOR  
DATE  
 
