1
Comhairle Contae Fhine Gall
Fingal County Council
Minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday, 8th April, 2024 in the 
Council Chamber - County Hall, Swords, at 5.00 pm
MEMBERS PRESENT
Councillors:
Councillors:
Boland, Cathal
Maguire, Grainne
Burtchaell, John
Mahony, Howard
Butler, Darragh
Manton, Brigid
Carey, Ian
McCamley, Mary
Conroy, Pamela
McDonagh, Brian
Dennehy, Brian
Mulligan, Dean
Donnelly, Angela
Mulville, Paul
Doyle, Tania
Newman, Joe
Graves, Ann
O’Brien, Eoghan
Griffin, Michelle
O’Donoghue, Robert
Guerin, Jimmy
O’Leary, Tom
Hanaphy, Breda
Onwumereh, JK
Healy, David
O’Reilly, Steve
Henchy, Adrian
Power, Karen
Hopkins, Joan
Ryan, Brendan
Humphreys, James
Shovlin, Siobhan
Kitt, Tom
Tormey, Aoibhinn
Lavin, Anthony
Treacy, Natalie
Walsh, John
The Mayor, Councillor Adrian Henchy presided.
OFFICIALS PRESENT
AnnMarie Farrelly (Chief Executive); Mary Egan (Director of Services/People,
Corporate & Digital); John Quinlivan (Director of Services/Economic,
Enterprise, Tourism and Cultural Development); David Storey (Director of
Services/Environment, Climate Action, Active Travel & Sports); Mary T Daly 
(Director of Services/Operations); Oliver Hunt (Head of Finance); Paul Carroll

2
(Director of Housing Services and Community Development); Matthew McAleese 
(Director of Services Planning and Strategic Infrastructure); Nikki Halleran 
(A/Senior Executive Officer), Carmel Brennan (Senior Architect).
F/127/24
   (Agenda Item No )
ANNOUNCEMENT
At the start of the meeting, the Mayor, Councillor. A. Henchy reminded Members 
that Standing Orders would apply to all aspects of the meeting.
 
F/128/24
   (Agenda Item No 1)
Confirmation and Re-Affirmation of Minutes of Council Meeting held on 
Monday 11th March 2024
Minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday 11th March 2024 which 
had been circulated were considered.  
 
It was PROPOSED by Councillor H. Mahony, seconded by Councillor B. 
McDonagh and RESOLVED – 
 
“That the minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday 11th March 
2024 be ADOPTED.”
 
 
F/129/24
   (Agenda Item No )
QUESTIONS
It was proposed by Councillor J. Humphries, seconded by Councillor T. Kitt and 
RESOLVED:
 
“That in accordance with Standing Order No. 51, Questions numbered 2 to 14 be 
ADOPTED.”
 
F/130/24
   (Agenda Item No 2)
Councillor J. Hopkins - Forest of Fingal Policy - Increase of trees in 2023 and 
Planting Target for 2024

3
F/131/24
   (Agenda Item No 3)
Councillor T. O'Leary - Swimming Pool Feasibility Study
F/132/24
   (Agenda Item No 4)
Councillor P. Mulville - Meaningful consultations with Disabled Persons' 
Organisations
F/133/24
   (Agenda Item No 5)
Councillor B. Manton - Sports and Recreational Facilities Audit
F/134/24
   (Agenda Item No 6)
Councillor B. Manton - Policy on Scooters in our Parks
F/135/24
   (Agenda Item No 7)
Councillor S. Shovlin - Drone Delivery Services
F/136/24
   (Agenda Item No 8)
Councillor A. Donnelly - Fingal County Council Customer Service wait times
F/137/24
   (Agenda Item No 9)
Councillor C. Boland - Proposed M2 Road Development
F/138/24
   (Agenda Item No 10)
Councillor J. Walsh - Inactive sites where full planning permission has been 
granted
F/139/24
   (Agenda Item No 11)
Councillor A. Graves - Housing Assistance Payment (HAP) Passport
F/140/24
   (Agenda Item No 12)
Councillor D. Healy - Planning enforcement information uploaded to the 
Planning Register
F/141/24
   (Agenda Item No 13)
Councillor J. Humphreys - Review of BoxUp Lockers
F/142/24
   (Agenda Item No 14)
Councillor J. Humphreys - Grass cutting in the County
F/143/24
   (Agenda Item No 15)
Report of Committees

4
a
Quarterly Reports - Strategic Policy Committee Meetings 
The reports by the Strategic Policy Committee Chairpersons which had been 
circulated were CONSIDERED and NOTED.
 
b
Report of Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk/Swords Services B Area Committee 
Meeting held on Thursday 14th March 2024 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor A. Henchy, seconded by Councillor G. Maguire, 
and RESOLVED:
 
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of 
Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk/Swords Services (B) Meeting held on Thursday 14th March 
2024, are hereby ADOPTED.”
 
c
Report of Corporate Policy Group Meeting held on Tuesday 2nd April 
2024 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor A. Henchy, seconded by Councillor G. Maguire and 
RESOLVED:
 
“That the recommendations contained in the report from Corporate Policy 
Group Meeting held on the 2nd April 2024, be APPROVED.”
 
 
d
Report of Howth Malahide Services B Area Committee Meeting held 
on Wednesday 3rd April 2024 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor A. Lavin, seconded by Councillor D. Mulligan and 
RESOLVED:
 
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of Howth 
Malahide Services (B) meeting held on 3rd April 2024 are hereby ADOPTED.”
 
e
Report of Blanchardstown/Mulhuddart/Castleknock-Ongar Services 
B Meeting held on Thursday 4th April 2024 

5
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor A. Henchy, seconded by Councillor G. Maguire and 
RESOLVED:
 
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of 
Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Services B meeting held on 
Thursday 4th April 2024, are hereby ADOPTED.”
 
F/144/24
   (Agenda Item No 16)
Financial Matters
a
Consideration of Draft 2023 Annual Financial Statement 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor H. Mahony, seconded by Councillor B. McDonagh 
and AGREED.
 
b
Annual Financial Statement 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, 
was CONSIDERED and following discussion, the report was NOTED.
 
F/145/24
   (Agenda Item No 17)
Proposed Disposal of Properties
a
Notice of proposed grant of a permanent wayleave on land at 
Bremore, Balrothery, Co. Dublin to ESB Networks 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor C. Boland and seconded by 
Councillor G. Maguire and RESOLVED:
 
“That the grant of a permanent wayleave on land at Bremore, Balrothery, Co. 
Dublin, as referred to in the Notice under S183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 as amended and dated 25th March 2024, be granted to ESB Networks, in 
accordance with the terms specified therein.”
 
 
b
Notice of proposed grant of wayleave at Blanchardstown Road 
North, Blanchardstown, Dublin 15 to Gas Networks Ireland 

6
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor A. Henchy and seconded by 
Councillor G. Maguire and RESOLVED:
 
“That the grant of wayleave at Blanchardstown Road North, Blanchardstown, 
Dublin 15, as referred to in the Notice under S183 of the Local Government Act 
2001 as amended and dated 25th March 2024, be granted to Gas Networks 
Ireland, in accordance with the terms specified therein.”
 
c
Notice of proposed grant of wayleave on land at Coldwinters, Dublin 
11 to Energia 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor M. McCamley and seconded by 
Councillor T. Kitt and RESOLVED:
 
“That the grant of wayleave on land at Coldwinters, as referred to in the Notice 
under S183 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended and dated 25th 
March 2024, be granted to Energia, in accordance with the terms specified 
therein.”
 
 
d
Notice of proposed disposal of land at 30 Clonard Street, Balbriggan, 
Co. Dublin to Aoibhneas 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor G. Maguire and seconded by 
Councillor C. Boland and RESOLVED:
 
“That lands at 30 Clonard Street, Balbriggan, Co. Dublin, as referred to in the 
Notice under S183 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended and dated 
25th March 2024, be disposed of to Aoibhneas, in accordance with the terms 
specified therein.”
 
 
e
Proposed Disposal of Fee Simple Interest of Dwellings 

7
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.   
It was proposed by Councillor A. Henchy and seconded by Councillor G. Maguire 
and RESOLVED:
“That the Fee Simple Interest referred to in the attached report be disposed of in 
accordance with the terms specified therein.”
 
F/146/24
   (Agenda Item No 18)
Declarations of Roads
a
Riverwood Gardens, Castleknock, Co Dublin 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor H. Mahony, seconded by Councillor S. Shovlin, and 
RESOLVED:
 
 “That the roads referred to in the attached report be, and are hereby declared 
to be, public roads.”
 
b
Emsworth, Kinsealy Lane, Co. Dublin 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor E. O’Brien, seconded by Councillor A. Lavin, and 
RESOLVED:
 
 “That the roads referred to in the attached report be, and are hereby declared 
to be, public roads.”
 
c
Golden Ridge, Phase 2, Rush, Co. Dublin 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor C. Boland, seconded by Councillor R. O’Donoghue, 
and RESOLVED:
 
 “That the roads referred to in the attached report be, and are hereby declared 
to be, public roads.”
 

8
d
Coopers Wood, Kinsealy, Co Dublin 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor A. Lavin, seconded by Councillor E. O’Brien, and 
RESOLVED:
 
 “That the roads referred to in the attached report be, and are hereby declared 
to be, public roads.”
 
F/147/24
   (Agenda Item No 19)
LADP/001/24 - Local Authority Development Proposal for 175 no. new 
Houses and Apartments, a Crèche, and associated site development works 
at New Road, Donabate. Notice of Intention to undertake development by 
a Local Authority (Fingal County Council) under Section 179A Of the 
Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended)
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
A presentation was given to the Members by Carmel Brennan, Senior Architect.  
 
The Mayor Councillor A. Henchy advised the Members that five motions were 
received.
 
The following motion in the name of Councillor A. Henchy was proposed by 
Councillor A. Henchy and seconded by Councillor B. Dennehy:
 
 
“That the Chief Executive commits to identifying a location for the provision of a 
community, cultural and entertainment space, as outlined in Objectives 6.7 and 
6.12 of the Donabate Local Area Plan and further to this, the Chief Executive, 
also provides a detailed update, including timelines, in relation to ongoing 
community projects for the Donabate Portrane area, including at the existing 
Community Centre & Ballisk House (Former Credit Union building) which Fingal 
County Council purchased in 2022.”
 
Following discussion, Councillor A. Henchy ACCEPTED the verbal report.
 
The following motion in the name of Councillor A. Henchy was proposed by 
Councillor A. Henchy and seconded by Councillor B. Dennehy:
 
“That the Chief Executive commits to carrying out an examination of the subject 
scheme with a view to increasing the provision of community space  together 

9
with the creche building. This  Council owned site represents an opportunity for 
the provision of additional community facilities and I would request that further 
consideration should be given to this, for example there is a real opportunity to 
increase the size of this building by making it two storey, multipurpose in its 
usage instead of a single storey Creche.”
 
Following discussion, Councillor A. Henchy ACCEPTED the verbal report.
 
 
The following motion in the name of Councillor P. Mulville was proposed by 
Councillor P. Mulville and seconded by Councillor A. Henchy:
 
“That this agenda Item be deferred, and that the meeting recommends the 
scheme be re-designed and brought back before council at a future date with 
the inclusion of a clearly identified site for the provision of a dedicated Arts, 
Cultural and Youth Centre.”
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS
 
Following discussion, the Mayor Councillor A. Henchy called for a 3 minute 
break.
 
 
The Mayor instructed that a roll call vote be taken and on a division the voting 
resulted as follows:
 
FOR:               5          FIVE
 
AGAINST:     24       TWENTY FOUR
 
ABSTAIN:        5       FIVE
 
 
FOR:                           Councillors; John Burtchaell; Joan Hopkins; Dean Mulligan; 
Paul Mulville; Robert O'Donoghue.
                        
AGAINST:                 Councillors Cathal Boland ; Darragh Butler; Brian Dennehy; 
Angela Donnelly; Tania Doyle; Ann Graves; Jimmy Guerin; Breda Hanaphy; David 
Healy; Tom Kitt; Anthony Lavin; Grainne Maguire; Howard Mahony; Brigid 
Manton; Mary McCamley; Eoghan O'Brien; Tom O'Leary; John-Kingsley 
Onwumereh; Steve O'Reilly; Karen Power; Siobhan Shovlin; Aoibhinn Tormey; 
Natalie Treacy; John Walsh.                        

10
 
 
ABSTAIN:                 Councillors Adrian Henchy; James Humphreys; Brian Mc 
Donagh; Joe Newman; Brendan Ryan.                        
 
 
The Mayor then DECLARED the Motion LOST.
 
 
 
The following motion in the name of Councillor R. O’Donoghue was proposed by 
Councillor R. O’Donoghue and seconded by Councillor P. Mulville:
 
“That the Chief Executive bring forward the meeting already agreed with the 
Crossroads Committee from Donabate and Elected Members to hear proposals 
that would be compatible with the objectives of Fingal Development Plan, 
Donabate Local Area Plan, Council Housing Policy and Section 179A (5) of the 
Housing Act 2000 as amended.”
 
Councillor R. O’Donoghue ACCEPTED the verbal report.
 
 
The following motion in the name of Councillor T. O’Leary was proposed by 
Councillor T. O’Leary and seconded by Councillor A. Lavin:
 
“Noting the campaign of an Arts, Cultural and Youth Centre that Fingal County 
Council identifies a suitable site in council ownership or acquire a site for such a 
centre in Donabate and scope out the required size of building, the capacity of 
the building (e.g. 150-200 seater theatre?) and uses therein and identify the 
minimum site size required, car parking required and bring a proposal to the 
relevant council committees for approval and agreement and identify the 
funding required for this proposal and where it might be sourced.”
 
Councillor T. O’Leary ACCEPTED the verbal report.
 
 
The report on the Local Authority Development Proposal for 175 no. new 
Houses and Apartments, a Crèche, and associated site development works at 
New Road, Donabate, was NOTED.
 
 

11
F/148/24
   (Agenda Item No 20)
Notice of Proposed Development Part XI Planning & Development Act 2000 
(as amended) Part 8 Planning & Development Regulations 2001 (as 
amended) Replacement Public Toilets at Rush South Beach, Rush, Co. 
Dublin
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.  A presentation was provided to the Members by Mary T Daly, 
Director of Services.  
 
It was proposed by Councillor. B. Dennehy, seconded by Councillor. R. 
O’Donoghue and RESOLVED that – 
 
“That Fingal County Council hereby resolves, pursuant to Part XI of the Planning 
& Development Act 2000 (as amended) and Part VIII of the Local Government 
Planning & Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) for proposed 
development and replacement of Public Toilets at Rush South Beach, Rush, Co. 
Dublin, be proceeded with as set out in the foregoing report.”
 
 
F/149/24
   (Agenda Item No 21)
Authorisation of Council to issuing of polling cards for Local Electors
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.
It was proposed by Councillor C. Boland, seconded by Councillor D. Healy, and 
RESOLVED that –
“In accordance with Section 55 of the Local Elections Regulations 1995, it is 
hereby resolved that polling information cards will be issued to electors for the 
local elections to take place on 7th June 2024.”
 
F/150/24
   (Agenda Item No 22)
Twinning of Howth with Cap d'Ail, France
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
A presentation was given to the Members by Nikki Halleran, Senior Executive 
Officer, Corporate Services.
 

12
The Mayor Councillor A. Henchy advised the Members that motions were 
received.
 
The following motion in the name of Councillor J. Hopkins was proposed by 
Councillor J. Hopkins and seconded by Councillor P. Mulville:
 
“To ask the Chief Executive to postpone the vote on the twinning of Howth with 
Cap D’Ail until such time as proper, full, open, publicly advertised consultation 
has taken place with the all the local population and residents regarding this 
twinning proposal.”
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS
 
It was AGREED to extend the meeting to conclude item 22 and the Chief 
Executives Report.
 
Following discussions, Councillor J. Hopkins submitted an amended motion. 
 
“That the vote be postponed on the twinning of Howth with Cap D’Ail until such 
time as proper, full, open, publicly advertised consultation has taken place with 
all the local population and residents regarding this twinning proposal.”
 
The amended motion was proposed by Councillor J. Hopkins and seconded by 
Councillor P. Mulville:
 
Following discussion, the Mayor instructed that a roll call vote be taken on the 
amended motion and on a division the voting resulted as follows:
 
FOR:               8          EIGHT
 
AGAINST:     24       TWENTY FOUR
 
ABSTAIN:        0       ZERO
 
FOR: Councillors Angela Donnelly; Tania Doyle; Ann Graves; Breda Hanaphy; 
Joan Hopkins; Dean Mulligan; Paul Mulville; Natalie Treacy.                                        
 
AGAINST:     Councillors Cathal Boland; Darragh Butler; Brian Dennehy; Jimmy 
Guerin; David Healy; Adrian Henchy; James Humphreys; Tom Kitt; Anthony Lavin; 
Grainne Maguire; Howard Mahony; Brigid Manton; Brian Mc Donagh; Joe 
Newman; Eoghan O'Brien; Robert O'Donoghue; Tom O'Leary; John-Kingsley 

13
Onwumereh; Steve O'Reilly; Karen Power; Brendan Ryan; Siobhan Shovlin; 
Aoibhinn Tormey; John Walsh.                        
 
The Mayor then DECLARED the Motion LOST.
 
 
The report was proposed by Councillor J. Guerin, seconded by Councillor J. 
Newman and RESOLVED that-
 
“That the Twinning of Howth with Cap d'Ail, France is hereby ADOPTED.”
 
 
 
F/151/24
   (Agenda Item No 23)
Chief Executive's Report
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.  
 
The Mayor Councillor A. Henchy advised the Members that a motion has been 
received.
 
The following motion in the name of Councillor J. Humphreys was proposed by 
Councillor J. Humphreys and seconded by Councillor B. McDonagh:
 
“That this Council reverses the decision made on September 11th, 2023, to 
implement a No Mow May policy on open spaces in the County, and instead, 
adopts a strategy based on the recommendations of the National Biodiversity 
Data Centre, including comprehensive mapping of grass areas and promotes the 
buy-in of resident associations, community organisations, and residents to 
support the original intention of No Mow May.”
 
Following discussion, the Mayor instructed that a roll call vote be taken and on a 
division the voting resulted as follows:
 
FOR:               17       SEVENTEEN
 
AGAINST:     14       FOURTEEN
 
ABSTAIN:        0        ZERO
 

14
FOR:                           Councillors Angela Donnelly; Ann Graves; Breda Hanaphy; 
Adrian Henchy; James Humphreys; Anthony Lavin; Brian Mc Donagh; Dean 
Mulligan; Joe Newman; Robert O'Donoghue; Tom O'Leary; Steve O'Reilly; 
Brendan Ryan; Siobhan Shovlin; Aoibhinn Tormey; Natalie Treacy; John 
Walsh.            
 
AGAINST:                 Councillors Cathal Boland ; Darragh Butler; Brian Dennehy; 
Jimmy Guerin; David Healy; Joan Hopkins; Tom Kitt; Grainne Maguire; Howard 
Mahony; Brigid Manton; Paul Mulville; Eoghan O'Brien; John-Kingsley 
Onwumereh; Karen Power.                      
 
 
The Mayor then DECLARED the Motion PASSED.
 
Following discussion, the Chief Executive’s report was NOTED.
 
 
F/152/24
   (Agenda Item No 36)
Councillor D. Healy - Effectiveness of Planning Enforcement - Planning 
Complaints
The motion, in the name of Councillor D. Healy was proposed by Councillor D. 
Healy and seconded by Councillor A. Henchy.
 
The report was ACCEPTED.
 
F/153/24
   (Agenda Item No 37)
Councillor J. Hopkins - Safe Universal Access for all Railway Stations
The motion, in the name of Councillor J. Hopkins was proposed by Councillor J. 
Hopkins and seconded by Councillor A. Henchy.
 
The report was ACCEPTED.
 
The Meeting concluded at 20.23.

15
MAYOR
DATE
