1 
 
Comhairle Contae Fhine Gall 
Fingal County Council 
 
 
Minutes of the Annual County Council Meeting held on Friday, 12th June, 2026 in 
the Council Chamber - County Hall, Swords, at 4.00 pm 
 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
Councillors: 
Councillors: 
 
 
Boland, Cathal 
Boland, Mark 
 
 
Burtchaell, John 
Butler, Darragh 
 
 
 
  
Carbone-Mangan, Eimear  
 
 
Corkery, Luke 
 
 
 
 
Dennison, Kieran 
Dockrell, Eoghan 
Donnelly, Angela 
 
 
Guerin, Jimmy 
Hanaphy, Breda 
Haughey, Cathal 
 
Healy, David 
Hopkins, Joan 
Humphreys, James  
Kelly Darren Jack 
 
 
Kitt, Tom 
 
 
 
 
 
Leddy, Ted 
Maguire, Grainne 
 
 
 
 
McCamley, Mary 
Mulligan, Dean 
Mulville, Paul 
Murphy, Tony 
Newman, Joe 
O’Brien, Eoghan 
O’Leary, Tom 
Onwumereh, JK 
Quinlan, Patrick 
Quinn, Malachy 
Ryan, Brendan 
Sheehan, Gerard 
Shovlin, Siobhan 
Smyth, John 
Tormey, Aoibhinn 
Troy, Ellen 
Walsh, John 
Apologies for inability to attend were received for Councillors  Tania Doyle, 
Corina Johnston, Brian McDonagh and Helen Redwood. 
 
The Mayor, Councillor Tom O’Leary presided. 
 
OFFICIALS PRESENT 
AnnMarie Farrelly (Chief Executive); Oliver Hunt (Director of Finance); David 
Storey (Director of Services/Environment, Climate Action, Active Travel & Sports); 
Matthew McAleese (Director of Services/Infrastructure and Transport); Roisin 

2 
 
Burke (Director of Services/Planning and Development); Paul Carroll (Director of 
Services/Housing Services); Mary Egan (Director of Services/People, Corporate & 
Digital Services); John Quinlivan (Director of Services/Economic, Community and 
Cultural Development); Sinéad Murphy (Director of Services/Operations), 
Fionnuala May (County Architect); Aoife Sheridan (Senior Executive Officer). 
 
  
  
F/302/26 
   (Agenda Item No ) 
Address of Outgoing Mayor 
 
The Mayor thanked the Chief Executive and her staff for their co-operation and 
dedication to the public and the Elected Members throughout the past year. He 
also thanked Deputy Mayor Councillor Grainne Maguire for all her support 
throughout the year and further thanked his fellow Councillors and family. 
  
Several Members then complimented the outgoing Mayor and Deputy Mayor on 
the manner in which they carried out the role of Mayor/ Deputy Mayor of Fingal 
throughout the past year. 
  
The Mayor welcomed the invited Deputies, visitors, and members of the public 
to the meeting. 
  
  
  
F/303/26 
   (Agenda Item No 1) 
Election of Mayor 
 
The Mayor then asked for nominations for the election of the Mayor. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor J. Guerin, seconded by Councillor J. Newman: 
  
“That Councillor Tony Murphy be elected Mayor.” 
  
It was then proposed by Councillor J. Walsh, seconded by Councillor D. Healy: 
  
“That Councillor Joan Hopkins be elected Mayor.” 
  
The Mayor then instructed that a roll call vote be taken and on a division the 
voting resulted as follows: 
  
Councillor Murphy:                      21       TWENTY-ONE 

3 
 
  
Councillor Hopkins:                       13     THIRTEEN 
  
Abstain:                                              1        ONE 
  
  
Cllr. Murphy:          Councillors Cathal Boland, Darragh Butler, Eimear Carbone-
Mangan, Luke Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Eoghan Dockrell, Jimmy Guerin, Cathal 
Haughey, Darren Jack Kelly, Tom Kitt, Ted Leddy, Grainne Maguire, Tony Murphy, 
Joe Newman, Eoghan O'Brien, Tom O'Leary, JK Onwumereh, Gerard Sheehan, 
Siobhan Shovlin, Aoibhinn Tormey, Ellen Troy. 
  
  
Cllr. Hopkins:          Councillors Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, Angela Donnelly, 
Breda Hanaphy, David Healy, Joan Hopkins, James Humphreys, Mary McCamley, 
Dean Mulligan, Paul Mulville, Malachy Quinn, John Smyth, John Walsh. 
  
Abstain:                    Councillor Patrick Quinlan.  
  
The Mayor then DECLARED Councillor Tony Murphy elected Mayor. 
  
Councillor Tony Murphy took the chair and was presented with the chain of 
office by the outgoing Mayor, Councillor Tom O’Leary. 
  
                         
  
  
F/304/26 
   (Agenda Item No ) 
Address by the Mayor of Fingal, Tony Murphy 
 
The Mayor thanked the Elected Members for their support, he also thanked his 
family, friends and colleagues for their support over the years.   
  
The Mayor congratulated the outgoing Mayor and Deputy Mayor on their 
previous year’s work. 
  
F/305/26 
   (Agenda Item No 2) 
Election of Deputy Mayor 
 
The Mayor, Councillor T. Murphy, then asked for nominations for the position of 
Deputy Mayor. 
  

4 
 
It was proposed by Councillor A. Tormey, seconded by Councillor E. Dockrell: 
  
“That Councillor Luke Corkery be elected Deputy Mayor.” 
  
It was then proposed by Councillor A. Donnelly, seconded by Councillor J. Walsh: 
  
“That Councillor Dean Mulligan be elected Deputy Mayor.” 
  
The Mayor then instructed that a roll call vote be taken and on a division the 
voting resulted as follows: 
  
Councillor Corkery:                      21       TWENTYONE 
  
Councillor Mulligan:                      13     THIRTEEN      
  
Abstain:                                              1        ONE 
  
Cllr. Corkery:          Councillors Cathal Boland , Darragh Butler, Eimear Carbone-
Mangan, Luke Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Eoghan Dockrell, Jimmy Guerin, Cathal 
Haughey, Darren Jack Kelly, Tom Kitt, Ted Leddy, Grainne Maguire, Tony Murphy, 
Joe Newman, Eoghan O'Brien, Tom O'Leary, JK Onwumereh, Gerard Sheehan, 
Siobhan Shovlin, Aoibhinn Tormey, Ellen Troy.             
  
Cllr. Mulligan:        Councillors Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, Angela Donnelly, 
Breda Hanaphy, David Healy, Joan Hopkins, James Humphreys, Mary McCamley, 
Dean Mulligan, Paul Mulville, Malachy Quinn, John Smyth, John Walsh. 
 
Abstain:                    Councillor Patrick Quinlan.  
  
The Mayor then DECLARED Councillor Luke Corkery elected Deputy Mayor. 
  
Councillor L. Corkery was presented with the chain of office by the outgoing 
Deputy Mayor, Councillor Grainne Maguire. 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

5 
 
F/306/26 
   (Agenda Item No 3) 
Election of Area Committee Chairpersons 
 
a 
Election of Cathaoirleach of Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk/Swords Area 
Committee  
 
The Mayor, Councillor T. Murphy, then asked for nominations for the position of 
Area Cathaoirleach of Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk /Swords Area Committee. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor A. Tormey, seconded by Councillor L. Corkery:   
  
“That Councillor Tom O’Leary be elected as Area Cathaoirleach of 
Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk /Swords Area Committee.” 
  
It was then proposed by Councillor A. Donnelly, seconded by Councillor B. 
Hanaphy:   
  
“That Councillor Malachy Quinn be elected as Area Cathaoirleach of 
Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk /Swords Area Committee.” 
  
The Mayor then instructed that a roll call vote be taken and on a division the 
voting resulted as follows: 
  
Councillor O’Leary:          21       TWENTYONE 
  
Councillor Quinn:             12       TWELVE 
  
Abstain:                                1          ONE 
  
Cllr. O’Leary:           Councillors Cathal Boland , Darragh Butler, Eimear Carbone-
Mangan, Luke Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Eoghan Dockrell, Jimmy Guerin, Cathal 
Haughey, Darren Jack Kelly, Tom Kitt, Ted Leddy, Grainne Maguire, Tony Murphy, 
Joe Newman, Eoghan O'Brien, Tom O'Leary, JK Onwumereh, Gerard Sheehan, 
Siobhan Shovlin, Aoibhinn Tormey, Ellen Troy.             
  
  
Cllr. Quinn:  Councillors Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, Angela Donnelly, Breda 
Hanaphy, David Healy, Joan Hopkins, Mary McCamley, Dean Mulligan, Paul 
Mulville, Malachy Quinn, John Smyth, John Walsh.                           
  
Abstain:                    Councillor Patrick Quinlan. 
  

6 
 
The Mayor DECLARED Councillor Tom O’Leary to be elected as Area 
Cathaoirleach of Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk /Swords Area Committee. 
 
 
b 
Election of Cathaoirleach of Blanchardstown-
Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Area Committee  
 
The Mayor, Councillor T. Murphy, then asked for nominations for the position of 
Area Cathaoirleach of Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Area 
Committee. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor T. Kitt, seconded by Councillor K. Dennison:   
  
“That Councillor Eimear Carbone-Mangan be elected as Area Cathaoirleach of 
Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Area Committee.” 
  
It was then proposed by Councillor B. Hanaphy, seconded by Councillor J. Walsh:   
  
“That Councillor Angela Donnelly be elected as Area Cathaoirleach of 
Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Area Committee.” 
  
It was then proposed by Councillor P. Quinlan that Councillor Patrick Quinlan be 
elected as Area Cathaoirleach of Blanchardstown-
Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Area Committee.  As this nomination was not 
seconded this nomination was not put to the floor.   
  
The Mayor then instructed that a roll call vote be taken and on a division the 
voting resulted as follows: 
  
Councillor Carbone-Mangan:   21       TWENTYONE              
  
Councillor Donnelly:                    12       TWELVE 
  
Abstain:                                           1          ONE 
  
  
  
Cllr. Carbone-Mangan:   Councillors Cathal Boland , Darragh Butler, Eimear 
Carbone-Mangan, Luke Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Eoghan Dockrell, Jimmy 
Guerin, Cathal Haughey, Darren Jack Kelly, Tom Kitt, Ted Leddy, Grainne 
Maguire, Tony Murphy, Joe Newman, Eoghan O'Brien, Tom O'Leary, JK 

7 
 
Onwumereh, Gerard Sheehan, Siobhan Shovlin, Aoibhinn Tormey, Ellen 
Troy.                    
  
Cllr. Donnelly:                    Councillors Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, Angela 
Donnelly, Breda Hanaphy, David Healy, Joan Hopkins, Mary McCamley, Dean 
Mulligan, Paul Mulville, Malachy Quinn, John Smyth, John Walsh.          
  
Abstain:                                Councillor Patrick Quinlan. 
  
The Mayor DECLARED Councillor Eimear Carbone-Mangan to be elected as Area 
Cathaoirleach of Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Area 
Committee. 
  
  
  
c 
Election of Cathaoirleach of Howth/Malahide Area Committee  
 
The Mayor, Councillor T. Murphy, then asked for nominations for the position of 
Area Cathaoirleach of Howth/Malahide Area Committee. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor E. O’Brien, seconded by Councillor J. Guerin: 
  
“That Councillor Aoibhinn Tormey be elected as Area Cathaoirleach of Howth/ 
Malahide Area Committee.” 
  
It was then proposed by Councillor D. Healy, seconded by Councillor P. Mulville:   
  
“That Councillor Joan Hopkins be elected as Area Cathaoirleach of Howth/ 
Malahide Area Committee.” 
  
The Mayor then instructed that a roll call vote be taken and on a division the 
voting resulted as follows: 
  
Councillor Tormey:          20       TWENTY 
  
Councillor Hopkins:         13       THIRTEEN 
  
Abstain:                                1         ONE 
  
  
Cllr. Tormey:           Councillors Darragh Butler, Eimear Carbone-Mangan, Luke 
Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Eoghan Dockrell, Jimmy Guerin, Cathal Haughey, 

8 
 
Darren Jack Kelly, Tom Kitt, Ted Leddy, Grainne Maguire, Tony Murphy, Joe 
Newman, Eoghan O'Brien, Tom O'Leary, JK Onwumereh, Gerard Sheehan, 
Siobhan Shovlin, Aoibhinn Tormey, Ellen Troy. 
  
Cllr. Hopkins:          Councillors Cathal Boland, Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, 
Angela Donnelly, Breda Hanaphy, David Healy, Joan Hopkins, Mary McCamley, 
Dean Mulligan, Paul Mulville, Malachy Quinn, John Smyth, John Walsh. 
  
Abstain:                    Councillor Patrick Quinlan. 
  
The Mayor DECLARED Councillor Aoibhinn Tormey as Area Cathaoirleach of the 
Howth/Malahide Area Committee. 
  
  
  
 
 
The Meeting concluded at 17.08. 
 
 
 
MAYOR  
DATE  
 
