1 
 
Comhairle Contae Fhine Gall 
Fingal County Council 
 
 
Minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday, 7th July, 2025 in the 
Council Chamber - County Hall, Swords, at 5.00 pm 
 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
Councillors: 
Councillors: 
 
Boland, Cathal 
Boland, Mark 
 
 
Burtchaell, John 
Butler, Darragh 
 
 
 
  
Carbone-Mangan, Eimear  
 
 
Corkery, Luke 
 
 
 
 
Dennison, Kieran 
Dockrell, Eoghan 
Donnelly, Angela 
 
 
Guerin, Jimmy 
Hanaphy, Breda 
Haughey, Cathal 
 
Healy, David 
Hopkins, Joan 
Humphreys, James  
 
Johnston, Corina 
 
Kelly Darren Jack 
 
 
Kitt, Tom 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
McCamley, Mary 
Mulligan, Dean 
Mulville, Paul 
Newman, Joe 
O’Brien, Eoghan 
O’Leary, Tom 
Onwumereh, JK 
Quinlan, Patrick 
Quinn, Malachy 
Redwood, Helen 
Shovlin, Siobhan 
Smyth, John 
Tormey, Aoibhinn 
Troy, Ellen 
Walsh, John 
Apologies for inability to attend were received for Councillor Tania Doyle, 
Councillor Ted Leddy, Councillor Grainne Maguire, Councillor Brian McDonagh, 
Councillor Brendan Ryan and Councillor Gerard Sheehan. 
  
 
The Mayor, Councillor Tom O’Leary presided. 
 
 
 

2 
 
OFFICIALS PRESENT 
AnnMarie Farrelly (Chief Executive); Oliver Hunt (Head of Finance); David Storey 
(Director of Services/Environment, Climate Action, Active Travel & Sports); 
Matthew McAleese (Director of Services /Planning and Strategic Infrastructure); 
Mary Egan (Director of Services/People, Corporate & Digital Services); John 
Quinlivan (Director of Services/Economic, Enterprise, Tourism and Cultural 
Development); Mary T Daly (Director of Services/Operations); Liam Burke (Senior 
Executive Officer);  Catherin O’Donovan (Senior Executive Officer); Ciara O 
hAodha (Senior Executive Officer); Pauline Burke (Administrative Officer). 
 
  
  
F/294/25 
   (Agenda Item No ) 
ANNOUNCEMENT 
 
The Mayor, Councillor T. O’Leary, at the start of the meeting, reminded Members 
that Standing Orders would apply to all aspects of the meeting. The Mayor also 
informed the Members one Emergency Motion was received and was ruled out 
of order. 
  
  
F/295/25 
   (Agenda Item No 1) 
Confirmation and Re-affirmation of Minutes 
 
a 
Confirmation and Re-affirmation of Minutes of Council Meeting held 
on Monday 9th June 2025  
 
Minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday 9th June 2025 which had 
been circulated were considered.   
  
It was PROPOSED by Councillor T. O’Leary seconded by Councillor M. McCamley 
and RESOLVED –  
  
“That the minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday 9th June 2025 
be ADOPTED.” 
  
  
b 
Confirmation and Re-affirmation of Minutes of Annual Meeting held 
on Friday 13th June 2025  
 

3 
 
Minutes of the Annual County Council Meeting held on Friday 13th June 2025 
which had been circulated were considered.   
  
It was PROPOSED by Councillor M. McCamley seconded by Councillor E. O’Brien 
and RESOLVED –  
  
“That the minutes of the Annual County Council Meeting held on Friday 13th June 
2025 be ADOPTED.” 
  
   
F/296/25 
   (Agenda Item No ) 
QUESTIONS 
 
It was proposed by Councillor T. O’Leary, seconded by Councillor E. O’Brien and 
RESOLVED: 
  
“That in accordance with Standing Order No. 51, Questions numbered 2 to 13 be 
ADOPTED with the agreed amendment.” 
  
  
F/297/25 
   (Agenda Item No 2) 
Councillor P. Mulville - Playful Street Pilot Scheme 
  
F/298/25 
   (Agenda Item No 3) 
Councillor P. Quinlan - Service Users who present to Fingal County Council 
as being served with a Notice to Quit 
  
F/299/25 
   (Agenda Item No 4) 
Councillor J. Hopkins - Draft Sports Audit 
  
F/300/25 
   (Agenda Item No 5) 
Councillor JK Onwumereh - Review and Update on Critical Workforce in 
Fingal 
  
F/301/25 
   (Agenda Item No 6) 
Councillor M. Quinn - Right Sizing Scheme 
  
F/302/25 
   (Agenda Item No 7) 
Councillor J. Newman - Office of the Planning Regulator 
  
F/303/25 
   (Agenda Item No 8) 
Councillor D. Healy - Beach Management Practices 

4 
 
  
F/304/25 
   (Agenda Item No 9) 
Councillor D. Healy - Beaches and Dunes for Climate Adaptation 
  
F/305/25 
   (Agenda Item No 10) 
Councillor C. Haughey - Ramp heights installed by Fingal County Council 
  
F/306/25 
   (Agenda Item No 11) 
Councillor B. Ryan - Active Travel Programme 
  
F/307/25 
   (Agenda Item No 12) 
Councillor A. Tormey - Cost of Branding Consultants - Swords Cultural 
Quarter 
  
F/308/25 
   (Agenda Item No 13) 
Councillor J. Humphreys - Bus Shelter Enhancement Programme (BSEP) 
  
F/309/25 
   (Agenda Item No 14) 
Report of Committees 
 
a 
Quarterly Report of Strategic Policy Committee Meetings  
 
The reports by the Strategic Policy Committee Chairpersons which had been 
circulated were CONSIDERED and NOTED. 
  
b 
Report of Organisation, Procedure & Finance Committee Meeting 
held on Monday 9th June 2025  
 
The report of the Organisation, Procedure & Finance Committee Meeting held 
on Monday 9th June 2025, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.  It was 
proposed by Councillor T. O’Leary, seconded by Councillor J. Walsh, and NOTED. 
  
c 
Report of Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk/Swords Services B Area Committee 
Meeting held on Thursday 12th June 2025  
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.  It was proposed by Councillor M. Quinn, seconded by Councillor 
L. Corkery, and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of 
Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk/Swords Services (B) Meeting held on Thursday 12th June 
2025, are hereby ADOPTED.” 

5 
 
  
d 
Report of Corporate Policy Group (CPG) Meeting held on Wednesday 
2nd July 2025  
 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.  It was proposed by Councillor T. O’Leary, seconded by Councillor 
E. Dockrell, and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of Corporate 
Policy Group (CPG) Meeting held on Wednesday 2nd July 2025, are hereby 
ADOPTED.” 
  
   
F/310/25 
   (Agenda Item No 15) 
Financial Matters 
 
a 
Local Property Tax (LPT)  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   
  
Mr Oliver Hunt, Head of Finance, gave a presentation to the Members.  
  
The Mayor informed the members four motions were received: 
  
Motion One 
The following motion was submitted and proposed by the Mayor Councillor T. 
O’Leary and seconded by Councillor E. O’Brien: 
  
MOTION TO VARY THE BASIC RATE OF LOCAL PROPERTY TAX IN THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE AREA OF FINGAL COUNTY COUNCIL 
“That the County Council determines in pursuance of the provisions of Section 
20 of the Finance (Local Property Tax) Act 2012 (as amended), that the basic rate 
of Local Property Tax stand varied downwards by 5.0 per cent for the period 
1st November 2025 to 31st October 2026 in respect of relevant residential 
properties situated in the administrative area of Fingal County Council.” 
  
Motion Two 
  
The following motion was submitted and proposed by Councillor P. Mulville and 
seconded by Councillor J. Walsh: 

6 
 
  
“That the County Council resolves that there be no variation to the Local 
Property Tax rate for the year 2026.” 
  
Motion Three 
The following motion was submitted and proposed by Councillor J. Smyth and 
seconded by Councillor M. Quinn: 
  
“The Local Property Tax, a tax on the family home, has been in place for 12 years 
now. During that time, it has added to the already huge strain on household 
budgets with a cost of living crisis spiralling out of control. 
  
The burden of poor planning and ineffective cost curtailment measures has 
fallen heavily on workers and their families with many 
households having had to make significant sacrifices just to get by. 
  
The Council has few opportunities apart from this to reduce the burden for 
households here in Fingal.  Sinn Fein supports using this rare opportunity to do 
exactly that. 
  
Sinn Féin is proposing that the full variation of minus 15% is applied in relation 
to the local property tax.” 
  
  
Motion Four 
The following motion was submitted and proposed by Councillor A. Tormey and 
seconded by Councillor L. Corkery: 
  
“To reduce LPT by -4%.” 
  
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS 
  
It was AGREED to take a 3 minute recess.  
  
  
Following discussions, the Mayor then instructed that a roll call vote be taken on 
the motion Local Property Tax stand varied downwards by 5.0 per cent and on a 
division the voting resulted as follows: 
  
FOR:               17       SEVENTEEN 
AGAINST:     16       SIXTEEN 
ABSTAIN:      0          ZERO 

7 
 
  
FOR: Councillors Cathal Boland, Darragh Butler, Eimear Carbone-Mangan, Luke 
Corkery, Kieran Dennison, Eoghan Dockrell, Jimmy Guerin, Cathal Haughey, 
Darren Jack Kelly, Tom Kitt, Joe Newman, Eoghan O'Brien, Tom O'Leary, JK 
Onwumereh, Siobhan Shovlin, Aoibhinn Tormey, Ellen Troy.                         
  
AGAINST: Councillors Mark Boland, John Burtchaell, Angela Donnelly, Breda 
Hanaphy, David Healy, Joan Hopkins, James Humphreys, Corina Johnston, Mary 
McCamley, Dean Mulligan, Paul Mulville, Patrick Quinlan, Malachy Quinn, Helen 
Redwood, John Smyth, John Walsh.                     
  
The Mayor then declared the motion PASSED.                        
  
  
  
  
  
The Mayor read the resolution into the record. 
  
“That the County Council determines in pursuance of the provisions of Section 
20 of the Finance (Local Property Tax) Act 2012 (as amended), that the basic rate 
of Local Property Tax stand varied downwards by 5.0 per cent for the period 
1st November 2025 to 31st October 2026 in respect of relevant residential 
properties situated in the administrative area of Fingal County Council.” 
  
The Mayor then declared the resolution RESOLVED. 
  
  
   
F/311/25 
   (Agenda Item No 16) 
Proposed Disposal of Properties 
 
a 
Notice of Proposed disposal of land at Pinnock Hill, Swords, Co. 
Dublin to St Michael’s House  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor E. O’Brien and seconded by 
Councillor D. Mulligan and RESOLVED: 
  
“That land at Pinnock Hill, Swords, Co. Dublin, as referred to in the Notice under 
S183 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended and dated 30th May 2025, 

8 
 
be disposed of to St Michael’s House in accordance with the terms specified 
therein.” 
  
b 
Proposed lease of land and grant of wayleave at Ballymastone, 
Donabate, Co. Dublin to St. Patrick’s Gaelic Football Club  
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor E. O’Brien and seconded by 
Councillor P. Mulville and RESOLVED: 
  
“That the grant of wayleave at Ballymastone, Donabate, Co. Dublin as referred to 
in the Notice under S183 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended and 
dated 24th June 2025, be granted to St. Patrick’s Gaelic Football Club, in 
accordance with the terms specified therein.” 
   
F/312/25 
   (Agenda Item No 16c) 
Proposed Disposal of land at Porterstown Road, Porterstown, Dublin 15 to 
Castlethorn Developments Luttrellstown Limited 
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor S. Shovlin and seconded by 
Councillor T. Kitt and RESOLVED: 
  
“That land at Porterstown Road, Porterstown, Dublin 15, as referred to in the 
Notice under S183 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended and dated 
27th June 2025, be disposed of to Castlethorn Developments Luttrellstown 
Limited in accordance with the terms specified therein.” 
  
  
F/313/25 
   (Agenda Item No 17) 
Declarations of Roads 
 
a 
Park Road, Rush, Co Dublin  
 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor M. Boland, seconded by Councillor T. O’Leary, and 
RESOLVED: 
  
 “That the roads referred to in the attached report be, and are hereby declared 
to be, public roads.” 

9 
 
  
   
F/314/25 
   (Agenda Item No 18) 
Draft Litter Management Plan 2025 - 2028 
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated 
was CONSIDERED.  A presentation was given to the Members by Ms Catherine 
O’Donovan, Senior Executive Officer, Environment Division. 
  
During the course of discussion, the Mayor informed the Members Councillor D. 
Healy submitted proposed amendments. 
  
The following amendment was proposed by Councillor D. Healy and seconded 
by Councillor J. Hopkins- 
Amendment 1 
  
a) Insertion of a box under Main Litter Contributors in Fingal section pages 15-
17: 
"Take-aways / fast food 
"Dealing with packaging from takeaway food consumed in public places, 
especially in our seaside towns, is a significant challenge for the Council, 
including emptying bins and addressing litter." 
  
b) include a green tick action on p. 18: 
"Return takeaway packaging to the business it came from." 
  
c. include a green tick action on p.19 
"Engage with the Local Authority on managing litter/waste from your premises in 
particular take-away packaging/litter." 
  
d. include a green tick action on p.20: 
"We will engage with Businesses who sell take away food to reduce waste and 
eliminate litter from their premises, including by means of s.16 notices where 
necessary." 
  
e.  include an action on p.38 reflecting the text under c and d above. 
   
Following discussion, the amendment was AGREED. 
  
It was then proposed by Councillor D. Healy and seconded by Councillor J. 
Hopkins- 

10 
 
  
Amendment 2 
a) amend text on p. 32 from: 
"Beaches are litter picked daily and raked once per week during the bathing 
season which runs from June to September. Additional bins are provided during 
this period."    
to 
"Most beaches are litter picked daily and raked once per week during the 
bathing season which runs from June to September. Additional bins are provided 
during this period. 
"Balcarrick Beach in Donabate is managed according to a Green Coast protocol 
which involves removing litter while ensuring seaweed and other natural debris 
is left on the beach to support beach and dune ecosystems and ecosystem 
services. The Council will consider extending this approach, fully or partially to 
other beaches, particularly those facing erosion challenges, subject to the 
availability of resources."  
 
b)  include an action on p.39 reflecting the text under a) above. 
  
Following discussion, the amendment was AGREED. 
  
It was proposed by Councillor. T. O’Leary, seconded by Councillor. J. Newman 
and RESOLVED that – 
  
“This 
Council resolves to in accordance with the Litter Pollution Act 1997 to: Adopt the 
Litter Management Plan 
2025 – 2028 as presented to Council on 7th 
July 2025 as amended.” 
  
The Mayor, Councillor T. OLeary read the resolution into the record. 
  
  
F/315/25 
   (Agenda Item No 19) 
Draft Homeless Action Plan 
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated 
was CONSIDERED.  A presentation was given to the Members by Mr Liam Burke, 
Senior Executive Officer and Ms Pauline Burke, Administrative Officer, Housing 
Department.  
  

11 
 
Following discussion, it was proposed by Councillor K. Dennison and seconded 
by Councillor JK. Onwumereh and RESOLVED: 
  
“This Council resolves to in accordance with Section 37 of the Housing 
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009 to: Adopt the Homeless Action Plan 2025 - 
2027 as presented to Council on 7th July 2025.” 
  
The Mayor, Councillor T. OLeary read the resolution into the record. 
  
  
  
  
  
F/316/25 
   (Agenda Item No 20) 
Chief Executive's Report 
 
SUSPENSION OF STANDIND ORDERS 
  
It was AGREED to extend the meeting to conclude item 20. 
  
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED 
and NOTED. 
  
  
F/317/25 
   (Agenda Item No 21) 
Mayor's Business - Councillor T. O'Leary 
 
a 
Councillor T. O'Leary - Zoning of Lands for Residential Homes in 
Fingal  
 
It was agreed to defer this item.  
 
F/318/25 
   (Agenda Item No 22) 
Conference Report 
 
a 
AILG Induction Training Day New Councillors  
 
The notice which had been circulated was NOTED. 
  
b 
MacGill Summer School 2025 will take place in Glenties 17th to 19th 
July 2025  
 

12 
 
The notice which had been circulated was NOTED. 
  
c 
The ALAN Conference, Westport, Co Mayo from 28th to 30th October 
2025  
 
The notice which had been circulated was NOTED. 
   
F/319/25 
   (Agenda Item No 23) 
Correspondence 
 
a 
Letter dated May 2025 from Carlow County Council Re - Occupied 
Territories Bill  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
b 
Letter dated May 2025 from Carlow County Council Re - Tenant-in-
situ Scheme  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
c 
Letter dated May 2025 from Carlow County Council Re - Paediatric 
Coeliac Disease Screening  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
d 
Letter dated 6th June 2025 from Limerick City & County Council Re - 
Tenant Incremental Purchase Scheme  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
e 
Letter dated 6th June 2025 from Limerick City & County Council Re - 
The Use of Smartphones  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
f 
Letter dated 12th June 2025 from Galway County Council Re - Review 
of Affordable Housing Policy  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
g 
Letter dated 13th June 2025 from Donegal County Council Re - 
Dismantling of the Triple Lock  

13 
 
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
h 
Letter dated 26th June 2025 from the Central Bank of Ireland Re - 
Item 51 - Cllr D. Mulligan - Israel Bond Scheme June Council Meeting  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
  
i 
Letter dated 27th June from Deputy Governor of Central Bank of 
Ireland - Re - Cllr D. Mulligan - Item 51 Israeli Bonds Scheme June 
Council Meeting 2025  
 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED. 
   
F/320/25 
   (Agenda Item No 24) 
Departmental/Ministerial Correspondence 
 
It was noted there was no business on this item. 
  
  
 
MOTIONS - STATUTORY FUNCTIONS 
 
F/321/25 
   (Agenda Item No 32) 
Councillor J. Newman - Local Area Plan Updates 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor J. Newman was proposed by Councillor J. 
Newman and seconded by Councillor T. O’Leary. 
  
The report was ACCEPTED. 
  
  
F/322/25 
   (Agenda Item No 36) 
Councillor M. McCamley - Visits to Heritage and Cultural Sites 
 
The motion, in the name of Councillor M. McCamley was proposed by Councillor 
M. McCamley and seconded by Councillor T. O’Leary. 
  
The report was ACCEPTED. 
  
 
 
 

14 
 
The Meeting concluded at 20.10. 
 
 
 
MAYOR  
DATE  
 
