1
Comhairle Contae Fhine Gall
Fingal County Council
Minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Monday, 12th February, 2024 in 
the Council Chamber - County Hall, Swords, at 5.00 pm
MEMBERS PRESENT
Councillors:
Councillors:
Boland, Cathal
Maguire, Grainne
Burtchaell, John
Mahony, Howard
Butler, Darragh
Manton, Brigid
Carey, Ian
McCamley, Mary
Conroy, Pamela
McDonagh, Brian
Dennehy, Brian
Mulligan, Dean
Dennison, Kieran
Mulville, Paul
Donnelly, Angela
Murphy, Tony
Doyle, Tania
Newman, Joe
Graves, Ann
O’Brien, Eoghan
Griffin, Michelle
O’Donoghue, Robert
Graves, Ann
O’Leary, Tom
Guerin, Jimmy
Onwumereh, JK
Hanaphy, Breda
O’Reilly, Steve
Henchy, Adrian
Power, Karen
Humphreys, James
Ryan, Brendan
Kitt, Tom
Shovlin, Siobhan
Lavin, Anthony
Tormey, Aoibhinn
Leddy, Ted
Treacy, Natalie
Walsh, John
Apologies for inability to attend were received for Councillor David Healy.
The Mayor, Councillor Adrian Henchy presided.

2
OFFICIALS PRESENT
AnnMarie Farrelly (Chief Executive); Mary Egan (Director of Services/People,
Corporate & Digital); John Quinlivan (Director of Services/Economic,
Enterprise, Tourism and Cultural Development); David Storey (Director of
Services/Environment, Climate Action, Active Travel & Sports); Mary T Daly 
(Director of Services/Operations); Oliver Hunt (Head of Finance); Paul Carroll
(Director of Housing Services and Community Development); Matthew McAleese 
(Director of Services Planning and Strategic Infrastructure); Aoife Sheridan 
(Senior Executive Officer); Nikki Halleran (A/Senior Executive Officer).
F/35/24
   (Agenda Item No )
ANNOUNCEMENT
At the start of the meeting, the Mayor, Councillor. A. Henchy reminded Members 
that Standing Orders would apply to all aspects of the meeting.
 
The Mayor and Members expressed their condolences on the passing of Shane 
O’Hanlon, Dublin GAA selector.
 
The Mayor and Members expressed their deepest condolences to Councillor 
John Walsh on the recent passing of his mother.
F/36/24
   (Agenda Item No 1)
Confirmation and Re-Affirmation of Minutes of Council Meeting held on 
Tuesday 16th January 2024
Minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Tuesday 16th January 2024 which 
had been circulated were considered.  
 
It was PROPOSED by Councillor H. Mahony, seconded by Councillor P. Conroy 
and RESOLVED – 
 
“That the minutes of the County Council Meeting held on Tuesday 16th January 
2024 be ADOPTED.”
 
 
F/37/24
   (Agenda Item No 2)
Nominations

3
a
Filling of casual vacancy on Fingal County Council following the 
resignation of Councillor Punam Rane 
The Mayor, Councillor A. Henchy, thanked Councillor P. Rane for her contribution 
and dedication over the past five years. 
 
The report by the Chief Executive, setting out the required procedures, which 
had been circulated was READ.
 
The nomination of Steve O’Reilly to fill the casual vacancy was proposed by 
Councillor K. Dennison and seconded by Councillor T. Leddy. 
 
In accordance with Section 19 of the Local Government Act 2001, as amended, 
Steve O’Reilly was co-opted as a Member of Fingal County Council.
 
b
Appointment of one Member to the Planning Strategic Transport & 
Infrastructure Development Strategic Policy Committee following 
the resignation of Councillor Punam Rane 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.
 
It was proposed by Councillor K. Dennison, seconded by Councillor. T. Leddy and 
AGREED:
 
“That Councillor Steve O’Reilly be appointed to the Planning Strategic Transport 
& Infrastructure Development Strategic Policy Committee.”
 
c
Appointment of one Member to Fingal Biodiversity Forum following 
the resignation of Councillor Punam Rane 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.
 
It was proposed by Councillor K. Dennison, seconded by Councillor. T. Leddy and 
AGREED:
 
“That Councillor Steve O’Reilly be appointed to the Fingal Biodiversity Forum.”
 
 
d
Appointment of one Member to Hansfield Strategic Development 
Zone Steering Group following the resignation of Councillor Punam 
Rane 

4
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.
 
It was proposed by Councillor K. Dennison, seconded by Councillor. T. Leddy and 
AGREED:
 
“That Councillor Steve O’Reilly be appointed to the Hansfield Strategic 
Development Zone Steering Group.”
 
e
Appointment of one Member to the Sports Partnership Committee 
following the resignation of Councillor Punam Rane 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.
 
It was proposed by Councillor K. Dennison, seconded by Councillor. T. Leddy and 
AGREED:
 
“That Councillor Steve O’Reilly be appointed to the Sports Partnership 
Committee.”
 
f
Appointment of one Member to Base Enterprise Centre following the 
resignation of Councillor Punam Rane 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.
 
It was proposed by Councillor K. Dennison, seconded by Councillor. T. Leddy and 
AGREED:
 
“That Councillor Steve O’Reilly be appointed to the Base Enterprise Centre.”
 
g
Nomination of one Member to Membership of Beaumont Hospital 
Board following the resignation of Councillor Punam Rane 
It was AGREED to defer this item to the March meeting.
F/38/24
   (Agenda Item No )
QUESTIONS
It was proposed by Councillor M. McCamley, seconded by Councillor E. O’Brien 
and RESOLVED:
 
“That in accordance with Standing Order No. 51, Questions numbered 3 to 16 be 
ADOPTED.”
 

5
F/39/24
   (Agenda Item No 3)
Councillor H. Mahony - Funding for The Arts
F/40/24
   (Agenda Item No 4)
Councillor S. Shovlin - Public Participation Network (PPN)  Registration
F/41/24
   (Agenda Item No 5)
Councillor J. Hopkins - Notice of Enquiry - Vacant and Derelict Buildings
F/42/24
   (Agenda Item No 6)
Councillor D.  Healy - Online systems available for reporting issues to this 
Council
F/43/24
   (Agenda Item No 7)
Councillor B. Manton - Audit of Tenancies in Social Housing
F/44/24
   (Agenda Item No 8)
Councillor B. Manton - Bridging loans for housing energy retrofit
F/45/24
   (Agenda Item No 9)
Councillor T. Murphy - Agreeing specific specification of Speed ramps
F/46/24
   (Agenda Item No 10)
Councillor B. Ryan - daa - Complaints - Aircraft Noise
F/47/24
   (Agenda Item No 11)
Councillor A. Graves - Planned Housing Provisions by this Council over the 
next three years
F/48/24
   (Agenda Item No 12)
Councillor A. Graves - Schemes being considered to deliver accommodation 
specifically for older people
F/49/24
   (Agenda Item No 13)
Councillor N. Treacy - Report on Process for Residents downsizing from 4 
and 3 bed to 2 and 1 bed properties
F/50/24
   (Agenda Item No 14)
Councillor P. Mulville - Report of the Inter Departmental Group on National 
Coastal Change Management Strategy

6
F/51/24
   (Agenda Item No 15)
Councillor A. Henchy - Update on the uptake of Housing Support Schemes 
from the Department of Housing
F/52/24
   (Agenda Item No 16)
Councillor K. Dennison - Postage costs by this Council, Draíocht Arts Centre 
and Seamus Ennis Centre
F/53/24
   (Agenda Item No 17)
Report of Committees
a
Report of Blanchardstown/Mulhuddart/Castleknock-Ongar Services 
B Area Committee Meeting held on Thursday 1st February 2024 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor T. Kitt, seconded by Councillor M. McCamley and 
RESOLVED:
 
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of 
Blanchardstown-Mulhuddart/Castleknock/Ongar Services B meeting held on 
Thursday 1st February 2024, are hereby ADOPTED.”
 
b
Report of Corporate Policy Group Meeting held on Tuesday 6th 
February 2024 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor E. O’Brien, seconded by Councillor R. O’Donoghue 
and RESOLVED:
 
“That the recommendations contained in the report from Corporate Policy 
Group Meeting held on the 6th February 2024, be APPROVED.”
 
 
c
Report of Howth Malahide Services B Area Committee Meeting held 
on Wednesday 7th February 2024 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor E. O’Brien, seconded by Councillor A. Lavin and 
RESOLVED:
 

7
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of Howth 
Malahide Services (B) meeting held on Wednesday 7th February 2024 are hereby 
ADOPTED.”
 
 
d
Report of Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk/Swords Services B Area Committee 
Meeting held on Thursday 8th February 2024 
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor T. Murphy, seconded by Councillor I. Carey and 
RESOLVED:
 
“That the recommendations contained in the report of Committee of 
Balbriggan/Rush-Lusk/Swords Services (B) Meeting held on Thursday 8th 
February 2024, are hereby ADOPTED.”
 
F/54/24
   (Agenda Item No 18)
Financial Matters
It was noted there was no business on this item.
F/55/24
   (Agenda Item No 19)
Proposed Disposal of Properties
a
Notice of Proposed disposal of Lands at Stephenstown Industrial 
Estate to Hannon Pharma Link Warehousing 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.   It was proposed by Councillor T. Murphy and seconded by 
Councillor G. Maguire and RESOLVED:
 
“That lands at Stephenstown Industrial Estate, as referred to in the Notice under 
S183 of the Local Government Act 2001 as amended and dated 31st January 
2024, be disposed of to Hannon Pharma Link Warehousing, in accordance with 
the terms specified therein.”
 
 
F/56/24
   (Agenda Item No 20)
Declarations of Roads
a
Barnageeragh Cove, Skerries, Co Dublin 

8
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor A. Henchy, seconded by Councillor G. Maguire, 
and RESOLVED:
 
 “That the roads referred to in the attached report be, and are hereby declared 
to be, public roads.”
 
 
b
Vauxhall Street, Balbriggan, Co Dublin 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor A. Henchy, seconded by Councillor G. Maguire, 
and RESOLVED:
 
 “That the roads referred to in the attached report be, and are hereby declared 
to be, public roads.”
 
 
c
Drynam Hall, Kinsealy, Co Dublin 
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor A. Henchy, seconded by Councillor G. Maguire, 
and RESOLVED:
 
 “That the roads referred to in the attached report be, and are hereby declared 
to be, public roads.”
 
 
F/57/24
   (Agenda Item No 21)
LADP/011/23 - Proposed development of 18 no. dwellings and associated 
site works at Rathmore Road, Lusk, Co. Dublin. Notice of Intention to 
undertake development by a Local Authority (Fingal County Council) under 
Section 179A Of the Planning and Development Act, 2000 (as amended)
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED and the report was NOTED.
F/58/24
   (Agenda Item No 22)

9
Part 8 of the PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 2001 (as 
amended). Proposed development of Public Playground at Laurel Lodge 
Park, Castleknock, Dublin 15
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor P. Conroy, seconded by Councillor J. Walsh, 
and AGREED.
F/59/24
   (Agenda Item No 23)
Part 8 of the PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 2001 (as 
amended). Proposed improvements to Corduff Park, Dublin 15
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.  
It was proposed by Councillor M. McCamley, seconded by Councillor B. Hanaphy, 
and AGREED.
 
 
F/60/24
   (Agenda Item No 24)
Proposed Amendments to the Road Traffic (Special Speed Limits) (County 
of Fingal) Bye-Laws 2020 - Damastown Way, Dublin 15
 
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.  It was proposed by Councillor A. Henchy, seconded by Councillor 
G. Maguire, and AGREED:
 
Fingal County Council, in exercise with the powers conferred on it by Section 9 of 
the Road Traffic Act 2004 (No. 44 of 2004), as amended by Section 6 of the Road 
Traffic Act 2010 (No. 25 of 2010), and Section 2 of the Road Traffic Act 2016 (No. 
21 of 2016) and following consultation with An Garda Síochána, makes the 
following Special Speed Limit Bye-Law 2024. 
 
 Reduction of Speed Limit from 60kmph to 50kmph at Damastown Way, Dublin 15 
 
F/61/24
   (Agenda Item No 25)
Draft Climate Action Plan 2024 - 2029
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was CONSIDERED.
 

10
The Mayor Councillor A. Henchy advised the Members that two motions were 
received, it was AGREED to take the motions at this time.
 
The following motion in the name of Councillor A. Tormey was proposed by 
Councillor A. Tormey and seconded by Councillor T. O’Leary:
 
“That Fingal County Council liaises with the Office of Public Works to set up a 
means to facilitate regular engagement between the OPW, councillors, and 
council officials about flood risk and defence.”
 
Report:
If this motion is passed it will be forwarded to the OPW.  However, it should be 
noted that the OPW are undertaking a review of their Preliminary  Flood Risk 
Assessment for the state and this process presents an opportunity for the 
members to engage with the OPW regarding flooding risk in Fingal. 
 
Following discussions, the motion was AGREED.
 
 
 
The following motion in the name of Councillor I. Carey was proposed by 
Councillor I. Carey and seconded by Councillor P. Conroy:
 
“To include an action for transport-related emissions as follows:
Action: Publish in annual progress reports of the LACAP, any publicly available 
figures relating to Dublin Airport emissions, and invite the daa to provide 
progress updates and plans to meet the national carbon neutrality objective. 
Indicator: figures published annually
Action Holder: ECAAT Timeframe: Annually”
 
Following discussions, the motion was AGREED.
 
It was proposed by Councillor A. Henchy, seconded by Councillor G. Maguire, 
and RESOLVED:
 
“That the Climate Action Plan 2024 – 2029 is hereby ADOPTED.”
 
F/62/24
   (Agenda Item No 26)
Presentation on 2023 Architectural Conservation Grants
A presentation was given to the Members by Helena Bergin, Senior Executive 
Architectural Conservation Officer.  Following discussion, the report was NOTED.

11
 
F/63/24
   (Agenda Item No 27)
Draft Economic Development Strategy
The report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was CONSIDERED.  
A presentation was given to the Members by Mr. Andrew Webb from Grant 
Thornton.
 
The Mayor Councillor A. Henchy advised the Members that two motions were 
received. 
 
The following motion in the name of Councillor I. Carey was proposed by 
Councillor I. Carey and seconded by Councillor P. Conroy:
 
“Under Objective 1 – Sustainable Fingal, the draft Economic Development 
Strategy be amended to include the following Action –
 
Action 1.1.5
To monitor and identify economic forecasts or trends which may impact the local 
economy and work proactively with relevant Agencies and Stakeholders in the 
development of just transition planning within the Fingal economy that minimises the 
impact of the move towards a carbon-neutral economy on businesses and 
communities.”
 
Report:
The motion proposes to include an Action that is consistent with the objectives 
of the draft Economic Development Strategy.
It is in order that the Motion be agreed.
 
Following discussions, the motion was AGREED.
 
 
The following motion in the name of Councillor B. McDonagh was proposed by 
Councillor B. McDonagh and seconded by Councillor D. Mulligan:
 
“That the Draft Fingal Economic Development Strategy be amended at Objective 
5.5 text by inserting "and sustainable " after Balanced and "with due regard to 
the health and wellbeing of Fingal residents in line with scientific evidence from 
the WHO in relation to the impact of aircraft noise on human health ".   
 
Resulting in 

12
Objective 5.5 Dublin Airport Support the balanced and sustainable development of 
Dublin Airport, in line with the National Aviation Policy, County Development Plan, 
Local Area Plan, and other applicable legislation and permissions.
 
Changing to 
Objective 5.5 Dublin Airport Support the balanced and sustainable development of 
Dublin Airport, in line with the National Aviation Policy, County Development Plan, 
Local Area Plan, and other applicable legislation and permissions and with due 
regard to the health and wellbeing of Fingal residents in line with scientific evidence 
from the WHO in relation to the impact of aircraft noise on human health.”
 
Report:
The insertion of the word “sustainable” is acceptable however much of what is proposed 
goes further than the National, Regional and County Development Plan Policy and is 
therefore beyond the remit of the Strategy.
 
It is proposed that the following more limited amendment would be in line with these 
policies, would be acceptable and in order that the following be agreed – 
 
To insert the words “and sustainable” after the word balanced and “and "with due 
regard to the health and wellbeing of Fingal residents” after the words “applicable 
legislation and permissions” to read as follows –
 
“Objective 5.5 Dublin Airport Support the balanced and sustainable development of Dublin 
Airport, in line with the National Aviation Policy, County Development Plan, Local Area Plan, 
and other applicable legislation and permissions and with due regard to the health and 
wellbeing of Fingal residents.”
 
Following discussion, Councillor B. McDonagh ACCEPTED the report.
 
 
It was proposed by Councillor A. Henchy, seconded by Councillor G. Maguire and 
RESOLVED:
 
“That the Economic Development Strategy is hereby ADOPTED.”
 
 
F/64/24
   (Agenda Item No 28)
Draft Strategic Policy Committee Annual Policy Programme 2024

13
The attached report by the Chief Executive which had been circulated was 
CONSIDERED.  Following discussion, it was proposed by Councillor A. Henchy, 
seconded by Councillor G. Maguire and RESOLVED:
 
“That the Strategic Policy Committee Annual Policy Programme 2024 is 
hereby ADOPTED.”
 
F/65/24
   (Agenda Item No 29)
St. Patrick's Day Events
A presentation was given to the Members by Declan Power, Senior Executive 
Officer.  Following discussion, the report was NOTED.
 
F/66/24
   (Agenda Item No 30)
Chief Executive's Report
The report by the Chief Executive, which had been circulated, was 
CONSIDERED.  
 
During discussions on this item it was AGREED to extend the meeting to 
conclude Item 30 and take Items 33 and 34.  
 
Following discussion, the report was NOTED.
 
 
F/67/24
   (Agenda Item No 32)
Conference Report
It was noted there was no business on this item.
 
F/68/24
   (Agenda Item No 33)
Correspondence
a
Letter from Limerick City and Council dated 12th December 2024 - 
Wind Energy Development 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED.
 

14
b
Letter from Limerick and City Council dated 18th December 2023 - 
Resolution - Joint Policing Committee - Proposal to disband dedicated 
Community Policing 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED.
 
c
Letter from Offaly County Council dated 20th December 2023 
Resolution - State Lands - Renewable Energy Projects 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED.
 
d
Letter from Mayo County Council dated 16th January 2024 - 
Resolution - Co-ordinate the provision of additional services for the 
communities hosting refugees and international protection 
applicants 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED.
 
e
Letter from Carlow County Council dated 22nd January 2024 - Work 
done by Sports Clubs in non-clár areas - Car parks 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED.
 
f
Letter from Sligo County Council dated 30th January 2024 - 
Resolution - Introduce effective laws to prosecute those who wilfully 
break the law on bicycles, electric bicycles and electric scooters 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED.
 
g
Letter from Wexford County Council dated 24th January 2024 re - The 
Enactment of the Control of Economic Activity (Occupied Territories) 
Bill 2018 and the illegal Israeli Settlements Divestment Bill 2023 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED.
 
F/69/24
   (Agenda Item No 34)
Departmental/Ministerial Correspondence
a
Email of acknowledgement from Minister Ryan's Office re Item 47 
Cllr B Manton - Hospital Access by Public Transport (December 2023 
Council Meeting) 

15
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED.
 
b
Letter dated 23rd January 2024 from Office of the Taoiseach re Item 
33 - Cllr A. Graves - Moore Street Area - November 2022 Council 
Meeting 
The correspondence, which had been received, was NOTED.
 
MOTIONS - STATUTORY FUNCTIONS
F/70/24
   (Agenda Item No 41)
Councillor P. Mulville - Age appropriate recreational and hang-out space for 
teenagers - The Space for Play
The motion, in the name of Councillor P. Mulville was proposed by Councillor P. 
Mulville and seconded by Councillor A. Henchy.
 
The report was ACCEPTED.
 
F/71/24
   (Agenda Item No 42)
Councillor T. Leddy - Installation of Salt/Grit Bins within Housing Estates
The motion, in the name of Councillor T. Leddy was proposed by Councillor T. 
Leddy and seconded by Councillor A. Henchy.
 
The report was ACCEPTED.
 
 
The Meeting concluded at 8.15pm.
MAYOR
DATE
