Minutes of Meeting
Climate Action and Community Strategic
Policy Committee
Monday 13th April 2026 at 9.30am
Council Chamber and via MS Teams
Corn hairle Cen tae
Laoise Laois
County Council
Present
Apologies;
In Attendance:
Cllr John Joe Fennelly (Chairperson)
Cllr Conor Bergin
Cllr Seamus McDonald
Cllr Tommy Mulligan
Ms. Jackie Carroll, Business/Commercial Rep
Mr. Niall Culleton, Laois PPN (Social Inclusion Rep)
Mr. John Oxley, Laois PPN (Community/Voluntary Rep)
Mr, Liam Delaney, Agriculture/Farming Rep
Mr. Liam O'Neill, Laois PPN (Environmental Rep)
Mr. Pat Delaney, A/Director of Services
Ms. Georgina Ireland, Senior Executive Officer
Ms. Mary Kennedy, A/Administrative Officer
Ms. Elaine Duff, A/Senior Staff Officer
Mr. Brian O'Sullivan, Assistant Staff Officer
Ms. Suzanne Dempsey, Climate Action Co-Ordinator
Ms. Anne Lennon, Climate Action Officer
Ms. Lisa Doyle, Biodiversity Officer
Ms. Bernie Foran, County Librarian
Ms. Sinead Williams, Community Safety Partnership Co-Ordinator
Welcome andlntroductions
Cllr John Joe Fennelly, Chairperson, began by welcoming everyone in attendance.
He especially welcomed Ms. Mary Kennedy, Acting Administrative Officer, Laois County
Council to her first Climate Action and Community Strategic Policy Committee meeting. He
also expressed best wishes to Ms. Suzanne O'Connor who has moved on to a different
department in Laois County Council since the last meeting and thanked her for her dedication
and professionalism while helping the Climate Action and Community Strategic Policy
Committee over the past number of years.
2.
Confirmation of Meeting Rescheduled from 2nd March 2026 to 13th April 2026
The rescheduling of the March SPC meetingwas adopted following a proposat from Cllr. Seamus
McDonald, seconded by Mr. John Oxley.
3.
Confirmation of Minutes
The minutes of the last SPC Meeting held on Monday 1 December 2025 were adopted following
a proposal from Mr. John Oxley, seconded by Cllr Seamus McDonald.
4.
Approval of Annual Work Plan_202ß for•jmate Action.
Mr. Pat Delaney, Acting Director of Services, Laois County Council presented the 2026 Annual
Work Plan and explained that the function of a Strategic Policy Committee is to "consider
matters connected with the formulation, development, monitoring and review of policy which
relate to the functions of the local authority".
Some of the upcoming Plans/Drafts/Reports for noting or approval will include:
Laois Climate Action Plan (Annual Implementation Report)
Laois Biodiversity Plan 2027-2031
Laois Arts Strategy 2026-2031
Laois Sports Plan
Laois Community Safety Plan
Development of Nature Based Solutions policy (preliminary work in 2026)
Following a proposal from Cllr. Seamus McDonald, seconded by Ms. Jackie Carroll, the Annual
Workplan for 2026 was approved.
5.
La o m ateAGtionPLan—Annuat-lmplementation-Report2025
Ms. Suzanne Dempsey, Climate Action Co-Ordinator, presented the Laois Climate Action Plan —
Annual Implementation Report to the SPC. The Climate Action Plan was adopted by members in
January 2024 and is a five-year plan. Ms. Dempsey advised that there is a statutory obligation to
produce a report each year which highlights the achievements from the previous year and
explained that the full report had already been circulated to members.
After the presentation the members unanimously congratulated Suzanne and the entire Climate
Action team for their enthusiasm, professionalism and dedication to their ongoing work on the
successful delivery of the Laois Climate Action Plan.
6.
Draft Biodiversity Action Plan Review
Ms. Lisa Doyle, Biodiversity Officer, gave a presentation on the Laois Biodiversity Action Plan
which is a 5-year plan. She explained that the full plan was already circulated to members in
advance of the meeting and their approval is now required to progress to the next stage which
will be Public Consultation, where the Draft Biodiversity Action Plan will be made available for
inspection online, through local Libraries and organised meetings.
After the Biodiversity Officers presentation, Ms. Jackie Carroll asked if there was any update on
the current protected sites in Laois?
Ms. Doyle replied by saying that many of the sites are in unfavourable condition, including
Ballyprior Grassland (SAC) which will come under the semi-natural grassland project this year.
The project will look at the past management, current management and future management.
The River Ba rrow SAC, is also in poor condition and the eminent establishment of a Barrow
Vision group will see a more positive focus on this region. The bat survey will inform the habitat
condition for bats and therefore the health of the river within the SAC of the River Nore and River
Barrow. On a positive note, Abbeyleix bog is one of the few actively growing raised bogs in
Ireland, this is an Annex 1 habitat.
The Draft Biodiversity Action Plan was then adopted following a proposal from Cllr Seamus
McDonald, seconded by Mr. John Oxley,
7.
ServiceDevelopment Plan Update
Ms. Bernie Foran, County Librarian, advised members that the Draft Laois County Library
Development Plan 2025 - 2029 was adopted by the elected members of Laois County Council at
their January 2026 meeting. This plan outlines strategic priorities for enhancing library services,
community engagement, literacy development, and digital access.
Some of the achievements highlighted during 2025 included:
8.
Reading and Literacy Programmes for people of all ages
Literacy and cultural awareness training for staff
The Purchase of specialist literacy stock
Laois and Offaly Libraries co-delivered 15 parent-focused talks and workshops
throughout the year, supported by CYPSC
All eight Laois library branches achieved Age Friendly Library status following the
National Recognition Programme
Transition Year students from across Laois took part in the "Battle of Wits "Library Quiz
Mountmellick and Abbeyleix Libraries hosted over 20 Art exhibitions in 2025.
Matters Arjsing
No matters arising.
9.
None
10.
Correspondence
Any other business
The next meeting is due to be held on 8th June 2026.
That concluded the business of the meeting.
Cll . ohn Joe Fen e y,
Chairperson.
Dated: