MINUTES OF THE PORTLAOISE MUNICIPAL DISTRICT MEETING HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY  20th May  2026 IN ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, PORTLAOISE 
 
 
PRESENT: 
 
 
Mr. John Joe Fennelly (in the Chair)  
 
 
 
 
Ms. Caroline Dwane Stanley, M.C.C. 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Paddy Buggy, M.C.C. 
 
 
 
 
Ms. Tommy Mulligan, M.C.C.  
 
 
 
 
Ms. Catherine Fitzgerald, M.C.C.  
 
 
 
 
Mr. Barry Walsh, M.C.C.  
 
 
 
 
Ms. Marie Tuohy, M.C.C. 
 
 
IN ATTENDANCE:  
Mr. Simon Walton, Director of Services 
Mr. Wes Wilkinson, Senior Executive Engineer  
 
 
 
 
Ms. Rhonda Mulhall, Acting Staff Officer  
 
 
1. 
MINUTES OF THE APRIL MEETING OF THE PORTLAOISE MUNICIPAL 
DISTRICT HELD ON THE 15th OF APRIL 2026 
 
On the proposition of Councillor Paddy Buggy seconded by Councillor Catherine 
Fitzgerald, the Minutes of the April 2026 Meeting of Portlaoise Municipal District 
held on the 15th of April 2026 were confirmed and agreed, as circulated. 
 
2. 
MATTERS ARISING FROM THE FEBRUARY MEETING OF THE 
PORTLAOISE MUNICIPAL DISTRICT HELD ON THE 15th OF APRIL 2026 
 
There were no matters arising from the Minutes of the 15th of April 2026. 
 
3. 
NOTICE OF MOTIONS  
 
Notice of Motion No: 73./2026 
Councillor Barry Walsh  proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That Laois County Council install a drop kerb for second entrance at Ballinakill 
GAA grounds and also extend the footpath to the end of grounds boundary." 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John Joe Fennelly. The 
Members were advised that the Portlaoise MD office will make themselves 
available to meet Cllr Walsh on site with a view to examining the proposal for 
additional drop kerbs. 
 

A funding mechanism/scheme will need to be identified in relation to the 
proposed installation of a footpath along the frontage of the Ballinakill GAA 
grounds. 
Notice of Motion No: 74./2026 
Councillor Barry Walsh  proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That Laois County Council make safe drain opposite Cobblers hill Ballypickas"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John Joe Fennelly. The 
Members were advised that the Portlaoise MD office will make themselves 
available to meet with Cllr Walsh on site with a view to make arrangements to 
make the location safe 
 
Notice of Motion No: 75./2026 
Councillor Barry Walsh  proposed the following Notice of Motion:-   
"That Laois County Council repair and make safe boundary fencing at Cross of 
Newtown Ballyroan"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John Joe Fennelly. The 
Members were advised that the Portlaoise MD office will make themselves 
available to meet with Cllr Walsh on site with a view to examining fencing in the 
public space and make arrangements to repair/make the location safe if 
appropriate. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 76./2026  
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley proposed the following Notice of Motion:-   
"That this council install paid, cash and card parking meters in Fitzmaurice 
place"  
This Notice of Motions was seconded by Councillor Paddy Buggy. The Members 
were advised by the Roads Department that the roads department have a 
temporary Card only Parking Machine installed at Triogue Carpark (near 
Millbrook) due to vandalism. We are arranging the purchase of new machines 
and can confirm these will take both card and cash. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 77./2026 
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 

"That this council install cycle lanes on the Ballyfin Road and reinstate the 
fencing along the ring road from the Ballyfin Road roundabout down to 
Fairgreen "  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Tommy Mulligan. The 
Members were advised by the Road Design Department that A Preliminary 
Design for cycle lanes on Ballyfin Road was prepared as part of future phases of 
the Triogue Way scheme, which includes Greenmill Lane and Mountmellick 
Road. Subject to provision of funding, the project must progress through a public 
consultation. They were also advised by the Portlaoise MD Office The 
maintenance of boundary fencing adjacent to a public road is responsibility of 
the landowner. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 78./2026 
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this council install traffic calming and safety measures in Colliers Court 
Portlaoise"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Tommy Mulligan. The 
Members were advised that the Portlaoise MD office will make arrangement to 
install a traffic calmed ramp near house number 35 Colliers Court 
 
Notice of Motion No: 79./2026 
Councillor Marie Tuohy proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council repair or replace the sign at Ashewood Walk roundabout that 
is leaning out onto the road."  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Tommy Mulligan. The 
Members were advised that The Portlaoise MD office will make arrangement to 
repair/replace the sign at Ashewood Walk roundabout  
 
Notice of Motion No: 80./2026 
Councillor Marie Tuohy proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council give an update on the provision of a Disability Parking Space 
close to the Credit Union."  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald. The 
Members were advised that The Portlaoise MD intend to carry out the works to 
install a Disability Parking Space near the Credit Union in Qtr. 3 of 2026 

Notice of Motion No: 81./2026 
Councillor Marie Tuohy proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council remark the Yellow box and pedestrian crossing at the end of 
Summerhill Lane and also the 3 pedestrian crossings surrounding the 
roundabout on the Stradbally Road as you turn for the school campuses."  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Paddy Buggy. The Members 
were advised that the Portlaoise MD office will make arrangements to refresh 
the road markings relating to the yellow boxes sand pedestrian crossing on the 
N80 and R945 in the vicinity of the O' Lalor Roundabout and Summerhill Lane 
junction. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 82./2026 
Councillor Tommy Mulligan proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
“That Laois County Council undertake the necessary planning and preparatory 
works, with a view to submitting an application for funding under the Large 
Scale Sports Infrastructure Fund, for the development and construction of a 
multipurpose community hall at the Moneyballytyrrell site to cater for the 
community, sporting, recreational and social needs of the growing population of 
Portlaoise.”  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald.  
The Members were advised by Simon Walton that the Large-Scale Sports 
Infrastructure Investment Fund (LSSIF) is currently closed. In 2024, LCC applied 
to the LSSIF for the development of a Sports Hall at Moneyballytyrrell. The 
application was refused in November 2024. Amongst other matters, the refusal 
letter stated that a reserve list of unsuccessful projects would be maintained and 
that unfunded projects may have the opportunity for future funding if a 
successful grantee fails to draw down available funds. Unfunded projects, with 
planning consents, will retain a higher chance of funding, should such 
circumstances come to pass.  
A discussion followed, after which it was agreed that a Part VIII proposal for the 
proposed development would be prepared and further discussions undertaken 
with the MD Members, all with a view to the commencement of a Part VIII public 
consultation process. This strategy is seen to move closer to a “shovel ready 
project” which is more likely to attract any grant funding that may become 
available. 
 
 

Notice of Motion No: 83./2026 
Councillor Tommy Mulligan proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
“That Laois County Council, in conjunction with the Residents’ Association, 
explore the option of providing a pedestrian access link between Woodgrove 
and the R945 at the vacant and derelict site in Woodgrove Lawns, in order to 
improve connectivity and facilitate residents’ access to the bus service.”  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Marie Tuohy. The Members 
were advised by Active Travel that the Active Travel Engineer will liaise with the 
Development Control Section and Residents Association to examine the 
possibility of providing a pedestrian access link to the nearby bus stop. 
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley informed fellow Councillors of a petition that 
had been put in by the residents, signed by 90 people of the estate against the 
pedestrian access link. 
Following discission in this matter, it was decided not to proceed, and the 
Motion was set aside. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 84./2026 
Councillor Tommy Mulligan proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
“That Laois County Council engage with Woodfort Group, the developers of the 
Lochán housing estate, with a view to reopening the amenity area at the pond at 
the end of Summerhill Lane, Portlaoise, to facilitate its use as a recreational 
amenity for local residents”  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley. The 
Members were advised by the Planning Department that Under Planning Ref. 
No. 19/727, permission was granted for a residential development at this site 
which includes the provision of an amenity green area, a walkway around the 
lake, and a pedestrian connection to Beladd. These elements form an integral 
part of the permitted scheme and are required to be delivered as part of the 
overall development. 
The Council notes that construction works on site are well advanced, and the 
amenity area, including the walkway, will be provided upon completion of the 
development in accordance with the terms of the planning permission. 
 
 
 

Notice of Motion No: 85./2026 
Councillor John Joe Fennelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council with the TII replace the current street bulbs with stronger and 
more efficient LEDs on the main street Abbeyleix" 
 This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Barry Walsh. The Members 
were advised that Road Design will assess the Public Lighting on the Main Street 
in Abbeyleix. A full survey of the existing lights will be carried out and a Lighting 
Design will be prepared and full costings ascertained 
 
 Notice of Motion No: 86./2026 
Councillor John Joe Fennelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council under the current urban speed limit review to extend the 
50kph on the Portlaoise Road Abbeyleix"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Barry Walsh. The Members 
were advised the Road Design Department that Laois County  Council will seek 
to change this speed limit, as requested, noting that, in law, any such change to 
this speed limit requires the approval of Transport Infrastructure Ireland. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 87./2026 
Councillor John Joe Fennelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council apply for funding with our Heritage Officer for essential works 
on the water fountain at Market Square Abbeyleix"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Barry Walsh. The Members 
were advised by Laois County Council Heritage Department that The BHIS (Built 
Heritage Investment Scheme) is the appropriate grant scheme to provide 
funding towards conservation works for the water fountain at Market Square 
Abbeyleix. This scheme open in September and the Heritage Officer will work 
with the community in Abbeyleix to make an application to this scheme when it 
opens. 
 
 
 
 

Notice of Motion No: 88./2026 
Councillor Paddy Buggy proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That Laois County Council carry out repairs to a footpath in Carrick Hill Estate."  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Barry Walsh. The Members 
were advised that The Portlaoise MD office will make arrangements to carry our 
minor footpath repairs at 4 Carrick Hill Estate 
 
Notice of Motion No: 89./2026 
Councillor Paddy Buggy proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That Laois County Council formally honour the contribution of Mother 
Columba to the education of young women in Portlaoise by planting an oak tree 
and installing a small monument beside it in the public area of the “Nuns 
Garden”"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald. The 
Members were advised that The Portlaoise MD office will make arrangements to 
meet with Cllr Buggy on site in the "Nuns Garden" with a view installing a 
tree/plaque to commemorate Mother Columba. 
A discussion ensued where it was proposed that a plaque to commemorate all 
the nuns also be considered. Regard will be had to this request when the details 
are being progressed. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 90./2026 
Councillor Paddy Buggy proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That Laois County Council include in the 2027 Road Strengthening works the 
L6135 Straboe road at the junction with the L6319"   
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald. The 
Members were advised that The Portlaoise MD office will examine the road at 
this location for consideration for inclusion on the 2027 Road Strengthening 
Works programme 
 
 
 
 

 
Notice of Motion No: 91./2026 
Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council install a long overdue footpath on Meelick / Timahoe Road" 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John Joe Fennelly. The 
Members were advised by The Portlaoise MD office that The Council supports 
and encourages active travel and acknowledges the appetite among residents in 
the Meelick/Timahoe Road area to walk and cycle to schools, recreational 
facilities and Portlaoise Town Centre. 
The lands adjoining the R426 Timahoe Road are generally zoned for General 
Business and it is anticipated that sections of footpath and cycle infrastructure 
along this corridor may be delivered incrementally over time as part of future 
commercial, retail, residential or amenity developments. 
At present there is no identified funding mechanism available to deliver 
infrastructure of this scale. The Council will however continue to examine any 
future funding opportunities that may arise. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 92./2026 
Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council remove 4 waste bins in Marian Avenue." 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley. The 
Members were advised that The Portlaoise MD Office make arrangements to 
remove the 4 waste bins in Marian Avenue. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 93./2026 
Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council should not support pedestrian links from one housing estate 
to another and should insert this proposal when reviewing the county 
development plan." 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley.  
The Members were advised by the Planning Department that the Council does 
not support the introduction of a blanket restriction on pedestrian links 
between housing estates within the County Development Plan. 

Pedestrian Links are a key component of sustainable planning and transport , as 
set out in national and local policy including the National Planning Framework, 
Section 28 Guidelines, Laois County Development Plan 2021-2027 and 
Portlaoise LAP 2024-2030 which promote permeability, walkability, and active 
travel. Well-designed pedestrian links enhance connectivity, improve access to 
services and public transport, and contribute to healthier and more inclusive 
communities. 
It is acknowledged that poorly designed or unmanaged links can give rise to 
concerns regarding anti-social behaviour. However, these issues are more 
appropriately addressed through design, natural surveillance, lighting, and 
ongoing estate management, rather than through an outright policy restriction. 
A case-by-case, design-led approach remains the most appropriate mechanism 
to balance community safety with the delivery of sustainable neighbourhoods. 
Following a detailed discussion in the matter, it was agreed that Elected 
Members will meet with the Planning Department in the short term to discuss 
the specific issues arising and to inform appropriate decision-making.  
 
4. 
Correspondence 
There were no items of correspondence. 
 
5. 
Making Places for and with young People  
The Sports and Leisure Department along with 4 Young secondary schools 
pupils who are part of  The Hub na Nóg group presentated on the ‘Making Places 
for and with Young People’ show casing the planning, work, and dedication that 
was inputted to create a place for young people in Páirc An Phobail Portlaoise. 
 
6. 
Fix Date for Next Meeting  
It was agreed that the next Meeting of the Municipal District will take place on 
Wednesday 17th of June 2026 @11.00am. 
 
To be followed by the Yearly AGM @ 12.30am. 
 
 
 
Signed:   _____________________                                                  ______________________________ 
                 Cathaoirleach 
 
 
 
                 Director of Services  
 
