MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF BORRIS-IN-
OSSORY/MOUNTMELLICK MUNICIPAL DISTRICT MEETING HELD 
IN THE COUNICL CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, PORTLAOISE, 
ON THE 11TH OF MARCH 2026 
 
PRESENT:  
Councillor  
Conor Bergin – In the Chair  
 
 
 
Councillor 
James Kelly 
 
 
 
Councillor  
Seamus McDonald  
 
 
 
Councillor  
John King 
 
 
 
Councillor 
Paddy Bracken  
 
 
 
Councillor 
Ollie Clooney 
 
IN ATTENDANCE: 
 
 
Ms. Angela McEvoy, Director of Services, Mr. Rory O’ Callaghan, 
S.E.E. & Ms. Michelle McCormack, Staff Officer 
 
(1) 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE FEBRUARY MEETING 
OF THE BORRIS-IN-OSSORY/MOUNTMELLICK MUNICIPAL 
DISTRICT HELD ON THE 11TH OF FEBRUARY 2026 
On the proposition of Councillor Seamus McDonald seconded by 
Councillor John King the minutes of the February meeting held 
on the 11th of February were confirmed as circulated. 
(2) 
MATTERS ARISING  
There were no matters arising. 
  
(3) 
SCHEDULE OF MUNICIPAL DISTRICT WORKS 2026 
The Members were circulated with the Schedule of Municipal 
District Works for 2026 and this was proposed by Councillor 
Ollie Clooney and seconded by Councillor James Kelly as 
presented. 
 
(4) 
NOTICE OF MOITONS 
 
With the permission of the Cathaoirleach, it was agreed that the 
following three Notice of Motions in the name of Councillor Seamus 
McDonald be taken first 
 

Notice of Motion No: 46/2026 – Councillor Seamus McDonald  
 
"That Laois County Council give an update on Finn's Bridge, 
Rearyvalley, Rosenallis" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Paddy Bracken.  
The Members were advised that a Natura Impact Assessment (NIS) 
Report is being finalised and will be submitted to An Coimisiún 
Pleanála in Q2 of 2026. The bridge works and the time of works are 
dependent on consent being approved. 
 
 
Notice of Motion No: 47/2026 – Councillor Seamus McDonald  
 
"That Laois County Council carry out urgent road repairs at Cloonagh, 
Ballyfin" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Paddy Bracken.  
The Members were advised that Laois County Council will continue 
with routine maintenance and localised repairs on this section of 
the roadway. If surface restoration work is needed the road will be 
considered for inclusion in the 2027 Road Restoration Improvement 
Works Programme, subject to Department funding allocations and 
budgetary approval. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 48/2026 – Councillor Seamus McDonald  
 
"That Laois County Council carry out urgent bridge repairs at 
Scaroon, Clonaslee" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Paddy Bracken.  
The Members were advised that this bridge is located in Gorragh 
Upper, Clonaslee on the L-6004. Sections of the abutments have 
collapsed. The Area Office will carry out a full engineering inspection 
on this bridge to determine the extent of structural works needed 
and to apply to the Department for funding. 
 
 
Notice of Motion No: 34/2026 
 
Councillor James Kelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council provide traffic calming measures and 
signage on the R423 regional road in close proximity of the Deadman's 
Public House, Ballyfin" 

 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Ollie Clooney.  The 
Members were advised that the Areas Office will survey the existing 
signage and road markings on the R423 at this location to determine 
if additional measures are required. If the issue is speed related the 
enforcement of speed limits is a matter for the Gardaí. This issue 
should be raised with the Gardaí. All works are subject to available 
budgets and resources. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 35/2026 
 
Councillor James Kelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council provide traffic calming measures at Ard 
Edmond, Castletown" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Conor Bergin.  The 
Members were advised that the Area Office will carry out a technical 
assessment at Ard Edmond to assess the traffic calming needs. Due 
to the additional monies being spent on the upkeep, maintenance 
and repair of the road network following the recent severe weather 
events the Area Office does not have the available budget for these 
works.   
 
Notice of Motion No: 36/2026 
 
Councillor James Kelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
  
"That Laois County Council send correspondence to the HSE 
requesting 
an 
urgent 
update 
on 
the 
promised 
funding/re-
development of existing Mountrath Health Centre to provide for a 
larger and more modern Primary Care Centre" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John King.  The 
Members were advised that Laois County Council will issue 
correspondence to the HSE requesting an update. 
 
 
Notice of Motion No: 37/2026 
 
Councillor John King proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That this Council clean out water tables and gullies where possible 
to alleviate water problems that will occur during heavy flooding at 
different times of the year" 

 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Conor Bergin.  The 
Members were advised that this is part of the routine road 
maintenance work programme. The Area Office will continue this 
routine maintenance work subject to available budgets and 
resources.   
 
Notice of Motion No: 38/2026 
 
Councillor John King proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That this Council carry out a road survey on all minor roads in the 
Mountmellick 
/ 
Borris-in-Ossory 
area and 
list 
them 
for 
serious consideration for repairs and resurfacing and also apply for 
extra funding from Central Government as our funding is not 
adequate to cover the damage to our roads following the continuous 
rainfall we have been experiencing over the past few months" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Ollie Clooney.  The 
Members were advised that the Area Office and the outdoor crews 
travel the road network daily. All roads needing repair and 
resurfacing are noted. The routine maintenance repair work (i.e. 
potholes & drainage etc.) is carried out. Roads that need surface 
restoration are recorded and will be considered for inclusion in 
future Department funded roads programmes as the Area does not 
the available budgets for this type of work. The Council has 
submitted a list of severe weather damaged roads to the 
Department. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 39/2026 
 
Councillor John King proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That this Council install a solar dust bin in the square Rathdowney 
as the ones that are there are far too small to cater for the amount of 
rubbish that accumulates at weekend time" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Conor Bergin.  The 
Members were advised that the Area Office will be unable to provide 
a solar powered bin due to cost and budgetary constraints. The 
collection schedule for the existing bins will be reviewed to see if 
any changes can help manage and reduce the overflow. 
 
 
 

 
Notice of Motion No: 40/2026 
Councillor Conor Bergin proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council support the installation of a new carpark 
at the Gaelscoil Slí Dala, Ballaghmore, including designated disability 
and age-friendly parking spaces" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor James Kelly.  The 
Members were advised that As these lands are in private ownership 
the Roads Department are not in a postion to provide funding. The 
car park is in the ownership of the parish, so funding options would 
have to be explored by the parish or school. 
  
Notice of Motion No: 41/2026 
 
Councillor Conor Bergin proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council carry out urgent repair works on the 
Ballinrally road, Camross to improve safety for residents and road 
users" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor James Kelly.  The 
Members were advised that Laois County Council will continue 
with routine maintenance and localised repairs on this section of 
the roadway. Surface restoration is not scheduled for the 2026 
works period. The project will be considered for inclusion in the 2027 
Road 
Restoration 
Improvement 
Works 
Programme, 
subject 
to Department funding allocations and budgetary approval. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 42/2026 
 
Councillor Conor Bergin proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council address the serious road safety issues on 
the L1036 at Tinnakill, Camross to protect local residents and road 
users" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor James Kelly.  The 
Members were advised that If the issue is speed related the 
enforcement of speed limits is a matter for the Gardaí. This issue 
should be raised with the Gardaí. The Area Office can consider this 
location for a Low-Cost Safety Scheme application to the 
Department. The next round of submissions will be in 2027. 
 

 
Notice of Motion No: 43/2026 
 
Councillor Ollie Clooney proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
  
"That Laois County Council install two gulleys at Gallows Hill, Cork 
Road, Durrow" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Conor Bergin.  The 
Members were advised that the Area Office will assess the current 
drainage arrangements. If additional drainage infrastructure is 
required to improve road safety or prevent flooding in the area, the 
works will be considered for inclusion in the annual road 
maintenance programme. The works will be subject to prioritisation 
against other road drainage works in the area and is dependent on 
available budgets and resources.   
 
 
Notice of Motion No: 44/2026 
 
Councillor Ollie Clooney proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council clear the grass margin at the Boley 
Junction, Shanahoe" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Conor Bergin.  The 
Members were advised that the stock-piled material at this junction 
will be removed and the junction signs will be relocated to improve 
visibility. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 45/2026 
 
Councillor Ollie Clooney proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council install safety measures on the N77 at The 
Course, Durrow" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Conor Bergin.  The 
Members were advised that Road Design will meet with Cllr Ollie 
Clooney on site to assess road safety measures on the N77 outside 
of Durrow. All existing line-marking and signage will be assessed" 
 
 

 
(5) 
CORRESPONDNCE  
There was no correspondence for noting at this meeting. 
 
(8) 
FIX DATE FOR NEXT MEETING  
It was noted that the next meeting of the Borris-in-
Ossory/Mountmellick MD would be held on the 8th of April 2026 
in the Council Chamber, Áras an Chontae, Portlaoise at the later 
time of 2.30p.m. followed by the Municipal District Reception 
to Camross Camogie. 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
Signed:  __________________                    ________________________ 
                   Cathaoirleach                         Director of Services 
 
 
 
