MINUTES OF THE PORTLAOISE MUNICIPL DISTRICT MEETING HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, 19TH OF MARCH 2025 IN ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, PORTLAOISE 
 
PRESENT: 
 
 
Mr. Paddy Buggy (in the Chair)  
 
 
 
 
Ms. Caroline Dwane Stanley, M.C.C. 
 
 
 
 
Mr. John Joe Fennelly, M.C.C. 
 
 
 
 
Ms. Tommy Mulligan, M.C.C. 
 
 
 
 
Ms. Marie Tuohy, M.C.C.  
 
 
 
 
Ms. Catherine Fitzgerald, M.C.C.  
 
 
 
 
Mr. Barry Walsh, M.C.C. 
 
 
 
 
 
IN ATTENDANCE:  
Mr. Simon Walton, Director of Services 
Mr. Wes Wilkinson, Senior Executive Engineer  
 
 
 
 
Ms. Michelle McCormack, Staff Officer  
 
 
 
 
Ms. Elaine Duff, Assistant Staff Officer  
 
1. MINUTES OF THE FEBRUARY MEETING OF THE PORTLAOISE 
MUNICIPAL DISTRICT HELD ON THE 19TH OF FEBRUARY 2025 
 
On the proposition of Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald seconded by Councillor 
Caroline Dwane Stanley, the minutes of the February meeting of Portlaoise 
Municipal District held on the 19th of February 2025 were confirmed as circulated. 
 
 
2. 
MATTERS ARISING FROM THE DECEMBER MEETING OF THE 
PORTLAOISE MUNICIPAL DISTRICT HELD ON THE 15TH OF JANUARY 
2025 
 
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley thanked Simon Walton and Laois County 
Council for fast-tracking the Taking in Charge process for all remaining areas in 
the Broomville/Fieldbrook Estates. 
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley also requested an update on the repairs to  
the traffic lights at Portlaoise College. 
Councillor John Joe Fennelly requested an update from Laois County Council’s 
Heritage Officer on the repairs to the Old Wooden Roadside Water Pump in 
Ballinakill. 
 
 
 

3. Schedule of Municipal District Works 2025 (for adoption with or 
without amendment) 
 
Mr. Wes Wilkinson S.E.E. briefed the Members on the Schedule of Municipal 
District Works for 2025.  The programmes were agreed on the proposition of 
Councillor John Joe Fennelly and seconded by Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley. 
 
Councillor John Joe Fennelly acknowledged that the Boleybeg Bridge and Safety 
Improvement Works on the Carlow Road, Abbeyleix will be welcomed and 
appreciated.  
Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald was disappointed that the Safety Scheme at 
Rathevan, Portlaoise was not included in Safety Improvement Works and also 
queried if the Active Travel Section could include the installation of footpaths on 
Timahoe Road, Portlaoise as part of this year’s works programme. 
Councillor Barry Walsh expressed his appreciation for planned road resurfacing 
works to be completed in Clontico, Ballyroan. Councillor Walsh requested that 
Active Travel Section consider examining locations in Ballyroan for inclusion on 
the 2025 works programme. 
Councillor John Joe Fennelly queried if it was still possible to move Councillor’s 
Discretionary Fund allocations between community grants and road work projects 
for the coming year, it was confirmed that it is possible but must be finalised in the 
coming weeks.  
 
4. Notice of Motions 
Notice of Motion No: 34/2025  
Councillor Paddy Buggy proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That Laois County Council to examine the section of the Borris Road between 
the entrance to John’s Square and the entrance to St Mary’s Hall with a view to 
improving the parking arrangements for the residents who live on this section 
of the road and the issue with respect to the road width, two way traffic and the 
new bus service" 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John Joe Fennelly. The 
Members were advised that the Road Design Department will undertake a 
review of this section of road both in the context of the request and any future 
proposals under the Local Transportation Plan for Portlaoise. 
Councillor Paddy Buggy spoke of the traffic congestion at this location and the 
difficulties experienced by residents in the area. 
 

Notice of Motion No: 35/2025  
Councillor Paddy Buggy proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
“That Laois County Council to examine the road at Derrygarron for inclusion in 
the restoration improvement / strengthening program" 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Barry Walsh. The Members 
were advised that the L-6139-0 at Derrygarron, Ballydavis, in the vicinity of 
Derrygarron Well, has been included in the Restoration Improvement 
(Strengthening) Programme for 2025. 
Notice of Motion No: 36/2025  
Councillor Paddy Buggy proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
“That Laois County Council to carry out drainage works at Killeen to address 
surface water on the road verge arising from nearby springs with some works 
carried out now as a priority and that the council also apply for funding to carry 
out further works at a later date. Also in the very same location there is a respite 
house run by the Muiriosa Foundation for which I’m asking for road markings 
and signage to calm traffic and make drivers aware of the presence of wheelchair 
users on the road" 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald. The 
Members were advised that Portlaoise MD Office will arrange to carry out initial 
drainage works as a priority on the L-2133 at Killeen. Portlaoise MD Office will 
also include this location as an application for funding for further drainage 
works. Portlaoise MD Office will arrange for SLOW road markings and for 
Wheelchair User signage to be installed at this location.  
Notice of Motion No: 37/2025  
Councillor John Joe Fennelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this council supply salt bins at 2 locations on Ballyroan Rd Abbeyleix at 
entrance to Fairway estate and Scoil Mhuire" 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Barry Walsh. The Members 
were advised that Portlaoise MD Office proposes to install salt bins at 2 locations 
in Abbeyleix due to the steep hill or incline on the entrance roads to Fairways 
Estate & in the vicinty of Scoil Mhuire on the Ballyroan Road. 
Councillor John Joe Fennelly confirmed he was happy with the response as these 
are two areas of great concern. Scoil Mhuire have confirmed to Councillor John 

Joe Fennelly that they will arrange to store the bin for the duration of the 
summer months. 
Notice of Motion No: 38/2025  
Councillor John Joe Fennelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this council erect Hidden Dip sign on lower Ballymullen Rd Abbeyleix 
between Booths concrete and Grallow Wood estate."  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Barry Walsh. The Members 
were advised that Mr. Wes Wilkinson S.E.E. will make himself available to meet 
Councillor Fennelly on site at the location to examine signage on the L-81058 
Lower Ballymullen Road, Abbeyleix. 
Councillor John Joe Fennelly advised that there is very poor visibility when 
situated in a car at this location and it’s a safety concern for users of this road.  
Notice of Motion No: 39/2025  
Councillor John Joe Fennelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this council re paint all Disabled bays parking in Abbeyleix"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Barry Walsh. The members 
were advised that Portlaoise MD Office will arrange to refresh the road markings 
on all disabled parking bays in Abbeyleix town.  
Councillor John Joe Fennelly highlighted the need for the road markings to be 
refreshed and that the works be undertaken at the earliest opportunity.    
Notice of Motion No: 40/2025 
Councillor Tommy Mulligan proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
“That Laois County Council install bollards on the cycle/pedestrian lane in front 
of Powerscourt estate” 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald. The 
members were advised that Portlaoise MD Office will make arrangements to 
meet with Councillor Mulligan on site to identify the exact location with a view 
to having a bollard installed in the coming weeks.  
Councillor Tommy Mulligan advised that on match days cars are parking on the 
footpaths in this location making it dangerous for both pedestrians and cyclists 

and Councillor Mulligan advised that two new bollards may be needed at this 
location.  
Notice of Motion No: 41/2025  
Councillor Tommy Mulligan proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
“That Laois County Council install double yellow lines on the avenue entrance to 
Abbey Court estate”   
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald. The 
members were advised that Portlaoise MD Office will arrange to install double 
yellow lines on the L-81036 in the vicinity of the entrance to Abbey Court on the 
Abbeyleix Road, Portlaoise.  
Councillor Tommy Mulligan advised that, on match days, cars are parking in this 
location and causing obstructed view and that concerns have been raised 
regarding the ability for emergency services to access Abbey Court estate, if 
required.  
Notice of Motion No: 42/2025 
Councillor Tommy Mulligan proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
““That Laois County Council proceed as soon as possible to take in charge the 
following roads in Kilminchy estate: Lake Place, Lake Vale, Lake Way, Lake Drive, 
Lake Gardens, Lake Grove, Lake Glade, Lake Crescent and Lime Tree Avenue”  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley. The 
members were advised that in Kilminchy, Lake Crescent , Lake Grove & Lime 
Tree Avenue have already been taken in charge. However, the remaining roads 
listed were not taken in charge as there was no formal application received to 
have them taken in charge.  
Councillor Tommy Mulligan stated that some of these areas are in-situ for 20 
years and have a number of issues outstanding. Councillor Tommy Mulligan also 
advised that there is currently a petition in circulation among the residents and 
that this will soon be handed into the Planning Department.  
Mr. Simon Walton, Director of Services, committed to commence the taking in 
charge process. 
 
 

Notice of Motion No: 43/2025  
Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
“"That this Council replace the broken fence at Brittas"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John Joe Fennelly. The 
Members were advised that Portlaoise MD Office will arrange to replace the 
broken knee rail fence with timber bollards on the L-21334 near Brittas 
Kilmainham. 
Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald advised that this repair will be much 
appreciated.  
Notice of Motion No: 44/2025  
Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
“"That this Council take in charge Dromadoon estate"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John Joe Fennelly. The 
members were advised that Dromadoon was not taken in charge as there are a 
number of issues relating to the Surface Water network & water supply network 
to be resolved. However, the Planning Department will review same with a view 
to commencing the Taking In Charge process.  
Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald advised that she would engage with the 
Planning Department regarding the taking in charge of the estate.  
Notice of Motion No: 45/2025  
Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council replace the trees in Newpark that were lost in the storm"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John Joe Fennelly. The 
members were advised that Portlaoise MD Office will arrange to meet Councillor 
Fitzgerald on site to examine the trees in Newpark with a view to replacing any 
lost trees in the public area as appropriate. 
Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald expressed her thanks for this response and spoke 
of the number of very mature trees located in the green area of the estate which 
were lost during recent storms. 
 

Notice of Motion No: 46/2025  
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"This Council be given an update on progress made regards the Domestic Abuse 
Refuge in Portlaoise" 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald. The 
members were advised that In November 2023, Laois County Council purchased 
a 0.7-acre site to facilitate and support the development of a Domestic Violence 
Refuge in County Laois. In order to advance the development of the Refuge, LDAS 
are required to partner with an Approved Housing Body. Once that partnership is 
established, Laois County Council will support an application to the Dept. of 
Housing, under the Capital Assistance Scheme.  The acquired site is currently 
accepted as sufficient for the project to proceed.  The County Council is acutely 
aware of the urgent need for the delivery of a Domestic Violence Refuge within 
the County and continues to work closely with Laois Domestic Abuse Service, the 
Housing Agency , CUAN (Dept of Justice) and the Department of Housing on plans 
to construct a refuge, including advice on funding such the development through 
the Dept of Housing’s Capital Assistance Scheme.  The Council continue to meet 
regularly with relevant parties, including attending two multi-party meetings 
over the past two months.  
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley welcomed the site purchase by LCC in 2023 
and advised that currently women and children are having to leave Laois to seek 
support in other counties. Laois is currently one of nine counties without a 
Domestic Abuse Refuge. Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley also expressed 
concern that there is no Council representation on the Board of Laois Domestic 
Abuse Refuge and urged the local Domestic Abuse Service to progress the 
development of the Site and the local provision of domestic abuse services.  
Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald stated that while site availability is good news, it 
is disappointing that no partnership had yet been formed with an Approved 
Housing Body, to enable commencement of site development works for this vital 
service, which is urgently needed.  
Councillor Marie Tuohy sought a timeline from the Service on when the 
partnership with the Approved Housing Body will commence.  
Mr. Simon Walton, Director of Services, advised that there are no further details 
on when the project will progress.  
All Councillors reiterated their support for this service. 
 

Notice of Motion No: 47/2025  
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"This Council install traffic calming measures in Clonkeen View Bellingham 
Estate"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Marie Tuohy. The Members 
were advised that Portlaoise MD Office will arrange for a traffic calming ramp to 
be installed on the L-81111, Clonkeen View, Bellingham.  
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley thanked Mr. Wes Wilkinson S.E.E. for his 
support in meeting residents recently and advised that she has funded 5 ramps 
for this estate previously out of her Councillors Discretionary Fund. Councillor 
Caroline Dwane Stanley spoke of the parking issues in the estate and highlighted 
that Laois County Council was one of the first to apply 30km speed limits within 
housing estates. Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley committed to funding the 
installation of a traffic calming ramp at Clonkeen View, Bellingham, in the vicinity 
of R32 DYW1. 
Councillor Paddy Buggy committed to funding the installation of a traffic calming 
ramp at Brescula Close, Bellingham, in the vicinity of R32 DY82. 
Councillor Marie Tuohy committed to funding 30kph speed limit road markings 
at the entrance to Bellingham, in the vicinity of Boughlone Way.  
Notice of Motion No: 48/2025  
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"This Council contact the NTA, and request them to extend the new bus routes in 
Portlaoise to take in the Summerhill area where the schools are located"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Tommy Mulligan. The 
members were advised that a letter will issue to NTA in this regard.  
Mr. Simon Walton, Director of Services, confirmed that the new bus service in 
Portlaoise is proving very popular.  
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley spoke of the bus service being very successful 
in Portlaoise and that she is delighted with the service, however, there are gaps 
whereby certain areas are not currently serviced.  
Councillor Tommy Mulligan fully supported this motion and insisted that school 
traffic in town would ease with the addition of more routes.  

Notice of Motion No: 49/2025  
Councillor Marie Tuohy proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council fill in the potholes in the lay by on the R425 as you turn left off 
the N80 at Bloomfield Cross"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald. The 
members were advised that Portlaoise MD Office will arrange for road repairs to 
be carried out on the layby on the R425 near Bloomfield Roundabout.  
Councillor Marie Tuohy welcomed this response and advised that the area is in 
bad need of repair.  
Notice of Motion No: 50/2025  
Councillor Marie Tuohy proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council consider using development funding to extend the footpath 
along Summerhill Lane to complete it as far as the R945 heading towards the 
schools"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald. The 
members were advised that Laois County Council will assess the cost of 
completing the missing section of footpath along this road and make the 
necessary arrangements with the Planning & Finance Depts for the release of 
development contributions to fund same. 
Councillor Marie Tuohy highlighted that this is a very busy road with schools in 
the vicinity and children are walking to schools and nearby GAA facilities.  
Notice of Motion No: 51/2025  
Councillor Marie Tuohy proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council replace the bin in Hynd's Square"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley. The 
members were advised that the Portlaoise MD Office will make arrangements to 
replace the solar powered compactor bin in Hynd's Square in the coming weeks.  
Councillor Marie Tuohy commented that Hynd’s Square is a hidden gem located in 
the town centre with seating areas and now coming into the summer, the 
replacement of the bin will have a positive impact on the area.  
Notice of Motion No: 52/2025  

Councillor Barry Walsh proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council relocate the pedestrian crossing on Rossvale Roundabout 
Mountmellick Road"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Paddy Buggy. The members 
were advised that Road Design will meet on site with Councillor Walsh and assess 
the current location of the crossing.  
Councillor Barry Walsh advised that residents find it difficult to get across the 
crossing and that the pedestrian crossing at this location needs to be reviewed. 
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley advised that the crossing is well used at the 
current location and there was a lot of engagement with residents and Laois 
County Council at the time of the original installation of the crossing. She also 
advised that she would not be in favour of the crossing being moved from it’s 
current location.  
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley advised that an invitation should be made to 
the Chairperson of the Residents Association to any meeting regarding the review 
of the pedestrian crossing. 
Notice of Motion No: 53/2025  
Councillor Barry Walsh proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council carry out drainage works at Kilvahan, Ballyroan outside 
entrance to R32 WP7V" 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John Joe Fennelly. The members 
were advised that the Portlaoise MD Office will clear the culvert at this location 
and also include this location as an application for funding for Drainage Works 
under the Climate Adaptation and Resilience Scheme.  
Councillor Barry Walsh welcomed this response and highlighted that the cause of 
this issue is due to the severe weather recently experienced in the county giving 
rise to flooding at this location.   
 
Notice of Motion No: 54/2025  
Councillor Barry Walsh proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council improve site lines and carry out drainage works at Aughnacross 
near entrance to R32VK16" 

This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John Joe Fennelly. The members 
were advised that emergency works were carried out to replace the culvert at this 
location (L-1798 Boleybawn/Aughnacross). 
Councillor Barry Walsh welcomed this response and highlighted that the cause of 
this issue is due to the severe weather recently experienced in the county giving 
rise to flooding at this location.   
 
5. 
Correspondence 
There was no correspondence. 
 
6. 
Fix Date for Next Meeting  
It was agreed that the next Meeting of the Municipal District will take place on 
the 16th of April 2025. 
 
 
 
Signed:   _____________________                                                  ______________________________ 
                 Cathaoirleach 
 
 
 
                 Director of Services  
 
 
 
