MINUTES OF THE GRAFGUECULLEN/PORTARLINCTON MUNICIPAL DISTRICT MEETING
HELD ON WEDNESDAY MARCH 2026 IN THE CHAMBER, ARAS AN CHONTAE,
PORTLAOISE AND VIA MICROSOFT TEAMS
PRESENT
IN ATTENDANCE:
APOLOGIES:
Ms. Vivienne Phelan M.C.C. (in the Chair)
Mr. Aidan Mullins M.C.C.
Mr. Padraig Fleming, M.C.C.
Mr. Paschal McEvoy, M.C.C.
Ms. Aisling Moran, M.C.C.
Ms. Julie Bergin, Director of Services
Mr. Brian Seale, Executive Engineer
Mr. Kevin Coogan, General Services Supervisor
Ms. Therese Kelly, Staff Officer
Mr. Ben Brennan, M.C.C.
Mr. Tom Drennan, Senior Executive Engineer
Confirmation of the Minutes of the February Meeting of the
GraiguecuIlen/Portarlington Municipal District held on the 17th February 2026
On the proposition of Councillor Aidan Mullins seconded by Councillor Paschal McEvoy the
Members unanimously agreed the minutes of the February meeting of the
Graiguecullen/Portarlington Municipal District held on the 17th February 2026.
(2) Matters Arising
No matters arising from the February Minutes.
Schedule of Municipal District Works 2026
(3)
The Members were circulated with the Schedule of Municipal District Works for 2026. On
the proposition of Councillor Pascal McEvoy and seconded by Councillor Aidan Mullins
the Schedule of Municipal District Works 2026 was unanimously agreed as presented.
(4)
Progress Report
All the Councillors praised Mr. Tom Drennan, Mr. Kevin Coogan and Mr. Brian Seale on his
Progress Report and commended the team on all their hard work.
A discussion took place regarding the Progress report and the need for same. On the
proposition of Councillor Aidan Mullins and seconded by Councillor Paschal McEvoy it was
unanimously agreed that there was no need for the circulation of the progress report each
month.
Mr. Kevin Coogan GSS stated that the progress report was helpful for the Area Staff and
that they would continue to collate same however, it will not be circulated to the
Councillors for discussion.
(5)
Notice of Motions:-
37/2026 - Councillor Paschal McEvoy
"That Laois County Council put Traffic Calming measures and Signage in place at Oakvale
Meadows Stradbally".
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Vivienne Phelan. The members were
advised that Laois County Council are currently drafting a Guidance Document on the
Selection and Implementation of Traffic Calming Measures and was due to go before
Laois County Councils Strategic Policy Committee for roads for their review with a
view adopting this as a policy.
In the interim the area office will schedule to have a technical assessment carried out
but will await the outcome of the updated guidelines and policy on this before making
a final determination on this.
38/2026 - Councillor Paschal McEvo
"That Laois County Council carry out works to address the Flooding at Ballycoolan"
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Vivienne Phelan. The members were
advised that Laois County Council have assessed this and have determined that
interventions are necessary in order to alleviate pluvial flooding that is taking place at
this I ocation. Drainage works have been scheduled to be implemented overthe coming
weeks.
39/2026 — Councillor Paschal McEvo
"That Laois County Council Write to the Minister for Health requesting that her
Department take over Drominin Nursing Home Stradbally permanently and run it as a
Community Hospital".
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Padraig Fleming. The members were
advised that Laois County Council will issue a letter to the Minister for Health post
meeting.
40/2026 — Councillor Padrai Flemin
"That Laois County Council give an update on the safety improvements works to be
carried out on the Ballyfoyle to Barrowhouse road as there have been a number of
accidents at one particular location on this road which caused significant damage to
a boundary wall and home".
This notice of Motion was taken with Motion 51/2026 and was seconded by Cllr.
Aisling Moran. The members were advised that Laois County Council The designated
speed limit of the L-3976 was reduced from 80kph to 60kph since the 7th of February
2025 as part of the Government national strategy to reduce the default speed limits
on rural local roads to 60kph. Additional speed limit signage has also been recently
installed on the section of road. Laois County Councils District Engineer in
conjunction with the Road Safety Engineer will carry out an assessment of the 1--3976
to determine if any further improvements to the roadway can be made with regards
to road safety.
41/2026 - Councillor Padrai Flemin
"That Laois County Council carry out surface repairs to the entrance of the older
estate in The Swan Village as it has deteriorated significantly in the past year"
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Vivienne Phelan. The members were
advised that Laois County Council will carry out the necessary repairs to this junction
and have it completed over the coming weeks.
42/2026 - Councillor Padrai Flemin
"That Laois County Council install passing bays on the Gracefield Road (rear of the
Pedigree) in the interest of health and safety as school buses and articulated trucks
cannot pass each other at certain locations on the road"
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Aisling Moran. The members were
advised that Laois County Council will carry out an assessment to consider the
merits for lay-by's on this section of road. This will also determine the extent of the
civil and drainage requirement. If these works were to advance this will be subject
to available budgetary resources.
43/2026 — Councillor Aidan Mullins
"That Laois County Council provide some extra parking spaces for the residents of
Ballymorris Manor estate in Portarlington".
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Aisling Moran. The members were advised
that Laois County Council's Graiguecullen/Portarlington Municipal Districts roads
office will carry out an assessment to determine its need and extent of any civil,
drainage or utility requirements and have works costed. When cost estimates have
been established this can be discussed with Cllr. Mullins on how these works may be
funded.
44/2026 — Councillor Aidan Mullins
"That Laois County Council begin the process of taking Railway Lane, Portarlington in
charge"
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Aisling Moran. The members were advised
that Laois County Council will arrange to meet with Cllr. Mullins in order to properly
identify the subject road in question and its extents. An assessment will then be carried
out to determine the roads eligibility to be taken in charge in accordance with Laois
County Council taking in charge assessment criteria procedures.
45/2026 —Councillor Aidan Mullins
"That Laois County Council refresh the road markings on Crowe Lane and Sandy Lane in
Portarlington, especially at Sandy Lane N.S. "
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Vivienne Phelan. The members were
advised that Laois County Council will review the line marking condition at both
locations and if warranted will schedule these in for renewal subject to available
resources.
46/2026 — Councillor Vivienne Phelan
"That Laois County Council consider including regular outreach work in towns
throughout the Graiguecullen-Portarlington Municipal District, to raise awareness of the
excellent training and mentorship initiatives hosted by Laois Local Enterprise Office, to
ensure both new and established businesses are aware of the range of supports
offered".
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Aisling Moran. The members were advised
that Laois County Council's Local Enterprise Office is currently planning a series of outreach
one to one business advice clinics with a Business Advisor member of staff, for both existing
business owners and entrepreneurs. These clinics will provide an opportunity for businesses
and entrepreneurs to learn more about the range of supports available through the Local
Enterprise Office, including training programmes, mentoring and financial supports.
It is intended that these outreach clinics will take place across the three Municipal Districts,
with at least two clinics planned in each Municipal District over the coming months. Initial
clinics are planned for Portarlington and Graigueculten in the the Graiguecullen-Portarlington
Municipal District.
Dates for the clinics are being finalised and will be confirmed shortly. The Local Enterprise
Office will advise the local councillors in each Municipal District when these dates have been
confirmed. The clinics will be also promoted through the Local Enterprise Office and Laois
County Council social media platforms to ensure that local businesses are aware of the
opportunity to engage with LEO supports.
47/2026 — Councillor Vivienne Phelan
"That Laois County Council arrange to paint the outside of Portarlington Library,
including the large planters outside. "
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Aidan Mullins. The members were advised
that the library building, planters & areas around the library are due to have planned
external cleaning, when this is completed we will examine the library to see if painting
is required and if so we will seek quotations forthe works.
48/2026 — Councillor Vivienne Phelan
"That Laois County Council place a 'Local Access Only' sign on a narrow rural laneway at
The Heath which is not suitable for the heavy volume of traffc it receives."
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Paschal McEvoy. The members were
advised that Laois County Council will arrange for a member of the Municipal Districts
roads staff to meet with Cllr. Phelan on site to confirm the roadway in question to
establish the merits of this re uest.
49/2026 — Councillor Aislin Moran
"That Laois County Council sort out the flooding issues on the RHS at the houses on the
Carlow road, Ballylinan."
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Padraig Fleming. The members were
advised that Laois County Council will review the roadside drainage at this location and
will consider interventions if necessary to alleviate against any ponding.
50/2026 — Councillor Aislin Moran
"That Laois County Council cut back the trees on the link road between the N78 and the
L7972 at Ballylinan."
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Padraig Fleming. The members were
advised that Laois County Council will carry out an assessment to identify and schedule
in any trees for trimming that are potentially affecting the public road network either
side of this junction.
51/2026 -Councillor Aislin Moran
"That Laois County Council install Speed/Slow radar and extra signage on the Ballyfoyle
to Barrowhouse road at the accident black spot."
This notice of Motion was taken with Motion 40/2026 and was seconded by Cllr.
Padraig Fleming. The designated speed limit of the L-3976 was reduced from 80kph to
60kph since the 7th of February 2025 as part of the Govemment national strategy to
reduce the default speed limits on rural local roads to 60kph. Additional speed limit
signage has also been recently installed on the section of road. Laois County Councils
District Engineer in conjunction with the Road Safety Engineer will carry out an
assessment of the 1--3976 to determine if any further improvements to the roadway
can be made with regards to road safety.
(6)
Correspondence
It was noted that no correspondence had been received since the last meeting of
the Municipal District.
The Next Meeting is scheduled for the 15th of April 2026 at 2.00 p.m.
(7)
(8)
(9)
AOB. Cllr Aidan Mullins wanted to know would the County Council intervene
with regards to the parking issue at Sandy Lane National School in Portarlington.
FAREWELL TO COUNCILLOR PADRAIG FLEMING
It was noted that this was Councillor Padraig Fleming's last Municipal District
meeting, and a presentation was made to Councillor Fleming on his retirement.
Members and officials paid tribute to Councillor Fleming on his contribution to
public life since his election in 2014.
This concluded the business of the meeting.
Signed:
Vivienne Phelan, M.C.C. , Cathaoirleach