MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF BORRIS-IN-
OSSORY/MOUNTMELLICK MUNICIPAL DISTRICT MEETING HELD 
IN THE LOCAL ENTERPRISE OFFICE MEETING ROOM, ÁRAS AN 
CHONTAE, PORTLAOISE, ON THE 15TH OF APRIL 2026 
 
PRESENT:  
Councillor  
Conor Bergin – In the Chair  
 
 
 
Councillor 
James Kelly 
 
 
 
Councillor  
Seamus McDonald  
 
 
 
Councillor  
John King 
 
 
 
Councillor 
Paddy Bracken  
 
 
 
Councillor 
Ollie Clooney 
 
IN ATTENDANCE: 
 
 
Ms. Angela McEvoy, Director of Services, Mr. Rory O’ Callaghan, 
S.E.E. & Ms. Michelle McCormack, Staff Officer 
 
(1) 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE MARCH MEETING  
OF THE BORRIS-IN-OSSORY/MOUNTMELLICK MUNICIPAL 
DISTRICT HELD ON THE 11TH OF MARCH 2026 
On the proposition of Councillor John King seconded by 
Councillor James Kelly, the minutes of the March meeting held 
on the 11th of March were confirmed as circulated. 
(2) 
MATTERS ARISING  
There were no matters arising. 
  
(3) 
NOTICE OF MOITONS 
Notice of Motion No: 49/2026 
 
Councillor James Kelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council allocate additional funding towards 
footpath and parking restoration at Patrick Street, Mountrath" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Ollie Clooney.  The 
Members were advised that the 2026 budget for footpath 
repair/maintenance works has been agreed. The MD Office is unable 
to provide additional funding. 
 

The Members were also advised that this may be considered under 
Town Regeneration & Active Travel funding   
 
Notice of Motion No: 50/2026 
 
Councillor James Kelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council carry out urgent road remedial works at 
the junction of the R430 and L10751 at Derrylusk, Mountrath. 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Conor Bergin.  The 
Members were advised that these road drainage works and road 
edge repair works have been completed. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 51/2026 
 
Councillor James Kelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
  
"That Laois County Council apply for national funding to provide a 
new footpath link between Donaghmore Village and Donaghmore 
Workhouse Museum that will be of major benefit in promoting a 
Circular Economy and Economic/Tourism Destination for the area" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John King.  The 
Members were advised that the proposed footpath on the R435 
presents significant safety risks due to high vehicle speeds (80km/h), 
restricted width, and poor horizontal alignment requiring multiple 
pedestrian crossing points. This proposal will not comply with 
Ireland's 'Safe Systems Approach' (Vision Zero 2050) regarding 
vulnerable road user protection. Safe pedestrian integration cannot 
be achieved without substantial speed reduction and/or physical 
segregation. An application for national funding is considered 
premature. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 52/2026 
 
Councillor John King proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That this Council install two modern village name signs with local 
crest attached for the village of Killesmeestia as this area has 
exceeded itself with very high results in the tidy villages competition 
every year" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor James Kelly.  The 
Members were advised that this was requested previously in 2025. 

The MD Office contacted the Tidy Towns Group in 2025 re the 
logo/local crest for these signs. The MD Office has not yet received 
a reply. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 53/2026 
 
Councillor John King proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That this Council carry out a survey to see how many public lights 
are needed from the golf links junction to Dunes Stores Rathdowney 
as these lights must be installed  before winter starts again" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Conor Bergin.  The 
Members were advised that Road Design will engage the Public 
Lighting Contractor to provide a quotation for these works. A 
meeting has been arranged at this location to carry out an 
assessment. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 54/2026 
 
Councillor John King proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council Engineers meet with the Errill walking 
group with a view to create a new footpath area for walking from 
the village heading out the Templemore road and turning right for a 
place known as the Derries bog walking route" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Conor Bergin.  The 
Members were advised that the MD Office will meet with the Errill 
Walking Group to discuss the proposed footpath. Due to budget and 
resource limitations, the Office cannot fund the project directly but 
will assist with surveying, design, and cost estimations. The Group 
will need to secure alternative funding for the route. 
 
Members were advised that contact would be made with Laois 
Partnership to agree a meeting on site regarding alternative funding 
streams. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notice of Motion No: 55/2026 
 

Councillor Conor Bergin proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council address the speeding issues on the road 
at Clonin Hill, Camross as a matter of priority" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John King.  The 
Members were advised that the enforcement of speed limits is a 
matter for the Gardaí. This issue should be raised with the Gardaí. 
The MD Office can consider this location for a Low-Cost Safety 
Scheme application to the Department. The next round of 
submissions will be in 2027. 
 
Members were further advised that a policy on ramps is currently 
being prepared by the Strategic Policy Committee and will be 
brought to full Council for consideration. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 56/2026 
 
Councillor Conor Bergin proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
  
"That Laois County Council install road markings and a speed ramp 
on Church Street, Borris-in-Ossory" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John King.  The 
Members were advised that Laois County Council are currently out 
a 30km/h speed limit review survey for identified urban/built up 
areas in the county as directed by the Department of Transport. 
There are 9 locations in the MD, Borris-in-Ossory being one. Church 
Street is included in the survey area. If the Special Speed Limit Bye-
Laws are adopted by Laois County Council, then all associated works 
(poles, signage etc.) will be completed by 31st March 2027. 
 
It was also agreed that road markings would be considered for this 
location. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 57/2026 
 
Councillor Conor Bergin proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council install speed ramps at Ballaghmore as a 
matter of priority" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor James Kelly.  The 
Members were advised that the Transportation SPC has approved a 
new Traffic Calming Measures Policy which will be brought to the 

Council for adoption. Review of this speed issue can be revisited 
pending the adoption of the policy.    
 
 
Notice of Motion No: 58/2026 
 
Councillor Ollie Clooney proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
  
"That Laois County Council install 'Welcome to Laois' signs at 
Aharney, Durrow" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John King.  The 
Members were advised that the provision of this type of sign is 
normally provided on major routes into the county. This road is a 
local road (L1756) with restricted width. The MD Office does not 
consider that this sign is required. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 59/2026 
 
Councillor Ollie Clooney proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council resurface the road from Larry's Cross to 
Castletown" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor James Kelly.  The 
Members were advised that the MD Office will continue to maintain 
the L1596. This road is not included on the 2026 Roads Programme 
but will be considered for future programmes. All works are subject 
to available budgets and resources. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 60/2026 
 
Councillor Ollie Clooney proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council install signage for traffic lights in 
Ballacolla" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Paddy Bracken.  
The Members were advised that the MD Office will provide this 
signage. 
 
 
Notice of Motion No: 61/2026 
 

Councillor Seamus McDonald proposed the following Notice of 
Motion:- 
  
"That Laois County Council resolve the flooding issue at Cappanrush, 
Ballyfin" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Paddy Bracken.  
The Members were advised that The MD Office will investigate this 
flooding issue and will arrange for suitable mitigation measures 
subject to available funding and resources. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 62/2026 
 
Councillor Seamus McDonald proposed the following Notice of 
Motion:- 
  
"That Laois County Council erect signs for "No Temporary dwellings" 
at the festival field, Glenbarrow, Rosenallis" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Paddy Bracken.  
The Members were advised that the MD Office will provide this 
signage. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 63/2026 
 
Councillor Seamus McDonald proposed the following Notice of 
Motion:- 
  
"That Laois County Council trim back the tree at Slieve Bloom Park, 
Clonaslee" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Paddy Bracken.  
The Members were advised that the MD Office has inspected the site 
and there are two trees leaning over and causing damage to the 
green area perimeter stone wall. The residents want these trees 
removed. These trees will be removed.   
 
Notice of Motion No: 64/2026 
 
Councillor Paddy Bracken proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That 
this 
Council 
be 
updated 
on 
the 
timeframe 
for 
the 
roadworks/drainage 
at 
O' 
Moore 
Street 
and 
Manor 
Road, 
Mountmellick” 
 

This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Seamus McDonald.  
The Members were advised that in relation to O'Moore Street - 
Tender documents are being prepared. The works will be carried out 
during Q2 or Q3 of 2026.  In relation to Manor Road, Manor Road - 
These works will be completed during July & September 2026. 
 
 
(4) 
CORRESPONDNCE  
The correspondence from the H.S.E. in relation to Notice of 
Motion No: 36/2026 with regard to the Mountrath Health 
Centre was circulated and noted by the Members  
 
(5) 
FIX DATE FOR NEXT MEETING  
It was noted that the next meeting of the Borris-in-
Ossory/Mountmellick MD would be held on Tuesday, the 12th of 
May in the Council Chamber, Áras an Chontae, Portlaoise at the 
later time of 2.30 p.m. It was further noted that the Municipal 
District Reception to Camross Heritage would take place on the 
13th of May 2026. 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
Signed:  __________________                    ________________________ 
                   Cathaoirleach                         Director of Services 
 
 
 
