 
 
MINUTES OF THE GRAIGUECULLEN/PORTARLINGTON MUNICIPAL DISTRICT MEETING 
HELD ON WEDNESDAY 20th May 2026 IN THE CHAMBER, ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, 
PORTLAOISE AND VIA MICROSOFT TEAMS  
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Ms. Vivienne Phelan M.C.C. (In the Chair) 
Mr. Aidan Mullins M.C.C.  
 
 
 
 
Ms. Elva Kelly M.C.C.  
 
 
 
 
Mr. Paschal McEvoy M.C.C. 
 
 
 
 
Ms. Aisling Moran M.C.C.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN ATTENDANCE: 
 
Ms. Julie Bergin, Director of Services 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Tom Drennan, Senior Executive Engineer  
 
 
 
 
Ms. Therese Kelly, Staff Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APOLOGIES:  
 
Mr. Ben Brennan, M.C.C. 
 
 
Councillor Phelan welcomed Cllr Elva Kelly to her first Municipal District meeting and 
wished her the very best in her new role. 
 
 
 
(1) 
Confirmation 
of 
the 
Minutes 
of 
the 
April 
Meeting 
of 
the 
Graiguecullen/Portarlington Municipal District held on the 15th April 2026. 
 
On the proposition of Councillor Paschal McEvoy seconded by Councillor Aidan Mullins the 
Members 
unanimously 
agreed 
the 
minutes 
of 
the 
April 
meeting 
of 
the 
Graiguecullen/Portarlington Municipal District held on the 15th of April 2026. 
 
 
(2) 
Matters Arising 
 
No matters arising from the April Minutes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) 
Notice of Motions:- 
 
67/2026 – Councillor Aidan Mullins 
“That Laois County Council give an update on the proposed improvement works for 
the Ballymorris Road / Sandy Lane Roundabout. 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr Aisling Moran.  The members were 
advised that the roundabout at Ballymorris Rd / Sandy Lane will be included in the 
Portarlington Traffic Study. Road Design are awaiting confirmation of funding from 
the Department of Transport” 
 
 
68/2026 – Councillor Aidan Mullins 
“That Laois County Council get clarification on the issue of extra parking at Sandy 
Lane School in view of the responses from the Minister for Education and Youth” 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr Vivienne Phelan.  The members were 
advised that the provision of safe access and egress to schools, including parking / 
drop off facilities is the responsibilities of the Department of Education.  
 
Laois county council will support the department in any endeavour it wishes to 
make in improving the situation, but ultimately it is the departments responsibility. 
 
 
69/2026 – Councillor Aidan Mullins 
“That Laois County Council review pedestrian safety at the junction of Lea Road and 
Canal Road, Portarlington, with a view to the provision of a raised crossing” 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr Paschal McEvoy.  The members were 
advised that a new raised uncontrolled crossing was installed at the junction under 
the 2025 active travel programme of work.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
70/2026 – Councillor Paschal McEvoy 
“That Laois County Council carry out a safety audit at the dangerous turn at Timahoe 
GAA Pitch”. 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr Vivienne Phelan.  The members were 
advised that the Road Safety Engineer in conjunction with the Municipal District 
Roads office will review the location and from there will determine what 
interventions may be required with regards to road safety. 
 
71/2026 – Councillor Paschal McEvoy 
“That Laois County Council carry out repairs to road surface along the canal from 
Courtwood Bridge to Barrier” 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr Vivienne Phelan.  The members were 
advised that Laois County Council will seek to assess the extent of the surfacing 
issues with a view to carrying out repairs in the interim. This will be scheduled in over 
the coming weeks.   
 
 
72/2026 – Councillor Paschal McEvoy 
“That Laois County Council inspect surface on footpath between Dunnes Pub and 
Stradbally stores with a view to re surfacing same”  
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr Elva Kelly.  The members were advised 
that Road Design will engage with the TII on this issue.  A full assessment of the area 
will be carried out.  All possible funding sources will be explored. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
73/2026  – Councillor Aisling Moran 
“That Laois County Council make safe a collapsing roadside drain at Whitebog, 
Ballylinan, and put in passing bays as the road is too narrow at that point for two vehicles 
to pass safely when meeting”. 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr Elva Kelly.  The members were advised that 
Laois County Council have assessed the drainage issues and can confirm that an 
intervention is required. Works to repair this drain have been scheduled in to be 
carried out over the coming weeks.  The installation of a passing bay may not be 
possible due to a lack of verge along this roadway to extend any passing bay, however 
this will be further assessed when reinstating the road following the drainage 
installation works.  
 
 
74/2026  – Councillor Aisling Moran 
“That Laois County Council alleviate the flooding in Cill An Oir Estate Graiguecullen.  The 
road seems to be sinking outside house numbers 22 & 23. 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr Elva Kelly.  The members were advised that 
Laois County Council will seek to assess the drainage and surfacing issues with a view 
to carrying out repairs in the interim. An investigation will be carried out of the existing 
pipe network with pipe jetting works likely required to be carried out.   
 
 
75/2026  – Councillor Aisling Moran 
“That Laois County Council repair the collapsing culvert on the N78 at Ballycorman, 
Ballylinan. Road is beginning to subside at this location and causing heavy and high 
vehicles to sway when passing. 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr Elva Kelly.  The members were advised that 
road Design have engaged with the TII on the above matter. The issue has been 
highlighted, and we await a response at present. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
76/2026  – Councillor Elva Kelly 
 
“That Laois County Council address concerns regarding ongoing flooding on L-78532  
Teampall Lane, Raheenadown, following periods of heavy rainfall, which may be  
attributed to an undersized drainage pipe incapable of accommodating peak 
surface‑water runoff”   
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr Vivienne Phelan.  The members were 
advised that Laois County Council have assessed the drainage issues and can confirm 
that an intervention is required which involve the upgrade of the existing drainage 
pipe networks. These works will be costed and from there all funding options will 
explored to enable works be added to our works schedule.  
 
 
77/2026  – Councillor Elva Kelly 
 
“That Laois County Council in the interest of public safety carry out the necessary repairs 
at the junction of the N80 and the laneway at Crannagh, Stradbally, which is causing 
difficulty for vehicles entering and exiting the laneway creating a serious road-safety 
hazard for both local road users and through-traffic on this national route” 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr Aisling Moran.  The members were advised 
that Road Design in conjunction with the Area Engineer will meet with Cllr Kelly at this 
location. The matter will be highlighted to the TII and a full assessment carried out. 
 
 
78/2026  – Councillor Elva Kelly  
 
“That Laois County Council inspect the condition of the road where it meets the 
walkway/driveway surfacing outside St. Joseph’s Church, Ballyadams, L-79553 in the 
interest of public safety”   
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr Aisling Moran.  The members were advised 
that Laois County Councils Area staff can meet with Cllr Kelly on site to confirm the 
location and identify any possible defects with a view to addressing them.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
79/2026  – Councillor Vivienne Phelan 
“That Laois County Council write to the manager of Laois Offaly Local Link requesting 
consideration be given to a nighttime bus service between Stradbally and Portlaoise” 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr Paschal McEvoy.  The members were 
advised that the Town Link operated by Slieve Bloom Coaches, currently serve the Portlaoise 
to Stradbally corridor on their 838 Portlaoise to Kilkenny licence. 
 
We have been looking at greater connectivity for the Stradbally area however there has been 
a pause on funding from the National Transport Authority for any new or enhancements to 
existing services since August 2025 and this is unlikely to change for 2026 at the moment.  
 
Cllr Phelan requested that a letter be issued to the three TD’s in the Laois area seeking 
intervention with the National Transport Authority on this matter. 
 
80/2026  – Councillor Vivienne Phelan 
“That Laois County Council install an Age Friendly parking space outside Stradbally 
library” 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr Paschal McEvoy.  The members were 
advised that Laois County Council will carry out an assessment at this location to 
determine the merits of this request and can provide an update to Cllr Phelan of this 
when completed.  
 
 
81/2026  – Councillor Vivienne Phelan 
“That Laois County Council add additional signage at Capakeel, Emo to encourage 
motorists to be mindful of pedestrians particularly along the residential area”    
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr Aisling Moran.  The members were advised 
that Laois County Councils Area staff can meet with Cllr. Phelan on site to confirm the 
location in question and from there determine if additional signage is warranted.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
(4) 
Correspondence 
 
Response from the OPW at Emo Court was read out regarding Notice of Motion 53/2026 
“That Laois Council request the OPW to provide a pedestrian gate at the entrance to 
Emo Park in the interest of safety of walkers” 
 
(5) 
Fix Date for Next Meeting  
The next meeting is scheduled for the 17th of June at 2.00 p.m. 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
Signed:  __________________________________ 
             Vivienne Phelan, M.C.C. , Cathaoirleach 
 
