 
 
MINUTES OF THE GRAIGUECULLEN/PORTARLINGTON MUNICIPAL DISTRICT MEETING 
HELD ON WEDNESDAY 15th APRIL 2026 IN THE MARKET HOUSE, PORTARLINGTON AND 
VIA MICROSOFT TEAMS  
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Ms. Vivienne Phelan M.C.C. (In the Chair) 
Mr. Aidan Mullins M.C.C.  
 
 
 
 
Mr. Ben Brennan M.C.C.  
 
 
 
 
Mr. Paschal McEvoy, M.C.C. 
 
 
 
 
Ms. Aisling Moran, M.C.C (Online) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN ATTENDANCE: 
 
Ms. Julie Bergin, Director of Services 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Tom Drennan, Senior Executive Engineer 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Ms. Therese Kelly, Staff Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
Confirmation 
of 
the 
Minutes 
of 
the 
March 
Meeting 
of 
the 
Graiguecullen/Portarlington Municipal District held on the 18th of March 2026 
 
On the proposition of Councillor Paschal McEvoy seconded by Councillor Aidan Mullins the 
Members unanimously agreed the minutes of the March meeting of the 
Graiguecullen/Portarlington Municipal District held on the 18th of March 2026. 
 
 
(2) 
Matters Arising 
 
No matters arising from February Minutes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
(3) 
Notice of Motions:- 
 
52/2026 – Councillor Aidan Mullins 
“That Laois County Council erect Digital Speed Signs on both approach roads in 
Killenard”. 
 
 
 
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Paschal McEvoy.  The members were 
advised that Laois County Council’s Municipal District Roads office in conjunction with 
the Road Safety Engineer is currently reviewing the existing arrangements with line 
marking improvements, additional signage (both standard and digital) under 
consideration.  The Road Design section is also currently reviewing existing urban 
speed limits across the district including Killenard which will be coming up for public 
consultation over 2026.  
 
53/2026 – Councillor Aidan Mullins 
“That Laois County Council request the OPW provide a pedestrian gate at the entrance 
to Emo Park in the interest of safety for walkers” 
 
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Vivienne Phelan.  The members were 
advised that Therese Kelly MD Administrator will issue a letter to the OPW post this 
meeting. 
 
 
54/2026 – Councillor Aidan Mullins 
“That Laois County Council replace the Taxi Rank in the Market Square in Portarlington 
which was recently removed for the installation of the bus stop” 
 
 
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Paschal McEvoy.  The members were 
advised that the layout at the bus stop in Market Square will be revised so that taxis 
can operate in line with previous arrangements. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
55/2026 – Councillor Ben Brennan 
“That Laois County Council install a ramp outside Rossmore view housing estate”. 
 
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Vivienne Phelan.  The members were 
advised that Laois County Council is currently drafting a Guidance Document on the 
Selection and Implementation of Traffic Calming Measures and was due to go before 
Laois County Councils Strategic Policy Committee for roads for their review with a 
view adopting this as a policy.   
In the interim the area office will schedule to have a technical assessment carried out 
but will await the outcome of the updated guidelines and policy on this before making 
a final determination on this. 
 
 
56/2026 – Councillor Ben Brennan 
“That Laois County Council put in some parking spaces in Rossmore view housing 
estate” 
 
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Vivienne Phelan.  The members were 
advised that the Graiguecullen/Portarlington Municipal Districts roads office will carry 
out an assessment to determine its need and extent of any civil, drainage or utility 
requirements and have works costed. When cost estimates have been established this 
can be discussed with Cllr. Brennan on how these works may be funded.  
 
 
57/2026 – Councillor Ben Brennan 
“That Laois County Council put safety measures in place on the junction of the Cuts and 
Newline Road in Killeshin as it is a death trap”  
 
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Paschal McEvoy.  The members were 
advised that Laois County Council will review and assess this junction and from there 
will determine what interventions may be required with regards to road safety.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
58/2026  – Councillor Aisling Moran 
“That Laois County Council repair the broken fence along Fr. Fingleton road”. 
 
 
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Ben Brennan.  The members were advised 
that Laois County Council has assessed the existing post and rail fence and will consider 
this for upgrade over the 2nd quarter of 2026 subject to available resources.   
59/2026  – Councillor Aisling Moran 
“That Laois County Council carry out surface repairs to Foyles cross (before Sleaty 
cemetery) Knockbeg road”. 
 
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Ben Brennan.  The members were advised 
that Laois County Council have assessed this and have scheduled in surface repairs to 
be carried out in the immediate term.   
 
60/2026  – Councillor Aisling Moran 
“That Laois County Council repair broken streetlight at Portlaoise road roundabout, 
Graiguecullen”  
 
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Vivienne Phelan.  The members were 
advised that Laois County Council’s Maintenance Contractor will be notified and the 
light fixed accordingly. 
 
 
 
61/2026  – Councillor Vivienne Phelan 
“That Laois County Council urgently address the drainage issue and resurfacing of 
Melbourne Lane Luggacurren which is in a very bad state of disrepair” 
 
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Paschal McEvoy.  The members were 
advised that Laois County Council will seek to assess the drainage and surfacing issues 
with a view to carrying out repairs in the interim. Restoration improvement works in 
Melbourne Lane has been included as Part of Laois County Councils Restoration 
improvement programme for 2027.  
 
62/2026  – Councillor Vivienne Phelan 
“That Laois County Council examine junction safety between the N80 and the L3960 to 
Ballyadams” 
 
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Ben Brennan.  The members were advised 
that Road Design will meet with Cllr Phelan at this location.  A full safety assessment 
will be carried out. Road Design will liaise with the Eastern Area Engineer and if 
possible, measures will be installed to help alleviate possible safety issues. 
 

 
 
63/2026  – Councillor Vivienne Phelan  
“That Laois County Council address the pooling of water at the junction of the N80 
adjacent to St. Joseph's Cemetery, which is resulting in cars drifting over to the far side 
of the road and could result in an accident”   
 
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Vivienne Phelan.  The members were 
advised that Laois County Council have assessed this and have scheduled in surface 
repairs with a view to alleviating any ponding with these works be carried out over the 
coming weeks.  
 
 
 
 
64/2026  – Councillor Paschal McEvoy 
“That Laois County Council refresh the Road markings / signs in Stradbally ”. 
 
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Vivienne Phelan.  The members were 
advised that Laois County Council will review the line marking condition in Stradbally 
and where identified for renewal will schedule these in for upgrade subject to available 
resources. 
 
65/2026  – Councillor Paschal McEvoy 
“That Laois County Council address the Flooding at the Mill on the Portlaoise Road 
Timahoe”. 
 
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Ben Brennan.  The members were advised 
that Laois County Council will review the roadside drainage at this location and will 
consider interventions if necessary to alleviate against any ponding. If the scale of the 
intervention is deemed significant an application to the Department of Transport may 
be necessary to secure sufficient funding though a Climate Adaptation application in 
order to complete the works.  
 
 
66/2026  – Councillor Paschal McEvoy 
“That Laois County Council fill the Potholes on the L7974 Road in Ballylinan”.  
   
 
This notice of Motion was seconded by Cllr. Vivienne Phelan.  The members were 
advised that Laois County Council will be carrying out preparatory works on the L-7974 
at Aughanure  in advance of the 2026 Restoration maintenance programme which will 
involve completing any patching or pothole repairs where necessary. These 
preparatory works will be carried out over the immediate term.   
 

 
 
 
(4) 
Correspondence 
 
It was noted that a reply was received from the Minister for health regarding 
Notice of Motion 39.2026.  Reply was read out which advised Laois County Council 
that the matter is more appropriate to the Minister of State with special 
responsibility for Older People which has been forwarded to Minister O’Donnell’s 
Office for a reply. 
 
(5) 
The Next Meeting is scheduled for the 20th of May 2026 at 2.00 p.m. 
 
(6) 
AOB. 
 
A discussion took place with regards to the Councillors Discretionary Funds.  The 
discretionary funds will now be managed by the Municipal District (MD) 
Administrators for each area.  Once the councillors have agreed to a project and 
received the relevant cost details, they should advise the MD Administrator that 
funding has been allocated to that project. The Administrator should then update 
their discretionary fund balance accordingly, and the funds will be transferred to 
the relevant job code. The balance will be available to the Councillors at any time 
from the MD Administrator.  The Protocol is to be distributed post meeting. 
 
It was also agreed to meet with Michael Malone Senior Executive Engineer roads 
department on Monday 27th of April at 10am to discuss the Urban Speed Limit 
Review pre-consulation. 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
Signed:  __________________________________ 
             Vivienne Phelan, M.C.C. , Cathaoirleach 
 
