MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF BORRIS-IN-
OSSORY/MOUNTMELLICK MUNICIPAL DISTRICT MEETING HELD 
IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER , ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, PORTLAOISE, 
ON THE 12TH OF MAY 2026 
 
PRESENT:  
Councillor  
Conor Bergin – In the Chair  
 
 
 
Councillor 
James Kelly 
 
 
 
Councillor  
Seamus McDonald  
 
 
 
Councillor  
John King 
 
 
 
Councillor 
Paddy Bracken  
 
 
 
Councillor 
Ollie Clooney 
 
IN ATTENDANCE: 
 
 
Ms. Angela McEvoy, Director of Services, Mr. Rory O’ Callaghan, 
S.E.E. & Ms. Michelle McCormack, Staff Officer 
 
(1) 
CONFIRMATION OF THE MINUTES OF THE APRIL MEETING OF 
THE BORRIS-IN-OSSORY/MOUNTMELLICK MUNICIPAL 
DISTRICT HELD ON THE 15TH OF APRIL 2026 
On the proposition of Councillor John King seconded by 
Councillor Seamus McDonald, the minutes of the April  meeting 
held on the 15th of April 2026 were confirmed as circulated. 
 
(2) 
MATTERS ARISING  
There were no matters arising. 
  
(3) 
NOTICE OF MOTIONS  
 
Notice of Motion No: 65/2026 
 
Councillor James Kelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
“That Laois County Council carry out road remedial works Forest, 
Mountrath, L-1652 to alleviate the constant flooding issues on the 
road” 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Seamus McDonald.  
The Members were advised that the maintenance crew will clean 

out the existing storm water network at this location. This stretch 
of road is included in the 2026 RI Works programme and this will 
rectify the road edge flooding issue. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 66/2026 
 
Councillor James Kelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
“That Laois County Council address the road safety issues due to an 
open drain in close proximity to Gaelscoil Thromaire and Trumera 
G.A.A. Club” 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Conor Bergin.  The Members 
were advised that given the significant storm water flow during 
rainfall, the Area Office does not recommend piping this drain. A site 
meeting will be arranged with the Elected Member to explore 
alternative safety measures (signage and road markings etc.). 
 
Notice of Motion No: 67/2026 
 
Councillor James Kelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
  
“That Laois County Council provide an update on when road safety 
works will commence at the junction entry to Castletown on the 
Mountrath side of the very busy R445” 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Conor Bergin.  The 
Members were advised that these works will commence in Q3 of 
2026. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 68/2026 
 
Councillor John King proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council give support and carry out some minor 
works and work with the Clough community in preparation for the 
upcoming Pride of Place competition for population under 300 
category which will take place around the end of July this year" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Conor Bergin.  The 
Members were advised that the Area Office will provide assistance 
to the Clough Community for the event. 
 
 
 

 
Notice of Motion No: 69/2026 
 
Councillor John King proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
  
"That Laois County Council repair damaged footpath at O' Daly 
Terrace, Rathdowney as this is caused by heavy vehicles parking there 
at different times as the surface is not suitable to carry the extra 
weight" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor James Kelly.  The 
Members were advised that the footpath works programme for 2026 
does not include for this footpath repair works. It will be considered 
for inclusion in the 2027 programme. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 70/2026 
 
Councillor John King proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
  
"That Laois County Council re-surface the road from the Bawnogue 
to Grantstown junction as this road is in a very poor state and must 
be included in the 2027 Roads Programme" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Conor Bergin.  The 
Members were advised that the Area Office remains committed to 
the ongoing maintenance of the R433, subject to available resources. 
This specific roadway segment will be assessed for inclusion in the 
2027 Restoration Improvement (RI) grant programme. 
 
 
Notice of Motion No: 71/2026 
 
Councillor Paddy Bracken proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council be updated on the progress on repairs and 
upgrade of the pedestrian railing at the junction of Connolly Street, 
Lord Edward & Sarsfield Street" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Seamus McDonald.  
The Members were advised that a topographical survey of the 
junction has been carried out. Survey data indicates that the 
footpath width at the Pharmacy does not meet current pedestrian 
standards. A detailed traffic calming design is needed on the 
Sarsfield Street approach to this junction. As a temporary measure 
the existing damaged railing will be repaired and the portion on the 

Sarsfield Street approach will be setback to provide additional 
clearance for oncoming heavy commercial vehicles.     
 
Notice of Motion No: 72/2026 
 
Councillor Paddy Bracken proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
  
"That Laois County Council in conjunction with the T.I.I. as a matter 
of urgency replace the road markings at the junction of O' Moore 
Street and Emmett Street on the N80" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Ollie Clooney.  The 
Members were advised that a new storm water sewer is scheduled 
to be laid early in Q3 of this year from this junction to a point 75m 
along O'Moore Street. The road markings on this junction and its 
approaches will be provided following the completion of these 
works. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 73/026 
 
Councillor Paddy Bracken proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council install the speed ramp at Connolly Street 
as this was included in the 2025 Roadworks Programme" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Seamus McDonald.  
The Members were advised that This traffic calming ramp will be 
provided in Q2 of 2026. 
 
 
Notice of Motion No: 74/2026 
 
Councillor Seamus McDonald proposed the following Notice of 
Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council put in place traffic calming measures at 
the Mountmellick and Birr Roads, Clonaslee" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Paddy Bracken.  
The Members were advised that this location will be reviewed in line 
with Laois County Council traffic calming policy, all proposed works 
will be subject to budget availability 
 
 
 

 
Notice of Motion No: 75/2026 
 
Councillor Seamus McDonald proposed the following Notice of 
Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council make safe Shelly's Corner at Rosenallis" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Paddy Bracken.  
The Members were advised that This location will be reviewed in line 
with Laois County Council traffic calming policy, all proposed works 
will be subject to budget availability. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 76/2026 
 
Councillor Seamus McDonald proposed the following Notice of 
Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council carry out urgent road repairs at Clonmore, 
Clonaslee" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Paddy Bracken.  
The Members were advised that The Area Office will continue to 
carry out routine road maintenance work on this road (L-6007) 
subject to available budgets and resources. No budget available in 
2026 for proper road restoration works. This road will be considered 
for inclusion in the 2027 Road Restoration Improvement Works 
programme. 
 
 
Notice of Motion No: 77/2026 
 
Councillor Ollie Clooney proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council re-surface the road in Gash Court estate 
in Castletown" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor James Kelly.  The 
Members were advised that The Area Office will continue to carry 
out routine road maintenance work on this road (L-10778) subject 
to available budgets and resources. No budget available in 2026 for 
proper road restoration works. It is suggested that a Community 
Involvement Scheme application be submitted. 
 
 

Notice of Motion No: 78/2026 
 
Councillor Ollie Clooney proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That Laois County Council implement safety measures on the road 
at Cullohill Church" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John King. The 
Members were advised that road signage and road markings will be 
provided at this location. It will be included as part of the 2026 
annual works programme. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 79/2026 
 
Councillor Ollie Clooney proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
 
"That Laois County Council re-paint the yellow box at the Health 
Centre in Durrow" 
 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John King.  The 
Members were advised that this yellow box will be included in this 
years programme. 
 
 
Notice of Motion No: 80/2026 
 
Councillor Conor Bergin proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
  
“That Laois County Council in conjunction with Castletown Tidy 
Towns apply for funding from the Development of Rural & Community 
Affairs & OPW for funding to clean the silt under the bridge in 
Castletown, clean the arches and also install a new sluice gate” 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor John King.  The 
Members were advised that Laois County Council's ecological 
consultants are currently carrying out a Natura Impact Statement 
(NIS). When completed, Laois County Council will lodge an 
application to An Coimisiún Pleanála for approval to carry out the 
works and an application for funding to the OPW. The provision of a 
new sluice gate is not part of the current works and will be reviewed 
with Laois County Council's consultants and the OPW. 
 
 
 

Notice of Motion No: 81/2026 
 
Councillor Conor Bergin proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
  
“That Laois County Council carry out urgent road repairs at Cappagh 
South, Mountrath" 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor James Kelly.  The 
Members were advised that the Area Office will continue to carry 
out routine road maintenance work on this road (L-10778) subject 
to available budgets and resources. This road is a cul-de-sac. Priority 
for Department funding is for heavier trafficked routes (regional and 
local primary and secondary roads). Residents on this road should 
consider submitting a Community Involvement Scheme Application.   
 
Notice of Motion No: 82/2026 
 
Councillor Conor Bergin proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
  
"That Laois County Council carry out road repairs at Glebe, Coolrain" 
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Ollie Clooney.  The 
Members were advised that This section of roadway (L5051)will be 
included 
for 
consideration 
in 
the 
2027 
Road 
Restoration 
Improvement Works Programme. 
 
(4) 
PROGRESS REPORT ON NOTICES OF MOTIONS (JANUARY 2025 – 
APRIL 2026) 
The Members were advised that this matter would be further 
discussed at the June meeting of the Municipal District. 
(5) 
CONSIDERATION OF A MUNICIPAL RECEPTION TO ROSENALLIS 
NATIONAL SCHOOL ON WINNING THE ALL-IRELAND VEX 1Q 
COMPETITION  
This matter was referred by the Corporate Policy Group where it was 
agreed at the April meeting of CPG that a Municipal District 
Reception be accorded to Rosenallis National School on winning the 
All-Ireland Vex 1Q Competition.  Councillor Paddy Bracken proposed 
that this item go back to CPG for their consideration to accord a 
Civic Reception on their further success in winning the Engineering 
Divisions Judges Award at the Vex Robotics World Championships in 

Missouri recently.  This was seconded by Councillor Seamus 
McDonald. 
 
(6) 
CORRESPONDNCE  
There was no correspondence for noting.  
 
(7) 
FIX DATE FOR NEXT MEETING  
It 
was 
noted 
that 
the 
next 
meeting 
of 
the 
Borris-in-
Ossory/Mountmellick MD would be held on Wednesday, June 10th 2026 
at 9.30 a.m. in the Council Chamber, Áras an Chontae, Portlaoise.   
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
Signed:  __________________                    ________________________ 
                   Cathaoirleach                         Director of Services 
 
 
 
