MINUTES OF THE PORTLAOISE MUNICIPAL DISTRICT MEETING HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY 15TH APRIL 2026 IN ÁRAS AN CHONTAE, PORTLAOISE 
 
 
PRESENT: 
 
 
Mr. John Joe Fennelly (in the Chair)  
 
 
 
 
Ms. Caroline Dwane Stanley, M.C.C. 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Paddy Buggy, M.C.C. 
 
 
 
 
Ms. Tommy Mulligan, M.C.C.  
 
 
 
 
Ms. Catherine Fitzgerald, M.C.C.  
 
 
 
 
Mr. Barry Walsh, M.C.C.  
 
 
 
 
Ms. Marie Tuohy, M.C.C. 
 
 
IN ATTENDANCE:  
Mr. Simon Walton, Director of Services 
Mr. Wes Wilkinson, Senior Executive Engineer  
 
 
 
 
Ms. Rhonda Mulhall, Acting Staff Officer  
 
 
1. 
MINUTES OF THE MARCH MEETING OF THE PORTLAOISE MUNICIPAL 
DISTRICT HELD ON THE 23RD OF MACH 2026 
 
On the proposition of Councillor Paddy Buggy seconded by Councillor Caroline 
Dwane Stanley, the Minutes of the March 2026 Meeting of Portlaoise Municipal 
District held on the 23rd of March 2026 were confirmed and agreed, as circulated. 
 
2. 
MATTERS ARISING FROM THE FEBRUARY MEETING OF THE 
PORTLAOISE MUNICIPAL DISTRICT HELD ON THE 23RD OF MACH 2026 
 
There were no matters arising from the Minutes of the 23rd of March 2026. 
 
3. 
NOTICE OF MOTIONS  
 
Notice of Motion No: 55/2026 
Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council include Ross Lane in our roads programme and in the 
meantime fill the potholes on the lane."  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley. The 
Members were advised that the Portlaoise MD office will arrange to fill the 
potholes on the L21125 . This road will be considered for inclusion on the Roads 
programme 2027 
 

Notice of Motion No: 56/2026 
Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council install a bus stop at Fieldbrooke."  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley. The 
Members were advised by Active Travel that the Council is not in a position to 
provide a new bus stop at Fieldbrooke. Investment is currently focused on the 
upgrade of existing bus stops across the county over and above the provision of 
new bus stops. In this case, there is an existing bus stop nearby at Portlaoise 
Hospital which serves both local and long-distance bus services. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 57/2026 
Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald proposed the following Notice of Motion:-   
"That this Council request  NTA to start a programme of installing bus shelters 
in the town."  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Paddy Buggy. The Members 
were advised by Active Travel that Laois County Council is engaging with the 
NTA regarding a number of embellishments to the Portlaoise Town Bus Service, 
including the provision of Bus Shelters, having regard to the success of the 
Service. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 58/2026  
Councillor Barry Walsh proposed the following Notice of Motion:-   
"That Laois County Council install a speed ramps and road safety signage in 
Cross of Newtown Estate Ballyroan"  
This Notice of Motions was seconded by Councillor John Joe Fennelly. The 
Members were advised that the Portlaoise MD office will make themselves 
available to meet Cllr Walsh on site at the Cross of Newtown estate Ballyroan 
with a view to agreeing locations for the installation of traffic calming ramps and 
signage 
 
Notice of Motion No: 59/2026 
Councillor Barry Walsh proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That Laois County Council install a pedestrian crossing and associated 
signage/lighting at Sue Ryder Kilminchy, Portlaoise."  

This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley. The 
Members were advised that the Portlaoise MD office will make themselves 
available to meet Cllr Walsh on site at Sue Ryder Kilminchy with a view to 
examining the location for the installation of a pedestrian crossing. Subject to 
examination of the site the allocation can be considered for an application for 
funding under for Safety and Improvement works 2027 
 
Notice of Motion No: 60/2026 
Councillor Barry Walsh proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That Laois County Council contact the HSE regarding unused dispensary 
buildings in our district with a view to either purchasing or put to community 
use"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Paddy Buggy. The Members 
were advised by Simon Walton that Subject to Member’s agreement with this 
Motion, a letter will issue to HSE. 
All members agreed. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 61/2026 
Councillor Tommy Mulligan proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
“That Laois County Council pursue the purchase of suitable property/land for 
use as a recreational and heritage space, with a view to enhancing the Old Fort 
Quarter area, Portlaoise”  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Marie Tuohy. The Members 
were advised by Simon Walton that Laois County Council has recently purchased 
the site of the Old Barracks and will consider other purchases in this area as and 
when the opportunity arises. Laois County Council will make an application to 
the recently announced Towns and Cities Regeneration Investment Fund to 
refurbish the Granary Building and the Old Barracks site to enhance the Old Fort 
Quarter Area and to support the ongoing development of a Cultural Quarter in 
Portlaoise Town. 
 
 
 
 
 

Notice of Motion No: 62/2026 
Councillor Tommy Mulligan proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
“That Laois County Council install additional bins at strategic locations 
throughout Portlaoise to promote cleaner roads and provide greater 
convenience for walkers”  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley. The 
Members were advised by the Portlaoise MD office that the street bin service in 
Portlaoise has been expanded incrementally in recent years. There are now 59 
solar compacter bins in operation in Portlaoise town. Portlaoise MD office will 
engage with Cllr Mulligan to examine proposed locations for additional street 
bins. These locations will be noted and referenced at a time if/when additional 
funding becomes available to enable further expansion of the service. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 63/2026 
Councillor Tommy Mulligan proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
“That Laois County Council install double yellow lines at the top of Parkview 
Road in Portlaoise to prevent parking, as vehicles are obstructing sightlines and 
impeding pedestrians”  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Paddy Buggy. The Members 
were advised that Portlaoise MD office will arrange to install double yellow lines 
in the vicinity of the junction L6135 and the L2120, adjacent to the property R32 
K4XY Parkview Portlaoise 
 
Notice of Motion No: 64/2026 
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That This council give an update on progress in the following areas that need 
to be taken in charge in kilminchy. Lake Glade, Lake Cresent, Lake Drive, Lake 
Vale, and The Cresent "  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Tommy Mulligan. The 
Members were advised by the Planning Department, Laois County Council that 
Sections of Lake Glade, Lake Drive and Lake Vale have been taken in charge by 
Laois County Council. The remaining areas of these sections of kilminchy will be 
taken in charge once any remaining active development is completed.   
The Crescent has not yet been taken in charge - It is intended to advertise The 
Crescent for taking in charge  in Q2 2026. 

Notice of Motion No: 65/2026 
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council give an update on the current works taken place on the green 
area in Rossvale , and to ensure the developer reinstates the grass area and 
paths as it was"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald. The 
Members were by the Portlaoise MD office that the works been carried out on 
the green area in Rossvale relate to the provision of electricity power supply 
infrastructure for a new development adjacent to Rossvale, this work will be on 
going for a number of weeks. The Portlaoise MD office will continue to engage 
with the utility providers regarding the reinstatements within the estate.  
 
Notice of Motion No: 66/2026 
Councillor Caroline Dwane Stanley proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this council carry out necessary works on the drainage in lakeglen and on 
the connecting road with O Moore Place"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald. The 
Members were advised that Portlaoise MD office will carry out a survey of the 
existing drainage at this location, subject to the findings of the survey the 
location will be considered for an application for drainage works funding 2027 
 
Notice of Motion No: 67/2026 
Councillor Paddy Buggy proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That Laois County Council paint road signs on Jessop Street Portlaoise to 
remind drivers to drive slowly"  
 This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Barry Walsh. The Members 
were advised that Portlaoise MD office will arrange to install slow road markings 
on Jessop Street Portlaoise L21129 
 
 Notice of Motion No: 68/2026 
Councillor Paddy Buggy proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That Laois County Council ensures that no more seating/benches are installed 
adjacent to the lakes in Kilminchy Estate without the permission of the local 
residents who live in the vicinity of the lakes. The people who live adjacent to 

the lakes have serious concerns about the use these seats/benches will be put 
to"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Barry Walsh. The Members 
were advised that The Portlaoise MD office liaises with the residents through 
the Kilminchy Management Company (KMC Ltd) in relation works that are 
carried out in the vicinity of the lakes in Kilminchy Estate 
 
Notice of Motion No: 69/2026 
Councillor Paddy Buggy proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That Laois County Council apply for funding under the Climate Change 
Adaptation & Resilience Works to drain a road in Pallas, Portlaoise"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Catherine Fitzgerald. The 
Members were advised by The Portlaoise MD office that the location on the 
L21125 adjacent R32 WV97, Ross Lane (near Pallas) will be included as an 
application for funding for Climate Change Adaptation & Resilience Works 2027. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 70/2026 
Councillor John Joe Fennelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council resurface the junction at the traffic lights in Abbeyleix and 
install new sensors"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Barry Walsh. The Members 
were advised by the Roads Design Department, Laois County council that the 
traffic light induction loops on the Ballinakill roadside of the junction will be 
replaced in the coming weeks. 
The condition of the N77 in Abbeyleix has deteriorated beyond the junction. TII 
want to retexture the surface for 570m starting from approximately south of 
Cleland's and continuing north through Stucker Hill and tying in with the 
pavement works we did last year. The TII proposal is for retexturing only. We 
have proposed to TII that the current pavement condition demonstrates that 
this needs resurfacing. TII have agreed in principle with our proposal . We are 
preparing a justification report showing the condition of the pavement and will 
submit it this week to TII for their approval . 
 
 
 

Notice of Motion No: 71/2026 
Councillor John Joe Fennelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council clear all gullies on all roads around Abbeyleix"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Barry Walsh. The Members 
were advised that Portlaoise MD office will arrange to carry out gully cleaning 
works in Abbeyleix. 
 
Notice of Motion No: 72/2026 
Councillor John Joe Fennelly proposed the following Notice of Motion:- 
"That this Council install flashing road markings on all Pedestrian Crossings in 
our Municipal District"  
This Notice of Motion was seconded by Councillor Barry Walsh. The Members 
were advised by the Roads Design Department, Laois County council that these 
flashing road markings will be installed at three existing pedestrian crossings in 
the Municipal District in 2026. The cost of these installations is ranging from 
between €4000 to €11000 per pedestrian crossing depending on several factors 
including crossing width, power supply proximity , number of light units 
installed etc. Please note that each installation requires a power supply at the 
Pedestrian Crossing. Not every pedestrian crossing has an existing power 
supply. 
 
4. 
Correspondence 
There were no items of correspondence. 
 
5. 
Fix Date for Next Meeting  
It was agreed that the next Meeting of the Municipal District will take place on 
Wednesday 20th of May 2026 at 10.00am. 
 
 
 
Signed:   _____________________                                                  ______________________________ 
                 Cathaoirleach 
 
 
 
                 Director of Services  
 
