Agenda
 
Fógra Cruinnithe / Notice of Meeting
A Chomhairleoir Uasail, Dear Councillor,
Tionólfar cruinniú mí Meán Fómhair Chomhairle Contae Uíbh Fhailí in Áras an Chontae, Tulach Mhór, Uíbh
Fhailí, Dé Luain an 15 Meán Fómhair 2025, ag tosú ag 2 a chlog tráthnóna.
Seo chugat an clár. Iarrtar ort leis seo a bheith i láthair.
Notice is hereby given that the September meeting of Offaly County Council will be held in Áras an Chontae,
Charleville Road, Tullamore, Co. Offaly on Monday next, 15 September 2025 at 2p.m.
The agenda is attached. Please arrange to attend.
Mise, le meas,
  
Meetings Administrator
 
Confirmation of Minutes - Monthly Meeting July
Minutes of the Ordinary meeting of Offaly County Council held on 21 July 2025
 
Minutes for Noting
Minutes of Corporate Policy Group Meeting held on 14th July 2025  
Minutes of Housing & Integration Strategic Policy Committee Meeting held on 8th May 2025
 
Part 8 of the Planning & Development Act 2000, (as amended)
Planning and Development Regulations 2001, (as amended) for
proposed development of former Library - Shinrone

Mr. A. Murray, Director of Services
 
Part 8 of the Planning & Development Act 2000, (as amended)
Planning and Development Regulations 2001, (as amended) for the
proposed Edenderry 3 Pedestrian Crossings Scheme
 
Draft Polling Scheme 2025 - Offaly County Council
Ms. A. Dillon, Director of Service
 
LCDC Change of Membership, in accordance with Section 128C of
the Local Government Reform Act 2014.
Ms. A. Dillon, Director of Service
 
Local Community Safety Partnership - 7 Nominations required (in
accordance with the Policing, Security and Community Safety Act
2024 (Section 114) (Safety Partnership)
Ms. A. Dillon, Director of Services
 
Presidential Election - Nominations Process and Special Meeting
arrangements
 
Proposed Rates Waiver Scheme
Ms. F. Millane, Director of Finance
 
Regional Health Forum - Change of Structure (for noting)
Ms. A. Dillon, Director of Service
 
Monthly Management Report
July & August Chief Executive Reports
List of Chief Executive Orders for July & August
Chief Executive, Anna Marie Delaney
 
Corporate Policy Group Report
Cathaoirleach John Leahy
 
Notices of Motion - 1 Item
1. "that Offaly County Council consider the installation of dog waste bins in the county, especially along the

Grand Canal Greenway. It has been noticed that some dog-owners do pick up after their dog and use the
provided bags but then throw said bags into the hedgerows. This naturally defeats the purpose of the bags and
adds to the issues around littering with these non- compostable bags. I appreciate Waterways Ireland have a
piece of work here also with this issue and ask that we stand together as a council and communicate with
Waterways Ireland to try and solve this problem" - Cllr. Claire Murray-Smale 
 
Comhdhálacha / Conferences
 
Comhfhreagras / Correspondence - 9 items
1. Galway County Council - Letter to CEO HSE - Portiuncula Hospital
2. Galway County Council - Letter to Minister for Health - Portiuncula Hospital
3. Galway County Council - Donegal County Council Resolution - Triple Lock
4. Limerick City & County Council - Ribbon Development Rules
5.Limerick City & County Council - College Contribution Fees 
6. Limerick City & County Council - Link to Community Welfare Support 
7. Tipperary County Council - Resolution on Renewable Energy Guidelines
8. Waterford City & County Council - Carer's Allowance and Benefit Reforms
9. Waterford City & County Council - Central bank, sale of Israeli Bonds
 
Any Other Business
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
