Municipal District of Edenderry
Bardasach Dåiche Éadan Doire
MINUTES
Main Committee
Chamber, Town Hall, Edenderry
Meeting:
Location:
Time:
Present:
Apologies:
In
Attendance:
In
attendance
for part of
meeting:
3:30pm
Cathaoirleach Cllr. Liam Quinn
Cllr. Noel Cribbin
Cllr. Claire Murray Smale
Cllr. Eddie Fitzpatrick
Cllr. Fergus McDonnell
Leas-Chathaoirleach Cllr. Claire Murray
Andrew Murray
Rory Moore
Enda Daly
Lourda Giles
Louise Murphy
Wednesday, 14h January 2026
Edenderry Municipal District
Edenderry Municipal District
Edenderry Municipal District
Edenderry Municipal District
Edenderry Municipal District
Edenderry Municipal District
District Director
District Engineer
Executive Engineer
Administrative Officer
District Administrator
AGENDA ITEMS
Cathaoirleach Cllr. Liam Quinn welcomed everyone to the January monthly meeting and
wished everyone a Happy New Year.
I. Confirmation of Minutes from the December Meeting
It was proposed by Cllr. Eddie Fitzpatrick and seconded by Cllr. Fergus Mc Donnell
that the minutes of the monthly meeting held on 10th December 2025 be adopted.
Comhairle Chontae Vibh Fhaili
Offaly County Council
2.
GMAs
Three applications were considered by the Members. Having been proposed
by Cllr. Claire Murray Smale and seconded by Cllr. Fergus Mc Donnell the
following details were accepted:
Application
Edenderry St
Patricks day parade
Rhode Parish
Historical Group
Ballinagar
Development
Association
Funding
Requested
€3000
€2000
€2500
Reason for Funding
Towards barriers bands, radio sounds
hoists and costumes for the parade
Towards printing and placing a tourist
map in glass and framed
Towards costs of a new boiler
Funding
given
€3000
€2000
€2500
District Administrator Louise Murphy informed the Members that a letter was
received from Portarlington Musical Society, thanking the Members for their grant
contribution.
3. Regeneration/Project Updates
District Director, Mr. Andrew Murray, advised Members that the library project is
currently at the tender assessment stage. He further informed Members that the
Edenderry Swimming Pool project is with the Department of Culture,
Communications and Sport and is awaiting approval.
4. Area Issues/Updates/Roads Update
District Engineer Rory Moore confirmed that EMD are still awaiting confirmation of
the funding allocation from the Department of Transport for various works under the
Roads Programme. OCC budgets for various items also yet to be confirmed to EMD.
District Engineer Rory Moore also noted the Monasteroris SIG Project is still awaiting
written approval from Department of Transport. for OCC to proceed to issue the
tender.
Comhairle Chontae (Jibh Fhaili
Offaly County Council
Cllr. Claire Murray requested regular updates with regards to the R400 Peat Pilot
Scheme - Phase 2 and also requested that the LIOIO Rhode to Croghan road be added
to salting/gritting routes under OCC Winter Service Plan, as this is the only part of a
bus route that is not treated. District Engineer Rory Moore confirmed the LIOIO road
is being salted/gritted while the R400 is closed and the temporary traffic diversion
is in place. RM explained that the routes chosen under Offaly County Council's Winter
Service Plan, which is available upon Offaly County Council's website, are based upon
the category of road (e.g. National / Regional roads), the volume of traffic and the
importance of the route on a national, regional or local level. RM advised that budget
and resource constraints also have an impact upon the routes that Offaly County
Council can salt/grit under the Winter Service Plan. Discussions took place, following
which the Elected Members resolved to write to Mr. Paul McLoughlin, Director of
Service, inviting him to attend a meeting to discuss the OCC Winter Service Plan and
to seek a review of same.
Cllr. Claire Murray Smale thanked all the Council staff for the works carried on the
Croghan Road whilst the R400 was reopened and is hopeful that there is no more
potential delays completing phase 2 of the R400 works.
Cllr. Fergus McDonnell complemented staff on the works done out in Croghan that it
was well received by the residents. Sentiments were echoed among the elected
Members welcoming the works in Croghan.
District Engineer Rory Moore updated the Members on the R400 that is now closed
with a planned reopening on Friday 13th of March. RM advised works intended under
Phase 3 along the R400 is subject to funding approval from Department of Transport.
Cllr. Eddie Fitzpatrick sought an update on the Survey of trees and noted several
overhanding trees on the Geashill to Ballinagar road that pose a safety issue. District
Engineer Rory Moore advised that the arborist report was received before end of last
year, but has yet to be reviewed by EMD Engineers to establish the scope of works
required for the actions recommended under the report. RM also advised that EMD's
budget for tree management works is not yet confirmed.
Cllr. Fergus Mc Donnell queried tree management & maintenance in public spaces,
noting there is low level branches in The Sycamores. He proposed that the onus is
on elected members to push for policy & funding; this was seconded by Cllr. Noel
Cribbin & needs to be brought to Climate Action, Transport & Environment Policy SPC.
Cllr. Eddie Fitzpatrick raised a query he had received from Portarlington Tidy Towns
about hoarding on Bottley Lane in Portarlington with a request for the Stone wall to
be reinstated. Executive Engineer Enda Daly advised they would look into this and
revert.
Comhairle Chontae Uibh Fhaili
Offaly County Council
5. Notice of Motion
None at this time.
6. Written Questions
None at this time.
7. Correspondence
District Administrator Louise Murphy advised that a further reply from An Garda
Siochana was received today stating that a new Superintendent has been appointed
and have proposed coming to speak to the members at the February meeting.
8. Any Other Business
District Administrator Louise Murphy reminded the Members that the draft Edenderry
parking byelaws are currently on public consolation until 28th of January.
Cllr. Fergus McDonnell extended his congratulations to Sister Åine Small on the
completion of 44 years of service, marking the end of the St. John of God Sisters'
association with the parish. He also congratulated Deacon Paul Wyer on his retirement,
having served as Permanent Deacon since 2012. Cllr. Noel Cribbin likewise extended his
congratulations to both individuals, thanked them for their significant contribution to the
Edenderry community, and wished them well in their retirements.
This concluded the business of the meeting. The next meeting is scheduled to take place
on the 11th of February 2026.
Signed:
Date:
Catha Irleach
-Llzlu.
Comhairle Chontae Uibh Fhaili
Offaly County Council