 
 
                        COMHAIRLE CATHRACH AGUS CONTAE PHORT LÁIRGE 
WATERFORD CITY AND COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
COUNCIL MEETING HELD ON 14th MARCH 2024 IN COUNCIL CHAMBER, 
CITY HALL, WATERFORD.  
 
Present 
 
Cllr. Joe Conway (Mayor) 
Cllr. Cristiona Kiely 
Cllr. Jim Griffin 
Cllr. Conor McGuinness 
Cllr. Liam Brazil  
Cllr. Jason Murphy 
Cllr. Joeanne Bailey 
Cllr. Seanie Power 
Cllr. Lola O’Sullivan 
Cllr. John Pratt 
Cllr. Tom Cronin 
Cllr. Thomas Phelan 
Cllr. Jody Power 
Cllr. Seamus O’Donnell 
Cllr. Pat Fitzgerald 
Cllr. Eamon Quinlan 
Cllr. Damien Geoghegan 
Cllr. John O’Leary 
Cllr. John Hearne 
Cllr. Donal Barry 
Cllr. Stephanie Keating 
Cllr. Pat Nugent 
Cllr. Seamus Ryan 
Cllr. Joe Kelly 
Cllr. Adam Wyse, 
Cllr. Mairead Tobin 
Cllr. Declan Clune 
Cllr. Frank Quinlan 
Cllr. Declan Doocey 
Cllr. David Daniels 
Cllr. Mary Roche 
 
 
Apologies: Cllr. Ger Barron. 
 
Officials in Attendance 
 
Mr. M. Walsh, Chief Executive 
Mr. I. Grimes, Director of Services, Housing 
Mr. S. Dobbs, A/SE, Economic Development 
Mr. F. Galvin, Director of Services, Roads, Water & Environment 
Mr. D. Murphy, Head of Finance 
Mr. P. Johnson, A/Director of Services, Corporate Services, IS, HR, Culture and Planning 
Ms. H. Dunphy, Meeting Administrator 
Ms. A. Flynn, Corporate  
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes 
 
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held on 8th February 2024 proposed by Cllr. Cronin and seconded 
by Cllr. Keating and agreed by all. 
 
2. Matters Arising 
 
Cllr. McGuiness asked if there was any further correspondence received from the Minister for 
Transport in relation to the N25. 
Item 
No. 1 

H. Dunphy, MA, will follow up on correspondence. 
Cllr. Ryan asked that the Palestinian Ambassador to Ireland be invited to address the Council. 
This was supported by Cllr. McGuinness and Cllr. Kelly. 
Cllr. Pratt asked if a letter had issued to Minister Eamonn Ryan regarding Active Travel 
funding and if so had a response been received. F.Galvin, DoS confirmed that it had with no 
response to date. 
Cllr. Kelly asked if a letter had been sent to University Hospital Waterford regarding the 
provision of a multi-storey carpark. H. Dunphy, MA confirmed it had. 
Cllr. Kiely asked for an update on the recording of  Council Meetings with H. Dunphy, MA to 
revert back. 
 
3.  Land Disposals 
 
P. Johnson A/DoS outlined details of the disposals of land for approval. 
Reference No. 1515 Lease of land at Ballinroad, Dungarvan to the Trustees of Ballinroad 
Football Club, proposed by Cllr. Phelan, seconded by Cllr. Cronin and agreed by all.   
Reference No. 1516 Disposal of land at North Quays to C.I.E, proposed by Cllr. Kelly and 
seconded by Cllr. O’Leary and agreed by all.   
 
Following Item 3 on the Agenda the Mayor called for a suspension of standing orders to allow 
for an address by Waterford IFA Dairy Chairperson, Laura Forbes.  
Proposed by Cllr. S. Power and seconded by Cllr. Nugent and agreed by all. 
 
Ms. Forbes highlighted the important role that farmers play in the local economy. She said 
5,800 people are employed in agriculture in Waterford contributing €1.6 billion to the local 
economy. The family farm is the backbone of rural communities and the viability of the family 
farm has to be protected. Issues faced by farmers raised by Ms. Forbes include environmental 
legislation, the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP),  the ever-increasing administrative burden 
being placed on farmers which has had a major impact on farm family incomes, additional EU 
regulations, over complicated schemes which have been poorly implemented and the Nitrates 
Derogation Scheme. In conclusion she said these are some of the issues which have led to the 
anger and frustration being felt by Irish farmers and the IFA’s Enough is Enough campaign has 
allowed farmers to voice this anger and frustration. 
 
Following the address the Mayor called for a further suspension of standing orders to allow 
Cllr. S. Power raise his motion under Item 9 on the Agenda. 
Proposed by Cllr. Kelly and seconded by Cllr. Brazil and agreed by all. 
 
1. Motion in the name of Cllr. Seanie Power  
 
“That this council support farmers in their campaign Enough is Enough and that this council 
write to agriculture minister Charlie McConalouge and environment minister Eamon Ryan of 
the council’s decision. 
Farming in Ireland has changed radically over the last decade and Waterford farmers have 
endeavoured to face and embrace many changes in order to have modern, productive and 
enterprises fit for purpose while also protecting the environment.  

It is a considerable challenge for farmers to produce food while contending with high costs 
and EU and state-imposed production limits and reductions. Farming in Ireland is under 
pressure and is being chocked by over regulations and complicated schemes.”  
Reg. No. PM/2024/240  (dated, 1st March, 2024) 
In proposing the motion Cllr. S. Power called on the Council to support the IFA’s Enough is 
Enough campaign and write to the Minister for Agriculture, the Minister for the Environment 
and the Taoiseach regarding the issues.  
Cllr. Brazil seconded the motion saying coming from a farming background he sees the 
pressure on farmers and called  on Waterford TDs to stand up for farmers and raise the issues 
with Government ministers. 
Cllrs. Phelan, Cronin, McGuinness, Kelly, Hearne, Nugent, O’Leary, Kiely, O’Donnell, Pratt, 
O’Sullivan, Doocey, Geoghegan, J. Power, Roche, Ryan, Tobin and E. Quinlan spoke in 
support of the motion.  
 
Proposed by Cllr. S. Power, seconded by Cllr. Brazil and agreed by all. 
Cllr. S. Power thanked all parties for their support and wished the IFA and the farmers the very 
best in their campaign. 
 
4.  Monthly Management Report 
 
Cllr. Kelly congratulated Tramore Library on the My Open Library initiative which means the 
library can be accessed from 8am to 10pm, seven days a week and welcomed the rates grant  
which will see businesses with a rate bill of less that €10,000.00 receive a grant of 50% of their 
rate bill.  
Cllr. Barry enquired if there were any proposals for the provision of female only homeless 
accommodation and asked for a breakdown of the number of single persons in emergency 
accommodation into male and female. He asked if a shuttle bus serving Dungarvan and 
Waterford City to Mount Congreve could be looked at. He asked for an update on the new 
schools for the Kilbarry/Ballybeg area and also for an copy of the Tourism Plan for Waterford. 
Cllr. J. Power congratulated all those involved in the recent Tricolour Celebrations and asked 
about the 90-day state accommodation limit for new Ukrainian arrivals. 
 
I. Grimes, DoS said he will revert with the gender breakdown of single persons in Emergency 
Accommodation and said the facilities in relation to  homeless accommodation are constantly 
being reviewed. No provision has been made in relation to the  90-day state accommodation 
limit for new Ukrainian arrivals and National Guidance is awaited.  
M. Walsh, CE said the Tourism Plan is a Fáilte Ireland plan and will seek their permission to 
circulate. In reply to Cllr. Barry regarding a shuttle bus service to Mount Congreve he said 
there is no solution at present saying the cost of a shuttle would be disproportionate. 
Discussions with the Department of Education are ongoing in relation to the new schools in 
the Kilbarry area. 
 
Cllr. Murphy asked about routine repairs to public lighting and if it was prudent to renew the 
contract with current provider.  
Cllr. McGuinness asked that a letter issue to An Post and  the Minister for Communications 
regarding the imminent closure of the post office in the West Waterford  Gaeltachta. He asked 
if the  underfunding of roads was the same across all districts. 

Cllr. Hearne asked if Waterford Airport and 24/7 Cardiac Care could be dealt with either by a 
delegation of members to the relevant Government Departments or by an invitation to the 
relevant Ministers  to address the members in the Council Chamber.  
 
F. Galvin, DoS said there is an obligation on the Public Lighting Contractor to repair standard 
faults within 10 working days, more complex issues are dealt with individually with no specific 
timeframe. In the context of the new LED retrofit there will be new maintenance requirements 
and a new contract. He said the spend on roads does not differ across the three districts.  
Cllr. McGuinness asked if the members could be provided with the total number of letters sent 
to Minister Ryan in relation to a range of issues raised by various members. 
 
Cllr. Ryan also raised the issue of public lighting agreeing with Cllr. Murphy and called for a 
survey of all public lighting to identify all the locations where there are issues. He asked for an 
update on the Council’s application for mobile library funding and enquired if the €50,000 set 
aside each year for four years in the Capital Programme for the provision of library services is 
still there. 
Cllr. Wyse asked if the staff contact list could be updated. He asked if there were any further 
age friendly housing developments similar to St. Joseph’s,  Manor Hill for the city and county 
and enquired about Waterford hosting the Tall Ships in the future.  
Cllr. Fitzgerald asked is there a procedure for derelict sites brought back into use but falling 
into dereliction again and enquired if extra funding was available from the Government to deal 
with the serious disrepair of roads as a result of the heavy rainfall. 
 
F. Galvin, DoS said there is a significant database for public lighting. Currently the majority of 
the 16,500 public lights have bulbs with a life span of just four years. The LED retrofit will 
dramatically improve the reliability of the public lights. He said future investment will be 
required to address the ageing network of underground cables. He said additional funding for 
roads had been received but currently there is no extra funding available. 
I. Grimes, DoS said Approved Housing Bodies are looking at schemes specifically for older 
people and our Housing Delivery Action Plan provides for  units that are suitable for older 
people.  
P. Johnson, A/DoS said in relation to the application for funding for mobile libraries that a 
response from the Department is being sought and he will revert with an update. The staff 
contact list will be updated. In relation to derelict sites the focus is to bring them back into use. 
M. Walsh, CE said at the moment  no consideration is being given to hosting the Tall Ships. 
P. Johnson, A/DoS confirmed the funding for library services is in the Capital Programme. 
 
Cllr. Bailey asked for a presentation from Housing Maintenace on budgets available, how the 
money is going to be spent and the additional funding for replacement windows and doors. She 
enquired about the possibility of building one or two bedroomed houses to accommodate those 
who may wish to right size but for whom apartment living does not suit. 
Cllr. Phelan said he agreed with Cllrs. Murphy and Ryan in relation to public lighting. The 
absence of data makes it difficult to determine if the contractor is fulfilling his obligations 
under the Service Level Agreement. He mentioned problems with logging faults on Deadsure 
and said there appears to be no improvement even though the backlog should have been dealt 
with at this stage. He enquired if new Ukrainian arrivals would be entitled to housing supports 
in light of the 90-day state accommodation limit.  
 
Cllr. Roche said she too supported the other Councillors in relation to public lighting and roads. 
She asked for an analysis of the housing list, the total number on the list and the length of time 

applicants are on the list. She asked if the council could write to Irish Water in relation to an 
issue around a public sewer. She enquired about the schedule for the LEO Evaluation 
Committee Meetings expressing concern that we do not fall behind in relation to local 
enterprise noting that there has been no Measure 1 support approved in 2024 to date.  
 
I. Grimes, DoS said the Maintenance Team are looking at the additional funding for 
replacement windows and doors across city and county and will be targeting the poorest 
performing units. A workshop can be provided but firstly will circulate the information. He 
said there are two Approved Housing Bodies looking at rightsizing schemes which may better 
suit people whose preference would be a one or two bedroomed house. New Ukrainian arrivals 
would not be eligible for social housing, a summary of the Housing List will be circulated. 
F. Galvin, DoS said any issue with Deadsure will be rectified. Deadsure has been asked to 
provide additional fields which will provide better information to the public. There is 
significant data available and if there are specific questions, the information we can supply can 
be looked at. He said the issue raised by Cllr. Roche rests with Irish Water. 
M. Walsh, CE, said the flow of projects for financial support for approval by LEO Evaluation 
Committee varies up and down. Our performance is good in terms of startups and otherwise. 
Annual figures are the better indicator. Cllr. Roche asked for further details for the next Meeting  
which the CE agreed to provide. 
 
Cllr. E. Quinlan asked that the Housing Department liaise with BAM in relation to works 
scheduled to happen simultaneously in Ferrybank to ensure local businesses are not affected. 
He asked that people housed in council accommodation who receive a custodial sentence for 
assault of a neighbour be rehoused when they are released from prison so they are not in close 
proximity to their victim. 
Cllr. O’Sullivan asked about resources in the Planning Enforcement Section noting that there 
is room for improvement in this area. 
Cllr. Nugent spoke to lend his support to the other Councillors in relation to public lighting and 
roads.  
 
I. Grimes, DoS said in relation to works in Ferrybank he would discuss with the Housing 
Contractor. In relation to persons leaving prison there is a category of prisoner subject to post 
release who have a specific team in place to supervise accommodation. There is also a local 
team which meet weekly which includes the Gardai who look at persons leaving prison and 
every effort is made to avoid housing these individuals close to their victims. We work closely 
with the Gardai in relation to individuals returning to the family home. 
P. Johnson, A/DoS said there is a significant workload in relation to planning enforcement. All 
staff sanctioned by the Department are in place or are due to take up duty. There is a proposal  
to significantly tackle this workload.  
 
Cllr. O’Leary mentioned the Connecting Communities Roadshows which provide communities 
with the opportunity to engage with community services and asked if the Executive would 
consider similar road shows to inform communities of  the various Council Services.  
 
M. Walsh, CE said Cllr. O’ Leary’s suggestion would be considered. 
 
Cllr. Kiely asked about the public lighting contract, the timeframe for the public lighting  
retrofit and whom that contract will be with. She asked about our byelaws and the enforcement 
of same. She asked for an update on the planning permission for the North Quays and asked if 
Waterford’s’ casinos are operating within the planning permission they would have received. 

She enquired about a water quality workshop previously requested and asked if anything could 
be done to encourage the residential use of  property over shops. 
 
Mr. S. Dobbs, A/SE said the planning application for the North Quays is scheduled for April 
with M. Walsh, CE saying environmental reports are being prepared and it is expected in April. 
F. Galvin, DoS said the public lighting contract is up later this year. The public lighting retrofit 
should be completed by Summer 2025 and will be a new contract.  Traffic and Parking Byelaws 
are enforced on a daily basis with the Environmental Team enforcing the Litter Byelaws on an 
ongoing basis. Responsibly for the enforcement of some of our byelaws is shared with the 
Gardaí. He said a work shop on water quality can be arranged and asked Cllr. Kiely to revert 
with what she would like covered. 
P. Johnson, A/DoS said there has been no audit of planning permissions granted for Casinos. 
He said he would circulate recent research in relation to over the shop living and said we have 
been relatively successful in this regard through our Housing Department. 
 
Cllr. Doocey asked if the process around the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant to refurbish 
vacant and derelict homes be simplified. 
 
P. Johnson, A/DoS said the Vacant Property Refurbishment Grant is administered by the 
Vacant Homes Officer and some grants are awarded subject to planning permission and so 
must go through the planning process where there may be conditions etc attached to the grant 
of permission. In cases of local need there are other factors to be considered. 
 
Cllr. Cronin commented on a case where an planning application sought for a septic tank for 
an existing property was treated as local need.  
P. Johnson, A/DoS said he was not aware of this particular case and would revert to Cllr. 
Cronin. 
   
 5.  Material Contravention Development Plan – for approval 
 
P. Johnson, A/DoS introduced the proposed material contravention of the Waterford City and 
County Development Plan 2022 to 2028 and recommended that the Plan be contravened, by 
resolution, to allow the granting of planning permission to the HSE at the former Glanbia Site, 
Maypark Lane for the construction of a Surgical Hub.  
 
Material Contravention Development Plan proposed by Cllr. Fitzgerald and seconded by Cllr. 
McGuinness and agreed by all. 
 
6.  Draft Housing Allocation Scheme for Social Housing Supports – for approval 
 
I. Grimes, DoS said the Draft Housing Allocation Scheme had two changes, the application of 
a Gaeltacht Residential Qualification to the order of priority and the Financial Contribution 
Scheme/Private Rightsizing.  
 
In proposing the scheme Cllr. E. Quinlan said despite some concerns around some of the 
sections in the scheme there has been considerable debate at  the Housing SPC meetings and 
the adoption of the scheme today to include the two changes as outlined by I. Grimes, DoS 
does not prevent future changes to the scheme.  
 

Cllrs. Barry, McGuiness, Phelan, Ryan, Murphy, Kelly,  F. Quinlan and Bailey all contributed 
to a discussion in relation to the scheme. Concerns raised by Cllrs. Barry, Phelan, F. Quinlan 
and Bailey included the sections on Financial Contribution Scheme/Private Rightsizing, 
Persons Leaving Prison and Assessment of Bedroom Requirement. Cllr. Phelan proposed that 
a vote on the adoption of the scheme be postponed pending legal advise in relation to National 
Policy dictating sections of the Allocation Scheme, the adoption of which is a reserved 
function. This proposal was seconded by Cllr. Ryan. Cllr. Murphy said he would be  supporting 
the adoption of the Allocation Scheme but asked for clarification in relation to national policy 
on the Assessment of Bedroom Requirement. On clarification from the Executive Cllr. Phelan 
withdrew his proposal to postpone adoption of the scheme. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. E. Quinlan and seconded by Cllr. Cronin and agreed by a majority show of 
hands. 
 
 7.  Supporting Waterford Communities Fund 2024 – for approval 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Geoghegan and seconded by Cllr. Hearne and agreed by all. 
 
8. Correspondence 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Quinlan and seconded by Cllr. Kelly and agreed by all. 
 
9. Notice of Motions 
 
2. Motion in the name of Cllr. Joe Conway, Cllr. Donal Barry, Cllr. Joe Kelly, Cllr. 
Declan Clune and Cllr. David Daniels.  
 
“ That Waterford City and County Council calls on the Government, Department of Further 
and Higher Education, Research, Innovation and Science; the Department of Public 
Expenditure, NDP Delivery and Reform, to commit forthwith to the total identified funding in 
the SETU strategic development plan funding of 350million (70m X 5 years) in order to 
deliver the promised transformational investment at SETU Waterford, as promised repeatedly 
by Government - and that such funding is guaranteed by the Government before the end of 
this Dáil's term”. Reg. No. PM/2024/241 (dated, 28th February 2024) 
In proposing the motion Cllr. Kelly said the motion is about the future of our young people 
who leave to study courses that are not available in SETU and this has a financial impact on 
the local economy. He said many students do not return home which in turn affects the vitality 
of our communities saying we need to help them in every way possible to stay in our City and 
in our Region.  
Cllr. Barry seconded the motion saying the SETU Strategic Development Plan can not be 
delivered without proper funding from the Government and highlighted the knock-on effect of 
such investment in terms of creating jobs and inward investment. He said the creation of a large 
scale high performing university in the South East is crucial to our local and regional economic 
development. 
 
Mayor called for a ten-minute extension to Standing Orders.  
Proposed by Cllr. Geoghegan and seconded by Cllr. Kelly and agreed by all. 
 

Cllrs. Daniels, Phelan, Kiely, J. Power, Roche, Keating, Geoghegan, Hearne, Doocey, Nugent 
and Fitzgearld contributed to a discussion on SETU. The  Mayor said the motion is calling on 
the Government to deliver their promised investment  in SETU and passing the motion will 
help the University. Following the discussion  the Members voted unanimously in favour of 
the motion.  
   
Proposed by Cllr. Kelly and seconded by Cllr. Barry and agreed by all. 
 
10. AOB 
 
Cllr. Doocey asked that people check the Register of Electors to ensure their details are correct 
and up to date. 
  
Cllr. O’Donnell said that up to 25 pubs closed in West Waterford since the Pandemic. He 
queried the Government’s proposal to allow pubs to open until 6:00am and expressed concern 
in relation  to anti-social behaviour. 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
Signed: ____________________________________ 
 
Dated: _______________  
Mayor of Waterford City & County Council 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Resolution of the Elected Members  
Waterford City and County Council, Plenary Council 
14th March 2024 
Ref: 2024/08 
 
 
Recommendation by Chief Executive that the Waterford City & County Development Plan 2022 – 2028 
be contravened, by resolution, to allow Waterford City & County Council to grant permission for 
planning reference 23/60576, subject to conditions, to the Health Service Executive (South East) at the 
former Glanbia Site, Maypark Lane, Waterford.  The planning permission is for the construction of a 
part two and part three-storey surgical hub building with 2nd floor plant enclosure and roof level PV 
panels, 2 no. generator buildings, a diesel tank, a VIE (Vacuum Insulated Evaporator) compound, an 
ESB Substation, a totem sign, 1 no. pumping station and all associated car parking, signage, landscaping 
and site development works at the former Glanbia site, Maypark lane, Waterford.  Permission is also 
sought to construct a temporary car park that will provide for 311 no. car parking spaces for a period of 
5 years.  The site will be accessed via the existing access and new vehicle access from Maypark Lane.  
Notice of proposal was given in accordance with Section 34(6) of the Planning & Development Act. 
CERTIFIED RESOLUTION OF THE Plenary Council of Waterford City & County Council that the 
Waterford City & County Development Plan 2022 - 2028 be contravened to allow Waterford City & 
County Council to grant permission planning reference 23/60576, subject to conditions, to the Health 
Service Executive (South East) at the former Glanbia Site, Maypark Lane, Waterford, proposed by Cllr. 
Fitzgerald seconded by Cllr. McGuinness and agreed unanimously.  
 
 
 
Signed: 
_______________________________  
 
 
Councillor Joe Conway  
 
 
Plenary Mayor  
 
 
 
 
Witnessed:  
_______________________________  
 
 
Honor Dunphy 
 
 
Meetings Administrator 
 
 
 
