COMHAIRLE CATHRACH AGUS CONTAE PHORT LÁIRGE 
WATERFORD CITY AND COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
COUNCIL MEETING HELD ON 11th JULY 2024 
 IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, CITY HALL, THE MALL, WATERFORD  
 
 
PRESENT        
 
      Cllr. Jason Murphy (Mayor) 
Cllr. Joe Kelly 
      Cllr. Declan Barry 
Cllr. Donnchadh Mulcahy 
      Cllr. Donal Barry 
Cllr. Joeanne Bailey 
Cllr. Liam Brazil 
Cllr. Pat Nugent 
Cllr. Catherine Burke  
Cllr. Niamh O’Donovan 
Cllr. Declan Clune  
Cllr. Adam Wyse 
Cllr. Joe Conway  
Cllr. Lola O’Sullivan 
Cllr. John Hearne 
Cllr. Joe O’Riordan 
Cllr. Conor D. McGuinness 
Cllr. Thomas Phelan 
Cllr. David Daniels 
Cllr. Seanie Power 
Cllr. Jim D’Arcy  
Cllr. John Pratt 
Cllr. Pat Fitzgerald 
Cllr. Eamon Quinlan 
Cllr. Damien Geoghegan 
Cllr. Frank Quinlan 
Cllr. Jim Griffin 
Cllr. Mary Roche 
Cllr. Blaise Hannigan 
Cllr. Seamus Ryan 
 
Apologies: Cllr. Tom Cronin,  Cllr. John O’Leary. 
 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE           
 
Mr. I. Grimes, Interim Chief Executive  
Mr. G. Hynes, A/Director of Services, Roads, Water & Environment 
Mr. M. O’Toole, Head of Information Systems 
Mr. B. Pollard, Head of Finance 
Ms. C. Hartley, A/ Director of Service, Housing  
Mr. M. Quinn, Director of Service, Economic Development 
Ms. H. Dunphy, Meetings Administrator 
Ms. A. Flynn, Senior Staff Officer, Corporate  
 
 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes 
 
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held on 11th April 2024 proposed by Cllr. E. Quinlan, seconded 
by Cllr. Pratt and agreed by all. 
Minutes of Plenary Special Meeting held on 23rd April 2024 proposed by Cllr. Wyse, seconded 
by Cllr. Brazil and agreed by all. 
Minutes of Plenary Special Meeting held on 7th  May 2024 proposed by Cllr. F. Quinlan, 
seconded by Cllr. Conway and agreed by all. 
Minutes of Plenary AGM held on 21st June 2024 proposed by Cllr. Bailey, seconded by Cllr. 
Wyse and agreed by all. 

Minutes of Plenary Special Meeting held on 1st  July 2024 proposed by Cllr. O’Donovan, 
seconded by Cllr. Declan Barry and agreed by all. 
 
2. Matters Arising 
 
Cllr. Ryan asked for an update on the Palestinian Ambassador’s address to the Council. 
Cllr. McGuinness enquired about a workshop or otherwise in relation to urgent capital works 
required at the majority of fire stations.  
 
H. Dunphy, MA said arrangements will be made in relation to an address by the Palestinian 
Ambassador to the Members. 
I. Grimes, Interim CE said workshops at district level will be provided in relation to fire 
stations. 
 
Cllr. Pratt asked if there was an update in relation to the Court Proceedings as regards the 
Development Plan. 
I. Grimes, Interim CE said that there are indications that there is a serious risk of a judgement 
against the Council and discussions have commenced with the other party.  
 
Cllr. E Quinlan asked if any settlement reached would need the approval of the Council.   
I. Grimes, Interim CE said this may be the case. 
 
Cllr. Phelan said there appears to have been contradictory legal advice given. 
I. Grimes, Interim CE said he would circulate the legal advice. 
 
3. Land Disposals 
 
Mark. O’Toole, Head of IS outlined details of the land disposals for approval. 
 
Ref. No. 1526 Transfer in fee simple 71 Grange Heights to Liam Whelan for a sum of €5.00. 
Proposed by Cllr. Kelly, seconded by Cllr. D’Arcy and agreed by all. 
 
Ref. No. 1527 Disposal of 3 car parking spaces at Harbour Bay, The Burgery, Dungarvan to 
Harbour Bay Owner Management Company Ltd for €9,000. 
Proposed by Cllr. Geoghegan, seconded by Cllr. Nugent and agreed by all. 
 
Ref. No. 1528 Disposal of 3 acres at Duckspool,  Dungarvan to Department of Education for 
€350,000. 
Proposed by Cllr. Phelan, seconded by Cllr. McGuinness and agreed by all. 
 
Ref. No. 1529 Disposal of 600msq plot at Ballybeg to Stone Arches Ltd for €23,300. 
Proposed by Cllr. Power, seconded by Cllr. Geoghegan and agreed by all. 
 
4. Monthly Management Report 
 
Cllr. Wyse asked about the high refusal rate of properties advertised on the choice Based 
Letting system. 
Cllr. Clune asked for a review of how the Monthly Management Report to Council is managed 
at meetings and asked that this be included as an agenda item at the upcoming planning day 
and also if the Corporate Policy Group could be involved.  

Cllr. Phelan asked for an update on walkability audits provided for in the Waterford Age 
Friendly Strategy. 
 
C. Hartley, A/ DoS said the 485 refusals of total properties advertised on CBL includes refusals 
at the beginning of the CBL scheme when the refusal rate was higher. The reasons for refusals 
can be looked at by the new Housing Strategic Policy Committee. 
I. Grimes, Interim CE said the Monthly Management Report can be given some consideration 
at the upcoming planning day.  
C. Hartley, A/ DoS said there is no specific funding to undertake walkability audits  and would 
need to be considered by the Executive. 
 
Cllr. Burke asked if a list of vacant properties by district could be provided and the timeline 
for bringing vacant properties back into use. She asked for information on the process and what 
factors might influence the timeline and asked for a workshop with the Housing Officer. She 
congratulated the organisers of the Comeraghs Wild Festival and commended the work of 
Waterford City & Council Library Service. 
Cllr. Donal Barry asked the Executive to contact the Department of Transport for an update on 
the reinstatement of the Waterford to Rosslare rail service. He requested an update on the 
Waterford Tourism Designation Plan asking the Executive to ensure that it is completed this 
year. He asked how many vacant houses there are  in the council’s own housing stock, the 
length of time of turnaround and would employing people directly result in more efficient 
turnaround. 
Cllr. McGuinness commended the work of the Civil Defence Staff for their involvement in 
various events over the last number of months. He noted the difficulty for people getting 
contractors in relation to adaptations to bathrooms and said it would be beneficial if the Council 
had an inhouse team to do this work. He raised the issue of the N25 noting that he and the 
Members have asked on a number of occasions for the Minister to come and meet the Council 
or receive a delegation from the Council to discuss the N25 to no avail. He called on the Mayor 
to contact the Government on this issue. 
 
C. Hartley, A/ DoS said our vacancy rate is 1.7% of our stock with a turnaround time of 22 
weeks. She said an inhouse team to deal with bathroom adaptations and so on is not something 
that  would be considered. 
M. Quinn, DoS said the Council would write to Irish Rail in relation to the Waterford to 
Rosslare service  for an update but have no direct role. He said that the Tourism Designation 
Plan has not been officially issued by Fáilte Ireland but the Council are already implementing 
the plan. 
G. Hynes, A/DoS said he would issue a letter to the Minister in relation to the N25 which The 
Mayor said he too would support. 
C. Hartley, A/ DoS agreed to Cllr. Burke’s request to hold a workshop. 
 
Cllr. Ryan asked for details in relation to residential units in the North Quays Development and 
what will be done to soften the landscape. He asked that the 285 derelict sites be brought back 
into residential use. He requested an audit of footpaths within Housing Estates and asked for 
an update on the new approved mobile library.  
Cllr. Pratt asked that all housing applicants be contacted again in relation to the CBL Scheme 
to ensure all applicants are aware that they can express an interest in a CBL property. He asked 
for improved disability toilets at the RSC. 
Cllr. Bailey referring to increased incidents of dogs being off the leash in public parks and on 
beaches asked that a previous motion in relation to the provision of an off-leash dog park be 

looked at again noting that other counties have off leash dog parks which has led to  a reduction 
of incidents of dogs being off the leash in public parks and beaches. She asked if the Housing 
Allocation Scheme adopted by the Council in March had been revisited in relation to the 
bedroom allocation for families with children of same gender. She noted the long wait time for 
grants for older people and people with disabilities and noted a discrepancy between the 
waiting time of council tenants and private home owners. She asked for a breakdown of the 
wait time for council tenants and private home owners.  
 
C. Hartley, A/ DoS said those on the Housing List who had not engaged with the CBL Scheme 
had been contacted and would be contacted again. She said a workshop on the Housing 
Allocation Scheme will be organised in the coming weeks. There is a difference in the wait 
times between adaptation grants for private property and grants for council housing and this 
has been flagged at national level. A report on wait times can be provided.  
G. Hynes, A/DoS said in relation to footpaths that there is an allocation for each district which 
will be reviewed prior to adopting a new Capital Plan. The signage in People’s Park can be 
reviewed and the report and its’ recommendations on an off-leash dog park can be revisited. 
M. Quinn, DoS said he will circulate a summary of the planning application in relation to the 
residential units for the North Quays. There is, he said a comprehensive landscaping plan for 
the area.  
I. Grimes, Interim CE said he would revert with update on mobile library. There is a funding 
application with the Department in relation to the upgrading of toilet facilities at the RSC. 
In relation to derelict properties he said Waterford is one of the more proactive local authorities 
in the country in dealing with dereliction and have a team targeting private properties. He 
outlined that the Compulsory Purchase Order process is time consuming and costly and 
suggested a workshop for September.  
M. Quinn, DoS said there are 106 one bed units, 208 two bed units and 36 three bed units 
proposed for the North Quays. 
 
Cllr. Kelly asked for clarification that a housing applicant making few or no bids on CBL are 
not at a disadvantage to those housing applicants who regularly express an interest in a CBL 
property and asked if funding is available to upgrade the public toilets on beaches. 
Cllr. Hearne commended the work of the council’s community section and asked if the 
representative from the American Embassy due to meet with members in the coming weeks 
would meet with groups from various communities in relation to the situation in Gaza.  
Cllr. Griffin asked if there could be additional staff resources made available for those days 
where there is an influx of people into our beauty spots. He asked if the location and allocation 
of houses under the cost rental and affordable schemes could be looked at to facilitate as far as 
possible people already living in the location to avoid change of schools etc. 
 
C. Hartley, A/ DoS clarified that there is no disadvantage in relation to the amount of bids made 
on CBL. Cost rental housing provides affordable rented accommodation to people who are 
above the threshold for social housing. You are eligible to apply if your household net income 
is below €59,000 per annum. Applicants are entered into a lottery and selected at random. The 
affordable housing scheme makes homes available at a reduced price for first-time buyers 
whose mortgage and deposit will not cover the price of the home and who are seeking to 
purchase a newly built home. In the case of oversubscription an application will be assessed 
based on the Council’s Scheme of Priority for Affordable Dwelling Purchase Arrangements. 

G. Hynes, A/DoS said that considerable resources are put into the maintenance of public toilets 
with significant additional resources at our main beaches during the summer months to manage 
the public toilets and manage refuse.  
I. Grimes, Interim CE said we are facilitating the visit by the American Embassy and as such 
cannot impose on it.  
Cllr. Conway raised the issue of enforcement of our Beach Byelaws in regard to dogs. He said 
there should be zero tolerance towards dog owners who breach these bylaws. 
Cllr. Roche asked for an update on the Airport, that Harcourt Developments be asked to 
facilitate a visit by the councillors to the North Quays or make a presentation to them and as 
requested previously information in relation to LEO supports. 
Cllr. E. Quinlan asked that the council revert to notifying community groups, residents 
associations, sports clubs and so on in relation to community grants to ensure that groups do 
not miss out as happened this year with some groups not meeting closing dates for applications 
etc. He asked if the Serviced Sites Scheme could be looked at to include a buy back option 
which would see people who sell the Council land for serviced sites being given the option to 
buy back one of the serviced sites for members of their own family.  
 
C. Hartley, A/ DoS said the notification of community grants could be looked at. 
M. Quinn, DoS said he would request Harcourt Developments to make a presentation to the 
members and said he would follow up in relation to more detailed reports from LEO. 
I. Grimes, Interim CE said there was no update on the Airport. He said Cllr. E. Quinlan’s 
suggestion of a buy back clause in relation to serviced sites had potential and would be looked 
at. 
G. Hynes, A/DoS said he would follow up with the Gardai in relation to enforcement of the 
Beach Byelaws and also have the Dog Wardens  patrol the beaches on key days  to ensure 
compliance. 
 
Cllr. Daniels asked that additional funding for footpaths be provided out of the Revenue 
surplus, asked about increasing the budget for community grants and thanked the various 
council teams for all the events held throughout the year. 
Cllr. Power said the CBL Scheme should be reviewed so that  only those housing applicants 
living in a particular area can express an interest in a CBL property in that area. 
Cllr. Fitzgerald asked if funding to maintain walkways, rights of way, short cuts and so on in 
towns and villages across the county could be provided in the budget going forward.   
 
C. Hartley, A/ DoS said the Housing Allocation Scheme is written into the CBL Scheme so 
that a housing applicant expressing an interest in a property in a location which is one of their 
preferred areas has priority over a housing applicant bidding for that property and  the location 
of the property is not one of their preferred areas. Increasing the budget for community grants 
is something the members can look at when the budget comes before them for consideration. 
G. Hynes, A/DoS said funding to maintain walkways, rights of way, short cuts and so on could 
be considered at budget time.  
B. Power, HoF said there is a surplus to the end of May of €270,000 and although it is still 
early in the year nonetheless there is scope to review our budget for next year during the budget 
process. 
 
Cllr. F. Quinlan queried the vacancy rate of  1.7% of housing stock with a turnaround time of 
22 weeks.  

Cllr. O’Riordan asked about the monitoring of AirBnBs and whether there had been any 
prosecutions for noncompliance and supported Cllr. Power’s comments in relation to 
ringfencing properties on CBL. 
Cllr. Nugent asked about the changes in policy around house purchasing. 
Cllr. Mulcahy asked for a workshop with Uisce Éireann. He asked if a plan could be developed 
for water-based tourism.   
 
I. Grimes, Interim CE said the vacancy rate and turnaround time are independently verified. 
There are properties acquired under various government funding schemes which would take 
longer to bring back into use and these are not included in those figures. The council has been 
informed of changes to the tenant in situ scheme with funding to be significantly reduced.  
M. Quinn, DoS said that monitoring of AirBnBs is a planning enforcement issue, and he has 
sought an update from the planning department. In reply to Cllr. Mulcahy he said a feasibility 
study has been done on the Blackwater and the estuary is being looked at to see what the 
opportunities are there and how to avail of them.  Blueway’s are very much part of the Tourism 
Development Strategy for the next five years. 
G. Hynes, A/DoS informed Cllr. Mulcahy that it is a policy of Uisce Éireann not to hold 
workshops. 
 
5. SPC Scheme 2024-2029 
 
H. Dunphy, MA introduced the Draft Strategic Policy Committee Scheme 2024 – 2029 
informing the members of the need for public consultation. The Council will also seek 
nominations from sectoral representatives under the pillars of farming, business and trade 
unions. Nominations for the social inclusion, community and voluntary sector and environment 
will be sought from the PPN and for the development and construction sector from the 
Construction Industry Federation. She sought the approval of the members to commence the 
public consultation process.  
 
Proposed by Cllr. Roche and seconded by Cllr. Conway and agreed by all. 
 
Cllr. Ryan proposed an amendment to the scheme proposing that the Planning & Culture SPC 
include a representative from the Arts Sector. 
Cllr. McGuiness said it appears that there is no longer a farming representative on the Economic 
Development and Enterprise SPC. He noted that although it is important to have two business 
representatives representing City and County he said it should not be at the expense of the 
farming representative and asked that a farming representative be included even if this means 
increasing the sectoral representative members and also asked that a representative from the 
Irish Language Community be included on the Planning & Culture SPC. 
Cllr. Geoghegan also noted that Culture is now included with Planning with no representative 
from the Arts Sector. He said Planning would be the focus of that SPC and asked if it is possible 
to have more than five SPCs suggesting a separate SPC for Culture, Sport & Recreation.  
Cllr. Kelly asked if people with disabilities were represented on each of the Committees. 
Cllr. Phelan agreed with the previous speakers in relation to a representative from the Arts 
Sector on the Planning & Culture SPC and a farming representative on the Economic 
Development and Enterprise SPC and said people with disabilities should be represented on 
the Transport & Infrastructure SPC and echoed Cllr. Geoghegan’s question as to whether there 
was scope for more than five committees. 
Cllr. Hearne noted a previous decision of the Council that each SPC would have a 
representative for people with disabilities.  

 
I. Grimes, Interim CE said that the document as presented is a first draft. For the purposes of 
the public consultation process the titles of each committee were kept closely aligned with the 
functions of the five directorates. He said the members’ comments will be taken on board in 
finalising the document and will be brought before the members in September for approval. 
 
Cllrs. Ryan, Wyse, McGuinness, Geoghegan, Fitzgerald, O’Sullivan, Conway & Phelan 
contributed to a further discussion mainly in relation to the sectoral representatives on each 
committee.  
I. Grimes, Interim CE, I. Grimes and H. Dunphy, MA responded to the questions raised. 
 
6. Correspondence 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Geoghegan, seconded by Cllr. E. Quinlan and agreed by all. 
 
7. Notice of Motions 
 
None. 
 
8. AOB 
 
The Mayor informed the members of the upcoming National Day of Commemoration which 
takes place on Sunday 14th July at the John Condon Memorial in Cathedral Square. 
 
The Members congratulated Fergus Galvin, former Director of Services, Roads, Water & 
Environment on his retirement, thanked him for his huge contribution and wished him well for 
the future.  
 
Cllr. Burke congratulated the Council on its’ twinning with Ramallah and asked for an update 
on the signage indicating the twinning.  
Cllr. E. Quinlan asked if the Mayor would consider inviting staff members who retired during 
the Covid years to the Mayor’s Parlour.  
Cllr. Griffin asked the Mayor to write to the Chairperson of the Board of the Airport and to the 
Minister.  
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
Signed:_____________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________ 
Mayor of Waterford City & County  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
