CATHRACH AGUS CONTAE PHORT LÁIRGE 
                              WATERFORD CITY AND COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
SPECIAL COUNCIL MEETING HELD ON 16th DECEMBER 2024 
 IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, CITY HALL, THE MALL,   
WATERFORD.  
 
 
PRESENT        
 
      Cllr. Jason Murphy (Mayor) 
Cllr. Joe Kelly 
      Cllr. Declan Barry 
Cllr. Donnchadh Mulcahy 
      Cllr. Donal Barry 
Cllr. Joeanne Bailey 
Cllr. Jim Griffin 
Cllr. Pat Nugent 
Cllr. Catherine Burke  
Cllr. Mary Roche 
Cllr. John O’Leary 
Cllr. Seamus Ryan 
Cllr. Joe Conway  
Cllr. Tom Cronin 
Cllr. John Hearne 
Cllr. Joe O’Riordan 
Cllr. Conor D. McGuinness 
Cllr. Adam Wyse 
Cllr. David Daniels 
Cllr. Seanie Power 
Cllr. Jim D’Arcy  
Cllr. Blaise Hannigan 
Cllr. Pat Fitzgerald 
Cllr. Eamon Quinlan 
Cllr. Damien Geoghegan 
Cllr. Frank Quinlan 
Cllr. Lola O’Sullivan 
 
 
Apologies: Cllr. Liam Brazil, Cllr. Declan Clune, Cllr. Thomas Phelan, Cllr. John Pratt,  
Cllr. Niamh O’Donovan 
 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE           
 
Mr. S. McKeown, Chief Executive  
Mr. I. Grimes, Director of Services, Corporate Services, IS, HR, Culture and Planning 
Ms. H. Dunphy, Meetings Administrator 
Ms. A. Flynn, Senior Staff Officer, Corporate  
 
 
1. Filling of casual vacancy on Waterford City and County Council following 
election of Cllr. Conor D. McGuinness to the 34th Dáil on 1st December 2024, in 
accordance with Section 19 of the Local Government Act 2001 
 
H. Dunphy, Meeting Administrator, confirmed that a casual vacancy does exist after the 
election of  Conor D. McGuinness in the General Elections.  As Conor McGuinness was a 
member of a registered party, namely Sinn Féin and under the provisions of Section 19 of the 
Local Government Act, 2001 the political party has nomination rights to the casual vacancy. It 
was confirmed that the required notification was received from Sinn Féin nominating Kate 
O’Mahoney and the nominee had submitted her required consent. 
 
 

Cllr. Burke proposed Kate O’Mahoney’s co-option describing her as an exceptional young 
woman with the skills, passion and dedication required to represent the people of Dungarvan 
and Waterford.  She has an impressive track record underpinned by her passion for fairness, 
equality and opportunity. She brings fresh energy, innovative ideas and a strong connection to 
the next generation. She said it was her honour and privilege to propose Kate O’Mahoney as 
Councillor and said she has every confidence that she will be as dedicated and determined as 
her predecessor Deputy McGuinness, who she congratulated on his election to Dáil Éireann. 
Cllr. Mulcahy seconded the proposal saying he has no doubt she will make a fantastic public 
representative. She has been a republican activist from the age of 16 and said she is grounded 
in her community through youth and sports organisations. He also extended his congratulations 
to Deputy McGuinness. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Burke, Seconded by Cllr. Mulcahy and agreed by all. 
 
The Mayor invited Cllr. Kate O’Mahoney to take her seat in the Council Chamber. He 
congratulated her and wished her all the best in the years ahead. 
 
Cllr. O’Mahoney firstly congratulated Deputy Conor McGuinness on his election to Dáil 
Éireann. She said it was an honour to be co-opted to Waterford City and County Council to 
represent the Dungarvan Local Electoral Area. She thanked her proposer, Cllr. Burke and 
seconder, Cllr. Mulcahy and her family and friends.  She noted that she comes from a proud 
family of Irish Republicans, Sinn Féin supporters and trade union activists. She will give the 
role her full commitment with her priorities including housing, local amenities and mental 
health in particular for young people. She looks forward to working with all in Waterford City 
and County Council and concluded by saying she promised to be a voice, not just for some, but 
for all. 
 
Cllr. O’Mahoney was welcomed and congratulated by the Members who also extended their 
congratulations to Deputy Conor McGuinness on his election to Dáil Éireann. 
 
The Mayor and CE also welcomed and congratulated Cllr. O’Mahoney and congratulated 
Deputy McGuinness on his recent election to the Dáil. 
 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
 
Signed:_____________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________ 
Mayor of Waterford City & County  
 
 
 
 
 
 
