CATHRACH AGUS CONTAE PHORT LÁIRGE 
                              WATERFORD CITY AND COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
COUNCIL MEETING HELD ON 12th DECEMBER 2024 
 IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, CITY HALL, THE MALL,   
WATERFORD.  
 
 
PRESENT        
 
      Cllr. Jason Murphy (Mayor) 
Cllr. Joe Kelly 
      Cllr. Declan Barry 
Cllr. Donnchadh Mulcahy 
      Cllr. Donal Barry 
Cllr. Joeanne Bailey 
Cllr. Liam Brazil 
Cllr. Pat Nugent 
Cllr. Catherine Burke  
Cllr. Niamh O’Donovan 
Cllr. Declan Clune  
Cllr. Seamus Ryan 
Cllr. Joe Conway  
Cllr. Tom Cronin 
Cllr. John Hearne 
Cllr. Joe O’Riordan 
Cllr. Jim Griffin 
Cllr. Thomas Phelan 
Cllr. David Daniels 
Cllr. John O’Leary 
Cllr. Jim D’Arcy  
Cllr. Adam Wyse 
Cllr. Pat Fitzgerald 
Cllr. Eamon Quinlan 
Cllr. Damien Geoghegan 
Cllr. Mary Roche 
Cllr. Lola O’Sullivan 
Cllr. Blaise Hannigan 
 
 
 
Apologies: Cllr. Frank Quinlan, Cllr. John Pratt, Cllr. Seanie Power. 
 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE           
 
Mr. S. McKeown, Chief Executive  
Mr. F. Gleeson, Director of Services, Roads, Water & Environment 
Mr. I. Grimes, Director of Services, Corporate Services, IS, HR, Culture and Planning 
Mr. B. Pollard, Head of Finance 
Ms. H. Dennehy, Director of Service, Housing, Community & Emergency Services 
Ms. C. Hartley, Senior Executive Officer, Housing  
Mr. M. Quinn, Director of Service, Economic Development 
Ms. H. Dunphy, Meetings Administrator 
Ms. A. Flynn, Senior Staff Officer, Corporate  
 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes 
 
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held on 14th November 2024 proposed by Cllr. E. Quinlan, 
seconded by Cllr. Geoghegan and agreed by all. 
Minutes of Plenary Budget Meeting held on 26th November 2024 proposed by Cllr. Declan 
Barry, seconded by Cllr. O’Sullivan and agreed by all. 
 
 

 
2. Matters Arising 
 
Cllr. Ryan enquired if letter issued to the Department in relation to the Tenant in situ Scheme 
and if so had a response been received.  
 
C. Hartley, SEO confirmed letter will issue after the meeting.  
 
Cllr. Mulcahy asked if a letter had issued to the Minister for Office of Public Works 
regarding funding to assist those impacted by flooding and if so had a reply been received. 
 
H. Dunphy, MA said it was her understanding the letter had issued with no response to date. 
 
Cllr. Kelly asked about the press release he suggested should issue in relation to the various 
problems around public lighting.  
 
F. Gleeson, DoS said he had no update on the press release and would revert to Cllr. Kelly. 
 
Cllr. Phelan said he was disappointed that a letter had not issued in relation to the Tenant in 
situ Scheme and suggested the information the members received in relation to the various 
public lighting issues be put in the public domain. 
 
3. Land Disposals 
 
I.  Grimes, DoS outlined details of the land disposals for approval. 
 
Ref. No. 1541 Transfer in fee simple of 8 Highfield Park, Rathfadden, Waterford to William 
Cunningham for €10. 
Proposed by Cllr E. Quinlan, seconded by Cllr. Kelly and agreed by all. 
 
Ref. No. 1542 Lease of 11.6 acres at Aglish, Cappoquinn, Co. Waterford  to Finnsk Valley and 
Aglish Community CLG for 50 years at annual rent of €200.  
Proposed by Cllr. Cronin, seconded by Cllr. O’Donovan and agreed by all. 
 
Ref. No 1543 Lease of 0.71 acres at Riverstown Business Park, Tramore, Co. Waterford to 36th 
Waterford Tramore Bay Scout Group at annual rent of €200. 
Proposed by Cllr. Hannigan, seconded by Cllr. E. Quinlan and agreed by all. 
 
Ref. No 1544 Disposal of 11 Bailey’s New Street, Waterford to Dylan Carey and Shauna 
Scannell for €81,000. 
Proposed by Cllr. Declan Barry, seconded by Cllr. Wyse and agreed by all. 
 
Ref. No 1545 Transfer in fee simple of 4 Chapel Lane, Waterford to William Burke for €3,500. 
Proposed by Cllr. Kelly, seconded by Cllr. Wyse and agreed by all.  
 
The Mayor asked for a suspension of Standing Orders to take Items 5 to 10 on the agenda 
before Item 4 Monthly Management Report. 
Proposed by Cllr. Cronin, seconded by Cllr. Roche and agreed by all. 
 
 

4. Monthly Management Report 
 
Cllr. Hearne asked that structures be put in place for those accessing homeless services who 
have a part-time bed. 
Cllr. Fitzgerald asked when private development will commence on the North Quays. He asked 
if grants for the installation of oil boilers are to be discontinued from 1 January 2025. 
Cllr. Griffin welcomed Conor D. McGuinness Teachta Dála to the Chamber and asked if the 
Council would consider writing to the four Waterford TDs requesting a meeting with the 
Members and the Executive. He asked that a letter issue to Paul Nolan, a former Civil Defence 
Officer, on his recent retirement. He asked in relation to the Tenant in situ Scheme if the 
independent valuation obtained by the Council could be revised up in the event of a similar 
property with a higher valuation being sold in the area.  
 
C. Hartley, SEO noted that there are eight out of hours beds and an additional three cold 
weather initiative beds.  Alternatives to what is already in place were looked at but the current 
structures were found to be best in terms of risk assessment. Under a new EU Directive grants 
for the installation of fossil fuel boilers will be discontinued from 1 January 2025. In relation 
to the Tenant in situ Scheme she said we are governed by unit cost ceilings issued by the 
Department. 
M. Quinn, DoS said once Harcourt Developments planning permission is approved it is 
expected they will be starting on site later next year. 
S. McKeown, CE suggested inviting Oireachtas Members to next Plenary Meeting. 
 
Cllr. E. Quinlan asked for clarification around hospital patients who were unable to vote at the 
recent election as there was no facility provided for them to do so. He asked if Winterval are 
offering a Sensory Santa Experience for children with autism or additional needs. 
Cllr. Declan Barry asked if reflective arm bands could be made available to make it safer for 
road users, pedestrians, cyclists.  
Cllr. Kelly asked about the City Centre footfall counters, the electronic parking signs and asked 
what the Council could do to improve the retail offering in Waterford City and Dungarvan.  
 
M. Quinn, DoS said the footfall counters are obsolete, and we are now using a mobile service 
provider who provides the information from the mobile masts around the city and county. In 
relation to retailers, he said we have good support schemes available such as start-up grants, 
rates incentive which are promoted on a regular basis. 
I. Grimes, DoS said the Courts Service is responsible for the General Election and said the 
absence of ballot boxes from hospitals during elections will be raised with them. 
 
The Mayor asked that a letter issue to the Electoral Commission in relation to the application 
for a postal vote for those with disabilities which requires medical certification which carries a 
charge. 
 
F. Gleeson, DoS said we will coordinate with The Road Safety Authority and the Garda 
Síochána in relation to the provision of reflective arm bands.  The traffic division ensure the 
parking signs are operating noting that there is a planned maintenance programme provided in 
next year’s budget. 
 
M. Quinn, DoS, confirmed that Winterval does have a Sensory Santa Experience scheduled for 
specific dates and is promoted on the website. 

Cllr. Donal Barry said Waterford City & County Council should not implement the EU 
directive in relation to discontinuation of grants  for the installation of fossil fuel boilers  unless 
it is being implemented across all local authorities. He asked that the minutes of all Waterford 
City & County Council Committees be made available online within seven days of being 
adopted. He asked if there have been discussions with the big-name brands with a view to them 
coming to Waterford and also asked if there have been discussions with the IDA in relation to 
new industries locating here.  
Cllr. Bailey asked about the HAP PlaceFinder Service for 2025 given the unavailability of 
properties to rent in the City, funding for the Tenant in situ Scheme for 2025 and the number 
and location of units to be retrofitted in 2025 and the funding available.  She concurred with 
Cllr. Kelly in relation to the retail offering available in the City. 
Cllr. Burke asked for an audit of services available at our smaller libraries and also asked about 
the timeline in relation to signage around our twinning with Ramallah. 
 
C. Hartley, SEO said there is far less private rental properties available to us and in particular 
as a move on from homeless services and alternatives are being looked at. In relation to 
retrofitting she said the target for 2025 is 180 units.  
I. Grimes, DoS said he would follow up on updating the relevant page on our website in relation 
to  the minutes of meetings. He said upgrades for libraries are planned for 2025. 
M. Quinn, DoS said the IDA are constantly working on potential investments for Waterford 
and the South East and said he would expect there to be announcements over the course of next 
year based on the engagements that have taken place. In relation to retailers, he said landlords 
have been actively engaged in trying to attract investment.  The Council have a support role 
but do not have property to make available to potential retailers. In relation to the twinning 
signage he said it is being looked at and any signage needs to be done properly and reflect the 
various twinning with the council.  
 
Cllr. Daniels said the Council need to play a more active role in attracting business to 
Waterford. The Council should retain the Water Services Team until very old pipes are fixed 
noting where these old pipes are on or under private property any problems that arise is the 
responsibility of the owner of the property under Uisce Eireann policy.  
Cllr. Phelan asked what two projects were recommended for funding under Window 2 of the 
Community Recognition Fund 2024 and how much funding will be available under Window 3 
of the fund. He asked for clarification that the funding allocated to Dungarvan under the fund 
will be used to cover overspends on other projects and any remaining funds to go towards the 
sensory playground in Dungarvan. 
Cllr. Roche asked if we have a right sizing policy and if not  can one be developed next year. 
She supported Cllr. Donal Barry in relation to job creation and suggested an invitation to the 
IDA to speak to the Members and also suggested a workshop with Waterford Chamber to see 
if there is something that could be progressed in terms of retail.  
 
C. Hartley, SEO undertook to have a report prepared and circulated to all Members in relation 
to the Community Recognition Fund addressing all of Cllr. Phelan’s questions. She said the 
right sizing policy is on the Housing Strategic Policy Committee’s  work programme for 2025. 
M. Quinn, DoS said there should be no problem with the IDA addressing the Plenary Council 
and in relation to retail challenges he said there is economic data on our website, we have 
various incentives schemes and said he would be happy to engage with Waterford  
Chamber and some of the larger retailers to see if something more can be done.  
Cllr. Roche asked if there was something we could do to disincentivise landlords leaving retail 
units vacant. 

 
S. McKeown, CE outlined that it is national policy that we transition water services fully by 
2026 and we are not in a position to address issues raised.  
 
Cllr. Ryan noted that there are 78 children in emergency accommodation which is a shameful 
figure. He asked if there is sufficient land zoned for housing and if everything possible is being 
done to assist people to access housing and asked that a one stop shop on housing be held in 
both the City and Dungarvan.  
Cllr. Geoghegan said Christmas is the busiest time of the year for retailers and we need to be 
mindful of the message being sent out in relation to retail offering in both the City and 
Dungarvan.   
 
C. Hartley, SEO said homeless accommodation often refers to a temporary license in one of 
our own houses and does not necessarily mean that the 78 children in emergency 
accommodation are accommodated in a hotel or bed and breakfast.  All cases within homeless 
services are managed in a sensitive manner.   
I. Grimes said the City and County Development Plan provides for more than adequate land 
for housing development across city and county. 
The Mayor informed the Members that there is a Committee looking at the Monthly 
Management Report and ways to improve how it is managed at meetings. 
 
5.  Audit Report 
 
The Local Government Auditor’s Statutory Report for the year ended 31/12/2024 was before 
the Council for noting. 
 
Cllrs. Barry raised queries in relation to tenants who have not engaged with the Council in over 
ten years, Possession Orders, the Council’s Tenancy Management Unit, the timely recovery of 
vacant/abandoned properties, subletting, Approved Housing Bodies where issues were noted 
around allocations and housing units used for offices, the North Quay Consultants fees, loan 
costs for public lighting and payments from other local authorities for the Airport. 
Cllr. Phelan noted that time did not allow for due consideration of this item and some of the 
other items on the Agenda.  
Cllr. Daniels asked about the Capital Programme, the Maypark Lane Site and whether the 
contingency budget is adequate to cover the increased North Quay Consultants fees. 
Cllrs. Hannigan, Wyse and Ryan raised queries in relation to social housing rent arrears. 
 
C. Hartley, SEE replied to queries in relation to housing with S. McKeown, CE replying to 
questions raised in relation to the Capital Programme, Waterford Airport, North Quays and 
Public Lighting.  
 
6. Corporate Plan 2024 - 2029 
 
I.Grimes, DoS, outlined the consultation process that had been undertaken with the elected, 
members, staff and the public which resulted in the objectives as outlined in the Corporate 
Plan 2024 – 2029, he recommended adoption by the members.  
 
Proposed by Cllr. Phelan, seconded by Cllr. O’Leary and agreed by all. 
 
7. Draft Heritage Strategy – Consultation Report 

 
The Draft Heritage Strategy – Consultation Report was noted by the members. 
 
8. Festival and Events Grants 
 
M. Quinn, DoS said the Executive were recommending the 2025 Allocations as proposed, 
applications are assessed by a working group having regard to money available, quality of 
applications, geographical areas and so on. 
 
Cllrs. Ryan, Phelan, Kelly, O’Leary, O’Sullivan, Wyse, Daniels, Fitzgerald and Geoghegan 
contributed to the discussion welcoming the allocations for 2025. Points raised including public 
acknowledgement by the recipients of the Council’s contribution, a review of how funds are 
allocated with more decision making at District Council level, how funds are split and on what 
basis between districts, the 2024 and 2025 allocation on Development of Flagship Festival 
KPIs, the disparity in funding allocation between the flagship festivals in Waterford City and 
West Waterford, the scheduling of the workshop dealing with festival and events grants, all 
festivals are Waterford festivals and the aim of all festivals is to encourage people to come to 
our City and County and the Harvest Festival receiving  the full amount of requested funding 
compared to the West Waterford Festival of Food receiving an allocation of €69,000 having 
requested €105,060. 
 
M. Quinn, DoS noted the points raised and will take into consideration. 
The Festival and Events Grants proposed by Cllr. Ryan, seconded by Cllr. Kelly and agreed by 
all.  
 
9. Arts Practice and Venue Grants 
 
The Arts Practice and Venue Grants proposed by Cllr. Hannigan, seconded by Cllr. Ryan and 
agreed by all. 
 
10. Mount Congreve Loan Proposal 
 
The Executive recommended based on the report of the Auditor of Mount Congreve that the 
remaining funding of €200,000 be provided to Mount Congreve as a loan and the repayment 
terms of the previous loan be extended to cover its repayment. 
 
Cllr. Ryan noted the recommendation of the Auditor in relation to improving  the expertise of 
the Board and asked what efforts are being made to recruit expertise in the areas of finance, 
legal and visitor attractions. 
 
M. Quinn, DoS said in reply that there is a short list of potential candidates, and he expects this 
issue to be resolved early in the New Year noting the difficulty of finding people in these areas 
of expertise who are willing to work on a voluntary basis. 
 
Cllr. Ryan suggested appointing a second Councillor to the Board. 
Cllr. Fitzgerald asked in relation to annual reporting or otherwise noting the need for ongoing 
assessment 
Cllr. Kelly concurred with Cllrs. Ryan and Fitzgerald and noted the excellent work of the 
current Board and asked that it be noted that the board is a volunteer one.  
Cllr. Daniels also asked about reporting suggesting quarterly reports.  

Cllr. Phelan asked about security in relation to the loans advanced. 
 
M. Quinn, DoS said progress  reports can be provided and said as we have a controlling interest 
in Mount Congreve security for the loans is not necessary. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. O’Leary, Seconded by Cllr. O’Sullivan and agreed by all. 
 
11. Correspondence 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Wyse, seconded by Cllr. Brazil and agreed by all. 
 
12. Notice of Motions 
 
None. 
 
13. AOB 
 
Cllr. Griffin acknowledged the work of the outdoor staff during the recent storm and also 
acknowledged the Theatre Royal as a venue for events. 
The Mayor welcomed Helena Dennehy, the new Director of Services for Housing. 
Cllr. Fitzgerald asked about funding for new sound systems in both Council Chambers. He 
asked for clarification in relation to applications for grants to replace fossil fuel boilers received 
before 31st December 2024 in light of the new EU Directive.  
 
C. Hartley, SEO said applications received on or before 31st December would be processed and 
H. Dunphy, MA confirmed funding has been allocated for new sound systems, tender for the 
installation is currently underway.  
 
S. McKeown, CE acknowledged the work off all staff along with the emergency services in 
dealing with extreme weather events.  
 
The Mayor wished everyone a happy and peaceful Christmas. 
  
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
 
Signed:_____________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________ 
Mayor of Waterford City & County  
 
 
 
 
 
