CATHRACH AGUS CONTAE PHORT LÁIRGE 
                              WATERFORD CITY AND COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
COUNCIL MEETING HELD ON 14th NOVEMBER 2024 
 IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER,  CIVIC OFFICES, DUNGARVAN,   
CO. WATERFORD.  
 
 
PRESENT        
 
      Cllr. Jason Murphy (Mayor) 
Cllr. Joe Kelly 
      Cllr. Declan Barry 
Cllr. Donnchadh Mulcahy 
      Cllr. Donal Barry 
Cllr. Joeanne Bailey 
Cllr. Liam Brazil 
Cllr. Pat Nugent 
Cllr. Catherine Burke  
Cllr. Niamh O’Donovan 
Cllr. Declan Clune  
Cllr. Seamus Ryan 
Cllr. Joe Conway  
Cllr. Tom Cronin 
Cllr. John Hearne 
Cllr. Joe O’Riordan 
Cllr. Conor D. McGuinness 
Cllr. Thomas Phelan 
Cllr. David Daniels 
Cllr. Seanie Power 
Cllr. Jim D’Arcy  
Cllr. John Pratt 
Cllr. Pat Fitzgerald 
Cllr. Eamon Quinlan 
Cllr. Damien Geoghegan 
Cllr. Frank Quinlan 
Cllr. Lola O’Sullivan 
Cllr. Mary Roche 
Cllr. Blaise Hannigan 
 
 
Apologies: Cllr. Jim Griffin, Cllr. John O’Leary, Cllr. Adam Wyse. 
 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE           
 
Mr. S. McKeown, Chief Executive  
Mr. F. Gleeson, Director of Services, Roads, Water & Environment 
Mr. I. Grimes, Director of Services, Corporate Services, IS, HR, Culture and Planning 
Mr. B. O’Kane, Management Accountant 
Ms. C. Hartley, A/ Director of Service, Housing  
Mr. M. Quinn, Director of Service, Economic Development 
Ms. H. Dunphy, Meetings Administrator 
Ms. A. Flynn, Senior Staff Officer, Corporate  
 
 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes 
 
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held on 10th October 2024 proposed by Cllr. Kelly, seconded by 
Cllr. Declan Barry and agreed by all. 
 
 
 

2. Matters Arising 
 
Cllr. Daniels asked for an update on Waterford Airport and requested copy of the business case.  
 
S. McKeown, CE outlined that there has been an assessment of the business case by the 
Department. The Council does not have a copy of the business case and The Board of 
Waterford Airport have only very recently received same and have met with Department 
officials. 
 
Cllr. D.McGuinness raised the issue of fire stations and the need for capital investment and 
asked for an update on the proposed workshop. 
 
C. Hartley, A/DoS said a workshop will be organised. 
 
3. Land Disposals 
 
I.  Grimes, DoS outlined details of the land disposals for approval. 
 
Ref. No. 1538 Disposal of 3.7 acres at Kilrush, Dungarvan to Trustees of Dungarvan United 
AFC for €70,000. 
Proposed by Cllr. Geoghegan, seconded by Cllr. Nugent and agreed by all. 
 
Ref. No. 1539 Disposal of 53.5msq at rear of 267 St. John’s Park to Audra Benetyte for €500.   
Proposed by Cllr. F. Quinlan, seconded by Cllr. Kelly and agreed by all. 
 
Ref. No 1540 Disposal of 18.2msq at 12 Military Barracks to Sharon White for €500.  
Proposed by Cllr. Kelly, seconded by Cllr. E. Quinlan and agreed by all. 
 
Cllr. McGuinness asked about a site adjacent to Scoil Gharbháin in Dungarvan and asked that 
the Mayor write to the Minister for Education to expediate purchase of this site. 
 
The Mayor asked for a suspension of Standing Orders to take Items 5 to 8 on the agenda before 
Item 4 Monthly Management Report. 
Proposed by Cllr. Kelly, seconded by Cllr. Phelan and agreed by all. 
 
4. Monthly Management Report 
 
Cllr. E. Quinlan asked, in light of other Christmas festivals taking place across the country, if 
Winterval needed to start earlier and is a review of the festival required. He asked if people 
could be employed on temporary contracts to tackle the back log of applications for private 
house adaptation grants. In relation to anti-social behaviour he asked that the Councillors have 
a greater role into inputting into the process. 
Cllr. McGuinness asked for any increase in commercial rates as part of the budget process that 
there be a rebate available to small and medium sized businesses. He mentioned the lack of a 
JIGSAW mental health service in Waterford noting no decision has been made on an 
application by the HSE for funding submitted in October 2022. He cited the case of a council 
tenant who is receiving letters from the Housing Department because her daughter and 
granddaughter have moved into the property and they do not have permission to reside due to 
overcrowding. He said they have nowhere else to go and asked that this case and similar cases 
be dealt with sensitively and with some discretion. 

Cllr. Daniels asked if council owned property could be looked at with a view to providing 
additional car parking spaces for our city and towns thus encouraging more shoppers while 
also providing additional income.  
 
C. Hartley, A/DoS said Internal Audit are reviewing the processes around grant applications. 
As regards private houses adaptation grants there is additional temporary clerical support in 
placed and noted that there is an availability issue in relation to Occupational Therapists. The 
housing section currently works with the Councillors as regards anti-social behaviour, 
operating within what is known to the Gardai, what is criminal behaviour and what actions we 
can take under the housing legalisation noting that a Garda report is sought for all new 
tenancies. She outlined that a temporary permission to reside is granted where there is 
overcrowding given that as a housing authority we are losing more HAP tenancies than what 
is being signed up to the scheme. In relation to a JIGSAW mental health service in Waterford 
this will be brought to the attention of the Waterford Children and Young People’s Services 
Committee. 
M. Quinn, DoS outlined that Winterval has been awarded the European Capital of Christmas, 
there is continuing development of the Winterval Programme and said starting the festival 
earlier is not realistic in terms of sustaining the momentum up to Christmas.  It would be rare 
that all of the car parking in the City would be fully utilised noting there is an improved bus 
service with further improvements proposed under the Bus Connects.   
S. McKeown, CE said we are looking at an increase in commercial rates but there are measures 
that we can introduce to protect the smaller businesses.  
 
Cllr. Donal Barry enquired about the reason for reduced visitor numbers between 2019 and 
2023 to the House of Waterford Crystal as published by Failte Ireland.  There was only a slight 
improvement  in the  2023 visitor numbers to the Medieval Museum and Bishop’s Palace since 
2019 and asked why we are not seeing a significant improvement and has the loss of the tourist 
office in the City impacted visitor numbers. He asked that the Executive report on the 2024 
attendances to Waterford Attractions in the first quarter of 2025. He asked if Waterford had 
representatives at a recent event in Limerick attended by 16 Coach Operators from the UK and 
if Waterford would host an event similar to the Global Incentive Summit hosted by Killarney 
this year. 
Cllr. Roche asked for an update on the planning application for the North Quays. She asked 
that Waterford’s second vehicular river crossing be prioritised. She supported Cllr. 
McGuinness in relation to Permission to Reside and asked for a review of this policy.  
Cllr. Ryan said it had come to his attention that the Tenant in-situ Scheme has ceased and asked 
that a letter issue to the Department requesting its’ reinstatement. He asked what resources are 
available for inspections of private rented accommodation and reiterated his request for a report 
on vacant properties in Waterford City and the timeline around bringing these properties back 
into use. 
 
C. Hartley, A/DoS noted comments in relation to Permission to Reside, a letter will issue to 
the Department in relation to the Tenant in-situ Scheme and said the resources available to 
PRTB inspections have increased with 358 inspections carried out in October. Figures in 
relation to Voids are available in the Monthly Management Report and while turnaround times 
vary we compare well with other comparable local authorities. 
I. Grimes, DoS said there was a further information request in July for the North Quays 
planning application, it is expected that it will be submitted within the required six months.  
M. Quinn, DoS said Covid has had an adverse impact on visitor numbers.  For 2024 there will 
be analysis of our own visitor information and will review producing a report which would 

show the issues and how these issues could be addressed. In relation to the second river crossing 
additional river crossings are part of the Development Plan and form part of the on-going 
development of Waterford. He would welcome opportunity to host the Global Incentive 
Summit and said Visit Waterford who represents the Visitor Sector in Waterford attend all 
tourism promotion opportunities in Ireland and abroad.  
 
Cllr. Burke noted the 47,173 visitors to libraries in October and commended this achievement. 
She suggested an audit of the facilities in the smaller libraries. She noted over 1,000 businesses 
made a pledge to create a greener Waterford and suggested further initiatives be looked at to 
engage businesses further in climate action and requested an update on fire station upgrade 
works across the county and in particular Kilmacthomas. 
Cllr. Declan Barry asked how many houses the council have built in 2024 and the proposed 
number for 2025. He asked about the process for reporting footpaths which are dangerous due 
to wet leaves. He asked how many dog licenses were issued in 2024, the number of fines issued 
for not having a dog license and the number of fines issued for dog fouling and if there were 
any prosecutions.  
Cllr. O’Donovan asked about the issuing of notices to landowners regarding hedge cutting and 
in particular where there is a danger to road users and asked for improved communication by 
the Council to candidates of an election regarding the regulations around erection of posters. 
 
F. Gleeson, DoS said reports in relation to dangerous footpaths should be logged on the CRM 
system, noted that Section 70 Notices in relation to hedge cutting will issue and will revert with 
details in relation to dog licenses etc. 
I. Grimes, DoS outlined that he has monthly meetings with the city and county librarian to 
discuss all issues pertaining to the libraries. Noted that the General Election is the responsibility 
of the Court Services. 
C. Hartley, A/DoS said there is a live planning application for the fire station in Kilmacthomas 
at the moment. The target for social housing delivery in 2024 is 214 and we are on target to 
deliver 217, the target for 2025 is 230. 
 
Cllr. Bailey asked for an update on the derelict site levy, breakdown on the number of properties 
on the Derelict Site Register, the amount collected in levies in 2024. She asked that this 
information be provided prior to the Budget Meeting. She asked that anti-social behaviour and 
in some instances it being allowed as grounds for a transfer be put on the agenda of the first 
Housing SPC meeting.  
Cllr. Phelan agreed in relation to anti-social behaviour and that it be considered as grounds for 
a housing transfer.  In relation to Age Friendly Waterford he asked for a commitment from the 
CE that walkability audits would commence in early 2025. He requested more detail in relation 
to the Outdoor Recreation Infrastructure Scheme and asked for a summary of the Monitoring 
Report of the Development Plan. He asked what we are doing in terms of planning permissions 
to encourage the installation of solar panels.  
Cllr. Conway noted from the Monitoring Report of the Development Plan instances where there 
was a deterioration in water quality due to unsatisfactory ecological, biological and or physio-
chemical status and asked if this was agricultural. 
I. Grimes said that there is information on derelict sites in the Management Report and more 
detailed reports are made available at district level on the activities of the Planning and Housing 
Departments in relation to tackling dereliction, currently working on 299 properties that are 
derelict or potentially derelict and said the objective is to get these properties back into use.  
Installation of solar panels would need to come as a directive from central government as a 
national policy.  

C. Hartley, A/DoS said the anti-social behaviour policy is on the agenda of the Housing SPC 
meeting scheduled for late December.  
S. McKeown, CE said the walkability audits will be prioritised in the Age Friendly action plan 
for 2025. 
 
Cllr. Kelly asked that the Council issue a press release in relation to the issues around the public 
lighting infrastructure. He supported the other Councillors in relation to the Permission to 
Reside Policy and overcrowding. He noted the CE’s comment in relation to  measures that can 
be introduced to protect the smaller businesses from any increase in commercial rates saying 
he was confident small businesses would continue to be supported in the upcoming budget.    
Cllr. Mulcahy asked that the Mayor write to the Minister for Office of Public Works, Mr. 
Patrick O’Donovan for funding to assist households, businesses and communities who are 
impacted by flooding in Waterford. 
Cllr. Hannigan asked that one bed units be included in any planning applications for both social 
and private housing developments. 
Cllr. Fitzgerald also expressed concern in relation to the water quality along our coasts and in 
our waterways and its impact on tourism and asked that a copy of the EPA Water Quality 
Report be circulated if available. 
 
C. Hartley, A/DoS said Cllr. Kelly’s comments in relation to Permission to Reside are noted. 
Noted that one bed need accounts for almost 50% of housing List. 
I. Grimes, DoS said a statement in relation to public lighting can be issued. 
F. Gleeson, DoS said he would revert in relation to the EPA Report. In relation to water quality 
further resources are being put in place and working on an improved level of testing.  
I. Grimes, DoS said in relation to planning applications that it is a matter for the developer to 
identify the number of bedrooms in each housing unit and said the Housing Department have 
been building one bed units in response to the demand.      
 
5.  Winterval Event Licence 
 
Proposed by Cllr. O’Sullivan, seconded by Cllr. Ryan and agreed by all. 
 
6. Presentation – ESB Offshore Wind 
 
Presentation by Sean Moroney, Ronan O’Flynn and Keith O’Sullivan.  
 
Cllrs. Kelly, Nugent, Power, Hannigan, McGuinness, Fitzgerald, Burke, Daniels, O’Donnovan, 
Brazil, Roche and Mulcahy all contributed to a discussion in relation to offshore wind. Issues 
raised included visual impact, floating offshore wind, interconnectors,  energy exports, The 
Community Benefit Fund, potential sites, impact for tourism, impact on sea fisheries, on 
biodiversity, on cetaceans and their migration, micro-generation, loss of territory to fishermen 
and the impact on their livelihood, landing points and bringing cables ashore, height, location 
and distance as regards the Tonn Nua site, impact on economy, overall cost and cost of 
electricity in the future, benefit in particular to Waterford, lifespan and cost of replacement.  
 
Mr. Moroney, O’Flynn and O’Sullivan replied to the members on their issues raised. 
 
 
 
 

7. Correspondence 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Donal Barry, seconded by Cllr. Conway and agreed by all.  
 
In relation to the letter from the Department of Social Protection regarding former employees 
of Waterford Crystal, Cllr. Barry, on behalf of the former employees, thanked the Members 
and the Executive for their support. 
 
8. Notice of Motions 
 
1. Motion in the name of Cllr. Thomas Phelan, Cllr. Seamus Ryan, Cllr. John Pratt, 
Cllr. Joe O’Riordan, Cllr. Donal Barry 
 
“That Waterford City and County Council, in light of the recent ruling by the 
International Court of Justice confirming the illegality of Israeli settlements in Occupied 
Palestine territories and in light of the Attorney General's recent legal advice, calls on 
the Government to come together in unity with the Opposition in the Oireachtas to 
expedite the passage of the Occupied Territories Bill and to cut Irish ties with Israeli 
goods and services produced in the illegally occupied territories. 
Reg. No.  PN/2024/247 (dated 22nd October 2024) 
 
Cllr. Phelan proposed the motion and welcomed Senator Frances Black as well as 
representatives of Waterford for Palestine and Gaza.  The motion as outlined highlights what 
is required, the horrors of war in Palestine need to stop. The enactment of the Occupied 
Territories Bill will send a strong signal in this regard. He asked that the motion, if passed, be 
circulated to the other Councils in addition to the Houses of the Oireachtas and the Party 
Leaders. 
Cllr. O’Riordan seconded the motion saying it’s been over 400 days that Israel has been 
pounding Gaza, deliberately targeting civilian infrastructure including schools, cultural sites 
and hospitals.  A doctor in Gaza has said that the casualties he saw were mostly children. He 
said the horror must end and we cannot be complicit in this genocide and must do all to end 
the suffering of the people of Palestine and called on the Members to support the motion and 
urge the Government to enact the Occupied Territories Bill.  
 
Cllrs. Ryan, McGuinness, Kelly, Hearne, Roche and Donal Barry all spoke in support of the 
motion. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Phelan, seconded by Cllr. O’Riordan and agreed by all. 
 
2. Motion in the name of Cllr. Conor D. McGuinness   
 
“That Waterford City and County Council notes that: 
-The Housing Commission report recommended a radical reset of housing policy, 
including the delivery of an average of 60,000 new build homes a year over the 
next five years 
 
-The Housing Commission also recommended that 20% of all housing stock 
should be social and affordable, which would require a doubling of public housing 

output on current levels 
 
and undertakes to write to Minister for Housing Darragh O’Brien calling on him;- 
- to double the direct capital funding for social and affordable housing in order to deliver  
at least 25,000 social and affordable homes on average over the next five years, and to 
 
- to introduce the necessary reforms to enable Councils to increase and 
accelerate the delivery of public housing and to ensure that affordable homes to 
rent and buy are delivered at prices that working people can actually afford”. 
  
Reg. No. PN/2024/248 (dated 1st November 2024) 
 
Cllr. McGuinness proposed the motion saying the motion requests that the Council write to the 
Minister for Housing calling on him to double the direct capital funding for social and 
affordable housing and to introduce reforms to enable Councils to increase and accelerate the 
delivery of public housing and to ensure that affordable homes to rent and buy are delivered at 
prices that working people can afford. This is important across the State and in particularly in 
parts of County Waterford where there is demand for private houses for sale and where young 
people are unable to access any affordable housing and said there is also need for a huge 
increase in the number of social houses being built. 
 
Cllrs. Burke, Hearne and Roche all spoke in support of the motion. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Bailey and agreed by all. 
 
9. Notice of Questions 
 
Noted. 
 
10. AOB 
 
Cllr. Geoghegan commented on taking Items 5 to 8 on the Agenda before Item 4 Monthly 
Management Report and said it improved the running of the meeting. 
 
Cllr. McGuinness informed the Members of the fundraising screening of ‘Where Olive Trees 
Weep’ in The Fusion Centre, Dungarvan on Saturday 16th November 2024. 
 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
Signed:_____________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________ 
Mayor of Waterford City & County  
 
 
 
 
