CATHRACH AGUS CONTAE PHORT LÁIRGE 
WATERFORD CITY AND COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
COUNCIL MEETING HELD ON 13th SEPTEMBER 2024 
IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBER, CIVIC BUILDINGS, DUNGARVAN, CO. 
WATERFORD 
 
 
PRESENT        
 
      Cllr. Jason Murphy (Mayor) 
Cllr. Joe Kelly 
      Cllr. Declan Barry 
Cllr. Donnchadh Mulcahy 
      Cllr. Donal Barry 
Cllr. Joeanne Bailey 
Cllr. Liam Brazil 
Cllr. Pat Nugent 
Cllr. Catherine Burke  
Cllr. Niamh O’Donovan 
Cllr. Declan Clune  
Cllr. Adam Wyse 
Cllr. Joe Conway  
Cllr. Tom Cronin 
Cllr. John Hearne 
Cllr. Joe O’Riordan 
Cllr. Conor D. McGuinness 
Cllr. Thomas Phelan 
Cllr. David Daniels 
Cllr. Seanie Power 
Cllr. Jim D’Arcy  
Cllr. John Pratt 
Cllr. Pat Fitzgerald 
Cllr. Eamon Quinlan 
Cllr. Damien Geoghegan 
Cllr. Frank Quinlan 
Cllr. Jim Griffin 
Cllr. Mary Roche 
Cllr. Blaise Hannigan 
Cllr. Seamus Ryan 
Cllr. John O’Leary 
 
 
Apologies: Cllr. Lola O’Sullivan 
 
OFFICIALS IN ATTENDANCE           
 
Mr. S. McKeown, Chief Executive  
Mr. P. Johnston, A/Director of Services, Roads, Water & Environment 
Mr. I. Grimes, Director of Services, Corporate Services, IS, HR, Culture and Planning 
Mr. B. Pollard, Head of Finance 
Ms. C. Hartley, A/ Director of Service, Housing  
Mr. M. Quinn, Director of Service, Economic Development 
Ms. H. Dunphy, Meetings Administrator 
Ms. A. Flynn, Senior Staff Officer, Corporate  
 
S. McKeown, CE spoke to thank the Members for endorsing his nomination as the new Chief 
Executive. He said he is privileged and honoured to to be entrusted with the role and is looking 
forward to working with the Members in the years ahead. He said his predecessor Michael 
Walsh was an outstanding Chief Executive and he wishes to continue the strong momentum in 
delivering the ambitious pipeline of projects and strategies in place to improve the quality of 
life for the people of Waterford and enhance the reputation of Waterford as a great place to live 
and do business. 
 

The Mayor and  Members welcomed the new Chief Executive and wished him well in the years 
ahead. 
 
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes 
 
Minutes of Special Plenary meeting held on 9th July 2024 proposed by Cllr. Brazil, seconded 
by Cllr. Wyse and agreed by all. 
Minutes of Plenary meeting held on 11th July 2024 proposed by Cllr. O’Donovan, seconded by 
Cllr. Phelan and agreed by all. 
 
2. Matters Arising 
 
Cllr. McGuinness reiterated his request for discussion in relation to fire stations, many of which 
require upgrade works. He thanked the Executive for securing a meeting with Transport  
Infrastructure Ireland in relation to the N25 noting however the continued lack of response 
from the Minster. 
Cllr. Daniels requested an update in relation to the Airport. 
Cllr. Cronin also brought up issues around the N25. 
 
C. Hartley, A/DoS agreed to address Cllr. McGuinness request. 
S. McKeown, CE said the initial assessment of the business case put forward in respect of the 
Airport is to go to the Minister in the coming weeks.  
 
Cllr. Bailey requested feedback on her previous question in relation to the bedroom allocation 
for families with children of same gender and also her request for a breakdown of housing 
adaptation grants. 
 
3. Land Disposals 
 
I. Grimes, DoS outlined details of the land disposals for approval. 
 
Ref. No. 1530 Disposal of 11 Bailey’s New Street to Mary Dolan for €85,000. 
Proposed by Cllr. D’Arcy, seconded by Cllr. Hearne and agreed by all. 
 
Ref. No. 1531 Disposal of 62.43msq at 5 Fitzgerald Road, Cork Road to Paul Whelan & Aoife 
Morris for €400. 
Proposed by Cllr. F. Quinlan, seconded by Cllr. Wyse and agreed by all. 
 
Ref. No. 1532 Disposal of 44.8msq at 5 Ceannt Road, Cork Road to Thomas & Mary Keating 
for €500. 
Proposed by Cllr. Bailey, seconded by Cllr F. Quinlan and agreed by all. 
 
Ref. No. 1533 Disposal of 0.41 acres at Dawn B&B, Kildermody, Kilmeaden to Luke & Ann 
Fitzgerald for €500. 
Proposed by Cllr. Brazil,  seconded by Cllr. O’Leary and agreed by all. 
 
Ref. No. 1534 Lease of 1.48 additional acres at BRILL Family Resource Centre to Ballybeg 
Community Development Project Ltd. No change to existing Lease term and rent. 
Proposed by Cllr Bailey, seconded by Cllr. Hearne and agreed by all. 
 

4. Monthly Management Report 
 
Cllr. Wyse asked about the Public Lighting Contract referring to the  many street lights 
currently out of order and the safety issues associated with this especially now as the evenings 
are getting darker. He asked what action has been taken to prevent the flooding of the scale 
seen last year. 
Cllr. McGuinness, referring to the new domestic violence refuge opened in Wexford which 
was developed with the support of Wexford County Council and Cuan, the Domestic, Sexual 
and Gender-Based Violence Agency, asked if there were any plans to provide something 
similar in Waterford. In relation to the housing crisis he said an ambitious public housing 
scheme and an increase in delivery of houses by the private sector in Waterford is required. He 
said that  everything we do, the new Council,  the new Chief Executive and  the Management 
Team, needs to deliver for the people of the Waterford. 
Cllr. Daniels asked for an update on the public lighting network and on speed limits and asked 
if a workshop will be provided in relation to funding for footpaths.  
 
C. Hartley, A/DoS said Cuan is a new statutory agency under the remit of the Department of 
Justice and Waterford is not one of the 18 priority locations.  Housing is a priority for the 
Executive and they are working to deliver houses across all tenures, social, cost rental, 
affordable and also working with private developers to develop private lands. 
P. Johnston, A/DoS said the energy efficient streetlight replacements scheme replacing street 
lighting with LED equivalents is in progress. There are significant issues with older 
infrastructure affecting between 15 to 20%  of the public lights. To address these issues would 
cost between €15 to €20 million. Significant upgrading and replacing of footpaths is required 
and is a priority for the Executive going forward. In relation to flooding he said significant 
work has been undertaken. The speed limits on rural or local roads will be cut from 80km/h to 
60km/h and the process of replacing signs will commence shortly. The speed limits on roads 
in urban areas will be cut from 50km/h to 30km/h which will happen early next year. 
S. McKeown, CE said in relation to the capital review that it is his intention, with the scale of 
projects, funding, initiatives and so on available nationally, to review the Capital Programme 
annually.  
 
Cllr. Brazil asked in relation to a traffic plan for those occasions when the N25 is closed. He 
enquired about the new €10 levy on soil and stone taken from construction sites.  
Cllr. Donal Barry asked for an update on the Copper Coast Walking Trail, the review of the 
Rent Scheme 2020 and if European Maritime Day could be celebrated here in Waterford. 
Cllr. Phelan asked how many council houses require retrofitting and how long it would take to 
retrofit these houses based on current Government funding. He asked at what stage would 
Members be able to examine the progress on the North Quays. He asked if the role of the EU 
Project Officer for Climate currently advertised could be expanded to liaise with the Southern 
Regional Assembly in relation to funding applications. Referring to the recent visit by New 
York firefighters he said we should seek to maximise these events and asked for a review of 
the High Court  Decision in relation to the Development Plan.  
 
C. Hartley, A/DoS said a review of the current rent scheme will be on the agenda of the first 
SPC Meeting. She said she will revert with a report on retrofitting. Referring to the New York 
firefighters’ cycle from Dublin to Cork to raise funds for charity she said events organised were 
very much specific to the counties in which they were held and mentioned the guard of honour 
formed by the firefighters at Kilmurrin Cove around a sand art portrait of a little girl. 

M. Quinn, DoS said in relation to the Copper Coast a review is taking place after An Bord 
Pleanála refused the Council’s application for a walkway along the coast for environmental 
concerns. A further application may be made in the future if it is decided that it is a viable 
proposition to develop walkways along the coast. In relation to the North Quays he said a visit 
by the councillors will be scheduled and said the Council are not in a position to take on a 
festival around European Maritime Day. 
I. Grimes, DoS said the Planning Report sets out the measures that have been taken to comply 
with the High Court Decision in relation to the Development Plan. The Development Plan will 
be kept under ongoing review and will be a priority for the Planning SPC. 
P. Johnston, A/DoS said the €10 levy on waste from construction sites was introduced by the 
Department of the Environment. He said the cost will ultimately be passed on to the end user. 
The role of the EU Project Officer can be expanded and protocols in relation to road diversions 
on the N25 can be reviewed. 
 
Cllr. Ryan asked for an update in relation to the walkability audits provided for in the Waterford 
Age Friendly Strategy. He asked in light of new regulations around XL Bully dogs if the 
Council would be employing additional Dog Wardens. He asked for an update on the new 
mobile library and enquired, as on previous occasions, if an open day for the public around the 
various housing options available could be held. 
Cllr. F. Quinlan asked about the considerable delays in processing housing grant applications.  
Cllr. Burke welcomed the new energy efficient streetlight replacements scheme but had queries 
in relation to light pollution. She asked about hoods for the LED lights to control the direction 
of light and asked if timers can be put on street lights set to turn off at night especially in rural 
areas. In relation to Rural Tourism, she thanked everybody for inviting the Comeragh District 
Councillors to participate in the strategy for recreational activities for the area. She asked the 
Mayor if he would write to the Minister for Education in relation to School Transport and said 
she supported Cllr. Donal Barry in relation to the Copper Coast.  
 
C. Hartley, A/DoS said the Walkability Audits are a cross departmental issue and there is an 
issue around funding.   Actions under the Age Friendly Strategy are managed through the Age 
Friendly Alliance. In relation to an open day by the Housing Department she said that would 
not be tenable. She referred to the Council’s website and the national websites and said she 
would liaise with the communications team around a social media campaign. Processing of 
housing grants applications would often involve requests for further information and said the 
staff numbers in this section will be reviewed as part of the workforce plan review. 
I.  Grimes, DoS said there are ongoing discussions with other Local Authorities to identify the 
best way to procure a mobile library and he would hope to have the mobile library in place next 
year.  
P. Johnston, A/DoS said an additional dog warden has been recruited. He said the new energy 
efficient lights  are designed to reduce light pollution and glare. 
 
Cllr. Roche requested an update on the Harcourt Developments planning application and on 
the Tourism Experience Development Plan. She asked if the Copper Coast could be designated 
as a dark skies area and commented that the Council need to be more reactive to the needs of 
people. She asked if a solution could be found to address the lack of day facilities for those 
accommodated in hostels at night. 
Cllr. Geoghegan said the County & City Development adopted in 2022 is not delivering houses 
on any great scale and requested that we begin the process to reopen our Development Plan, 
noting it was requested by the Minister in April of this year. He said the emphasis in the 

Development Plan seems to be what developers are not permitted to do and this needs to 
change. 
Cllr. Griffin  asked about the Repair & Lease and the Tenant in Situ Schemes. He also 
mentioned the ‘Guardian’ project to the new Chief Executive.  
 
C. Hartley, A/DoS said with the review of the Cold Weather Initiative and dependency on 
funding it is hoped to have the full complement of hostel beds on a 24/7 basis. In relation to 
accessing the Repair & Lease Scheme she said because of the level of interest in the scheme it 
may be taking longer to reply to queries. In relation to the Tenant in Situ Scheme the valuation 
of an independent valuer must be adhered to and there are also ceilings on cost and the number 
of properties that the council can acquire. 
S. McKeown, CE said that although it may not be the ‘Guardian’ project, a major attraction is 
being developed in conjunction with Failte Ireland.  
M. Quinn, DoS said there has been a number of workshops with Failte Ireland and a concept 
has been worked out. Expressions of interest will be sought to see who may be interested in 
working with us on an attraction of scale. The Tourism Experience Development Plan is going 
through an environmental assessment process and is part of our work plan for the current year. 
I. Grimes, DoS said the Development Plan does need to be reviewed and the Planning SPC will 
commence working on it. In relation to the planning application for the  North Quays he said 
we are engaging with the applicants. 
P. Johnston, A/DoS said all our locations are significantly above the illumination levels 
required for Dark Sky designation. 
 
Cllr. Declan Barry asked if we have a full time Road Safety Officer and asked if all the schools 
in city and county are included in the Safe Schools Programme. He too mentioned the 
significant issues with public lighting and the delays in repairing faults. He noted also that all 
the parking display boards in the City are out of order. 
Cllr. Fitzgerald noted that to date there has been no malicious fire calls and asked if this was 
down to the actions of the Council or the Courts. He asked if there was any plan to seek funding 
to deal with Ash tree dieback disease. He asked who is responsible for the disposal of the 
hazardous materials that schools have since Covid. 
Cllr. D’Arcy asked for clarity around the terms of the Public Lighting Contract.  
 
C. Hartley, A/DoS said she will revert in relation to false fire alarms. 
P. Johnston, A/DoS said we do have a Road Safety Officer and said he would revert with details 
on safe schools. Action is being taken on public lighting and the parking display boards. In 
reply to Cllr. Fitzgerald, he said we are in the process of preparing the tree strategy and once 
completed we will be in a better position to tackle the issue of Ash tree dieback disease.  He 
said there may be a solution to the disposal of hand wash issued to schools by the Department 
of Education, he will discuss with Environment Team and revert. He said a workshop to address 
all the issues in relation to public lighting may be required.  
Cllr. Kelly asked for an update on illegal dumping and the use of CCTV. He asked about the 
delay in payments to building contractors by the Council.  
Cllr. Bailey raised the issue of the delay in payments to contractors in respect of adaptation 
grants and noted that some contractors are now reluctant to carry out this work. She asked for 
an update regarding the €400,000 additional budget for housing maintenance. She asked about 
the TFI bike Scheme and asked in relation to the speed limits review given that the limits will 
not reduce immediately if there is anything that the Council can do now to reduce the speed 
limits in locations that are particularly dangerous to road users. 

Cllr. E. Quinlan asked if the council could create a list of famous Waterford and/or Irish People 
and make that list available to Developers in relation to the naming of estates to continue the 
tradition of having streets named after revolutionary political figures and so on. He asked if a 
space could be made available in Waterford city or county to accommodate an animation studio 
noting that SETU provides a course in animation and the closest studio to Waterford is in 
Kilkenny.  
 
P. Johnston, A/DoS said our CCTV is being reviewed with impact assessments at each location 
required and said a workshop may be provided in the future. He will revert to Cllr. Bailey on 
the TFI bike scheme. The speed limits on rural or local roads will be cut from 80km/h to 60km/h 
and this is to happen by the end of November.  
B. Pollard, HoF said the Finance Department will liaise with the Housing Department to 
resolve any delays in payments to Contractors. 
C. Hartley, A/DoS said the additional funding for the maintenance programme is being 
concentrated in Ballybeg with properties prioritised based on the length of time since the last 
refurbishment programme. 
I. Grimes, DoS said he would revert to Cllr. E. Quinlan in relation to the naming of places. 
M. Quinn, DoS said he would be happy to engage with SETU in relation to an animation studio. 
 
Cllr. O’Leary said the Council has paid out almost €1m in compensation for trips and falls on 
footpaths in the past 12 months and asked how or if this affects the annual budget. He asked 
that the Council strengthen communication in relation to traffic diversions. 
Cllr. Hearne said the homes of older people need to be prioritised in the retrofitting scheme.  
He too mentioned the importance of place names. 
Cllr. Clune asked about Active Travel for 2025 and asked for a guarantee that funding would 
be restored in 2025 to those rural projects that had lost funding in favour of urban projects. He 
requested further detail on the 2131 environmental complaints to date this year and said he 
supported Cllrs. F. Quinlan & Bailey in relation to delays around processing grant applications 
and welcomed the review of resources. 
 
P. Johnston, A/DoS said a commitment has already been given to review  road diversions. He 
said those active travel rural projects that did not progress due to lack of funding can be 
revisited.  
C. Hartley, A/DoS said the housing workshop will address the issues raised in relation to 
housing grants and said prioritising older people in the retrofitting scheme could be looked at. 
B. Pollard, HoF said compensation claims are covered under our public liability insurance and 
can affect the insurance premium. However he said our public liability insurance for 2025 may 
be down 4.5%. 
 
Cllr. Nugent asked if a farmer wanted to move clay from one field to another if a license 
required. He asked for confirmation in relation to finance for a public swimming pool in 
Dungarvan and asked about funding for St. Declan’s Way. 
Cllr. Power also mentioned the need for increased resources to process housing grants. He 
asked if the workshops with Uisce Eireann could resume. 
Cllr. O’Donovan asked about hedge cutting and in particular where overgrowth poses a risk to 
road users. She asked after the 1st September are land owners contacted by the Council and 
how long does a landowner have to comply and when will the Council step in to undertake the 
work themselves and charge the land owner. 
Cllr. Mulcahy asked if there are plans to spray the Japanese Knotweed on St. Declan’s Way. 
He asked in light of the serious issues with the public lighting infrastructure that the Mayor 

write to the Minister for Finance for funding referring to the €13bn back tax now payable by 
Apple to Ireland. 
Cllr. O’Riordan said complaints are often made by households in relation to the build-up of 
rubbish in their neighbours back gardens and asked if there is a policy around this. He asked if 
action is taken against tenants who fail to adhere to the terms of their tenancy. 
 
B. Power, HoF said he would revert to Cllr. Nugent in relation to the public swimming pool 
for Dungarvan. 
P. Johnston, A/DoS the €10 levy is on waste from construction sites and a farmer moving 
material on his land would not attract the levy.  
H. Dunphy, Meetings Administrator said a workshop with Uisce Eireann is scheduled for 
October. 
As regards hedge cutting P. Johnston, A/DoS said the National Parks & Wildlife Service 
enforces the legislation which prohibits the cutting of hedges and ditches between 1st March 
and 31st August. The Council has no discretion unless there is a road safety issue. He said the  
spraying of Japanese Knotweed needs to be looked at in terms of resources and said a workshop 
has been agreed around public lighting. In reply to Cllr. O’Riordan he said the Council would 
not generally get involved unless the property was a social house.  
C. Hartley said the Tenant Handbook sets out the obligations of the tenant in relation to the 
tenancy and said action can been taken in conjunction with the Environmental Team where a 
build-up of rubbish has occurred. 
M. Quinn, DoS said St Declan’s Way is a project that has great potential but currently there 
are no resources available. 
 
5.  Draft SPC Scheme 2024-2029 
 
I. Grimes, DoS introduced the Draft Strategic Policy Committee Scheme. Following a period 
of public consultation which resulted in twelve submissions the SPC Scheme was before the 
Members for approval. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. McGuinness, seconded by Cllr. Phelan and agreed by all. 
 
6. Festival & Events Funding Policy 
 
M. Quinn, DoS presented the Festival & Events Funding Policy. Following a review of the 
current policy and adoption by the Economic Development & Enterprise SPC it’s approval by 
the members is sought. The adoption of the change to the policy objectives to include the 
objective on sustainability ‘Festivals and events should be encouraged and supported to 
become more sustainable across all areas including Energy, Travel & Transport, Materials & 
Waste, Food & Beverage, Water, Nature & Biodiversity, and Governance’. The continuation 
of multi-annual funding over three years to the designated Flagship Festivals, which includes 
Waterford Festival of Food, Spraoi, Blackwater Valley Opera Festival, Waterford Walls and 
Winterval. 
 
Cllrs. Kelly, Roche, Griffin, Phelan and Hearne raised questions in relation to opportunities 
available to other festivals, funding smaller less economically viable festivals, funding full cost 
of Winterval, additional funding to cover Waterford’s designation  as European city of 
Christmas 2024,  the holding of both Spraoi and the All Together Now Festival over the August 
Bank Holiday Weekend,  the different levels of funding of the Flagship Festivals and the cost 

of Hotel accommodation during festivals/events. All queries raised were addressed by M. 
Quinn, DoS.                                                                                                                                                           
 
Proposed by Cllr. Kelly, seconded by Cllr. Roche and agreed by all. 
 
7. Mount Congreve Funding Proposal 
 
S. McKeown, CE recommended the approval of a loan of €750,000 to Mount Congreve. The 
loan is to assist the Board complete works that are underway for additional accommodation 
units and to cover cash flow issues that have risen as a result of lower-than-expected visitor 
numbers. The loan if approved will have no adverse impact on services or other projects. He 
said there are 30 people employed at Mount Congreve. He said tourism is an important sector 
for Waterford and Mount Congreve will become a major visitor attraction over time.  
 
In proposing the Chief Executive’s recommendation Cllr. O’Leary described Mount Congreve 
as an international attraction which has benefited the local economy enormously and called on 
the Members to support the proposal.  
Cllr. Clune seconded the proposal referring to the strategic importance of Mount Congreve in 
terms of a world class visitor attraction and the long-term benefits of such for Waterford and 
the South East Region, the funding already provided, ensuring the job security for the 30 
employees and the fact that services will not be impacted by the proposal.  
 
Concerns were raised by Cllr. Daniels,  Cllr. Donal Barry,  Cllr. McGuinness, Cllr. Hearne, 
Cllr. Roche and Cllr. Fitzgerald primarily in relation to the lack of documentation, audit 
accounts, business plan, review of operations and use of funds provided to date. 
 
M. Quinn, DoS and S. McKeown, CE addressed the concerns raised. 
 
An amendment was proposed by Cllr. Daniels and seconded by Cllr. McGuinness to separate 
the capital element of the loan and only provide support for cash flow.  
 
A roll call vote on the amendment was requested. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Name: 
In Favour 
Against 
Abstain 
Absent 
Joeanne Bailey (SF) 
√ 
 
 
 
Declan Barry (Ind) 
 
√ 
 
 
      Donal Barry (Ind) 
√ 
 
 
 
Liam Brazil (FG) 
 
√ 
 
 
Catherine Burke (SF) 
√ 
 
 
 
Declan Clune (Ind) 
 
√ 
 
 
Joe Conway (Ind) 
 
√ 
 
 
Tom Cronin (FF) 
 
√ 
 
 
Conor D. McGuinness 
(SF) 
√ 
 
 
 
David Daniels (Ind) 
√ 
 
 
 
Jim D’Arcy (FG) 
 
√ 
 
 
Pat Fitzgerald (SF) 
√ 
 
 
 
Damien Geoghegan 
(FG) 
 
√ 
 
 
Jim Griffin (SF) 
√ 
 
 
 
Blaise Hannigan (Ind) 
 
√ 
 
 
John Hearne (SF) 
√ 
 
 
 
Joe Kelly (Ind) 
 
√ 
 
 
Donnchadh Mulcahy 
(SF) 
√ 
 
 
 
Jason Murphy (FF) 
 
√ 
 
 
Pat Nugent (FG) 
 
√ 
 
 
Niamh O’Donovan (FG) 
 
√ 
 
 
John O’Leary (FF) 
 
√ 
 
 
Lola O’Sullivan (FG) 
 
 
 
√ 
Joe O’Riordan (Ind) 
√ 
 
 
 
Thomas Phelan (Lab) 
 
√ 
 
 
Seanie Power (FG) 
 
√ 
 
 
John Pratt (Lab) 
 
√ 
 
 
Eamon Quinlan (FF) 
 
√ 
 
 
Frank Quinlan (FG) 
 
√ 
 
 
Mary Roche (SD) 
√ 
 
 
 
Seamus Ryan (Lab) 
 
√ 
 
 
Adam Gary Wyse (FF) 
 
√ 
 
 
TOTAL 
11 
20 
 
1 
 
The Amendment was rejected by 20 votes to 11. 
 

A roll call vote on the proposal of a loan of €750,000 to Mount Congreve was requested. 
 
Name: 
In Favour 
Against 
Abstain 
Absent 
Joeanne Bailey (SF) 
 
 
√ 
 
Declan Barry (Ind) 
√ 
 
 
 
      Donal Barry (Ind) 
 
 
√ 
 
Liam Brazil (FG) 
√ 
 
 
 
Catherine Burke (SF) 
 
 
√ 
 
Declan Clune (Ind) 
√ 
 
 
 
Joe Conway (Ind) 
√ 
 
 
 
Tom Cronin (FF) 
√ 
 
 
 
Conor D. McGuinness (SF) 
 
 
√ 
 
David Daniels (Ind) 
 
 
√ 
 
Jim D’Arcy (FG) 
√ 
 
 
 
Pat Fitzgerald (SF) 
 
 
√ 
 
Damien Geoghegan (FG) 
√ 
 
 
 
Jim Griffin (SF) 
 
√ 
 
 
Blaise Hannigan (Ind) 
√ 
 
 
 
John Hearne (SF) 
 
√ 
 
 
Joe Kelly (Ind) 
 
 
√ 
 
Donnchadh Mulcahy (SF) 
 
√ 
 
 
Jason Murphy (FF) 
√ 
 
 
 
Pat Nugent (FG) 
√ 
 
 
 
Niamh O’Donovan (FG) 
√ 
 
 
 
John O’Leary (FF) 
√ 
 
 
 
Lola O’Sullivan (FG) 
 
 
 
√ 
Joe O’Riordan (Ind) 
 
 
√ 
 
Thomas Phelan (Lab) 
√ 
 
 
 
Seanie Power (FG) 
√ 
 
 
 
John Pratt (Lab) 
√ 
 
 
 
Eamon Quinlan (FF) 
√ 
 
 
 
Frank Quinlan (FG) 
√ 
 
 
 
Mary Roche (SD) 
√ 
 
 
 
Seamus Ryan (Lab) 
√ 
 
 
 
Adam Gary Wyse (FF) 
√ 
 
 
 
TOTAL 
20 
3 
8 
1 
 
The proposal of a loan of €750,000 to Mount Congreve was carried by 20 votes to 3 with 8 
abstaining. 

8. Correspondence 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Conway, seconded by Cllr. Roche and agreed by all. 
 
9. Notice of Motions 
 
Emergency Motion in the names of Cllrs. O’Riordan, Phelan, Conway, Kelly, Daniels, Barry, 
Clune, Hannigan, Ryann and Pratt. 
 
Waterford City & County Council calls on the Minister for Further and Higher 
Education, Innovation and Science, Patrick O’Donovan, to make a final determination 
on the new veterinary and pharmacy programmes for the South East Technological 
University before October 1st, so that arrangements can be made to commence such 
student registration by 1st September 2025. 
 
In proposing the motion Cllr. O’Riordan said Simon Harris as Minister for Further and Higher 
Education and the Government promised transformational funding for SETU to allow it to 
compete with the other regions of the Country to end the brain drain that sees two thirds of 
school leavers each year go outside the region for higher education courses. He said this has 
not happened and SETU is forced to compete for Technology University money which is 
inadequate. The college has demonstrated it is ready to provide new courses in veterinary, 
pharmacy and increase nursing places. The applications to demonstrate the ability of the 
College to provide the required standards for these courses have been submitted. Having 
veterinary training in the South East would eliminate the need for students to travel to Eastern 
Europe and University College Dublin and allow them along with students of pharmacy and 
nursing to train in their own Region which would end the significant income displacement 
which is taking place. 
 
The Mayor called for an extension of Standing Orders. Proposed by Cllr. Geoghegan, seconded 
by Cllr. Bailey and agreed by all. 
 
Cllr. Phelan seconded the motion saying it calls for investment with SETU so it is ready to take 
on this role of providing these new courses. He called for unanimous support for the motion.  
 
Proposed by Cllr. O’Riordan, seconded by Cllr. Phelan and agreed by all. 
 
10. AOB 
 
The Mayor noted that this year marks the 125th anniversary of the commencement of the 
Local Government Act 1898 and acknowledged the display in the Atrium. 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
Signed:_____________________ 
 
 
Dated:_____________ 
Mayor of Waterford City & County  
 
 
 
 
