 
 
                        COMHAIRLE CATHRACH AGUS CONTAE PHORT LÁIRGE 
WATERFORD CITY AND COUNTY COUNCIL 
 
COUNCIL MEETING HELD ON 8th FEBRUARY 2024 IN COUNCIL CHAMBER, 
CITY HALL, WATERFORD.  
 
Present 
 
Cllr. Joe Conway (Mayor) 
Cllr. Cristiona Kiely 
Cllr. Jim Griffin 
Cllr. Conor McGuinness 
Cllr. Liam Brazil  
Cllr. Jason Murphy 
Cllr. Joeanne Bailey 
Cllr. Seanie Power 
Cllr. Lola O’Sullivan 
Cllr. John Pratt 
Cllr. Tom Cronin 
Cllr. Thomas Phelan 
Cllr. Jody Power 
Cllr. Seamus O’Donnell 
Cllr. Pat Fitzgerald 
Cllr. Eamon Quinlan 
Cllr. Damien Geoghegan 
Cllr. John O’Leary 
Cllr. John Hearne 
Cllr. Donal Barry 
Cllr. Stephanie Keating 
Cllr. Pat Nugent 
Cllr. Ger Barron 
Cllr. Joe Kelly 
Cllr. Adam Wyse, 
Cllr. Mairead Tobin 
Cllr. Declan Clune 
Cllr. Frank Quinlan 
Cllr. Declan Doocey 
 
 
Apologies: Cllr. David Daniels, Cllr. Mary Roche, Cllr. Seamus Ryan.  
 
Officials in Attendance 
 
Mr. M. Walsh, Chief Executive 
Mr. I. Grimes, Director of Services, Housing 
Mr. M. Quinn, Director of Services, Economic Development 
Mr. F. Galvin, Director of Services, Roads, Water & Environment 
Mr. B. Pollard, Head of Finance 
Mr. L. McGree, Senior Planner, Planning 
Ms. H. Dunphy, Meeting Administrator 
Ms. A. Flynn, Corporate  
 
Deputy Mayor Cllr. Declan Doocey commenced the chairing of the meeting  
 
1. Confirmation of Minutes 
 
Minutes of Plenary Meeting held on 11th January 2024 proposed by Cllr. Brazil, seconded by 
Cllr. Phelan and agreed by all. 
 
 
 
 
Item 
No. 1 

2. Matters Arising 
 
Cllr. McGuinness asked if any further correspondence was received from the Minister for 
Transport regarding the N25. 
Cllr. Kiely asked about the recording of Council Meetings and if the income from the recovery 
of rent arrears is ringfenced could it be used to fund the humidifier pilot scheme.  
Cllr. Phelan asked when meetings could resume in the Council Chamber in Dungarvan.  
Cllr. Wyse spoke to acknowledge the benefits of recording of Council meetings.  
 
Ms. H. Dunphy, Meeting Administrator said there was no further correspondence from the 
Minister of Transport. The Council Chamber in Dungarvan is undergoing works which should 
be completed by next month’s Plenary Meeting and said  in relation to the recordings of Council 
Meetings she would look at what other Local Authorities are doing. 
I. Grimes, DoS said the provision of humidifiers to tenants to tackle mould was under 
consideration.  
 
Cllr. Kelly asked if a letter of clarification had issued to ratepayers with B. Pollard, HoF 
confirming it had. 
 
Cllr. Murphy spoke to support the provision of humidifiers. 
 
3.  Land Disposals 
 
L. McGree, SP, outlined details of the disposal of premises at 2 Bernard Place for approval. 
Proposed by Cllr. Phelan and seconded by Cllr. J. Power and agreed by all.   
 
M. Quinn, DoS outlined details of the disposal of 0.93 acres at Kilmacthomas Mill for approval. 
 
Cllr. Kelly queried the sale price.  
M. Quinn, DoS said the site was independently valued and was satisfied with the sale price. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Barron and seconded by Cllr. S. Power and agreed by all. 
 
4.  Monthly Management Report 
 
Cllr. Barry asked about the outsourcing of private rental accommodation inspections, estate 
management and enquired if  the end of year SICAP review with the Community Development 
Committee had taken place and if this report could be published. 
Cllr. Hearne enquired about the affordable housing scheme and whose responsibility it is to 
remedy any defects and asked if the Council’s funding to The Kingfisher Club could be looked 
at to ensure rates continue to be affordable for old age pensioners. 
Cllr. McGuinness noted the funding allocation of €500,000 from the National Transport 
Authority and asked how the money will be spent and requested a workshop to discuss. He 
asked for an update on the provision of affordable serviced sites and enquired about the impact 
of the €2m cut to funding under the Leader Programme. He asked how many companies the 
Council has an interest in and how these companies are operated. 
 
I. Grimes, DoS said he would revert with the cost of  the contract in relation to private rental 
accommodation inspections saying it was the subject of open competition and is cost effective. 
The Estate Management Team are responsible for all aspects of estate management including 

anti-social behaviour. The SICAP report has yet to be approved and will look at making it 
available. He said new affordable houses would most likely be still under warranty and the 
developer should be contacted to address.  Based on discussions with the Department and on 
previous experience he is confident that the €2m cut to funding under the Leader Programme 
will be made up by the end of the Programme. 
M. Quinn, DoS said there are four companies we have control of  including Waterford 
Treasures, Splashworld & Mount Congreve and work with other entities in various ways. 
F. Galvin, DoS said in relation to the allocation of €500,000 for bus stop improvements that 
the NRA have asked that a draft programme be drawn up for their approval. The draft 
programme will be brought to the members at district level. 
L. McGree, SP said the process of identifying land in public ownership where services are 
available or can be easily provided has begun. In conjunction with the Housing Department the 
sites will be offered for sale to applicants to build houses for their own use. The provision of 
sites where services are not readily available will be a longer process. 
 
Cllr. Phelan welcomed the €500,000 funding allocation for bus stop improvements noting the 
requirement also for adequate bus shelters to further encourage people to use public transport. 
He asked for clarification that social housing is not allocated to refugees. 
Cllr. Kiely raised the issue of Casinos and the lack of regulation and enforcement around their 
operation referencing the issues around gambling addiction. She noted the presence of a cash 
machine without planning permission outside a casino in Tramore and a screen advertising 
casino games in breach of advertising standards and also without planning permission and 
asked that the Council ensure that casinos and amusement arcades have planning permission 
appropriate to their current operations. 
Cllr. O’Leary raised what he felt was an inconsistency between a person building their own 
home which must be within 10km of where they currently live and the allocation of social 
housing where this is not a consideration and if it were it would result in a fairer spread of 
where social housing is built and asked that this be brought to the Housing SPC for discussion. 
 
I. Grimes, DoS confirmed that that there has been no allocation of social houses to Ukrainian 
refugees and said the issue raised by Cllr. O’Leary  will be brought to the next meeting of the 
Housing SPC.  
L. McGree, SP will follow up on ATM in Tramore and revert. The register of gaming licenses 
is the responsibility of the Revenue Commissioners. The Planning Department will follow up 
on any premises not operating within current planning permission. 
 
Cllr. Kelly asked if the Council could write to the Manager of Waterford Regional Hospital  
about the possibility of providing a multi-storey carpark to address the parking situation at the 
hospital. He also asked about Housing Adaptation Grants and grants for those who are not 
Priority 1 cases.  
Cllr. J. Power enquired if Waterford still held the title of best place to live in Ireland. He asked 
about the post of Outdoor Recreation Officer, the Outdoor Recreation Plan and the resources 
that will be available. He asked if there were any initiatives to try to increase the number of 
schools participating in the Composting for Schools Programme. 
Cllr. Nugent asked if the Council had received a letter from the Cork Coroner following an 
inquest into a tragic drowning in Whiting Bay, Ardmore in April 2023 addressing the need for 
signage in relation to dangerous currents and riptides. 
 
M. Walsh,  CE said we did receive correspondence from the Coroner which has been forwarded 
to our Water Safety Officer.  

I. Grimes, DoS said in relation to Adaptation Grants that a framework has been put in place in 
the last 12 months which he hopes will be more cost effective resulting in Priority 2 cases being 
reached. He said allocating funds from our own resources could be looked at. 
F. Galvin, DoS said he would ask our Environmental Awareness Officer to try and prioritise  
the Composting for Schools Programme. 
M. Quinn, DoS said Waterford is still the best place to live, the award being for 5 years. The 
Outdoor Recreation Officer will be employed by Waterford Sports Partnership and will work 
in collaboration with the Council.  
Deputy Major noted correspondence request regarding the provision of a multi storey car park 
at UHW that a letter would issue through the Mayor’s Office. 
 
Cllr. Fitzgerald asked what percentage of  our older housing stock met environmental housing 
standards and also the time frame for the retrofitting of our public lights. He asked going 
forward that Community Grants be advertised in newspapers circulating in the east and west 
of the County. 
Cllr. Pratt proposed that we write to Minister Eamonn Ryan asking him to reverse the decision 
whereby just €365,000 of €25.2m funding in respect of Active Travel was allocated to rural 
projects, seconded by Cllr. McGuinness. As Chair of Local Link he welcomed the €500,000 
allocation for bus stop  improvements.  
Cllr. O’Donnell mentioned statements by the Members to the media. 
 
A five-minute recess was proposed by Cllr. Geoghegan, seconded by Cllr. Keating and agreed 
by all. 
 
Mayor Cllr. Conway took over the chairing of the meeting after the recess.   
 
I. Grimes, DoS said environmental standards compliance is not recorded but the Management 
Report does show data in relation to planned and reactive inspections of our housing stock. The 
issue of the advertising of Community Grants in one newspaper only will be addressed. The 
Community Department have contact details for every group who would previously have 
received grants and these groups are notified when new schemes are advertised. The Public 
Participation Network (PPN) would also notify the various groups registered with them. 
M. Walsh, CE said the public lighting retrofit scheme should commence towards the middle of 
this year. 
F. Galvin, DoS said a letter to the Minister in relation to Active Travel would issue.  
 
Cllr. Murphy spoke about anti-social behaviour and the issues that people have which often 
lead to anti-social behaviour such as mental health problems and asked what level of 
communication the Council’s Estate Management Team has with the various agencies whose 
responsibility it is to support those with mental health illness etc. and are those agencies 
providing the required support to these people. 
Cllr. E. Quinlan asked if the council could seek funding to build extensions to houses to tackle 
overcrowding and if the Local Enterprise Office would consider employing a person from the 
Ukrainian Community. He asked for better communication from the Council in relation to how 
the Council works with BAM in relation to decision making as regards works being carried out 
on the North Quays noting that residents in Ferrybank are concerned about the level of control 
the construction company appears to have in the area in relation to closing of roads etc.  
Cllr. O’Sullivan supported Cllr. Murphy in relation to anti-social behaviour and the mental 
health issues or otherwise often behind it and the lack of support for these people. She   

asked that the Council consider having Eircodes spray painted onto public buildings to facilitate 
emergency calls. 
 
I. Grimes, DoS said in relation to anti-social behaviour there are many cases which are the 
result of mental health or addiction problems and it can be challenging to get these people to 
engage with services. Our relationship with the other agencies such as the Garda, HSE and 
Tulsa is strong and we work with them on a day-to-day basis on some very difficult and 
complex cases. He said he would look for funding for extensions from the Department  and 
said the provision of English language classes is part of the Ukrainian Community Response. 
M. Quinn, DoS said that there is no Ukrainian speaker in the Local Enterprise Office but could 
avail of the services of one in the Ukrainian Community if necessary. BAM have been 
commissioned to construct all the access infrastructure, a contract has been signed and work 
approved so all the activity on the North Quays is at the Council’s direction. 
M. Walsh, CE said the Council would consider Cllr. O’Sullivan’s suggestion of  having 
Eircodes spray painted onto public buildings noting that putting signage on heritage buildings 
might be difficult. 
 
Cllr. Keating enquired if the Urban Facade Improvement Scheme could be extended to include 
areas other than Waterford City, Dungarvan and Tramore. She requested an update on the speed 
limit review and referring to an older person who had been informed that details in relation to 
an abandoned car had to come via email she said we need to be mindful of ensuring access to 
services for older people who may not have access to email. 
Cllr. S. Power supported Cllr. Pratt’s call for a letter to issue to Minister Ryan as regards 
Waterford’s  Active Travel allocation of €25.2m expressing his disappointment at the lack of 
funds for rural areas. 
Cllr. Bailey asked how many extensions to property have been carried out and enquired about 
those  people for who extensions were refused, how long must they wait  on the transfer list for 
an allocation to a bigger property and asked that this be brought to the Housing SPC for 
discussion. In relation to the requirement for quotes to accompany a Housing Adaptation Grant 
Application she asked if the name and contact details of Companies who could carry out the 
work be made available on our website for the convenience of applicants who are generally 
older people. 
 
M. Quinn, DoS noted the Urban Facade Improvement Scheme was open to all urban centres 
and will have this clarified. 
F. Galvin, DoS noted the Department has requested that the speed limit review be stalled 
pending new guidelines and the process will resume following further direction from the 
Department. Outlined that information regarding abandoned cars is accepted over the phone as 
well as by email.  
I. Grimes, DoS said the length of time a person is on the Housing Transfer List varies depending 
on location noting that overcrowding is one of the  priority areas taking in to account when 
making allocations. Quotes are required in relation to an Housing Adaptation Grant Application 
but given the difficulty people are experiencing in getting them he will have it reviewed.   
 
Cllr. Clune asked for clarification in relation to the cutting of Active Travel Projects in rural 
areas noting that he has been informed by the NTA that there has been no change in policy in 
terms of active travel funding for urban and rural areas.  
Cllr. Griffin enquired if the further properties to be advertised on Choice Based Letting at Gorse 
Hill, Ballygunner are also specially adapted and if so could egress from the estate be looked at 

for people with mobility issues. He asked if the letter to UHW could include a request that the 
Mortuary and Mortuary Chapel be put in use. 
 
I. Grimes, DoS confirmed five properties in the estate will be specially adapted and will discuss 
infrastructure with F. Galvin, DoS, Roads, Water & Environment. 
F. Galvin, DoS said in the early years of the Active Travel Programme in Waterford most of 
the investment went into rural areas whereas now the Council has been asked to prioritise the 
larger scale projects in Waterford City, Dungarvan and Tramore which the NTA would 
consider to be more impactful in providing alternative sustainable transport methods for people. 
   
 5.  Climate Action Plan – for approval 
 
Climate Action Plan proposed by Cllr. Hearne and seconded by Cllr. Phelan and agreed by 
all. 
 
6.  Draft Housing Allocation Scheme for Social Housing Supports – for approval 
 
I. Grimes, DoS said the Draft Housing Allocation Scheme had two changes, the application of 
a Gaeltacht Residential Qualification to the order of priority and the Financial Contribution 
Scheme/Private Rightsizing 
 
Cllrs. Phelan, Bailey, F. Quinlan, McGuinness, Barry and Keating raised queries in relation to 
some sections of the draft scheme. 
Cllr. Clune proposed a workshop to allow for further discussion. 
I. Grimes, DoS agreed to the holding of a workshop and bringing the Draft Housing Allocation 
Scheme back to the Members for approval at the next Plenary Meeting. 
 
 7.  Draft Anti-Social Behaviour Policy 2024 – for approval 
 
I. Grimes, DoS said the Draft Anti-Social Behaviour Policy 2024 sets out our  principal 
objectives and the legislation available to deal with Anti-Social Behaviour. Action taken by the 
Council in relation to anti-social behaviour include arranging for mediation between 
neighbours, arranging for individuals to attend anger management classes and the issue of  
Tenancy Warnings. 
 
Cllrs. Wyse, Phelan, O’Sullivan, McGuinness, Kelly, Murphy and J. Power welcomed the 
Policy and noted the following:- training for Staff and Councillors around mental health issues, 
meetings with An Garda Siochana and other Agencies to share information, timeframe for the 
anti-social behaviour process, the criminality of some anti-social behaviour, Excluding Orders, 
engagement with Approved Housing Bodies, the perceived non-effectiveness of  the policy, 
how social tenants benefit from having such a policy and the measures to “design -out” Anti-
Social Behaviour. 
 
I. Grimes, DoS responded to comments as outlined. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Wyse and seconded by Cllr. McGuinness and agreed by all. 
 
 
 
 

8. Annual Service Plan 2024 – for approval 
 
In introducing the Annual Service Plan 2024 M. Walsh, CE said it is a statement of the 
objectives of each section across the organisation and recommended the document for 
adoption. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. Phelan and seconded by Cllr. Barron and agreed by all. 
 
9. Correspondence 
  
Proposed by Cllr. Pratt and seconded by Cllr. Kelly and agreed by all. 
 
10. Notice of Motions 
 
Motion in the name of Cllr. Pat Nugent  
  
“That Waterford City & County Council considers deploying the necessary resources to make 
a robust application to the Large-Scale Sports Infrastructure Fund for a community swimming 
pool & gym in Dungarvan when the application window opens.  
 
Waterford City & County Council further resolves to consider meeting the match funding 
element under the terms of the application process by including the project, which is a strategic 
objective of the Waterford City & County Development Plan, in its capital plan 2022-2028.”  
 
Reg. No.  PJ/2024/239    (dated 23rd January 2024) 
 
In proposing the motion Cllr. Nugent said the project would provide community recreational 
facilities, support tourism, support local businesses and promote lifelong learning and implored 
the Members to see the value of the investment for the future. 
Cllr. Phelan seconded the motion noting that it is an objective of the City & County 
Development Plan and the  Large-Scale Sports Infrastructure Fund now presents an opportunity 
to achieve this objective. 
 
Cllrs. McGuinness, Cronin, Pratt, Doocey, Brazil and Hearne spoke in support of the motion. 
Cllr. Geoghegan said the feasibility study into the provision of a swimming pool in Dungarvan 
should be made public and noted a discussion around the cost is required. 
Cllr. O’Donnell said he could not support the motion expressing concerns in relation to the 
amount of money that would be required. 
 
M. Walsh, CE said he could not support an application to the Large-Scale Sports Infrastructure 
Fund with no provision made for it in the Capital Programme and  questioned the project’s 
financial viability. However he said the Capital Programme and expenditure therein is a matter 
for the Members. He said he can review the Capital Programme to include this project which 
would mean taking out proposals already there to the value of €8M or €10M  if that is what the 
Members wish but in the absence of this he said there will be no application to the Large-Scale 
Sports Infrastructure Fund.  
 
The Members voted in favour of adopting the motion by a majority show of hands. 
 
 

11. AOB 
 
Cllr. J. Power asked where there are a number of reports on the Agenda if these documents 
could be distributed earlier. 
Ms. H. Dunphy, Meeting Administrator said notification of meeting and agenda are set down 
in the Plenary Standing Orders. 
 
This concluded the business of the meeting. 
 
 
 
Signed: ____________________________________ 
 
Dated: _______________  
Mayor of Waterford City & County Council 
 
