Municipal District Muinebheag
Minutes of the
Municipal District of Muinebheag Meeting
held on Wednesday, 3rd December 2025 at 4.00 p.m.
in the Meeting Room, McGrath Hall, Muinebheag, Co. Carlow
Members Present: Cllr. Daniel Pender — Cathaoirleach
In Attendance:
Cllr. Michael Doran — Leas Cathaoirleach
Cllr. Tommy Kinsella
Cllr. Willie Quinn (remote)
Cllr. Andy Gladney
Mr. Pådraig O'Gorman, Director of Services, Transport & Infrastructure
Ms. Lilly Slye, Senior Executive Engineer
Ben Woodhouse, A/Chief Fire Officer
Tadhg Madden, A/Senior Executive Officer, Housing
Tommie Hickson, Meeting Administrator
Cllr. Daniel Pender, Cathaoirleach, welcomed everyone to the meeting.
1. Confirmation of Draft Minutes
1.1
1.2
To Approve Minutes of Muinebheag Municipal District of Muinebheag
Draft Budgetary Plan (General Municipal Allocation) 2026 held on
Wednesday, 22nd October at 3,30 p.m.
Resolved on the proposal of Cllr. Andy Gladney and seconded by Cllr. Tormny
Kinsella, following a show of hands that the draft minutes of the Municipal
District of Muinebheag Draft Budgetary Plan (General Municipal Allocation)
2026 hetd on the 22nd October 2025 be confirmed as accurate and taken as
read.
All agreed
To Approve Minutes of Muinebheag Municipal District meeting held on
Wednesday, 22nd October 2025 at 4.00 p.m.
Resolved on the proposal of Cllr. Andy Gladney and seconded by Cllr. Michael
Doran, foflowing a show of hands that the draft minutes of the Municipal Dictrict
of Muinebheag Draft Budgetary Plan (General Municipal Allocation) 2026 held
on the 22nd October 2025 be confirmed as accurate and taken as read.
All agreed
Page 1 of 6
Municipal District Muinebheag
2. Business Prescribed by Statue, Standing Orders or Resolutions of the
Municipal District Members for Transaction at such meeting
3. Consideration of Reports and Recommendations
3.1
3.2
Town Centre First Plan Update
Pådraig O'Gorman, Director of Service gave an update on this project. He
confirmed that very successful workshops were held on the 2nd December and
good feedback has been received from the consultants. Nicola Lawler, Town
Regeneration Officer, has advised that the next step in the process will be
Public Consultation. The Town Centre First team will approve any proposals
and it is expected that this will be complete by end of January 2026. Nicola
requested to meet with the Members prior to signing off on any approval, and
proposed Wednesday, 28th January 2026.
Pådraig O'Gorman then requested that the first Municipal District of
Muinebheag meeting in 2026 is brought forward to Wednesday, 28th January
2026. This would be a full Municipal District meeting held at the normal time of
4.00 p.m.
Cllr. Michael Doran acknowledged that this was a very proactive campaign and
he was delighted with the engagement received. However, he was
disappointed with the support from the public.
Cllr. Andy Gladney agreed with Cllr. Doran and said that overall it was a va.ry
good meeting.
Pådraig O'Gorman highlighted several very good projects which give great
scope for linkages and well planned green areas.
Cllr. Daniel Pender acknowledged that it was a poor turnout from the public.
However, it was well advertised and this plan will create opportunities to apply
for further funding applications in the future.
The proposal to bring the first Municipal District of Muinebheag meeting in 2026
forward to Wednesday, 28th January 2026 was agreed by all.
Housing Progress Report
Tadhg Madden, A/Senior Executive Officer, gave the Housing Progress
Report as follows:-
Ballyknockan, Leighlinbridge completed and allocated
Bilboa complete and allocation complete before year end
Ballymurphy at design proposal
Borris housing allocation in January 2026
Page 2 of 6
3.3
Municipal District Muinebheag
The following queries were raised:-
Future projects/sites
Waiting list
3 bed houses in Borris
Town Centre sites with services
Health Centre in Tlnnahinch
Ballyknockan Manor street lighting
Ballyknockan snag list
Housing grants
All queries were answered.
Muinebheag Fire Station Refurbishment Update
Ben Woodhouse, A/Chief Fire Officer gave this report. He acknowledged {hat
the project has taken longer than he had hoped, but he is thrilled to have
received approval from the Department dated 28/11/2025 in the amount of
€2,788,244 for the refurbishment and extension of Bagenalstown Fire Station.
A lot of work has gone into this application, and when additional works were
identified, it was decided to apply for extra funding of €1,396,000 which has
now been granted. This project will involve the refurbishment of the current
site, avoiding dereliction, and is fantastic news for Bagenalstown. It will be
aesthetically pleasing from the outside for the public to enjoy, but more
importantly, it will bring Bagenalstown Fires Services into the future. Ben
emphasised that this report was an update only, and will need to go through the
full Part VIII process. The elected members will be notified in due course.
Ben also highlighted the arrival of two new vehicles which will be launched on
the 4th December. The first is a HGV Combined Prime Mover and Hi-Aby fuelled
by hydro treated vegetable Oil (HVO). This will replace two old heavy diesel
HGVs. The second vehicle is a 100% electric van. Both vehicles will contribute
to Carlow County Council's Climate Action Plan by reducing our carbon
emissions and improving local air quality.
The following queries were raised:-
•
Part Vill
Fire Engine callouts
Rural areas
Insurance
Drones
All queries were answered.
The members thanked Ben and his team for the tremendous work being done
and congratulated him for blazing a trail for others to follow. They acknowledged
the valuable service that our Fire Service provides to the community, ortan
under extremely difficult circumstances.
Page 3 of 6
3.4
3.5
Municipal District Muinebheag
Bagenalstown Cemetery Expansion Proposal Update
Pådraig O'Gorman gave an update on the proposed expansion of
Bagenalstown Cemetery. He advised that the Part VIII process was coming to
a conclusion and will be included on the Agenda for consideration at next
week's meeting of Carlow County Council. When it is approved, it can then go
to tender stager Although this has been quite a complicated project, a lot oi
work has been completed in the background in preparation for works to begin
early summer, approximately. He would like to take the opportunity to thank the
landowner who has always been very patient throughout this process.
The following queries were raised:-
Capacity of cemetery
Columbarium wall
o Parking
St. Mullins cemetery
Tinnahinch cemetery
• Ballinkillen cemetery
All queries were answered.
MD Roads Report
Lilly Slye, Senior Executive Engineer gave the roads report update. She
confirmed that the programme was now complete.
The following queries were raised:-
• Wall & carpark in Milford
• Milford Cross
Gullies in housing estates
Stop signs
• Local Emprovement Schemes
Ali queries were answered.
4. Notices of Motion
4.1 Standing in the name of Cllr. Daniel Pender
"That the Councillors of the Municipal District of Muinebheag cail on Carlow
County Council to develop and carry out plans to acquire a new carpark to serve
the public in Bagenalstown"
Proposed by Councillor: D. Pender
Seconded by Councillor: M. Doran
And agreed following a show of hands
Page 4 of 6
4.2
Municipal District Muinebheag
Pådraig O'Gorman confirmed that he would write to Irish Rail and enquire ii it
is possible for them to open more of their carpark to the public, or, extend
area that is already there.
Standing in the name of Cllr. Daniel Pender
"The Municipal District asks that the speed limit review be expedited to deal
with dangerous sections of road raised previously by Council Members"
Proposed by Councillor: D. Pender
Seconded by Councillor: M. Doran
And agreed following a show of hands
Pådraig OGorman responded to the above motion. He advised that details
had been received from the Roads Department confirming that the process hac
commenced, with several steps required, and a deadline of March 2027. This
response will be circulated to the members.
5.
6.
Correspondence
None
Any Other Business
Lease on lands at McGrath Hall to Bagenalstown Area Community Development
Group/Bagenalstown Community Garden - Noted
The possibility of 'Twinning' opportunities abroad was discussed. It was agreed
to extend an invitation to Pont Pean to visit Carlow. Pådraig O'Gorman confirmed
that he would contact Michael Brennan, Director of Service in relation to these
discussions.
The next meeting is scheduled for Wednesday, 28th January 2026
This concluded the business of the meeting
Page 5 of 6
Municipal District Muinebheag
Signed:
Signed:
Cllr. Daniel Pender
Cathaoirleach
Meetings Administrator
Page 6 of 6
Date:
Date:
01 QI.)