 
 
Minutes of February Meeting of Carlow County Council held in the 
Council Chamber, County Offices, Athy Road, Carlow  
on Monday 9th February 2026 at 2.00 p.m. 
 
 
Present:  
 
Councillor K. Murnane, Cathaoirleach 
 
 
 
Councillor F. Browne 
Councillor J. Cassin  
 
 
 
Councillor A. Dalton   
 
 
 
Councillor J. Deane 
 
 
 
Councillor P. Doogue 
 
 
 
 
Councillor M. Doran 
Councillor A. Gladney                                                                                                     
 
 
 
Councillor T. Kinsella 
Councillor C. Murphy 
Councillor B. O’Donoghue Remotely 
Councillor W. Paton   
Councillor D. Pender  
Councillor J. Pender  
Councillor F. Phelan 
Councillor W. Quinn   
Councillor A. Wallace  
Councillor B. Ward 
 
 
In attendance:   
Mr. C. O’Reilly, Chief Executive 
 
 
Mr. P. O’Gorman, Director of Service 
 
 
Ms. P. O’Brien, Director of Service 
 
 
M. Brennan, Director of Service 
 
 
Mr. P. J. Leonard, Director of Finance 
 
 
Ms. F. O’Neill, A/Director of Service 
 
 
 Ms. F. Byrne, Senior Executive Officer 
 
 
 Ms. M. Griffin, Administrative Officer  
Ms. C. Healy, Staff Officer 
Ms. J. O’Brien, Climate Action Coordinator 
Mr. L. Carroll, Senior Executive Officer,  
Mr. D. Hayde, Administrative Officer 
Mr. K. Comerford, Head of Economic Development & Enterprise  
Ms. A. Sweeney, Senior Planner  Remotely 
Ms. O. Barrett, Senior Engineer Remotely 
Mr. N. Dillon, A/Senior Engineer Remotely 
Mr. N. Barrett, Senior Executive Engineer Remotely 
Mr. T. Madden, A/Senior Executive Officer Remotely 
 
 
Ms. S. O’Neill, A/Senior Executive Officer Remotely 
 
 
Ms. N. Lawler, Senior Executive Officer Remotely 
 
 
Mr. B. Knowles, Senior Executive Officer Remotely 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed everyone to the meeting. 
 
 
Votes of Sympathy 
Timmons family on the death of Mary Timmons, Henry Street, Graiguecullen. 
Mrs. Elizabeth Walker and family on the death of Thomas Walker of Idrone 
Park, Tullow Rd, Carlow.  
Deere Family on the death of Elizabeth Deere, Bridge Street, Carlow,  
Mrs. Margaret Carr and family on the death of Michael Carr of New Oak Estate, 
Carlow. 
Mr. John Doyle & family on the death of Caroline Doyle, Raheendoran, Carlow. 
Broughall Family on the death of Ina Broughall, Beech Park, Blackrock, Co. 
Louth  
Mr. John Deverill & family on the death of Angela Deverill, Mountain View, 
Myshall, Co Carlow. 
Nolan family on the death of Sheila Nolan, St Fiacc’s Terrace, Graiguecullen, 
Carlow. 
 
 
 
 
1.0 Confirmation of Minutes/Dearbhú Miontuairiscí 
 
Approval of Minutes of monthly meeting of Carlow County Council held on 
Monday, 12th January 2026 
 
Proposed by Cllr. W. Quinn, 
Seconded by Cllr. M. Doran, 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That the Minutes of the monthly meeting of Carlow County Council held in the 
Council Chamber on Monday 12th January 2026 at 2.00 p.m. having been 
circulated to each Member, be taken as read, confirmed as to accuracy and 
accordingly signed”. 
 
 
Emergency Motion 
Motion for purpose of dealing with urgent business (Standing Order No 20) 
Under the terms of Standing Order No. 20, the consent of at least nine 
Members was required to allow the motion to be discussed, which was agreed. 
 
A group of IFA members entered the meeting. 
 

 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach read out the Emergency Notice of Motion. 
Proposed by Cllr. B. Ward, 
Seconded by Cllr. P. Doogue 
And agreed following a show of hand. 
“That Carlow County Council ask the Minister for Agriculture, Food and the 
Marine to intervene in the Board Bia dispute and ask its Chairman Larry Murrin 
to step aside.” 
 
It was further agreed to circulate a copy of this Notice of Motion to the 
Taoiseach and Tánaiste.  
 
The IFA members left and the meeting resumed. 
 
 
2.0  Business prescribed by Statute, Standing Orders or 
Resolutions of Council/Gnó forordaithe do réir reachtaíochta, 
orduithe seasta, nó rúin an Chomhairle 
 
21.  Approval of Audit Committee Annual Report 2025 
Susan Kearney, Chairperson of the Audit Committee, presented the Audit 
Committee Annual Report 2025, Audit Committee Charter 2026 and Audit 
Committee Work Programme 2026 and answered questions raised by the 
members. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. J. Deane, 
Seconded by Cllr. D. Pender, 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council approve the Audit Committee 
Annual Report 2025.” 
 
2.2  Approval of Audit Committee Charter 2026 
 
Proposed by Cllr. J. Deane, 
Seconded by Cllr. D. Pender, 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council approve the Audit Committee 
Charter 2026.” 
 
2.3  Approval of Audit Committee Work Programme 2026 
 
Proposed by Cllr. J. Deane, 
Seconded by Cllr. D. Pender, 

 
 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council approve the Audit Committee 
Work Programme 2026.” 
 
2.4   Approval of Annual Service Delivery Plan 2026 
Questions raised by the members on the Annual Service Delivery Plan were 
answered by the Management Team. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. F. Phelan, 
Seconded by Cllr. P. Doogue, 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council hereby approve the Annual 
Service Delivery Plan 2026 
 
2.5  Planning & Development Act 2000 - Section 211, Local Government 
Act 2001 - Section 183 (1) - Disposal of land contained in Folio CW11257F 
(0.0120 Hectares) at 8 Castle Hill, Carlow. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. J. Cassin 
Seconded by Cllr. A. Gladney 
And agreed following a show of hands 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council hereby approve in 
accordance with Planning & Development Act 2000, Section 211, Local 
Government Act 2001, Section 183 (1) the disposal of site and premises situate 
at and known as 8 Castlehill, Carlow, a plot of ground being part of the 
Townland of Carlow, measuring 0.0120 Hectares, registered under Folio 
CW11257F in consideration of the sum of €137,000 to Luke Connors, Tullow 
Road, Carlow, in accordance with the statutory notice as circulated.  The 
consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not 
necessary in this disposal.” 
 
2.6  Planning & Development Act, 2000 – Section 211 Local Government 
Act 2001 – Section 183 (1) - Lease of Lands at Woodview, Main Street, 
Borris, Co. Carlow, R95C982 
 
Proposed by Cllr. T. Kinsella, 
Seconded by Cllr. W. Quinn, 
And agreed following a show of hands 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council hereby approve in 
accordance with Planning & Development Act 2000, Section 211, Local 
Government Act 2001, Section 183 (1) the grant of a 15 year lease of 0.2 of an 

 
 
acre of land as per Folio No. CW28938F at Woodview, Main Street, Borris to 
Carlow  Community Enterprise Centres CLG in consideration of the sum of 
€100 per annum (Carlow Community Enterprise Centres CLG will be 
responsible for both their own and the Council’ legal costs) in accordance with 
the statutory notice as circulated.  The consent of the Minister for Housing, 
Local Government and Heritage is not necessary in this lease.” 
 
 
2.7  Planning & Development Act, 2000 – Section 211 Local Government 
Act 2001 – Section 183 (1) - Lease of Lands at O’Brien Road Carlow 
 
Proposed by Cllr. F. Browne, 
Seconded by Cllr. A. Dalton, 
And agreed following a show of hands 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council hereby approve in 
accordance with Planning & Development Act 2000, Section 211, Local 
Government Act 2001, Section 183 (1) the grant of a 15 year lease of 1.163 of 
an acre of land at O’Brien Road, Carlow (Folios CW23596F/CW 
31379F/CW31415F) to Southeast Catalyst Innovation Company CLG (trading 
as Catalyst HQ) in consideration of the sum of €100 per annum.  Southeast 
Catalyst Innovation Company CLG (trading as Catalyst HQ) will be responsible 
for both their own and the Council’s legal costs) in accordance with the 
statutory notice as circulated.  The consent of the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage is not necessary in this disposal.” 
 
2.8  Proposed Loan to Southeast Catalyst Innovation Company CLG, 
trading as Catalyst HQ in respect of Campus on O’Brien Road , Carlow. 
K. Comerford briefed on the proposed loan to Southeast Catalyst Innovation 
Company CLG and answered questions raised by the members. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. M. Doran 
Seconded by Cllr. F. Phelan 
And agreed following a show of hands 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council pursuant to Section 66 (1) (a) 
of the Local Government Act 2001, approve a loan in the amount of €1,325,100 
for a 15-year term on a non-interest basis, to Southeast Catalyst Innovation 
Company CLG (T/a Catalyst HQ) for the development of Enterprise Campus on 
O’Brien Road, Carlow.” 
 
 
 
 

 
 
2.9  Implementation Report (2025) of Local Authority Climate Action Plan 
2024-2029  
 
J. O’Brien gave presentation to the members and answered questions raised. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. D. Pender 
Seconded by Cllr. F. Phelan 
And agreed following a show of hands. 
 
 
3.0  Consideration of Reports and Recommendations/Breithniú ar 
Thuarascálacha agus Mholtaí 
 
3.1  Presentation from Acquired Brain Injury Ireland at 4.30 p.m. 
Sarah Kavanagh and Sharon O’Neill, Acquired Brain Injury Ireland, gave a 
detailed presentation, Paul Flinter and Trish Doyle spoke about their Aphasia 
group and they answered questions raised by the elected members. 
 
The members thanked Sarah, Sharon, Paul and Trish for their presentations, 
who then left the meeting. 
 
3.2   Training and Conference Approvals 
 
Proposed by Cllr. F. Phelan, 
Seconded by Cllr. A. Dalton 
And agreed following a show of hands. 
 
Organise
d by 
Venue 
Theme 
Dates 
Fee 
AILG 
Hotel Kilkenny “From Policy to Practice; 
what Local Authorities in 
Ireland Can Offer to 
Support Disabled People 
and an Ageing 
Population”. 
21st February 
2026 
 
€100 
AILG 
Hotel Minella 
Annual Training 
Conference 2026 
22nd & 23rd April 
2026 
€190 
 
Extension of Time 
Proposed by Cllr. F. Phelan 
Seconded by Cllr. J. Cassin 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed: 
“We the members of Carlow County Council in accordance with Standing 
Orders, approve the continuation of the meeting until 6.00 p.m. 

 
 
4.0 Chief Executives Report/Tuarascáil an Phríomhfheidhmeannaigh 
Noted. 
 
5.0 Correspondence/Comhfhreagras 
Members noted response from MEP Walsh in relation to Notice of Motion 
passed at the November council meeting in relating to Mercosur. 
 
Members noted response from Caredoc in relation to Notice of Motion passed at 
the December council meeting. 
 
Members noted response from Office of the Secretary General to the President 
acknowledging council’s letter of best wishes following her Inauguration as 
President of Ireland. 
Members noted resolution passed by Sligo County Council expressing deep 
concern to the Government’s decision to ratify CETA and in particular, the 
Investor Court System (ICS) and calls for the Government to suspend Ireland’s 
participation in the ICS element of CETA pending a full, independent 
assessment of its impact on local authorities, public services, and environment 
protections. 
 
Members noted resolution passed by Offaly County Council calling on 
Government to instruct party MEPs to oppose adoption of the Mercosur Trade 
agreement when the agreement is presented at European Parliament. 
Members noted resolution passed by Tipperary County Council asking the 
Minister for Transport to ensure the compulsory wearing of hi visibility jackets by 
all E-Scooter and E Bike users, in addition to the lights they are already 
compelled to have on same said vehicles. 
 
Members noted request for AILG Speaking Time at Plenary Council Meeting.  It 
was agreed for AILG to address a meeting of Carlow County Council. 
 
6.0 Notices of Motion/Fógraí Rúin  
6.1 Standing in the name of Cllr. Adrienne Wallace 
 "Given the current unrest in Minneapolis and the deaths of Reene Good and 
Alex Peretti, the increased amount of attacks on migrants and U.S. citizens and 
the U.S. attacks in Venezuela and threats made to Greenland, Iran, Colombia, 
Cuba and Mexico, it is being called for that any Carlow councillors attending 
U.S trips for St. Patrick’s Day will boycott any and all events that associate with 
the Trump administration."  
 
Proposed by Cllr. A. Wallace 
Seconded by Cllr. J. Cassin 
 

 
 
A roll call vote was taken as follows:- 
Member of Carlow 
County  Council 
For 
Against 
Abstain 
Absent 
Fergal Browne 
 
 
 
√ 
John Cassin 
√ 
 
 
 
Andrea Dalton 
 
 
 
√ 
m Deane 
√ 
 
 
 
u Doogue 
 
√ 
 
 
chael Doran 
 
√ 
 
 
Andy Gladney 
√ 
 
 
 
Thomas Kinsella 
 
√ 
 
 
Ken Murnane 
 
√ 
 
 
Charlie Murphy 
 
√ 
 
 
Brian O’Donoghue 
 
 
 
√ 
William Paton 
 
√ 
 
 
Daniel Pender 
 
√ 
 
 
John Pender 
 
√ 
 
 
Fintan Phelan 
 
√ 
 
 
William Quinn 
 
√ 
 
 
Adrienne Wallace 
√ 
 
 
 
Ben Ward 
 
 
 
√ 
 
Result 4 For, 10 Against, 4 Absent 
Decision/Resolution: Motion Defeated 
 
 
Extension of Time 
Proposed by Cllr. P. Doogue, 
Seconded by Cllr. J. Pender, 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed: 
“We the members of Carlow County Council in accordance with Standing 
Orders, approve the continuation of the meeting until 6.30pm. 
 
 
 
7.0 Any other business with the consent of the Cathaoirleach/Aon gnó 
eile le haontú an Chathaoirligh 
The elected members raised questions relating to Housing Acquisitions Funding, 
Flood Relief Scheme, River Level Sensors, Flood Alleviation Scheme in Tullow, 
Works at Shamrock Square, Derelict Buildings, Funding required for road repairs; 
Ministers visit following Storm Chandra; Flooding in Clonegal; Discretionary 
Funding, issue with motorway and junction lighting, Flood Defence Scheme, 
Shamrock Square, Derelict Buildings and Rural Residents Wind Aware & 
Environmental Group Old Leighlin request for funding. 
 

 
 
 
 
Members commended all staff on works completed during the recent floods.   
Chief Executive will convey thanks to all staff and huge team effort in relation to 
Storm Chandra. 
 
Questions raised were answered by the Chief Executive and the Management 
Team 
 
 
 
 
