 
 
 
 
Minutes of December Meeting of Carlow County Council held in the 
Council Chamber, County Offices, Athy Road, Carlow  
on Monday 8th December 2025 at 2.00 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
Present:  
 
Councillor K. Murnane, Cathaoirleach 
 
 
 
Councillor F. Browne 
Councillor J. Cassin  
 
 
 
Councillor A. Dalton  Remotely 
 
 
 
Councillor J. Deane 
 
 
 
Councillor P. Doogue 
 
 
 
 
Councillor M. Doran 
Councillor A. Gladney                                                                                                     
 
 
 
Councillor T. Kinsella 
Councillor C. Murphy 
Councillor B. O’Donoghue  Remotely 
Councillor W. Paton  Remotely 
Councillor D. Pender  
Councillor J. Pender  
Councillor F. Phelan   
Councillor A. Wallace  
Councillor B. Ward 
 
Apologies:     
Councillor W. Quinn 
 
In attendance:   
Mr. C. O’Reilly, Chief Executive 
 
 
Mr. P. O’Gorman, Director of Service 
 
 
Ms. P. O’Brien, Director of Service 
 
 
Mr. P. J. Leonard, Director of Finance 
 
 
Ms. F. O’Neill, A/Director of Service 
 
 
Mr. K. Comerford, Head of Economic Development & Enterprise Remotely 
 
 
 Ms. F. Byrne, Senior Executive Officer 
 
 
 Ms. M. Griffin, Administrative Officer  
Ms. C. Healy, Staff Officer 
Ms. A. Sweeney, Senior Planner  Remotely 
Mr. L. Carroll, Senior Executive Officer, Remotely 
Mr. N. Barrett, Senior Executive Engineer Remotely 
Mr. T. Madden, A/Senior Executive Officer Remotely 
 
 
Mr. B. Knowles, Senior Executive Officer Remotely 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed everyone to the meeting. 
 

 
 
P. O’Gorman advised that An Garda Síochána wished to honour Mr. Padraig 
Cahill with a Good Citizen Award on his retirement as Civil Defence Officer. 
 
 
Proposed by Cllr. F. Phelan, 
Seconded by Cllr. B. Ward, 
And agreed following a show of hands  
“To suspend Standing Order to make the presentation to Padraig Cahill.” 
 
Superintendent Anthony Farrell paid tribute to Padraig on 37 years of 
dedication, support, and close cooperation with An Garda Síochána. He 
highlighted Padraig’s invaluable role in some of the most challenging 
situations, noting that both he and the Civil Defence team consistently upheld 
the highest standards in their work.  He commended their efforts in river 
searches, caring for vulnerable members of the community, hospital transfers, 
and the delivery of food and medicines during emergencies. He described 
Padraig as diligent, hardworking, and always cooperative with the Gardaí in 
every circumstance. 
 
To mark the occasion, Superintendent Farrell presented Padraig with a Good 
Citizen Award in demonstrating outstanding service to the people of County 
Carlow through leadership of the Civil Defence.  
 
In response, Padraig reflected on the privilege of serving as Civil Defence 
Officer. He emphasised the vital contribution of the volunteers who make the 
organisation what it is, and he extended his heartfelt best wishes to all for the 
future. 
 
 
The meeting resumed. 
 
Votes of Congratulations 
Patricia Mulcahy on her upcoming retirement from SETU.  
Community Section on the organisation of the Pride of Place Awards  
Participants in the Tullow Area School Completion Programme on winning a 
Child and Youth Participation Award.  
Finn Brophy on winning the 2025 Beko Club Champion Award for his outstanding 
contribution to Palatine GAA Club in Croke Park recently. 
Sean Swan on being honoured recently in Croke Park for his support to 
sport in Carlow over the years. 
Spotlight Stage School on their participation on the Late Late Toy Show. 
Mrs. Eileen O’Leary, Montgomery Street, Carlow on recently celebration her 
100th birthday.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Patsy & Helen Whelan, Carlow Cabs, on celebrating 40 years in business.   
St. Leo’s College Students on receipt of  the Community Safety Award for the 
Carlow/Kilkenny division at the Garda National Youth Awards held recently for 
their “Phoneless Phobia” project. 
Pat Breen on receipt of an Individual Award at the Pride of Place Awards 
Ceremony held recently.   
Tom Byrne Auctioneers, Dublin Street, Carlow, on celebrating 60 years in 
business 
Adelaine Dargan, Dargan School of Irish Dance on celebrating 25 years in 
business. 
Fighting Cocks Football Club on reaching their first Leinster Junior Football Final 
and extended best wishes in the competition. 
 
Votes of Sympathy 
Savage Family on the death of Martin, Tullow, Co. Carlow. 
Fitzpatrick Family on the death of Paul, Killenane Lane, Bagenalstown. 
Pat Murphy and family on the death of his wife Maura, Ratheadon, 
Bagenalstown. 
O’Connor Family on the death of Peter O’Connor, New Oak Estate, Carlow. 
Dunphy Family on the death of William (Billy) Dunphy, Rathnapish, Carlow. 
 
 
 
 
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes/Dearbhú Miontuairiscí 
 
(i) 
Approval of Minutes of monthly meeting of Carlow County Council  
held on Monday, 10th November 2025 
 
Proposed by Cllr. B Ward, 
Seconded by Cllr. T. Kinsella, 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That the Minutes of the monthly meeting of Carlow County Council held in the 
Council Chamber on Monday 10th November 2025 at 2.00 p.m. having been 
circulated to each Member be taken as read, confirmed as to accuracy and 
accordingly signed”. 
 
 
 

 
 
(ii) 
 Approval of Minutes of Statutory Budget Meeting 2026 held on 
Thursday 20th November 2026 
 
Proposed by Cllr. F. Browne, 
Seconded by Cllr. P. Doogue, 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That the Minutes of the Statutory Budget Meeting 2026 of Carlow County 
Council held in the Council Chamber on Thursday 20th November 2025  
at 2.00 p.m. having been circulated to each Member be taken as read, 
confirmed as to accuracy and accordingly signed”. 
 
 
2.0  Business prescribed by Statute, Standing Orders or 
Resolutions of Council/Gnó forordaithe do réir reachtaíochta, 
orduithe seasta, nó rúin an Chomhairle 
 
2.1   Part XI of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as amended), 
Part VIII of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001 (as amended) 
and Section 138 of the Local Government Act 2001 (as amended) 
Proposed extension of Our Lady of the Assumption Cemetery, 
Bagenalstown/Muine Bheag, Co. Carlow. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. T. Kinsella, 
Seconded by Cllr. A. Gladney, 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council hereby approve in 
accordance with Part XI of the Planning and Development Act 2000 (as 
amended), Part VIII of the Planning & Development Regulations 2001 (as 
amended) and Section 138 of the Local Government Act 2001 (as amended), 
the extension of Our Lady of the Assumption Cemetery, Bagenalstown/Muine 
Bheag, Co. Carlow be proceeded with in accordance with the plans and 
particulars placed on public display and to any such minor and immaterial 
alterations to these plans and particulars and subject to the conditions as set 
out. 
 
 
2.2   Planning & Development Act 2000 - Section 211, Local Government 
Act 2001 - Section 183 (1) - Disposal of Plot and Substation (No. 2934635) 
at Mountain View, Hacketstown, Co. Carlow, 0.001 acres being part of 
land registered under Folio No. CW4224F 
Proposed by Cllr. J. Pender, 
Seconded by Cllr. B. O’Donoghue, 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 

 
 
 
 
 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council hereby approve in 
accordance with Planning & Development Act 2000, Section 211, Local 
Government Act 2001, Section 183 (1) the disposal of Plot and Substation 
(No. 2934635) at Mountain View, Hacketstown, Co. Carlow, 0.001 acres 
being part of land registered under Folio No. CW4224F to ESB Networks, 27 
Fitzwilliam Streeet, Dublin 2, D02KT92 in consideration of the sum of €1.00 
(Nominal Sum) in accordance with the statutory notice as circulated.  The 
consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not 
necessary in this disposal.” 
 
 
2.3   Planning & Development Act 2000 - Section 211, Local Government 
Act 2001 - Section 183 (1) - Disposal of Plot and Substation (No. 2934513) 
at Fr. Flood Avenue, Rathvilly, Co. Carlow, 0.001 acres being part of land 
registered under Folio No. CW27171F 
Proposed by Cllr. J. Pender, 
Seconded by Cllr. B. O’Donoghue, 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council hereby approve in 
accordance with Planning & Development Act 2000, Section 211, Local 
Government Act 2001, Section 183 (1) the disposal of Plot and Substation 
(No. 2934513) at Fr. Flood Avenue, Rathvilly, Co. Carlow, 0.001 acres being 
part of land registered under Folio No. CW27171F to ESB Networks, 27 
Fitzwilliam Streeet, Dublin 2, D02KT92 in consideration of the sum of €1.00 
(Nominal Sum) in accordance with the statutory notice as circulated.  The 
consent of the Minister for Housing, Local Government and Heritage is not 
necessary in this disposal.” 
 
2.4  Approval of Festival and Event 2026 Plan 
K. Comerford briefed on the Festival and Event 2026 Plan and answered 
questions raised by the members. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. J. Cassin, 
Seconded by Cllr. F. Phelan, 
Following a show of hands,  
“That we the members of Carlow County Council approve the Festival and 
Event 2026 Plan 
 
 

 
 
3.0  Consideration of Reports and Recommendations/Breithniú ar 
Thuarascálacha agus Mholtaí 
 
3.1  N80 Leagh Bends Realignment Scheme Update. 
P. O’Gorman gave an Update on the N80 Leagh Bends Realignment Scheme 
and answered questions raised. 
 
 
3.3  Training and Conference Approvals 
Proposed by A. Gladney, 
Seconded by M. Doran, 
And agreed following a show of hands. 
 
 
4.0  Chief Executives Report  
The elected members raised questions relating to issues with public lighting, 
housing applications, housing grants and funding, presidential visit to Carlow 
and protocol regarding invitations, issue with lights at motorway exit, property 
marker purchase, CCTV, pyrite update, Bunclody nursing home access and 
cemeteries. 
 
Questions raised were answered by the Chief Executive and the Management 
Team. 
 
 
5.0 Correspondence/Comhfhreagras 
Members noted request for Carlow Tourism to present at a meeting of Carlow 
County Council  
 
Proposed by Cllr. F. Phelan, 
Seconded by Cllr. A. Wallace  
And agreed following a show of hands 
“That Carlow Tourism will present at a meeting of Carlow County Council.” 
 
 
Members noted request for Acquired Brain Injury to present at a meeting of 
Carlow County Council  
 
Proposed by Cllr. B. Ward, 
Seconded by Cllr. F. Phelan, 
And agreed following a show of hands 
“That Acquired Brain Injury will present at a meeting of Carlow County 
Council.” 

 
 
 
Members noted resolution passed by Kerry County Council endorsing the End 
Discrimination of Inheritance (EDIT) campaign. 
 
Members noted resolution passed by Clare County Council calling on the 
government of Ireland not to support the European Commission’s proposal to 
establish a single common fund under the new Multiannual Financial 
Framework (MFF) 2028-2034, which would merge key EU policy instruments 
such as the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) Cohesion Policy and the 
European Maritime, Fisheries and Aquaculture Fund into one overarching 
funding mechanism. 
 
Members noted resolution passed by Leitrim County Council regarding the 
development of an alternative pathway for students following completion of the 
Junior Cycle through the ETB and SOLAS and other networks to provide skills-
based and career-orientated and training opportunities in construction, 
business, IT, tourism, cosmetology, healthcare and agriculture – to offer 
students practical routes to employment and further study as an alternative to 
the traditional Leaving Certificate programme. 
 
Members noted correspondence passed by Laois County Council regarding 
the establishment of a Referendum Commission to implement the 
recommendations of the Constitutional Convention, concerning the nomination 
process for the Presidential elections. 
 
Members noted motion passed by Wexford County Council expressing 
solidarity to Mary Dunlevy Green, Mary Donovan, Maurice Patton O Connell 
and Mirian Moriarty Owens who are on hunger strike outside of Dáil Éireann 
and the thousands of survivors of Ireland’s Industrial and Reformatory Schools.  
 
Members noted resolution adopted by Donegal County Council requesting the 
executive to run a public information campaign reminding homeowners to have 
their electrical systems checked, particularly in respect of older homes. 
 
Members noted resolution passed by Limerick City & County Council calling for 
the Irish Government to hold a formal national commemoration on 17th April 
2026 to mark 150th anniversary of the Catalpa expedition organised by John 
Devoy and John Boyle O’Reilly. 
 
Members noted Feliciter correspondence. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
3.1  Presentation from Comhairle na nÓg 
The Cathaoirleach invited Aoife and Oran from Comhairle na nÓg to make a 
presentation. 
 
Aoife and Oran gave a presentation on Comhairle na nÓg works, activities, 
networking and events attended since 2024. Aoife and Oran answered 
questions raised by the members.  The members thanked Aoife and Oran and 
asked for the presentation to be circulated and offered their assistance, if 
required.  
 
 
 
6.0  Notices of Motion 
 
6.1  Standing in the name of Cllr. Ben Ward 
"That Carlow County Council write to the Minister for Transport, TFI, and Bus 
Eireann seeking an update on the expansion of rural public transport services 
across county Carlow. In particular, the introduction of services to Ardattin and 
Clonegal."  
 
Proposed by Cllr. B. Ward, 
Seconded by Cllr. A. Wallace, 
And agreed following a show of hands 
"That Carlow County Council write to the Minister for Transport, TFI, and Bus 
Eireann seeking an update on the expansion of rural public transport services 
across county Carlow. In particular, the introduction of services to Ardattin and 
Clonegal."  
 
6.2  Standing in the name of Cllr. Ben Ward 
"That Carlow County Council urgently take action on implementing the funding 
received in February for a bus stop enhancement programme across the 
county"  
 
Proposed by Cllr. B. Ward, 
Seconded by Cllr. M. Doran, 
And agreed following a show of hands 
"That Carlow County Council urgently take action on implementing the funding 
received in February for a bus stop enhancement programme across the 
county"  
 

 
 
 
 
6.3  Standing in the name of Cllr. Fergal Browne 
That Carlow County Council call for reform for those wishing to contest future 
presidential elections to include two separate dates for nominations by the 
oireachtas and local authorities and a move away from councils needing to 
back candidates and instead individual county councillors being allowed to 
nominate candidates once minimum number reached.  
 
Proposed by Cllr. F. Browne, 
Seconded by Cllr. B. Ward, 
And agreed following a show of hands. 
“That Carlow County Council call for reform for those wishing to contest future 
presidential elections to include two separate dates for nominations by the 
oireachtas and local authorities and a move away from councils needing to 
back candidates and instead individual county councillors being allowed to 
nominate candidates once minimum number reached.” 
 
It was agreed that this motion be circulated to all other county councils and 
relevant government department. 
 
 
6.4  Standing in the name of Cllr. Fintan Phelan 
"That Carlow County Council write to Iarnród Éireann (Irish Rail) requesting 
that they urgently explore options to increase car parking capacity at Carlow 
Train Station. 
Given that the existing car park is consistently at full capacity by the time of 
the 7:56 a.m. train, many commuters and rail users are unable to avail of 
parking thereafter. This is causing significant inconvenience and stress for 
individuals travelling to Dublin and other destinations for work, education, 
medical appointments, and leisure. 
The Council should engage with Irish Rail and all relevant stakeholders to 
identify and examine potential short, medium, and long-term solutions, 
including additional or alternative parking options to support increased 
demand at the station." 
 
Proposed by Cllr. F. Phelan, 
Seconded by Cllr. J. Cassin, 
And agreed following a show of hands. 
"That Carlow County Council write to Iarnród Éireann (Irish Rail) requesting 
that they urgently explore options to increase car parking capacity at Carlow 
Train Station. 

 
 
Given that the existing car park is consistently at full capacity by the time of 
the 7:56 a.m. train, many commuters and rail users are unable to avail of 
parking thereafter. This is causing significant inconvenience and stress for 
individuals travelling to Dublin and other destinations for work, education, 
medical appointments, and leisure. 
The Council should engage with Irish Rail and all relevant stakeholders to 
identify and examine potential short, medium, and long-term solutions, 
including additional or alternative parking options to support increased 
demand at the station." 
 
 
6.5  Standing in the name of Cllr. Adrienne Wallace 
“Noting the essential work that healthcare staff play in society, and particularly 
here in Carlow, this Council will write to Caredoc to request they 
implement the agreed 8% pay uplift arising from a WRC agreement in 2023 
to their workers. In addition, this council stands in solidarity with the workers 
from Caredoc who were forced to protest on Wednesday the 26th and who 
voted to begin a strike in December if their request for a pay uplift is not met.” 
 
Proposed by Cllr. A. Wallace, 
Seconded by Cllr. J. Cassin, 
And agreed following a show of hands. 
“Noting the essential work that healthcare staff play in society, and particularly 
here in Carlow, this Council will write to Caredoc to request they 
implement the agreed 8% pay uplift arising from a WRC agreement in 2023 
to their workers. In addition, this council stands in solidarity with the workers 
from Caredoc who were forced to protest on Wednesday the 26th and who 
voted to begin a strike in December if their request for a pay uplift is not met.” 
 
 
 
7.0 Any other business with the consent of the Cathaoirleach/Aon gnó 
eile le haontú an Chathaoirligh. 
 
The members requested that an invitation issue to NTA to come to a Carlow 
Municipal District Meeting in the new year. 
 
 
 
