 
 
 
 
Minutes of January Meeting of Carlow County Council held in the 
Council Chamber, County Offices, Athy Road, Carlow  
on Monday 12th January 2026 at 2.00 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
Present:  
 
Councillor K. Murnane, Cathaoirleach 
 
 
 
Councillor F. Browne 
Councillor J. Cassin  
 
 
 
Councillor A. Dalton   
 
 
 
Councillor J. Deane 
 
 
 
Councillor P. Doogue 
 
 
 
 
Councillor M. Doran 
Councillor A. Gladney                                                                                                     
 
 
 
Councillor T. Kinsella 
Councillor C. Murphy 
Councillor B. O’Donoghue Remotely 
Councillor W. Paton   
Councillor D. Pender  
Councillor J. Pender  
Councillor F. Phelan 
Councillor W. Quinn   
Councillor A. Wallace  
Councillor B. Ward 
 
 
In attendance:   
Mr. C. O’Reilly, Chief Executive 
 
 
Mr. P. O’Gorman, Director of Service 
 
 
Ms. P. O’Brien, Director of Service 
 
 
Mr. P. J. Leonard, Director of Finance 
 
 
Ms. F. O’Neill, A/Director of Service 
 
 
 Ms. F. Byrne, Senior Executive Officer 
 
 
 Ms. M. Griffin, Administrative Officer  
Ms. C. Healy, Staff Officer 
Ms. J. Brophy, Administrative Officer 
Ms. A. Sweeney, Senior Planner  Remotely 
Mr. K. Comerford, Head of Economic Development & Enterprise Remotely 
Mr. L. Carroll, Senior Executive Officer, Remotely 
Mr. N. Barrett, Senior Executive Engineer Remotely 
Mr. T. Madden, A/Senior Executive Officer Remotely 
 
 
Ms. S. O’Neill, A/Senior Executive Officer Remotely 
 
 
Ms. N. Lawler, Senior Executive Officer Remotely 
 
 
Mr. C. Madden, A/Senior Executive Engineer Remotely 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
The Cathaoirleach welcomed everyone to the meeting. 
 
 
Votes of Congratulations 
Carlow’s Footballers following their victories over Wexford and Laois in the 
O’Byrne Cup Shield. 
Palatine footballers on winning the U21 A Football Championship Final. 
Tinryland footballers on winning the U21 B Football Championship Final. 
Independent Ireland for coordinating the recent successful protest in Athlone 
against the Mercosur trade deal. 
 
 
Votes of Sympathy 
Rath Family on the death of Willie Rath, Tinryland, Carlow. 
Holohan Family on the death of Norah Holohan, Carlow. 
Ger Lucas on the death of Sandra Harkin, Quinnagh, Carlow. 
Shortall Family on the death of Rory Shorthall, Ballindaggin, Co. Wexford. 
Morrissey Family on the death of Joe Morrissey, Carlow. 
Kelly Family on the death of Dylan Kelly, Graiguecullen, Carlow. 
Condron Family on the death of Eugene Condron, Rutland, Carlow. 
Coakley Family on the death of Patrick Coakley, Carlow. 
Kennedy Family on the death of Joan Kennedy, Hanover, Carlow. 
 
 
 
1.0 
Confirmation of Minutes/Dearbhú Miontuairiscí 
 
(i) 
Approval of Minutes of monthly meeting of Carlow County Council  
held on Monday, 8th December 2025 
 
Proposed by Cllr. D. Pender, 
Seconded by Cllr. M. Doran, 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That the Minutes of the monthly meeting of Carlow County Council held in the 
Council Chamber on Monday 8th December 2025 at 2.00 p.m. having been 
circulated to each Member, be taken as read, confirmed as to accuracy and 
accordingly signed”. 
 
 
 

 
 
2.0  Business prescribed by Statute, Standing Orders or 
Resolutions of Council/Gnó forordaithe do réir reachtaíochta, 
orduithe seasta, nó rúin an Chomhairle 
 
2.1   Section 11 of the Roads Act 1993, Section 180 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2000, as amended and Section 59 of the Planning and 
Development Act 2010 - Taking Charge of roads and services at: 
 (a) 
Chaff Lane, Chaff Street, Graiguecullen, Carlow. 
 (b) 
Monastery Court (Units 1 – 6) Tullow, Co. Carlow. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. J. Cassin, 
Seconded by Cllr. P. Doogue, 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council hereby approve in 
accordance with Section 11 of the Roads Act 1993, Section 180 of the 
Planning and Development Act 2000 as amended and Section 59 of the 
Planning and Development Act 2010 – Taking in charge of roads and services 
at Chaff Lane, Chaff Street, Graiguecullen, Carlow. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. W. Paton, 
Seconded by Cllr. B. Ward, 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council hereby approve in 
accordance with Section 11 of the Roads Act 1993, Section 180 of the 
Planning and Development Act 2000 as amended and Section 59 of the 
Planning and Development Act 2010 – Taking in charge of roads and services 
at Monastery Court (Units 1 – 6) Tullow, Co. Carlow. 
 
2.2   Planning and Development Act 2000, Section 211, Local 
Government Act 2001, Section 183 (1) - Grant of a 10-year lease on lands 
at McGrath Park, Bagenalstown, Co. Carlow.  
 
Proposed by Cllr. W. Quinn, 
Seconded by Cllr. T. Kinsella, 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council hereby approve in 
accordance with Planning & Development Act 2000, Section 211, Local 
Government Act 2001, Section 183 (1) the grant of a 10 year lease on lands 
at McGrath Park, Bagenalstown, as per Folio No. CW6467F (671.2m² 0.067 
Herctares) to Bagenalstown Area Community Development Group in 
consideration of the sum of €100 per annum in accordance with the statutory 
notice as circulated.  The consent of the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage is not necessary in this lease.” 

 
 
2.3   Planning & Development Act 2000 - Section 211, Local Government 
Act 2001 - Section 183 (1) - Disposal of Freehold on lands at Tullow 
Industrial Estate, Tullow, Co. Carlow. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. J. Pender, 
Seconded by Cllr. W. Paton, 
Following a show of hands, it was agreed:- 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council hereby approve in 
accordance with Planning & Development Act 2000, Section 211, Local 
Government Act 2001, Section 183 (1) the disposal of freehold on lands at 
Tullow Industrial Estate Tullow as per Folio CW1842L and CW8483F (1110m² 
0.111 Hectares) in consideration of the sum of €2,000 plus all associated 
costs to Mervyn Campbell and Bernadette Campbell in accordance with the 
statutory notice as circulated.  The consent of the Minister for Housing, Local 
Government and Heritage is not necessary in this disposal.” 
 
2.4  Statutory Audit Report 2024 
P. J. Leonard briefed the members on the Statutory Audit Report 2024 and 
answered questions raised by the members. 
 
2.5  Audit Committee – Section 60 Report to Council on 2024 Statutory 
Audit Report 
P. J. Leonard briefed on the Section 60 Report on the 2024 Statutory Audit 
Report and answered questions raised. 
 
Proposed by Cllr. F. Phelan 
Seconded by Cllr. F. Browne 
And agreed following a show of hands 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council approve the Statutory Audit 
Report 2024 and the Audit Committee Section 60 Report on the 2024 
Statutory Audit Report”. 
 
It was agreed to issue a report on the outstanding development levies at end 
of 2024.  
 
2.6  Approval of Delegation to attend New York for St. Patrick’s Day. 
Proposed by Cllr. F. Phelan 
Seconded by Cllr. A. Dalton 
And agreed following a show of hands:- 
“That we the members of Carlow County Council approve the travel of  
Cllrs. D. Pender, J. Pender, P. Doogue to New York for St. Patrick’s Day.” 
 

 
 
It was agreed that the Council would contact all twinning associations linked 
with Carlow, including London, Birmingham and Manchester to extend an 
invitation to attend the International Pan Celtic Festival in April 2026.  
 
 
 
3.0  Consideration of Reports and Recommendations/Breithniú ar 
Thuarascálacha agus Mholtaí 
 
3.1  Carlow County Council Event Management Guidance  
Julie Brophy gave a presentation on Carlow County Council Event 
Management Guidance Documents and questions raised by the members 
were answered by Julie Brophy and Coilín O’Reilly. 
 
3.2  Training and Conference Approvals 
Proposed by Cllr. F. Phelan 
Seconded by Cllr. A. Gladney 
And agreed following a show of hands. 
1 LAMA Spring Seminar The Connacht Hotel Galway Spring Seminar 28th & 29th January 
2026 €245  
2 Association of Irish Regions Inishowen Gateway Hotel, Buncrana, Co. Donegal The 
Future of Regions in Ireland – Regional Development Towards 2035 25th & 26th 
February 2026 €TBC  
3 Celtic Conferences Four Seasons Hotel, Carlingford Finance Act 16th to 18th January 
2026 €130  
4 Celtic Conferences O’Donovans Hotel, Clonakilty, Co. Cork Misinformation, 
Disinformation and Fake News – Finding the Truth 6th, 7th & 8th February 2026 €130 
 
3.3  Presentation from Carlow Tourism at 4.30 p.m. 
This item was deferred. 
 
 
4.0  Chief Executives Report/Tuarascáil Bainistríochta an 
Phríomhfheidhme 
The elected members raised questions relating to Town Bus service, Bus Stop 
Shelters, Speed Limits N80, Retrofitting of houses, Social Worker, Carlow 
Southern Relief Road, Public Lighting, ESB connections, Pyrite, IBAL, Fire 
Safety Drills, Housing Grant funding, Tullow Park, Tullow Cemetery, Post 
Mortems delays, Housing Energy Upgrades, Tenant in SITU, Litter fines, 
Lighting at Fair Green Bagenalstown and Improvement works in 
Bagenalstown.  Questions raised were answered by the Chief Executive and 
the Management Team. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
5.0 Correspondence/Comhfhreagras 
 
Members noted the responses to council’s correspondence issued in relating 
to notice of motion passed at the November council meeting relating the 
Mercosur Trade Deal. 
 
Members noted resolution passed by Clare County Council calling on the 
Taoiseach to initiate a full urgent review of local government funding, powers 
and democratic structures with a view to aligning Ireland with European norms. 
 
Members noted resolution passed by Clare County Council calling on the Irish 
Government to respond urgently to the concerns raised by John Collison (co-
founder of Stripe) and by businessman Denis O’Brien regarding Ireland’s 
declining economic competitiveness, infrastructure shortages, skills 
mismatches in the labour market, and challenges in our tax and regulatory 
environment. 
 
Members noted resolution passed by Clare County Council calling on the 
Minister for Health to provide for Vaginal Estrogen Gels & Creams to be 
available over the counter without a prescription like other countries. 
 
Members noted response from Department of Housing, Local Government & 
Heritage regarding motion passed at the June 2025 council meeting regarding 
the publication of the wind energy development guidelines. 
 
Members noted response from Department of Housing, Local Government & 
Heritage regarding motion passed at the December council meeting regarding 
nomination process for presidential elections. 
 
 
 
 
