Municipal District Muinebheag
Minutes of
Municipal District of Muinebheag
Annual General Meeting
held on Wednesday, 10th June 2026 at 3.30 p.m.
in the Meeting Room, McGrath Hall, Muinebheag
Members Present: Cllr. Daniel Pender - Cathaoirleach
In Attendance:
Cllr. Michael Doran - Leas-Cathaoirleach
Cllr. Tommy Kinsella -
Cllr. Willie Quinn (remote)
Cllr. Andy Gladney
Pådraig O'Gorman, Director of Services
Orla Barrett, Senior Engineer
Lilly Slyer Senior Executive Engineer
Tommie Hickson, Meeting Administrator
Cllr. Daniel Pender, Cathaoirleach, welcomed everyone to the Annual General Meeting of
Municipal District of Muinebheag 2026.
Election of Cathaoirleach
Cllr. Daniel Pender invited members to consider the election of Cathaoirleach {or the
new term 2026/2027.
He took this opportunity to thank his fellow councillors and council staff for their support
during his first year as Cathaoirteach. He acknowledged how grateful he was to
Cllr. Michael Doran who gave him his time and support when he was first elected to
Council, guiding him through the halls of County Buildings and showing him how
everything works. Cllr. Pender described him as a true gentleman, and it now gave
him great pleasure to nominate Cllr. Michael Doran as Cathaoirleach for 2026/2027
which was seconded by Cllr. Tommy Kinsella.
Resolved on the proposal of Cllr. Daniel Pender, seconded by Cllr. Tommy Kinsella
that Cllr. Michael Doran be elected as Cathaojrleach.
As there were no further nominations for Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Michael Doran was
deemed elected as Cathaoirleach and took the Chair.
The outgoing Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Daniel Pender presented Cllr. Michael Doran with
the Chain of Office.
Page 1 of 3
2.
Municipal District Muinebheag
The newly elected Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Michael Doran took this opportunity to thank
Cllr. Pender for his nomination and congratulated him on the tremendous work carried
out throughout the year and his professionalism in doing so. He thanked all ihe
Members for their support and co-operation and looks forward to taking the Chair fo,•
the coming year.
Cllr. Tommy Kinsella thanked Cllr. Pender for the great work he carried out throughout
the year as Cathaoirleach. He also acknowledged how he has worked with
Cllr. Michael Doran since 1994 and it was a great pleasure to second the nomination
of Cllr. Doran as the new Cathaoirleach for 2026/2027.
Cllr. Andy Gladney acknowledged that the role of Cathaoirleach is not an easy one,
but congratulated Cllr. Pender on doing a great job, especially as it was his first time.
He welcomed Cllr. Michael Doran as the new Cathaoirleach, describing him as a 'good
guy' who is easy to work with.
Cllr. Willie Quinn congratulated Cllr. Pender for a great year as Cathaoirleach of
Muinebheag Municipal District and welcomed the news that Cllr. Michael Doran will
now take the Chair.
Pådraig CYGorman, Director of Services took this opportunity to congratulate
Cllr. Pender and all the Members for the progressive work achieved throughout the
last 12 months. He acknowledged the substantial and continued improvements in
Bagenalstownt and how the town is now looking the best it has done in many years.
He noted that every parish and district has been touched by projects, big and small.
He congratulated Cllr. Doran on his nomination and welcomed him as the new
Cathaoirleach for 2026/2027.
Election of Leas Cathaoirleach
Cllr. Michael Doran, Cathaoirleach, then invited Members to consider the election oi
the Leas Cathaoirleach.
Resolved on the proposal of Cllr. Tommy Kinsella, and, seconded by Cllr. Michael
Doran that Cllr. Daniel Pender be elected as Leas Cathaoirleach. As there were ne
further nominations, Cllr. Daniel Pender was deemed elected as Leas Cathaoirieach.
Cllr. Daniel Pender thanked the members for their support and said that he was looking
forward to serving as Leas Cathaoirleach and committed to assisting the newly elected
Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Michael Doran in his duties for the coming term.
All Members and Council Officials extended their congratulations and wished
Cllr. Pender the very best during his term as Leas Cathaoirleach.
Page 2 of 3
3.
Municipal District Muinebheag
Schedule of Meetings for 202612027
The members agreed the Calendar of meetings for 2026/2027.
2026
2027
July
September
October
December
February
April
June
8th
2nd
(date tbc to coincide with Budget meeting when set)
2nd
3rd
7th
9th (date tbc to align with AGM 2027)
All Members approved the dates presented and agreed that the next Municipal
District Meeting be scheduled for Wednesday 8th July 2026 at 4.00 p.m.
This concluded the business of the meeting
Signed:
Signed:
Date:
% .2&2C
Cllr. Michael Doran
Cathaoirleach
Meetings Administrator
Page 3 of 3