Municipal District Muinebheag
Minutes of the
Municipal District of Muinebheag Meeting
held on Wednesday, 28th January 2026 at 4.00 p.m.
in the Meeting Room, McGrath Hall, Muinebheag, Co. Carlow
Members Present: Cllr. Daniel Pender — Cathaoirleach
In Attendance:
Cllr. Michael Doran — Leas Cathaoirleach
Cllr. Tommy Kinsella
Cllr. Willie Quinn
Cllr. Andy Gladney
Mr. Coilin O'Reilly, Chief Executive
Mr. Pådraig O'Gorman, Director of Services, Transport & Infrastructure
Ms. Lilly Slye, Senior Executive Engineer
Nicola Lawler, Town Regeneration Officer
Barry Knowles, SEO, Community
Kieran Comerford, Head of Local Enterprise Office
Linda Culleton, Economic Development Officer, LEO
Tadhg Madden, A/Senior Executive Officer, Housing (remote)
Eoin Sullivan, Heritage Officer
Tommie Hickson, Meeting Administrator
Cllr. Daniel Pender, Cathaoirleach, welcomed everyone to the meeting.
1.
2,
Confirmation of Minutes of Municipal District of Muinebheag
3rd December 2025
Resolved on the proposal of Cllr. T. Kinsella and seconded by Cllr. W. Quinn,
following a show of hands that the minutes of the Municipal District of Muinebheag
held on the 3rd December 2025 be confirmed as accurate and taken as read.
All agreed
Business Prescribed by Statue, Standing Orders or Resolutions of the
Municipal District Members for Transaction at such meeting
None
Page 1 of 8
3.
Municipal District Muinebheag
Consideration of Reports and Recommendations
3.1 Draft Muinebheag Town Centre First Plan
Nicola Lawler, Town Regeneration Officer, circulated copies of the draft
Muinebheag Town Centre First Plan and gave a comprehensive presentation.
She advised that this plan has been prepared in collaboration with the
Muinebheag Town Team and Carlow County Council.
It sets out a clear
pathway for the sustainable regeneration of Muinebheag which has been
developed through detailed research and an inclusive co-design process with
the local community.
Nicola gave a brief outline of the 17 projects proposed and the various funding
streams available. As this is non-statutory, approval by the Members is not
required. The official launch of this proposed Muinebheag Town Centre First
Plan could possibly happen in April of this year, but this is dependent on the
availability of the Minister.
The Cathaoirleach, Cllr. Daniel Pender thanked Nicola and her team for the
work involved in preparing this draft plan which he said is very welcome for the
town of Muinebheag. He then opened the floor for questions.
Cllr. M. Doran took the opportunity to thank Nicola and her team and regretted
the poor public participation in the consultation process which had been
available to them. He raised a query about future maintenance of these
proposed public outdoor spaces and costs involved.
Cllr. W. Quinn also thanked the team and acknowledged that a huge amount oi
work had gone into preparing this plan. He queried if all angles have been
covered in relation to funding, land purchase and involvement of Uisce Éireann.
Cllr. A. Gladney acknowledged the amount of work it takes to get to this stage
in any proposed town plan. He believes that if only three quarters of these
projects are realised, it will be an improvement to the town and attract more
people to visit, work and live in Muinebheag. He understands that this will take
time, but it will be worthwhile and has massive potential.
Cllr. T. Kinsella also welcomed the plan and queried the time period for these
proposals. He also queried where the funding would come from.
Cllr. W. Quinn queried how many projects would require Part VIII planning? He
also queried if this plan would effect other districts applying for substantial
projects in the future?
Nicola Lawler, Town Regeneration Officer, answered these questions. She
advised that an average of 10 projects would require Part VIII planning. She
also assured the members that other areas would not be excluded from
applying for future funding as different categories cover different funding
amounts.
Page 2 of 8
3.2
Municipal District Muinebheag
Nicola emphasised that the proposed projects within the Plan are concepts and
show ideas only. If the plan is approved, each of these projects will be required
to go through the usual statutory process. All proposals are based on public
land and it would be premature to approach Uisce Eireann at this stage. Nicola
acknowledged that there was a very strong town improvement group (B.I.C.)
represented in Muinebheag who have great pride and desire within theif
community. She advised that Local Authority funding could not be relied on and
these outdoor projects would depend on these types of groups for support end
ongoing maintenance. However, when an approved Town Plan exists, it puts
that town in a strong position when submitting new funding applications for
approval each year.
Proposed: Cllr. T Kinsella
Seconded: Cllr. Quinn
And Agreed following a show of hands
Annual Service Delivery Plan 2026 — Economic Development
Kieran Comerford, Head of Economic Development & Enterprise gave a
presentation. The following is a summary of the budgetary allocation for 2026:
Element 1: Christmas Programme -
Element 2: Streetscape Enhancement Scheme -
Element 3: Maintenance & Management Industrial Estates -
€26,000
€15,000
It is proposed that the funding will be allocated on the following basis;
Element 1: Christmas Programme
Christmas Lights -
€16,000
Féile Lonrach Christmas Event- € 5,000
Shop Local Shop Carlow
Total =
€ 5 ooo
€26,000
An application scheme was introduced in 2025 to support Christmas Lights
initiatives led by community and business groups. It is proposed to continue
this scheme in 2026 offering grants of up to €10,000 for district towns and up
to €5,000 for small towns and larger serviced rural villages. The purpose of this
funding is to enable commercial activity associated with the festive period.
Applications will be accepted from other areas, but allocation will be at the
discretion of Elected Members. This scheme is intended to support the annual
erection and management of existing lighting systems.
fn 2025 Féile Lonrach — Santa Bus Experience visited Bagenatstown and this
was a very successful event. It is envisaged that a similar experience be
planned for 2026.
Page 3 of 8
Municipal District Muinebheag
Shop Local Shop Carlow is a countywide promotional campaign delivered in
partnership with County Carlow Chamber and other stakeholders. Activities
within Muinebheag Municipal District will include radio shows, road signage,
digital advertising, and competitions, co-ordinated by the Economic
Development Team.
Element 2: Streetscape Enhancement Scheme 2026
Streetscape Enhancement Scheme is operated in order to support and
facilitate the enhancement of the streetscapes and the presentation of the
public realms of the towns and villages in Muinebheag Municipal District.
It is proposed Streetscape Enhancement Scheme 2026 will facilitate the
improvement of premises and shop front improvements by supporting
upgrade works which can include painting, repairs, decluttering, new signage,
outside lighting, and window display design/merchandising.
The maximum upgrade proposed will be as follows:
Residential - up to €1 ,000 (including VAT) based on 75% of eligible expenditure
Commercial -up to €1 ,500 (excluding VAT) based on 60% of eligible expenditure
The proposed closing date for applications is 13th March 2026 and successful
applicants will have until 31st October 2026 to complete works. The scheme
has been redesigned to support the ongoing work of the Town Centre First
Office and applications will be reviewed in consultation with them.
The following approach which was approved by Elected Members for the
three year period 2025 — 2027 is as follows:-
Year
2025
2026
• 2027
Focus Area
Borris
Bagenalstown
Ballinkillen / Tinnahjnch
The scheme wilt be advertised following approval of the Annual Service Plan
via an online application/press release/flyer drop in the selected areas, with a
fixed period of 28 days for applications to be developed.
Element 3: Maintenance & Management of Industrial Estates
Proposed supply, manufacture and installation of new signage at entrance to
Muinebheag Industrial Estate/Business Park.
Kieran Comerford concluded his presentation and requested approval from
the members.
Proposed: Cllr. W. Quinn
Seconded: Cllr. M. Doran
And agreed following a show of hands
Page 4 of 8
3.3
Municipal District Muinebheag
Annual Service Delivery Plan 2026 - Community
Barry Knowles gave a presentation on the Community Annual Service
Delivery Plan for 2026. A total of €45,000 has been allocated for the
Muinebheag Municipal District and proposed as follows:
Grant Type
Carlow's Pride of Place Grant
Carlow's Pride of Place Tid Towns Grant
Buildin Communi Leadershi Su ort Scheme
St. Patrick's Da Parade
S ub- Total
Discretiona Grants
Overall Total
Recommended
Fundin in 2026
€15,500
€12,000
€14,500
€ 3,000
€45,000
€50,000
€95 ooo
In addition, Members have €10,000 each as a special fund for their own
discretion — total €50,000 for the Municipal District of Muinebheag. This can
be used individually or aggregated with agreement of Members.
Other contributions/grants specifically provided in the budget are:
Contribution to
Swimmin Pool Muinebhea
Total
Amount
€25,000
€25,000
An amendment was proposed by Cllr. Andy Gladney to divide the proposed
allocation of €3,000 for St. Patrick's Day Parade as follows;
Muinebheag -
• Borris -
€2,000
The following queries were raised:-
• Environmental/Amenity Grant replaced by Pride of Place Grant
St. Patrick's Day Fund
• Building Community Leadership Support Scheme
• Tidy Towns Groups
New application forms
Coilin O'Reilly, Chief Executive, and Barry Knowles answered all queries.
Proposed: Cllr. W. Quinn
Seconded: Cllr. T. Kinsella
And agreed following a show of hands
Page 5 of 8
3.4
3.5
3.6
Municipal District Muinebheag
Community Support Centres
Barry Knowles, Senior Executive Officer, Community, gave details of the
establishment of nine designated community support centres across the
county. He highlighted the need to provide services in areas where people
who are affected by severe weather conditions can get access to basic
welfare requirements such as food, heating and wi-fi connection.
He gave a progress report and confirmed that the nine centres would be split
evenly between the three municipal districts. Muinebheag will have centres in
McGrath Hall, Ballymurphy and Old Leighlin. McGrath Hall is now complete
with a generator installed and is ready for immediate use.
Annual Service Delivery Plan 2026 — Roads
Lilly Slye, Senior Executive Engineer gave a presentation and brief overview.
She advised that the allocation list as circulated remains the same as 2025
and these projects are subject to funding and Department approval.
The following queries were raised:-
Effect of storms on budget
• Maintenance of roads
Environmentally friendly materials
All queries were answered.
Proposed: Cllr. Andy Gladney
Seconded: Cllr. Willie Quinn
And agreed following a show of hands
Housing Report
Tadhg Madden, A/Senior Executive Officer, Housing, gave a brief update on
the Housing Progress Report, The following areas were discussed:-
Ballyknockan estate
ESB connection in Borrjs
Green Drake, Borris
Bilboa
Ballymurphy
Health Centre, Tinnahinch
Serviced sites
Derelict buildings
Short Term Leases — new legislation
Manor House, Bagenalstown
Tadhg Madden and Nicola Lawler answered these queries.
Page 6 of 8
3.7
3.8
Municipal District Muinebheag
Pådraig O'Gorman advised that he will request the planning department to
attend the next Municipal District meeting to answer any planning related
queries.
Heritage-led Regeneration Plan for Borris
Dr. Eoin Sullivan, Heritage Officer, gave this presentation. He advised of hie
intention to apply for funding from the Heritage Council which would enable him
to engage the services of a conservation architect. A cohesive design and long
term plan looking at the heritage of Borris town will then be prepared under the
Historic Towns Initiative. This plan will be for heritage-led regeneration in Borrie,
and can be used for funding applications in relation to conservation works in
the Architectural Conservation Area in 2027 onwards.
Cllr. W. Quinn acknowledges and appreciates this valuable work.
Cllr. T. Kinsella raised a question about the church and also windows.
Dr. Sullivan advised that a call for the Community Heritage Grants will open in
February.
Ballyellen Group Water Scheme
Pådraig O'Gorman, Director of Services, gave this update. He advised thc
Members that Ballyellen Group Water Scheme was approved funding oi
€864,473 under the Dept. of Housing, Local Government and Heritage's iViuåi-
Annual Rural Water Programme 2024-2026. The purpose of this funding is to
connect the Ballyellen GWS with Uisce Éireann's network on the Goresbridge
side of the River Barrow, as this is the preferred solution from an economical
and practical point of view. The Scheme has 38 domestic connections and 1
non-domestic connection within 3.5km of a distribution network. Once the
works have been completed and a connection has been made, the Ballyellen
GWS will be taken in charge by Uisce Éireann and the GWS will be dissolved.
All queries were answered.
4. Notices of Motion
None.
Page 7 of 8
Municipal District Muinebheag
5. Correspondence
Pådraig O'Gorman, Director of Services confirmed that a letter had been sent to
larnråd Éireann in relation to the carpark facilities in Muinebheag Train Station. The
letter enquired of the possibility of opening more of this car park to the public, or,
extending the area that is already there. We are currently waiting for a response Io
our request for a meeting.
6. Any Other Business
Cllr. Daniel Pender, Cathaoirleach, raised the issue of dumping in Seskin and The
Ridge area of the county. He enquired of the possibility of erecting mobile CCTV
cameras in this area.
Pådraig O'Gorman, Director of Services confirmed that this will be listed on the Agenda
for the next Muinebheag Municipal District meeting and the Environment Department
will attend.
Pådraig O'Gorman, Director of Services advised that the car-parking facilities in St.
Mary's cemetery is a valuable addition and will be reviewed in 6 months.
The next meeting is scheduled for Wednesday, ISt April 2026
This concluded the business of the meeting
Signed:
Signed:
Cllr. Daniel Pender
Cathaoirleach
Meetings Administrator
Page 8 Of 8
ate:
Date: