Municipal District Muinebheag
Minutes of the
Municipal District of Muinebheag
Meeting held on Wednesday, 10th June 2026 at 4.00 p.m.
in the Meeting Room, McGrath Hall, Muinebheag, Co. Carlow
Members Present: Cllr. Michael Doran — Cathaoirleach
In Attendance:
Cllr. Daniel Pender — Leas Cathaoirleach
Cllr. Tommy Kinsella
Cllr. Willie Quinn (Remote)
Cllr. Andy Gladney
Mr. Pådraig O'Gorman, Director of Services
Orla Barrett, Senior Engineer
Ms. Lilly Slye, Senior Executive Engineer, Muinebheag MD
Tadhg Madden, A/Senior Executive Officer, Housing
Barry Knowles, Senior Executive Officer, Planning (Remote)
Tommie Hickson, Meeting Administrator
Cllr. Michael Doran, Cathaoirleach, welcomed everyone to the meeting.
A proposal to start the meeting early at 3.45 p.m. was proposed by Cllr. A. Gladney and
seconded by Cllr. T. Kinsella. All Agreed.
1.
2.
Confirmation of Minutes of Municipal District of Muinebheag ISt April 2026
Resolved on the proposal of Cllr. A. Gladney and seconded by Cllr. M. Doran,
following a show of hands that the draft minutes of the Municipal District oi
Muinebheag Monthly Meeting held on the 1st April 2026 be confirmed as accurate and
taken as read.
All agreed
Business Prescribed by Statue, Standing Orders or Resolutions of the
Municipal District Members for Transaction at such meeting
None.
Page 1 of 5
3.
Municipal District Muinebheag
Consideration of Reports and Recommendations
3:1
3.2
Urban Speed Limit Review
Orla Barrett, Senior Engineer gave this presentation and the following points
were clarified:-
•
National 2023 Speed Limit Review —
Proposed National Urban Speed Limit Review
Practicalities and Safety discussed
All housing estates 30 kph
Speed limits depend on street types and shopping areas
Non-statutory — Proposed Public Consultation at pre-draft stage
Phase 1 — Rural speed limits review
Phase 2 — Urban speed limits review
Phase 3 — National Secondary Roads
Phase 4 - Schools to be reviewed
Councillors were made aware that most schools will be addressed under the
Urban Speed Limit Review, and Newtown, Borris, which is on a regional road,
will be caught in Phase 4.
The Members agreed to review the R448 on completion of the Urban Speed
Limit Review in 2027.
Orla took this opportunity to thank the Members for all the feedback received
after a recent Members' workshop on the Urban speed limits. As this ie a
'Reserved Function' approval is sought from Members to bring the non-
statutory public consultation to main Council meeting. She advised that a public
consultation is planned for July/August. Draft Bye-laws will be completed and
brought to the September MD and Council meeting. A second workshop will be
held for the Members on completion of the Draft Bye-laws for discussion and
statutory public display.
Queries were raised in relation to the speed limit in Glynn and schools that
are not in urban areas. All queries were answered.
Housing Report
Tadhg Madden, A/Senior Executive Officer, Housing, gave a brief update on
the Housing Progress Report. The following areas were discussed:-
Housing Stock Muinebheag MD
Upper Main Street, Borris
Tinteån, Borris
Tinnahinch
Funding to buy further houses
All queries were answered.
Page 2 of 5
3.3
3.4
3.5
Municipal District Muinebheag
Roads Report
Lilly Slye, Senior Executive Engineer gave an update on the Roads Report.
The following areas were discussed:-
Additional works due to Storm Chandra
Town Improvement Works Projects — Bagenalstown, Borris, Leighlinbridge
Borris Viaduct
St. Mullins car park
St. Mullins public toilet upgrade
St. Mullins conservation works to Bath
All queries were answered. Lilly confirmed that all works are on target, with
several already complete.
Pådraig O'Gorman advised that following a recent meeting held in May, the
Chief Executive is hopeful to receive extra funding to cover the additional worke
required after Storm Chandra. However, he is currently waiting for official
confirmation from the Department.
Cllr. Andy Gladney acknowledged how well Bagenalstown is looking and how
the whole community appreciates all the works which have been completed.
Cllr. Michael Doran agreed with Cllr. Gladney, acknowledging that at times ik
has been difficult, but worth it now. He also wished to compliment the Bloom
Team.
Planning Matters
Barry Knowles, Senior Executive Officer, Planning gave this update. The
following queries were raised:-
Unauthorised work on Mount Leinster
• Staffing levels in Enforcement
All queries were answered and Barry suggested that any queries the
Members had can be sent directly to him.
Bagenalstown Cemetery Update
Pådraig O'Gorman gave this update. He confirmed that all surveys have
been completed and tenders for construction were published in April. Three
tenders were received and a letter sent to the successful contractor. There is
a mandatory standstill period of 14 days prior to signing contracts. An
immediate start on site is expected end of June, early July, with a timeframe
of approximately 6 — 8 weeks, with completion end of August. All planned
works to be completed for September meeting.
Page 3 of 5
4.
5.
6.
Municipal District Muinebheag
Queries were raised in relation to:-
Trees on dividing ditch in Bagenalstown cemetery
• Tinnahinch cemetery
St. Mullins update
• Ballinabranna cemetery
All queries were answered. Cllr. Andy Gladney and Cllr. Daniel Pender
complimented all the work that has been done to reach this stage in the
process and welcomed it as great news for the area.
Notices of Motion
None.
Correspondence
None.
Any Other Business
Cllr. Tommy Kinsella queried the temporary diversion of traffic caused by the bridge
rehabilitation works on Ferrymountgarrett bridge that are being carried out by Kilkenny
County Council.
Lilly Slye advised that a 24 hour closure of this road R700 at Ferrymountgarrett Bridge
will being at 8.00 a.m. Wednesday 24th June to 6.00 p.m. Friday 28th August 2026
inclusive. Alternative routes are in place and hedgecutting along the entire diversion.
Cllr. Willie Quinn raised a query in relation to overgrown junctions and surveys on stop
signs around the county. Orla Barrett answered all queries.
Queries were raised in relation to the current larnröd Eireann sen.'ices and the
Executive agreed to examine same.
The next meeting is scheduled for Wednesday, July 8th 2026
This concluded the business of the meeting
Page 4 of 5
Signed:
Signed:
Municipal District Muinebheag
Date:
Cllr. Michael Doran
Cathaoirleach
Meetings Administrator
Page 5 of 5
20