   ALLOCATIONS SCHEME FOR SOCIAL HOUSING SUPPORT
               FINGAL COUNTY COUNCIL (the Council)

                        Adopted on 15th June 2011

                  Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions Act) 2009

1. Introduction

The purpose of this Allocations Scheme is to provide a means for
determining the order of priority for the provision of Social Housing
Support in accordance with the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
2009 and regulations thereunder, to persons whose need has been
established by the Council through their inclusion in the most recent
assessment of housing needs or their acceptance afterwards for
inclusion in the next such assessment or existing tenants who wish to
transfer from their existing tenancy. To be eligible for inclusion in the
assessment an applicant must:

·  Be in need of accommodation and be unable to provide it from

   his or her own resources.

·  Applicant's income must not exceed the limits set by the

   Minister.

·  Applicants must not have accrued rent arrears with a local

   authority or an approved housing body.

·  There must be no alternative accommodation available to the

   applicant.

This scheme applies to Housing Applicants, Transfer Applicants, RAS
tenancy transfers and Long term lease tenancy transfers, alike.

Social Housing Support is provided:-

(a) by the Council,
(b) in accommodation sourced by the Council through the Rental

         Accommodation Scheme,
(c) accommodation in the private sector leased by the Council,
(d) by nomination of applicants to Approved Housing Bodies from

         the Council's list of approved housing applicants for housing
         support provided in the County by these Bodies and
(e) through the provisions of the Incremental Purchase Scheme.

                 1
2. Applications for Social Housing Support

The following considerations will apply where applications are received by the
Council for inclusion in the assessment of housing needs.

    1. Applicants must reside in the functional area of Fingal County
             Council. Applicants residing outside the functional area of the
             Council may be included to such extent that (a) they have a local
             connection to the functional area or (b|) at the Council's discretion.

             (a) Local Area Connection

                         · Member of household has resided for a continuous five
                             year period at any time in the area or

                         · Employment of any member of household is in the area
                             or is located within 15 kilometres of the area or

                         · A household member is in full-time education in any
                             university, college, school or other education
                             establishment in the area or

                         · A household member with enduring physical, sensory,
                             mental health or intellectual impairment is attending a
                             related educational or medical establishment in the
                             area

                         · A relative of any household members lives in the area
                             and has lived here for a minimum of two years

             (b) Council's discretion

             The Council may at it's discretion accept an application from an
             applicant not resident in the Fingal area and who does not meet the
             local connection criteria. These applicants may only choose from the
             housing areas within Fingal County.

3. Areas of Choice

         A household applying for social housing support to this Council shall
         specify a minimum of one area of choice in this County. Such applicants
         may also choose from the housing areas of Dublin City Council, Dun
         Laoghaire-Rathdown Council and South Dublin County Council to a total
         of 3 housing areas. Where the household resides outside the functional
         area of Fingal County Council, such applicants may apply in accordance
         with local connection criteria as above.

A qualified household may notify the housing authority that it wishes to change
one or more than one area in the applicant's areas of choice. Changes to areas
of choice by an applicant may only be made 12 months following approval of
the application. Where a household notifies the housing authority that it no

                                                              2
longer wishes to receive housing support in an area of choice that it previously
specified, the household may not, within the period of 12 months following
such notification change its preferences so as to specify that area of choice
again.

Where a qualified household changes its areas of choice to specify an area of
choice in the functional area of a housing authority in the application area in
which it was not, immediately prior to change, recorded as qualified for social
housing support, the date of entry of the household on that housing authority's
record of qualified households shall be the date on which the housing authority
of application receives notice of the change in the area of choice.

4. False or misleading Information.

     Where a person who is a member of a household requested to give
     information to the local authority under Section 32 of the 2009 Housing
     (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act knowingly gives false or misleading
     information, that person is guilty of an offence. Applicant(s) providing
     false/misleading information may be prosecuted and may be liable to a
     fine, not exceeding 2,000 and all associated costs.

5. Method of allocation

         "Date in Need" is defined as the date on which the Council determines
         that the household is qualified for Social Housing Support. When an
         applicant moves from one category to another higher category "Date in
         Need" is the date on which the move is effected.
         Applicants will be categorised by housing need in accordance with the
         scheme and will be placed on the housing list in accordance with their
         "Date in Need". Incomplete or partially supported applications will not
         be considered and will be returned to the applicant.
         Applicants will be allocated dwellings suitable for their needs by "Date
         in Need" order, starting from Category 1 through Category 2 to
         Category 3.

         Equality in Date of Need

         In a case of equality of Date in Need, the final decision with regard to
         any letting will be made by the Manager who will have regard to all the
         circumstances including the area in which the applicants are currently
         residing and family size.

         Applicants provided with Social Housing Support will be deemed to have
         their need fulfilled, and their housing applications will be closed.

                                                              3
Housing Categories

Category 1.

 Families or persons living in dangerous premises on whom a
    requisition under Section 3(9) of the Local Government (Sanitary
    Services) Act, 1964 has been served.

 Families or persons displaced as a result of acts of the Local
    Authority.

 Families or Persons on exceptional medical or exceptional
    compassionate grounds. Where priority is claimed on exceptional
    medical or exceptional compassionate grounds, regard shall be had
    to the report of the Chief Medical Officer and/or the Council's
    Welfare Committee whichever is appropriate.

 RAS tenants where the landlord has indicated that the contract will
    not be renewed or the property is no longer available to the Council.

Category 2

 Transfer applicants due to overcrowding .
 Transfer applicants who wish to down-size.
 Transfer applicants who wish to vacate 2 dwellings for 1
 Transfer applicants wishing to transfer to a "Vacancy Rich" area

    from a "Vacancy deficient" area.
 Transfer applicants wishing to transfer to an area in order to assist

    in care of a close relative or avail of the care of a close relative.

 Category 3 (to include other transfer applicants)

 Families or persons rendered homeless through no fault of their
    own and who are not in a financial position to provide their own
    accommodation. (Section 2 of the Housing Act, 1988 defines
    homelessness).

 Families or persons evicted through no fault of their own on foot of a
    Court Order and who are not in a financial position to provide their
    own accommodation.

 Persons fleeing Domestic Violence.

 Families living in overcrowded conditions.

                                                   4
6. Inspection

         In order to ensure full and accurate disclosure by applicants, random
         inspections will be carried out. The Council will inspect the
         accommodation of all those applicants who reach the Offer Zone.

         "Offer Zone" is defined as that part of the housing list from which offers
         of accommodation are mostly likely to be made within the coming three
         months.

         In addition, applicants applying for accommodation on account of the
         state of repair or lack of amenities in their current accommodation will
         have their accommodation inspected. Following such an inspection, the
         appropriate action will be initiated under the unfit code and/or private
         rented dwellings (standards) code if warranted.

7. Managers Prerogative Emergency Lettings

         Nothing in the Scheme shall operate to prevent the Manager from
         allocating a tenancy in emergency circumstances.

8. Succession of Tenancy

         On the death of a tenant, the tenancy may be transferred to the tenant's
         partner/spouse or to a member of the tenant's immediate family who
         has been resident in the dwelling at the date of the tenant's death, and
         included in the rent assessment return by the deceased tenant for the
         preceding period of 2 years.
         A tenant may apply to include a partner/spouse or a member of the
         tenant's immediate family (i.e. son or daughter) as co-tenant provided
         such a person has been included in the rent assessment return for the
         preceding period of 2 years.
         Such tenancy changes must be in the interest of good Estate
         Management and are at the discretion of the Manager.

9 Tenancies in Joint Names

         Tenancies of Fingal County Council housing support will normally be in
         the joint names of husband and wife, where appropriate, but the
         Manager may put the tenancy in the name of either party in exceptional
         circumstances. In cases other than husband and wife, joint tenancies
         may be created where it is considered advisable.
         Where a relationship subsequently breaks down, the Manager shall
         decide, after considering all circumstances, which spouse/partner, if
         either, is to be granted the tenancy.

                                                              5
10. Choice Based Letting (CBL)
         The manager may designate properties for Choice Based Letting. CBL
         is a new approach to letting homes which allows tenants and
         prospective tenants to bid for the available designated properties they
         are interested in. Where there are 2 or more bids for the same property,
         the applicant with the highest priority in accordance with the
         Allocations Scheme will be offered the property.
         An applicant having refused an offer under CBL will not be eligible for
         CBL for a period of 12 months.

11. Refusals of Accommodation
         Applicants having refused two reasonable offers of accommodation
         within a 12 month period in areas of their choice (except in
         emergencies) will have their application suspended for 12 months. This
         will mean that the household will not be offered social housing for the
         suspension period and this period will not subsequently count for "time
         on the list" credit purposes.

                                                              6
                                Appendix

Application of Rules and General Administrative Procedures for the purpose
                       of Allocations Scheme for Social Housing.

1. Age.

An applicant must have reached the age of 18 years on or before the
date of any application for accommodation.

2. Income eligibility level

The income bands are expressed in terms of a maximum net income
threshold for a single person household, with an allowance of 5% for
each additional adult household member subject to a maximum
allowance under this category of 10% and 2.5% for each child, subject to a
maximum allowance under this category of 10%.

See the table below for examples of the limits for the difference sizes of
household.

Single              2 adults    1 adult    1 adult     2 adults
                                1 child    2 children  1 child
Person              no

Household children

35,000              36,750      35,875     36,750      37,625

2 adults            2 adults    2 adults   3 adults
2 children          3 children  4 or more  4 or more
38,500              39,375      children   children
                    40250       42,000

The above income limits have been set by Ministerial regulation and may
be subject to change from time to time.

3. Residential Requirement
         An applicant must have the legal right to reside in the state. Applicants
         from EEA States other than Irish Citizens must have been resident in
         the State for a minimum period of 3 months and in employment.
         Bulgarian and Romanian nationals must have/hold employment for a
         continuous period of 12 months.

                                                              7
         Applicants from non-EEA States must have established a long term
         right to reside in the State and have been issued with a Stamp 4 status
         and stamp 3 status for the spouse of an applicant by the Department of
         Justice. They must register with the Garda National Immigration
         Bureau. Such applicants are required to have been legally resident in
         the State for a minimum period of 5 years prior to application.

4. Anti-Social Behaviour

         In order to be considered for social housing support applicant
         households are required to provide the housing authority with a range
         of information including ­

         (a) convictions in the 5 year period prior to the date of application for a
             variety of offences under the Criminal Justice Act (Public Order) Act
             1994, and

         (b) convictions for breaches of orders relating to Anti-Social behaviour
             under the Criminal Justice Act 2006 and the Children Act 2001

         (c) Offences committed under the Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions)
            Act 1997 which include, inter alia, the contravention of an excluding
             or interim excluding order, and or failure to provide, or provision of
             false or misleading, information in relation to anti social behaviour
             offences. In accordance with the provisions of the 1997 Act, anti
             social behaviour includes offences in relation to the misuse of drugs
             (i.e. the manufacture, distribution, sale or intent to sale, of drugs
             etc).

             This information is required to enable the housing authority, in
             appropriate cases, and when making an allocation of support to a
             household, to consider exercising its powers under Section 14 of the
             Housing (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1997, as amended. This
             provision allows a housing authority to refuse to make or defer the
             making of, an allocation of a dwelling to a person where the
             authority considers that he or she is or has been engaged in anti
             social behaviour or that an allocation to that person would not be in
             the interest of good estate management.

 5. Separated Spouses/Partners.

         Where applicants are owners or joint-owners or tenants or joint-
         tenants of dwellings, but are not living in those dwellings due to
         irreconcilable differences, such applicants may be considered for
         housing if, where appropriate, a legal separation agreement has been
         entered into and all other eligibility requirements apply.
         Such applicants may be considered for 2 bed-roomed accommodation
         where the applicant does not have primary care of child/children but
         does have joint custody/access.

                                                              8
       Custody/access may have been determined by Court Order or by
       mutual consent. Where no court order exists details of access
       arrangements must be provided by sworn Affidavit

6. Overcrowding

       Overcrowding exists where there is a lack of a bedroom space, as
       defined in section 63 of the Housing Act 1966.

       For the purpose of assessing how many bedrooms are required by an
       applicant the following table will apply:

7. Social Housing Need

Family Number                             Bedroom Requirement.

 Single Person, or Cohabiting Couple, or

Two children over 10yrs of same sex                  1

 Two Persons over 10yrs not of the

same sex & not living together as a cohabiting

Couple.                                              2

 Cohabiting Couple/Lone Parent with 1or 2 Children

Under 10 yrs.                                        2

 Cohabiting Couple/Lone Parent, 2 Children of

opposite Sex and over 10 years of age.               3

 Cohabiting Couple/Lone Parent with 3 or 4 Children

Under 10 yrs.                                        3

 Cohabiting Couple/Lone Parent with 3 or 4 Children

Over 10 yrs.                                         4

 Cohabiting Couple /Lone Parent with 5 or 6 Children 4

8. Exceptional Medical Grounds

    Medical Priority may be recommended in respect of an applicant or a
    person who is part of the applicant household who suffers from Chronic
    illness (physical or mental) or disability where the Chief Medical Officer
    considers that the persons health will significantly deteriorate unless

                                    9
         he/she is re-housed, and that re-housing will have a beneficial effect on
         that person. Priority may cover a particular type of accommodation
         and/or accommodation in a particular location. The decision to award
         Category 1 priority will rest with the Welfare/Medical Committee.

    9. Medical Evidence

         Medical evidence will only be considered, by the Chief Medical Officer,
         based on written information received from a medical doctor.

         Photocopies and letters from individuals who are not medical doctors
         will not be considered.

         If access to the housing list is being claimed on medical grounds,
         supporting medical evidence should be submitted at application stage.

10. Exceptional Welfare Grounds.

         Priority for accommodation may be awarded on exceptional
         compassionate grounds. This priority may cover a particular type of
         accommodation and/or accommodation in a particular location. The
         Council's Welfare committee shall consider the report of the Council's
         Welfare Officer before making any recommendation to the manager
         under this heading.

         Cases will only be re-examined if there is a change of circumstances.

         Recommendations by the Welfare Committee will be made on the basis
         of:

          The exceptional nature of the case
          The stated urgency and
          The likelihood of a vacancy occurring in an area to relieve the

             stress and suffering of the applicant.

         Examples of cases that may be considered under this heading are:-

          Victims of sexual abuse.
          Child care issues, e.g. non-accidental injury.
          Domestic Violence
          Bereavement, e.g. suicide, multiple deaths, grieving difficulties

                which effect social functioning.
          Elderly persons at risk.
          Traumatic life events.

         Applications, from persons or families residing in council estates, which
         allege that they are the subject of harassment and/or intimidation must

                                                             10
be investigated by the Council's Estate Management Section in the first
instance. It is only when Estate Management Section have been unable
to resolve the matter Estate Management may refer the application to
the Welfare Committee for consideration on exceptional compassionate
grounds.

11. Composition of the Councils Welfare Committee.

The committee shall be appointed by the manager to examine housing
welfare cases referred to it.

         Recommendations of the committee will be by collective majority vote.
12. Applications for Former Tenants

Former tenants of the Council or indeed of any Housing Authority or
Approved Housing Body will be placed on the housing list if they comply
with the following:

 They are in need of accommodation and are unable to provide it
    from their own resources.

 They did not abandon their tenancy. The former tenancy has been
    appropriately surrendered.

 The rent account on their previous tenancy is clear.
 The letting conditions relating to their previous tenancy including

    the conditions relating to anti social behaviour were complied with.

13. Transfers Applications.

General

An applicant will only be eligible for consideration if they have complied
with the following:

·  Have a clear rent receipt.

·  Tenants with arrears of Rent who have not entered into an

   arrangement to clear the arrears are not eligible to apply for a

   transfer to alternative accommodation where the arrears

   accumulated to an equivalent of 12 weeks debit during the

   preceding 3 years.

·  Have resided in their current dwelling for at least two years.

The Manager may in exceptional circumstances waive compliance with
any or all of the above conditions.

The Council may refuse to make or defer the making of, an allocation
of a dwelling to a person where the authority considers that he or she

                             11
         is or has been engaged in anti social behaviour or that an allocation to
         that person would not be in the interest of good estate management.

14. Mutual Inter Transfers.

         A tenant of the Council, may with the consent of the manager, exchange
         the tenancy of his/her existing dwelling for the tenancy of another
         Council, Housing Authority or Approved Voluntary Housing Association
         dwelling.

         Applications for inter transfer between a Council tenant and another
         Housing Authority tenant are subject to the approval of both the Council
         and the other Authority. Applications for inter transfer between a
         Council tenant and an Approved Voluntary Housing Association tenant
         are subject to the approval of both the Council and the Association.

         In addition to the conditions at section 13 above, the Councils
         consideration of an inter transfer application will have regard to the
         following:

          The reasons given by the applicants for the inter transfer in either
             applicant household

          If the transfer would result in overcrowding in either moving group.
          If the transfer would result in under utilisation of either dwelling.

         If the Council is satisfied that there has been any financial gain by
         either party as a direct result of the Inter Transfer e.g., any payment
         being made by one party to the transfer to the other party to the
         transfer in respect to any aspect of the transfer, the application will be
         refused. If evidence is received after the transfer takes place the
         transfer will be reversed.

         Applicants will be required to sign a declaration that they will go into
         occupation of and continue to occupy the respective dwellings. If one
         of the parties does not take up residence or vacates it within a period of
         six months, the Council will move, in the absence of a satisfactory
         explanation, to have the other dwelling in the exchange repossessed.

15. Illegal Occupation

         Applicants who take up illegal occupation of a Housing Authority or
         Approved Voluntary Housing Association property will not be considered
         for the tenancy of any Council Dwelling unless the dwelling the
         applicant occupies illegally is voluntarily surrendered to the relevant
         authority or association in the same condition in which it was first
         illegally occupied by them.

                                                             12
16. Financial Contributions

Senior Citizens who are owners of private dwellings and who find that
their existing dwelling is too large for their needs may apply to the
Council for senior citizen accommodation subject to the payment of a
financial contribution which is set at 1/3 of the net proceeds of the sale
price. However, should the Senior Citizen die or enter a nursing home
within 5 years of the tenancy being awarded a refund, in accordance
with the table below, will be made to the tenants estate or to the tenant
which ever is appropriate.

Time as Tenant                   Refund

Less that 1 year                 80% refund
1 year less than 2 years         60% refund
2 years less than 3 years        40% refund
3 years less than 4 years        20% refund
4 years or greater               No refund.

Refunds will be calculated on the original contribution made exclusive
of any interest that might have accrued

The Council will not allocate vacancy deficient senior citizen units of
accommodation under this heading at the expense of senior citizen
applications on the Housing List.

17. Unfit Dwellings

     Persons who knowingly take up residence in a dwelling which is unfit
for human habitation and cannot be made fit at reasonable cost and on
which Orders or Notices under Section 66 of the Housing Act, 1966 have
been made or served will not be considered for housing accommodation by
the council.

18. Tenant Induction

         All applicants will be required to attend and participate in the Council's
         Tenant Induction Module following acceptance of an offer of
         accommodation. Failure to attend and participate may result in the
         withdrawal of an offer of accommodation.
19. Appeals

All appeals for any decision taken in accordance with this Allocations

Scheme should be made in writing within 28 days to the Senior Executive

Officer, Housing Department.

                                                                                                                            15thJune 2011

                             13
